man kneeling before Jesus Christ, with three men standing to his left and one
man standing to his right BLESSED REST FOR THE Burdened Sinner.
London Printed for Benj. Harris.



BLESSED REST FOR THE Burdened Sinner. Or the only Center of the Soul.

Wherein is Discovered, 1. Who he is that invites and calls Sinners to this
Rest. 2. The encouragements to come unto him for Rest. 3. Many Obstructions and
Impediments which keep back Sinners. With their unreasonableness Answered. 4.
The rest that every one shall have that comes unto Christ.


Delivered in some Sermons at first, yet since some Addition and Enlargement
has been made to them.

By John Hopwood Preacher of the Gospel.

Tu es recreator omnium, qui dixisti, venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, etc.
anima enim quae est in te, radicata in centro suo, and recreata, and quieta
est: quae vero in te non est, multis vanis phantasmatibus fatigatur. Tu
sufficientissimus es; qui te habet, totum habet; qui non, mendicus est, and
pauper. Quia quicquid praeter te est, non reficit, non sufficit,

Gerson. Part. 3. Alphabet. Amoris Divini. c. 14. London, Printed for Benj.
Harris at the Stationers Arms in Sweethings Rents in Cornhil, 1676.

IMPRIMATUR ANTHONY SAUNDERS, Ex Aedibus Lambethanis, Reverend. Arch. Episc.
Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

Jan. 18. 1675.

To the Reverend Mr. Nathaniel Vincent, Minister of the Gospel, and my much
Esteemed FRIEND.
Worthy Sir,
IT is well known that, that famous Lacedemonian Legislator, would not
establish (among all others) a Law against Ingratitude, Quod prodigiosa res
esset, benificium non rependere, and of all ingenious spirits, it was ever
accounted monstrous, to make slight of favors, and easily forget Pristine
benefits; for neglect of favors, makes all favor void, and should I come
under this sensure, by my dis-ingenuous and impolite carriage, I might from you
justly incur the ignominious title of an ungrateful person: Your complicated
kindnesses conferred upon me, do perpetually oblige me, whilst not being
capable of suitable returns, yet to publish my humble acknowledgements of them,
and if the Laws of God and Nature injoyne and require the homage of due
respects to be given unto our earthly Parents, I know no Reason or Law which
exempts from attributing the like to our Spiritual. It was the saying of
Alexander, that as we have our being from our Parents, we have our well being
from our instructors, and if he could esteem himself happy for terrene
knowledge, how much more then ought I for that Divine, in which you have been
my Teacher; and if that earthy knowledge may so much conduce to a well being
here, what will Celestial Science do, but safely carry the Soul to an
everlasting Weal, a happy being, which never knows end to terminate its
satiateing and abounding comforts. Sir, I shall not blush to own, or be
timorous to declare, that (which I know to you, is matter of joy) although I
have had many Instructors) you are he that has begotten me unto Christ; and I
may truly call you, as Cyprian did Cecilius, Vitae novae patrem, your sweet
invitations and divine Rhetoric (being accompanied with the blessed influences
of Heaven) drew me out of the Womb of this world, and from the power of Satan,
into the gracious embraces of the Lord Jesus, it was eternally the design of
the Father, but you were the Instrument (by the Word and Spirit) in time to
call me home to Christ. Moreover, you did not only beget me to a second birth,
but also constantly entertained me with those heavenly dainties, with which
Christ does nourish his beloved ones. But to add to these the remembrance of
your private instructions and care for me, are not to be obliterated by Times
swift Motion, or Diurnal vicissitudes and mutations. But Sir, as an addition to
the former favors, I have here presumed to prefix your Name, and make
a-Dedication of this little Treatise to your self, not for your Instruction,
but a manifestation of my submissive respects due to you.

I know that I have here exposed my self and labors to the view of no less a
censuring, than a sinning Generation, therefore by your favorable Aspect, it
may in some measure abate (if not altogether prevent) the hard speeches of a
calumniating world. It is too perspicuous that our Age abounds with such, who
study more to carpe at, than gather the sweet fruits of the Gospel; but Momo
satisfacere, would be an endless work; therefore, if I can but exalt the Lord
Jesus, and help immortal Souls to glory. I shall not value the foul aspersions
of a dirty World, for in this Generation, there are such, who will not spare
the tallest Cedars in the Lebanon of God, much less the lowest shrubs.
Therefore, I will not fondly promise my self better entertainment then Christ
and his Apostles, and his faithful Laborers have ever met with. Neither do I
so much address my self unto you, to shroud me from the frowns, or hereby to
silence the perverse sayings of Men, as that I would study to declare my
gratitude, in humble acknowledgements, and thankful returns, like gliding
streams, that swiftly move toward the abounding Ocean, from whence their
original sprang. I am not ignorant that the world is copiously furnished with
Books, yet these Muti Magistri (as Alphonsus called them) are not totally in
vain, for I have extracted benefit from some of them, which I hope others may
do from this. I have adventured to cast my might into the Treasury, and my
grain into the field, leaving the increase unto God. (...)
This Book I may call my Primitiee, for when the Lord first called me forth to
publish the Gospel, he sent me with this Message, to call and invite Sinners
unto Christ, which found entertainment with some then, wherefore it gives me
some matter of encouragement that it will not prove now as water spilt upon the
ground. I was unwilling for a time to suffer it to see the light, being
conscious of my own defections and imperfections, but at last being prevailed
with by some, and having it long by me, I was willing to send it forth into the
world, although not invested with splendid clothing of rhetorical Phrases, yet
I trust (like pure Gold) it will bear the Touchstone of Divine verity, and so
prove for the advancement of Gods glory, the exaltation of the Lord Jesus, and
the Salvation of immortal Souls. All which I am certain are the ardent desires
of your Soul, and that these may receive a gracious answer, with all true
prosperity to you and yours, shall be the sincere and constant requests of him
who will for ever acknowledge, a firm obligation to subscribe himself,

SIR, Your obliged Friend and Servant JOHN HOPWOOD.

To The Unprejudiced Reader.
I Here present unto thy view what (for the most part) I some time delivered to
the Ear, that thou by Divine Benediction, may through the Reading, gain more
then some others did by hearing, and obtain an eternal emolument to thy
immortal Soul: expect not here to drink of those mellifluous Streams of that
Nectorean Eloquence, which flows from the lips of well skilled Orators; but
Tractates are not, Veriores quia disertiores, more true, because more eloquent,
for as one said, there is ambitiosum eloquentiae mendacium, and I would not
seem to affect words more than matter, or to catch at the shadow, and let the
substance go; and I hope thou art one that puts a more inestimable appretiation
upon plain and simple verity, then upon painted figments, and elaborate
trifles; which if it be so, then I have some humble confidence, that in the
perusal of these my mean endeavors, thy expectation shall not meet with a total
frustration, or thy labor prove, nulla opera moliri, to be in vain. My grand
design in the publishing this work, is the exaltation and advancement of the
Lord Jesus; that lapsed and miserable mankind may be alliciated, and induced to
have precious valuations, and inextinguishable Ceraphic love to the Lord of
Glory, the knowledge of whom, is life eternal: Joh. 17.3. 1 John 4.7. Joh.
14.6. Romans 9.5. 1 Cor. 3.23.
love to whom, is a sure character of a Heaven-born Soul, faith in whom, is the
infallible way to glory; and whose to be, is no meaner then to be the
Almighties. Now this glorious one, is he that makes free tenders of himself to
perishing sinners, condescends so, as to invite the infirm, laboring, and heavy
laden, to come unto him, who alone give rest. The Subject on which I have
fixed, does sufficiently demonstrate Christ's abundant willingness to receive
and ease poor wounded and oppressed Mortals. And who is there that has not an
absolute necessity of accepting such offers of Peace and Mercy? are not all by
actual sin wounded? by original sin contaminated and polluted? by multiplied
transgressions, intolerably laden? did any escape that primitive lapse of our
first Parents? no, none, that was, or is, or shall be, who are acted merely by
a rational Soul: The serious consideration of which, should prevail with all to
seek out for cure for their wounds, medicines for their maladies, rest for
their burdened Souls, all which, and infinitely more, the Lord Jesus is willing
to confer. What more delectable than Divine embraces? what more excellent than
celestial knowledge? what more desirable than rest and comfort for the weary
and disconsolate Soul? all which is to be found in Christ, and he that seeks
unto him, shall certainly obtain, for he is the Divine Treasurer, who has all
necessaries to communicate; and he is a full Fountain of living waters, Col.
2.2.
which flows freely to all thirsty Souls. Therefore, if thou art not yet come
unto Christ, let me persuade thee no longer to make demurs, and let me be
Christ's Ambassador, to call thee home unto him. I know thou can have no
reasonable argument that should deter thee. Acts 4.12. Gal. 3.10.13. 1 These.
1.10. 1 Cor. 2.14.
I know thou have a Soul to save from the curse of the Law, and eternal wrath;
then come unto Christ, for it is he alone can save thee from the Curse, and
everlasting Vengeance. I know by Nature thou want Divine knowledge, come to
Christ, Mat. 11.27
and he will teach thee the knowledge of the Almighty. And surely if Robert
King of Naples did so much prise human learning, as to say Chariores sibi
literas regno esse, it was dearer to him than his Kingdom: how much more then
should thou and I esteem the true knowledge of the Eternal Jehovah, that
Divine learning, Joh. 17.3.
which begins with the prelibation, and ends in the fruition of eternal life;
thou want grace to enrich and beautify thy Soul, and to make thee meet for
glory; why, it is out of his fullness; thou must receive (if ever) grace for
grace, Joh. 1.16. There is not any thing which may conduce to thy everlasting
benefit, but Christ has rich supplies, and is ready to extend to all indigent
and humble mendicants, and seeing thou may have for asking, and receive for
coming, let this Treatise lead thee by the hand to the Lord Jesus; for Christ
says come, and thy miseries (if thou consultest thy Soul) say go, or thou art
undone: it may be that through some stratagems of Satan, thou art prevented
from getting into Christ, therefore I have here laid open thirty two of them,
and I think, the most subtlest of his Arguments and Baits; and I have also (in
a weak measure) labored (though in brief) to invalidate and discover the
danger of them. Other obstructions which are from our selves, whilst we
continue in an unconverted State; likewise some from the world, thou shall here
find them manifested and removed; but I could not be so large for the removal
of them quite out of the way, as I at first intended, because my volumn grew
bigger then I expected, therefore I was forced to contract in some things, and
in fine to draw up those things which I thought largely to handle, into a very
narrow compass. But Reader, pardon my abruptness, for I designed this piece for
a common good, that the meanest sort might be able, as well as willing, (if any
be so) to purchase it; and this I would further entreat of thee, (if thou
please to spend thy labor) read with an unprejudiced and impartial mind,
with a design to profit, if thou have not already made such a proficiency (as
some persuade themselves) that thou need no further instruction; do not read
it as too many go to hear Sermons, to wit, that they may judge of them, not
thinking that they are to be judged by them; but do thou peruse it, (I beseech
thee, in the name of Christ) with a respect to the good of thine immortal Soul;
and although thou may find some things which are in other Authors, yet know
that I have used those arguments, for the confirmation of that great truth
(necessary to be known, and absolutely needful to be believed) to wit, the
Divinity of the Lord Jesus. And it may be my Book may fall into the hands of
some, who never yet read so much of his Eternal Deity. I know this truth has
too many opposers, but we must not let the Truth go because of opposition; but
as it was said of the Romans, Victi multo fortius nesistant, being conquered
the more valiantly, they resisted; so, if thou have been overcome in pleading
for this fundamental point, the more earnestly contend for the faith of it now,
as the Apostle exhorts, (...).
Jude 3. verse. There are two many who are called Christians, that are yet
unable to confirm what they profess to believe. Therefore, that providence may
order that this book may be helpful, both to thy understanding of, and also
establishment in that glorious Truth, and likewise be a means to bring thy Soul
to close with Jesus Christ, and that the eternal God may have the glory of all,
shall be the perpetual prayers of

T^y Souls servant in the Lord, John Hopwood.

BLESSED REST for the BURDENED SINNER.
Mat. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye that Labor and are heavy Laden, and I will
give you Rest.


JEsus Christ when the fullness of time was come (determinated by the eternal
counsel of the blessed Trinity) manifested himself for two principal and great
ends. Gal. 4.45.
The first was the glory of his Father, in the exaltation of the riches and
abundance of his grace toward poor sinners. The second, was the salvation and
eternal felicity of all them who are brought to believe in, and accept of him.
And there is such a conjunction and near union of these two, that there is now
an impossibility (Secundum quid) of their separation, for the glory of Gods
grace is illustrated, and exalted in the conversion, and everlasting salvation
of poor sinners, therefore Christ Jesus has so frequently and publicly
declared his and his Fathers willingness to embrace believing and repenting
sinners, John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me, and them
that come to me, I will in no wise cast out. In the 38, 39, 40. verses of that
Chapter, Christ tells us, it was his Fathers will that he came to fulfill, which
is, that every one that sees the Son, and believes in him, shall have
everlasting Life. And that Christ might not fail of these ends, he encourages
sinners to seek after their eternal happiness, and makes known his readiness to
unburden the heavy-laden sinner, to refresh the laboring, and give the weary
rest: If the Troubled know not where to get peace, or the sick and wounded
where to find an Able, Faithful, and Merciful Physician, or the poor and needy,
a bountiful benefactor, let them convert and fix their Eyes upon the words of
my Text, and be encouraged and rejoice, for Jesus Christ says, Come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. In these
words observe, 1. An Invitation, (...).
and the Person Inviting; the Invitor is the Lord Jesus, the invitation is to
come unto him, Come unto me. A Metaphorical expression, where coming is put for
believing; because by faith the Soul goes to and closes with the Lord Jesus.
(...).
2. The persons invited, the laboring and heavy laden. The word for Labor in
the Original signifies a Laboring with difficulty and wearisomness: Christ in
this phrase seems to have respect to the Jews laboring under the yoke and
burden of the Mosaical Law, 1 Romans 9.13. Act. 15.10.
whereby they endeavored to work out a righteousness that would justify them
in the fight of God, and by which they might procure favor from him, but more
especially those who Labor in their Souls, and Consciences, by a lively
feeling of their sins, and the terror of Gods judgments, and the severity of
his scourges, and punishments, as Diodate annot. 3. The universality, Come unto
me all ye. Not all who live in their sins, (...)
and persevere in their iniquities, but all such who are sensible of, and
affected with the intolerable burden of sin, and their imperfection in and
imbecility to perform the strictness of the Law, to satisfy the justice of God,
because the Law requires perfect and complete obedience, or else leaves the
Soul under a curse, Gal. 3 10. 4. The great incouragment of these words, (...).
I will give you rest: rest from all your unprofitable Labors, Sorrows,
Afflictions, and sins, if you come unto me Isa. 55.2. What more Incouragment to
the Laboring, what greater inducement to the weary and heavy laden, than rest?
and such a rest as Christ has purchased, promised, and will certainly give to
all that come unto him; from the words there are these several points of
Doctrine deducible.

1. Doctrine is this, that Jesus Christ graciously condescends to invite
Laboring and Heavy Laden Sinners to come unto him, [come unto me:]

2. Doctrine, (...) est modus imperandi tanquam precandi.
that it is the indispensable duty of all who are heavy laden, and seek for
rest and salvation, to come to the Lord Jesus for it.

3. Doctrine, Sinners before they come to, and close with the Lord Jesus,
Labor under heavy and intolerable burdens.

4. Doctrine, That all those who are sensible of the heavy burdens they labor
under, and come unto Christ for help, shall certainly find rest, [I will give
you rest:] I shall begin with the first Doctrine. 1. Doctrine, Jesus Christ
graciously condescends to invite Laboring and heavy laden sinners to come unto
him, John 7.37. If any man thirst let him come unto me, and drink. Thirst for
peace of Conscience, thirst for righteousness, grace and salvation, let him
come and accept of it freely, Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the bride say come,
and let him that hears say come, and let him that is a thirst come, and
whosoever will let him take the waters of Life ((...) gratis) freely: (...).
Christ is an inexhaustible fountain, and the purest and sweetest water is from
the fountain; therefore Christ invites to come even to himself. In prosecution
of this Doctrine, I shall 1. show what is employed in coming to Christ. 2. Who
he is that invites Sinners to come. 3. The means by which he invites. 4. The
reasons why he does invite Sinners. 5. Make some application of it. 1. What is
meant by coming, for Christ is now in the highest Heaven, at the Right Hand of
God the Father and we are hear on Earth, how may we then come to him? I Answer,
1. Coming, is sometimes expressed by looking unto Christ; Look unto me and be
ye saved all the ends of the Earth. Isa. 45.22.
So John 1.2, 9. I (...), behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of
the World. There must be looking unto Christ till the Eye affect the heart, as
Zach. 12.10. We are all stung by the fiery Serpent, i.e. Sin, Jo. 3.14.
therefore there is an absolute necessity to lift up our Eyes and fix them on
the Lord Jesus, who is the Anti-tipe to the brazen Serpent, there must be a
constant looking till we are perfectly cured; by nature the Eye is averted from
God and Christ, and placed either upon this World for our total and ultimate
felicity, or upon our imperfect obedience to the Law for our complete
Righteousness, so that we think we have no need of Christ, but now Christ calls
the Sinner off from both these, that he may fix it on himself, in whom
Salvation is to be found; the Soul can be completely happy in none but Christ,
Col. 2.10. (...), we are complete in him if we expect full salvation and
blessedness, we must look unto Christ, Heb. 12.2.
and look off from all other things, (...). Heb. 12.2.
Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith. 2. It implys a
turning to him, Sin has turned us away from Christ, and put a great distance
between us and him, and if we would have our Burdens taken off, we must return
unto him, Adam when he had eaten the Forbidden fruit, ran away from God, and we
his Children descended from him by ordinary generation, have imitated and
followed his steps, for as the Prophet says, Isa. 53.6. We all like sheep have
gone astray. This has been our practice to wander from God and Christ, we
Prodigal-like, 1 Pet. 2.25.
have forsaken our Fathers house, but now we should return to the Shephard and
Bishop of our Souls; now seeing that in Adam we (like the Evil Angels) fell
from our primitive state of holiness and perfection, and so turned away from
God, and also that we our selves have been personally active in departing from
the living God; there is therefore a necessity of our returning to him, that we
may lay hold on eternal life, which is to be obtained by coming to the Lord
Jesus, and turning wholly from all sin and beloved lust: And this was the great
blessing God gave the Jews, as we read Act. 3.26. Unto you, first God having
raised up his Son Jesus Christ, sent him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his Iniquity, and as there is a turning from iniquity, so there
is a turning to God, Joel 2.12. Therefore also now says the Lord, turn ye even
to me with all your hearts. 3. Coming to Christ implys an acceptance and
reception of him, for when Christ says, come unto me, He thereby intimates as
if he should say, receive and accept of me, now in the tenders of the Gospel,
now whilst the day of grace lasts, Jo. 1.11.
it is said Christ came (...), to his own, but yet they did (...), not embrace
or accept of him, his own Country men his own Relations and kinsfolk in the
flesh, yet they rejected and refused him, but there were some in that
degenerate age that received and embraced him, as in John 1.12. they received
him upon Gospel terms, scil. (Christ and a whole Christ, Christ and nothing but
a Christ) in point of justification, Christ Jesus in his Kingly as well as in
his Priestly office, not only righteousness to cloth the naked Sinner, but
also regnant power to rule and govern the soul: not only to be a Redeemer but a
Sanctifier too, 1 Cor. 1.30. the Soul that comes to Christ, receives Christ
alone without any competitors, as Christ says of his Spouse, Cant. 6.9.
my Dove, my undefiled is but one, so says the Soul that is come to Christ by
receiving of him, my Savior is but one, the only one, and the choice one of my
Soul, Hos. 2.19.20.
I must not be betrothed to another, for he has receivme, and I have received
him, he has made choice of me, and I have made a Sole and full choice of him,
and so am become one spirit with him, they who are joined to the Lord are
(...), one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.4. And that principally, coming unto Christ
implys a believing in him, for faith is pes Animae, the foot of the Soul, by
which it goes unto Christ, and makes a continual progressive motion heavenward.
Now that the proper meaning of coming is believing, or that believing in Christ
is expressed by this phrase, Come unto me: These Scriptures prove it, He that
comes unto me shall never hunger, Jo. 6.35.37.44.
and he that believes in me shall never thirst. In these words the latter are
exegetical to the former, for that which is called coming in the first part, in
the latter is expressed by believing, ^so 37. All that the Father has given me
shall come unto me, and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out: no
man can come unto me, except the Father draw him. These Scriptures can be
understood no other way than believing in Christ, for there is now no other way
to come to him, seeing his residence is in glory, at the Right hand of God the
Father, so also Jo. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye may have life, in
the 44. verse it is termed believing, how can ye believe, who receive honor
one of another. i. e. How can you come to believe in, and embrace me who
respect more the honor of men than the honor of God: true faith leads the
Soul to Christ, and so it seeks that honor that is from God alone, Jo. 7.37.
If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink, in the 38. verse, it is
called believing, he that believes on me, (...), into me. Faith is the leading
grace which carrys a man. 1. Out of himself. 2. To Christ. 3. Into Christ. 1.
Out of himself, out of all self confidence, or self righteousness, which is the
ruin of many precious Souls because they take up a vain presumption founded
upon false principles and foundations instead of a real saving faith which
leads the Soul to live upon invissibles; faith is the (...), Heb. 11.1.
the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen; faith so
leads the man from all terrene things, or any thing he finds in himself, either
of virtue or morality, that the Soul lives wholly on an 1 Pet. 1.8.
unseen Christ, not any thing short of Christ will the Soul rest upon, like the
great Apostle, Phil. 3.3. having no confidence in the Gal. 2.20
flesh, i. e. birth, privileges, ceremonial or moral Righteousness, high
profession, great zeal, all which he accounts but carnal and vain, therefore he
looks on them, as (...), dogs-meat in comparison of Christ as may be seen from
verse 3. to 10. 2. True Faith leads the Soul to Christ, I mean to understand
and believe the Deity of Christ, and to apprehend the benefits of his death,
and apply his righteousness to the Soul, the Soul goes by faith to him, who is
God-man, for it was the blood of God which redeemed his Church Act. 20.28. He
who is Romans 9.5.
God blessed for ever suffered in that humane nature which he assumed,
therefore it rests not short of him, so likewise it goes to the benefits which
flow from the death of Christ, as grace and peace here, glory hereafter, access
with boldness now, vision and fruition for ever, after the Soul has made
entrance within the gates of glory, joy and exhileration at present,
halleluiahs and triumphings in bliss to all Eternity hereafter. Moreover it
leads the Soul to the righteousness of Christ; for God the Father has made
Christ Jesus to be 1 Cor. 1.30.
righteousness for believers, he was made 2 Cor. 5.21.
sin for us who knew no sin, that we might become the righteousness of God in
him, and therefore Christ is called (...)
Jehovah Zidkenu, i. e. Jer. 23.6.
the Lord our Righteousness. Now the Soul goes by faith, and apprehends, and
applies this to it self. 3 It not only leads to Christ, but into Christ. The
Soul when once brought out of all self-confidence will rest and center in
Christ, when it has wandered about, like the silly Dove, and can find no safe
rest, she returns to the Ark Christ Jesus, and seeks admittance into him, for
the Soul is not content only to behold Christ, but also desires to enjoy him,
not only to come unto him, but to get into him; thus it was with the Apostle
Paul, Phil. 3.9. He would be found (...) in him, though stripped naked of all his
righteousness, yet be found in him alone, in him in life, in him at death, for
Rev. 14.13.
blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. Faith is the uniting and
implanting grace, whereby the Soul is ingrafted into Christ, and so becomes a
living branch of that living Vine the Lord Jesus. Joh. 15.5. I am the Vine, ye
are the branches. This is the import of the expression, believe Joh. 3.36.
(...) into Christ, thus we see that by coming to Christ is meant believing in
him. So much for the invitation, Come. 2dly
I come now to the second particular, and that is to show who this person is
that invites weary laden sinners to come to, and believe in him; for I know the
sinner may be ready to say who is he? he makes a fair invitation, but can he
give rest? can he make good his promise? I answer, yea, he can to the uttermost
make good his promise, for he is (...), God-man, 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifest in
the flesh, Romans 9.5. (...), God blessed to eternity: he is not a created Angel,
as Ebion says, neither is he one Person with the Father, as Sabellius
attested, neither is he one that God only dwelt in, as Nicholaus said; but know
this for thy consolation, thou heavy laden and laboring Soul, that he is the
true God and eternal life, Joel. 5.20. He is the (...) not (...)
same divine Essence with the Father, and not like unto it. Joh. 10.30. I and
my Father are (...), one Essence. 1 John 15.7. these three are (...), one
speaking of the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of Essence, the Lord Jesus and
his Father are not (...) dissimiles essentia.
unlike in Essence; neither are they (...), of diverse Essences, for God is
indivisible, as to his simple and eternal essence; neither are they (...) sicut
homines, like men, eadem essentia, sed non innumero.
the same in essence, but not in number; for they are coessential and
consubstantial, having one and the same Essence. Basil (contra Eunomium)
calls the Lord Jesus (...).
goodness itself, life it self, and righteousness it self in the very abstract;
and how can he be otherwise, when there dwells in him the fullness of the
Godhead (...) bodily, Coll. 2.9. The Father and the Son Christ Jesus are at
(...).
once and together in nature, as the Sun and light, the one has the priority
in order, but not in nature; so God the Father, and God the Son, both persons
were from eternity, the Father in order first, but not in nature. But let us go
to the melius est petere fontes, quam sectari rivulos.
fountain, scil. the holy Writ, to the Law and to the Testimony. Is. 8.20. for
if our speech and proofs be not according to that, there will be no light in
us. Therefore we will see whether or no from thence we may more perspicuously
and evidently understand this divine truth for the Scripture does best discover
this great verity, scil. that Christ is God-man in two distinct natures and one
person, therefore seeing the right understanding of this is the ground of our
encouragement to come unto him, and to forsake all others, and rely upon him
alone for ease and rest; I shall endeavor to prove that the Person that
invites sinners to come unto him is the true and living God, and therefore
those that come unto him shall not fail of rest.

1. Argument shall be taken from what the Scripture says of his divine
Original, he is called John 1.14. (...), The only begotten of the Father; Heb.
1.6. the first begotten, (...)
according to that Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the word was God. The divine Apostle being guided by an
infallible Spirit, did foresee that this truth would meet with Opposers,
therefore he is positive in his assertion, that he who was the eternal Word is
God; (...).
and if all Socinians deny this evident Scripture, or put false interpretations
upon it, and call for humane arguments and reasons, we are not to believe them;
for here is that in the word of God, which does far transcend all Philosophical
notions and Scholastic distinctions, which do rather darken than illustrate
this truth; for the Spirit of God was the dictator of it, and he wants not
wisdom to apprehend, nor suitable words to express aright this fundamental point
in Divinity. I shall not make it my business in this Discourse to enter upon
Controversy, but labor to confirm this weighty point. In 1 John 5.20. Christ
Jesus is called the Son of God in one part of the verse, and in the other part
he is called the true God and eternal life. (...).
What ever the Socinians say of this text is invalid, for it is evident to any
truly enlightened mind that the main scope of the words is to prove the Divinity
of the Son of God, this were sufficient grounds for faith, if there were no
other Scriptures to prove the Deity of Christ, when Christ asserted that he was
one with the Father, Joh. 10.30.
the unbelieving Jews did rightly apprehend the words, but could not understand
or conceive the thing, for they said that he by this expression, who was but a
mere man (as they thought) made himself God, verse. 33. therefore they term it
blasphemy, which yet Christ never sought to deny or vindicate himself from so
enormous a crime, if it had been blasphemy; but goes on to confirm it, Joh.
10.36, 37, 38.
he owns that he said he was the Son of God, which must necessarily be
understood that it was by eternal generation, therefore one with the Father in
essence. But I shall wave all prolixity, and contract in as narrow compass as I
may, not being prejudicial to the truth: moreover knowing that it is more
learnedly and copiously handled by many worthy Divines. My work shall be only
to touch upon particulars to prove this point, and to confirm those into whose
hands this my Book may come, and find acceptance with, and also to encourage
them to come unto Christ, who so graciously invites poor sinners to come that
they may have rest for their souls.

2d. Argument, a nominibus Divinis, from the names of God, which are also given
to Christ, he is called Romans 9.5.
God over all, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifest in the flesh, Tit. 3 13.
the great God, so Is 9.6, the mighty God, now the mere name is not only
ascribed to the Lord Jesus, as it was to them, Psalm. 82.6. but because he truly
is so. 2d. the name Jehovah, as in Jer. 23.6. this is the name whereby he shall
be called Jehovah, our righteousness; the name Jehovah has relation to the very
essence and being of God, and springs from the same root with that Exodus 3.14.
I am that I am, in Rev. 1.8. (...)
Christ is termed, He that was, is, and is to come. 3ly. Lord, which relates to
his dominion over, and sustentation of the world, Heb. 1.10. (...)
And thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundations of the Earth, Psalm.
110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. The name [Lord] in the first place is meant of the
Father, but in the second of the Son, as Christ himself interprets it, Mat.
22.44. Thus it appears by the names of God given unto him, he is not a mere
creature; Essentia Dei tum ex nominibus ejus, tum ex proprietatibus
intelligitur. Wol. Job 32.21, 22.
for the Essence of God is understood from his names and properties. Now these
being given to the Lord Jesus, we may conclude there is more appertains to him,
than merely the names, for if Elihu could say I know not to give flattering
titles, for in so doing my Maker would soon take me away; what blasphemy then
will it be to imagine that the holy Spirit will do so; his names are real and
proper to him, for he is what the Scriptures term him to be, and a happy soul
will thou be, if thou can believingly say with Thomas my Lord, and my God,
Joh. 20.28.

3d Argument, Proprietates Dei essentiales attribuntur Christo. Alsted.
the essential properties of God which are ascribed to him prove that he is of
a divine essence and nature; as [1] Immensity, Joh. 14 23 If a man love me, he
will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him. As Christ Jesus is of an infinite nature, he is
altogether immeasurable, 2ly Eternity, as in Micah 5.2. But thou Bethlehem,
Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee
shall come forth unto me, (...) Ab initio and diebus aeternitatis.
that is to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old (or as
in the Original) from the beginning, from the days of eternity; which very well
agrees with that of the Apostle, In the beginning was the word, and the word was
with God, and the word was God, Joh. 1.1. he does not mean here the beginning of
the Creation, for then he might be accounted a blasphemer because he asserts
that he is God, Rev. 1.11. (...).
but he means, that God the Son was with God the Father, even from Eternity.
3ly. Immutability is attributed to him, Heb. 1.8. Joh. 8.58.
Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. And thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundations
of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands; they shall perish,
but thou remainest, and they all shall wax old as does a garment, and they
shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. The Lord
Jesus is not mutable as the creatures are, but he ever abides the same. Heb.
13.8. 4ly. Omnisciency, which is an essential property of God, and cannot be
ascribed to any created thing, but it is written of the Lord Jesus that he
knows all things, Rev. 2.23.
even the hearts and thoughts of men, Jer. 17.10.
I search the heart, and I try the reins; which is the great Attribute of God
alone, for it is he only, that is God, that can unlock the doors of the Soul,
and penetrate into the dark chambers thereof, and search out its secret
imaginations and actions. Peter could say to Christ, Lord thou know all
things, Joh. 21.17.
all things past, present, and to come are naked and plain to him: he needs
none to instruct him what has been, or shall be, or what the thoughts of men
are, Mat. 12.25. Jesus knew their thoughts, not only their words or external
actions, but their internal cogitations were manifest to him, 5ly, Ubiquity and
Omnipresency, as Christ says, Mat. 18.20.
where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them; now he could not have said this of himself, if he was not God, So Mat.
28 20. Lo I am with you to the end of the World. Lastly, (...), in omnibus
diebus.
Omnipotency is attributed to him, for he is able to subdue all things to
himself, Phil. 3.21. as there is nothing too hard for God the Father, so there
is nothing impossible to God the Son, he is (...), the Almighty, Rev. 1.8. Isa.
9.6.
and in Isa. he is called the mighty God, mighty to save his Elect ones, Omnia
Atttibuta propter (...) singulis Divinitatis personis competunt.
and mighty to confound his and their enemies. This clearly proves the Deity of
the Lord Jesus, for all the Attributes, (because of the sameness of the
Essence) belong to the three Persons, only with the limitation of a Persons
propriety.

4. Argument, ex operibus Divinis, from his divine works; for as never man
spoke as the Lord Jesus spoke, so there was never mere man did or could do, as
he has done, or can do. For (1) he created the World, all things both in
Heaven and Earth. Joh. 1.3.
All things were made by him, Heb. 1.10.
and without him was not any thing made, that was made. The Apostle in the
words [that was made] seems to exclude sin, as being no creature of Gods
making; sin came into the World, as rottenness into an apple, which is merely.
the defection of the creature from its primitive solidity, and pure original
essence; Heb. 1., 10. And thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation
of the Earth, the Heavens are the works of thy hands. 2ly, Conservation is an
act of the Lord Jesus, Coll. 1.16.
for he supports, conserves, and upholds all things by his omnipotent arm,
Coll. 1.17. 3ly, those miraculous Works which he did to confirm his doctrine do
evidently prove his Divinity, and call for divine faith, Joh. 14.11
as Christ said to Thomas, Believe me for the very works sake, what works were
they? why, they were such as are almost incredible, and to many seem
impossible, as giving sight to the blind, strength to the weak, health to the
sick, life to the dead, etc. but it would be tedious for me to relate all the
miracles he did upon the bodies of men and women, he did and does effect
greater things upon the Soul, Luke 4.18.
for he enlightens darkened understandings, heals broken hearts; likewise there
are his works for the good of his Church. My Father (says Christ) works
hitherto, and I work; Joh. 5.17.
Christ is continually working for the glory and happiness of his beloved ones,
for he protects them, as the apple of his eye, and sends his Spirit, who
conveys celestial treasure into their souls, fills them with grace, and
conducts them over the raging waves of this tumultuous World to the haven of
rest, Joh. 16.13, 14, 15.
and the land of eternal felicity. Christ's care is continual toward his
Church, and therefore he has, and does, and will work wonders for it. Thus his
divine works prove that he is more than a creature, yea, that he is the
Creator. Joh. 20.28.


5th Argum.
The fifth Argument to prove his Divinity, is deduced ex honor Divino, from the
divine honor given to him; God the Father says, I will not give mine honor
to another, i. e. Is. 4.8. Joh. 5.23.
any creature; yet it is said of Christ Jesus, That all men should honor the
Son, even (in the same manner, and in the same measure) as they honor the
Father; he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father, which has
sent him. He is not only to be honored as a person designated to the office of
Mediatorship, but also as he is the true and living God. For as Christ said to
Philip, He that has seen me, has seen the Father; so that one said concerning
the Trinity, (...). Greg. Naz.
I cannot think of one, but presently I am environed with the glory of three; I
cannot discern three, but immediately I am carried to adore the glorious Unity.
The Angels are said to adore and worship him, Heb. 1.6. When he brings his
first begotten into the world, he says, let all the Angels of God worship him,
i. e. give divine honor to him. Is. 6.3. The Angels did cry holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of Hosts. Now the divine Apostle says, that it was the glory of the
Lord Jesus, that the Prophet did behold in that glorious Vision, Joh. 12.41.
When the Angels were thus magnifying and adoring him (for they are but
ministering Spirits) in Rev. 5.12, 13. we have the whole regiment of them
celebrating his praise, Heb. 1.14.
as one worthy of divine honor. 2ly, Saints Militant do pay the tribute of
divine honor to him, who is their Lord and Savior. As (1) Faith, this is
accounted part of divine honor, as a learned Divine has defined it, Cultus
qui tendit in Deum, anquam in bonum nostrum. Ames Medull. Theol.
(says he) it is a worship which extends to God as our present good. Now that
Faith is proper to Christ as part of divine worship, I need not say much to
prove, because the scriptures are so clear in it, as Joh. 14.1. Ye believe in
God, believe also in me, i. e. believe that I am the second Person in the
blessed Trinity, therefore am able and faithful to perform what I have said and
promised unto you; Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now we know that the Scripture says it is sin to trust in man, Act.
20.21.
and a curse to them that rely on him for salvation; nay, to believe or depend
upon Angels, because they are but creatures, Jer. 17.5.
and it would derogate from the honor of God, that we should believe for
salvation from any but from him, who is all-sufficient, and all-mighty to save.
2ly, as Faith, so Prayer, which is part of divine worship, is frequently made
unto Christ. Prayer, as one says, is made up of two species or kinds,
Orationis species Duae sunt, Petitio and gratiarum actio Ames. Phil. 4.6.
scil. Petition and giving of Thanks. Be careful for nothing, but in every
thing by Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known to God; for he alone is the true object of all religious services, as
Christ told Satan, It is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. But, I suppose, Mat. 4.10.
this granted by all, Oration est voluntatis nostrae religiosa representatio
coram Deo, ut illa Deus, quasi afficitur Ames. Medul. Theol.
that Prayer is a religious Act. And thus that excellent Author defines it.
Prayer, says he, is a religious representation of our will before God, that he
may (as it were) be affected with it. My work then is to enquire whether this
part of divine honor be given unto Christ Jesus, as (1) Petition in the 2 Cor.
13.14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen; so 2 Thessalonians.
3.18. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen; 2 Timothy 4.22. The
Lord Jesus Christ be with thee. All which prove that petitions are made to
Christ, and that for the highest mercy, scil. grace and peace, Tim. 1.2. Romans
16.20, 21. 2 These 1.2.
which comprehend most spiritual blessings, and seeing the Apostle prays for
these things, it proves that he is a divine Person from whom he requests them,
or else he could never give such mercies, for who can give grace but God alone,
who is the fountain of grace: Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 16.
now grace and peace flow from the Lord Jesus to poor sinners, for he has made
peace by the blood of his Cross, it is he that has purchased peace for
believers with his Father, and grace in an abundant measure: Joh. 1.16.
I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly; (...) Gratiam super gratiam.
life is put here for grace, and other spiritual blessings; for it is out of
his fullness we all receive, and grace for grace. There is a fullness of
redundancy that dwells in the Lord Jesus, and well it may; for there dwells in
him the fullness of the Godhead Bodily. Col. 2.9. Romans 9.5.
Therefore the servants and true worshippers of God make their petitions to the
Lord Jesus for Grace, who is God over all Blessed for ever. Secondly The other
part, which is thanksgiving and praise, is by the Apostle Ascribed to him, 2 Timothy 4.18. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me, 2 Timothy 4 18.
unto his heavenly Kingdom, unto whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen. The
context makes it evident, that it is applied to the Lord Jesus, Heb. 1.6. When
he brings his first begotten into the World, he says, (...)
let all the Angels of God worship him. The word among the Hebrews for Worship,
sometimes signifies Prostrating the whole Body, as 2 Chronicles. 20.18. Jehosophat
and the men of Israel did (...) fall to the Ground before the Lord, 1. (...).
such worship is given to the Lord Jesus, Luke 17.16. The Lepper that was
cleansed, fell upon his Face at his Feet. 2ly, 2. (...)
It signifies to inclinate and bend the Head, as in Genesis 24.48. So the Angels
are said to (...) incurvate, Verticis inclinationem significat.
and bend their Heads to understand the things concerning Christ in the Gospel,
1 Pet. 1.12. 3ly, 3. (...)
A stooping of the Head with the Superior parts of the Body, Esther. 3.5. 4ly,
4. (...)
Lastly they use a word for worship which signifies to bless with Bended knees,
(...) genuflectere.
Psalm. 45.6. O come let us Worship, and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord
our maker; so it is said, Every knee shall bow to the Lord Jesus. All these
external gestures, are to signify the internal humble actings of the Mind. Now
seeing Angels are glorious Creatures, and that part of worship, scil. Petition
is not so proper to them, therefore they are employed in the other, scil.
Praise and Blessing, and Adoring of him although not for their redemption by
him, (being never captivated) yet for their confirmation and election in him,
for it is the opinion of our orthodox Divines, that the Angels in Glory, stand
by virtue of their eternal election in Christ, therefore they have cause to
extol, Rev. 5.12, 13.
praise, and magnify the Lord of Glory; we read that all Creatures in Heaven,
and in Earth, are at this word, giving honor, and blessing, and Praise to the
Lamb for ever and ever: This makes it evident, that Divine Honor is attributed
to the Lord Jesus, and there are sure grounds for it, if we consult and believe
the Scriptures, which term him, Zach. 13.7. Phil. 2.6.
The Fathers Fellow, Equal to God, i. e. the Father, But because the Lord of
Life and Glory did (...), empty himself of his glory, and honor, when he
assumed the humane nature, and became Man; therefore the most honor him little
more than if he was a man, I am something larger upon these particulars then I
intended; but when I consider (what the Apostle said, Phil. 2.10.11. Every
Tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of the Father.) It
is for the glory of God the Father, as well as the good of Souls, to understand
aright, and also confess this main fundamental truth, scil. the deity of
Christ, it oblieges me to enlarge a little, Mat. 28.9. (...)
to the end I might make it more perspicuous, I might he^r speak of being
Baptized into his name; Baptism is an Ordinance of Divine institution; and to
be Baptized in his Name, 2 Timothy 2.19.
is an obligation to become his in all ways of obedience: to exalt his name and
forsake Sin, all ought to yield Love and Service to the Lord Jesus.

6. Argument, Shall be from the comparing Scripture, of the Old and New
Testament, And we shall find, that what is atributed to Jehovah in the Old; the
same is to the Lord Jesus in the New Testament, and remember this, we are to
believe what the word of God says, and not what Caviling Unbelieving Men
affirm in Numbers. Number. 21.56.
The People are said to Sin, and Murmour against God, for which he sent Fiery
Serpents among them, compare this with 1 Cor. 10.9. There it is said they
tempted Christ, for the Angel which conversed with Abraham, wrestled with
Jacob, appeared to Moses, Compare Psalm. 45.6. with Heb. 1.8. thy throne O God
is for ever and ever.
and was with the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, was the Lord Jesus, as
is excellently, and evidently proved by Dr. Owen in his exercitations, Psalm.
68.18. compared with Ephesians. 4.8. Psalm. 102.25. with Heb. 1.10. And thou Lord in
the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, compare Isa. 8.13.14. with
Luke 2.34. Romans 9.33. and 1 Pet. 2.6. These places evidently prove the deity of
the Lord Jesus to any judicious and unprejudiced Reader; compare Isa. 6. with
Jo. 12. in Isa. it is said, he saw the Glory of the Lord, filling the Temple, in
Joh. it is said, the Prophet then beheld the Glory of Christ Jesus, compare
Isa. 40.9.10.11. with Jo. 10.11. In that Prophecy it is said, behold your God
and the Lord God will come and feed his Flock, and it is applied to the Lord
Jesus in the Gospel; in the last place compare Isa. 45. 22, 23, 24, 25. with
Romans 14.11. and Phil. 2.10. Do but read these Scriptures, and Study the Intent
and scope of them, and then you will conclude with the Apostle, that he is the
true God and Eternal life: 1 Jo. 5.20.
I have not writ the Places at Large, least my Book should swell too Big, but I
suppose you have Bibles, and will, Act. 17.11.
like those Noble Bereans, search the Scriptures.

7. Argument, To prove this great Point, is this, he that is the second Person
in the blessed Trinity is God, but Jesus Christ is so, therefore he is God;
that there is a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the essence is clear, both
from plain Scripture, and also from Arguments deduced from thence. The
Scriptures to prove it are these; 1 John 5.7.
For there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, and these three are one. This Scripture is sufficient (one would
think) both to confirm the truth, and also silence all Socinians that oppose
it, and that is but a weak evasion of theirs, when they say it signifies no
more than the words in the 8 verse, (...) ^i tres unum sunt. Beza
scil. that they agree in one; for in the Original it is, These three are one,
i. e. Three distinct Persons, subsisting in one and the same indivisible
essence, Mat. 3.16, 17. verses, will serve in some measure to Prove the Point,
there is the Lord Jesus ascending out of the Water, the Holy Spirit descending
from Heaven, and the Voice of the Father proclaming, this is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased. But a more plain Scripture is that, Mat. 28.19. Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. These Scriptures may suffice to prove the
Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine essence, but farther to confirm
this, that there are three distinct Persons, in one Divine essence, it may be
proved, (1) From their several, and distinct Names. (2) From their distinct
personal acts. (3) From their distinct personal Propertys. Mat. 28.19, 1 John
5.7.
(1) From their distinct Names, they are called Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, so
Father, Word, and Holy Ghost. These names do manifest a distinction, not of
Nature, and Essence (for they are one,) therefore of Personality. (2) From the
Distinct personal acts, ascribed to the three Persons, as (1) The giving of the
Spirit, is ascribed to the Father, Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter: the act of giving is proper to a Person that
has understanding and will. (2) Sending the Comforter, is ascribed to the Son,
Jo. 15.26. And it is proper to Christ, to send his holy Spirit to his Servants.
(3) Guiding into all truth, is ascribed to the Holy Ghost, Jo. 16.13. their
Personal Acts, as Giving, Sending, and Guiding; prove the distinction and
trinity of persons, yet there can be but one single and (...) essence, which
proves the unity. (3) that they are three distinct persons, is evident from
their distinct Personal and incommunicable propertys; as (1) The personal
Property of the Father, is to beget the Son: Heb. 1.5. (2) The personal
Property of the Son, is to be Begotten: Joh. 1.14. We beheld his glory, the
glory as of the only begotten of the Father. (3) The personal property of the
Holy Ghost, is to proceed from the Father and the Son, Jo. 15.26. And when the
Comforter is come, whom I will send from the Father, even the Spirit of truth
which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. I need not say more
to prove the Blessed Trinity, or that the Lord Jesus is the second Person; of
those that require further satisfaction in this point, let them consult the
famous Duplesses in his treatise de vera Religione. I could say much more to
prove this Point, that the Lord Jesus is a Divine Person, and that he is the
Second (in order although not in Nature,) in the blessed trinity, but having
proved the trinity from the word of God, I suppose the other Granted, viz. That
the Lord Jesus is God.

8. Argument, Shall be taken from the greatness of the sufferings that the Lord
Jesus endured, and satisfaction he made to his Fathers justice, the sufferings
of Christ were infinite in regard they were the sufferings of an infinite
Person: Act. 20.28.
The Church of God which he has purchased with his Blood, Est aliquid in
Christo quod non est passum. Vrsin.
spoken Senechdochally, because of the communication of properties; the
communication of properties is to attribute to the whole Person, that which is
the property of one of the Natures, the Deity of the Lord Jesus is impassible
and altogether incapable of depression, suffering, or affliction; it was his
humane Nature suffered, and died, it was Christ who is God-man, that did bear
our sorrows, 1 Timothy 2.5. He is called man; and in 1 Jo. 3.16. He is called God;
Hereby perceive we the Love of God because he laid down his Life for us,
continebat paenas maximas. quia miseriam illam totam aequabat hominum peccata
merebantur. Ames Med. Theo.
he, what he? even he, that was God-man, in one person, and two distinct
natures. By the one he underwent Death, and by the other ( viz. his divine) he
overcame and triumphed over Death and the Grave; if he had not been an Almighty
Person, he would have been pressed down under that load of guilt and
punishment, for he sustained the greatest punishment, in that it did equal all
the misery which our Sins merited, and we to eternity ought to have suffered.
(2) The satisfaction he made was infinite: Bellarmin (de Justificil. 2. Cap. 7.
Ser. 4.) confesses, that nothing can make satisfaction for sin, (which is an
infinite wrong to God) but that only which is Infinite in value: so was the
(...), the price that Christ paid, Ca. 22. i.e. quod nos in aeternum
debuissimus pati. Vrsin.
it was of infinite Value, for it gave satisfaction to infinite justice,
offended by the Sinner; he could never have made peace except he had broken
down the middle Wall of Partition, between God the party offended, and poor
Sinners the partys offending, and this he did by that Price he paid, viz. His
blood. 1 Pet. 1.19. And having paid the uttermost Farthing, he came out of the
Prison of the Grave, Id circo illis tertio diae vita resumpta denuo apparuit.
Joseph. lib. 14. Antiq. Cap. 4.
and appeared to his Disciples, as both Scripture and History relate; the third
day he reassumed life, and appeared to his Disciples; if Christ had not done
and suffered that which was equivolent to the demands of divine justice, and
made full satisfaction for every Sin of his elect ones; we might then question
whether his satisfaction was of infinite value; but he has done so and made
complete satisfaction; therefore it is said, The Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses from all sin. 1 John 1.7. Joh. 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World. Now this could
not be if he had not completely satisfied every demand of justice; and paid an
infinite Price for our Sins. Peccati gravitas irae Dei immensum and
intolerabile pondus, mortis imperium, tirannis Diaboli, quae tollere, vincere,
abolere placare, nemo potuit nisi Deus. Bucanum.
So that the Sufferings being Infinite, and the Satisfaction infinite, it must
needs be of an Infinite Person, which is, Christ the second Person of the
Blessed Trinity. and so his suffering and satisfaction becomes Meritorious. now
there are three things required in a Person that merits (1) He must be a free
voluntary Agent, no way obligated to the performance of that act done by him,
but of this sort there are neither Angels nor Men, for they are all obligated
and enjoined to do their uttermost for the glory of God. (2) What they merit
with, must be of their own, but (as the Apostle says) What have we (or Angels)
that we have not received, 1 Cor. 4.7. Mensura debet esse unigenira and similis
mensurato.
(3) The work must be equivalent to the reward. But these qualifications are
found in none but in Christ and the work he did: he was a free voluntary Agent
no way obliged till he bound himself and became our surety, as he himself
says, Joh. 10.17, 18. Therefore does the Father love me, because I lay down my
Life, none ((...)) takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self, I have power
to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again. So the work was perfected
by his own Divine Power as being Almighty, and it was of equal value to the
reward, even grace, pardon, life and glory for ever; then we conclude that
Christ Jesus the Inviter, is God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5.

9. Argument, From Christ's Testimony of, or concerning himself; and we shall
find this is no slight Argument, if not prevalent with Pagans, yet it should
with those who term themselves Christians, for if they will not believe his
Testimony, let them cease to be called by that glorious name; let them be
Christians (...), (...) Jus.
not in words, but in deeds: now Christ says of himself, I am the Son of God,
Mark. 14.62. not by Creation, as Angels and Men, not by adoption as Saints, for
then it could not be Blasphemy in Christ, as the Jews termed it, but I am the
Son of the blessed God by eternal generation. Joh. 11.4. Joh. 5.18. Rev. 1.8.
The Jews accuse Christ of this, That he said he was the Son of God, without
any equivocation or mental reservation. Now it would be horrid to think that
Christ did not testify the truth, who is (...), Joh. 14.6. ipsae veritas, truth
it self. And if we believe he says true, when he declares he came to give
himself (...), a ransom for man, Mat. 20.28. We ought to believe him in this
especially. 2dly, Christ testifies that he is one with the Father, Joh. 10.30.
one in Essence, Joh. 5.23. Phil. 2.6. (...).
equal in glory and dominion, for it is no Robbery in Christ to be equal to
God, or to be Gods fellow, Zach. 13.7. and the reason is because he is God,
Joh. 1.1. Joh. 14.10, 11. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me; the meaning of which is (in short) I and my Father are one; according to
that known Maxim, Nihil in Deo est quod non sit ipse Deus, (...), Joh. 15.26.
There is nothing in God which is not God himself; there is a mutual immeation
and eternal inseparable union between the Father and the Son. I might here
declare how the Spirit that proceeds from God, according to Athanasius's Creed,
proceeds from Christ also, John 20.22. He breathed upon them, and they received
the Holy Ghost.

10. Argument, from the Testimony of the Prophets and Apostles; this is of
weight to those who are called Christians, and own the Scriptures to be the
Word of Truth, and the Penmen thereof to be guided by the holy Spirit of God, 2
Pet. 1.21. I shall not number up many places, because I would finish this head
of Christ's eternal Deity. The holy Prophet says, The Lord said unto my Lord,
Psalm. 45.6. Heb. 1.8.
sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool, which
Scripture Christ applies to himself, Matt. 22.24. Isaiah called him the Lord of
Hosts, chap. 8.13, 14. applied to Christ, Luke. 2.34. Romans 9.33. and 1 Pet.
2.8. and Isa. 9.6. the mighty God, Jer. 23.6. Jehovah our Righteousness. Now
for the Apostle, see Peter's Confession, Mat. 16.16. Thou art Christ the Son of
the living God. Jo. 1.1. The word was God. Jo. 6.69. Thomas's confession in Jo.
20.28. My Lord and my God. The Apostle Paul, Romans 1.3.4. His Son Jesus Christ
our Lord. Verse. 4. Declared to be the Son of God with power. And in Chap. 9.5.
God over all blessed for ever. Hear and see you that deny the assertions of the
ancient reverend Fathers, will you or can you deny the Testimony of those who
were chosen of God to bear witness to this Truth? I might add more (as 1 John
3.16. and 5.20. The true God and Eternal Life.

11. Argument, from the acknowledgment of ancient Rabbis who were most eminent
for the Interpretation of the old Testament upon that Scripture, Psalm. 110.3.
Jehovah said unto Jehovah, sit thou at my right hand. Rabbi Jonathan says,
Rabbi Jonathan lib. Col. and Misde. Tehillim in Psalm. 2.7.
Although Christ was David's Son, according to his Manhood, yet he was to be
David's Lord according to his Godhead. And so do Rabbi Jonathan, and the
public Commentaries interpret this place, on Jer. 23.6. Rabbi Abda does
confess it is meant of the Messiah, who is (says he, Comment. in Then. in
verse. 6.) The Eternal Jehovah. Rabbi Moses, Hadarsan expounding Zeph. 3.9.
says, Jehovah here in this place signifies nothing else but the Messiah. The
Caballistical Expositors among the Hebrews, do prove Christ the promised
Messiah, to be God as well as Man. In Isa. 1. chap. 9.
Rabbi Hacadosch expounding the words of Jeremiah before recited, finding the
name Jehovah there, wherein the Hebrew is compounded of 3 Letters, Jod, Vau,
and He, twice repeated, does Cabalistically discourse of it thus, The Letter He
in Jehovah is compounded of two Letters, named Daleth and Vau, so shall the
Messiah be made of two natures, the one Divine, the other humane, and as in
Jehova there is twice He, and consequently two Daleths and two Vaus contained;
so there are two filiations or childhoods in Messiah, The one whereby he shall
be the Son of God, the other whereby he shall be the Son of a Virgin; and as in
Jehova the letter He is twice put, and yet in effect makes but one Letter, so
in Messiah there shall be two distinct natures and yet but one Christ. Here
although the Argumentation may be denied, yet we see their belief concerning
the Messiah. I might quote more places and Authors, as Rabbi Simen, and Ibda
upon Deuteronomy. 6. Jehova our Lord is one Lord, the first to signify God the
Father, the second the Son, the third the holy Ghost, and the Word one to
signify the unity of Essence; so likewise Isa. 6.3. (I will add this one more)
Philo de Exulibus, speaking of the Death of a high Priest, by which they should
be redeemed from their Captivity, says, That this High Priest shall be the
very Word of God, who shall be void of all sin, voluntary and involuntary,
whose father shall be God, and this Word shall be that Fathers wisdom, see how
agreeable this is to Scripture, Joh. 1.1.
The Word was God: 1 Pet. 1.19. A Lamb without Spot. 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the
Wisdom and Power of God.

12. Argument, I might here produce the sayings of some Heathens according to
what was revealed to them. Zoroastes called him (secundam mentem) the second
mind, they had extraordinary Revelations. Clem. Alex. l. 1. Strom.
Hermes Trismegistus calls him, The first begotten Son of God, his only Son,
his dear, eternal, immutable, and incorruptible Son, whose sacred name is
Ineffable; these are his words Lactantius lib. 4. Divin. Instit. c. 6. makes
much mention of certain Heathen Prophetesses, called Sybilla, Mern. Iter. in
Demund Augus lib. De Civit. Dei cap. 23.
that Prophesied concerning Christ, now as he says, this is the expression of
one of them, Know thy God which is the Son of God: Another in Acrostick verses,
treats of Jesus Christ, Son of God, the Savior; although these may not be
much accounted of, yet they were made use of by Justin Martyr, Origin,
Augustine, and Constantine the Emperor, against the Heathens who denied the
Divinity of Christ. Virgil applies some of their Prophesies, (I shall not now
cite the occasion) as this Jam nova progenies Coelo dimittitur alto. Chara Dei
soboles.
Now a new Progeny or offspring is sent down from Heaven, the dearly beloved
Son of God, with many other expressions to the like purpose. Thus we perceive
from Scripture, and from extraordinary Revelation, that Jesus Christ the
Messiah, is proved and owned to be God. I might come nearer home, and allege
the confession of all Orthodox Divines, but I made mention of some before, only
let me add that of Bucan, that learned Divine, Verus Deus manens homo factus
est, Filius haber eande^ essentiam cum Patre. Vrs.
so remaining true, God he became true Man: thus have I endeavored (with as
much brevity and perspicuity as I could) to set forth who this Person is that
invites poor laboring heavy laden Sinners to come unto him, he is God,
therefore able to help and succor poor sinners; Heb. 7.25.
he is God, therefore faithful to his promise; he is God, therefore willing to
refresh and ease weary Souls, I might here add the very confession of the
Devils, who are forced to acknowledge this Truth.
Joh. 6.31. then Sinner be ready to close with his gracious tenders of mercy
unto thee. But more of this in the application.

3. How does Christ invite, 1. By his Word. 2. His Ministers. 3. His Spirit.

1. By his Word, as Christ said to the Jews, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures
for they testify of me. And Isa. 45.22. Look unto me and be ye saved all the
ends of the earth, for I am God, and there is none else, Christ (for it is
applied to him, as we may see in the following words, verse. 23. compared with
Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.10.) would fain insinuate himself into the affections and
hearts of poor creatures. I am God, and there is ((...) Nullus praeterea) none
else, as if Christ should say, Soul, there is no Savior, no Redeemer to
deliver thee; if thou seek'st to Eternity [as the Hebrew word (...) sometimes
signifies] there is none that can help thee, for I am God, and all others thou
can go to, are but creatures, therefore far unable to save thee; then sinner
(...) turn thy eyes unto me, (...)
fix thy face here, and find salvation, Isa. 55.1.2, 3. Ho every one that
thirsts come, thirsts for peace, pardon, grace, salvation, and glory, come;
says he, though never so Poor, never a good work, a Gentile without God, a
stranger to the covenant of grace, no money, yet come; believe, and I have all
things for thee, come to the Waters, my grace is free like the Ocean for Rich
or Poor, High or Low, do but come, do but believe, and fill thy bucket, satisfy
thy Soul with marrow and fatness, and Wine on the Lees, well refined. If thou
art a poor publican that dare not look up to Heaven, Isa. 25.6. Luke 12.13
yet look down upon my Blood. If my Fathers holiness does affright thee, yet
let my Blood revive and cheer thy Soul, if thou art (in the Court of thy own
Conscience) a condemned Malefactor, yet look unto me, come unto an able and
willing Savior. Joh. 7.37, 38. Rev. 22.17
If thou thirst, come, believe, and then out of thy Belly shall flow Rivers of
Living water. Thou shall have grace abundantly. We see here is free invitation
to sinners, those who labor and thirst may come: So hear in my Text, Come unto
me.

2ly. By his Ministers. Christ has taken care in all Ages to have some to
publish the glad tidings of Salvation, and to invite and persuade Sinners to
come unto him: he sent forth his Apostles with this commission, To Preach the
Gospel to every Creature, Mark 16.15. Now the Gospel contains the glad tidings
of Salvation through a Redeemer, it calls the Sinners to believe in Christ, and
to accept of him, now this is the work of his Ministers, and for this end they
are Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.18.20.
He has committed to them the Ministry of Reconciliation and care. We are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Christ by his Ministers prays and
beseeches the Sinners to be reconciled unto God, to himself, and to his own
Conscience. Christ has prepared the Feast of fat things, therefore he sends
forth his Servants to bid the guests, Luke 14.17. But too too many have their
excuses, as those in the 18.19.20. verses.

3ly. By his Spirit, as in Rev. 22.17. The spirit and the Bride say come, the
spirit convinces the Soul of its impoverished condition, and declares the
abundant Riches of the Lord Jesus, Jo. 16.14. He shall glorify me, for he shall
take of mine and shall show it unto you, the Spirit is called (...), which
signifys not only a Comforter, Jo. 16.7.
but an advocate also, 1 John 2.1. And the Spirit does plead and solicit in
the behalf of Christ, he shows the Sinner the happiness, the glory, and
privilege of coming to Christ, and the danger that attends the Soul upon
refusing, indeed the Word and Ministers will do nothing effectually unless the
spirit cooperate: they may persuade, but it is he alone prevails and conquers,
and makes of unwilling willing; he can make the Heart flexible, and make it
bend to the will of Christ; he prepares the desires in the Soul, then leads it
to the Lord Jesus, Pra. 16.1.
that the Soul may derive out of his abundant and redundant fullness, grace for
grace; Jo. 1.16.
Love and all grace is the work of the blessed Spirit, Gal. 5.22. He inables
the Soul to apprehend Christ with all his benefits, for the natural man knows
nothing of Christ, or the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14 15.
but the Spiritually enlightened man discerns and is affected with them; those
full treasures which are in Christ are the believers, and they rejoice in them;
the Spirit has invited and brought them to Christ, and now they rest and center
there; Christ and none but him is their Language, as the Apostle Paul, Phil.
3.9.

4ly. (...), the Reasons of the point. 1. Negatively. 2. Possitivly. 1.
Negatively, He does not invite thee, Sinner, because he has need of thee, for
he is God blessed for ever, he is the beloved of the Father; Col. 1.16.
He is the Heir of all things, thou indeed have need of him, and art undone,
and that for ever, if thou come not to him, but seeing he is God we must
conceive no deficiency or want in him, Psalm. 50.12. He possesses all in himself.

2ly, Neither is it because thou can add any thing to his eternal infinite
blessedness, for as from infiniteness there can be no detraction, so to it
there can be no addition, he will add glory to, and confer happiness upon thee,
if thou come unto him, if thou do embrace and accept of him, he will give
thee Rest, which implys all spiritual blessings, both for time and Eternity.

Why Christ invites.
2ly, Possitively, 1. In Obedience to his Fathers Will, as he was Mediator, for
although he was in the form of God, yet he did (...), Phil. 2.6.7.
empty himself, disrepute himself, and took upon him the form of a Servant,
therefore Christ says so frequently, I come not to do my own will (in reguard
of his Manhood) but the will of him that sent me, Jo. 5.30. Jo. 6.38. I came
down from Heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. In
the 39.40. He declares what is the Fathers will, even the Salvation of poor
Sinners; the Father he wills, and the Son he wills, the eternal well-being of
poor Sinners, therefore he clothed himself with a body of Flesh, to the end he
might declare and fulfill his Fathers (...), Luke 2.14.
good pleasure toward poor perishing Creatures. For allthough he was a Son,
yet he learned Obedience, Heb. 5.8. Therefore he says (...), Heb. 10.7,
behold I come to do thy will O God, Heb. 10.7.

2. Reason, Why Christ thus condescends to invite poor Sinners to come unto him
may be taken from his tender love and compassion to poor Souls, Christ Jesus is
full of tenderness and love, as he manifested when he was grieved for their
unbelief; for faith is the leading grace (as I showed before) which carries
the Soul to Christ, in Mat. 14.14. We read Christ was moved with compassion,
(...), his bowels did yearn toward the multitude, and then it was only bodily
food they needed; but Oh how much more does Christ commiserate and pity poor
distressed Souls, that is a kind of a pathetick expression of Christ, in Jo.
5.40. Ye will not come unto me that ye may have life. As if Christ should have
said, you my Friends, my Countrymen, Jo. 11.25.
you are all morally dead, but I am the resurrection and the Life, And he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet should he live. You are lost ones,
but I came to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19.10. you are
miserable Sinners, but I a merciful Savior, Heb. 2.17. Therefore come unto me,
believe in me, and ye shall have Life, and have it more abundantly; all that
Christ Jesus did and suffered was from a principle of love to poor Souls. Jo.
10.10.
We commonly say Magnes Amoris Amor, Love is the Loadstone of Love, but now
here was no such Argument in the Sinner, for instead of Love, here he found
hatred; instead of Friends, deadly enemies; therefore Christ did all from his
Love and Pity, ((...)) he saw the Sinners Misery, Ezekiel. 16. Therefore is moved
with mercy; so Christ did when he foresaw the destruction of Jerusalem, Luke
19.41.42.
He beheld the City and wept over it, saying, if thou had known, even then,
at least in this thy day, the things which belong to thy Peace, but now they
are hid from thine Eyes. Christ had been here inviting with much love and
kindness, but they refused and slighted his invitation; we see here when
Christ's words and Doctrine will not prevail with hard-hearted Sinners, he is so
full of compassion, notwithstanding that, his Soul mourns in secret for their
Pride, Folly, and Unbelief; Illis compatitur a quibus patitur. Ang. Jer. 13.17.
when gracious intreatys will not bring the Sinner home, he himself will send
tears, sighs, and groans after him, thus we see Christ invites because he is
full of tenderness and love to poor Souls. O Sinner, then retard not, but love
thy self and come to Christ.

3. Reason, Because he knows the worth and excellency of their Souls, the
excellency of the Soul did consist at first in its conformity to the Creator in
wisdom and true holiness, but upon Sinning, the Soul lost its pristine Beauty
and primitive excellency, only this remains, scil. the faculty and capability
of being restored and renewed again. The worth of the Soul transcends all
sublimary things; Mat. 16.26.
What is a Man profited if he gain (not a City, not a Kingdom, not some parts
of (...) but) the whole World, and loose his own Soul. Now because Christ knows
this, therefore he invites them to come unto him, that they may not lose a
Jewel of so high value, that there is no exchange for it, see Psalm 49.7.8. None
can by any means redeem his Brother, nor give to God a Ransom for him. He
gives the Reason in the 8. v. For the Redemption of the Soul is precious and it
cease for ever. Well may he say the redemption of the Soul is precious, for
no less then the precious blood of Christ (who was God-man) will redeem it, 1
Pet. 1.19. and it cease forever as to its deliverance by any Creature, so
Christ seems to intimate in my Text; and in v. 29. I have reguard to the better
part, even to the Soul; I will give you rest for your Soul, and indeed that is
the happiest and most glorious rest.

4. Reas. Because he knows it will prove in vain to go or seek to any other, he
alone can bear their Burden, and ease them of their Labor and weary Travel.
Men cannot help, Angels which excel in strength cannot succor in
Soul-distresses; Isa. 45.22. a quibus vulnetatur, illis medetur.
look unto me and be ye saved, says Christ, he who was wounded by thee, is the
only Physician for thee, Jo. 14.16. I am the way, the truth, and the Life. He
is the direct way to Salvation and Glory, God has made him to be Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. If thou want Wisdom, thou
must go to Christ for he is the Teacher come from God. 1 Cor. 1.30. Jo. 3.2.
Col. 1.19.
If Righteousness, we must seek to Christ, and so for all mercies. For it has
pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell. He has ability to save
and willingness too; come unto me says Christ, why? For there is no other name
given under Heaven whereby you can be saved, Act. 4.12. All Power is given unto
me says Christ, Jo. 17.2. I have power to kill, and power to make a live;
therefore Sinner be persuaded to return and come unto me, and find rest: I can
ease thee from the yoke of Bondage, and I can make thee free with the Privilege
of the Sons of God.

5. Reas. Because he knows the weight of Glory the Sinner will lose, and the
greatness of the misery he involves himself into if he refuse. It is not a
temporal but eternal, not a light but a weight of Glory, that the refusing
Sinner will fall short of: He knows the misery is great, the Burden
intolerable, the Flames inextinguishable, the Fire eternal, that will be the
portion of those who refuse to come, Jo. 3.36. He that believes not the Son,
shall not see Life, (which implies all happiness, peace and glory,) but the
wrath of God abides on him. And who can define or conceive the greatness of
that Wrath? or who can endure it? Isa. 33.14.
Who can dwell with devouring Fire? who can lie dow in everlasting flames?
Therefore Sinner come, here is Glory, refuse and perish for ever. The five
Foolish Virgins were shut out of Heaven because they came not to Christ in
their Life time, for says Christ, I know you not. If they had come to Christ
before, Mat. 25.10.11.12.
he had known them at this time also, if they had believed in him (for as I
have showed coming is believing) they would certainly have been saved by him,
for says Christ, I will in no wise cast out those who come unto me, Jo 6.37.

6. Reas. He invites because this was the end for which he came into the World,
it was to seek, as well as to save them which are lost, Luke 19.10. For this
very end he divested him-himself of Glory, and took upon him a servil
condition. Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners. 1 Timothy 1.15.
Not to be only an Example as some fondly conceive, but he came to save them,
and that Sinners believing in him might obtain eternal Life; what is the main
scope of the Gospel but to hold forth and tender Christ Jesus a Savior to
miserable Sinners, and to call after them to believe in and embrace him? Jo.
3.16.
For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, (there is the
tender of Christ) that whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have
everlasting Life; observe the words, Believe in him. Not only believe, for that
is not faith properly which is not in Christ, Act. 20.20. Repentance toward
God, and faith toward Jesus Christ. So that I say this was Christ's design that
Sinners might come unto him; therefore he entreats them, and calls after them
to accept of him that they may live by him.

I come now to the application, which shall be, 1. For Information. 2.
Reprehension. 3. Council.

1. For Information, Does Christ invite sinners to come unto him, learn hence
the gracious condescension and humility of Christ, Here is mercy upon her
knees, to teach misery to bow. It is great condescension, if we consider well
who he is that ivites; (as I before manifested) he is not a meer-man, or an
Angel, but God blessed for ever; not a Creature, but the Creator, the Heir of
all things; the possessor of Heaven and Earth: it is great condescension in a
Lord, to court his offending Servant to be reconciled; a King his rebellious
Subjects; but this surpasses all examples, as it is Storied of Augustus, that,
Ei gratius fuit Nomen Pietatis, quam potestatis, That the name of Piety, was
more grateful to him then the name of Potency. So much better may it be said of
Christ, Ei gratius fuit nomen humilitatis, Mat. 9.13.
quam potestatis, Humility more then power, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am
meek, and lowly of Spirit.

2. If we further consider who they are he invites: not the righteous, but
Sinners, not those who have light Burdens, a few Sins, (as they may conceive;)
abundance of Morality (though this is commendable) excellent education, a sweet
and flexible disposition, of a noble extraction, Wealthy, and Honorable; but
they are the heavy laden ones, Mat. 11.5. Luke 4.18, 19, 20.
the Sick, the Poor and needy, the Blind, the Lame, the Distressed, the
Captivated, the Lost, these are the Persons that Christ invites.

2ly, It informs us of the immensity, and profundity of the love of Christ,
Ephesians. 3.18.19. That you may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
Breadth, and Length, and Depth, and Height, (...). Arist.
and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge. It is unparalled Love
beyond expression, and beyond conception; it is as long as eternity; as high as
Heaven. To love, says the Philosopher, Is to wish that which we esteeem good
to any one, and to the uttermost of our power procure that good unto him. This
diffinition may truly be applied to Christ, for he desires they may participate
of the greatest good, scil. His Fathers Love, and of himself, and of eternal
rest and happiness: and Christ Jesus has procured all these for Poor Souls, if
they will but come unto him; he invites the unworthy, the undeserving, that he
may show mercy unto them. David did show great love to the house of Saul, when
he sent for Mephibosheth to eat bread at his Table; but yet nothing comparable
to this of Christ's calling after Sinners to come and sit down with him in his
Kingdom, 2 Samuel 9.56.
Rev. 3.21.

2. Use is of Reprehension, to Sinners in General, that refuse to come. Does
Christ invite thee and will thou refuse to come? does he condesend to woo, and
entreat thee, and wilt not thou consent? shall he call, and will thou stop
thine Ears? shall he be willing to ease thee of thy Burden, and will thou be
unwilling to accept of Rest? What shall Mercy entreat, Orat. Misericordia,
tacet miseria.
and shall misery be Silent? Shall the Physician offer Cordials freely, and the
Patient refuse and Perish? what must the Judge court the guilty condemned
Malefactor to accept of a Pardon, Orat. Judex silet Reus.
and shall he obstinately slight it; O what stupidity! what folly and
ingratitude is this to the Lord of glory, when he so friendly invites thee;
do thou think thy blind excuses will serve thee in the day of Christ? like
those in Luke 14.17, 18, 19, 20. But more particularly. 1. This is a reproof to
those who condemn this invitation, and O how many justly fall under this
reproof, many contemn it because they Imagine they have better provision then
Christ can give unto them; his Person is contemned by them; his tenders of
grace Slighted, his Ordinances disregarded, his name must be rooted out from
their Israel, they see no necessity of coming to him; they have a better
foundation to build upon; contrary to the great Apostles Doctrine, 1 Cor. 3.11.
he says, Thus Sinners Imagine.
Christ is the only Foundation. But they can build upon something, either
within, or without them, that will support their tottering structure, firmer
than the Rock of Ages, the Lord Jesus, therefore they contemn both Christ and
coming to him; we will not believe in him; we will believe in our selves, say
the deluded Quakers; we have something within, Our Light will save us; but what
if your Light be darkness; so the Papists say (for they are nearly allied) we
care not for coming, for we have enough either of our own works of
supererrogation, or else in the Church Treasury; and if I but open and empty my
Bag, Luke 24.25.26.
the Pope will fill my Hand with other men's good works and merits, sufficient
to procure Life for me; but O Fools, and slow of Heart, to believe what the
Scripture says concerning Christ, and what Christ says concerning himself;
will thou contemn Christ, for thine own conceited Righteousness, or for the
Righteousness of another, who is but a mere Man; the Apostle Paul would not,
durst not rely upon this; Phil. 3.3 7, 8, 9.
but fled out of himself into the Lord Jesus: thou contemnest him without whom
thou can never be saved, if the word of God be true. Jo. 3.18.36.
Thou do not come to him, but thou runest from him, and he will one day judge
thee for it, and count thee among the number of his Enemies, Luke 19.27. For
thou do trample under foot the Blood of Christ, without which there is no
cleansing, 1 Jo. 1.7. The Blood of Christ Cleanses from all Sin. And without
which there is no Pardon, Heb. 10.29.
Heb. 9.22. Without sheding of Blood, no remission of Sins; one day God will
reprove thee, and set thy Sins in order before thee; and this will be none of
the least, thy contemning Christ, and his invitation; and so consequently glory
and salvation.

2ly, Reproof to those who do not contemn coming to Christ, but neglect and
defer it; they are for Cras, Cras, to Morrow, to Morrow: They have
procrastinations and delays, they think of coming, but not now, it is too soon
yet, they were yet in Flore Etatis, in the Flower of their Age, and they have
not yet passed through the Pleasures of the Spring; their Bones are full of
Sapp, they have Health and Strength as yet, therefore time enough; yet a little
more Slumber, a little more folding of the Hands together; if we come now, we
must leave our Sins; we must then deny the World, Ephesians. 5.15.
the Flesh, and Satan, we must then walk circumspectly, we must not then be
conformable to this World, Romans 12.2.
but there is time enough yet for all these things; say thou so Sinner, then
I would ask thee one serious question, When will thou come; Thou may be ready
to say to morrow, but Christ says to Day, this present day, is only certain to
thee, Heb. 3.15.
to morrow thou may be in thy Grave; it is a dangerous and evil thing to
neglect Christ one hour for thy Soul; and how will thou escape if thou neglect
so great Salvation; Heb. 2.3. Further, consider it is not in thy own power, to
come when thou please; (but more of this when I come to answer objections in
the second Doctrine) thou may be deprived of Reason; thy Heart may be
hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin, and Satan, therefore if thou
neglectest Christ and his invitation now he is weighting, Cant. 5.2. It
declares thou esteemest the World above Christ; thy Lusts above thy immortal
Soul; O what words are bitter enough to be written against thee? what can
thou neglect Christ and his tenders of mercy for such trifles as these? O
wretched creature, turn thine Eyes about and behold Christ, open thine Ears and
hearken to him see if there be not more in Christ and his, invitation, then all
the World will afford; if it be but in that word Rest, and that for thy Soul.

3ly, It reproves those, who notwithstanding they feel themselves burdened,
yet keep off from coming unto Christ; they think to ease themselves, their good
meaning or their Prayers, or some little external reformation keep them back,
if they can but obtain a little, (though false) peace of conscience, here they
rest; what Sinner do thou make of Christ? do thou think he cannot or will
not ease thee? if he alone can, why do thou not come unto him? if thou say
he will not, then thou make him who is God, a Lier; for he invites thee to
come; I tell thee, Christ takes it unkindly from thee that thou will not give
Credit to him, Jo. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me (says Christ) that ye may
have Life, Peace, Rest, and happiness; thou art the Guest he has sent forth
his servants to invite, all things are ready prepared for thee, Luke 14.17.
Therefore thou of all others art to be reproved, when thou refusest to come,
thou give advantage to Satan, and wrongest thine own Soul, (...), thou must
not think to gather Canaan Grapes, of rest and Peace, from Thorns of thine own
planting, thou must come to Christ if thou will taste them, and have eternal
rest.

3ly, For council, Christ does graciously invite, therefore I would council you
to come unto him; let not Christ Jesus call and entreat in vain; he invites to
come without Money, and without Price, come though poor; he has riches for you,
Isa. 55.1.2.
if Blind he has Eye salve, if Naked he has clothing, Rev. 3.18. come I say
unto him, for he has all, Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him all
fullness should dwell, fullness of Pardon, fullness of Grace, fullness of
Glory, Out of his fullness we all receive grace for grace, Jo. 1.16. And then
Further, he is all, and in all, Col. 3.11. If you have him, you have all; there
are treasures in him, Col. 2.3. Not treasures of wrath and punishment, but
treasures of mercy and grace, come then, and make no delays, come now, or else
thou may come never, come ease thy laboring Burdened Soul, Christ is
willing, then refuse not.

Some Motives to enforce this word of Council.

1. Consider if thou come not now he entreats, thou will declare great
disingenuity and ingratitude; has Christ condescended so far as to entreat
thee, manifested so much Love as to call after thee, and will thou not return?
what is there no retaliation? no embracing his offers? this was the great Sin
of the Jews, Jo. 1.11.
He came to his own, but his own received him not. He tendered himself, but
they refused him, Prodigosa res est Benificium non rependere. Lycurgus.
O what horrid ingratitude is this, for such unparralled love, Salvation
offered, but they put it from them, Luke 13.16. This (I say) was their Sin, and
base unthankfulness to Christ, so it will be thine if thou do not receive
him, and come unto him, this is requiting evil for good, Pro. 17.13. The
Persians Punished Ingratful Men with Death; and Queen Elizabeth in a Letter to
Henry the Fourth King of France, used this expression, If there be any
unpardonable Sin in the World, Camb. Eliz.
it is Ingratitude. Oh Sinner, be not Ungrateful, do not slight and neglect
Christ's gracious invitations.

2ly, If thou consent not and hearken to Christ, thou will hearken to Satan,
for where the ears and heart are shut to Christ, they are open to Sin and
Satan, so it was with the Jews, when they would not believe Christ, that he was
the Son of God, they presently believe Satan, and term him a Blasphemer, and a
Devil.

3ly, Consider that it is he alone can help thee, and if thou seek unto any
other Physician it may cost thee thy Life, even the Life of thy Soul, it will
be with thee as it was with King Asa, who when he was sick, sought not to the
Lord, but to Physicians of no value, 2 Cron. 16.12. and so he perished in his
affliction; If thou mountest up to Heaven, and from thence go down to the
Deep, if thou compassest the whole Universe, to seek for another Savior, (...)
it will be but Labor spent in vain, Isa 45.22. Christ says, Look unto me,
and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth; for I am God, and there is none
other; therefore none other Savior, because there is no other God; for he that
is any thing less then God, (who is altogether Infinite) is no way sufficient,
neither can he be a complete Savior to Poor Sinners, Thy transgressions O
Sinner are infinite, thou have broken the pure spiritual Law of thy Creator,
thou can not make satisfaction, because it requires that which is infinite:
Men or Angels cannot do it for thee; the Pope himself with all his
Church-treasures, cannot satisfy for the least of his own Transgressions; it
may be said to him, as Agesilaus said to the Thasians when (for some great
Favor received of him) they built him a Temple and deified him, and withal
sent Ambassadors to certify him of it; Can your Country men (said he) make Gods
of men? To which, Zenophon.
answering him, they could; Let them first make themselves Gods (replied he)
and then I will believe they can make me one: so say I, when the Pope can save
himself, I shall have greater grounds to expect help from him. But Further,
thou art obnoctious to eternal Punishments, and do thou think any can deliver
and redeem thee but the Lord Jesus Christ, who can pacify the wrath of an angry
God? who can satisfy Infinite Justice? and who can undergo, and yet overcome
Infinite Torments; None, O none but Christ, therefore Poor Soul hasten unto him.

4ly, Let Christ's willingness to embrace and ease thee, be a motive to thee, to
come unto him; never let the greatness of thy Labor, the weightiness of thy
burden, the deceitfulness of Sin, or the subtilty of Satan, keep thee back, or
impede thy coming unto him; if Christ were not willing to receive thee, he
would never invite thee; Ho every one that Thirsts, come; Drink freely, Jo.
17.37.
for Christ is freely willing, Christ is troubled for thy unwillingness, Jo.
5.40. Reason then with thine own Soul, and say, is Christ willing to ease me,
and shall I still lay under my burdens? is Christ willing to give me life, and
shall I still remain in a state of Death? will Christ make me free with the
freedoms of the Sons of God, and shall I still abide in slavery to Sin and
Satan? is Christ willing to give me peace and rest, and to keep my Soul in that
state? (Isa. 26.3. He will keep them in peace, whose minds are staid upon him.)
And shall I still keep my Soul in perpetual perplexity? Hose. 13.9.
shall I be a Self Murderer, when Christ is a willing and Merciful Savior? O
this would be horrid impiety, and I might then cry out with the rest, Heu
patior telis, vulnera facta meis, a lass, I suffer wounds made with mine own
Darts, and yet slight such an able Surgeon; sick even to Death, and yet
neglect so willing and kind a Physician; I say, thus reason thy self out of thy
unwillingness from the consideration of Christ's willingness; as in my Text,
Come unto me.

5ly, Consider as a motive, who it is that invites thee, I have showed thee in
the Former part that he is God, Tit. 2.13.
he is the great God, therefore able, he is Jesus, therefore Willing. If a King
should invite thee, and make great offers unto thee, I am persuaded thou
would not as Diogenes, Quint. Curt.
scorn and refuse them; but consider this is not a Cyrus, who can promise only
Towns or Citys to his Subjects; neither an Alexander, that may promise an
Earthly Kingdom to thee, but he is (...), The King of Kings, Rev. 19.16. Rev.
5.10. Heb. 12.28.
and Lord of Lords: He can make thee a King, and give unto thee an heavenly and
glorious Kingdom, a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. Employ thy thoughts a little
upon this consideration, who the Inviter is, and this will inflame thee; and
engage thee without delay to come unto him.

6. Motive, Consider what, and who thou art, that by so glorious a Person art
invited, Thou art by Nature a Child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Under the wrath of
God, Under the Curse, Gal. 3.10.
and the power of Satan; a lost, undone, perishing sinner, Luke 19.10. an Enemy
to God, to Christ, to Goodness, to thy own Soul by nature, Romans 5.10. Whilst we
were yet Enemies, Christ dyed for us. Thou art under the Yoke of Bondage, a
Poor, Needy, Indigent creature: and it is he alone that can supply thee; if
thou had been a glorious Angel, thou would then have needed Christ to
confirm and establish thee; but thou art not such, Mat. 9.13. Luke 18.13.
thou art a Sinner, and he a glorious Savior; consider that well in thy
meditations; what a Sinner? it implys a miserable State and person, yet Christ
invites thee.

7. Motive, Consider what thou may be; if thou come unto him from a Child
of wrath, thou will become the Son of God; from an Heir of Hell, to be an Heir
of Glory; from being under the Power of Satan, to serve the Liveing God; and be
kept by the mighty power of God, through faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. If
thou come unto him, thou shall be for ever happy; Blessed in Body, Blessed in
Soul, Blessed in Time, Blessed in and to Eternity, Rev. 14.13. (...) Jam nunc.
Blessed are the Dead which Die in the Lord. In the very moment of their
entering upon eternity, they are Blessed, and shall be so for ever; so says the
Apostle Paul, And so we shall be for ever with the Lord: Thou shall be made
like unto God in Righteousness and true Holiness. 1 These. 17. Ephesians. 4.24. 1
Epis. 3.2.
Beloved (says the Apostle John) Now are we the Sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be, but we know when he shall appear, we shall be like
him. Who is not ambitious of being a Prince and Heir to an Earthly Crown and
Kingdom? how much more should thou be desirous of being Son and Heir to the
King of Glory? and this is the only way by coming to the Lord Jesus. No coming
to the Father but by the Son, Ephesians. 1, 4, 5, 6. According as he has chosen us
in him; and he has adopted us to be Children by Christ, to himself, And if
Children, then Heirs, Heirs with God, and joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17.
Here see, and meditate well what thou shall be if thou come to Christ, it may
be thou art a poor, distressed, dejected, despised Creature here among the men
of the World; it may be thou art a Servant, a slave to men, well, but come unto
him, and he will exalt thee even to his own throne, Rev. 3.21.

8. Motive, To excite poor Creatures to come unto Christ who invites them, is
this, consider what you shall have if you come unto him, but hear I may say
(with the Apostle in another case, Who is sufficient for these things? I want
understanding to conceive it, 1 Cor. 2.9.
and words to express it, For (as the Apostle says) Eye has not seen, Ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has
prepared for them that love him; I may as well think to number the days of
eternity, as Imagine to declare all the Immunities, Privileges and Benefits,
those will Partake of, who come unto the Lord Jesus Christ; they shall know
more fully when they come to glory; but I will lay some of them before thee.

1. If thou come unto Christ thou shall have Pardon for thy Sins, Act. 13.38,
39. Through this man is Preached the Forgiveness of Sin. That is, through the
man Christ Jesus, verse. 39. And by him all that believe, are justified from all
things. O Sinner, here is pardon and justification, if thou will but come to
and believe in him, and how desirable is a pardon to a condemned Malefactor,
thou art undon for ever if thou art not pardoned, now it is alone by Christ,
Exodus 34.6.
and upon his account that thou caust expect to obtain it; the Lord is a
sin-pardoning God, but there is no man can come to the Father for this Pardon,
but in and through Christ, Jo. 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous.

2ly, Thou shall have peace for thy Conscience, not such peace as the World
gives, but the peace of God; God is called, The God of Peace, 2 Cor. 13.11.
Because he gives peace to his People; thou shall be at peace with God, at peace
with thine own Conscience; and what would a wounded Conscience give for this
peace? but it is too precious to purchase for Silver or Gold: My peace (says
Christ, I give unto you, not as the World gives, give I unto you. Jo. 14.27.
The World can afford no such fruit, for it is brought forth by the Spirit in
the heart of the believer, Gal. 6.22. This peace is permanent, Isa. 26.3. I
will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed upon me; now Worldly peace
is deceitful it is uncertain; but this is true and abiding, because rt is from
God and at peace with God, upon the account of the Lord Jesus. But I intend not
to be large in these particulars, only my great desire is, Sinner, that I might
induce thee to come unto Christ.

3. Thou shall have Grace in abundance; and what can be more desirable? or
what do thou need more on this side Eternity? it will beautify, and make thee
lovely in the sight of God, Virtus clara aeternaque habetur. Salust.
Angels and Saints: Thy Soul is deformed by Sin, but this will make thee comely:
Grace will enrich thee with a Divine treasure, as Christ said to the Church of
Smyrna, Rev. 2.9. Virtus intaminatis fulget honoribus. Hor.
Thou art Rich; Rich in Grace, although poor in worldly Treasure; as Jam. 2.5.
Poor in the world, yet rich in faith; now these riches come from the fullness of
Christ, Joh. 1.16. Out of his fullness have we all received, and grace for
grace: (...). Isocrates.
It will establish the Soul in shaking times, Heb. 13.9. (...), it is an
excellent and good thing to have the heart established with Grace. I should
burden you, and prevent my self, if I should here treat of the Excellencies of
the graces, as faith, love, hope, patience, and all the other graces which are
the golden Chains and Pearls which adorn the Soul of a Believer; only consider
this, that all grace is from God, through Christ, by the Spirit, conveyed and
wrought in the Soul.

4. If thou come to Christ, thou shall have life; so says Christ, I am come,
that you may have life, and have it more abundantly; Life naturally is much
desirable, but how much more life spiritual, and life eternal; Thou art
spiritually dead, Ephesians. 2.5.
and it is from him thou must receive quickening, Joh. 11.25. Jesus says unto
her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live. Verse. 26. And he that lives and believes in me,
shall never die. Here Soul is spiritual and eternal life for thee, and will thou not come unto Christ for this? what, do thou not reguard life, life
everlasting? Mat. 25.46
(the righteous shall go into life everlasting:) O let the consideration of
this excite and stir up thy Soul to come unto Christ; for all those that come
unto him, shall obtain this blessed privilege, of living for evermore. Our
days here are but a shadow, Vita ipsa qua fruimur brevis est. Salust.
Pulvis and umbra sumus; we soon pass away into Eternity; and is not life
eternal much more to be esteemed of, then to be everlastly in a dying state of
misery, and yet never die?

5ly, Thou shall have joy, Romans 15.13. Act. 16, 25.
The God of peace fill you with all joy in believing. In the midst of outward
troubles and afflictions, this joy will keep thee company, as it did Paul and
Silas in Fetters, (they Sung praises to God) this joy will be strength to thee,
Neh. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is our strength. It is not like the worldlings
joy, which is transient and momentary, but it is everlasting joy, Isa. 35.10.
The Ransomed of the Lord shall return to Zion, with Songs, and everlasting joy
shall be upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and
sighing shall flee away. Indeed after thou do come to Christ, Psalm. 42.5.
and have tasted of this joy whilst thou art here Sinning, God may for a time
hide his Face, but when thou do return again by repentance and humiliation,
he will again lift up the light of his countenance upon thee, and put more
gladness into thy Soul, then all sublimary consolations can; Psalm. 4.6.7.
and when thou do come above the Clouds, thou shall then rejoice for ever,
Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is (...) Satietas laetitiarum, fullness of joys,
or (as the Word sinifies) fullness to Satiety. Thou will have it in abundance
then, therefore defer not thy coming to Christ.

6ly, If thou come unto him thou shall have a Crown and Kingdom, Then shall
the King say unto them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my Father, Mat.
25.34.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World. Christ
has prepared the Kingdom for you, and by your coming to him, he prepares you
for the Kingdom, (I say from the word of God) thou shall have a Kingdom, Rev.
3.21. He that overcomes shall sit down with me in my Throne. Thou shall Reign
with Christ in that Kingdom for ever; now this Kingdom is a transcendently
glorious Kingdom, it is the Court of the great Jehova, it is a rich Kingdom
full of treasure, no want there: read but Rev. 21. It is an invincible Kingdom,
all the Black Regiments of the infernal Prince, cannot overcome it. Lastly it
is an everlasting Kingdom, it will abide as long as God is, and that will be to
all Eternity, and thou shall be Crowned with a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy
4.8. I could be much larger in every one of these Particulars, but I have much
exceeded what I intended, being desirous to exalt Christ in thine estimation,
and allure thee to come to, and close with him, seeing he so graciously invites
thee.

7. Thou shall have God, Christ and the blessed Spirit, and what a privilege is
this, to have God to be thy God; this is the great blessing of the new
covenant, Jer. 31.33. This shall be the Covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel. After those days says the Lord, I will put my Law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my People. See hear Soul what a blessing thou will obtain, God will be
thine; what can thou desire if he be thine, then his power is engaged to
defend and protect thee, Psalm. 84.11. Psalm. 73.24. Psalm. 103.13. Exodus 34.36.
I will be a Sun and a Shield (says God) to those that walk uprightly. And
such are the Souls who come unto Christ, his wisdom shall direct thee, his love
Pity thee, his Mercy pardon thee; but what shall I say? I might run through all
the Attributes of God, for some way or other they are employed for thy good.
Happy is that Soul whose God is the Lord, for he can bring good out of Evil to
thee, he can make all things work together for thy good; I cannot number up all
the mercys which are contained in this one, but let me tell thee in a word, it
is the Mercy of Mercys; for if we seriously consider that those people (ever
since the lapsation of Adam) were looked upon as the most miserable, who were
said to be without God, as the Apostle speaks of the condition of the Gentiles,
before the Gospel came among them, Ephesians. 2.12. They were without God in the
World. i. e. They had no saving knowledge of God; as Christ says, Jo. 17.3.
This is Life eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. They had no knowledge of God in Christ; moreover the words implys they had
no God in covenant with them, they were Aliens to the commonwealth of Israel;
now seeing this is so miserable a condition, to be without God, to have no
interest in him, no access unto him, no smiles from him, it must on the
contrary be granted, that it is a signal blessing to have God to be our God;
now this inestimable benefit is confered upon the Soul, in and by the Lord
Jesus, as in Romans 5.1.2. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, through our Lord Jesus. verse. 2. By whom also we have access unto that
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. Thus we
see when the Soul comes to Christ by Faith, then it is justified, and has free
access to God, which before it had not. It now can cry Abba Father, Romans 8.15.

2. Christ himself will be thine, and thou shall be his, 1 Cor. 3.23. Ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Christ will be a head to communicate Life unto
thee, and also to rule thee; he will be a Mediator and Intercessor at the Right
hand of the Father in thy behalf. 1 Jo. 2.1.
O consider what it is to have Christ to be thine; for if he be thine, he will
be a hiding place for thee, from all those tempestuous storms that may arise
against thee, Isa. 8.14. He is called a Sanctuary, this must be for his own,
Isa. 22.2. A man shall be for a hiding place, and for a Covert from the Storm;
this Man is the Lord Jesus, Col. 3.3. Our Life is hid with Christ in God. Now
Christ will be a hiding place, a sanctuary, From 1. The wrath of Men that may
be enraged against his Servants, Pro. 18.19. The name of the Lord is a strong
Tower, the Righteous flee into it, and are safe. Thus he defended Luther from
all malice of the Pope and his Emissaries; and many more instances I could give
out of History, and the word of God, but I should be too prolix and tedious
then; but as he has been to his Servants, so he will be to thee, if thou come
unto him. 2. From the wrath of God which will inevitably destroy and consume
all those who are out of Christ, 1 These. 1.10. Jesus who redeemeth us from
wrath to come. It must be Christ alone that can hide thee, and defend thee from
the wrath of God. 1 Pet. 5.8.
3. From the wrath and malice of Satan, who goes about like a Roaring Lion;
Christ keeps his Sheep from being destroyed by him, Jo. 10.28. I give unto them
Eternal Life, and they shall never Perish, neither shall any pluck them out of
my hands. 2. If thou have Christ, he will be a Redeemer to thee, Rev. 5.9. Who
has redeemed us with his Blood; he paid a sufficient price, (...). 1 Pet.
1.18.19. Tit. 2.14. Gal. 3.13. Jo. 15.19. Jo. 14.16.
it was (...), with his own precious Blood; He is a Redeemer from Sin, from the
World, and from the Curse of the Law; and he has redeemed thee for everlasting
Glory. 3. He will be a Mediator between God and thee, he will Mediate for
Pardon for thy Sins, for acceptance with God, for grace for thy Soul, for his
Spirit to guide thee, for perseverance that thou may hold out to the end, Jo.
17.15. Christ prayed that Peter's Faith might not fail: lastly, Jo. 6.35.
he mediates for a Crown of Righteousness; what privileges are all these? will thou not come to Christ upon these terms? if thou have Christ he will be (...),
food for thy Soul; he will be Righteousness to thee, 1 Cor. 1.30. God has made
him to be wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, unto every one
that believes in him. In a word, Christ is all, and in all, Col. 3.11.
Therefore thou will be no looser but an infinite gainer, if thou have the Lord
Jesus for thy Portion; for he is the Eternal delight of the Father, the glory
of Angels, the admiration of Saints, 2 These. 1.10.

3. The holy Spirit will be thine, says Christ, Jo. 14.16. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever. ver. 17. Even the spirit of truth, whom the World cannot receive, because
it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him, for he dwells with
you, and shall be in you. See here what a mercy this is, to have the blessed
Spirit, for thou can have no true comfort here, but from him it must flow;
thou can not know, nor understand the way to Zion, but by his Divine
assistance; 1 Cor. 2.14.15.
it is he who is spiritually enlightened that can discern the Excellency of
Divine objects, thou can not pray without him, Romans 8.26. Then is it not a
blessing greatly to be desired, to have the blessed spirit, without whom thou
can not perceive thine own misery sufficiently; nor apprehend Christ a
Savior satisfactorily? it is the Spirit that searches the deep things of God,
1 Cor. 2.10.
and reveals them to his Children, as much as is for his glory, and their
Eternal good. Now I entreat thee in the name of Christ, let this consideration,
(that God will be thy God, Christ will be thy Savior, and the Spirit thy guide
and Comforter,) excite thy Soul to come to Christ.

8. If thou come unto Christ thou shall have an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. (...), the words cannot be well expressed in English, but it is as if the
Apostle should have said, thou shall have Hyperboly's of Glory, Glory upon
Glory, ineffable, such as has not entered into the Heart of Man to conceive,
neither can Tongue utter it; but observe this, it shall be a weight, and an
eternal weight of Glory; not transient and momentary, like unto worldly Glory,
which depends upon the estimation of poor silly Mortals as it is usually said,
Honos est in Honorante, Honor is in him that gives Honor, not in him that
receives it, but the greatest Glory of this World is not to be compared, nay,
rather to be contemned in comparison of that Glory believers shall be Crowned
with; the greatest part of their Glory shall be in this, That they shall see
God, and be made like unto him, 1 Jo. 3.2. What can thou be humbly ambitious
of more then this, That thou shall be like unto God in holiness and
Righteousness, and that for ever. Thou shall have a Crown of Righteousness upon
thine Head; 2 Timothy 4.8. Rev. 3.21.
and thou shall sit down with Christ in his throne. Here Soul it is lawful for
thee to run for this prize, Phil. 3.14. To fight for this heavenly Crown. Take
but a serious view of what thou shall have if thou come to Christ; and then
refuse if thou can: see if the world can offer more then what Christ does to
encourage thee to come unto him: if the World or Satan can promise and give
more and better things then these I have mentioned from the word of God, then
embrace them, and let Christ go, but if they cannot, why do thou make delays
in coming unto him.

9ly, and lastly, 9. Motive.
consider the misery thou do involve thy self in, if thou do not come unto
Christ; thy Misery is great in this Life thou art a Child of wrath; a Servant
to Satan; Ephesians. 2.3.
a Servant to Sin; thou art an Enemy to God, and God is an Enemy to thee; Romans
6.20. Romans 5.10.
the Curse of the Law abides upon thee, Gal. 3.10. Read and consider, can
thou be content to be in this estate? have thou no pity for thine own Soul? no
love to God, who sent his Son to dye for Sinners, Jo. 3.16. no love for Christ,
who came to sacrifice himself, that thou might have access to God by him;
but consider further, thy misery will not end in this Life, nor with it, for
the wrath of God will follow thee to the Grave, and tumble thy Soul into
everlasting Flames. That is a terririble word, Jo. 3.36. The wrath of God
abides on him that believes not in Christ. He does not say, it shall be for a
little time, for a year, or a hundred, or a thousand years; but it abides on
him, and so it will for ever, 2 These. 1.8, 9. See what will be the doom of
those, who obey not Christ, that is, who believe not in him. Now I say, Sinner,
come unto Christ, least that terrible word be said unto thee in the last day,
Pro. 1.24.25.26.
Because I have called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hands, and
no man reguarded. But ye have set at naught all my Council, therefore I will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes. So much shall
suffice for the first Doctrine, That Jesus Christ graciously invites Sinners to
come unto him.

2. Doctrine, It is the duty of all heavy laden Sinners, who look for Rest and
Salvation, to come unto Christ for the obtaining of it. If the invitation will
not prevail with thee to come unto Christ, yet let his command, and the
consideration of thy Duty. Christ has not left it mearly to their own wills,
but he commands them. The Method that I shall proceed in, is as follows. 1. I
shall prove the point. 2. Show many of those obstructions which keep Sinners
from coming to Christ, with their unreasonableness. 3. Answer some objections.
4. Apply all, and I shall bring in the two other Doctrines in the application.
1. To prove that it is a duty, Jo. 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye
believe in him whom he has sent, 1 Jo. 3.23. This is his Commandment, that ye
believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. I shall demonstrate the point by
these propositions. 1. It is the great duty incumbent upon all, to seek the
eternal well-being of their immortal Souls, this is granted I think by all
sober persons; it is made our second principal end in the Assemblies Catechism.
1. Glorify God. 2. Save our own Souls. Phil. 2.12. Work out your Salvation with
fear and trembling. God requires this from all men, whether they be Princes or
subjects, Rulers or ruled, (...), The Arminians do pervert this Text.
1 Timothy 2.4. He wills all men to be saved. So the words may be read, and they
have relation to the foregoing verses, where the Apostle exhorts to pray for
all degrees of Men, for Kings and those in authority, for God wills all Men,
all sorts of Men to seek after their Salvation, for he is no respecter of
Persons, in that sense, but he that fears God and works Righteousness, and
believes in his Son, shall be saved, Act. 10.35. Jo. 3.36. He that believes
the Son has Life.

2. Prop. Is, that it is the duty of all to make use of means in order to the
attaining of this great end, scil. the Salvation of their Souls; God has
ordained the means as well as the end; and he has enjoined it as our Duty to
make use of the means, God has given his Son to dye for us, and does command
us to come and believe in him, 1 Jo. 3.33.

3. Prop. is, that Christ Jesus is the only way for sinners to attain eternal
life by, Acts 4.12. There is no other name given under heaven whereby we can be
saved, therefore I say, it is the duty of all that expect salvation to look and
return unto, to accept of, and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, That they may
obtain remission of sins, and an Inheritance of eternal Glory among those who
are sanctified by faith in Christ, 2. These. 2.13.

4. God the Father has given his son for this very end, that Sinners coming
to, and apprehending of him, might have life and rest from him. Jo. 3.16. God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life: Now seeing this
is the end of God, it is our duty therefore to close with it, for there is no
coming to the Father but by the Son, Jo. 14.6. So much for the confirmation of
the point: if all ought to seek the happiness of their Souls, and in order
thereunto, use the means, which is coming to, and apprehending of Christ, which
is the Fathers will, and end, in sending his Son, then it is a duty to come,
but it is clear from the word of God that it is so; therefore neglect not
sinner to come unto Christ.

2. I shall make manifest many of these obstructions which deter and hinder
Sinners from coming to the Lord Jesus (notwithstanding it is their duty) and
also show the unreasonableness of them all, which is the main thing intended in
this Doctrine. Sinners make these impediments to themselves they are not
efficient but accidental causes.
1. Ab extra. 2. Ab intra; Lets from without, and from within. 1. External Lets
and hindrances, and that 1. from Christ himself, who is the Inviter and
Commander of this great duty, as 1. the meaness and lowness of his earthly
extraction and descent. So it was with the Jews, Jo. 6.42. And they said, is
not this Jesus the Son of Joseph, whose Father and Mother we know? and how is
it then that he says I came down from heaven? Christ preached his divine
Original, but they stumbled at it, because he was not of noble Parentage,
Praeclarum est a principibus nasci, It is an excellent thing to be the progeny
of Princes. They did not consider that it was for their sakes that he became
low, and although he was in the form of God, yet for their sakes he came in the
form of a servant. Christ put himself into this capacity that he might suffer
for sin, and make an atonement to the Father. But they stumbled at that
stumbling stone, Romans 9.32. Christ instead of being to them the Rock that
should save them, was made by them a Rock of offense; and as it was with them,
so it is with too too many in our days, who are ready to say, how can he who
was born of a poor Virgin save or succor us? They will not search and believe
that Testimony God has given of his Son, Mat. 3.17. This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased. Therefore refuse him not for thy Savior because he made
himself of no reputation, for it was the Ordinance of Heaven, that Christ
should come in that way, Isa. 7.14. Consider he is the Immanuel, which being
interpreted (according to the Hebrew) is God with us.

2ly. The Poverty of his life. Impediment.
As Christ says, the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests,
but the Son of man has not wherein to lay his head: he was so poor, that
others were fain to Minister of their sustenauce to him, Mat. 27.56. Now for
this cause also the Jews rejected him, for they expected their Messiah should
be some potent and honorable one in the earth, and that he should restore the
Kingdom unto them, then under the Roman Bondage. This is some hinderance I fear
at this day; for if Christ were an Earthly Prince, and would give them terrene
Inheritances, how would persons flock to him? but they do not consider that he
became poor, that he might make many rich, and bring many Sons and Daughters to
glory; therefore let not this keep thee back, for he has riches in abundance
for thee, riches of grace and glory, for he is the heir of all things, He
created them, and by him they do subsist, Coll. 1.16.17.

3. The Ignominy of his death, because he dyed a cursed, painful, and shameful
death, Mat. 27.39. They reviled him, saying, If thou be the Son of God, come
down from the Cross. v. 42. He saved others, himself be cannot save. If he be
the King of Israel, let him come down from the Cross, and we will believe in
him: Thus much we may gather from these words, that because they saw Christ dye
such a cursed death, therefore they conclude that he was not the Son of God,
and so consequently not the promised Messiah. They made that the Obstacle to
their faith, which should have been the chief ground of their faith, scil. the
death and suffering of the Lord Jesus, for had not he willingly consented to
dye that cursed death, and to be made a curse for sinners, they must all have
been cursed to all eternity, Gall. Gal. 3.13.
3.10. Thus some in our days make a scoff, and revile him who dyed without the
gates of Jerusalem; and trample his blood under their feet as being nothing
worth, Heb. 10.29. Therefore they will not believe in him, because he yielded
himself, and humbled himself unto death, Phil. 2.8. Even the death of the
Cross, which had a curse annexed to it, and this Christ did suffer, not as a
Malefactor himself, nor for any example only, but he gave himself a Ransom for
many, Mat. 20. 28.

2. As many stumble at the person of Christ, his mean descent, his poverty of
life, and his cursed death, so also at the Doctrine of Christ. This will not
down with them, they cannot relish it, Luke 23.5. He stirs up the people,
teaching throughout all Jury; but what was it he taught? he taught that he was
the Son of God, and that he was the way to salvation; he taught the way to
Salvation by a Redeemer, and that their Pharisaicall Righteousness would not
save them, this they were offended at; but more particular, 1. The plainness of
his Doctrine, this was an offense to them, notwithstanding, his words were more
sweet than the honey, and the honeycomb, He was full of grace and truth, Jo.
1.14. And his Doctrine was gracious, Luke 4.22 They wondered at the Gracious
words which proceeded out of his Mouth. But yet we find some were and are
offended at the plainness of it; the Grecian Philosophers were for high strains
and rhetorical florishes; they sought earthly wisdom, therefore they stumbled
at Christ, 1 Cor. 1.22.23.
and the pure plain simplicity of the Gospel; and how many such Grecian
Spirits have we in our days; if the Ministers of Jesus Christ teach and preach
the Gospel with plainness to the capacity of the Vulger, that is an offense to
many; when the Apostle Paul could say, I use plainness of Speech. But I think
if this be well considered, we should not so much stand off from coming to
Christ because of this, for suppose a person was going a journey into a strange
Country, but knew not the way, and should come into a great Wilderness where
many Paths present themselves, but he knew not which would bring him to his
journnys end, and he meets a man there who knows the way very well, of whom he
makes inquiry to know the right way, but this man answers in a Dialect or
Language he understands not, (notwithstanding he could have answered him in his
own Language) in the first place would not he look upon his inquiry of him as
unprofitable? in the second place, and would he not condemn him of cruelty and
unmercifulness. Just thus it is between Ministers of the Gospel and poor
sinners, who are the travelers, and in a wilderness; there are many teachers
who propose various ways of Salvation, and the Minister of Christ is the man
who meets the poor sinner in this bewildred condition, and he enquires of him,
who knows the way to Sion, but he answers in a Language he cannot understand,
would not this savor of cruelty and affected pride? is it not more grateful to
speak so as to be understanded by the inquiring party? yea certainly, and most
profitable to the soul; therefore do not contemn Christ's Doctrine or his
Ministers for preaching of it plainly, but rather rejoice; Christ has taken
such care for thy soul, that the way to happiness may be easily known if thou
humbly seek, and inquire into it. I have been told that a Learned divine
who in his preaching used much plainness, and had done great service for the
Gospel, and the good of souls: but it happened that some more curious than
wise, reproached and scandalized him in secret, saying, he was no scholar,
etc. He always used such a plain style, he being informed of it by some
friends, prepares his Sermon for next Lords day, composed most of Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, and coming to preach, he takes his text, and delivers his
Sermon in those languages; The people being amazed (for few or none understood
him) began to be troubled, because they came there to be instructed, but
understood nothing, so he took an occasion to ask them what they profited by
that Sermon, and withal sharply reproved them for their folly and madness, in
censuring his plainness in preaching, which he intended only for their good. It
was that kind of preaching the Apostle Paul most affected, 1 Cor. 1. chap. 2.
And this if it be the pure Gospel is the most effectual for the conversion of
sinners unto Christ, there is the love, the Wisdom, and the power of God,
discovered in the Simplicity of Gospel truths; therefore let not this hinder
thee from coming to the Lord Jesus, for undoubtedly he who gave to his Apostles
all kinds of Tongues, could much more have so spoken himself, if it had been
either for his or his Fathers glory, or the good of poor Souls.

2. The strictness of the Gospel; it will not allow that Latitude and liberty
which corrupt nature requires, therefore they refuse Christ and his Doctrine.
If the Gospel says, Christ has redeemed us from all iniquity. Tit. 2.14.
We must no longer live in sin, 1 Cor. 15.34. Awake to righteousness and sin
not. You must leave your former vain conversation, you must be holy as God is
holy, you must take up the Cross of Christ and follow him, Mat. 10.38. 1 Pet.
1.15.
Sinners are ready to reply with those disciples Jo. 6.60. This is a hard
saying, and who can bear it, if we can have more liberty (I only allude to it)
under Rehoboam, which we may term the Gospel, than under Solomon (the Law) we
will serve, if not Israel to your tents. House of David look to thy self, for
we have no lot or inheritance with the son of Jesse, 1 Kings 12.16. If they may
have Christ, and their lusts, the pleasures, honors, and unjust profits of the
world; if the Love of Christ and the love of Mammon will agree together; if the
Samaritan Religion will serve, i. e. to fear the Lord, 2 Kin. 17.33.
and worship their own Gods; they would embrace Christ and the Gospel; but
seeing those will not conjoin and stand together, give us our swine, but let
Christ be gone; if they come to him, it is but to beg his retreat, and that he
would leave their coasts, not at all desiring his presence: but oh the folly of
sinners to refuse coming unto Christ upon this account! it would be their
honor, Lucurgus, Solon.
their happiness, their privilege to be holy and free from the tyranny of base
inslaving lusts, which bring nothing but shame and detriment to the Soul, Romans
6.21. Mat. 16.26. Among the Heathens those Lawgivers were ever in most account,
who made the strictest and severest Laws against vice, as being destructive to
common wealths; and shall not Christ the great Legislator be esteemed and
embraced for his holy and stricct precepts against sin, which is destructive to
precious Souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. Obtain from fleshly Lusts which war against the
Soul. Observe this sinner, Christ's making his precepts strict, which extend not
only to the external, but the internal man, Mat. 5. chap. 10. Not because he
hates, but because he loves poor souls; therefore let not the strictness of his
Doctrines be an obstacle or let unto thee, for none are more just in imposing
precepts on their Subjects then Christ is. Agesilaus King of Sparta said,
Plutarch
(when he heard the King of Persia called the great King) Nemo me major, nisi
justior, No man is greater than I, unless he be more just; and I say, none can
be more just than Jesus Christ is, in his injunctions, and commands, therefore
none more excellent, or that does better deserve thy obedience than the Lord of
Glory.

3. The powerfulness of his Doctrine, Luke 4.32. And they were astonished at
his Doctrine, for he spoke with power. Christ taught not as the Scribes and
Pharisees, for he loved to awaken sleepy consciences, which they never
reguarded; they thought it sufficient to cleanse the outside, but never reguard
the internal part; when Peter Preached that excellent Sermon, Act. 2. and
proved the Deity of him whom they had crucified, verse. 36. and verse. 37. It is
said, they were pricked in their hearts; it did not only reach the ear, but it
did affect and touch the heart; but we may see an instance in Felix, that when
the word comes with power they cannot bear it, Acts. 24.24.25. Felix sent for
Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ, v. 25. And be reasoned of
Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come; Felix trembled, and answered,
go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for
thee. Here it seems the Word came with power and touched his Conscience, made
Felix tremble, but he sends him away with this, I will call for thee, when I
have a convenient season. And how many such Felix's, have we in our days? They
pretend to Love the Letter, but cannot endure the power of the Gospel, though
it is the power, not the Letter, that must save their Souls. Paul praised God
for the power of the Gospel, among the Thessalonians, For we give thanks to God
always for you, because our Gospel came not to you in word only, but in power,
1 Thessalonians. 1.2.5. But how many turn their backs upon Christ, his Ministers, and
his word, because the power of the Gospel will not let them sleep in sin, and
go quietly to Hell with deluded ungrounded hopes of Heaven! If John Baptist
will preach and let Herod peaceably enjoy his Herodias, he will gladly hear
him, rejoice in him, but if he preach powerfully, Mat. 14.
and reprove him because of his Herodias, then through him into prison, behead
him, rather than I will be separated from my Herodias. It is said, Heb. 4.12.
The word of God is powerful, sharper than a Two-edged sword; But sinners cannot
endure the Keenness of it, when it comes to dissect and lay open the Interiors,
those cursed principles of lust and wickedness which lodge within the soul,
they will then bid Adeiu unto Christ, not considering that the Gospel is the
power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. Therefore this would be but a weak
bulwork to keep the soul from coming to Christ, if sin and Satan did not delude
the soul.

4ly, There is this in the Doctrine of Christ, which is an obstacle and
hindrance to sinners, it condemns and casts away all self Righteousness in
point of salvation, and directs the sinner to Christ alone for it, Isa. 45.22.
Look unto me, and be ye saved, Some of the Papists confess we are justified by
the imputation of Christ's righteousness.

Nos imputatione Christi meriti justificamur Tapper. Tom. 2. art. Cap. 36.


all the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else, which as I
have proved before, is spoken of Christ, Acts. 4.12. Neither is their Salvation
in any other; for there is no other name given under heaven, whereby we can be
saved. The Scripture holds forth Christ as the only way to salvation, Christ
and his Apostles preached up this Doctrine. God has so loved the world, that
he has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life. So Christ is the way; when the Jailor was
convinced in his Conscience, and cried out, What shall I do to be saved? The
answer was, not become more righteous, leave thy sins; (although that he must
do) but, believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy house,
Acts. 16.30, 31. This is the Doctrine of the Whole Assembly of the Apostles and
Churches of Believers in Jerusalem, We believe that through the grace of our
Lord Jesus we shall be saved even as they, Acts. 15.5. The Apostle Paul would
be saved no other way, Phil. 3.8.9. He would not be found in his own
Righteousness, but in the Righteousness of Christ. But yet how many Thousand
Souls have split, and do daily split themselves upon this Rock? They have
stumbled at the stumbling stone, Romans 9.32. The Jews did so of old, they would
not with the Apostle Paul renounce their Pharisaical Righteousness. They sought
a Righteousness but not that of faith, therefore the Gentiles obtain it, and
they miss of it, verse. 30.31. Jesus Christ bids them come unto him without money
and without price, but these will not come unto him unless their hands be full
both of money and price. Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae and periculum
inanis gloriae tutissimum est totam fiduciam in Sola Dei misericordia and
benignitate reponere. De Justific l. 5.
So it is and has been with the Papists and Quakers, they have no need of a
Christ and his Righteousness whilst they live, but when they come to a death
bed, and conscience is a little awakened, they will with that great Goliath
Bellarmine (who stiffly contended for relyance on good works) say * that because
of the uncertainty of Man's own righteousness, and the danger of vain glory, it
is the safest way for men to place their whole confidence in the mercy and
goodness of God alone. The Gospel exalts Christ, but they debase him, and set
up themselves with their imperfect Righteousness, rather than they will come to
him, in whom they may be complete, Col. 2.10.

5ly, The Doctrine of the Gospel ascribes the whole of our Salvation to free
grace, ( Ephesians. 2.5. By grace ye are saved.) and gives God all the Glory; now,
the Arminians Quarrel at this, and will have the grace of God no further free
than we are free, and have a power to accept of it, therefore this keeps them
from coming fully to Christ, (although they do pretend to believe in him)
because they will not quite renounce self; for it is no true coming to Christ,
unless we come as lost condemned Wretches, and not being able to help our
selves in the work of our Salvation; all is done by a free act of grace of the
Father electing, the Son redeeming, and the blessed Spirit converting and
leading the Sinner to the Lord Jesus, for it is God who does work all our works
in us, both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. and because
of the Doctrine of election, and the free grace of God, many refuse to come
unto Christ.

6ly, And lastly, it is an hindrance, because the Gospel commands all works of
Righteousness, yet none to be relied upon 1 Cor. 15.34. Awake to Righteousness
and sin not. It is not sufficient that we avoid sin, but we must also do good,
work righteousness, yet when we have done all, to say we are unprofitable
servants. We have done that which was our duty to do. Luke 17.10. The Gospel
commands to love enemies at well as friends, Mat. 5.44. Now these precepts will
not well digest with those who are of a persecuting spirit. Also the Gospel
commands to love our Brethren, 1 Jo. 3.54.
to be charitable, to be full of good works, to be Zealous for God and the
Gospel, and it requires obedience to all the institutions of the Lord Jesus,
Tit. 2.14.
but this the sin cannot away with, to bring his neck under Christ's yoke,
notwithstanding his yoke is easy and his burden is light, Mat. 11.29. He loves
to be at liberty that he may sin with freedom, which is indeed the greatest
slavery. Now this stumbles the sinner that he must do that which is Righteous
and holy, and that at all times, and to flee from the appearance of sin, and
fear nothing so much as it, as Chrysostom said, Nihil timeo, nisi peccatum. So
that he looks upon it the greatest servitude imaginable to yield up himself
unto Christ. Then thinks he there is no meriting by what I do, therefore do
never so much, I must rely wholly upon another, and it it is uncertain whether
he can, or will save me, therefore I will not go unto him. These are the
Obstacles that lies in sinners ways, and keeps them from coming unto Christ.

I come now to the second outward Obstacle or Impediment of the sinners coming
unto Christ, Imped. 2.
and that is Satan, that Arch-Enemy of poor souls, who goes about like a
roaring Lion seeking whom and how he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. The great Apostle
tells us of the Wiles and fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.11.16. and if his
Engines of Craft and subtilty will not do, he will then throw forth his
fireballs, and shoot his fiery darts, and all to keep poor miserable Creatures
from coming unto Christ.

I shall endeavor to discover some of his subtilties, and lay them open to the
view of sinners, that they may not be so easily deluded and deceived by him, 2
Cor. 2.11.
and be ignorant of his devices, for he is always waiting and watching to take
advantages of sinners, (...), Satan is altogether evil, therefore he can bring
forth nothing that is good; he is the Father of Lies, Jo. 8.44. He is called in
the same verse a Murderer, and so he may well, even in the worst sense, for he
loves to Murder Souls: it is thy life, not thy living, the Jewel, not the
Cabinet, he desires and aims at; therefore seriously peruse these following
particulars, wherein is discovered what stratagems Satan uses to keep the soul
(if he can) from coming to Christ.

1. By his power: not that Satan is stronger than God, or can do any thing more
than what God permits him; for God has him in a Chain, and can curb him when he
pleases, but when man rebelliously fell from God, and refused him for his
Guardian and Protector, God most justly for his sin and iniquity, permited him
to be under the Dominion and power of a most tyranical Lord, scil. Satan, who
ever since has held him in slavery, till God by Christ did redeem him, and by
his Spirit does convert him. He is called ( Ephesians. 2.2.) The Prince of the power
of the Air, the Spirit who works in the Children of disobedience. And it is
very observable that the Apostle there speaks of Believers, and converted ones;
we had our conversation according to this world; those who are the elect ones
of God are under this power of Satan, till God by his own Almighty power
delivers them from the jaws of this roaring Lion, and from the paw of this
devouring Bear, Acts 26.18. To turn from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God. Satan reigns in Elect ones before conversion, but when
converted, Christ erects and sets up his Throne in their hearts. The Apostle
exhorts the Ephesians, to put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11. But why
must they do it? In the 12 verse. says he, We wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, (...).
but against Principalitys, against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness
of this World, against wicked Spirits, (as it may be red) in high places, i. e.
in the air; they are the enemies which was against poor Souls, and do their
utmost to deter and hinder them from coming to the Lord Jesus.

2. Satan does it by casting a mist before their eyes, so that they cannot
perceive their own misery, nor the necessity of a Savior, 2 Cor. 4.4. The God
of this world, i. e. Satan, has blinded the eyes of them who believe not, lest
the light of this Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should
shine unto them. The sinner is blinded by Satan, he thinks not his condition so
bad as it is, therefore he sees no necessity of coming to Christ; thus he did
by the Jews, they thought themselves happy, they were the Children of Abraham,
so it could not but go well with them. They perceived not that they were under
the curse (notwithstanding they were Abraham's natural offspring) Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
Book of the Law to do them. They were to fulfill all the Commandments, both
externally and internally and continually without any omission of Good, or
commission of evil, or else they lay under the curse, but they understood not
this their misery, therefore they came not to Jesus Christ. Thus it was with
the Laodicean Church, she thought she was rich and increased in goods, and had
need of nothing, and knew not that she was miserable, Rev. 3.17.
poor, blind and naked: but what was the cause of all this? it was her
blindness, she knew not (as the Text says) her Misery, Poverty, and Nakedness,
therefore Christ exhorts her to come unto him, in the 18. v. for it was her
keeping away from him, put her in this low condition; for had her eyes been
open to have seen her deplorable condition, without Christ, she would speedily
have gone unto him; but till the Mask of ignorance be taken off from the Soul,
it will never see the excellency or necessity of the Son of Righteousness, Act.
26.18. They must be turned from darkness to light, before they can come to
Christ who is the bright morning Star.

3ly, If the Conscience be awakened, and the eyes a little enlightened, then he
raises doubts in the Soul, as 1. Whether the Scriptures are the word of God.
Thus he has done by many, and so made them turn out of the way which leads to
Christ, and the knowledge of him, and run into horrid Atheism and Blasphemy
against the God who made them, and the Christ who alone can save them, Jo.
5.39. Christ says, search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal
life, and they are they who testify of me. That is the true way to come unto
the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, by the assistance of the holy Spirit,
which Satan is not ignorant of, therefore it is his policy to bring the Soul to
doubt this, as he did Eve, concerning the strict Command of God, and the
punishment threatened, Genesis 3. So at last she stretches forth her hand to the
forbiden fruit. Thus he does bring them to doubt the certainty and the truth of
the word of God, and then causes them to stretch forth their hand to all
manner of wickedness, and wholly to neglect the savior, the Lord Jesus. 2. To
doubt of Christ whether he be the son of God. Thus he did by the Jews of old,
when Christ asserted so frequently that he was the Messiah, that he was one
with the Father, Jo. 10.30. That he came forth from God. He made them doubt it,
therefore it is so often mentioned in the four Evangelists, that they inquired
of him whether he was the Christ the son of God, Jo. 1. There they send to John
Baptist to inquire of him whether he was the Christ: they expected a Messiah,
but doubted whether Christ was he that should save them; therefore they
rejected him, for it was through ignorance, as the Apostle Peter asserts in
Acts 3.17. And the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 2.7. They were ignorant of his deity,
therefore doubted whether they might go unto him for Salvation. 3. Quid aternis
minorem consiliis animum fatigas? Hor.
By raising doubts concerning Election, and this is a great let to many, so
that they totally neglect Christ and their salvation; but why (as the Heathen
said) do thou vex thy Soul with the eternal Councels, and wilt not seek unto
him? because Satan tells thee thou art not elected. Observe here the subtilties
of Satan, to stave off poor souls from coming unto Christ; when ever this
objection comes in thy way, conclude it is from the Devil; for Election is a
secret belongs to God; and although he has chosen a certain number, thou
may be one of them. The Gospel does not say, if you are elected you shall be
saved, although that is true, But if you believe, you shall be saved, Prudens
futuri temporis exitum caliginosa nocte premit deus idem.
Joh. 3.16.36. Now if thou have true saving faith, Act. 15.9.
heart-purifying, and a Jo. 5.4.
world conquering faith, then conclude thou art elected; inquire more after
that than thy election, for that is the way unto salvation, by coming to, and
believing on the Lord Jesus. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, 2
Cor. 5.17. If thou art so, thy condition is safe.

4. He keeps them from coming to Christ, by representing Christ unable to save
sinners, but this is another of his lies; for he is able to save to the
uttermost all that come unto God through him, Heb. Isa. 9.6.
7.25. Isa. 63.1. He is mighty to save, and well he may, for he is the Mighty
God, and he is the Lord Jehovah; Jer. 23.6.
but by this subtilty of his, he has kept thousands of Souls from coming unto
Christ, and makes them set up false Christ's, and Competitors with him, as
though he could not do the work alone; thus the Papists have done all along,
they have exalted and magnified other Christ's, as Charity, this has usurped
the place of Christ; Good works, Prayers, Masses, works of super-erogation, (a
vain proud lie, as though Man could do more than God required) and these must
help on the work of our salvation, or else it cannot be perfected; moreover,
there is the Intercession of Saints; and Virgin Mary must do more than Christ
can, in their apprehension, therefore they implore them ten times for once that
they seek unto the Lord Jesus. For if they did look upon Christ as an able
Savior, they would never thus set up new Saviors; but these people are like
the heathens who worshipped many Gods, and relied upon them for succor and
salvation (as their Jupiter, Apollo, The Athenians had an Alter with this
inscription. (...).
Mercury and Minerva, and many more) because they were ignorant of the true God
and his Almightiness to save. So these, because persuaded by Satan, of the
inability of the Lord Jesus to save alone, therefore they come not unto him:
but Christ Jesus is infinite in regard of his diety, and therefore able,
omnipotent, therefore sufficient to save all those who rely upon him for
salvation, Rev. 1.8.

5. By representing Christ unwilling to save; this is another of his falsities,
for Christ says, Jo. 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
out. There are two negatives in the Greek (...), not, not, which declare
Christ's abundant willingness to embrace sinners, and the certainty of their
acceptance with him, Jo. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have life,
Which implies Christ's willingness to give life, if they would but come; but by
this subtle argueing of Satan, he impedes and hinders poor sinners: they
conclude from his instigation and suggestion, that Christ is unwilling,
therefore it is in vain for them to come to him, for he has no mercy for them,
no love to extend to their souls, although they are willing, yet Christ they
know is unwilling. Thus the Devil possesses the Sinner with hard thoughts of
the Lord Jesus without any reason; for if he had not been willing to save, he
would never have been willing to dye; if he was not willing to receive
returning Sinners, he would never call after them, nor invite them, as in the
text, Come unto me; For Christ is faithfullness it self, he is the (...) Amen,
(...).
Rev. 3.14. But the Devil is the (...), The wicked one and a Liar, Jo. 8.4.
Then come sinners, for Christ is willing to accept of, and embrace thee.

6. He impedes them, by persuading them the evil day is far off, i. e. the day
of death, says Satan, there is time enough yet, you are young and strong,
there is no fear of death yet; and what need you look unto Christ so soon? and
how many (especially young ones) does he hold with this argument? let a
Minister or godly Christian exhort them to repent, and make have to get into
Christ, their reply is, Time enough yet: thus the Devil deceives them in that
which their own senses daily confutes the folly of, for they see, that where
one lives to be old, five dye in youth: but all this will not convince them of
the weakness of this Argument which Satan produces; Dum loquimur fugerit invida
aetas carpe diem quam minimum credula postero. Hor.
for the Spirit of God never suggests such things, he says, To day if you will
hear his voice harden not your hearts, Heb. 3.13.15. The Spirit of God will not
allow of a Morrow for the sinners to come to Christ, for the present time is
only theirs, to morrow may be denied, as a Heathen could say, therefore do not
defer upon this account, for who knows whether God will add one day more to thy
life. We are but dust and a shadow, and who knows whether the Celestial powers
will add to morrow to the sum of this days hours. Pulvis and umbra sumus quis
scitan adjiciant hodiernae crastina summae tempora Dii superis. Idem.
O hasten out of this snare of Satan and come to the Lord Jesus.

7. By promising peace to them in his service, but trouble and perplexity in
the ways of God. He is always ready to promise that he can never perform, this
is one of his wiles to keep sinners back from Christ. O says he, if you will
but serve me, follow me, you shall have peace on every side; thy ungodly
relations will be at peace with thee, thy wicked neighbors will keep
correspondence with thee; nay, the greatest part of Mankind will be at amity
with thee; but if thou go to Christ, nothing but trouble both without and
within, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9, 10. and 11. chap. from 23. to 28. See there what befell
them, and thou must expect no better; also Heb. 11. There is no peace in that
way, it is full of Thorns and briers, thou must expect to be pricked and
wounded, therefore spare thy self, as Peter said to Christ, Mat. 16.22.23.
Be it far from thee, but Christ terms it the language of Satan, get thee
behind me Satan, said he, for thou savourest not the things that are of God.
Thus he deludes poor souls with promises of peace which is no true peace, for
here is not a word of the peace of God which passes understanding, such a
peace that the world cannot give, Jo. 14.27. Neither can the world take it
away; for as it is said of the Nightingale, she sings with her breast against a
thorn; so the people of God have such peace and joy within, that when the
thorn of affliction is against their breasts, they can rejoice, as Paul and
Silas did in prison; and although they have not peace with the world, yet they
have peace with God, Christ, and their own Consciences, which is the best of
all, therefore let not Satan keep thee by this wile from coming to Christ, for
he tells thee in the text, he will give thee rest, which implys all peace as
far as it is good for thy Soul, but Satan cannot give one moment of true peace
or tranquillity to the Soul.

8. If peace will not do, then he promises the world, the pleasures, the
honors and the profits of this world, as he did to Christ (but in vain) so he
does to all (...), All these things I will give unto thee, do but fall down and
worship me, Mat. 4.9. O how many Souls does he catch by this bait!
notwithstanding he frequently deceives the Soul, and gives a blear-eyed Leah
instead of a beautiful Rachel Tuta frequens via est sub amici fallere Nomen.
Under the name of kindness and friendship he frequently deludes the sinner,
And these are brave alluring baits, and do most usually ensnare the poor silly
creature, being so suitable to flesh and blood, and that corrupt part of man
which is like tinder easily fired with the desire of these things; these have
kept thousands from coming, and have drawn back many that were gone a fair way
toward Christ, this made Judas instead of believing in Christ for his Savior,
betray him as a Malefactor; the Love of the world drew away Demas who had
followed Christ a great way; the Devil knows full well how to impede and hinder
sinners from coming to Christ. I have read a story of one Hippomenes, who fell
in Love with a beautiful Woman called Atalanta, who had vowed Virginity, only
she proposed this to her Wooers, that they should run a Race with her unarmed,
she having a dart in her hand; and if she won the Race, she was to kill them
with her dart, she having ended many so, Himpomenes was to run with her, and he
had gotten three Golden Apples (given him by Venus) which in the midst of the
race, when she drew nigh unto him, he severally throws down, and she being
allured by them, runs to gather them up, and so he wins the race and her: which
I apply thus (for the moral of it is good) This Hipomenes is Satan who falls in
love with the soul (which is Atalanta) who has vowed Virginity in its baptismal
covenant; he goes to Venus, which is the world, and gets three Golden Apples,
which are profit, pleasure, and honor, and when the soul is as it were half
way to Zion, he throws down these before it, and whilst it stops to gather
them, the Race is lost, and the soul is undone for ever. Satan works most
effectually by these, which are but perishing vanitys, and thousands of souls
are swallowed up in this Gulf, who believe Satan that is the Father of lies,
when he promises only a dirty world, and neglect to come to Christ, when he
promises an eternal glorious Kingdom: Satan promises the earth, and he too
often prevails; but Christ offers Heaven, with all the immunitys, glory, and
happiness imaginable, and yet is refused; Satan promises that which he cannot
perform without divine permission, but Christ promises that which he will
certainly bestow upon the believing soul, therefore let not these Cobwebs hold
thee, seeing he Commands thee, and it is thy duty to obey.

9ly. He persuades the sinner that he shall live a Malancholly life, if he come
to Christ, and then produces various instances, then shows him such a one and
such a one, who when they followed the course of the world, and had their
conversation as other men, they lived cheerfully, and merrily, but since they
turned out of that way, and have gone in another new way, they are sad and
disconsolate persons; now ye shall not see them rejoice, but hang down their
heads as a Bullrush. This I say is another of his devices, to keep back poor
Souls when they are coming to Christ although there is no reason why it should,
for if they are sorrowful and pensive, it is not with the sorrow of the world,
which is deadly, 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works Repentance to Salvation
never to be Repented of; but the sorrow of the world works death; and as the
wise man says, In the midst of laughter the heart is sad; thus it is usually
with the men of the world, but the Godly, though they have a dejected
countenance, yet then they have a cheerful heart; as their sorrows are not
alike, so their joys cant be compared; the Apostle can say to the Godly,
rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.16. And rejoice in the Lord always; when he says
to the wicked, Go weep and howl for the misery that shall come upon you, James
5.1. Satan lies, when he says the ways of God are Melancholy; for as the wise
man says, Romans 3.17. All her ways (speaking of wisdom) are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; and he may truly say all, because
all her paths are holiness. I could give several instances besides scriptural
ones, of persons who have found it, and declared it to be the most pleasant
way: all the godly, more or less, Galeaceus Carraciolus
have experienced this: I shall mention only that of the Noble Marquess who had
experienced what comforts the world could afford, and what were to be found in
the ways of God) could say Cursed be that Man who shall prefer all the Gold
and Silver in the world, before one days Communion with the Lord Jesus. See
here how he esteemed the comforts and delights he met with in the ways of God.
Therefore let not this deter thee: and I will add mine own experience, I never
had such joys and delights as in the holy ways of God: I cannot express it; but
come thou to Christ, and thou shall taste it, nay satiate thy soul out of his
superabundant fullness; for he has rivers of pleasure by him, and he does often
here give plentiful draughts to the believing soul.

10ly. Remember Satan is called (...). 1 Pet. 5.8. A calumniator, and (...)
Rev. 12.10 the accuser of the Brethren.
By laying open the Infirmities and miscarriages of the saints and servants of
the Lord Jesus, and representing them as vile as others; if not to the eye of
the world, yet they are so in secret; and they are but painted on the external
side, but all rotten within. But I know this to be one of Satan's devices to
keep poor souls from coming to Christ. O says he to the sinner, there are none
without their failings, and if you expect to be perfectly holy, you must be so
in another world; observe the steps of those that seem most precise, says
Satan, and you shall see that they sin daily, they are as proud as passionate,
and as worldly as others; if you live in one sin, they live in another;
therefore be not so much concerned about your self and about coming to Christ.
And if this will not do, he finds out some who walk with the people of God,
and go under the notion of Servants of Christ (when indeed they are not, but
are like those, Jo. 6.26. Who followed Christ, not because of his Miracles, but
for the Loaves; for some by interest not for love) and yet they live in sin and
do as they world do. Now he strikes the nail to the head, and the sinner sits
down contented, as if he had no need to press forward through the Crowd of the
wicked, and wickedness of this world, and come to Christ. I grant that which
cannot be denied, that the best of Saints have their failings and infirmitys,
as Noah, Abraham, Lot, David, and many more; but consider, 1. They did not live
in the practice of any known sin. 2. They did not neglect coming to Christ and
believing in him. 3. If none of these be so holy as thou think, they pretend
or ought to be, yet it is thy duty to provide for thine own soul. Therefore
resist Satan and come to Christ.

11ly. By showing the poverty and afflictions the people of God undergo, Joh.
7.48.
and that if they come to Christ they must expect the same. This is a wile by
which she insnares many, says Satan, see there are not many mighty or noble
ones of that way. They are but an impoverished people that are his followers,
and are afflicted and distressed daily, as the Apostle said, 2 Cor. 4.8.9.
Troubled on every side, In perplexities continually; this is the portion of
them who are his disciples, it has ever been so with them; here the Devil
speaks truth but to a wicked end, scil. To keep the miserable from seeking to a
Savior. Abraham, Moses, David, Josiah, Constantine, Galeaceus, with many more.
Indeed the followers of Christ have been and are for the most part a poor and
afflicted people, although there has been some honorable ones that have
forsaken all and followed Christ but the reason why there have been and are so
few great ones of the world that close with Christ, is, because Satan and their
Riches will not let them. Thus it was with the young man in the Gospel, Mat.
19.21. Go says Christ, part with all, sell all, and follow me; but he rather
chose to part with Christ and bid farewell to him; he went away, the Text
says, sorrowing, but we never read he came again repenting. Again, they who
abound with the riches of this world, are least sollicitous about the riches of
another; now the poor having but little here seek for a better treasure, James
2.5. God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, Heirs of the
Kingdom. 3. They are most secure thinking God is obliged to give Heaven
freely unto them, because he bestows earth liberally upon them. 4. They must
needs have the least love for their immortal Souls, whose greatest care is
taken up about their bodies; therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many
wise after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; not but that
they are invited to come, but they refuse it. And as for their afflictions
which the Apostle calls light, they will work for them a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory; therefore let not Satan hold thee by this wile.

12ly. Professorum paucitas religionem non probat esse falsam. The Paucity of
Professors does not prove the Religion to be false.
The Paucity and fewness of Christ's Followers, is another device of his to
impede and hinder sinners, with this Argument the serpent makes excellent work
for and among the Papists. O say those Hellish Emissarys (fit Instruments for
that roaring devouring Lion to work by) when they come to dispute with poor
silly creatures, there are but few of that way in comparison of ours, we have
whole Kingdoms of our persuasion, that way is but an affected Singular way,
and in the Multitude of Counselors, there is much safety; a few may err, but
the universal Church cannot; this is the subtilty of Satan and his Servants,
but this is no just reason for thy not coming, because there are but few, for
Christ's Flock has always been a little Flock. Luke 12.32.
When Christ was upon the earth, he had but Twelve Apostles and a few more that
followed him; those of the Pharisees and Saduces were of greater number; but it
could be no true Argument that therefore they must needs be of the true
religion then Christ's few Disciples that followed him. 2. Counsels have and do
err (as our Divines have sufficiently proved) but the word of God is true. 3.
If none else come to Christ, yet it is thy duty, and should be thy care,
because Salvation is alone to be had in him, Acts. 4.12.

13ly. Satan deters many from coming to Christ by telling them of the
reproaches, scorns and hatred of others which t^^y will incur, and must expect
to undergo, for the world has ever despised such persons who have been Christ's
true and faithful Disciples. If they go but through the street, and their habit
discover what they are, you shall hear how they are reproached and scorned, but
it is not so with those who lead their conversation after the Customs of this
world. Moreover they are hated by their relations, their friends and
acquaintance, you must not expect a good name, nor an aspect of love from them;
this must be your Lot, and who would expose themselves to all these
afflictions? what, will you make yourselves to be abhorred of most men? bring
misery upon your selves; do not do it, but keep in the same way you are in;
keep up your reputation among your neighbors, and maintain the love of your
friends, get the good will of all, and this is the only way. It is a common
Maxim, That Truth is Truth ever, Veritas semper est veritas a quocunque
dicatur.
from whomsoever it is spoken: So Satan speaks abundance of truth when he
suggests these and the like cogitations into poor sinners; but yet consider, to
be reproached for Christ's sake, is an honor, Heb. 11.26. Moses esteemed the
Reproaches of Christ, greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt; observe, it
is said, he esteemed them, he put a high value upon them, he was not ashamed of
them, but he accounted them his honor. 2. It is better to be reproached, and
follow Christ, than commended and follow Satan. The meanest part of Christ's
service, is more honorable than the greatest the Devil can confer upon you. 3.
It is the same that Christ and his Apostles did find in the world, Joh. 15.18,
19. If the world hate you (says Christ) ye know it hated me before it hated
you. And verse. 19. I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you, Luke. 21.16, 17. All friends shall set themselves against you, and
ye shall be hated of all men for my name sake. 4. It is better to have men and
friends reproach and hate, than our conscience to reproach, and the great God
to hate for ever. And if thou do not come to Christ, be sure thou will have
no peace in thy conscience, nor any Love or pity from God. And if thou
suffer with Christ in thy name or whatever else, thou shall be glorified
with him, Romans 8.17. Then notwithstanding all these Devices of Satan, come unto
the Lord Jesus that thou may have rest for thy Soul.

14ly. By persuading the Sinner to rest in the performance of some Moral acts,
as temperance, and just dealing, abstaining from gross enormities which others
daily fall into; if they do fall, yet they do not wallow in the mire. By this
Chain he held the Jews fast, and many thousands of those who are called
Christians, I speak not against Morality, for where there is not Morality,
there is no true Christianity; but we must not rest here.
that by reason of this, never come fully unto the Lord Jesus. It has troubled
me sometimes to see those who are high in Morality, very just, very Temperate,
and circumspect in their external deportment, and all their actions are so
regulated even to admiration, but no Christ all this while; discourse to them
in their life time, not a word of Christ; come to them in times of sickness,
they have a refuge to fly to, they never wronged any one, they have not been
guilty of Adultery, Fornication, and the like gross sins; they have done what
they could, and they hope God will accept the will for the deed, and the like;
but no mentioning of Christ, here is no renouncing self, they have laid Feeble
foundation, and have raised their superstructure, but the next storm of Gods
wrath, will quite evert and overturn the building, and demollish this stately
Fabric; For other foundation can no man lay, No other firm Gospel foundation;
such as will bear up the soul in the day of Gods wrath.
than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. He is the only
foundation of Gods elect ones. Therefore be not deceived by this wile of Satan,
for although I must confess Morality is a duty incumbent upon all, and I wish
there was more used among them who are termed Christians; yet this must not be
thy Christ if thou expectest to be saved, for There is Salvation in none other,
Acts. 4.12. If thou could live the life of an Angel, sail, Free from sin, one
only transgession excepted, thou would be undone for ever, unless Christ
should satisfy his fathers justice for that iniquity; nay without thine actual
transgression, thine Original sin would damn thee, except it were washed away
with the blood of Christ, for we all sinned in Adam, Romans 5.12. (...), in whom
all have sinned; and all thou can do can never wash away that pollution; for
if Doing would have done it, Christ needed not to have dyed. Again, if Morality
would do the work in order to Salvation, we may conclude that many of the
Heathens, and also of the Jews, who never believed in Christ, shall be saved,
but as the Apostle says, Gal. 2.16. By the works of the Law shall no flesh be
justified. Paul had abundantly more to say for himself in this case, Phil.
3.3.4.5.6. Than many of our proud Pharisee's now a days, yet he renounces all
as not being safe to rest in and build upon, and (...) to Christ alone,
7.8.9.10. verses. So I would advise thee whoever thou art, that do peruse
this treatise, never to rest upon any foundation for thy eternal well being,
but upon the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Rock to build upon, Mat. 16.18.

15ly. By the applause of men, this Subtle Adversary has detained many as he
did the Rulers mentioned, Jo. 12.42. Nevertheless among the chief Rulers also,
many believed on him, but because of the Pharisee's, they did not confess him,
least they should be put out of the Sinagogue. And the reason is given, ver.
43. For they loved the praise of Men, more than the praise of God. I must not
enlarge; but know this is no good reason, Hinc apicem rapax fortuna cum
stridore acuto sustulit hic posuisse gaudet. Hor
for which is better, the praise of Man, or the praise of God? do but judge the
one is of finite dust, the other of an infinite Jehovah. The applause of men is
like the bubble on the water, which soon vanishes, it is uncertain as daily
experience teaches us, and it is dangerous for the soul because it often puffs
up and elevates the mind to act above its own sphere, and soar too nigh the
schorching sun; so that Icarus-like at last they come tumbling down into the
Ocean of woe and Misery, for God resists the proud, but gives grace to the
humble, Jam. 4.6. Consider but this, to be a faithful disciple and Follower of
Christ, is greater honor, than to be the highest Monarch upon earth, and have
no Interest in him; for true honor is that which comes from God; therefore
seek not so much the vain applause of man, Jo. 5.44. But that honor which
comes from God. By believing in the Lord Jesus.

16ly. Satan impedes many by keeping them in a mear external profession, wholly
neglecting the internal work of Grace, as saving faith in Christ, sincere Love
to him, to his Ordinances, and to his members, the work of regeneration upon
the soul, without which they can never be saved, Jo. 3.3. Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom; These have the form but not the power of
Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. They profess Christ but in works deny him, they are
called Nathaniel's, but indeed are full of guile, they have the name of
Christians, but never labor to become true and sincere Christians; they honor
God in words, but their hearts are far from him; like unto the Jews, they cry
out, The Temple of the Lord, The The Temple of the Lord, and yet disobey the
Lord of the Temple: So these cry up a Christ, a Jesus, but yet never obey him
so as to believe in him; Qui Christum non habet ipse, non potest Christianus
dici. Augu.
profess him they do, but regard not whether they profess him, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, unless you be reprobates. Reigning in
you and ruling of you by his holy spirit. He who has not Christ in him, is not
a Christian.
I speak all along what daily observation does confirm, and this is a wile of
Satan by which he hinders thousands of Souls from coming unto Christ: If we
look into the Euopean part of the world where the name of Christ is professed
we shall find that the Basis upon which the greatest number do build and rest,
is only a profession of the Lord Jesus, and by professing of him are let from
coming to him: a strange Paradox, but too evidently true: Satan knows how to
use this weapon for the Souls eternal ruin, unless prevented by Divine grace
from on high; therefore I say, let not this Devil hold thee by this device, but
labor to come nearer unto Jesus Christ, for as the Body without the Soul is
dead, so is the Soul that only professes, but does not possess the Lord Jesus.
But in a word, consider well and thy own Judgment and Conscience will tell
thee, that all shall not be saved that profess the name of Christ; for if all
should be saved that are called Christians, then thou may conclude, that
Whoremongers, Adulterers, Liars, Theives, Murderers, and other abominable
Livers, shall be happy when they come to dye, although there is no saving chang
wrought in the heart, only a bare profession of Christ, as is throughout
England, and other places where the Gospel is spread. Which Argument I know
thou will deny, if thou have any esteem for real Godlyness. It is not every one
that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 7.21.
(...). Justin.
Christians are such who keep the commands of Christ, says Justin Martyr, Very
Orthodoxi dicuntur a fidei rectitudine and vitae integritate.
a true Christian is known by the rectitude of his faith, and the integrity of
his Life, was the saying of the Ancients.

17ly, He impedes, by persuading the Sinner to rest in a continual series of
Duty: this is a step higher then the former, they Look, Speak, and act as if
they were come unto Christ, when indeed they are far from him; they keep
communion with Christ's Flock, and are not discerned from his Sheep. They hear
the word Preached, partake of the Sacrament, read the word, and pray in
Public, and Secret, but still are like the Foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.1.2. Which
had Lamps, which I take not only to be of profession, but a Series of duties,
for they kept company with the Wise till the Bridegroom was comeing, Jo. 17.3.
To rest in dutys without Christ, is like Joseph's Brethren who bring all things
with them but Benjamine.
i. e. till they were to appear before Christ Jesus; and then they wanted oil,
i. e. Grace in their hearts, and a saving knowledge of Christ, as may be
gathered from Christ's answer to them, verse. 12. I say unto you I know you not.
They did not in all their Duties labor to know Christ, so as to believe and
rest on him for Salvation, therefore says he, I know you not, depart from me.
There must be a coming off from all Duty in point of Salvation, and there must
be a reliance on Christ alone; and not to make that our Jesus which is but the
way to him; here Satan does not deceive the notorious Sinner, but the seeming
devout Saint; these take a large step toward Heaven, and yet come one step
short of Heaven, and so tumble headlong into everlasting Misery. When the
Conscience is a little awakened or wounded upon the account of some Sin, he
will permit the Sinner to go to Duty, there to seek for cure, but not to the
Lord Jesus. By this wile he seeks to deceive the Heirs of the Kingdom, if it
were possible, therefore beware in all conditions, of resting short of coming
to Christ; for if Duty does not lead the Soul to Christ the Savior, that which
usurps that office, i. e. of a Jesus, will certainly in the end Damn the Soul
for ever; consider, this is one of the depths of Satan; therefore to the end he
may not delude thee, and keep thee in this Snare, suspect every duty and
ordinance, which does not by Faith bring thee to Christ alone, both for grace
and Glory.

18ly, By reason of some gifts bestowed upon the Soul, as knowledge, it may be
in the word of God, and ability to discourse of it; likewise a gift of Prayer
even to admiration, now Satan is ready to tell the person he need go no
further, for if God did intend to condemn him, he would not so liberally bestow
such gifts upon him; he need not question but his condition and state is very
secure, and by this means the Soul rests satisfied in what is bestowed upon it,
but never looks to Christ, as the sole foundation of Salvation. O How many does
he deceive by this wile, that because of some supernatural gifts confered upon
them, conclude thence, they shall be saved. Have a care of this Golden bait,
for it has allured many Souls into everlasting Flames; for thou may have
great knowledge, parts, and gifts, and notwithstanding all be a Fire brand of
Hell, (...)
For if thou know Christ savingly, it is enough, though thou art ignorant in
other things, but if thou know not him, all other Learning is as nothing,
Jo. 17.3. And if thou know him savingly, then thou love him really and
superlatively.

19ly, By promises of repentance and future obedience, The Language of Satan.
live in thy Sins, gratify thy Lust, secure the World, follow the Customs of
the times, thou shall repent hereafter, which is many times Judas like; this I
know to be the device of Satan, by which he prevents many from coming to
Christ: tell some of their Sins, and the necessity of repentance, and coming to
Christ by faith now; they will answer (by the instigation of Satan) they do
intend to repent, and lead a now life, if they are by afflictions, or by the
word, or some providence, sometimes convinced that those things should be done
now, that they should turn to God, lay hold upon Christ, abandon all Sin, Satan
will not let them now, but promises hereafter they shall do it; I fear too
many are caught by this wile: but Reader be not thou one of them, but come to
Christ now repentingly and believingly, for besure it is not the Spirit of
Christ that bids thee demur, and put off thy repentance and obedience, it is
only the voice of Satan. The Spirit of God says to day, Heb. 3.15. Satan is
for to Morrow.

20ly, Satan obstructs by telling the Sinner of the mercy of God, what if thou
do Sin, God is Merciful, he is full of Pity, Exodus 34.6.7. He is gracious and
long suffering. Therefore question not but thou will do well, and we find this
answer very ready in their Mouths, when we come to set their Sins before them,
and demand how they expect to be saved, seeing they live so in Sin, the answer
is, God is merciful, and I hope he will pardon my iniquities. By this wile of
Satan the mercy of God is abused, and the Sinner undone for ever; it is true,
that Gods mercys are infinite, and he is full of pity and tenderness unto poor
Creatures, but his mercy will not save without Christ. I shall not now enter
into that dispute, whether or no God could save Sinners by his mercy alone,
without any Consideration of, or relation unto the Lord Jesus, but this I
assert from Christ's own words, Jo. 14.6. That there is no coming to the Father
but by the Son, no coming to him for mercy, pardon, and salvation, but by
Christ alone. But consider further, it is the Malice of Satan to thy Soul, and
he designs only Cruelty, when he keeps thee in thy Sins, and yet flatters thee
with hopes of Mercy; I do not write this to discourage any poor penitent Sinner
from finding mercy, but to bring deluded Sinners from the abuse of it, and
discovering the Wile of Satan, showing them the only way to obtain it; for
never think to be saved by his mercy, when thou have lived as long as thou
can in Sin, for God is a consuming Fire to all such, Heb. 12.29. And instead
of extending Mercy, he will on the contrary Condemn thee, if thou do not come
unto Christ, Romans 8.1.

21ly, He impedes them, by begeting prejudices in them against the faithful
Ministers of the Lord Jesus; and if he can but do this, he thinks he has done
the work; thus he did in the Jews, Act. 3.45. when Paul and Barnabas had
Preached Christ and so consequently Salvation to the Gentiles; they then
contradict, and Blaspheme, and are filed with envy against them. Christ's
Ambassadors are the very Butt Satan Shoots at, and he knows if he can but keep
Sinners from embracing their Doctrine, then he has them secure, because Christ
has committed such treasure unto them, and his chosen them as instruments in an
ordinary way to convert Sinners, and turn them from darkness unto light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18. and as Christ says, Jo. 15.20.
If they have kept my sayings, they will keep yours also. Satan is not ignorant
of this, that the Preaching of the Gospel is the means of conversion, and the
hearing of it, the means of the begeting faith in the Lord Jesus, Romans 20.14.
Therefore he does all he can to prevent Sinners, and this he does sometimes by
scandalizing of them, and casting contempt upon them, giving forth names of
Schismatics, Heretics and the like, as the Church of Rome has done, and some
others; sometimes by blaspheming the Doctrine they deliver, as though it was
not congruent to the word of truth. But Sinner thou have no reason to believe
him, for he is a Liar, and a Murderer, and seeks the Blood of thy Soul, and
under pretense of keeping thee from delusion, he deludes thee altogether: For
although the World and Devil hate them, persecute them, and speak evil of them,
that is no Argument that they are not therefore Christ's Ministers and Servants,
but rather that they are so, Jo. 15.30.

22. Satan hinders, by persuading the Sinner, that Christ's service is very
difficult, his Yoke is heavy, and his burden Intolerable; that Christ is a
hard Master, and will exact the whole tale of Bricks, but will not allow Straw;
there is no abiding long in his Service, for there are several that have made
trial, but are returned to their former courses; if he become his Servant, he
must take up his Cross and deny himself; he must be universal and constant in
his obedience, Pray always, Watch always, and in all things, 2 Timothy 4.5. Thus
Satan renders the service of Christ, as unlovely and intolerable as may be, to
the end he may impede the Sinner from coming home to Christ, but Satan is not
to be credited before Jesus Christ, therefore I say hearken to what Christ
says, Mat. 11.30. My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is Light. All his commands
and injunctions are light and easy, because he puts under everlasting arms to
support the Soul, and inables it to go cheerfully under it. There is no service
like his, for it is perfect freedom, and the Soul is never free till it is
subject to him. The experience of all his sincere disciples and servants will
confute this lying Argument of Satan, for there is not a faithful servant of
his, but will say, they have found his ways pleasant, and his Burden
tolerable; thou may hear them cry out of the thorn in the Flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7,
8. of the Body of Sin, Romans 7.24. And of the Burden of it, Psalm 38.4. Mine
iniquities are gone over my head, as a heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me
to bear. But they are so far from accounting his service difficult, or crying
out of the weightiness of Christ's Burden, that on the contrary they cry, O how
do we love thy Law; as David in Psalm. 119. I rejoice in them more than in hid
Treasure, so Paul, Romans 7.22. I delight in the Law of God, after the inward
Man. Da quod mandas and manda quod vis. Aug.
This is their language, give but strength Lord, and command what thou will,
let not this discourage thee, for it is only Satan's wile.

23. If all this will not do, then he will let fly his fiery Darts, and by
terrors, and horrors of Conscience, (...), Ephesians. 6.16.
he will seek to scare the Sinner from coming to Christ, he will send forth
Thunder and Lightening against the poor Soul, and threaten nothing but
damnation, if it go to seek for Salvation; he will give it no peace, till it
returns again to folly. Woeful experience does confirm the truth of this, many
have tasted of the powers of the World to come, but yet by Satan's Darts have
been shamefully overcome. If Christ promise Peace, Satan will give the Soul
nothing but trouble, he will terrify and amaze it if once it offer to look to
Christ; when his sophystry and subtilty will not do, then he plays his Engines
of War, and makes the poor Sinner willingly yield, and lay down Arms, upon
condition of peace; It is willing to comply and yield subjection rather then
stand the contest with such a potent adversary, but let not Satan with his
fiery Darts beat thee back from coming unto Christ, the Captain of thy
Salvation; Pray Christ to give thee the shield of faith, wherewith thou may
quench his fiery Darts, Ephesians. 6.6. If thou come to Christ, he will tread this
Enemy Satan under thy Feet, and bring thee conqueror out of the Field; for
Consider, although Satan's Darts are terrible, yet the terrors of the Lord are
infinite, and there is none but Christ alone that can deliver thee from them
both; therefore come and lay hold upon his strength, Isa. 27.5.

24 Is by another means, persuading the Sinner his Sins are greater than can be
Pardoned, and it will prove in vain to seek for a remission of them; God never
promised Pardon or acceptance to such a one; Christ dyed not for such Crimson
Sinners, therefore it is the best way to sit still, and bare his burden with
content, for there is not Virtue in the Blood of Christ to wash their filthy
and polluted Souls, or to justify them from their guilt; then he aggravates the
hainousness of his Sins, in the number, nature, and circumstances of them; the
number infinite, the nature abominable, and considering the circumstances
irremissable; here he terrifies the poor Soul, so that it finds no rest,
because it has had Sin presented through a magnifying glass, but the mercy of
God in Christ to be small, and altogether too short to cover his Wounds, or
cure his distemper, by this Dart he drives away the Sinner from coming unto
Christ, as Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradise, least they should eat of
the Tree of Life, and live for ever. But believe not Satan, when he thus Wars
against the Soul, for the mercy of God in and through Christ to poor Sinners is
infinite; the Price which Christ paid was infinite, I write not this that
Sinners may presume, but that poor penitents may come unto Christ for mercy.
It was the Blood of God, Act. 20.28. Therefore he is able to save to the
uttermost, Heb. 7.25. Although thy Sins are great, yet the mercy of God, and
the merit of Christ, are much greater: Therefore come unto Christ when Satan
thus assaults thee, and see whether he has not purchased Pardon for thee; are
thy Sins greater than Peter's, who denied his Lord and Master? do they exceed
Manasses; Idolatry, Murder, Witchcraft, 2 Chronicles. 33.6. or Paul, when a
Persecuter and Blasphemer, and Injurious, 1 Timothy 1.13. Yet these penitentially
returning to God, found mercy through the Lord Jesus, Romans 5. By him we have
access into this grace wherein we stand.

25. He does all he can to bring the Soul into despair, and to cry out as
those, Jer. 18.12. There is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices,
and we will every one do the Imagination of his own Heart. Thus he served
Judas, first leads him into Sin, then into despair, and makes him lay violent
hands upon himself; and that notable instance of Francis Spira, who left the
World in a dispairing condition for his denying the Lord Jesus: This does
exceedingly dishonor God when we despair of finding mercy; unbelief is the
main Wheel that moves this Engine of despair, 1. It calls Gods Pity and Mercy
into question, as in Psalm. 77.8. Is his mercy clean go^ for ever? 2. His Love
and Grace, verse. 9. Has he forgotten to be gracious? 3. His Faithfulness, as
in verse. 8. Does his promises fail for evermore? 4. His Omnisciency, and is
ready to tax God of imperfection, Like unto Man, has he forgotten, says the
dispairing Soul. By this Dart he has for a time kept some of the elect from
coming unto Christ; till the Lord Jesus has broke in, and rescued the captive
out of his hands, and declared his faithfulness to his promise, and his
readiness to save all repenting believing Sinners; Luke 4.17.
it is certain that Satan keeps off more by presumption, then by despair, but
when the one will not effect his grand design, scil. The destruction of the
Soul, then he will make his best improvement of the other; if he cannot make
the Sinner run precipitantly into Hell, he will labor to bring him into
despair of ever getting to Heaven; now seeing Satan is thus busy, watch against
his Wiles, Devices, and fiery Darts, remember what is said Heb. 2.17. Jesus
Christ is a Merciful and faithful High Priest. And in that Jo. 1.9. If we
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Therefore I say, be not discouraged, but
come unto Christ and thou shall find Peace for thy Conscience, and rest for thy
Soul.

26. Another fiery Dart by which Satan deters Poor Sinners from coming unto
Christ, is by telling them there is no God. Psalm. 10.4. The Wicked through the
Pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his
thoughts, (...)
or (as in the Hebrew) all his thoughts are, there is no God. There have been,
and are some, who have attained to that degree of impudence, as to deny that
there is an eternal being, who himself was before all, and gave being and
existence to all Creatures. Diagoras, Milesius, and Protagoras Abderites, and
Theodorus, commonly called the Atheist, and others, in former times, denied
that there is a Numen or Deity, that by his omnipotency has created all
things, and it is very much to be lamented, that there have been, and are at
this day in England, those who boldly and impudently write and dispute against
this eternal divine truth; these have suffered the wicked one to abcecate the
Eye of reason, and so they are led captive by him at his will; but methinks it
is one of the absurdest points that may be, for a rational Animal thus
ignorantly to reason; what, is there not a supreme being, who created,
sustaineth, and gubernates all things? It is most impudent to assert the
negative, for either they must be produced into being from themselves, and so
prove Independent; or else it is from some more noble supreme and eternal
being, who himself wants beginning, and so consequently will never cease to be;
according to that maxim, Lacttantius du plesses de vera Religione Rawleighs
Guost cum multis aliis.
Quod caret principio effective, caret etiam fine; That we have not our being
from our selves; that no creature can be the immediate Efficient, or first
moving Principle, in the production of it self, but that there is a supreme
Author and Efficient of all things, whom we call God, has been so copiously
proved by many Famous Men, both for Piety, and Learning, that I shall not now
insist on it; Nay some of the Heathen Philosophers have owned, and declared
that there is a God; the natural Philosopher proves it Ex motu, fine, and causa
efficiente, From the Motion, the End, and the efficient Cause, Ens Finitum, a
finite thing, Closed within bounds and limits (as this World, and every
Creature in it is could not be, but from some Maker or Creator, with many
Arguments to confirm it. The Moral Philosopher has found many strong
Arguments, that there is a God, as from the Natural inclination and propensity
that is in Man, to confess and own some God or Deity, for as it is seen in all
Nations (though never so Barbarous) they Worship and Adore something for a
Deity; there is such a divine Impress left upon the Conscience of Man, that
Lactantius lib. 2. Div. Instit. Cap. 2. observed when they Swore, or Cursed, or
Prayed, or Wished any thing heartily (especially when in affliction) their
manner was to say God, Deus, non Dii.
not Gods; other Arguments they have, as the Finis Vltima, and the Summum
Bonum, the last end and chief felicity of man, and also from the consideration
of good and evil, vice and virtue, and the reward in equity due to the one, and
the Punishment belonging to the other; but I must not enlarge, for I intend
only to declare the Darts Satan has to shoot at Poor Souls, and sometimes he
casts them at the elect, upon their conversion, or some time of weakness, or
sore afflictions, but they are in the end repulsed by the power of Divine
grace, and are extinguished by the shield of Faith. But now he fills others who
live in wickedness, with some secret conceits that there is no God, that will
call them to a strict account, therefore they persevere in their evil
Practices, and totally neglect coming to Christ.

27. If they step so high as to grant there is a God, who is supreme and the
Author of all things, then he is ready to persuade them that he concerns not
himself with, Democritus, Heroclitus, Epicurus and Lucretius, acknowledged a
Numen or Deity, but denied the providence of the same.
nor observes humane affairs; as there have been many that he has deceived by
this Argument, and so they have thrown off the Yoke of obedience, and wholly
neglected their Souls, so there are many to be found at this day, who have such
strange conceptions of God, therefore they neglect coming to Christ; they are
ready to say, as in Job. 22.13, 14. How does God know? can he judge through the
dark Clouds? thick Clouds are a covering to him that he sees not, and he
walks in the Circuit of Heaven. There are many such who are deceived with
this, to think that God is bounded within the circuit of Heaven, and deny unto
him all Prescience, Omnipresence, and Omniscience; that Fancy God does not
observe their minute, and eye every singular action of theirs; therefore they
freely live, and daily delight in Sin, and hearken not to the calls of Christ,
by his Ministers inviting them to come unto him; this is another obstacle of
Satan's, by which he impedes many, I fear, of those who go under the notion of
Christians; for this may be gathered clearly, if we do but view their actions;
O how greedily do they fall upon Sin, both Publicly and Privately without any
abashedness or remorse, which they could never do, if they understood and
believed that God sees and observes all their ways, Job. 34, 21. For his eyes
are upon the ways of Man, and he sees all his goings; Moreover that he will
render according to each ones deeds, as 1 Pet. 1.17. But whoever thou art, that
do cast thine eye upon this Book, and Satan does suggest such a thing to
thee, as that God does not reguard the actions of Men here below, shield thy
self against this Dart, by giving credit to the Word of God, Job. 31.4. Does
not God see my ways, and count all my Steps? Prove. 5.2. For the ways of man are
before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings. And thus
considering that God beholds all thy actions, and will call thee to account for
them, and that thou art not able to answer him one of a thousand, when he
enters into judgment with thee; will make thee more diligently seek after
Christ Jesus; that thou may be secured from perishing in and for thy iniquity.

28. If that will not do, then Satan persuades the Sinner that he has no Soul
distinct from the Body in Nature and Essence, but they are the same substance,
thus he has deceived many, with a base persuasion, that they are no better
than the bruits; that their Soul is no other thing then their Blood or Breath,
or some such like thing, and is not of a spiritual nature, which can exist
separate from the Body; therefore there is no necessity of Christ to save it;
it is not a spirit as many foolishly conjecture; then what need any care for
the Salvation of it? thus the Sadduces of old were deluded by Satan, that
Father of Lies, and Lying Spirits, that there are no Angels or Spirits, Acts
23.8. Which made them neglect Christ, who came to save the Spirits of all them
that believe in him; to confute this, and remove this obstacle out of the way,
read Eccle. 12.7. Then shall the dust (meaning the Body) return to the Earth as
it was, and the Spirit shall return unto God who gave it. Hear are these things
observable in these Words. 1. Here is the Nature of the Soul, it is a Spirit
[the Spirit shall return to God.] 2. The Author and Donator of it, scil. God:
who creating it, infused it; and by infusing it, created it: the Soul is not
communicated by the seminal virtue, in the conjunction of both sexes, as some
vainly immagin; but it is a spirit created by God Immediately, and infused
into, and united to the Body; which unition makes a complete man.
3. That it does exist distinct from the Body, after the dissolution of it, for
it returns to him that gave it, even when the Dusty Body, the House of Clay, is
mouldred into Earth, which was the Materia prima, the first matter of it: Now
if it were not a distinct Imaterial substance it could never be said to return
to God, Luke 12.4. Fear not them that can kill the Body, but are not able to
kill the Soul. Which words declare, that the Soul and the Body are two distinct
things, although being united, they constitute one man. Now seeing thy Soul is
of a Spiritual nature, that can exist, separate from the Body, eject and
abominate this brutish Argument of Satan, who to the end he might bring thy
Spirit into the Place of Torment with himself, seeks to persuade thee, thou art
no degree higher than a Beast, and so neglect coming to Christ by whom
Salvation alone is to be expected.

29. If they are convinced that the Soul is of a Spiritual Nature, (which no
serious and rational Man can deny) then he Labors to persuade them that it is
Mortal, and that when the Body dies, the Soul is annihilate, or at least dies
with the Body till the resurrection, which is a time most uncertain, if any
such thing be. So he persuades the Sinner to neglect Christ, and indulge his
Senses; for if the Soul is Mortal, or must not appear till the general
Resurrection, it need not be solicitous about a future being, for what man will
take care to provide a Mansion, or Build a stately Fabric when there is none
to inhabit it? so who would busy their anxious thoughts about Eternity, when
they themselves shall be utterly extinct in time? as concerning an immortal
State when they are mortal; and shall one day totally cease to be? By this
false Argument, he overthrows many a Soul; and intangles them in the Labyrinth
of their Lusts, one continually attending the other, upon the consideration
that the Soul is Mortal; but let it not be thy case, thus to hearken to the
wicked suggestion of Satan; but believe truth, and the word of God, which
evidently manifest that the Soul is Immortal, 2 Cor. 5.6.8. We are confident I
say; and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present with the
Lord. If the Soul were not Immortal, the Apostle would not desire to be out of
the Body, that so he being a believer, should be present with the Lord. So the
Scripture before spoken to, fully manifests the Mortallity of the Soul, Eccle.
12.7. and Phil. 1.23 To prove this at Large, I leave you to that excellent
treatise of Mr. Wadsworth concerning the immortallity of the Soul. But if the
Soul be (as certainly it is) Immortal, and that by the decree of God it shall
never die, or utterly cease to be; then that it may live for ever with Christ
in bliss and hapiness, come unto him now he is pleased to invite thee.

30. And the next Impediment is this, that there is no such Heaven and Hapiness
for the Righteous as they imagine, neither is there any Hell to be a tormenting
place for the Wicked. He sometimes is so bold as to set upon gracious Souls
with these Falsities of his, but Christ brings them off victorious, and in fine
fixes the Crown of Glory upon their Heads; but hear Satan implicates and
insnares the Sinner, as may be daily seen if observed; for how few by their
conversation do discover, that they believe and expect the Glory of Heaven, and
an immortal state; or that they fear the torments of Hell; for if they did it
would make a wounderful change in the Heart, Words, and Actions, the promises
of Glory do not prevail with them to leave their Lusts; nor the threatenings of
Eternal Torments, terrify them from the ways of Sin, but they go on vigorously
in Satan's Service; But O Sinner be not deceived, for there is certainly a
reward for the Righteous, even Heaven, Life and Glory for ever, To. 2.7.
Certainly there is a Heaven, where God resides in magnificent Glory, Mat.
25.34. Lok. 12.32.
Christ exalted at his Right Hand with Angels Adoring, and Saints admiring him,
and where all Christ's beloved ones shall be and reign for ever, 1 These. 4.
16.17. And so shall we be for ever with the Lord. Rev. 3.21.30.
Likewise there is a place of Torment prepared for the Wicked, which is called
Hell, Psalm. 9.17. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations
that forget God. Mat. 25.41. Then also shall he say unto them on the Left Hand,
depart from me, ye Cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the D^vil and bis
Angels. Therefore seeing it is certain there is a Heaven and a Hell, come unto
Christ that thou may escape the one, and possess and enjoy the other.

31. By persuading them there will be no resurrection, I mention this because
Satan is so subtle, that if he cannot prevail with the Sinner by these
Arguments, as that there is no God, or that he does not intermeddle with, or
observe humane affairs; or that he has not a Soul which is distinct from his
Body, or that it is not immortal, and also that there is no Heaven or Hell; I
say, if the Sinner gets above all these, and is able to confute the subtle
Sophyster, then he comes with the impossibility of the resurrection of the
Dead, and so overthrows the faith of some. A Temporary and commom Faith.
Whilst the Watchmen were a Sleep or absent, we find he sowed this seed among
the Corinthians, which was the occasion of the Apostles wrighting that
excellent Chapter to prove it, 1 Cor. 15. To which I refer the Reader; and if
thou art one whom Satan seeks to keep in Sin, and neglect of coming to Christ
upon this false Argument, labor to shake it off and come to Christ, that thou
may be raised, and thy Soul and Body reunited in that great day. The
Sadduces were of this opinion, that there is no resurrection, Act. 23.8. But
Christ confutes them, by that inferrence consequential from the Scripture, that
God being the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he was so of them Living i. e.
in their Souls: and at the general resurrection their bodies should be raised in
Glory, and with their Souls united together.

32. And lastly he deters them, by persuading them there will be no future
Judgment. I should not have particularized thus, but have contracted and joined
some two heads in one; but considering that the Tempter is malicious, and
subtle, and that means by which he does impede one, he does not lay to obstruct
another; but considering our complexion, inclination, and disposition; the
place where; the time when; with all the circumstances and state of our
condition, he most pollitickly bends the force of his Temptation accordingly;
so that if one will not do, he will not fail it possible to do by another:
therefore I say one he may hold with that Argument that there is no
resurrection of the Dead, and by that means he persuades him to all
licentiousness; and another by this, there will be no future Judgment;
therefore thou may take thy fill of Sin, and never look after Christ Jesus,
for if there is no Judgment, there is no need of Christ. O how many are there
in this day of Sin and Abomination, that are impeded by some one of these
Arguments but I beseech thee let it not be thy case; but Read, and beg that
thou may believe these Scriptures, Heb. 9.27. Romans 14.10. 2 Cor. 5.10. Act.
17.31. Eccle. 11.9. and 12:14. And bare upon thy Spirit that of Jerome, surgite
Mortui, and venite ad Judicium, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment. And also
consider this, that if thou have a Soul that is immortal, and if there be a
God, (which certainly is true) then his Faithfulness, Righteousness, Love and
Kindness to his People, do engage and oblige him to make good his Word, fulfill
his Promises, and execute his Threatenings. Therefore beg grace that thou
may repulse all the Darts; discover all the baits and devices of Satan
against thy Soul, and also that thou may come unto Christ and accept of him
upon the terms of the Gospel.

3ly. I come now to the third external obstacle or hinderance, which impedes
the Sinner from coming unto Christ, and that is the World. 1. The men. 2. The
things. 1. The men of the world have been great obstacles; and that,

1. By their corrupt Doctrines, as those Luke 11.52. Mentioned by Christ with
an (...), Woe to you Lawyers; for ye have taken away the Key of knowledge, ye
enter not in your selves, and them who were entering ye hindered. Or forbid,
those Lawyers called (...), (...).
are sometimes taken for the Scribes, called (...), because they were writers
of the Law, and (...), 1 Timothy 1.7. Dionisius de tribus sectis l. 2. Chap. 11.
The teachers of the Law of Moses: they did expound the Law to the People in
Esra 7.6. But yet by their false interpretation took away the Key of Knowledge,
i. e. the right meaning of it, and so shut out both themselves and others from
happiness by their false and corrupt glasses. Upon Texts of Scripture: it is
probable they prohibited and forbid the Jews to believe that Christ was the
promised Messiah, therefore they ought not to obey him, who is the only way to
Eternal Life. Thus the Papists, Socinians, and Pelagians, have perverted Souls,
and caused whole Kingdoms to deviate and turn out of that direct way, which
leads unto Christ; but O what a dreadful account will these Soul-Murderers have
to give in at the day of Christ. The Papist is for his Works and Merits, the
Socinian for his Faith, not laying hold upon the object and Foundation, the
Lord Jesus; the Pelagian for his free Will, he will come to Christ when he
pleases. Others by a bare notion and assent; thus when they should do as the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.5. Not Preach themselves but Jesus Christ, they on the
contrary Preach down Christ and extol themselves; but Sinner receive none of
these Doctrines which Savor not of Christ, but reject them with that saying of
Augustine when he read Cicero's Works, Dukes non sunt quia nomen Jesu non est
in illis. Aug.
They are not sweet because the name of Jesus is not in them. Let him be alone
exalted, and held forth as the Brazen Serpent, for the Eye of thy Faith to look
unto, Jo. 3.14. That thou may receive cure for thy wounded Soul.

2ly. By their evil example; for this has a great influence upon the common
sort, and generality of mankind. Exemplis sane qui docet, ille docet.
He teaches well who teaches by examples. These pretend to believe in Christ,
yet live like the Servants of Satan, Linaker reading the 6. and 7. Chap. of
Mat. and considering the lives of Christians, threw away his Testament, saying,
Certainly, Certe aut hoc non est Evangelium Christi aut nos non sumus
Christiani.
either this is not the Gospel of Christ, or we are not Christians. I say this
has been and is at this day a very great Let to poor Sinners, and keeps them
from coming to Christ. The conversation of such who profess Christ, ought to be
managed so uprightly, that thereby they might win others unto Christ; I know
the evil of this by experience, for when I was Puris Naturalibus, in my Natural
State and Condition, and observing the loose conversation of one who seemed a
great Zealot for Christ and pure Christianity; it proved an obstacle unto me
for a time, and kept me back from fully closing with the Lord Jesus. Therefore
I only say this, Christians look to your lives, that they be exemplary for
holiness; and Sinner look to the word of God, which will lead thee unto Christ,
who is the best example and pattern of Piety.

3ly. By their Edicts and strict Laws against them, and their threatening of
them. Thus the Jews threatened the Apostles, that they should not Preach up
Christ, Act. 4.17. And thus the Papists threaten people with fire and faggot if
they come unto Christ; their Bloody Inquisitions scares many from believing,
professing, and embracing the truth of the Gospel; this they have done ever
since Christ's time; but let not these things deter thee, but consider the
answer of the Apostles, when called before the Council, Act. 4.19. Whether it
be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye.

4ly, By keeping the word of God from them, and not permiting them to read the
holy Scriptures, which are able by the assistance of the holy Spirit, to make
one wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Chrisostom calls them Animae Pharmaca,
the Medicines of the Soul; there the wounded may find cure, the blind may
receive sight: the Scriptures are such a copious treasure, that the Soul may
have full supplies in time of straits; there it may have council, as David had,
they were the men of his council; there the Soul may come to understand its
misery, the way of justification and Salvation by a Redeemer; who, and what
person he is, that he is the Eternal Son of God, Jo. 3.16. The only begotten
Son of God. In fine, there are all things necessary to Salvation; it is like a
well stored Magazin, wherein there is plenty of Ammunition to offend, and defend
against the Enemy, and also plenty of Provision to supply the wants of those
enclosed in the Garrison. But cruel Papists deny them to the Layety, and by that
means prevents them from knowing who Christ is, and the necessity of coming
unto him; many have been converted by reading the Scriptures, as Augustine,
Tertullian, and Luther, with several others, therefore labor to get the
Scriptures, to read and understand them, that thou may come unto Christ, and
that thy Soul may be made eternally happy by him.

5ly. By persecuting of, and destroying those, who are Christ's faithful
Ambassadors, that would bring them to Christ. Justin Martyr was converted by
seeing the undanted Spirit of those who suffered for Christ. And many more
instances I might give.
Thus the Papists have spit out their poisonous venom; how many have they made
to deny the Lord that bought them! although it must be confessed that God is
pleased to order it so, that Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae, The Blood of
the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church, and the more they have been oppressed,
the more they have Augmented, and by scattering have been increased, as they
were in the Apostles days, yet quite contrary to the design of their
Adversaries, as it is said of the great King of Assyria, Isa. 10. He designed
to destroy Nations, not a few; But God designed no such thing, but only to
convert and chastise those who had sinned against him; so the wicked
persecutors of the World in all the ten bloody persecutions, and in the Marian
Days here in England, their whole purpose and intent was to keep Persons from
believing in Christ, and laying hold upon him for Salvation; therefore they
destroyed the shepherds that the Sheep might go astray, others through fear of
their cruelty be impeded and let from coming, but that this may not hinder,
consider that to have Christ at a dear rate, is better than to have the World
at a Cheap; for thou will infinitely be a looser, if thou have the whole world,
and yet missest of Christ One Christ will make thee amends for all thy
sufferings and afflictions; but ten thousand Worlds can do thy Soul no good,
nor help thee in the evil day, these sufferings are but light and momentary,
but the Crown and Glory shall be eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17.

2ly, The things of the World they impede. I shall not here particularly treat
or make mention of them, because I have already exceeded what I first intended;
therefore I shall only name those three usual heads, under which all are
comprehended, scil. Pleasure, Profit, and Honor, these obstacles are mentioned
by the Apostle John, under the names of the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eye, and the Pride of Life, 1 Jo. 2.16. O how many have these worldly terrene
vanities prevented from coming unto Christ; As

1. The pleasures of the world, both lawful and unlawful, as in Luke 14.20. I
have married a Wife and therefore I cannot come. Here was not so much as a
civil excuse from him, as from the two former, in verse. 18.19. And why? because
he thought such a delightful relation was lawful by divine appointment, and
therefore he concluded he might very well answer, I cannot come, this man
supposed it more just and equal, to solace, and felicitate himself with the
enjoyment of a Wife, then to come when the Lords Servants invited; but I fear
he is not alone in this answer, for if we pass by former Ages, and only take a
prospect of the present, we shall meet with many such answers; if not in their
Lips, yet in their Lives; it is most perspicuously demonstrated: but remember
this, that comforts are Lawful when Lawfully enjoyed; and as the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 10.23. All things are Lawful, but all things are not expedient. For when
any enjoyment keeps the Soul from fully closing with Christ, (though never so
lawful in it self,) it then becomes sinful; as in Luke 14.20. Instead of loving
and delighting in, all must be hated in comparison of Christ, who is the
eternal delight of the Father, Prove. 8.30. The joy of Angels, and the glory of
Saints.

2. Those pleasures which are unjust, base and sordid; which true virtue and
ingenuity never invented, which only gratify the brutish part of man, and have
Plus Alloes, quam Mellis, more of Gall, then of Honey in them, which do immerge
and drown the Sinner in sensuallity, nay, may I not say in brutish bestiality;
which make him forget God his Creator, and neglect coming unto Christ the only
Redeemer and Savior of Mankind. How many in this Age prefer the gratifying a
base Lust, before the obeying a glorious Jesus? their sordid pleasures before
the welfare of their immortal Souls; they will do more to please one single
Lust, though it be to their eternal detriment and loss; then to delight Christ
and Angels, by converting and turning to him, for there is joy in Heaven at the
conversion of a Sinner. There is no reason to be given, why a Sinner should be
held by such Cobwebs as these: but we see by daily and woeful experience, that
their Lust prevails more to keep them from Christ; then all the sweet
invitations and promises of Christ will do to bring them unto him. They will go
Twenty Steps after a vain pleasure, to damn their Souls, but not one in order
to the Salvation of them; it may be when some dark Providence beclouds them,
when the Night of affliction overshaddows them, and the Terrors of Conscience
affright them, old decriped Age has imbicilitated and decayed them, and Death
stands ready to attend them; then it may be, but not till then, (when the
delicacies of this World are imbittered and have no relish) there may be some
faint desires after those sweet Celestial Pleasures, which are at the right
hand of God for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. But O Sinner, neglect not Christ for a
Vanity, a more then Vanity; let not temporal Pleasures be prefered before
eternal felicities; what for a momentary delight, hazard everlasting Treasures;
I have before declared what thou shall have if thou come unto Christ, weigh
them in the Balance of sanctified reason, and try them by the Touchstone of
the Scripture, and then see whether Christ and his pleasures, be not to be
prefered before all others.

2. The Profits of the World, are great impediments, when these stand between
Christ and the Sinner, and if he comes to Christ, he must transileate and leap
over all these, he rather chooses to Sit down contented with his Worldly
Portion, and to take the Left hand, rather than the Right hand blessings; give
him but the Earthly and terestial, let who will take the Heavenly and Celestial
Mansions, this kept the young man from closing with Christ; Mat. 19.22.
this made Demas forsake Paul and embrace this present World; and many others
both then and now, To Err from the Faith, and drown themselves in destruction
and perdition, Tim. 6.10. Exitio est avidis Mare Nautis.
What made Judas betray the Glorious Jesus, but the vain Profits of a perishing
World? what is the great support of the Papists Religion, but their Gain, and
Profits from their several quarters? this makes them debase Christ, instead of
exalting him, and Daphne-like run away from the great Apollo, scil. the Lord
Jesus, Quid non mortalia pectora cogit, auri sacra fames
when they should willingly run themselves and encourage others to come and
meet him, but as the Poet said, the greedy and cursed desire of Gold does
destroy men; how are men lincked with these Chains? these Silver shrines cause
multitudes to prostrate themselves to the base Diana of this World, i. e. their
profit; when Christ is Preached up to be the only Savior, Act. 19. I think
this Chapter would serve excellently to paint forth the Whore of Rome with her
Demetrius's.
and Sinners are beseeched and exhorted to come unto him; then come the
Idol-Worshipers of this World, and cry Great is Diana of the Ephesians; Great
profit and gain there is to be had if we adore this false Deity. But least I be
too prolix I will contract; let not the thick clay of this World so depress and
weigh down thy Soul, that thou can not sore aloft to meet a Jesus; for it is
Christ, not Gold, that can save thee; it is Heaven, not Earth, that can truly
enrich thy Soul, Multa petentibus desunt muta.
here thou may desire still, and be in want; but if thou come to Christ he
will possess thee with everlasting Treasure, thou shall satiate thy Soul, with
the riches of Heaven; in a word, the more thou do deny thy self in the things
of this World, Quanto quisque sibi plura negaverit, a Diis plura feret.
the more thou shall receive from Christ, as grace here, and Glory for ever,
Psalm. 84.11. Therefore let not vanity possess thy Soul, and keep out him, who
is all, and in all, Col. 3.11.

3. The Honors of the World are great hindrances, these elevate the Soul above
the bounds of reason, Non semper idem floribus est honos vernis.
and please it with a vanishing glory; which like the Flower this day is
Beautiful and pleasing to the Eye, but to morrow is quite withered and decayed:
Christ tells us of some such, Jo. 5.44. Which receive Honor one of another,
but seek not the honor that comes from God only. And in the beginning of the
verse: Christ makes it an Argument of their unbelief, How can ye believe? (says
he) the Introgation implys a Negation; as if he should have said, whilst you
thus seek after the honor of Men, ye cannot believe; there is a kind of
impossibility in it. How few Moses's or Galeaceus's are there in the World? who
divest themselves of this fading Earthly Honor, to the end they may partake of
true honor, immortality, and eternal Life, Romans 2.7. Daily observation does
confirm this; I need not stand to give instances, for the World does afford
innumerable, both abroad, and at home, who for this Worlds glory will refuse
Christ, and everlasting bliss; but let it not be so with thee, Reader, who ever
thou art. Fix thine Eye upon Christ, and that Crown of Righteousness he will
give thee. Here thou may live i^ honor, but like a Candle, which gives but a
dim light, and soon is extinct; but if thou come unto Christ, Dan. 12.3.
thou shall shine as a Star in the Firmament, and as the Sun for ever and ever.

I come now to the second particular, which is to declare what impediments
there are ab intr^, from within, that let and hinder Sinners from coming unto
Christ, and there are many of them. (...).
I shall begin first with carnal reasonings, which are great obstacles in the
Sinners way, 2 Cor 10.45.
and these must be thrown down, before the Sinner will come unto Christ, (...).
for they are strong holds, which keep the Sinner secure, 2 Cor. 10.4. He is,
as it were, in a Garrison by these his reasonings. ^ Says Reason, how can God
assume the Nature of Man? live and converse among Men? suffer and Die, and be
made a Curse? can these things be? is it possible for God to Die, who is
immortal? I can never believe it; my Reason cannot apprehend or conceive it; it
can never dive into my thoughts, that God would ever come down from Heaven, to
suffer for Men, to satisfy for their Sins: is not God infinite? is he not from
eternity to eternity? and shall he be made a finite Creature, and of yesterday?
certainly this does derogate from the Honor of God, and does reflect upon the
greatness and infinitness of his glorious Majesty. Is it not said of God, his
Throne is in the Heavens? and that no Mortal Eye can behold him? and if it be
so, I have no reason to believe that it was God, who shed his Blood without the
Gates of Jerusalem; and that I must expect Salvation from him alone. To the
removal of this Impediment. 1. I say art thou wiser then God, that thou thus
reason^st against his revealed truth? for in 1 Timothy 3.16. It is said, Phil. 2.6.
God was Manifest in the Flesh; i. e. The second Person in the glorious
Trinity, who was equal with God the Father, did assume humane nature, and so
was manifest in the Flesh, and so became God-man united in one person, although
there ever remains two distinct Natures. 2dly. This God-Man suffered for Sin,
he made himself a Sacrifice to satisfy divine justice; therefore it is said,
Act. 20.28. The Church of God which he Purchased with his own Blood: not that
the divine Nature shed Blood, or suffered, for that is impossible, and
incapable of afflictions, or death, but that nature which was united to the
divine, suffered and effused Blood by which our Sins are washed away; 1 Jo. 1.7
we redeemed and reconciled unto God, Rev. 5.9. 1 Jo. 3.16. Hereby perceive we
the love of God, because he laid down his Life for us; His Life who was God
blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. went to redeem us from eternal Death. 3. This great
truth is a Divine Mystery, no where revealed but in the word of God, 1 Timothy
3.16.
as Christ said to the Jews, Jo. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them, ye
think ye have eternal Life, and they are them that testify of me. Therefore
thou must not reason with Flesh and Blood; Gal. 1.16.
or think ever to comprehend this by Carnal disputes and reasonings; for these
do but exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, and are not brought into
the obedience of Christ, as 2 Cor. 10.5. The Gospel calls for Faith, which is a
supernatural Work, for according to that common saying, Although it is not
contrary to reason, yet it is above it. And if by reason it might be
apprehended, Faith would then be unnecessary; but Faith is absolutely
necessary, for without it, it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. And he
that believes shall be saved. Jo. 3.36. In a word, if thou will not come unto
Christ, till thy Carnal reason, or thy Worldly wisdom (as the Apostle calls it,
1 Cor. 2.6.) can comprehend this profound Mystery, thou will never come, for as
the World by Wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor. 1.21.
so neither can thou by that Wisdom know Christ, for he said unto Peter when
he made that excellent confession of the Deity of the Lord Jesus; Flesh and
Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven, Mat.
16.17. Therefore let this be no Let unto thee, when thy Reason cannot conceive
the Depths of this Mystery, but humbly beg God to give thee Faith to apprehend
and believe it, because the holy word of God does declare it, Credo quia tu
dixisti.
against all Arrians and Socinians whatsoever.

2ly, I cannot conceive, says the Sinner, carnally reasoning, how finite
Punishments, could satisfy for infinite offenses; and how it may be then safe
for me to venture my eternal welfare on this account; could so small a time of
suffering, procure Redemption from Eternal Torments; this cannot stand with
reason, for an infinite Person is offended, and so an infinite Punishment is
due for every Sin. All this is granted, that every Sin deserves eternal
Punishment, because an infinite Person is offended: and yet it is clear, both
by Scripture and reason, that the Punishment Christ underwent, (though but
finite as to the time,) has satisfied fully for infinite offenses; Gods Justice
is thereby Salved, and the Sinner who is brought to believe, eternally saved.
1. His obedience of his Fathers will; the Scripture says, Heb. 10.10. By which
will we are sanctified, though the offering of the Body of Jesus once, (...),
one single time wherein Christ suffered, although but Momentary as to the
duration; yet it made full compensation and satisfaction for the eternity of
misery due to Sinners, v. 12. But this Man, i. e. The man Christ Jesus, After
he had offered one sacrifice for Sin, for ever s^t down on the Right hand of
God. Which Scripture declares that the finiteness of Christ's suffering, in the
reguard of the time, made in finite satisfaction, and it is proved from the
particle, after; which implys the work first done; and then after that he sat
down for ever on the Right hand of God the Father. 14. v. By one offering he
has Perfected, for ever them which are sanctified. That is to say really and
effectually purge from all their Sins, reconcile to God, and justify all Gods
Children. 2dly, The Person that suffered was an infinite Person, therefore his
suffering, Proved above because he is God.
although but for a Time, was infinite, and made complete satisfaction, for it
is as Rational to conclude, that the sufferings of an infinite Person, though
but temporal, should satisfy for infinite Transgressions; as that one offense
of a finite Person, done against an infinite God, should merit and deserve
infinite Punishment; for as the offense is according to the greatness of the
circumstance and the Person offended; Had Christ always suffered, then he could
never be satisfied.
so is the suffering accounted according to the magnitude of the Circumstance,
and the Person who suffers. I shall further illustrate and make this plain, by
this Simile; suppose a person lies in Prison for ten thousand Tallents of Gold,
and there he is to remain till the Law be satisfied, and the Debt Paid; but he
is no way solvent or able to discharge himself, or make satisfaction; Reason
will here conclude it to be no injustice in the Creditor to keep this man in
Prison, though it were to eternity, because he cannot pay the Debt; but if in
the interim a Man comes who is sufficiently able, and with all freely willing
(although no way obliged) to pay this great Sum, in the behalf of the Debtor,
common Reason will here also conclude it most equal, that the man should be set
at liberty because the Law is satisfied and the Creditor has his full Debt, and
yet the man that discharges the Debt, does not lie in Prison one Minute; but
will reason apprehend and conclude this most equitable, and not the former,
which is as clear and evident as this? for thus I apply it, the Debtor is the
Sinner, who has contracted an infinite Debt, and is liable to infinite
punishments, because he cannot himself any way pay it; and it is most just with
God to inflict condign punishment, and exact infinite satisfaction; and lay
eternal torments upon him; but Christ who is able and willing to discharge the
Debt, and satisfy the Law, in all its demands, pays the uttermost Farthing,
and contents the Creditor, scil. God much more then if the Sinner had suffered
to all eternity; for the Damned in Hell are suffering, but can never satisfy
the justice of God; but Christ has done it completely; for the (...), the
price he paid was his Life, Mat. 20.28, The Blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Therefore let not this ungrounded reason keep thee from coming unto the Lord
Jesus.

3ly, I cannot understand how the Righteousness of another can be made mine;
and that by imputative Righteousness, I shall stand Righteous and justified in
the Sight of God; must not every one have his own personal Righteousness? for
according to the works will God judge; and it cannot be the Righteousness of
another imputed to me that can save me. I shall not stand long in answering
this, because it it learnedly handled and answered by our Divines. But know
this that thy own personal; Righteousness will not save thee, nor justify thee
in the Sight of God, for it is imperfect. 1. In that all thou do is mixed
with Sin, the very good: as Eccle. 7.20. There is not a just man upon the Earth
that does good and Sins not; Even in his doing of good; as one excellently
observes. Dr. Manton.
But let us observe this Scripture well, and we shall find enough in it to
confute the self-justiciaries and perfectionists in the World, both Papists and
Quakers. 1. It is to be granted, that the Penman of this Scripture was guided
by an Infallible Spirit, for all Scripture was given by divine inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. and 2 Pet. 1.21. and if so, then the true explication of it is to be
believed. 2. He does not say there is not a Man, or there is not an ungodly
Person upon Earth, that does good and Sins not; but there is not (...) a
Just or a Righteous man, as in Isa. 41.26. these just and righteous men called
Dr. Kinchi.
* Tsadikim * where such who gave themselves to the study of the Scriptures.
2ly. Psalm. 103.17.
They would conform to what the Law required as to the external Part of it. I
think these went as far as any who pretend to perfection; and yet they came
short of it, (...)
they Sinned notwithstanding they were such, whom the Lord is said to Love,
Psalm. 146.8. for the same word is used for a righteous Man. 3. Here is this
also to be taken notice of; Not a just Man upon Earth; which must not be taken
only for that present time, in which Solomon wrote this; for that would be to
limit the Text to too narrow a compass; but it must be taken for all those who
are numbered among the Righteous ones, ever since Adam, throughout all
generations, (Christ only excepted) that none of them do good and Sin not. 4.
Does Good, The word sometimes signifies to prepare as if he had said there is
no just Man, (...)
although he prepares himself (with great diligence) to do good, that does it,
and yet Sins not in the doing of it, from which we gather this, That there
is no mere Man, who has a complete personal righteousness, by and for which he
shall be justified in the sight of God. Therefore there is need of a more
perfect and complete Righteousness adequate and commensurate to the whole Law
of God; and there is none other that is perfect, but the Righteousness of the
Lord Jesus; which must by imputation of God, and apprehension of Faith, be made
thine, or else thou art miserable for ever. 2. It must not be by the Works of
the Law, that thou can be justified, as the Apostle asserts, Gal. 2.16. By
the Works of the Law shall no Flesh be justified. Here he is peremptory, he
excepts not any one, let him be who or what he will. Jew, or Gentile, there is
no hopes of being justified by his own Righteousness; which can be no other but
the deeds of the Law. I question not but those Jews the Apostle mentions,
Romans 9.31. who followed after the Law of Righteousness, Do but watch and
examine thy heart one quarter of an hour every day for a Month, and then tell
me whether thy own Righteousness is not imperfectt.
so as to be justified by it; were as exact, circumspect, and upright in their
conversation, if not more then those in our days who vainly pretend themselves
perfect, yet that Righteousness would not justify and save them: why then
should any one expect to be justified by his own Personal Righteousness? it may
be thou art unwilling to be accounted a Sinner, and Debtor that cannot pay his
own Debts, as the Scripture says, Gal. 2.17. Whilst we seek to be justified by
Christ, we our selves are found Sinners. Therefore by Christ's Righteousness
imputed to thee, thou can alone be justified. 3ly. It must be one of these
two ways; thou must be justified by thy own Righteousness, or by the
righteousness of another imputed to thee, for there is no escaping the Curse of
the Law, without a perfect Righteousness, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law, to do
them. But by their own righteousness it cannot be, for that is imperfect as I
have already declared, and if it be imperfect, it can no way satisfy the Law of
a righteous God. For he that keeps the whole Law, and yet offends but in one
point, is guilty of the breach of all, James 2.10. and if guilty of all, then
thou can never satisfy for any, for the Law cannot now be satisfied by any
mere Man, as Thomas Aquinas confessed, saying, Nullus po^est Legem servare, hoc
Modo, quo ^expraecipit. Thom. Agu. in cap. 3. ad Gal ^ect. 4.
No man can keep the Law. in that manner which the Law commands, i. e.
perfectly, so he says, Implere totam Legem, Per Legem ^emo un^uam ad visionem
Deiredjit. Rupert ^b. 1. Comment. in Cap. 1. Jo.
est impossible, To fulfill the whole Law is impossible. And another says, By
the Law no man shall come at any time to the vision of God. And if not by the
Law, then it must be by some other means or way, and that way is only Christ,
Jo. 14 6. and his righteousness imputed to the person, and apprehended by
Faith, by which it becomes really his; so that I say it must be the
righteousness of another, scil. Christ imputed, that is the cause of
justification in the sight of God, Bellarm. de Justit. lib. 1. cap. 2. dicitur
Christus Justitia nostra, quoniam satisfecit Patri pro nobis. Taperus Tom. 2.
Art. 12. page 36. Nos per imputationem justitiae Christi fide apprehensae
tantum justificari Vega. li. 7. de Just. Cap. 15. and Staples de just. cap. 9.
this is confessed by many of the Learned Papists themselves: Bellarmin says,
Christ's righteousness is ours, because he satisfied the Father for us, and it
will not be absurd if any one say, that the righteousness and merits of Christ
are imputed to us, when they are given and applied to us, as if we our selves
had satisfied God for our faults. Tapper asserts, we are justified by the
imputation of Christ's merits. Others of them say, We are justified by the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, only apprehended by faith. I could here
give many others who affirm, that by Christ's righteousness imputed to us we are
justified, and so stand righteous in the sight of God, for there is no other
righteousness can do it, then stumble not at this that thou must rely upon the
imputative righteousness of another for justification, Tantum per imputationem
Justitia Christi quatenus fides nostra apprehendit miseri cordiam atque
Justitiam Christi propter meritum Christi, nos Justificari coram Deo
Coloniensis Canonici and Authors. lib. Obla. a Caesare.
and not upon thine own subjective, because thine is imperfect, but that of
Christ is complete, and as the Apostle says, we are complete in him, Col.
2.10. and it is certain, we can be complete in none else. That made the Apostle
Paul so willing to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. this imputative righteousness
has been much disputed off, how it could be made ours; but it is clear and
evident, 2 Cor. 5.21. He was made Sin for us, who knew no Sin, that we might
become the righteousness of God in him, from which Scripture it is plain, that
our Sin was imputed unto Christ, and it could no other way be his, Tap. Tom. 2.
Art de Just. p. 26. sicut Christo nostra scelera a Patre ob spontaneam eorum
assumptionem and scorporis mystici intimam unionem imputantur, ita eju
justitiaque nos capitis, nobis ejus membris ad justitiamet vitam eternam
imputatur.
for he knew no Sin of his own. So also his righteousness became ours, by
imputation and apprehended by Faith. So says the Learned Tapper, As our
offenses are from the Father imputed unto Christ, for his spontaneus assumption
of them, and the intimate union of the Mystical Body, so his righteousness, as
our head, is imputed to us, his Members to justification and Life Eternal. I
shall only add that of Justinian the Jesuit, to show how he proves imputative
righteousness, These are blessed (says he) to whom God imputes righteousness,
as if he should say, It is much more Emphatical in the Latin.
he confesses that a payment to himself; for the word [to Impute] is taken from
an humane custom; for the Creditor is said to account the Money received, when
he confesses, to account it paid, which Action from the Lawyers, is termed
exceptilation or a discharge, which is an imaginary solution, Justinianus
Jesuita in Cap. 4. Epist. ad Romans Fol. 144.
done without the intervention of the thing, and is compared to a Payment;
which form of speech wonderfully agrees with free justification; for as if the
Creditor does account the Money to be received from the Debtor, he is free from
Obligation; so he to whom God accounts righteousness as received, is free from
the guilt of Eternal Punishment, for the Sinner himself is no way solvent, or
able by any means to satisfy for his fault, but God beholding Christ, by the
help and benefit of his own free divine Grace, works repentance in the hearts
of the Faithful, and so freely forgives them their Sins. So far this Learned
Jesuit. Thus then to conclude this head, I say, it is the righteousness of the
Lord Jesus imputed of God, and received and applied by faith, that will save us
and justify us in the sight of God, therefore come unto Christ by Faith, and
lay hold upon this perfect and complete righteousness of his, that thou may
be freed from thy guilt, and also from eternal destruction.

2ly. The blindness of the mind, this is a great impediment, for by Nature
Sinners are Darkness in the very abstract, Ephesians. 5.8. The understanding is
darkened, being alienated from the Life of God through ignorance, Ephesians. 4.18.
The Natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, for they are Spiritually
discovered, 1 Cor. 2.14. 1 He is ignorant of himself, Juvenal.
(...) e caelo descendit, Know thy self descended from Heaven. 2. Of his
misery, for Man is in a most deplorable state and condition, being lost, and
liable to eternal condemnation, unless Christ deliver him from it; and the
greatest part of his misery consists in this, that he is for the most part
insensible of his sad condition; for it is the first step to happiness and
felicity, to be made sensible of ones misery; for this moves the Soul to look
out for a remedy. 3. He knows not his wants and indigences: Man in his Sinful
lapsed state is full of wants. 1. He wants Pardon for his Sin, for if Sin be
not forgiven, the Soul is undone; if the guilt of Sin does remain upon the
Soul, when it enters upon an Eternal State, the Soul is lost for ever; and must
lie cursed in intolerable and inextinguishable Flames to all eternity, Mat.
25.41. 2. Grace and holiness for the Soul, Jo. 3.3. Except a man be Born again
he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men; and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. 3. A Mediator to interceed
and procure these and all other Mercys for the Soul; which Mediator is only the
Lord Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is a Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus. 1 Jo. 2.1. We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous. Did the Sinner but understand his wants and necessities, he would
not much be entreated to come unto Christ, That out of his fullness he might
receive Grace for Grace, Jo. 1.19. 4ly. The mind being darkened, does not
discern the evil of Sin. Chrysostom when threatened Exilement by Eudoxia the
Empress, answered, I fear nothing but Sin; He saw Sin to be the greatest and
worst of Evils. The Apostle Paul when he was divinely illuminated, exclaimed
and cried out of the exceeding Sinfulness of Sin Romans 7.13. which made him look
upon himself as most miserable; and therefore he so pathetickly, and
affectionately expresses and bewaileth his state by reason of sin, which
remained (although not regnant) within him, v. 24. O Wretched Man that I am,
(not that I was, as some vainly would pervert the Text) who shall deliver me,
(not the unconverted Sinner) from this Body of Death: This present state I am
in now; I have a Body of Death, Sin cleaves close to me, it is tied to me as a
Dead Corpse; therefore I am wretched now because of this Body of Death, and not
when I was a Persecuter, a Blasphemer, and Injurious. Thus does a person truly
enlightened, see the evil of Sin, and lament over it, so the Prophet Isa. Chap.
6.5. then said I, Woe is me for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean Lips.
Here we see two eminent and holy Servants of the Lord bewailing their Sin, (the
one a great Prophet called by Piscator, Magnus Propheta, the other a great
Apostle) but why? because they perceived the evil that is in Sin, and if
Sinners did but know the evil of Sin, they would cry out so too, and thank God
with the Apostle that there is a Christ to go unto; Romans 7.25.
but because they see not the Evil, Jo. 17.15. therefore they embrace it, and
refuse Christ. 5. Ignorant of the wrath of God revealed against obstinate
Sinners, this makes them regardless of Christ, for did they but know with a
sanctified knowledge, what God has threatened against them, they would tremble
and be astonished, at the tremendious and terrible noise of those Thunder
claps, as the Children of Israel were, when God descended upon Mount Sinai, to
deliver the Law unto them: but because of this stupedity, Sinners are secure
without a Jesus, not considering, that The wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven, against all ungodlyness, and unrighteousness of men, To. 1.18. To them
who obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, (such are all those who obey
not Christ and his Gospel, 2 These. 1.8.) Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and
Anguish, upon every Soul of man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of
the Gentile, Romans 2.8.9. Now I say, did Sinners but rightly conceive of this
wrath of God, which he has denounced against them, they would soon hasten to
tome to Christ Jesus, for refuge and safety from it, for it is he alone that
can do it, 1 These. 1.10. Jesus who delivers from the Wrath to come. But whilst
they neglect coming unto Christ they are treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath, treasures of Wrath; but who is able to endure the least grain of it (may
I so express my self) in its extremity? Romans 2.5.
for such as his power is, such is his wrath; it is terrible, yet without
passion, infinite, yet without mitigation; intolerable, without cessation; and
swift to consume the Sinner, yet without any motion in God. O the ineffable,
and inconceivable torments that will be the consequence of impenitency, and
final neglect of the Lord Jesus. 6. Ignorant of that glory and blessedness they
would partake of, if they came unto the Lord Jesus, they cannot discern that
glory, because their Eyes are blinded, and their Faces turned away from God.
There is a vail of Ignorance over their Hearts, which is taken away from
believers who are come unto Christ, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open Face
beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
from Glory to Glory, even as by the Lord. There is a blessedness and glory in
this Life, believers are partakers of, and invested with. They are blessed in
Life, Mat. 5. 2. to the 12. v. Blessed at death, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the
Dead which dye in the Lord. Blessed at the day of Judgment, when the wicked are
Cursed, Mat. 28.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, (says Christ) Inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of the World. And they remain
blessed for evermore, 1 These. 4.17. I cannot here number up all the blessedness
of the Saints. The glory is unconceivable, 1 Cor. 2.9. It has not entered into
the Heart of man to conceive, the things God has prepared for them that love
him, 2 Cor. 14.17. A far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Believers
shall be glorious for ever, Dan. 12.3. They shall shine as the Sun in the
firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever. Ignoti nulla Cupido.
And because the darkened Mind apprehends not this Glory and blessedness,
therefore it slights coming unto Christ. 7. The Carnal mind is ignorant of
Christ; as John Baptist said to the Jews, There stands one amongst you, whom
you know not, Jo. 1.26. So I may say to many, who term themselves Christians,
there is one who is daily Preached among you, yet ye know him not; and it is
evident by this, you come not to him. 1. They whose minds are darkened, know
not Christ essentially, i. e. that he is very God, and very Man; as Romans 9.15.
God over all, blessed for ever. The man Christ Jesus, Tim. 2.5. 2dly. They are
ignorant of him in his offices, as King. Psalm. 2.6. as Prophet, Mat. 21.11. as
Priest, Heb. 3.7. 3ly. They understand not that he is the only, and alone way
to the Father, Jo. 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the Life, no man comes
to the Father but by me, Acts 4.12. for there is Salvation in none other. He is
the only way to all happiness, Peace, Comfort, and Eternal Life, Jo. 3.36. But
the benighted Soul being altogether in the Dark, as to these things, wholly
defers coming unto Christ. 8. They whose minds are Blinded, know not God, who
is the fountain of all Good; if they had but a Spiritual understanding
concerning God, they would not desire to be long away from Christ; and where
there is not this divine knowledge, the Heart cannot be good, For it is Life
eternal to know the only true God, Jo. 17.3.1. They are ignorant of the
infinite holiness and purity of God, He is of purer Eyes then to behold evil,
and he cannot look on Iniquity, Hab. 1.13. God cannot look on Sin with any
approbation; for the least Sin is contrary to his Holiness. Those glorious
Seraphins we read of, Isa. 6.3. do adore God in his holiness; which when the
Prophet Isaiah heard and saw, he presently cries out, ver. 5.
I am undone, because I am a Man of unclean Lips; when he perceived the
holiness of God, he was made more sensible of his own pollution, and what need
he had for the Seraphin to bring a coal from the Alter to touch him; ver. 6.
that so his Iniquity might be taken away, and his Sin purged. So I say, did
but Men and Women apprehend the holiness of God, and that no Sinner or Sinful
thing can abide in his presence, because he is a consuming Fire to all such,
Heb. 12.14.29. They would cry out we are undone because we are polluted and
defiled; O that Christ the Angel of the covenant, would come and Sprinkle us
with his Blood, that we might be cleansed from all our Iniquity, and purified
from all our Sin, that we may be holy as our God is holy; for who can dwell
with devouring Fire? or who can dwell in ever lasting burnings? Isa. 33.14.
2ly, Of his righteousness, Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways,
and holy in his Works. There is no unrighteousness with him; he will give to
every one that which is Right, as David confesses, Psalm. 51.4. That thou
might be just when thou speak, and clear when thou judge. Sinners are
very subject to think God is like themselves, Psalm. 50.21. They think because
they are unrighteous, therefore he is so to; they do not believe that he will
render to every man according to his Deeds, and that God is so righteous that
he will Punish the Least Sin with eternal damnation, if the Soul be out of
Christ: but if God was not thus impartial, he could not be righteous; for as
the Apostle says, Romans 3.6. Is God unrighteous who takes Vengeance? God
forbid; for then how should God judge the world? Now it is the want of the
right knowledge of this, scil. That God is a righteous God, and that he will
exact the uttermost Farthing, either from the Sinner, or from Christ the
surety; which impedes and let them from coming unto Christ. 3. The faithfulness
of God, 2 Timothy 2.13. He abides faithful. God is a faithful God, he will fulfill
all his promises of mercy to them, who receive and believe in Christ, 2 Cor.
1.20. For all the promises of God in him, are yea, and in him are Amen. That
is, they are all certain and true, in and through Christ; God will fulfill every
one of them; and also he is Faithful to make good his Threatenings denounced
against Sinners, who continue strangers to Christ, and enemies to the Gospel,
which invites Sinners to come unto him. They will be ready to lay hold upon
that Scripture, Exodus 34.6.7. The Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful;
but read not those Words, who will by no means clear the guilty, which relate
to his Justice and Righteousness. 4. They do not know that hatred God bares to
Sinners, whilst they are disobedient to Christ, Psalm. 11.5. They understanding
not who are the only persons God loves; conclude they are of that number, who
have an interest in his Love, not considering he loves none but those who
believe in, and except of his Son, the Lord Jesus; all others are objects of
his hatred. For he who is Love it self, 1 Jo. 4.16. Abhors those who slight his
only Son, the Son of his love, even the Lord of glory.

3ly, The third Let or Hindrance from within, is the perverseness of the will,
at first when God created man, he gave unto him a perfect will; and he always
willed that which was pleasing unto God, but upon his Sinning he quite
depraved, although de did not loose that faculty; now in this depraved state
and condition, the Will is perverse and averse to that which is truly good;
and wills evil continually; therefore, says Christ, Jo. 5.40. Ye will not
come unto me that ye may have Life. Christ Jesus who is Life, Jo. 11.25. makes
offers and tenders of Life unto Sinners, and promises, If they come he will in
no wise cast them out, Jo. 6.37. Yet they obstinately refuse, and are ready to
cry out, we will not have this Man to reign over us, Luke 19.27. Mansit quidem
arbitrium hominis liberum a coactione sed tantum ad Malum Wolleb.
The will of Man does still remain free from all coaction or compulsion; but it
is free only to evil, not to good. Therefore Christ so graciously invites, and
it is their duty, yet they wilfully refuse to come un^t him.

4ly, The vitiosity and irregularity of the affections; is another internal
impediment. Those affections which have good for their object, as Love, Joy,
Desire; these are fixed upon wrong objects, and so they are impeded from coming
unto Christ. Love which should be fixed upon God, Sufficiens and perfectum
bonum.
who is the Summum bonum, the Supreme good; the sufficient and perfect good, is
placed upon the Creature, which is but an inferior, insufficient, and perishing
good. The Scripture says, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine
Heart, and withal thy Strength, Deuteronomy. 6.5. But God generally has the least
part, for if God was chiefly beloved of the Soul, Christ would be so too, for
he that loves the Father truly, loves the Son sincerely, so for joy and
delight, we are commanded to rejoice in the Lord always, Phil. 4.4. We should
take complacency, and delight in him above all; but for the most part their joy
and delight is in carnal perishing objects; in the Creature more than in the
Creator; for if the Soul took delight in the Father, it must needs take
complacency in the Son, who is the eternal delight of the Father, Pro. 8.30. so
the desires of the Soul when they should be after God, Christ, Grace, and
eternal Blessedness; as David says, Psalm. 42.2. My Soul thirsts for God, for
the living God. Instead of this, they are after the World, and the things
thereof; they are for who will show us any Good here, as for the Light of Gods
Countenance, let those that will seek after that: And those passions and
affections which have evil for their object, are irregular also, as Fear,
Sorrow, Hatred, and the like, these are placed upon quite contrary objects, the
Soul should hate evil; sorrow for Sin, fear the wrath of God, which he has
threatened against rebellious Sinners: but on the contrary, it does by nature
hate the good, and choose the evil; sorrow for worldly concerns and
disappointments more then for Sin; fear the wrath of Man, more than the wrath
of God; and by reason of this depravity and irregularity of the affections, the
Sinner minds not coming unto Christ.

5ly, The hardness of the heart is another Let. This kept many of the Jews
from believing in Christ, Mat. 3.5. The Heart of Man by nature is so hard and
obdurate, that the distillation, and daily droppings of the Gospel cannot
penetrate or make impression, therefore God has graciously promised to take
away the Heart of Stone, and give a Heart of Flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. And till God
does effect this upon the Soul, to take away the hardness from it, and mollify
it with the Blood of Jesus, it will never receive any divine impression, or
come unto Christ that it may be for ever happy. Heb. 3 15.16.18.
As it was through the hardness of Heart, the Israelites provoked God in the
Wilderness; and believed not in him; and so shut themselves out of the promised
Land of Rest: so to this day, the obduratness of Sinners impedes them so, that
they regard not coming to Christ. As the Heart of Man is so desperately Wicked
and deceitful above all things; Jer. 17.9.
so it is desperately hard and obdurate above all things. Moses struck the Rock
but twice, and the Waters came out abundantly, Number. 20.11. but Christ stands
knocking at the door and cannot get admittance into the hearts of most Sinners,
Rev. 3.20. all his sweet and kind expressions, and glorious promises will ^ot
induce them to let him in; or allure them (though miserable) to come unto him.

6ly, And lastly, the Pride and haughtiness of Man's Spirit obstructs him. A
Proud man is loath to own his own poverty and come to Christ for Riches; he is
unwilling to own his nakedness and come to Christ for clothing, Rev. 3.18.
Because God at first made him Lord of the Creature; he concludes he has now no
need of his Creator; he thinks by his own Arm to procure Salvation; and by his
own industry work out redemption for himself. To be saved by the merits and
righteousness of another, he cannot endure to hear of. Man cannot endure to own
himself a Bankrupt, lost and undone, unless he seek to another for help; that
he is poor and must now turn Beggar, when he has so much Riches by him, as he
vainly conceits; he has accumulated, and heaped together a little treasure of
fine wishes perhaps, with an inconsiderable number of morral or civil acts, and
so he is an accomplished person, and it is beneath him to seek adjuvation or
assistance from another, for being vainly puffed up in his Fleshly mind, he
slights Christ; he is like Esau, who having got something of the Riches of the
World, seems to slight Jacobs presents, till he urged him to take them; so the
Sinner being elevated by the Pride of his Heart, disesteems Christ, and his
tenders of Love and Mercy, till Christ do as it were force them upon him, if he
at all receive them. Thus have I labored (as briefly as I could) to lay open
many of those impediments and obstructions, which deter and impede Sinners from
coming unto the Lord Jesus, although it is their duty to come, and they are for
ever miserable and undone if they come not unto him, therefore if any of the
forementioned obstacles stand in the way between thee and Christ, labor to
remove them, and beg grace to overcome them, that thou may come unto the Lord
Jesus.

3ly, I come now to remove a few objections, that some may make against this
Doctrine, that It is the duty of all heavy laden Sinners to come unto Christ.
Some may object and say, how can this be a duty for all to believe in, receive,
and come to Christ? this supposes a will and power in man, or else it is to bid
a Blind man see, a Cripple walk upright, a Child encounter a Giant, and a Mole
overturn a Mountain: if man has no ability, this can be no duty; I answer, 1.
Man has no free will, or power of his own by nature to come, Jo. 1.13. Not
born of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of
God. Romans 5.6. Whilst we were yet without strength, Christ dyed for us. No
strength or ability to carry our selves to Christ, it is God must work in us
both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. but although men
cannot will or come to Christ, yet it is their duty, Jo. 6.29. This is the Work
of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, i. e Believe in his Son
Jesus, 1 Jo. 3.23. This is his commandment, that ye believe in the name of his
Son Jesus Christ, here we see it is made an express command, incumbent upon
all, and from which none may exempt themselves. Christ preached this Doctrine,
and has commanded his Ministers to preach and publish it to all, Mark.
16.15.16. Go Preach, says he, the Gospel to every Creature, 16. verse. He that
believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be
damned. The Apostle Paul preached and pressed this duty upon both Jews and
Gentiles, Acts 20.21. Testifying both to Jews and Greeks repentance toward
God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus.

2: adjuvation and help of an omnipotent Arm to draw him, Jo. 6.44.
Silly man is apt to conceit great things of his own ability, and that it is
easy and Facile to believe in Christ Jesus, but when they are under the
apprehensions of death or the like, they are convinced of the necessity of
coming to Christ, but find their power to be faintness, and their will to be
mere conceitedness, as one of that persuasion (being under the apprehension of
Death) told me, she could not then find power in her self to come to Christ,
or believe in him for Salvation, unless he would work faith in her to apprehend
him, and apply the promises. 2. To exalt the infinite riches of Gods grace and
love in bestowing freely, what the Sinner finds he needs, and what God
requires from him, scil. Faith in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are
saved, through faith, and that not of your Selves, it is the gift of God. The
Sinner wants Faith, which is a supernatural of the Blessed Spirit, Gal. 5.22.
for without Faith, there is no apprehending of Christ, now God is pleased in
his abundant mercy, to confer this and all other graces upon the Sinner, to the
praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6. 3. To declare to man his own
deplorable state, and condition, and that he may see what he has made himself
by Sin; he can do nothing in his lapsed fallen estate, which conduces to his
eternal well being, without me (says Christ) ye can do (...) nothing, Jo.
15.5. He does not say ye can do no great thing without me, but nihil, nothing.
4. That poor Creatures (who are lost and undone by reason of Sin; and who are
imbecilitated and weakened through iniquity, so that they cannot come
themselves to Christ,) being convinced of the duty incumbent, and the necessity
of having this grace, might more earnestly seek unto God for it; and having
obtained it, highly esteem this Jewel, for no Faith, no Christ; and no Christ,
no Salvation, Jo. 3.36. 5. This is to exalt the Lord Jesus, in the estimation
of miserable Sinners; for being persuaded of the absolute necessity of this
duty, without which they cannot come unto the Father, it will make Christ more
desirable, Jo. 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and the Life; no man comes unto
the Father, but by me, i. e. By believing in Christ Jesus, that is the only way
to be reconciled to God, and to obtain mercy from him, For without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. or be any way grateful to him, for God is
so far from manifesting his Love to sinners, whilst they remain strangers to
Christ, as that he rather hates them; for God takes complacency and delight
(...) chiefly in his Son Christ Jesus, who is the eternal delight of the
Father, and may I speak with reference, Prove. 8.30.
(and as I humbly presume congruent to the Analogy of Faith) that God the
Father takes delight or complacency in none, neither Angels nor men, except
considered as elected in Christ, because the finiteness, of the Creature
renders it not an adequate object for the delight of an infinite God, or that
he should fix his Love upon a Finite being, when he is infinite and eternal;
for God loves not the Creature for it self; for any intrinsic worth or
excellency in it, but for himself, and so far as he has ordained it for his
glory; there can be no additional felicity unto God; the Creating of the
Creature adds nothing to him, neither does the perishing of it detract any
thing from him; for he has the same fullness and perfect object for his delight
now, as from all eternity, scil. his Son Jesus, in whom he is well pleased, For
he is God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. So that if we desire to be beloved of the
Father; or to have any manifestation of it to us, we must go unto Christ in a
way of Duty, that he may confer and bestow those graces, (by which we may come
unto him,) in a way of Mercy, scil. Repentance and Faith, for as Christ has
purchased Salvation, so has he also the means by which we may obtain it, and
apply it to our own Souls; as the Apostle says, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me; and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by
the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. By that
Faith which Christ had purchased, and his Spirit had wrought, the Apostle did
live.

I come now to the uses and application that may be made of this Doctrine. 1.
Information. 2. Examination. 3. Exhortation.

1. It informs us of a great and indispensable duty; for as I have before
declared, this receiving of, looking, coming unto, and believing in Christ, is
a duty relating to all who expect salvation; and are desirous to be eased of
their Burdens, which otherwise would press them down into everlasting misery,
it is by coming to Christ, and believing in him, that the Soul comes to be
exonerated and eased from all its heavy loads of Sin and guilt; it is a duty
and a work that must be done, Jo. 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye
believe in him whom he has sent, scil. His Son Jesus Christ.

2ly. Learn hence the erroneous falsity of those opinions, that direct the
Sinner some other way to seek for ease and help; when it is only to be found in
the Lord Jesus; as Christ says, If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye
in your Sins, Jo. 8.24. There is no other remedy for the wounded Soul, but
coming to the Blood of Christ; no other Savior for the lost Sinner, but the
Lord Jesus; no other refuge for the persued Malefactor to sanctuary in, but the
name of the Lord Jesus, Romans 10.13. and there is none other that can bare away
his burdens of guilt, Levit. 16.22.
into the Land of separation, but the Scapegoat, scil. the Lord Jesus;
therefore they do but deceive and delude poor Sinners, who direct them to any
other for ease or comfort.

3ly, Learn hence that believing, which is the right coming unto Christ, is not
meritorious because it is a Duty. We are under a command of believing in
Christ, 1 Jo. 3 23. now that which is enjoined as a duty to do, cannot be
meritorious when done, for the name of Duty does casheir and cut off the very
Sinnews and Strength of Merit, Luke 17.9.10. When we have done all, we must say
(not complementingly) we are unprofitable Servants; for (here is the Reason) we
have done but that, which was our duty to do. It is a duty to come and believe
in Christ, but our believing does not merit or deserve that he should accept of
us. Believing in Christ is the work of the Spirit of God, it is not by a man's
own Power that he imbraceth him.

2ly. Use of Examination, to know whether you are come unto Christ; and indeed
this is the Life of all, for as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves whither you be in the Faith, prove your selves; know you not your own
selves, that Jesus Christ is in you except you he Reprobates? Here I shall
propose this question, how shall I know whether I am come to Christ Jesus or
no? I am satisfied that it is my Duty to come, and that if I do not come, I am
undone and lost to all eternity. I answer, first, If thou art come unto Christ,
the Father has drawn thee, Jo. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the
Father which has sent me, draw him. Now the Father draws by his election, and
so gives them unto Christ, verse. 37.39. All that the Father gives me shall
come unto me, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the
Foundation of the World; so 1 Pet. 1.2. God has elected and made choice of
thee, if thou art come to Christ, Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. Gods Love
was fixed from all Eternity, and he manifests it in time unto the Soul, in
drawing it unto Christ, Jo. 6.37. All that the Father has given him shall come
unto him. God has chosen them, and given them to his Son, therefore he draws
them to him. Sinners are not able to move hand nor foot, Zyon-ward, unless God
draws them, they cannot come unto Christ.

2ly, If thou art come unto Christ, the holy Spirit has been at work upon thy
Soul. 1. To illuminate and inlighten thy understanding. 2. Convince thy
Conscience. 3. Incline thy will. 4. Sanctify thy affections. 5. Work grace in
the inward Man.

1. The Spirit does inlighten the understanding. By nature Man is darkness,
Ephesians. 5.8. Therefore he must be turned from darkness to light, Act. 26.18. And
this is done by the Spirit of God, he opens the Sinners Eyes, that he may know
himself. Know thy self descended from Heaven; it is said concerning the
Prodigal, Luke 15.17. When he came to himself, then he thought of returning
home to his Father, not before; so it must be with every Sinner, he must come
to himself, to know what he is before he will come to Christ, if thou art come
to the Lord Jesus, thou have been made to see thy miserable and deplorable
condition by nature, that thou art a Child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. subject and
obnoctious to the wrath of God, deservest nothing but wrath, and it were
justice in God to execute wrath upon thee, even for thy natural pollution and
defilement, much more for that contracted filth and impurity in thy
conversation; that thou art lost and shall perish for ever without a Redeemer,
a Jesus, to save thee; that thou art an enemy to God, Romans 5.10. and need
reconciliation with him through the Blood of Christ; that thou art
unregenerate, and without regeneration, no seeing the Kingdom of God, Jo. 3.3.
miserable all over, nothing but Wounds, and Bruises, and Putrefying Sores;
miserable because in thy flesh Romans 7.18.
dwells no good thing, Sin Reigning, Satan Captivating at his will, the World
allureing and persuading, and thou art without strength or ability to resist
and overcome these, and many more I might number up, are the evils which in
Puris naturalibus, in thy Natural condition, make it deplorable, therefore the
holy Spirit brings thee first to know thy self, before thou come unto Christ.

2ly, To know and understand the Scriptures is another effect of the Spirit
upon the understanding of those, who are come to, and have closed with the Lord
Jesus. As it is said, Luke 24.45. He opened their understandings that they
might understand the Scriptures. Therein all things concerning Christ are
revealed, Jo. 5.39. Search the Scriptures for in them ye think to have eternal
Life, (i. e. the knowledge of eternal Life) and they are they which testify of
me. Now the Spirit does open the Eye of the understanding, that it may in the
glass of the Scriptures, see those things clearly, which are necessary to
Salvation, to wit, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus,
Act. 20.21. it declares the mind and will of God fully, and directs poor
Sinners, who are stung in the Wilderness to look up to the BrazenSerpent, scil.
the Lord Jesus, Jo. 3.14. it declares that there is Salvation in none other. I
do not here say, Act. 4.12.
that the Spirit teaches all to read the Scriptures, who are adult, and grown
into a capacity of exercising their Reason, for there are many, who I am
persuaded, have closed with Christ, Luther, Tertullian, and others, were
converted from Papism and Gentilism by being brought to understand the
Scriptures.
that could not read the Scriptures; but this I assert, that the understanding
is enlightened by the Spirit to discern the things of God and Christ, when
preached or read to them out of the holy Scriptures; for without a right
understanding of the Scriptures, there can be no apprehending the right way of
Salvation. All the Philosophers of old, with all their profound Learning, Arts,
and Sciences, did not know Christ, and so consequently they were ignorant of
the way of Salvation, because Christ is the only way.

3ly, Thou art brought to understand and know thy duty in a great measure, thy
duty toward God, thy duty toward thy Neighbor, and thy duty toward thy
self. 1. Toward God, that thou ought to Love him for himself, to Love him
as thy Creator, and as a bountiful Benefactor to thee; to Love him primarily,
superlatively, and above all: as the Text says, Thou shall Love the Lord thy
God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Mind, and with all thy Strength,
Deuteronomy. 6.5. To love him fervently and permanently: if thou art not come to
Christ, besure there is none of this sincere love in thee, for as God loves not
the Sinner but as chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. so the Sinner can never love God
as he ought, but in and through Christ; and as God sees no lovelyness in the
Sinner, considered out of Christ; so the Sinner perceives no amiableneness in
God, but in the Face of Jesus Christ; for God is a consuming fire to Sinners if
they be separate from Christ; so that I say, Heb. 12. ult.
thou art taught to love God as an infinite good. 2. To fear him, not with a
Bondage, Slavish fear, Romans 8.15. but with a Filial and Holy fear, such a fear
as becomes Gods Children, a reverential fear, a fearing to displease him, such
a fear Christ Jesus had in his humiliation state, Heb. 5.7.8. and such a fear
have all his members, who are come unto him, and are implanted in him. 3.
Taught to serve him, before thou wast the Servant of Sin and Satan, but now the
Servant of the living God, Romans 6. now thou desire, and indeavourest to obey
him constantly, as to the time, fervently and faithfully, as to the manner; and
universally, as to the Practice of them, in all holy dutys, as it was said of
Zachary and Elizabeth, They walked in all the Commandments of God, Luke 1.6. So
it is thy care and Study to obey him in all things he requires from thee. 4.
Thou art taught to glorify God, as being the chief end of thy Creation; For he
has made all things for himself, Psalm. 16.4. Thou indeavourest to glorify thy
Soul and Body which are his, according to that command, 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify
God in your Bodies and in your Spirits which are Gods. Thus Christ Jesus did, as
he says, Jo. 17.4. I have glorified thee on Earth; so he says of his
Disciples, Jo 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified that ye bare much Fruit, so
shall ye be my Disciples. Thus thou will manifest thy self that thou art come to
Christ, and to be one of his Disciples, if thou indeavourost to glorify God.
2. Thou art enlightened to know thy duty toward thy Neighbor, as Christ
says, This is the second great Commandment, to love thy Neighbor as thy self,
Mat. 22.39. 1. To love his Person, as he is the workmanship of God, fearfully
and wounderfully made, Psalm. 139.14. Thou art to love him, not to envy him, Let
not thy Heart envy Sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day
long, Says the wise man, thou may hate the Sins of thy wicked Neighbors,
because they are against God and his own Soul; but thou art to Love his Person,
because he may be converted, and shine gloriously for ever; you may be Heirs
together of the same happiness. 2. And principally, to desire and endeavor the
good of his Soul; by seasonable reproof for Sin, Lev. 19.17. Ephesians. 4.25.
and by admonition and exhortation unto good, which tends to the eternal well
being of his Soul. I might number up many more, as to tender his Name and
Reputation; not any way to prejudice him in his estate, but I must contract. 3.
Thou art instructed thy duty concerning thy self, as 1. To preserve thy Life by
all lawful means, whilst God is pleased to lengthen out the days of thy
Pilgrimage. 2. To Fly and turn from all Sin which wrongs thy own Soul, Pro. 8.
ult. and to make use of all these means, God has appointed in order to thy
Salvation. These are some of the dutys in short, which the holy Spirit does
teach a Man, who is come unto the Lord Jesus.

4ly, Thou art brought to understand the Law, not only the Letter of it, but
the spirituallity, so says the Apostle, Romans 7.14. not only as it relates to
the external but the internal Man, verse. 7. Christ when he expounded the Law,
Mat. 5. showed the extent of it reached to the outward man, and especially to
the inward man; the thoughts and cogitations of the Soul, as well as the
actings and motions of the Eye, the Tongue, and the Hand. Paul whilst a
Pharisee was very exact as to his external deportment in all things, keeping to
the rule of the Law, Phil. 3.6. Act. 8.1.
he little thought then that his consenting to the Death of Steven was such a
Sin that it deserved eternal Damnation, although he had no hand in the Stoning
of him; but when his Eyes were opened, then he cries, the Law is Spiritual, but
I am carnal, sold under Sin; then he saw how the Law condemned Passion, Malice,
Spiritual Pride, and other motions of Sin, (as he calls them verse. 5.) when
they never broke out into action, as well as the actions of Sin done in the
Flesh; for indeed there is an action of the Soul, even in the very thoughts of
evil, the Imagination acts and communicates it to the understanding; the
understanding to the will, the will to the affections. Thus there is a secret
passage of every thought of evil, throughout the whole Soul: therefore the holy
Ghost says, Genesis 6.5. The imaginations and thoughts of Man's Heart, were evil
continually. Now the natural unconverted man, discerns not this heart-evil or
the spirituallity of the Law but he that is come to Christ, as the Apostle Paul
was, to close with him, and believe in him, he perceives it. 2. Thou see the
purity and holiness of it, as well as the spirituallity of it. The Law of God
is pure and holy, Psalm. 19.8. the Commandment of the Lord is pure, inlightening
the Eyes; it is holy in that it comes from a holy God, and tends to make and
keep men holy; holy in its nature; and the enlightened Soul perceives and
discerns an extraordinary sanctity and holiness in the Law of God, Romans 7.12.
The Law is holy and the commandment holy, Says the holy Apostle, when he was
made holy by the Blood of Jesus. 3. Romans 7.12.
The justness and Righteousness of the Law; it is just, therefore it will clear
none that are guilty; it is just and therefore it requiers complete obedience,
and in case of default or transgression, threatens eternal Punishment; it
allows of no repair, neither will it abate the least mite of its just demands.
Thus when the Eyes are open to discern these things of the Law, it becomes a
Schoolmaster to bring the Sinner to Christ that he may be justified by faith
in him; therefore our Divines say, the Law should be Preached before the
Gospel, John Baptist-like, to be a Harbinger to prepare the way for Christ into
the Soul, that he may find free and ready entertainment. 4. Thou art brought to
see the goodness of the Law, Romans 7.12.13. The Law is good, 16. I consent to
the Law that it is good, In that it manifests the contrary evil, to wit, Sin,
and it is opposite to it; and God has ordained and commanded it for the good
of his People, Deuteronomy. 10.13. now he that is come to Christ, looks upon the Law
as good; therefore with the Prophet David, He loves it above Gold or Silver,
Psalm. 119.72. And takes delight in it as the Apostle did, Romans 7.22. I delight
in the Law of God after the inward Man. This is thy condition if thou art come
to Christ; thou art more grieved that thou can not keep that Law which is so
just, and good, and holy; then because God has made it so strict, holy, and
just, thou art ready to cry out, Give power to do what thou command, and
command what thou will; the Spirit is made willing, although the Flesh is weak,
Romans 7.15.

5. Thou art brought to understand the Gospel; I mean not that thou should
understand the Gospel, as a Divine, or learned Scholar by the Spirits
assistance may do; but I mean thou art enlightened to understand and apprehend
the glad tidings of Salvation, and the good will of God toward Men, declared
throughout the whole covenant of grace; wherein God makes known his
willingness and readiness to be reconciled to poor Sinners, upon the account of
Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 5.18. All things are of God, who has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ, 19. God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself; not imputing their trespasses unto them, verse. 12. He has made him to
be Sin for us, who knew no Sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him. In these words, here are the great transactions between God and Christ
concerning the Salvation of poor Sinners. 1. Here are the great benefits
redounding to Believers, scil. Reconciliation with God, and a complete
Righteousness of God in Christ, verse. 18.21. 2. The causa (...), as the
Scool-men term it, the Proegoumenal or moveing cause, not the foresight of Man's
obedience, but mere mercy of God, All things are of God, verse. 18. 3. The causa
(...), the procureing cause, which is the Lord Jesus; he was in Christ,
reconciling the World unto himself. Christ has purchased all for believers. 4.
The manner how Christ procured it for us; to wit, having our Sins imputed to
him, and suffering and satisfying for them, verse. 21. He was made Sin for us
who knew no Sin. 5. The manner how we partake of this righteousness, to wit, by
imputation, our Sins are imputed to him; and his righteousness imputed to us,
verse. 19. Not imputing their Trespasses unto them, but making them become the
righteousness of God in him, scil. by imputation; God has provided, the
righteousness imputes it, and accepts of it, upon the account of Christ: now
faith alone apprehends all this, which the Gospel reveals. I have explained
these words briefly, to the end we may see what is held forth in the Gospel,
which reveals these things unto us, And is the Power of God unto Salvation, to
all them who believe, Romans 1.16. Now if thou art come to Christ, brought to
believe in him, the Spirit has enlightened thy understanding in the things
contained in the gospel of the Lord Jesus; thou must have some knowledge of
this, or else there cannot be any of thy Salvation.

6ly, He has enlightened thy understanding to know God the Father, who by
nature thou art ignorant of, 1 Cor. 2.14.15. The natural man discerns not the
things of God, neither can he know them; for they are Spiritually discerned.
The mind must be spiritually illuminated, before it can know God, or the things
of God savingly; as the Apostle prayed for the Ephesians, That the God of our
Lord Jesu Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom
and revelation in the knowledge of him, the Eyes of your understanding being
enlightened that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and the riches of
the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. It is Eternal life
to know God, Jo. 17.3. Which must be meant of a sanctified knowledge of him,
wrought by the Spirit of God in the hearts of all those who receive and believe
in Christ, for as it is in the 1 Romans There were some who knew God, but yet did
not worship him as God, verse. 22. There is a kind of dark glimering light men
have of God, the understanding and rational facultys not being quite lost and
destroyed in the fall; but yet this knowledge is sufficient to guide a man to
Eternal bliss; there must be a further work of the Spirit of God, or else the
Soul can never know God as it ought. There are these several things which the
Spirit teaches the Soul concerning God the Father, that he is, Heb. 11.6. He
that comes unto God, must believe that he is. There is something of Atheism in
the heart of every man by nature, if thou have but consulted thine own Heart
thou will tell me so; have thou never had thoughts that there was no God? I
believe thou will answer, yea, but if thou art divinely enlightened, these are
extinguished and fled away; thou art now fully persuaded that there is a God;
and that he is of an eternal existence; this was the Message God sent by Moses
to the Children of Israel, if they should inquire to know from whom he was
sent; tell them, says God, my name is, I am, that I am; which the Septuagint
Translate, I am the being. i. e. that being of beings, (...).
which gave being to all others; but have my being eternally from my self. This
the Spirit does do, it teaches thee that there is a God. 2. That this God is a
Spirit existing without parts or dimention; immaterial and without composition
of any matter, Jo. 4.24. God is a Spirit. He is incorporal and invisible,
Objecta sensuum, non sunt in Deo. Vrsin.
the objects of Sense are not in God, No man saw God at any time, but he who
has seen Christ by the Eye of Faith has seen the Father, because the Father
dwells in him, and he dwells in the Father, Jo: 14.10, 11. Christ reveals the
Father by the Spirit unto those who are his; them who believe in him, Mat.
11.27. 3. Infinite beyond all bounds and limits; infinite in his understanding,
Psalm. 147.5. omnipotent, Genesis 17.1. Jer. 32.27. Is there any thing too hard for
me? Omnipresent, Psalm. 139.7. Jer. 23.24. can any hide himself in secret places
that I cannot see him? says the Lord, do not I fill Heaven and Earth? God is
all sufficient, he needs not any of his Creatures to add to his felicity; for
he is, Sibi ad faelicitatem sufficiens obtima and causa boni in natura,
Sufficient to his own felicity, the chief and the cause of all good in nature:
the natural Man discerns not these things concerning God; they fancy either
that he is not, Psalm. 10.4. all his thoughts are, there is no God; or if there
is one, he is but finite, and as another Creature, as those in 1 Romans 23. Who
changed the glory of the incorruptable God, into an Image made like to
corruptable man, and to Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and creeping things. So
their successors the Papists do at this day, or as the Paylosophers who own
there is a God, but confine him to his celestial Mansion, not at all to view
the affairs of Men upon Earth; but when Christ sends his spirit to the Soul,
these dark clouds are discipated, and the splendid rays of the glorious Majesty
of Heaven shines in upon the Soul. 4. The understanding is made to apprehend
the holiness and infinite purity of God, Heb. 1.13. God is of purer Eyes then
to behold iniquity, 1 Pet. 1.16. Be ye holy for I am holy. God is holiness in
the very abstract, he cannot be polluted with Sin; which the natural Man does
not apprehend.

5ly, The righteousness of God; the person that is come to Christ apprehends
God to be a just and righteous, God; for his righteousness is seen in the death
of his Son, Romans 3.26. To declare his righteousness; the righteousness of God
was manifestly declared, in that he spared not his own Son, although he was
only a surety, and Sin was only imputed to him, 2 Cor. 5 21. He was made Sin
for us, i. e. he suffered the punishment due unto us for our Sins; yet he knew
no Sin, that we might become the righteousness of God in him. God is a
righteous and just God in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. This was one thing
Christ said the Spirit should do, when he came from the Father, He should
convince of righteousness, Jo. 16.8. of the righteousness of God, as well as
the want of righteousness in themselves. I greatly question whither a person be
come to Christ, if he is not in some measure acquainted with the righteousness
of God; my reason is this, till the Eye of the understanding be opened, so as
to see the righteousness of God, that he renders to every Man according to his
deeds; that he requires complete obedience, and will exact the uttermost
Farthing, that he will not pass by the least Sin without full satisfaction to
his justice; or else in equity he will punish every Sinner with infinite
punishment; till then I say, the Soul does not so much regard coming to Christ,
that it may be made partaker of his righteousness, when the Sinner is made to
see Gods righteousness, then he flys to the Horns of the Alter, scil. to lay
hold of Christ's righteousness, tendered to Poor Sinners in the Gospel.

6ly, I might add further that the Spirit does inlighten the understanding to
discern the Love, Pity, and mercy of God in Christ, and his readiness and
willingness to accept of those who come unto him, in and through his Son, Jo.
3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting Life; God is
ready to give and be reconciled, Psalm. 86.5. But there is no coming unto him
but by Christ, Jo. 14.6. these considerations do encourage the Poor Soul to
come to Christ, because God is full of Pity, and faithfulness to forgive. 1
Jo. 1.9.

7ly, The Spirit inlightens the mind in the knowledge of Christ, 1. What he is.
2 What he has done. 3. What he is doing in the behalf of Poor Sinners.

1. What he is, I have declared in the beginning of this Book, that he is God
blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. the true God and eternal life, 1 Jo. 5.20. that he
is the eternal delight of the Father, the Glory of Angels, admired by Saints;
and the Savior of poor lost Sinners; that he is God-man in two distinct
natures, and one person, for ever: as he was Man, he suffered; but as he was
God-Man, he satisfied infinite Justice, by laying down an infinite price for
infinite transgressions: It was the blood of him that was God, as well as Man,
that was effused and poured forth for our sins, Acts 20.28. 1 Job. 3.16.

2dly, What he has done for lost sinners? he who was in the form of God, took
upon him the form of a Servant, Phil. 2.6, 7. he put himself into a capacity to
fulfill all righteousness, and to undergo all misery for our iniquities, that he
might save us from the wrath of God, which will consume all those who believe not
in Christ: he has completed the work of Redemption, for we are made complete
in him, Col. 2.10. In short, he has fulfilled the whole Law in way of
obedience; he suffered the penalty due unto those whom he redeemed; he was made
a Curse for them, Gal. 3.13. that they might obtain the blessing, even life for
evermore; he died that they might live, for by dying he conquered Death, and
brought life and immortality to light: he broke through the Prison of the
grave, and by his own power brought Salvation, and ascended on high, and lead
captivity captive, that he might give gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.8.

3. He is now sitting at the right hand of God till his Enemies be made his
footstool, Psalm. 110.1. and his Saints crowned and glorified with him in his
Kingdom; he prayed for them when he was here on earth, Joh. 17. but now he is
interceding at the right hand of God in the behalf of his redeemed ones, 1 John
2.1. These things, and many more, the spirit reveals unto them that are come to
Jesus Christ. Christ is the head of the Body, his Church, Ephesians. 1.22.23. And
gave him to be the head over all things to the Church which is his Body, the
fullness of him who fills all in all; Sicut vita ex solo capite in omnia
membra propagatur: sic ex un^ Christo in omnia membra spiritus ipsius
spargitur, non autem ex uno membro in aliud. Ursin. de doc. Chris. pa. 249.
for as life from the head alone is propagated into all the Members, so from
one Christ, his spirit is poured out into all his Members, but not from one
member into another; as the Head is sons omnis vitae, the fountain of all life,
so Christ is the fountain from which his Members derive continual supplies.
Now, seeing Christ and Believers are so nearly related as to be one spirit, 1
Cor. 6.17. he the Head, and they the Members, there must needs be an intimacy,
and knowledge of each other, for as Christ says, Job. 10.14. I am the good
Shepherd, I know my Sheep, and am known of mine; so I say, if thou art come
unto Christ, the Spirit has revealed Christ Jesus to thee, he has enlightened
thy understanding to know in some measure what he is, what he has done, and
what he is doing for thy Soul.

2dly, If thou art come to Christ, thy conscience has been convinced by the
holy spirit; it is his work to convince a person of sin, Joh. 16.8. and when he
is come, (to wit the holy Spirit) he shall convince the world of sin: (...).
it is beyond the power of man to convince the conscience, it is proper to the
holy Ghost. 1. Then he has convinced thee of thy original sin, which is the
source and spring from which all other sins flow; it is not Fons vitae, the
fountain of life, but Fons corruptionis, and Mortis, of corruption and death;
from this spring flows forth the bitter waters of Meribah, which prove
destructive to Mankind; the whole man being vitiated and corrupted by original
sin, which made the Apostle say, I know that in me (that is in my flesh)
dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18. he calls it, The Law in his Members. Verse.
23. The Body of Death, ver. 24. Thus he was convinced of his Original sin, and
therefore he says, We are all the children of Wrath by Nature, Ephesians. 2.3. which
Scriptures are fully and excellently declared to be meant of Original sin, by
that worthy Minister of Christ Mr. Anthony Burgess, in his Doctrine of Original
sin. The Prophet David confesses it, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in
Iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me; he was convinced of his
pollution even in the very womb, and so art thou if the Spirit has been
effectually at work in thy Soul; from the heart naturally proceeds no good
thing; but thence come Thefts, evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries,
Fornications, false Witness, Blasphemy, Mat. 15.1.9. All which defile and
pollute a Man. 2. Thou art convinced of the evil of thy actual sins, thy
manifold transgressions, and violations of the Law of God; those sins which thy
hand, thy heart, thy tongue, thy ear and eye, have been employed in, as David
was convinced of his Murder and Adultery, which the 51. Psalm. declares; Paul
of his Persecution, injuriousness, and blasphemy, 1 Timothy 1.13. Peter of denying
his Lord and Master, Mat. 26.74, 75. Thou art now convinced that Sin is
exceeding sinful, Romans 17.13. and that thy great work and business in thy
unconverted state was to Sin against God.

3ly, Thou art convinced that every Sin does contaminate and defile thy Soul,
Psalm. 19. Cleanse thou me from secret Sins. Which Petition implys that Sin
(though never so secret) defiles the Soul; moreover the holy Prophet has not
only regard (in the word secret) to those Sins which the Eye of man had not
seen; but to those Sins which were secret to himself, which in thought, Word,
or deed, he had perpetrated, and yet not observed, Psalm. 51.2. Wash me
thoroughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin. verse. 7. Purge me with
hysop, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter then Snow. Which
Scripture does evince that Sin does defile, and therefore the Soul needs
cleansing, which cannot be done but by the Blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Jo. 1.7.
The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. The Prophet Isaiah
witnesses this truth, when he beheld the glory of the Lord Jesus, Isa. 6.
(proved by Jo. 12.41.) he cried, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a Man
of unclean Lips, Isa. 6.5. When he had a vision of the Lord Jesus, and was nigh
unto him, then he exclaims that he is unclean: so it is with thee if thou art
come to Christ; thou art convinced that Sin has polluted and defiled thee, the
conviction of which drives thee to that Fountain viz. the Blood of Christ laid
open for Sin, and for uncleanness, Every Sin committed is against the blessed
Trinity, and the goodness, love, wisdom, and Patience of God.
Zach. 13, 1.

4ly, Thou art convinced that Sin is against God, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee,
thee only have I Sinned, and done evil in thy sight. Agreeable to this, is that
of the Prodigal, Luke 15.18. I will arise and go to my Father, and say unto
him, Father, I have Sinned against Heaven and before thee. Thou art convinced
that every Sin is against the Essence and Being of God; contrary to his nature,
and to his revealed will; I leave thee to enlarge upon this in thy private
meditation.

5ly, Thou art convinced of the dangerous consequences and effects of Sin if
persisted in; for then there is nothing to be expected but wrath, confusion,
and eternal destruction; where Malum culpae, the Evil of guilt preceeds and
goes before; Malum penae the Evil of punishment follows after. If the
preceding sins, be not repented of, and the Soul washed with, and justified
through the blood of Jesus, To. 2.8, 9. To them who are contentious, and do not
obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation
and anguish upon every Soul of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also
of the Gentile, To. 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodlyness, and unrighteousness of Men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness;
here is nothing but wrath upon wrath threatened against disobedient Sinners.

6ly, Thou art convinced of Righteousness, as Jo. 16.8. When be it come, he
shall convince the World of Righteousness. Thou art convinced that a
righteousness thou need, and a righteousness thou must have; both internal,
which is wrought by the Spirit, and external, which is wrought by Christ; God
is a righteous God, and his Law is righteous, and there is no standing the
trial without a complete and perfect righteousness, the Law will admit of no
repentance as the gospel does, it requires full satisfaction in point of
suffering, or complete and perfect performance in point of doing; if the
offense be but one, and against one clause of the Law, there is a breach of the
whole, Jam. 2.10. and how shall the poor Sinner do now who has broken all? the
Spirit convinces the Sinner of the righteousness of Christ, which is
apprehended by faith, and he inables the Sinner to lay hold of it; and to say,
Christ was made Sin for me, who knew no Sin, that I might become the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Paul was thus convinced, when he
said, I would not be found in my own righteousness, but in the righteousness of
God which is by Faith in Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9. Thou art convinced of the
necessity of a perfect righteousness if thou art truly come unto, and have
closed with Christ.

7ly, and Lastly, thou art convinced of Judgment, Jo. 16.8. he convinces of
Judgment, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for Men once to dye, and after death comes
judgment; a particular, as well as a universal, and it shall be a righteous
judgment, Romans 2.5. speaking of the Sinner who is impenitent, Thou treasurest
up wrath, against the day of wrath, and Revelation of the righteous judgment of
God; now being convinced of this, thou expectest and preparest daily for it,
because it is the day in which thou shall be acquitted; but the enemies of
Christ condemned, For there is no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus,
Rom 8 1 But there is no standing forth ungodly in Judgment, Psalm. 1.5. That
which is the ground of terror to the wicked, scil. the day of judgment is a
ground of comfort and consolation to the righteous; the Apostle James does
exhort the afflicted Brethren to be patient, upon this consideration, that the
coming of the Lord was at hand, and the Judge stands before the Door, Jam.
5.7.8, 9.

3ly, If thou art come to the Lord Jesus, then the holy Spirit has inclined
thy will and made it flexible, Psalm. 110.3. They shall be a willing People in
the day of thy Power, Cantic. 6.12. The Margent of some Bibles read it thus, My
Soul, set me on the Chariots of my willing People. It is true that the will
remains still in Man, Wollebius Mansit quidem arbitrium hominis liberum a
coactione sed non ad bonum and malum idem.
but it is as true that it is depraved, as one says, Mansit, Voluntas, sed
depravata, the Spirit does not coact or enforce the will, for the will of Man
remains free from compulsion, but yet not equally so, both to good and evil,
for it is free only to evil. Now I say, the Spirit has not drawn compulsively;
but willingly lead thee unto the Lord Jesus, of unwilling by nature he has
made thee abundantly willing, through the Work of grace.

1. Thou art made willing to part with thy Sins; to shake hands with them, and
bid adieu to all thy former vanitys, which by nature thou art Prone to; there
is a purging out of the old leaven, For the Temple of God is holy, 1 Cor. 3.16,
17. And believers are that Temple, it is inconsistant for Sin and Christ to
dwell together, for Christ came to destroy Sin, and to redeem his People from
it, Tit. 2.14.

2ly, Thou art made willing by the holy Spirit to renounce thy own ragged and
imperfect righteousness; for as I have declared before, this keeps back many
from coming fully to the Lord Jesus; but there must not only be Sin cast away,
but self-righteousness also; for it is the ruin of many, and has been so, that
they rely more upon their own righteousness, then on Christ's righteousness;
the Jews lost themselves by this, Romans 9.13. but if thou art come to Christ,
thou willingly say with the Apostle Paul, Phil. 3.9. And be found in him,
not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through
the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith. Thou look
upon thy own, as indeed it is, imperfect and insufficient in point of
justification, and that it must by no means stand in competition with Christ
and his righteousness.

3ly, Thou art made willing to accept and embrace a whole Christ upon Gospel
Terms; Christ on the Throne as well as at the Altar; Christ in his Kingly
office, to rule and govern thee, to impose Laws and institutions which thou
must obey; as well as Christ a Priest to sacrifice himself, that he might
appease the Wrath of God, satisfy his divine justice, extinguish those flames
with his Blood, which sin had incendiated, and that he might procure Salvation
for poor Sinners: Christ in his prophetic office, to teach and reveal his
Fathers will to thee, for no man can know the Father or his will as he ought,
but he to whom the Son will reveal them by his holy Spirit, Mat. 11.27. Neither
knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him. 1 Cor. 2.11. The things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. I
say thou art willing to receive a whole Christ, as the Gospel tenders and
offers him to poor Sinners, to be Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.20. Christ will either be a whole Savior, or none; he
will reign in the heart alone, or not at all.

4thly, Thou art willing to obey the Lord Jesus in all his divine Institutions
and commands and not say as those Disciples, Joh. 6.60. This is a hard saying,
who can bear it? thou do not look upon his commands as grievous, for his Yoke
is easy, and his Burden is light, Mat. 11.30. To will is present with thee,
although how to perform thou know not, Romans 7, 18. Thy great desire is to
walk in his Precepts, and The Spirit is willing, although the flesh is weak,
Mat. 26.41. Indeed this is the great trial and touchstone by which we may know
what Metal we are of: If thou art not fruitful in obedience to Christ, thou art
none of his Disciples, John 15.8. as the Apostle says, Know ye not to whom ye
yield your selves servants to obey? his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness, Romans 6, 16. it
does not trouble thee that his Laws are strict, holy, and good, but thou art
grieved that thy power is but imbecility and weakness, so that thou can not
do that good which thou would, Romans 7, 15. Believers are the only persons
that yield obedience to the Lord Jesus; they follow him wheresoever he goes,
Rev. 14, 4. To all his commands thou art willingly subject, and in all his
Ordinances thou would willingly be active,

Fifthly and lastly, Thou art willing to deny thy self, and follow Christ to
the end, notwithstanding those Mountains of difficulties that may oppose thee
in thy Christian course, both external and internal, Luke 14, 26. If any man
come unto me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and
Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple;
Verse 27. And whosoever does not bear his Cross and come after me, cannot be my
Disciple. Self-denial is a special lesson to be learned in the school of
Christ; he was frequently (when he was upon earth) instructing his Disciples in
this kind of Literature. Christ's Cross is to be learned even in the A B C of
Christianity; and Christians are daily to exercise themselves in the study of
it, that they may be good Proficients. The Apostle Paul had made a fair
Progress, and was got to the highest Form in Christ's School, when he could
say, God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world, Gal.
6.14. This was a brave spirit in him, that he could glory and boast of his
afflictions and sufferings for the Lord Jesus. Enemies and afflictions must be
expected in the narrow way which leads to life, and those who follow the Lord
Jesus to the end, will be followed by Satan and Temptation; and yet for all
these things the Spirit makes the Soul willing to keep close to the Lord
Jesus; and once having chosen him, never finally to forasake him, Heb. 10.39.

4thly, The Spirit does sanctify and regulate the affections, which in the
unregenerate state are totally vitiated; in the unregenerate state the heart
loves sin more than holiness; the perishing Creature, more than the eternal
Creator; it can delight in earthly carnal vanities, but takes no complacency in
the ways or things of God and Christ; it can sorrow and lament for worldly
sufferings and disappointments, but has no grief at all for sin, and
transgression of the holy Law of God, and that affront upon the glorious
Majesty of Heaven; the unregenerate Mind fears more the displeasure of mortal
Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, then offending the great God, who lives
for ever; but now the work of the Spirit is to purify and regulate these
affections and passions of the Soul, and fix them upon more suitable and
God-pleasing objects; and this he has affected upon thy Soul if thou art
brought home to the Lord Jesus. Now thou can say with David, O how I love thy
Law; it is my Meditation all the day long, Psalm. 119.97. The Law of thy Mouth
is better to me than thousands of Gold or Silver, ver. 72. The Soul has a high
estimation of, and valuation for the Law of God; it esteems of God as the
supreme good, because he is an all sufficient, eternal, and unchangable good;
he is the fountain which never cease flowing, a Sea not to be exhausted, a
Tree which always bears fruit; therefore the Soul makes choice of him, and
highly magnifies him; Christ is now an object thy heart does most delight in,
and thou look upon all other things, but as (...), Dogs-meat in comparison
of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.7, 8. Thou can
say of Christ as the Philosopher lid of Virtue, (...), there is no possession
more glorious and splendid, more firm and permanent; now thy heart hates and
abhors that evil which before thou lovedst; and thou love that good, which
formerly thy mind was a verse to.

5thly and lastly, If thou art come unto the Lord Jesus, then the holy Spirit
has wrought all these graces within thy Soul, which do manifest thee to be a
real and sound Christian. I shall only treat of these six, Repentance, Faith,
Love, Hope, Humility and Zeal; where these are wanting in the heart, Christ is
not possessor there; but where these are effectually wrought, be sure the Soul
has closed with him.

1. Then I say, thou art brought to Repentance, this was the Doctrine John
Baptist preached, Mat. 3.2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.
Christ preached it, Luke 13.35. Except ye repent, ye shall likewise perish. The
Apostle Paul preached up this Truth, Acts 20. and 21. Repentance toward God;
That they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for Repentance. So
that we see here is an absolute necessity of this grace being wrought in the
Soul. The Apostle speaks of a Repentance unto life, Acts 11.18. Then has God
granted unto the Gentiles Repentance unto life. Here I suppose thou may be
ready to propose this Query, how may I know whether my repentance be unto life
or no? I answer, there is a twofold Repentance, Legal and Evangelical: I shall
pass by the first, and only speak to the last, being that which resolves the
Query, an Evangellic Repentance, may be known these three ways, 1. by the
Objects of it. 2. by its Nature and Propertys. 3. by the several effects of it.
When I have declared these things in particular, thou may resolve thy self
whether this grace be wrought in thy Soul by the holy Spirit or no.

1. An Evangellic Repentance may be known by its objects: by Objects, I mean
those things the Soul eyes and looks upon when it is moved thus to repent; and
they are these five 1. sin. 2. the Law. 3. God. 4. Christ. 5. Gospel. 1. sin;
both original and actual, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my Mother conceive me. 1 and 2 ver. According to the Multitude of thy
tender mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleans me from my sin, 3 ver. My sin is ever before me. How often
does the Prophet mention his sin. This cut and wounded his Soul, that he had
sinned, the Soul looks upon sin both externally, and internally; secret, as
well as public, Psalm. 19.12. It looks upon sin, as sin: Therefore Mourns over
it with a Godly sorrow. Sin is such a vile thing in it self, Satis enim nobis
(simodo in Philosophia aliquid proficiemus) perswasum esse debet, si omnes Deos
hominesque clare possimus, nihil tamen avare, nihil injuste, nihil libidinose,
nihil incontinentur esse faciendum. Cicero de Offic.
that the Heathen Philosopher could say, we ought to be persuaded (if we have
made any proficiency in Philosophy) if we could be secret or hid from all Gods
and Men, yet to do nothing avaritiously, nothing injustly, nothing lustfully,
nothing incontinently; but the true gospel-Penitent looks upon it as the worst
of evils, the Soul polluting evil, Soul deforming, and Soul damning evil, it
cannot look upon Sin with a pleasant aspect, when grace is truly active the
Soul cannot behold Sin, without a sigh in the Heart or tear in the Eye, Woe unto
us that we have Sinned, says the Church, Lam. 5.16. All who have been brought
home to Christ, have come by weeping Cross; lamenting and bewailing their Sin;
they have looked upon Sin as the heaviest burden, Psalm. 384 and the bitterest
Pill that ever they took.

2ly, The next object is the Law, when the Soul looks upon the holiness,
justness, and goodness of the Law; it cannot but mourn because it has violated
and transgressed it. Every Sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 Jo. 3.4. We
find it thus with the Servants of God, in their confession and humiliation for
Sin; when they repented, they had an Eye to the Law, Ezra. 9.10. And now O Lord
what shall we say after this; for we have departed from thy commandments, Dan.
9.5. We have Sinned and committed Iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled even by departing from thy Precepts, and thy judgments. Thus we see
they had an Eye to the Law of God which was broken by them; and it was the
trouble and grief of their Souls, and so it has been with thee, if thy
repentance is true.

3ly, The Soul has an Eye to God. When it considers God to be an infinite
good, and yet he has been slighted; a gracious God, yet he has been offended;
a loving and merciful Father, yet he has been abused; a glorious God, and yet
he has been dishonored; this melts the Soul into tears, because it has thus
requited the Lord for all his mercys; what says the Soul? has he given me my
being, Act. 17.28. and 20.21. and that for this end, that I should glorify him,
love, fear, and serve him, and that to the uttermost, both with my Soul and
Body? and have I wicked wretch, dishonored him, sinned against him from the
very womb? I went astray, followed the cursed immaginations of my own base
heart, my ears were open to the whisperings, and suggestions of Satan, that
enemy to my Soul; but they were shut, and deaf to the calls of God, my Creator,
from whom I receive my All, and to whom I owe all that I am or can be; all the
members of my Body, and all the faculties of my Soul, should have been employed
in obedience to his will, but I, vile wretch that I am, have neglected,
disesteemed, and offended my gracious God, Psalm. 51.4. Try if this has been the
language of thy Soul, I have Sinned against my God, and therefore I mourn; and
Oh that my head was a fountain, Jer. 9.1.
and my Eyes Rivers of Tears, that I could weep day and night for my Sins.

4ly, True repentance has Christ for its object, Zach. 12.10. And I will pour
upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of
grace and of supplication, and they shall look upon me whom they have peirced,
and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only Son; and shall be in
Bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his First born. Here we
see a prophecy of Christ, to be fulfilled in the latter days, does clearly
confirm this truth. And thus it is with every Gospel-penitent, who comes unto
Christ; he looks upon the wounds of Christ by the Eye of Faith, the Eye affects
the Heart, and makes the Sinner mourn and lament that he should be wounded for
his Sins, and bruised for his Iniquitys; that the chastisement of his peace
should be upon him; and that by his Stripes he should be healed, Isa. 53.5. O
how does the consideration of this wound the poor Soul, and makes it kindly
mourn over all those Sins and transgressions, which wounded and peirced the
Lord Jesus. It has an Eye to the Person that suffered; a glorious Person, the
second in the Blessed Trinity, God-Man shed his Blood for my Sins, Act. 20.28.
O the heinousness of my Sins that no meaner Person could suffer for them:
Again, it looks upon the sufferings themselves, they were Torments,
Chastisements, Bruises, and Stripes; the inflictions were infinite, to satisfy
for infinite Transgressions; he was wounded in his Body by wicked Men, and he
was wounded in his Soul from his Father, which was the Soul of his sufferings,
Mat. 26.38. My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death. Mat. 27.46. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. He dyed an ignominious, Painful, and
Cursed Death, Gal. 3.13. These things did the Lord of Life and Glory undergo,
that he might redeem me from that punishment and wrath due to my Sins. How does
the consideration of Christ's suffering, humble and break the Adomantine heart,
and makes it Labor to express its sorrow, with sighs and groans that cannot be
uttered? but further when it comes to apprehend the procuring cause of all this
misery that Christ endured, then indeed the Soul does even disolve it self into
tears, and with unfeigned contrition cries out, what my Sins? mine Iniquitys? my
rebellion against God? my disobedient walking? my cursed Lusts, and vile
polluted Actions? to be the procuring cause of all Christ's sufferings? O wretch
that I am! Vile, Unworthy, Degenerate Creature, thus to cause Christ to be
wounded with and for my Sins. Lament, O my Soul; bath thy self in tears of
blood: lament I say, for behold Christ was wounded, he suffered, bled, and dyed
for my Iniquitys, and violations of the Law of God.

5ly and lastly, It has an Eye to the Gospel; Jo. 6.37.
which is the glad tidings of Salvation, which declares, and holds forth Christ
to be an able and willing Savior; it makes manifest the free grace of God, in
and through Christ to poor Sinners, upon the consideration of the excellency of
the Gospel, and those things contained in it, and yet to be despised, thus the
Soul frames its Arguments, I have not only Sinned against Justice, but I have
also Sinned against mercy; not only against the Law, but most egrediously
against the Gospel; Christ by his Ministers called once, yea twice, but I
harkned not, he knocked, Act. 3.46. Rev. 3.20. Cant. 5.2.3.
but I opened not unto him; he invited, but I refused him; he wooed me, but I
scorned him: I made Christ weight a long season before I would give him
admittance; he followed me with intreatys, but I unworthy wretch ran away from
him, and slighted the means of grace, even to the indangering the Ruin of my
immortal Soul; in the days of the Gospel the light is more splendid, then it
was under the Law; therefore my Sins are more aggravated; under the Law the
Church was but in its infancy, but under the Gospel it is grown up into
Manhood; and as Murder, or any Sin is more heinous being committed by a Man,
than by a Child; so it is with me, I cannot say but I have Sinned against the
checks of Conscience, against light and knowledge, against many warnings and
admonitions, given me both by Christ's Ministers, and other Godly Friends,
therefore I cannot but lament and mourn, being now convinced of all that evil I
have perpetrated and wickedly committed against the Gospel of the Lord Jesus.

2ly, True Evangellic repentance which is wrought in the Soul by the Spirit of
God, may be known by the nature and propertys of it, now the propertys are. 1.
To confess Sin, Psalm. 32.5. I acknowledged my Sin unto thee, and mine Iniquitys
have I not bid. I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. Pro. 28.13. Who so confesses and forsakes
his Sin shall find Mercy. 1 Jo. 1.9. If we confess our Sin, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our Sin. It is the property of repentance, I say to confess
Sin, and that, 1. Freely and ingeniously; not like a legal Repentant from
horror of Conscience, or fear of Punishment; but from a sense of the evil of
Sin, as David did, Psalm. 32.5. I said I will confess my transgressions, and in
Psalm. 51.3. I acknowledge my transgression, and my Sin is ever before me. 2ly,
As Freely, so also particularly; as Nathan said to David, Thou art the Man, 2 Samuel 12.7. so the sinner confesses and acknowledges his sin, he cries out,
Thou art the sin, the Achan, which has troubled the peace of my Israel, scil.
Conscience. Thus we find it has been with the servants of God, David, Psalm.
51.14. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou God of my Salvation, Dan.
9.5, 6. We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly,
and have rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts, and from thy Judgments,
neither have we hearkened to thy Servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy name
to our Kings, our Princes, and to our Fathers, and to all the people of the
Land, Ezra chap. 9. and Neh. 9. throughout declares, how they confessed their
sins in particular, 1 Timothy 1.13. says Paul, I was before a P^rsecuter, a
Blasphemer, and Injurious, but I obtained Mercy: Many will confess they have
sinned in general, but never particularize them before the Lord.

3dly, It is mixed with contrition and sincere mourning for sin; for as the
Psalmist says, the Sacrifices of God are a broken heart; A broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. There is a godly
sorrow the Apostle mentions, 2 Cor. 7.10. For godly sorrow works repentance
unto salvation, never to be repented of; and indeed without this godly sorrow,
and sincere mourning for sin, confession is insignificant, for Confession
without Contrition, is like a Body without a Soul; dead, cold, and unactive, it
does nothing that will prove advantageous to the Soul; for as a dead Corpse is
offensive to man, so is a mere confession unto God, and much more; for where
there is only confession without due sense of sin, it savours of Hypocrisy,
but when there is a deep and sensible contrition, it savours of sincerity.

4. It is accompanied with shame and confusion of face, Ezra 9.6. O my God, I
am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face unto thee, my God, for our Iniquities
are increased over our heads, and our Trespasses grown up unto the heavens. The
sense of the exceeding evil that is in sin, and of the greatness of the Majesty
that has been offended, makes the poor soul ashamed to look up, but like the
poor Publican, stands a far off, and would not lift up his eyes to Heaven, but
smote upon his Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13. O
when the Soul is truly sensible of the vileness and evil of sin, it is ashamed
and confounded, and dare not look up to God.

5thly, It is mixed with self-abhorrence, and self-condemning, Job 42.6.
Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job 40.4. Behold I am
vile, what shall I answer thee, Dan. 9.8. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of
face. Lord, says the poor humble penitent, I am a guilty Malefactor, I deserve
nothing but Death, Hell, and eternal Damnation; it is true thou have declared,
that Christ has merited Mercy, Life, and Salvation; but I my self deserve
nothing but misery; I am unworthy of the least manifestation of thy Love and
Kindness; I am not worthy to be called thy Son; Luke 15.19.
My heart condemns me, 1 John 3.20. But do thou justify me upon the account of
thy free grace, in thy Son the Lord Jesus.

6thly and lastly, It does in all still declare God to be just, let his
proceedings be never so severe, Neh. 9.33. speaking there of the Afflictions
God had brought upon the Children of Israel for their sins, Howbeit, says he,
Thou art just in all thou have brought upon us, for thou have done right, but
we have done wickedly, Psalm. 51.4. That thou might be just when thou
speak, and clear when thou judge. I have sinned, and it is just with thee
to condemn me, whatsoever thou bring upon me, yet thou art just, for I have
transgressed thy commands.

2dly, The second Property is to depart and turn away from iniquity. Man since
the fall has a natural pronity and propensity to follow sin and vanity; but in
true repentance there is a forsaking and turning from sin, which the Schoolmen
call the Terminus a quo, the Term from which every sincere penitent does turn;
there must be a tergiversation and forsaking all Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. Let
every one that names the Name of Christ, depart from Iniquity.

There are these four things employed in our departing from Iniquity.

1. A turning from it, and forsaking of it; a bidding adieu to all and every
sin, Acts 26.18. To turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, Acts 3.26 God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning every one of you away from his Iniquity, Isa. 55.7. Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his thoughts; in which
Scripture it is evident, that to depart from sin, is to forsake it utterly, not
to depart from it as a man does from a Friend, only for a while, and with
intentions of returning again, but it must be a forsaking of it as one would do
a strange and unpleasant Country, designing never to return to it more.

2. Cleansing ones self, Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, Isa. 1, 16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil. 2 Timothy 2.21. If a man therefore
purge himself from these, scil. sins, he shall be a vessel to honor,
sanctified, and meet for the Masters use. There must be a purifying and
cleansing where there is right departing from iniquity; not only the outside,
but the inside must be washed, Jam. 4.8.
the heart as well as the hand: the fountain being corrupt and defiled, it must
be purified, before any pure streams will issue there.

3. The abstaining from all evil, both internal and external, 1 These. 5.22.
Abstain from all appearance of evil. If but the shadow of sin does appear, we
must post away from it; the very thoughts of evil God takes notice of,
therefore they are to be abstained from, for they are as really sins as if they
were acted externally, Jer. 4.14. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within
thee? Vain thoughts are offensive to God, and they are transgressions of his
holy Law, Prove. 24.9. The thoughts of foolishness is sin. As to External sins,
I know it will be granted by most, if not all, that we should abstain from
them, 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee youthful lusts, but follow righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.11.
Dearly Beloved, I beseech you as strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which War against the Soul.

4thly and lastly, The absession or departing from Iniquity, is to go the quite
contrary way, scil. the way of righteousness and holiness, 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee
youthful lusts, but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, with them that
call on the Lord with a pure heart. As there is the departing from the one,
there is a walking in the other; it is not enough to cease to do evil, but
there must be a learning to do well, Isa. 1.17. There is a way called the way
of holiness, which the righteous must walk in, Isa. 35.8. A highway shall be
there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness, the unclean shall
not pass over it. Christ has redeemed his not only from Iniquity, but that
they should be Zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.

3dly, The next property of Evangelic Repentance, is with the whole heart, to
turn to the Lord; and this is called the Terminus ad quem, the Term to which
every true penitent does turn; there were some we read of who returned, but not
to God, Hosea 7.16. They returned, but not to the most high: It may be they
turned from the gross and notorious sins, to private, and seemingly lesser
sins; the Prodigal turns covetous, and the openly profane become secret
hypocrites; but this is no repentance, for there must be a total turning to the
Almighty, as in Jer. 4.1. If thou will return, O Israel, says the Lord, return
unto me; to me, and to none other; for else it is but a mocking of God, and
cheating our own selves; to rest any where short of God, is not real
Repentance; for it is the nature of it (when wrought by the Spirit) to lead the
Soul home to God, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the Man of
Iniquity his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy
upon him; and to our God, for he will multiply to Pardon; There must be a
converting to God the Lord, for he is the Center of the Souls happiness: as the
needle once touched with the Loadstone, turns to the North Pole continually; so
the heart once touched with true Repentance, turns evermore to God; The
understanding, will, and affections, are all now Godward, as being the chief
Good.

4thly, The Nature of it is to bring forth fruit, Mat. 3.8. (...).
Bring forth fruit meet for Repentance; It may be rendered, Therefore make
manifest fruits worthy of Repentance: Let the fruits of Grace, Righteousness,
and holiness, declare your Repentance to be true; when the Tree brings forth no
fruit, we conclude it dead and sapless; so if there is no fruit to be found, no
amendment of life, no love to God and goodness, then we may certainly conclude
this work is not done upon the Soul; for the true tears of Repentance do so
water, and bedew the Soul, that forever after it is most fertile; it is not as
a Plant in a dry ground, but as a Tree planted by the Rivers of water, which
brings forth fruit in due season, Psalm. 1.3. If the ground brings forth nothing
but Briers and Thorns, it is near unto cursing; if sin does still predominate
over the Soul, and it is lead captive by lusts, and enormities, then it is far
from blessing, or partaking of that Evangellic grace of Repentance; for where
it is wrought by the Spirit of God, it does certainly bring forth fruit, in
some thirty, in some sixty, and in some a hundred fold, to the eternal
glorification of that God, who works all our works in us, and for us, Isa.
26.12. The property of true Repentance is not only to drop a tear for sin, or
to lament a little, whilst the Soul is under some apprehensions of future
Judgment, and then in a short time to turn again to folly; but it immediately
buds and brings forth fruit, and so continues to the end. Now humility grows on
the same Tree which before was heavy laden with Pride; now there is Love,
Meekness, Charity, exerting and putting forth their several fruits, where
formerly there was nothing but Envy, Hatred, Impatiency, 1 Cor. 7.11.
and Uncharitableness: Now the Soul does not only hate, fear, and forsake sin;
but it is constant in bringing forth fruit of obedience to all the known
Precepts of God, and Christ Jesus, Psalm. 34.14. It departs from sin, and does
good, and it seeks peace, all the ways that tends to peace.

3dly, This Repentance may be known by the effects of it in the soul; it has
various influences upon the heart and conscience. 1. It works a deadly hatred
and enmity in the Soul to sin, both internal and external; sin in it self, and
in the being of it, as well as in the practice of it, Romans 7.15. For what I
would, that do I not; but what I hate, that I do; here the Apostle had a
Combat, and was sometimes overcome to do that which he would not; but yet he
hated it with his whole Soul; for he had tasted of the bitterness of sin, and
therefore could have no Love or likeing for it, Psalm. 119.4. says the holy
prophet, I hate every false way, and verse. 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy
Law do I Love. This goodman had sometime been tutored in the School of
repentance, and had learned the Lesson of the Rod, by which he was Lashed for
his transgressions; he felt the smart of it, and Learned the cause, which was
Sin and Iniquity; therefore now he abhors and detests every vain way; therefore
you may make trial by this, whether your repentance has been true; for as it
is in nature, we are apt to hate those things we are sensible have prejudiced
or pained us, so the Soul cannot but hate Sin, which it now finds and is
sensible that it is wronged by it, Pro. 8.26.

2ly, A timidity and fearfulness of falling into Sin any more, or to be
ensnared by the devices of Satan. This effect Godly sorrow and repentance had
upon the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.11. For behold this self same thing that ye
sorrowed after a Godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, what
indignation, yea what fear. The Soul now is so fearful of Sin (when grace is
active) that it is afraid to look upon temptations, therefore it cries out with
David, Turn away mine Eyes from beholding vanity. When the Soul has been
scorched with a sense of Gods wrath and displeasure for Sins and Iniquitys
perpetrated, and committed against him; it is made afraid of Sin, when before
like the silly Child, it could play with the fire of Sin, till it had burned it
self, and brought griefs and wounds upon the Soul; the Soul is so terrified at
the sight of Sin, that it flys from the very appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5.2.

3ly, It works a watchfulness in the Soul against all Sin for the future, 2
Cor. 7.11. For behold this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a Godly
Sorrow, what carefulness it wrought in you? The word signifies a careful
Studiousness with great intensness of mind. O how careful and watchful is the
Soul now, Magna animi intentio and desiderium. Phil. Mel.
lest it be caught in the Devils Trap again; it is very mindful of that duty,
Christ enjoined his disciples to be found, in Mat. 13.33. Take ye he^d, watch
and pray, verse. 37. what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. The true
repentant lays a charge and command upon every faculty of the Soul, and every
member of the Body, to stand upon their particular guard, because of the Enemies
continual assaults.

4ly, Fixed resolusions and covenanting with God, to keep his Law in violably,
as far forth as the Soul is assisted by the blessed spirit. David says, I have
sworn, and I will perform it, Ezra. 9.4, 5, 6. to 15.
that I will keep thy righteous judgments, in the 9. Chap. of Ezra. Ezra and
the People were assembled together, and they confessed and bewailed their sins
and transgressions in the bitterness of their Souls, and in the 10. Chap. They
are covenanting with God, verse. 3. Now therefore let us make a covenant with
our God. They were ready to covenant with God, to put away all their
abominations, and to keep his righteous judgments. The like we find in the 9.
of Nehem. They had kept a sollemn Fast, and the Levites confessed Gods
goodness, and their wickedness in departing from the Living God, verse. 38. And
because of this we make a sure covenant, and write it, and our Princes,
Levites, and Priests Seal unto it. What effect this true Godly sorrow had upon
them in general, where it is right, it has the same upon every one in
particular: the Soul that has smarted by Sin, and sincerely lamented over it,
and repented for it, O what resolves! what engagements! what sollemn promises
does it make; that it will not live in Sin, but will walk in the paths of Gods
commandments, and keep his precepts to the end. This is the resolved purpose,
(I say) of every individual person that has evangelically repented of his
transgressions.

5ly, Another effect is a constant Love to, and sincere desires after holiness,
2 Cor. 7.11. what vehement desire (says the Apostle) has this Godly sorrow
wrought in you? a desire after holiness, after more grace, the Soul pants after
it, because it loves it; there is Sacra fames non auri, sed sanctimoniae, a
greedy and a vehement appetite, not after Gold, but after Grace and Sanctity; 2
Pet. 1.4. Heb. 12.14. Exodus 15.11.
now it clearly perceives that holiness is a most excellent thing, a beam of
the Son of Righteousness, a Ray of Glory, the Finger-work of the divine Spirit,
the very Image of the Eternal being, the nature and essence of the glorious
Jehovah, the meet quallification of those who expect a fruition of the
beatificial vision. Where this has gotten possession, there is peace,
exhaltation, and tryumphing in God, and Christ, therefore the Soul loves it
with a permanent and fixed Love; she greatly Loves it, and also the means that
tend to the obtaining of so great and glorious a good. The Soul Loves the
Spirit because he is the efficient; the word of God which is the instrument,
Psalm. 119.9.

6thly, and Lastly, Peace of conscience, by the application of the Blood of
Jesus Christ, now there is a sweet and pleasant calmness in the Soul; when
before there was nothing but continual preturbations; one wave tossing and
rolling upon the neck of another, scil. Trouble and vexation of Spirit. Where
Lusts domineer, and corruptions prevail, there is nothing but perpetual
Commotions and distractions; but when this Legion is ejected and cast out, and
the Soul has bathed it self in the tears of Repentance, and is made pure by
the Blood of the Lord Jesus; O then what inward sedateness, and tranquillity is
there. Sin (whilst a Man remains in an impenitent State and condition,) like a
Madman rages in the Soul; but when Christ brings the Soul to himself by the
weeping-cross of Repentance, he then says to it, as he did to the Sea, Peace,
be still; or as he did to his Disciples, Jo. 14.1. Let not your Hearts be
troubled; and Verse. 27. My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you;
not as the World gives, give I unto you, let not your Hearts be troubled. The
Gospel of Christ, is a Gospel of peace, Romans 10.15. and Ephesians. 6.15. Because it
proclaims Peace, and speaks peace from God and Christ unto poor wounded and
distressed Consciences; the Blood of Christ is the only sanctifying Medicine,
which the Gospel holds forth to cure wounded consciences. Thus I have finished
the first particular.

I come now to the second particular grace, by which a person may know that he
is come to Christ; and it is this, the Spirit has wrought the grace of Faith
in the Soul; for it is by Faith the Soul apprehends and lays hold upon the Lord
Jesus. Although there are four kinds of Faith, yet there is but one true
Evangelick and saving Faith; and my business must be to acquaint you how you
may discern this from the others, which will never end in salvation, and I
shall do it with as much brevity as may be, for the discussing so great a
question as this is, how may I know that I have saving Faith? I answer, it may
be known these four ways. 1. By the Author or Efficient. 2. By the Objects. 3.
By the Nature of it. and 4. By the effects.

1. By the Author, and he is the Spirit of God; for no Man can work Faith in
his own Heart, or can believe by his own Power, it is a supernatural and Divine
work, Faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. It is the work of the Spirit of God,
Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of the Spirit, are Love, Peace, Joy, Goodness, Faith. If
the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, has not been at work
upon thy Soul; never conceit thy self to have any Grace, we find this work once
attributed to Christ, Heb. 12.2. Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith;
but this must be understood, Agit filius per spiritum sanctum. Ursin.
* that Christ does it by his holy Spirit, and the Spirit works powerfully and
with the irresistible efficacy; he makes the Soul believe those things now,
which all Men or Angels could never have done, if they had Preached Millions of
years: it now believes unseen things, an unseen Jesus, and an invissible glory,
1 Pet. 1.8. If you have no more Faith then what your own reason or judgment
helps you to, or the teachings of men has principled you with, do not conclude
it to be saving, but Sinful; the Spirit is the Efficiently, and works
instrumentally by the word of God, by which he brings the Soul to believe in,
and close with Jesus Christ.

2ly, It is known by the objects of it. 1. The Word of God; that is an object
of true Faith; the Soul is brought to believe the verity and certainty of it;
therefore it believes not because Man says, so and so you must believe, but
because the word of the Living God says it, as the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.19. We
have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, to which ye do well to take heed, as
unto a light that shines in a dark place, Materia quae objecti rationem habet,
communiter, quidem Dei verbum est, propriae vero gratuitae promissiones in
Christo fundatae. Wol. de fide salvis.
until the day dawn, and the day Star arise in your hearts. She believes the
reports of men no farther, than they concur with the clear and evident truth of
the word of God; for as the Prophet says, to the Law and to the Testimony,
Isa. 8.20.

2ly, Faith eyes the promises therein contained which relate unto and are
founded in Christ, as one says the material cause of saving faith, (which may
be termed an object) is commonly the Word of God, but properly the gracious
promises founded in Christ. It is said, 2 Cor. 1.20. All the promises of God
are in him, i. e. in Christ. Says God, by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 43.25. I
will blot out thy transgressions for my one name sake, and will not remember
thy Sins. 2 Cor. 5.19. The Apostle tells us, God was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. So that we see what
God promises in one place to do for his own namesake; in the other we find
made good in Christ; promises of Peace, Pardon, Grace, and Glory upon the
account of Christ; are the objects of a saving Faith. For indeed it is by
laying the mouth of Faith to the breast of the promises, that the Soul sucks and
draws nourishment by which it grows in grace; for had not Faith a promise of
such and such mercys, benefits and Privileges to go to at all times, it would
grow languid and decay; it would pine away. The promises by the assistance of
the holy Spirit keep Faith alive and active, vigorous and strong, as it is said
of Abraham, that Father of the Faithful, Romans 4.15.20. He staggered or doubted,
not at the promise of God, through unbelief, but was strong in Faith, giving
Glory to God. But how came he to be so strong? but by Eying the Promise, and
the power of that God that made it, verse. 21. And being fully persuaded, or
knowing most certainly, that what he had promised, he was able certainly to
perform. It was the apprehention of the promise that held his head above water;
so I say, if thy Faith be of a salvific and evangelic kind, it has an Eye to
the promises of God, which contain those spiritual Blessings made over through
Christ to the Soul.

3ly, And that principally, it has Christ for an object, Act. 20.21.
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. He is the
foundation for Faith to build upon, as 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can no man
lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. The Gospel throughout directs
the Eye of Faith unto the Lord Jesus, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus who is the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, Joh. 3.16. God so Loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, shall not Perish
but have everlasting Life. That is no saving Faith, which has not an Eye to
the Lord Jesus. But having spoken more fully to this before, I shall pass it
over, and come to the third particular, by which it may more evidently be
discovered.

3ly, The nature and propertys of it do make it manifest. 1. It cleanses and
puryfieth the heart: true Faith and an unsanctified Heart, are never
concomitants, or coinhabitants, Acts 15.9. And put no difference between us and
them, Purifying their Hearts by Faith. A defiled Gentile, as well as a chosen
Jew, is purified by Faith, for Faith apprehends the right means of purifying,
scil. the Blood of Christ, it will not suffer corruption to remain predominant
in the Soul; therefore the People of God, are said to be a holy Temple, for the
Holy God to dwell and abide in, 2 Cor. 6.16.

2ly, It lifts the Heart above the World, and makes it come off Conqueror, 1 John 5.4, 5. Whosoever is Born of God overcomes the World, and this is the
Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. Verse. 5. Who is he that
overcomes the World, but he that believes that the Lord Jesus is the Son of
God, Faith is a World-conquering Grace; it can presentiate future things, it
looks to the Land that is a far off, Isa. 33.17. Faith clothes the Soul with
the Sun of Righteousness, and gets the Moon of this World under his Feet, it
regards these things, but as perishing and transitory; the things of the future
and sempiternal world to be most Glorious, Permanent and abiding. It was by
Faith that all the Worthy Champions of Christ, have conquered this Base World,
and followed their Lord and Master, through the greatest difficultys; I might
instance in many; Moses Refused all the Pomp and Splendour of Pharaohs Court,
the Riches and Grandeur of the World, and made a voluntary choice of suffering
with the People of God, and esteemed the reproach of Christ, greater Riches
then all the Riches of Egypt; but how did this valliant Conqueror break through
all these difficultys? what could not Courts? nor Kingdoms? nor Terrors of a
King? nor Treasures? nor Horrors? nor Displeasures? conquer one Moses? such an
Army as here was set in array against him, the least of which is enough to foil,
if not to conquer the greatest Monarch, if Faith be not his shield; Ephesians. 6.16.
Heb. 11.24, 25., 26, 27.
but all these cords were too weak to hold him, whilst the sevenfold Lock of
Faith remained, his strength abode firm, and his bow abode in strength; it was
by Faith he did all this, and there were two main Pillars, which supported him
and his Faith; the first was looking to him who is invisible, i. e. God. The
second was the prospecting and looking forward to the recompense of reward. I
might number up many more Instances; but in short, all the Servants of Christ
have this conquering Faith, Romans 8.37.
for the nature of it, although one acts inferior to another, by reason of the
different degrees, some being not called to that trial, as others are, but all
have a measure of this, Romans 8.37. Nay in all these things (speaking of several
sorts of afflictions) we are more then Conquerers through him that Loved us.
Every Christian is to Fight the Fight of Faith and Righteousness; and in a
Combat there is a conqueror, and the Conquered; either we Conquer the World, or
the World Conquers us; but if we come off Conquerers, it must be by the Shield
of Faith.

3ly, It is a laboring working Faith, in opposition to an Idle Faith, Jam.
2.22. See thou how Faith wrought with his Work, and by Works was Faith made
perfect? That is, by his works it was manifest, that his Faith was a perfect
and right Gospel one; true Faith is opperative, it is active in putting the Soul
upon all obedience unto God; as it did Abraham in that difficult Service he was
called to; by Faith he went through with it, Heb. 11.17. By Faith Abraham when
he was tried offered his Son Isaac. Faith put Noah upon his obedience unto God,
when all others neglected their Salvation, and the Preach-of Noah unto them,
Heb. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God, of things not seen as yet, he
being religiously afraid (as the word may be rendered) prepared an Ark to the
saving of his house. (...),
A right saving Faith wherever it is, Religiose and solisite cavet ne Deum
offendat.
puts the Soul upon the performance of all dutys, enjoined and commanded by
God; it does not rest only in a bare assent to the revealed will of God,
saying, it is true, and so sits down there, and proceeds no farther, but it is
up and doing for God, Christ, and the Soul.

4ly, It is a Living Faith, it works a principal of Life in the Heart where it
is wrought, The just shall live by Faith, In opposition to a dead faith.
Romans 1.17. Heb. 10.38. It is a quickening Principle which inlivens all other
graces, and keeps them in motion; they would all faint and Dye, if Faith did
not keep them alive, Gal. 2.20. I am Crucified with Christ; nevertheless I
Live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the Life I now Live in the Flesh,
I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
Here the Apostle clearly manifests how he lived; it was by a living Principle
of saving Faith, apprehending a living Jesus.

5ly, and Lastly, It is a lasting and permanent, in opposition to a temporary
and perishing Faith: many pretend to believe, but it is for a time, like the
Stony-ground Hearers, which rejoice to day, and by reason of some afflictions
are offended to morrow; but now true Faith is abiding, Mat. 13.20.21.
growing and increasing daily, 1 Jo. 3.9. Whosoever is born of God sineth not,
for his seed remains in him. This Seed remains firm there, because it is
sowed, not by Satan, but by the Spirit of God, Heb. 10.39. We are not of those
who draw back into perdition; but them who believe to the saving of the Soul.
According to that of Christ, he that induers to the End shall be saved. There
must be a Perseverance in Faith, if we expect the Crown of Righteousness; for
Christ will Crown none but conquerers; and none can conquer unless they
believe, and none believe but them who persevere in it.

4ly It is known by its effects, I shall mention only these two, Joy, and Peace.

1. Joy and exaltation, Romans 15.13. Now the God of Peace fill you with all Joy
and Peace in believing. Joy is a Fruit that Grows upon the root of Faith; what
has made the Servants of Christ in all Ages Rejoice, when they met with
nothing in the Inn of this World, but rough Entertainment, but their believing
in Christ? 1 Pet. 1.8. The Apostle in verse. 7. tells the believers of the trial
of their Faith, and the preciousness of it in the day of Christ, and says in
the 8. verse. whom having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not,
yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Faith assends
by the wings of Love and Zeal, and fixes it self above the Clouds, and takes
a view of the celestial Canaan, and the Glory of the new Jerusalem, she takes a
survey of those blessed immunities, eternal felicitys, and that Immortal glory
the Saints shall be environed and invested with, when they come to enjoy
Christ, who is (...), all and in all, Col. 3.11. and from the blessed Prospect
of these things, Faith makes a return and descent into the Soul, implets and
fills it with divine joy, even to the supreme confines of it; it tells such
storys of the Love of God and Christ and the blessed Spirit, to the believer,
that it does conflagate and inflame the Soul, and makes it rejoice perpetually
in the Lord, according to that exhortation of the Apostle, rejoice in the Lord
always. May I speak with reverence, Faith penetrates into the very Bosom of
the Almighty, and sees there is Love, Peace, and reconciliation for the
believing Soul, it looks into the records of Heaven, and can read, Thy Sins are
forgiven, and thy Iniquitys are blotted out. It can look into the Lambs book of
Life, and read the name of the believer, imprinted there; this makes the Soul
exalt and triumph with Songs of praise; what made Paul and Silas Sing and
Rejoice, when their Feet was incastriated, their Bodies with Stripes vulnerated,
Act. 16.22, 23, 24, 25.
in an interior obscure Prison; denied the solace of that which nature is very
ambitious of, scil. their Eyes to behold the Sun; but this a lively Faith,
which devocated and fetched down new comfort to their Souls? Faith when Active,
makes the Soul rejoice in God and Christ, and in divine and spiritual objects.

2ly, Peace is another effect of that Faith which is wrought by the Spirit of
God; as in that forequoted place, Romans 15.13. The God of Peace, fill you with
all joy and Peace in believing. Peace of Conscience from sound principles, is a
happy privilege and great blessing. To be under the racks of a disquieted and
tormented Conscience, O what a mercy is it, to enjoy peace and a Calm within
the Soul, when there is nothing but tempests and tumults abroad! what a
comfortable condition is this? God has made a promise of Peace to believers,
Isa. 26.3. I will keep him in Peace whose mind is Staid upon me, because he
trusts in me. Christ gives his Peace to Believers, as he did to his
Disciples, Jo. 14.27. My Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you. The
Believer is at Peace with the Law of God, because it is satisfied by the Death
of Christ, at peace with God the Father, because he is well pleased in his Son,
to be reconciled to poor Sinners, he is at peace with himself because his Sins
are pardoned, but he is never at peace again with Sin, or Satan, because they
are Enemies to this true Peace, which believers do partake of. The believers
peace is not remaining in Sin; but it is a peace from Sin, from the guilt and
power of it.

3ly, In those who are come unto Christ, the Spirit has wrought the grace of
Love, for as the Apostle says, 1 Jo. 4.8. He that Loves not, knows not God,
for God is Love. This is the great Gospel Grace as the Apostle Paul calls it, 1
Cor 13.13. Jo. 13.35.
Now there abides Faith, Hope and Love, these three, but the greatest of these
is Love. This is the distinguishing grace, by which we are known to be Christ's
Disciples, it declares our Divine original, That we are Born from above, 1 Jo.
4.7. it manifests our near union, and communion with God, 1 Jo. 4.16. God is
Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him. But I
shall speak to this Query, how may one know, that the grace of Love is wrought
by the Spirit in the Soul? The Resolution of which may be known by these two
means, scil. the propertys and objects of it.

1. As to the propertys of it, it is Divine, for the Spirit of God is the
Author of it, Gal. 5.22.
it descends from above, Jam. 1.17. Every good gift, and every perfect gifts,
is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights. Now Love is one of
these good and perfect gifts, 1 Jo. 4.7.
for there is not any thing in the new Creature, which is not the Finger-work
of God, all grace flows from him through Christ by his holy Spirit into the
Soul; Love is a grace that is Immortal, for when Faith is turned into fruition,
and hope into possession, this divine Love Remains, (...).
1 Cor. 13.8. Love never fails. It is a Seed that never dies, a fire, that
once being kindled, never more will be extinguished; it transformes the Soul
into the very Image of God, and makes it most like unto its maker, it is
Divine, in that it Loves, Joys, and takes complacency in pure, holy, and divine
objects; it is not Like Carnal Love which finds nothing but the perishing
Creature to diligate and delight in; but it seeks better and more durable
objects, because it is of a Divine original, 1 Jo. 4.7. Love is from God.
Therefore there are reflex acts toward the Author and giver of it.

2ly, This Love is sublime, it is high and lofty (although not puffed up with
vain pride) because it scorns to fix its felicity in a vain Perishing world;
the base things of this World are not objects noble enough for this excellent
grace, it is of a noble extraction, and therefore Loves and delights in Divine
and noble objects. David who was a Man after Gods own Heart, was full of this
Divine and sublime Love, therefore we have him often expressing his Love to
God, to the Law, far above Gold or Silver, or the perishing trash of a sinful
World, Psalm. 119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better to me then thousands of
Gold and Silver. The beauty of this inferior World, is but deformity and
blackness, compared with the Splendour and glory of those divine objects, which
this Love is fixed upon; the Honors and Riches of this World are but Dung and
Dross to the Soul, who has this sublime Love, Phil. 3.8. Ye doubtless, and I
count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus
my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and count them but
(...) dogs-meat, that I may win Christ. What made the Apostle thus to trample
upon these terrene things? and so to stain the glory of those things which are
most excellent in the Eyes of most men! why his Heart overflowed with this
divine, sublime, and seraphick Love; this is the true nature of evangelick
Love, it Loves the World and the things of it, with a World-like Love, which is
cold, indifferent, and mutable; the Heart that flows with this Love ever ebbs
and runs low to the things of this world, because it looks upon them as not
worthy of its Love.

3ly, It Loves superlatively all divine things; it does not only Love in a high
degree, but in the highest, even with all the Heart, with all the Mind, and
with all the Strength; God and Christ are to be beloved beyond all measure, as
one says, the right manner of Loving God, is, Modus diligendi deum est ut
diligatur quantum potest diligi. Bern.
that he may be beloved as much as he can be beloved. This evangellick Love
seats it self in the most superlative place of the Soul; there is no comparison
between this Love and the Love of the Creature.

4ly, This Love is sincere. Grace be with all those who Love the Lord Jesus in
Sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. If there is not Sincerity at the Root, besure the Fruit
is corrupt; Hypocrisy is the destruction of many, but Sincerity, Integrity,
and Uprightness preserves the Soul; wherefore were Noah, Job, and others
counted Perfect? it was not because they were Perfect in their obedience, but
because their Love was Sincere; this makes the Scripture give such an excellent
Charactor of them. Sincerity is (as it were the Salt which seasons every duty)
and a Sincere Love (although but weak in the actings) is that which savours of
a right Gospel Spirit.

5ly, It is a fervent Love, Romans 12.11. Fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord. It
is true that this Love may not always, Seraphin like, be in a bright burning
flame; but yet where once it is wrought by the Spirit, it never after is quite
extinguished; for when it flames not it does burn, and when it burns not
clearly, there are some scintilla's and Sparks, which keep it from quite going
out; and when the Cinders of Corruption are blown away, it kindles up into a
flame again. Let one who has this fervent Love through invigilancy fall into
Sin, or neglect duty, it cools and damps the fire of his affection for a time;
but let him come again to the ordinances, and by Faith Drink a draught of the
warm Blood of Christ, and by Prayer blow up the heat of his affections; it will
prove but like the Water the Smith Casts upon the fire, which seemingly Puts it
out, but when he has blown a while, it flames more violently, I say not this
to encourage any to make trial by Sin; but if it be so with any, that now find
their Love but cold which formerly was fervent, they may see the cause, and be
wise to improve and apply the Remedy; this Love I say is Ardent Love, which
warms the heart, for it is a ray from the Sun of righteousness, which sets the
Soul all in a Divine fever.

6thly, This Love is total; I mean, it is with the whole heart. God hates a
divided Heart, or as the Hebrew has it, a Heart and a Heart; one as it were
for God, and another for the World and Sin, but God will have the whole or
none; therefore it is said, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God, Mat. 22.37. Deuteronomy.
6.5.
with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. See here how
many Times (...), all is expressed; as God is of an indivisible essence, so he
would not have that which is his due to be divided; now the true Saint is very
well content that God should have all; he would have none to be Copartner with
God and Christ, but desires that his Love and affections may wholly be fixed
and set upon the right objects; when God says to the person who has this
Love, my Son, give me thy heart, he is ready to respond, and say, Lord here am
I, take the whole of my heart; nay, take the all of my all, let me be but thine
and that for ever.

7thly and lastly, It is a constant and permanent Love; as Christ said unto his
Disciples, Jo. 15.9. Continue ye in my love; so may I say to you, See that this
love abide and continue in you; For if your Love be of an Evangellick nature,
it is a permanent Love, 1 Cor. 13.8. Love never fails; Christ spoke of some
whose Love should fail them, but that which is durable ends in Salvation, Mat.
24.12.13. Because Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold, but
he that indures to the end, the same shall be saved; He whose Love keeps warm
and abides, shall certainly obtain Salvation, as the love of God toward his
People is an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. So he expects that their love should
be a permanent love. God hates those who draw back, Heb. 10.38. but it is the
nature of this love to press forward, to increase and aspire till it comes unto
the Center, from whence it came. He that has this love maintains it in
adversity, as well as prosperity; when the Clouds do darken the Face of God, as
well as when the Sunshine of this love, beams forth upon the Soul; many of the
Saints have experienced this; they have found their love hottest, when their
afflictions have been heavyest when most shaken by the World, they have been
most confirmed in their love to God and Christ. I come now to the objects of
this spiritual evangelick love, and I shall speak of them first negatively,
showing what are not the objects of this love. 2ly, possitively, what they are.

1. Negatively, what are not the objects. 1. Not Sin neither in ones self or in
another. The Soul that has this Divine love in it cannot but hate all Sin,
Psalm. 119.101. and 104. I have refrained my feet from every evil way, v. 104. I
hate every false way, v. 113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy law do I love. As
God is said to be of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity; so the Saints are of
purer Hearts then to love Iniquity; Sin has brought bitterness to their souls,
therefore they now abhor it, they have no love or liking at all for Sin; it
does not fix upon Iniquity, as a delectable and lovely object, but hates and
flees from all base lusts which seek to ensnare the Soul.

2ly, It is not fixed upon Satan, for although no Creature, mearly as a
Creature, is to be the object of our hatred, because it declares something of
the wisdom and power of the Creator, in giving existence and being to such a
Creature; yet Satan in his Sinful lapsed State, and condition as an Enemy to
God, Christ, and the well being of our immortal Souls, ought to be the object
of our hatred, 1 Pet. 5.8. For he goes about like a Roaring lion seeking whom
he may devour. He makes it his great employment to effect the ruin of poor
Souls, therefore he is become the object of hatred.

3ly, It is not placed upon this te^rene, dying, and perishing world; love to
God and Christ, in that measure and degree as it should be; cannot consist with
an eager and earnest love of the world, Jam. 4.4. Ye Adulterers, and
Adulteresses, know ye not that the Friendship of the World is enmity with God?
whosoever therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God. This is
further manifest in 1 Jo. 2.15. Love not the World, neither the things of the
World, for if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him.
Here the divine Apostle gives a reason, which withal proves that these two are
not consistent; for as Christ said, Luk 16.13. You cannot serve God and Mammon,
one will have the pre-eminence; and where this true evangellick Love is, there
the Love to the World is but flat and cold.

2ly, And possitively, what are the true adequate and constant objects of this
Evangellick Love in general, all spiritual divine and holy objects, to which
our Love is commanded or required by the Holy Word of God; there is nothing
which the believer apprehends to be truly divine, but the Soul Loves entirely,
fervently, and constantly; for these objects are suitable to the State of a
Believer: he can perceive a greater excellence in them, then in any other;
therefore the Soul is carried forth to love them above all others: but more
particularly, and yet succinctly.

1. God is the object of this Evangellic Love; he is the chief and supreme
good, therefore supreamly to be beloved; even with all the heart, with all the
Soul, and with all the strength, Mat. 22.37. The Soul that is come to Christ by
believing in him, loves God not only as a Creator, but as a reconciled Father,
in and through Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. Now it looks upon it self as oblieg'd and
bound to love God who has manifested such Love, Joh. 3.16.
as to give his only begotten Son, that whoever believes should not perish, but
have everlasting life: if God out of his infinite love had not been willing to
give his Son to die for Sinners, Christ would not have been willing to come,
and give himself for, and to those who are his. The Father out of his Love
elected some to be Heirs of God, and Coheirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. Now the
consideration of these things does inflame the heart with Love to God, as the
Apostle says, 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us. The fruits
and effects of the Love of God, shed abroad in the Soul, makes it now to love
God with an impartial and superlative Love; Modus diligendi Deum est sine modo.
Bern.
it Loves God (as one says the measure of loving him should be) without
measure.

2ly, Christ Jesus is the object of this Love. O how the Believer loves Christ!
the Soul is so fired with Love to the Lord Jesus, that it knows not how to
express it: words are too mean, actions too low, and the Soul thinks all too
little to express and manifest its Love unto the Lord Jesus. When the Believer
considers Christ in the transcendent excellency of his person; that he is God
blessed for ever; that he is the Eternal Son of God, beloved of him, adored of
Angels; then he says with the Spouse, Cant. 5.10. My beloved is the chiefest
among ten thousand: and as it is in the 16. verse. He is altogether lovely.
Further, when he considers the extremity, infiniteness, and ignominy of the
Passion and Suffering Christ underwent for him, and that he should express his
Love at so dear a rate to one altogether indeserving; it does so inflame the
Soul, that it vehemently longs to get above the clouds into the bosom of Jesus;
and that it may drink of the celestial Fountain and Springs of life, Rev. 7.17.
Moreover, when it considers what Christ has purchased, and what he is doing
now for his Elect and Redeemed ones; that he has procured Pardon,
Reconciliation with God, Grace, and Glory, Life, and eternal Bliss; for those
who were sometimes dead in Trespasses and Sins, 2 Timothy 4.8. 1 Pet. 5.4.
Ephesians. 2.5. and that he continues interceeding by the virtue of his Blood and
Merits, that all his may have these blessings confered upon them, and at last
be crowned with a Diadem of Righteousness and Glory. O the consideration of
these things does so incendiate the Soul with the flames of Divine Love, that
many waters cannot quench it, neither can floods drown it, Cant. 8.7. nay,
Afflictions, Persecutions, or Death, cannot separate this Soul from the Love of
Christ. When the Believer looks upon Christ, in his Offices, and in that near
Relation between them; this does still elevate and heighten his Love; so that
the Soul is full, and as it were, immerged and swallowed up with Love to
Christ, who is the Head and the all of Believers, Col. 3.11.

3ly, This Divine Evangelick Love, has for its object the holy Spirit; he who
is the alone Author, is now become the Object: the Spirit is he who infuseth
and operateth this grace in the Soul, Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of the Spirit is
Love: now, seeing this is a Fruit of the Spirit, it has reflex actings; so that
it leads the Soul to love affectionately and entirely the holy Spirit, knowing
that except he cooperates, nothing can profit the Soul, and that if he work
not, Joh. 16.15.
there will be no exception of grace; it is he which leads and guides into the
way of all truth, which is the alone way of Salvation; he teaches the Soul to
know God and Christ, and to know it self: he fills the heart with Divine
blessings, which make the Believer greatly to admire and love him. Try your
Love by these objects; see whether Carnal or Divine objects have the Supremacy
in your affections; for these are infallible ways to try your Love by, and to
discern a true Evangelic Love from all others whatsoever.

4ly, Holy Angels are greatly beloved of Believers, because they are to be
their Companions to Eternity, and bear part in that Celestial quire, where they
shall sing eternal Hallelujahs to their God and Father in the Kingdom that
cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. and further, because they are a Lifeguard to
them here, and Ministering Spirits sent forth for the good of all those who are
Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14.

5ly, All Saints as such, are the objects of this Divine Love, without any
distinction or difference. Because they perceive their Fathers Image shine
forth in such; therefore that which is so amiable in them, does attract and
draw their affection to it. The Apostle John in several places puts this down
as a Character, by which we may prove our Love if it be right; nay, the only
way to know whether we Love God or no, 1 John 4.20. If a man say I love God,
and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for he who loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? David says, Psalm. 16.2,
3. O my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord, my goodness
extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the
excellent ones, in whom is all my delight. Here this holy man declares that the
Saints were excellent in his eye, and all the delight of his Soul; but why were
they so? but because they were Saints, they were holy ones, born from above,
and the children of the most high.

6ly, Faithful Ministers of the Gospel, in an especial manner have an interest
in this love. The persons that have this right love, cannot but esteem of the
Ministers of Christ, and love them because they are Messengers and Ambassadors
sent from God for the good of their Souls 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God. Their feet are beautiful because they
proclaim the glad tidings of Salvation, and are Co-workers with God in the
conversion of sinners, from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan, to
serve the living God, 1 Cor. 3.9. for we are (...), Co-labourers with God; now
upon these and the like considerations, this Evangellic Love flows forth toward
the Ministers of Christ; and it is manifested three ways. 1. by obeying them in
the Lord, and doing those things which they enjoin from the word of truth, as
Christ says, He that hears you, hears me, and he that receives you,
receives me, and he that keeps my sayings, will keep yours also, Jo. 15.20.
Obedience in these things is a great demonstration of a real and sincere Love.
2. It is manifest by the high estimation of them, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders
that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor
in the word and Doctrine. There is (...) Maxim principally, those who are
laborious in preaching the Doctrines of the Gospel; it is evident that we do
not love that person, who we esteem not according to his deserts and degree. 3.
In allowing them a cheerful and competent maintenance, according to the
capacity of them over whom the Lord has set them, to feed them in the way to
life eternal.

7ly. The objects of the Love are the word of God and his Commandments; and
this is a certain rule to try thy Love by; for if a person should propose this
Question to me, how may I do to know whether I have a true Evangellic Love
which is a fruit of the Spirit of God? I would answer, by this, See if you love
the Commandments and the word of God; as the Apostle John says, 1 Epist. 5.3.
By this we know, we are the Children of God, if we love God, and keep his
Commandments; he that loves me not, keeps not my sayings; Here we may
clearly and evidently perceive that a Love to the Commandments does demonstrate
our Love to God and Christ to be real, and if it be so, then we may conclude
that it will never fail, as 1 Cor. 13.8. But will endure for ever. How did
David declare himself to be a man after Gods own heart; but by this, in
expressing the greatness of his Love to the law of God? as in Psalm. 119.72.97.
verse. 163. O how I love thy Law, it is my Meditation all the day long, I love
it above Gold and silver. So in Psalm. 19.10. But how few David's are there! How
few are there of his Spirit to be found in the World! on the contrary, most
trample under foot the Law of God; and esteem Gold, and trash, and Lusts above
it; but yet the true believer and disciple of Christ does greatly love that
holy law; and with the Apostle, delights in it after the inward man, Romans 7.22.

8ly, This Love has Souls for its objects. As it was the greatness of Christ's
Love to Souls (next to the obedience to his Fathers will) which brought him
from Heaven to Earth, and made him willing to divest himself of his glory, and
take upon him the form of a Servant. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
So they who have this Love of Christ wrought in their Souls by the holy
Spirit, are vehemently carried out with Love and desire after the good of
Souls. He that in some measure apprehends what a great thing it is to be saved,
cannot but desire the Salvation of all others. If upon inquiry you find no
sensible and real Love to Souls, then conclude there is but little of this
grace of Love within you. The person in whose heart this grace is implanted,
pants after nothing more than the eternal Salvation of his own Soul, and the
Souls of his Relations, Friends, and acquaintance. It may be said of them, as
it is of God, 1 Timothy 2.5. They would have all men be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth. What was it that made the Apostles and Servants of
Christ in all Ages suffer so much, and yet willingly? It was these two
Principles. First, their Love to Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14. For the Love of Christ
constrains us. Secondly, their zealous love and desire of the everlasting
salvation of Immortal Souls; they were willing (according to that Scripture) to
lay down their Lives for the good of the Brethren, scil. Believers. Now see if
your Love be such that you earnestly desire the well being of the Souls of
those who are about you, or related to you.

9ly, The objects of this Love are all the institutions of Christ. O how lovely
are his Ordinances to his beloved ones! Prayer is Lovely and aimable because it
is the Key that unlocks the Gates of Heaven, and opens the very Bosom of God,
so that he is ready to confer plentiful treasures of grace upon this divine
Lover; hearing of Gods word is delectable to such an one, because therein the
Love, glory, and Transcendent excellencys of Christ are displayed, and the will
of the Father clearly revealed to the Soul, and thence the Soul derives and
finds grace communicated out of the fullness of Christ, because it is the means
of conveyance; the Sacraments are amiable, because they are Seals of Heaven, by
which God makes over himself and all to believers, and assures them of the
stability, faithfulness, and everlastingness of his Love, in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, the believer by Faith beholds Christ broken and bleeding for
his Sins, and it becomes nourishment to the Soul; in it the Soul injoys
communion with God, Christ, and Blessed Saints; these Privileges render the
ordinances very lovely and delectable to Believers. I might run through others,
as Reading, Meditating, and holy conferrence which are all very lovely to the
Evangellic Lover.

10ly, and lastly, Grace and Holiness these bare so much of God in them, that
the Apostle calls them the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given to us
exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these you might be partakers of
the Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the World through
Lust. Grace has a lovely aspect, and holiness shines forth like a Beam of
Heaven in the Eyes of them whose Hearts are full of Love to Divine objects;
Grace and Holiness being the Image of God, and the way and means through Christ
to Heaven and happiness, are entirely beloved; the Divine Lover is so enamoured
with the excellency and true worth of Grace, that he esteems it above all
terrene objects; and the Soul wishes nothing more than to be full even to the
brim, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
with this celestial Liquor. And for Holiness the Soul is ambitious to attain
to the perfection of it, To be Holy as God is Holy in all manner of
conversation. But seeing it cannot acquire that Perfection in this Life, it is
so in Love with Sanctity, that it pants and Prays, and longs to get to that
state of Glory, wherein it is not perfecting, but perfect in Holiness; not
cleansing, but cleansed and purified from all Iniquitys. By these things you
may know whether the Spirit has wrought the Grace of love in your Souls.

4ly, The Fourth grace is Hope; This is numbered among the three graces, 1 Cor.
13.13. And now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, but the greatest of these is
Charity. I shall speak to this and the other two, scil. Humility and Zeal very
Briefly, because I have been longer then I intended in the former, the Spirit
is the Author of this evangellick grace in the Soul; and it is the Character of
the People of God, that they are those who hope in him, Psalm. 3.24. Be of good
Courage and he shall strengthen your Hearts all ye that hope in the Lord. 1. I
shall declare what this Hope is. 2. Its Nature and Office. 3. Its objects.

1. What it is: Hope is a Grace of the Soul whereby every true Christian does
surely expect and patiently wait and look for the enjoyment of promised mercys
and Salvation, Romans 8.24.25. For we are saved by Hope, but hope that is seen,
is no hope, for how can a Man hope for that which he sees? but if we hope for
that we see not, we do with patience wait for it, Heb. 10.35.36. Cast not away
therefore your Confidence which has great recompense of reward. Verse. 36. For
ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the Promise, i. e. The thing promised, Romans 5.2. Rejoice in the hope of
the glory of God. Hope looks to the time to come, for the certain possession of
the thing hoped for.

2. The propertys of it. 1. It Looks for the thing promised; God has promised
Life, Salvation, Glory, and Bliss to believers, Tit. 1.2. In hope of Eternal
Life, which God that cannot lie promised, before the world began. I will give
Grace and Glory says God, Psalm. 84.11. Now hope does firmly expect that God
should make good his word; and not fail in one Iota or tittle of all things he
has promised to his Saints and Servants. 2. It is the nature of it to look
forwards to the end, and full perfection of bliss. Here our blessedness is but
imperfect, because our graces are not completed (there being the Relics of
Sin in the Soul,) but hereafter, when we are taken above the Clouds, and
possessed of eternal Glory, (being in full fruition of God) Grace shall be
perfected and Crowned with Glory, Faith shall be turned into a glorious vision,
and hope into everlasting fruition; this hope expects and waits for. 3. From
the consideration and certain persuasion of the things hoped for, it fills the
Soul with joy and gladness, Romans 5.2. Rejoicing in the Hope of the Glory of
God. The very Expectation that the Day will come, when the Soul shall be
invested with, and possess That far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory,
spoken of 2 Cor. 4.17. makes it even in the midst of afflictions exult and
rejoice. It can Glory in tribulation when the Heart is possessed of this Grace of
Hope. 4. This Hope is not ashamed to discover it self, neither does it make the
Person ashamed that has it. Paul is not ashamed to own it before Agrippa and a
Court of Judicature, Act. 26.6. And now I stand and am Judged, for the Hope of
the promise made by God to our Fathers. Although the worldly Miser may condemn
Believers, who build so much upon the expectation of future happiness; and for
that are willing to undergo afflictions here; Yet this hope makes not ashamed,
because the Love of God is shed abroad in the heart by the holy Ghost, Romans
5.5. 5. It puts the Soul upon purification of it self. Seeing it expects such
great things, as to be delivered from all evil to enjoy God, and be made like
unto him, 1 John 3.2.3. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when we shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is. verse. 3. And every man that has this
hope in him, purifyeth himself, even as he is pure. This Soul expects to live
with a holy God, holy Angels, and Saints, therefore it labors to become holy,
and to be made meet for so blessed an Inheritance, as God has provided for
them who hope in his Mercy.

3ly, The objects and foundations of this Evangelic hope. 1. God, as in Psalm.
42.5. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me,
hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his Countenance.
So verse. 11. and Psalm. 43.5. The Psalmist does still call upon his Soul to hope
in God, Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope
the Lord is. 2. This hope builds upon the Mercy of God in and through Christ,
Psalm. 33.1.8. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them
that hope in his Mercy. And in the 147. Psalm. 11. The Lord takes pleasure in
those that fear him, in them that hope in his Mercy. God has declared himself
by this Name, The Lord gracious and merciful, Exodus 34.6. therefore hope looks
unto this, expecting that his Mercy and pity will move him to tender forth
grace to the poor soul. Christ is called the Mercy promised to the Fathers,
Luke 1.72. To perform the Mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his
holy Covenant; And the fulfilling of this is said to flow from the tender
mercys of God, ver. 78. Through the tender mercys of God, whereby the day
spring from on high has visited us, so that hope takes encouragement from the
mercy of God still to rely upon him.

3ly. The faithfulness of God, Titus 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God
that cannot lie, has promised before the foundation of the world; Here the
soul casts Anchor, flies to refuge in storms, and concludes the foundation of
God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.13.19.
and he cannot deny himself; he can as soon cease to be, as fail of fulfilling
his promises, which he has given as bonds to his people, and they are sealed
with the blood of Christ, therefore never to be cancelled till they are fully
discharged.

4ly. This hope looks upon the promises that God has made, and builds upon
them. 1. for salvation and eternal life; the believer firmly hopes for it, and
expects to partake of life and happiness; as in that forementioned place, Tit.
1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, has promised. So
says Christ, Jo. 3.16.36. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, Jo. 10.28. I will give unto them eternal life; Now God and
Christ having promised this, the believer hopes for the performance of it. 2ly.
Promises of glory, Psalm. 84.11. He will give grace and glory, and no good thing
will he withhold from them that walk uprightly before him. 2 Cor 4.17. and in
many other places. Therefore these sublime and eternal objects, this hope is
fixed upon; not upon the base vanitys of this perishing world; not upon the
promises of men or Angels; but upon the promises of God in Christ, 2 Cor.
1.20. All the promises of God are in Christ, yea and amen, to the praise of his
glory; Therefore it being for his praise and glory, he will fully perform and
not disappoint the expectations of any who hope and trust in him.

5ly. The spirit has wrought the grace of humility. This grace is most lovely
in the eyes of God and men; nay, it is so excellent and amiable, that generally
those who themselves are lofty cannot but admire and commend this beautiful
adornment, when they behold it in others. It is so transcendent and comely,
that the great God takes delight to dwell with such Souls, Isa. 57.15. For thus
says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I
dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of an humble and
contrite Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble, and revive the heart of
the contrite ones. Christ Jesus was not ashamed to be clothed with this
garment, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Spirit. Therefore
the Apostle exhorts believers to put on this complete Robe of humility, 1 Pet.
5.5. Be clothed with humility. I shall show in a few particulars how it may be
known, whether this Grace be wrought in the Heart or no. 1. Where this grace
is, there is contriteness of Spirit. A broken heart and an humble heart go
together; so in that place, Isa. 57.15. To revive the Spirit of the humble, and
to revive the Heart of the contrite ones. and in the 66. Chap. 2. verse. But to
this Man will I Look, even to him that is of a poor and contrite Spirit.
Therefore brokenness and contrition are sometimes put for a truly humble
frame, as Psalm. 51.17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken heart, a broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. 2ly, The person who has this
Grace, has self-debasing thoughts of himself. When on the contrary, the Proud
Spirit does elevate and lift up it self, it has high thoughts (although
altogether undeserving) of it self; the humble person thinks all to much that
is conferred upon him, when any Praise and commend him (though he truly
deserves it) yet he has such mean thoughts of himself, that he concludes, they
have out of extreme Love, or Flattery, exceeded the bounds of his merits; but
now the superbious and lofty, imagine every one is defective and comes short of
attributing to him according to his worth and deserts. Absolon, thinks he has
not Honor enough in being the Kings Son, but he must stand in the Gate, and by
all means be made King in the room of his Father; when humble David looked upon
it as a great matter to be only Son in Law to a King; see how he expresses his
humility, 1 Samuel 18.23. And Saul's Servants spoke those Words in the Ears of
David; and David said, seems it unto you a Light thing to be a Kings Son in
Law, seeing that I am a poor man and lightly esteemed. Thus we see that Pride
is ambitious of exaltation; when humility lays it self even with the Dust.

3ly, Where this Grace is in the Heart, the Person highly exalts free grace,
and acknowledges all mercys to flow, merited from the free grace of God alone,
2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
in Christ Jesus before the world began. The Apostle Paul is often at this work,
extolling of Free Grace, as Ephesians. 2.5.8. By Grace ye are saved, through Faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Jacob the Patriark looked
upon himself as unworthy of the mercys of God, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of
[or I am less then] the least of all thy mercys, and of all the truth which
thou have showed unto thy Servant. See this humble good man, he exalts Mercy,
and acknowledges the freeness of it, even in the least measure of it, that it
did transcend his deserts.

4ly, Where this humility is, the heart fears and trembles at the word of God,
i. e. fears to Sin and transgress the holy word of God, Isa. 66.2. But to this
man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and
trembles at my word. This humble heart dreads Sin and transgressing the Law of
God, Jam. 1.
because in so doing he keeps himself Spotless, and injoys the blessed asspect
of Gods countenance, he looks toward such a one. Moreover, he injoys in some
measure the blessedness of Heaven, for he has Communion with God, Isa. 57.15.
God dwells with the humble. But if he Break Gods Law, then God will frown, and
turn away his Face, and withdraw his sensible presence from the Soul; therefore
it labors to walk humbly, as being that which keeps the Soul with God, and God
with it. God requires it from his People, Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? [or to humble thy self to
walk with thy God.]

5ly, Where this grace is, there is Poverty of Spirit, Mat. 5.3. Christ begins
the Blessings to the Poor in Spirit: which Diodate expounds, Humility and
meekness of Spirit before God. Those who have this grace always apprehend
themselves to be Spiritually Poor; therefore they are continually Praying to
God, and crying to Christ for supplys of grace. They are not like to the
Laodiceans, Who thought themselves rich, and increased in Goods, and to have
need of nothing, Rev. 3.17. But yet were most miserable. But they are like to
the Poor who are always in wants, and daily going to the Gates of the Rich, and
laying open their necessitys, and earnestly craveing supplys. These humble ones
are daily knocking at Heavens gate by Prayer for some mercy and grace the Soul
stands in need of from God.

6ly, The Person that has this grace is ready to prefer every gracious Soul
before himself; he esteems the Person, parts, and graces of another very
highly; for he looks upon himself as the Apostle did, even the meanest and
unworthyest servant of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.9. For I am the least of the Apostles,
I am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God.
The Sense of his own imperfections, and the remembrance of former Sins, make
him think better of another than himself, Phil. 2.3. But in lowliness of mind,
let each esteem other better than himself.

6ly, and lastly, The Spirit has wrought a holy Gospel Zeal, in the hearts of
those who are come unto Christ; we read of an Ignorant and Blind Zeal, To.
10.2. For I bare them Record that they have a Zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge. This Zeal, which is a Fruit of the Spirit, is, 1. A holy Zeal, the
heart burns with the Fire of Zeal against Sin and Wickedness: such a Zeal was
in Phin^as when he Slew the Israelitish Man, and the Midianitish Woman for
their abominable Sin in the sight of God, Numb. 25.6, 7, 8. And David being a
man possessed with this holy Zeal, was troubled for the wicked's forgetfulness
of the Law of God, Psalm. 119.139. My Zeal has consumed me, because mine Enemies
have forgotten thy words. And it is a holy Zeal, in that it is fervent for
holiness, and for godliness, for Christ has redeemed such, Tit. 2.14. Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar People, Zealous of good Works. I say, this Zeal being holy,
is for the depression of Sin, because it is contrary to holiness; and for the
promotion of holiness, because the Soul delights in it, and is a fervent Lover
of it. 2. It is a Zeal for God, his Glory, and his Name: this true Zealot is
tender of the Name and Honor of God; this the Lord testifys concerning
Phineas, Numb. 25.11. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Phineas the Son of
Eleazar, the Son of Aaron the Priest, has turned away my wrath from the
Children of Israel (whilst he was Zealous for my sake among them,) that I
consumed not the Children of Israel in my Jealousy. So Elijah was Zealous for
the Lord, 1 King. 19.10. And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God
of Hosts. The Septuagint renders it, (...).
I have burned with vehement Zeal for the Lord. 2. For his worship and
service, as in that forequoted verse. 1 Kings 19.10. Zelando, Zelavi, hoc est,
vehementissimo arsi zelo pro Domino.
For the Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine
Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the Sword. Thus it was Prophesied of
Christ, Isa. 69.9. and applied to him, Jo. 2.17. For the Zeal of thine house
has eaten me up. i. e. A Zeal for the true worship and service of God, so as
he has instituted and commanded in his word. 3. This Zeal leads the Soul to
be Zealous for Christ. O how Zealous were the Apostles and all the faithful
Servants of Christ, when they broke through all difficultys to exalt Christ,
and keep Faithful to him. All the Waters of affliction could not quench this
Zeal, neither could the Scorching Flames consume it; the threats and edicts of
Enemies, could not at all cool the heat of this Zeal, but rather added Fuel to
the Fire, and made it burn more vehemently. What made Paul so resolute when he
heard what was prophesied concerning him, if he went up to Jerusalem, Act.
21.11, 12, 13. Why, it was his Zeal made him so courageous, and answer like a
Faithful and bold Champion of Christ Jesus; I am ready not only to be bound,
but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

4ly, It is a Zeal according to knowledge; There is much blind and ignorant
Zeal abroad in the World; such as was among the Jews, Romans 10.2. the Apostle
Paul was once a blind Zealot, Phil. 3.6. Concerning Zeal, Persecuting the
Church; how many such Zealots are there among the Papists? nay, how many have
we here at home who are zealous for either their own invention, or else the
traditions of our Forefathers? but this Zeal is not an ignorant one, but flows
from Divine illumination, and is accompanied with a saving knowledge of the
revealed will of God, and of those things which concern the Lord Jesus, which
makes the Soul more zealous for them.

5ly, and lastly, It is a Zeal for spiritual things and gifts, 1 Cor. 4.1.
(...).
Follow after Love, and zealously affect spiritual things, as the words may be
read; and verse. 39. Therefore Brethren be ye zealous, that ye may Prophecy.
There is a zeal which pretends to be for spiritual things, but Jehu like, is
ready for carnal and base things; spiritual and divine things, are most suitable
to be the objects of this Spiritual and Divine Zeal. Thus have I finished the
use of Examination, by which you may certainly know, whether you are come to
Christ or no.

There is still a use of Exhortation that remains under this point of Doctrine,
that It is the indispensable duty of all laboring and heavy laden Sinners (who
look for rest and Salvation) to come unto the Lord Jesus, that they may obtain
it. And if it is a duty (as has been proved) then let me exhort all to come;
for if you do neglect or refuse to come, you do neglect your dutys, and slight
your Souls, and refuse the only means of eternal Salvation. But here you may be
ready to make this question, how must I come unto the Lord Jesus that I may
obtain rest and salvation? In answering of this question, I shall take in the
third Doctrine, because I have already exceeded my first intentions, and shall
manage the fourth by way of motive and encouragement; because I observe poor
sinners are generally very unwilling to come to Christ; they had rather weary
themselves, and labor under their burdens of sin, till they are in the end
crushed down with the intolerable ponderosity of eternal vengeance.

1. Then, if thou would come unto Christ aright, pray for the holy Spirit,
that he may enable thee to come to Christ in that way which will certainly end
in rest and Salvation; for as I have before declared, it is the Spirit that
illuminates the understanding in all those things which are necessary to
Salvation; it is that convinces the conscience of those dutys which absolutely
concern the Soul; he inclines the will to comply readily with the whole, known,
and revealed will of God; he sanctifys the affections, and works grace in the
Soul; all these are his works alone, (...), efficiently, let the Instrument be
what it will: he is not obliged to any means or method; yet the means, as
Instruments, depend wholly upon his Energy and Cooperation; therefore if thou
would come to Christ aright, pray heartily, and seek fervently for the holy
Spirit, without whose conduct thou can never come to Christ effectually, and
so as to be eased of thy Burdens.

2ly, When thou have sought for the Spirit, and do feel him working upon thy
Soul, then come unto Christ as laboring under the intolerable Burden of sin;
for sin is a heavy burden, although multitudes in the world count it light, as
may be seen by their cheerful countenances, merry hearts, jovial lives, and
running and drawing under this burden into Eternity, being very little
concerned for the weight of it. Holy David was sensible of the ponderosity of
it, (...) Onus grave.
when he cried out, Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over my head as
agrievous, they are too heavy for me. The pressure of sin lay so hard upon poor
David, that it made his back bend, his heart pant, his tongue roar, and his
groanings to multiply, as may be seen in that 38. Psalm. at large. So Psalm.
40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine Iniquities have taken
hold of me, so that I am not able to look up, they are more than the hairs of
my head, therefore my heart forsakes me. He was so bowed down under this
burden, that he could not elevate himself; nay, it made his very heart forsake
him when he considered the gravity and innumerable number of them; but what did
David do in this case? why, he goes to God through Christ for ease from this
great and heavy burden, Psalm. 25.11. For thy Name sake, O Lord, pardon mine
Iniquity, for it is great; great both for weight and number; therefore for thy
Names sake magnify thy grace; and what was the Issue, see Psalm. 32.5. I said I
will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou forgavest the Iniquity of
my Sin. He went with this Burden to the Lord, and found Mercy and Pardon from
him: so must thou do. Go to Christ, under the sense of the weightiness of your
sins, and beg him (according to his promise) to ease thee of thy burden, which
otherwise will sink thee down into eternal misery; for it weighed Angels out of
Glory, and now confines them under Chains of darkness; therefore come unto
Christ, for he will not refuse thee because of the greatness of thy burden,
but rather embrace thee for the Exaltation of his free grace.

3ly, Come laboring under a deep sense of the immense and intolerable weight
of the wrath of God; for who can endure if he be enraged? or what can stand and
oppose, if God be the Antagonist? Job 9.34. by nature we are all under this
burden, Ephesians. 2.3. And were by Nature Children of wrath, even as others, i. e.
by nature we are subject and liable to Divine vengeance, because the imputation
of the guilt of Adams transgression abides upon us, and the corruption of
Nature is derived unto us. The extreme weightiness of this wrath makes damned
Angels and wicked Spirits roar, lament, and gnash their teeth. It is more
tolerable, Poets Fiction.
Atlas-like, to bear the Heavens upon our shoulders, or to lie under Rocks and
Mountains thousands of years, then to abide under this wrath but a day, nay, an
hour, nay, a minute, for it burns, yet never utterly consumes; it presses
heavy without mitigation: now there is no releasement from the obnoxiousness to
this wrath, but from a deep sense of the grievousness of it by applying our
selves speedily to the Lord Jesus, for it is he alone that can deliver from the
wrath that is to come, 1 These. 1.10. come unto Christ with a sense of it upon
thy heart whilst thou art here, that thou may not see the intollerableness of
it hereafter.

4ly. Come to Christ as laboring under and being heavy laden with the curse of
the Law, and the Empire of death; I mean by the Empire of death, not only our
obnoxiousness to the stroke of death upon our bodies; but the sting of death;
and the eternity of it in regard of our Souls. Death has reigned (by reason of
sin, Romans 5.) over the bodies of all (two or three excepted) and over the Souls
of most, even from Adam, to Moses, and from Moses, until Christ, and from
Christ, even to our days. Death is a universal Monarch, his Empire is from East
to West, and from North to South. There is no escaping his fatal blow. Only
believers then take their flight from a dead Corpse to Christ, who is their
life; from a muddy Tabernacle, to a glorious city ( Rev. 21.22.23.) Col. 3.3.
Heb. 12.28. Romans 2.15.
from a tottering Cottage, to a firm Kingdom; from a dark and mortal state, to
a splendent and immortal glory: for although the body dies, yet the life of the
Soul is secure, as Being hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.4. Believers can never
dye (take it in a Spiritual sense) so long as God and Christ live; but yet I
say, the way to be freed from the eternal Bondage of this deadly Monarch, is to
come unto Christ for Ease from this burden also. Moreover, the burden of the
curse of the Law must be taken away, or else the former Emperor will keep his
dominion, Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the
curse, for it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the Law, to do them: But seeing we have not
continued in all things to do them, and therefore are under the curse, what
must we do now, but go unto Christ who was made a Curse for us? Gal. 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us:
Now the Judge when he gives forth pardon to the Malefactor, expects that he
should be sensible of the greatness of his guilt, and also of his desert, the
sentence of Condemnation having passed upon him: so Christ expects a sensible
owning the Curse and Misery we are under, that his grace may be magnified in
our relief, succor and Salvation.

5thly.
Come unto Christ as laboring under the cruel tyrany of Satan; for Satan is the
Prince of the Powers of the Air, Magnitudo mali in quatuor consistit, quae sunt
peccati gravita quae Dei immensum and intollerabile pondus. Mortis imperium
Tyrannis Diaboli quae tollere abolere, placare, vincere nemo potuit nisi Deus.
Bucan.
and he rules in and over the children of disobedience, and there is none that
can deliver from this tyranny but Christ; for as one reasoning why it behoved
Christ the Redeemer to be God, said, it was for two causes. 1. Ob magnitudinem
mali, For the greatness of the Evil by which mankind was pressed down. 2. Ob
magnitudinem Boni, For the magnitude of the good, which could be restored by no
man nor Angel unto mankind, but only by him who is God: now the greatness of
the Evil which Christ underwent, and in fine overcame, consisted in bareing the
weight of Sin, the intolerable burden of Gods wrath; and in conquering Death
and the tyranny of Satan, which none could or was able to do, but he that was
Godman by his own mighty Power; so that seeing Christ has done these things
for all those that come unto him, neglect not but come, For Christ came that he
might destroy the works of the Devil. 1 Jo. 3.8. For this purpose the Son of
God was made manifest, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil. By nature
we are slaves to Satan, and he tiranizeth over us, and the way to be
effectually delivered from it, is by coming to Christ, and being weary of, and
willing to throw away his Yoke; and to yield subjection unto Christ; I say, the
way to be eased of these Burdens, is to come to Christ as weary and heavy
laden with them.

6ly, Come unto the Lord Jesus repenting, and believing; I put these both
together, because I would contract. Christ is ready to behold the Watery Eye
and bleeding heart (caused by a sense of the heinousness of Sin,) with a
gracious aspect, he loves a broken and contrite Spirit; he is willing to heal
the wounds of a broken heart, and set at liberty them that are bruised with the
intolerable Burden of Sin, Luke 4.18.
and a sense of the wrath of God, and because of that are willing to turn to
Christ, and become wholly his. Those who are Heirs of the Crown of glory, are
for the most part brought to the Kingdom by weeping Cross, Luke 13.3. Except
you repent, ye shall all likewise Perish. So likewise there must be a
believing, or else there is no true closing with Christ; for Faith is the Hand
that lays hold on Christ, the Mouth that feeds upon him, and derives out of his
fullness, Jo. 1.16. That Soul is in a dead and deplorable state and condition,
that has not a saving Faith in Christ, Jo. 3.36. He that believes on the Son,
has everlasting Life, and he that believes not the Son shall not see Life,
but the wrath of God abides on him. There is nothing but Wrath for that Soul
that believes not in the Lord Jesus.

7ly, and lastly, Come unto Christ with high estimations and valuations of that
rest which Christ has Promised; for this will discover thy sincerity, and true
love to divine and spiritual things; and hereby thou will honor Christ, when
thou believe in him, and preferrest his Rest above all that this vain World
can afford. The World is a fading Perishing thing, and the best rest that it
gives, is full of disquietness, fears, perplexities, but now the rest which
Christ will give, has so much contained in it, that the World cannot compare
with it; therefore, I say, keep up a high valuation of this rest; which leads me
to the Motives that may induce us freely and cheerfully to come unto Christ,
and they shall be taken from the consideration of what kind of rest this is,
which Christ will give unto them that come unto him. 1. In regard of this World.

1. It shall be a rest from the Dominion of Sin, and I think it is a happy rest
and privilege to be free from the dominion of Sin; if it was only this rest
that should be obtained, it would be very well worth coming unto Christ, for
who would be a slave and servant to Sin, Humanorum nullum est grave malorum
nisi Peccatum. Chrisost.
which brings trouble and vexation of Spirit; now those the Son makes free,
they are free indeed, Jo. 8.34, 35, 36. Whosoever commiteth Sin, is the Servant
of Sin, and the Servant abides not in the house for ever; but the Son abides
ever, if the Son therefore shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. It is
Christ alone that can make any free from the reigning power of Sin; therefore
come unto him that thou may partake of this Blessedness, not to be a Servant
of Sin, whilst thou art here; it is a base servitude and very dishonorable,
most uncomfortable, and has the least and worst security; for he that is
Servant to Sin, has abundance of Enemies, but no real Friends; therefore he is
obnoctious to miserys every moment, both temporal and eternal.

2ly, It is a Rest from the tyranny of Satan, although not from his temptations
and Snares: whilst thou abidest in this sinful world, and art a sojourner as
all thy Fathers were the Devil will hunt and tempt thee to commit Iniquity; but
yet if thou come unto Christ, he will give thee rest from the tiranical power
of this grand enemy, for he will do and say unto thee as he did unto Paul when
buffered by the Messenger of Satan, My Grace is sufficient for thee for my
strength is made perfect in thy weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. And if thou have the
strength of Christ for thee, although thou art weak in thy self, Yet thou will
be strong to resist Satan, Verse. 10. of that Chap.

3ly. It is an inward Soul-rest that thou shall have if thou come unto him,
it is not such a Rest as the world gives, neither can the World deprive thee of
it, the World may afflict, and perplex thy outward man, and give no rest unto
it; but it can never touch thy internal peace and rest, if Christ is pleased to
confer it upon thee; if thou have rest for thy Soul, thou art most happy even
in the midst of Worldly disquietments; for it is the affliction and trouble of
the Soul, that is the Soul of affliction; but now Christ has promised to give
this Soul-rest to those that come unto him, Mat. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you,
and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Spirit, and ye shall find rest for
your Souls. This indeed is the best of rests; for suppose a man has never so
many temporal enjoyments, yet if his Soul be not at rest and peace, all these
blessings seem to be cursed to him; because his Soul is under preturbations, or
if not so, yet under sleepy sinful security, which is worse; but O the serene
calmness, peace, and sedateness that the saints enjoy in this life; for I am
not speaking of that rest the Righteous shall inherit hereafter; but whilst we
are here in the Wilderness and journey to Canaan; God has promised to give them
peace, Isa. 26.3. Whose minds are stayed upon him; and the Saints experience
this daily.

2ly. What kind of peace and rest this is in regard of the future World. 1. It
is a true rest, not any fiction of the Poets, but a certain and firm rest; that
Christ has purchased for, Non expectationem fallit.
and promised to believers, they shall be sure of it, for he that cannot lie
has promised it; he who is the Amen, Rev. 3.14. He in whose mouth was found no
guile, therefore he will not deceive poor Souls, for The foundation of God
stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. Men many times promise themselves rest, but it
proves false to them, for the most part, and they never find that rest which
they imagined would be their lot: but now this rest will prove true even beyond
expectation. 2. The rest that Christ will give to them that come unto him,
shall be perfect and complete rest: it is not part rest, and other part
trouble; it is not only for the Soul, but for the body too; the Saints are in
this life Complete in Christ, Col. 2.10. Bu^ the time is hasting in which Soul
and body shall be complete and perfect in rest; and also it is a perfect rest
from all sorrows and molestations whatsoever, Isa. 35.10.

3ly. A holy rest; for there is no unclean thing enters into that rest, Rev.
21.17. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
neither that works abomination, or makes a Lie, but they which are written
in the Lambs book of Life. It is the place and seat of the holy God, and there
are none but holy Angels and Saints, to attend the great Jehovah, who inhabits
this holy Place, Isa. 57.15. For thus says the high and lofty one that
inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is holy. I dwell in the high and holy Place. O
who would not desire to enjoy this holy place of rest where there is no
defilement or corruption, but all persons and things are holy, therefore come
unto Christ, to the end thou may obtain rest, for it is holy.

4ly, It is a glorious rest, and who is able to express the Glory of it? 2 Cor.
4.17. Our light afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Hyperbolies of Glory, far transcending
our shallow Capacitys and weak conceptions: it is a participating of the same
Glory with Christ, Romans 8.17. If Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint
Heirs with Christ: if so be we suffer with him, that we may also be Glorified
together. It is a glorious rest in these respects. 1. The most glorious God,
Trinity in Unity, Father, Son, and holy Spirit, keep their residence (...)
splendent Glory, in that place, where the Saints shall take up their ^est.
Although God fills the Heavens and the Earth with his presence, as ^eing
infinite in his essence, and so can be excluded no where, neither can be
included in any circumferrence, limits or bounds: yet more especially, he makes
manifest his glorious and majestical unipresence in the imperial heavens, for
there he keeps his glorious Court, and shines forth in the beams of his
brightness, and makes evident his refulgent glory. Rev. 21.22.23. And I saw no
Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb, are the Temple of it,
and the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it, for
the Glory of God did Lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. 2. There
are none but Glorified Creatures, that are inhahitants of this glorious
Palace, attending always upon the Lord the great Jehovah. Seraphins, and
Cherubims surround his Throne, singing forth his magnificent Glory, Isa. 6.1.2.
3. Crying out, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts. And Glorified Saints they
are at this work, extolling and magnifying the great God, Rev 4.10.11. and in
the 19. Chap. They are singing forth Halelujah, Salvation, and Honor, and
Glory, and Power, unto the Lord our God. 3. It is a Glorious Rest in respect
that the Saints shall have a glorious view of the beatifical vision. They shall
behold the Glorious God, 1 Jo. 3.2. We shall see him as he is. Here no mortal
Eye can behold him and Live; but there all Clouds shall be disipated, the
Curtains drawn a side, the vision shall be perspicuous; here we see but in a
Glass darkly, but then Face to Face. 4ly, It is a Glorious rest in this, that
the Saints are not only blessed with the vision of this Glory, but they have
glory conferred upon them all: they do not only see him, but are made like unto
him. They shall all Reign as Kings and Princes for ever, Rev. 3.21. and 4.10.
Here the Saints are looked upon as contemptible Creatures, and the World hates
them, and for the most Part tramples them under foot, but Christ will confer
such a Glorious rest upon them, that they shall be exalted above their Enemies,
and shall Reign with him in Glory, and that to eternity: which leads me to the
last particular, and that is this, that this Rest which Christ will give to all
them that come unto him, and accept of him, is fifthly, and lastly, an
everlasting Rest, 1 These. 4.17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and so
shall ever be with the Lord. Indeed this is the Crown and Happyness of all,
that it shall be to eternity, not for a day, a year, or thou sands of years,
but as long as God is, and Christ is, which will be for ever, so long shall the
Saints inherit and possess Glory, therefore it is called immortal Glory, and
eternal Life, Romans 2.7. To them who by Patient continuing in well doing, seek
for Honor, and Glory, and immortallity, and eternal Life. O the sweetness and
comfort that is in the word Eternal to all those that believe Most People would
think themselves happy, if they could have Tabernacles of rest built for them
whilst they are in this World, which very rarely exceeds the time of threescore
years and Ten, but what is this comparable to that Eternity of Rest prepared
for the Saints, when they shall be taken up to live with Christ for ever. Satan
is a Liar when he promises Rest, for he can never give it. The World is
continually attended with preturbations, dsiquietness, or at the best, with an
imperfect Rest, but those who close with Christ shall enjoy an everlasting and
perpetual Rest; and what greater motive can there be to induce poor Sinners who
here are in continual Labor, and wearying themselves under heavy and
intolerable burdens? it is most certain that there is no rest, (that will
comfort the Soul) to be found out of Christ; it is he that can give rest unto
the weary, it is he that has purchased rest for the Laboring and heavy Laden;
and withal, he condescends to invite, and has promised that those who come and
believe in him shall have a rest from the dominion of Sin, from the Tyranny of
Satan, and a Soul-Rest in this Life, and also they shall have a true and
perfect, a holy and glorious Rest, and in fine, an eternal Rest, which adds
exceedingly to the felicity of the Saints, therefore as I began, so I shall
conclude with the words of the Lord Jesus, (varying the Person) Come unto him
all ye that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and he will give you Rest.

(...). FINIS.

