THE BOOK Called, The Mirror of Justices: Made By ANDREW HORN. With the
Book, called, The Diversity of Courts, AND Their Jurisdictions. Both translated
out of the old French into the English Tongue.

By W.H. of Grays Inn Esquire.

Cassiodor. Iura publica, certissima sunt virae humanae solatia; infirmorum
anxilia, impiorum frana.

Imprinted at London for Matthew Walbancke. at Graies Inn gate. 1646.

The Translator to the READER.
Courteous Reader:
IT has ever been an Objection (grounded upon ignorance,) which has been made
by the meaner sort of the people to traduce the Common Laws of England, and to
bring the Professors thereof into contempt, to give out Speeches, and cast it
in the teeth (as it were) of them, That the said Laws are built but upon a
sandy foundation, viz. the conceits of a few men, and that they are not
grounded upon the Laws of God; from which all Laws of men ought to flow, as
from a clear and pure Fountain.

This vulgar conceit and objection has been principally nourished amongst
them, because the Common Laws have been kept from their view and
understandings, being for the most part published in the French Tongue.

I must ingeniously confess, That since it is a received Maxim amongst us,
That ignorance of the Law does excuse no man, that it were good that the
fundamental Laws were published in our Mother Tongue, that so no person might
be miscounsant thereof. And I have observed, that it has been the course and
care of most of the late Publishers of our Laws, to put them forth in such
Language as the common people might the better know them, and practice the due
observation of them. But that I may with the more ease and plainness answer
that frivolous Objection, remove that fond conceit of the ignorant, vindicate
our Commnn Laws from so foul an aspersion, and let the Objectors see from
whence our Laws deduce their Original (though the learned Author in the
ensuing Treatise has in part done it) yet for the clear manifestation thereof
I shall entreat the courteous Reader to be pleased favorably to accept of this
short Breviary of the Grounds and originals of the Common Law, which I shall
apply only as an introduction to the Work which follows.

All Laws are comprehended under a Threefold division: 1. The Law of Nature.
2. The Law of God, of Faith, or of the Gospel. 3. The Law of man, made upon
the Dictates of Reason; upon all which Laws the Common Laws of England are
built, as upon firm and sure foundations.

The First is, that which is called the Law of Nature, which is ordained of
God, and may be called Gods Law, united unto man's nature; Genesis 1. ver. 26,27.
for what was that Image of God in man, consisting of righteousness, holiness
and truth; but Lex primordialis, a primordiall Law, exactly requiring, and
absolutely enabling the performance of duties of Piety unto God, and of equity
to men both in habit and Art. St. Ambrose
Amiquam scripte fuit lex in hominum mentibut vigebat. God in the beginning
wrote his Laws in men's hearts, and therefore according unto the opinion of
most learned Divines and Legists: Lex nature nibil aliud est quam participatio
legis eterne in rationali creatura; And according to others, Lex naturae est
lamen ac dictamen illud rationis, quo inter bonum and malum discernimus. The
most principal Precepts of the Law of Nature) which are also Maxims and
Grounds of the Laws of England) are 1. Deum venerari, 2. Honest vivere, 3.
Patrie magistratibus, and parentibus obedire, 4. Alteri ne facias quod tibi non
vis fieri. 5. Suum cuique tribuere. 6. Tollere nocentes e medio propter
servandam publicam salutem. 7. Rerum dominia proprietates, possessiones, and
usum distinguere; To honor God, to live honestly, to obey Magistrates, etc. to
do as we would be done unto, to render every one his due, to punish the guilty
for the preservation of the Public, to distinguish and settle the Dominion,
propriety, possession, and use of temporal things.

These fundamentalls of the Law of Natvre are not principally acquired or
obtained by Art, or Doctrine, but naturally ingrafted. Learning and instruction
serve only to bring forth and increase those natural Seeds; but neither
Learning nor instruction do principally and originally give them; they are
(faith Socrates) but as skillful Midwives, Socrates.
whose office it is only to further the birth of the Child not to beget the
Child.

The Second is the Law of God, the Law of Faith, or of the Gospel; which may
well be called Lex amoris, the Law of love. Is not this Nation Christian? Has
it not professed the common Faith for 1200. years? Do not our Laws all tend
to the maintaining of peace, concord and love fruits of the Gospel? Are not
all Statutes, Acts of Parliament, Constitutions Customs, made and used for the
government of this people, founded upon such principalls? Let the Objectors
cite me any Law in use now amongst us, which is not warranted by some express
Gospel, Text, either in the Letter, or not by necessary consequence drawn from
it; sure I am that every Law, Custom, Usage, Privilege, Prescription, Act of
Parliament, or Prerogative, which does exalt it self above or beyond the Law
of God, the Law of Christ, or the Law of Nature has ever by the worthy Sages
of our Laws been declared to be void It were to no purpose to instance upon
particulars, it is sufficient to say; That as it appertains to all godly and
Christian men to observe and keep this Law; so to let all men know, that we
are instructed by the worthy Professors of the Gospel of Christ, in the
fundamental Rules and grounds of this Law, to live after it, and to direct all
our words and actions according to it; and by it, and therefore I shall not say
more of it.

The third the Laws of men, and the municipall Laws of this Realm, which
although they may seem to some to have their progeny from men, (for as Solon
to the Athenians, Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians, Numa Pompelius, and Actius
Claudius to the Romans, were accounted the Principal Authors and givers of Law
to those several Nations; so Alured on Alfred, Athelstone, Edmundus, Edgar,
Canutus, Edward the Confessor, William the first, and Henry the first, called
Beauclark, noble and famous Princes of this Nation, part of all whose Laws are
yet in force, were the chief promulgers of many necessary and good Laws yet
in use with us in this Realm) yet if we look into their Laws we shall find,
that most of them have their rise from a higher power, from the Law of God, and
the Law of Faith. It is true, Dan. Hist. in tit. Will. Conq. Cicero l. 1. De
legibus.
that some Historiographers have written, that the original of the Common
Laws now in use flowed first out of Normandy, I shall decline that as to the
generality; but as Cicero was bold to derive the pedigree of his Roman Law from
the great God Jupiter, so I hope without offense I may be emboldened in the
person of our Common Law, to say, That when the Laws of God, and Reason came
first into England, then came I in.

The Temporal Laws of this Kingdom may be divided into three parts. 1. The
general or Common Law. Bracton. lib. Sermon.
2. The customary Law: 3. Statute or Parliament Laws; the end of all which
are, Vt sopianter jurgia and vitia propulsenter, and ut in regno conservetur
pax and justitia.

The Common Law is nothing else but pure and tried Reason (Responsa prudentum)
allowed and known containing the Principalls and Maxims of Law (consonant
unto the Laws of God) with a certain method for the orderly proceeding
therein; Egerton, Postant.
the rest consisting in the minds of the Sages of the Law, ready by Argument to
approve what is truth, and under-propt with Authorities to condemn what is
false.

The customary Laws are certain ancient Customs grounded upon Reason, which
abridge the course of the Common Law. The diversity of Customs have grown by
reason of the several Nations who have had government over this Kingdom; as 1.
The Britains. 2. The Romans. 3. The Britains again. 4. The Saxons. 5. The
Danes, and lastly the Normans; all which sorts of people have left behind them
within this Realm part of their Language, and part of their Country usages.

The Customs within the Realm are called by several names: as As Customs.
As Prescriptions. As Vsages. As By Laws.
Customs extend properly to Conntries, Cities, Boroughs, Towns Corporate, and
large Signiories. 2. Prescriptions run with persons who have capacities to have
Interests and properties. 3. Usages refer to Places or Towns not
incotporate, as to Inhabitants and the like. 4. ByLawes are properly made in
Courts by the Tenants of the Manor or Precinct, or out of Courts, with a
common consent for good order and Neighbourly usage. The efficient causes of
good and lawful Customs are, Reason and Time, the one begetting, the other
bringing forth and continuing the same; in one place Master Lit says, This is
a good Custom, because it stands with some reason; Litt. pl. 209.212.
in another, This is a void Custom because it is against reason.

3 The last is Statute or Parliament Laws; Parliaments have been ancient, they
were in the time of the Saxons, long before the Norman Conquest (for as the
Proverb is) In the time of the Danes, the Laws lay then in water, the people
were governed rather by Princes wills then public Laws, for then (as one
says) Sepultum fuit jus in regno, leges and consuitudines simul sopitae,
temporibus illorum prava voluntas vis and violentia magis regnabunt, quam
judicium in terra.) And although in the Saxons time I find the usual words of
the Acts then to have been: Edictum, Constitutio, little mention being made of
the Commons, yet I further find that, Tum demum leges vim and vigonem
habuerunt, cum fuerunt non modo justituta sed firmatae approbatione
Communitatis.

Our Author and others tell us, 20. H. 7.7. c. 12. part 86.
That the administration of Justice was only originally in the Crown, Bracton,
lib. 2. cap. 24.
and Kings in their own Persons rode Circuit every seven years through the
Realm, to hear the Complaints of their People, and to redress Public
grievances. But after the division of the Realm into Shires, public Courts
were erected; as the County Court, Sheriffs Turns, Hundred Court, Court
Leets, Viewes of Frankpledges, and Court Barons, for the conservation of the
Kings Peace, and the hearing and determining of all differences, Debts,
Contracts, etc. which might arise betwixt Party and Party; and all persons were
forted into Companies or Societies, wherein ten of the principal men called,
Capitales plegii, or Franchi plegii, because they were Freemen, stood as
Sureties for the residue, that they should stand to Justice, and not fly from
it when they had committed any offense; The Law of Saint Edward is most
excellent to that purpose in these words; Legis Sancti Edwardi in Lambert.
Est quedam summa and maxima sccuritas qua omnes Statu firmissimo sustinentur,
viz. Vt unusquisque stabiliat se sub fidejussionis sccuritate, (quod Angli
vocant Friburber;) Haec securitas hoc modo fiebat, quod de omnibus villis
totius Regni sub fidejussione decemali debeant esse universi: And to that
purpose also is the Ordinance of King Alured: Decrevit Aluredus ut liberae
conditionis quisque in Centuriam aseriberetur aliquam atque in docemvirale
coniiceretur Collegium, the difference only consisting in this, That King
Alureds Law extended but to Freemen, Saint Edwards to all men.

This Decemalis fidenissio, or Decemvirale Collegium, by our Author is called
the Decenery, who were charged to bring forth the Person of every offender to
answer unto the Law; Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 10.
whereof Mr. Bracton speaks in these words: De eo autem qui fugam fecerit (he
speaks of one after a Felony committed) Diligentur erit inquirenum si fuerit
in Franciplegio and decenna, and tunc erit decenna in misercordia coram
Justiciariis quia non habent ipsum malefactorem ad rectum. 13. H. 4.13.6.
And according to that Law if a Felon after his flying, or conviction were
possessed of Goods, the Town or Decenary was answerable for the same. And if
the same were imbesselled, or holden from them, the Decenery might seize those
goods in whose possession soever they were found; as appears by 3. E. 3. Itin
North, Fitz Corone 366. quod vicecomes and Decennarii sesire possunt cattella
felonum in manus Domini Regis; Et vic. cattella illa deliberabit villae ad
respondend. Regi in itinere, quod si vic. nec Decinnarii sesicrint villa
respondebit dom. regi in itenere, but this Law has been since altered by the
Statute of 3. E. 3.

I have Courteous Reader stood the longer upon these things, as well to
vindicate the Common Laws from those weak cavills of the ruder sort, as to
demonstrate the care our ancient Kings and Counsels have had for the peaceable
Government of the people of the Land, according to the right rules of Justice,
deduced from the Law of Nature, of God, and of right Reason; and I wish that
Princes in this age would consider and put in practice, (...) Demoth.
that golden Rule of Demosthenes: Been gubernare, recte judicare, just facere;
so should their Kingdoms flourish, and they themselves be in high estimation
in the eyes of all their people.

In these distracted times, wherein the fundamental Laws, and Liberties of
the Subject have been by a Malignant Party so much opposed, I have offered this
Treatise, entitled, The Mirror of Justices; I have translated the same out of
the French Tongue into English: In this Book many of those fundamental Laws
so much of late called upon, are to be found (though I do not warrant all in
this Book to be Law at this day; many of the Laws being absolete, and altered
by Acts of Parliaments and common usages) It has been some difficulty for me
to finish it: And although that the Manuscript Copy be in the Original very
imperfect: the French impression by mil joining of words in many places without
sense, and false Printed; the Terms of Law therein for the most part obsolete
and worn out; yet have I endeavored (as all Translators of Books, especially
of Books of the Law ought) to keep my self close to the words and meaning of
the Author, and of the Law then in use and practice, well knowing, that Laws
many times have their interpretation according to the strict Letter, and not
according to such flourishes of Rhetorique and Oratory as may be put upon them.

I entreat thee, Courteous Reader, to accept of it as it is; if thou find any
Errors in the Translation (as I suppose thou may do many) to pass them
over, or amend them: If thou find any thing in the Work it it self which may
advance the Common Laws, or the Liberties of the Subject, or set forth the
true Prerogative of Kings, to weigh them in the Balance of Justice: If thou
find any thing therein not fit to be published in these days of distraction
betwixt the King and prople, Consider that this Work was written in in the
time of King Edward the first: Consider again, it is not mine, but the
Authors; who for his Antiquity and Learning in the Laws of the Realm then in
use, has found the favor and honor to be cited by many of the grave Sages of
our Public Laws; so I commend it to thy favorable acceptance, and bid thee
farewell:

Thy friend, who in his desires strives that the Common Laws of the Land may
now and for ever flourish. W. H.

The PREAMBLE.
When I perceived diverse of those who should Govern the Law by Rules of
Justice, to have a respect to their own earthly profit, and chiefly to please
Lords, and their friends, and to have a respect thereunto, and not to give
their consents that the right Usages should be ever put in writing, whereby
power might be taken from them to pervert Judgment, and others to banish or
dis-inherite without punishment for the same; covering their offenses by the
exceptions of Error and Ignorance, never or little regarding the Souls of
Offenders condemned by their Judgments, as their duties and places required;
having used to Judge the people according to their own heads by Abusions, and
by the Examples of others erring in the Law, rather then by the Rules of the
Holy Scripture, greatly to have erred from the true understanding thereof,
building without any Foundation, and to Judge and have Cognizance, and
Jurisdiction in that which they little understood both in the Law of the Land,
and of the Law of the Persons; as it is of those who take upon them Art to
pronounce false Judgments, and by their Executions falsely to pervert the
Privileges of the KING, and the ancient Roles of his Treasure. Taking the same
into my serious consideration, and the Foundation and Original of the Usages
of England given by the Law, together with the Rewards of good Judges, and the
punishments of others; I thought it needful (wherein my Companions gave me
their assistance) to study the Old and New Testament; and therein we found,
That the Law is nothing else but Rules, delivered by our holy Predecessors in
the Holy Scriptures, for the saving of Souls from perpetual Damnation,
notwithstanding that the same were disused by false Judges. And we found that
the Holy Scripture remained in the Old and New Testament.

The Old Testament contained 3. orders. The Law. The Prophets. The
Hagiographies.
In the Law there are five Volumnes Genesis. Exodus. Leviticus. Numbers.
Deuteronomy.
In the order of the Prophets are eight Volumnes. Josua. Judges. Samuel with
the 1. and 2. of Kings. The 1. and 2. of Kings. Esaias. Jeramy. Ezekiel. The
Books of the 12. small Prophets.
In the order of Hagiographie are Job. The Psalms. Proverbs of Solomon.
Ecclesiastes. The Song of Solomon. Daniel. Paralipomenon. Esdras. Hester.

And besides these there are Books in the old Testament, although they are

Not authorized Canonical. Tobie. Judeth. Maccabees. Ecclesiasticus.
The New Testament contain 3 Books. The Evangelists. The Apostles. The holy
Fathers.
The Evangilists contain 4 Volumnes. The Epistles of St. Paul. The Epistles of
the Canon. The Revelation. The Acts of the Apostles.

The writings of the Apostles contain four Volumnes.

Of the writings of the Fathers there is no certain matter agreed upon.

And we find that our Laws were agreeing to Scriptures, and that they were in
a Language best known both for the help of us and the common people.

And for the condemning of false Judges, I compiled this little Book of the Law
of Persons, into 5. Chapters, that is to say, 1 Of offenses against the peace.
2 Of Actions. 3 Of Exceptions. 4 Of Judgments. 5 Of Abusions.


Which Book I have called The Mirror of Justices, according as I have found
their virtues, and the most excellent substance after the time of King Arthur,
used by holy usages according to the Rules aforesaid; and I desire you that you
would amend the defects therereof, according to such lawful and true warrants
as you prove, both to learn the truth, and confound the daily abuses of the
Law.

ERRATA.
FOl 4. l. 18. for Iarrickshire, r. Everwickshire. f. 5. l. 12. r. after. f. 7.
l. 5. r. estray. f. 10. l. 1^. r thence f 10. l. 20. r. exigent. f. 11. l. 22
r. right heirs. f. 12. l. 8. r. that married before. f. 13. l. 5. ad they. ib.
l. 6. r. Escuage. f. 14. l. 20. r. good. f. 14. l. 35. r. disseisins. f. 16. l.
27 r. Heresy. fi 19. l. 5. r. chinniage. f. 25. l. 5. r. offense. f. 28. l.
18. r. not. f. 30. l. 11. r. duresse f. 34. l. 19. put out, to f. 35. l. 6.
after appoineed. ad time f. 30. l. 1. r. trove f. 47. l. 10. r. unknown. f. 49.
l. 3. r. done. f 63 l. 10. r. endictee. f. 65. l. 3. r. Countors. f. 66. l. 12.
put our (as) f. 69. l. 24 r. seisin. f. 70. l. 5. put out (the) f. 76. l 9. r.
contumacers. f. 77. l. 8. put out (the) f. 93. l. 34. r. disscisin. l. 16. r.
Darcein presentment. l. 15. r. Mortdamicester f. 99. l. r. promy t. An. f. 102.
l. 17. r. l. eplegiary facias. f. 103. l, 18. put out (of) f 1105. after 100.
f. r. five pounds. f. 116 l 30. r, resummons. f. 123. l. 29. ad (in) f. 126. l.
3 r. felony. f. 150. l. 6. ad (not) f. 152. l. 28, 29. r. diffesivit. f. 154.
l. 8. r. waging. f. 155. l 14, ad (not) f. 156. 33. r. Record. f. 163. l. 29.
r. enjoyed. f. 167. l. 14. r. plaintiffs f. 267. l. 26 put out (not). f. 168.
l. 27 ad(be) f. 176. l. 23. r. plaint. f. 178. l. 14. r. remove. f. 181. l. 2^.
where the blank is, put (demean) f. 183. l, 16. 18. r. Law. f. 190. l. 10. r.
pecuniary. f. 191 l 3. r. they. f. 192. l. 9. r. judgment. f. 198. l. 3. r.
if. f. 201. l. 30. r. contradict. f. 208. l. 11. r. by breach. f. 209. ^. 31.
r. or by. f. 215. l. 18 ad(say) f. 217. l. 9. put out (done) f. 220. l. 4. r.
bought. f. 226. l, 28 r. payment or brasie. f. 228. l. 8. r. forcjudged. f.
229. l. 8. r. in. f. 230 l. 32. r. mortal. f. 239. l. 1. r. rarely. f. 240. l.
19. r. assist. f. 243. l. 17 ^had. f. 256. l. 33. r. grantiog. f. 274. l. 17.
r. servants. f. 288. l. 28. r. tent f. 287. l. 27. r. delivered. f. 304. l. 17.
r. consideraverit. f. 308. l. 3. r. ville^^b. l. 7. r. scientes. f. 312. l. 4.
r. consuram. f. 324. l. 28. r. quaerens. ibid. l. 28. r. netvi. f l 318. l. 2.
r. confessed. f. 320. l. 1. in the blank put the word (mark) f. 322. l. 23. r.
possessor. ibib. l. 28. to et per. i. of. r. quaerens recaperit. f. 325. l. 12.
r. bos^^. ibid. l. 17. r. (...) it. ibib. l. 13. r. villa. l. 25. r. prefato.
f. 324. l. 11. r. conduction (...) l. 13. r. impedit. ibid. r. plona; ly. f.
325. l. 16. r. pe^lapidem. (...) l. 17, 18. r. jur^. l. 2^. ad per.

The Contents of the first Chapter.
OF the Original of the Law. Of the coming of the English into this Land. Of
the first Constitutions. Of Offenses, and their division. Of the Crime of
Majesty. Of falsifying. Of Treason. Of Burning. Of Murder. Of Larcine. Of
Burglary. Of Rape. Of the Office of the Coroner. Of the Exchequer. Of inferior
Courts. Of the Turns of Sheriffs. Of Viewes of Franckpledges.
CHAP. I.
SECT 1. Of the Offenses against the Peace.
Of the Original of the Law.
ALmighty God showed more love to Man then to any other creature; when he made
him after his own image and gave him understanding; considering that he stood
continually ready to fall into sin by three manner of Adversaries, and
therefore he gave the Law to force and drive sinners to salvation by earthly
punishments; That for the pure love of God men would abstain from sin, and
thereof made Moses their Teacher, which place the Pope now holds.

That Law by Ordinance of our holy Predecessors is divided into two Volumes;
into the Cannon Law, which consists in the amendment of Spiritual offenses;
First, by Admonitions, Prayers, Reproofs, Excommunication; Secondly, into the
written Law, which consists in the punishing of temporal Offenses, by
Summons, Attachments, and punishments or penalties.

Of the Spiritual Law, the Prelates judged; and say Princes of the other Law:
The Law whereof this sum is made, is the written Law of the ancient usages
warranted by the holy Scripture. And because it is given to all in general, it
is called the Common Law. And because there was no other Law but that, were
general Councels and Parliaments in use, and that diversely in several places,
according to the qualities of the people of diverse Countries, and Boroughs;
they were according to ancient privileges changed for the ease of the people
of those places.

All our Usages and Laws are also laid for the keeping and exaltation of the
peace of God; and therefore it is to be known, That the people are not to be
adjudged by similitudes and examples not canonized, but by the love of Peace,
of Chastity, of Temperance, of Charity, of Mercy, and of good Works.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 2. Of the coming of the English into this Realm.
AFter that God brought down low the Nobility of the Brittons, who used more
force then right, he delivered the Realm to the most humble and simple of all
the countries adjoining; that is to say, to the Saxons, who from the parts of
Almaine became Conquerours thereof, of which Nation there were forty Sovereigns
who were Companions. These Princes called this Land (England) which before was
called Great Brittainie, or Britania Major. These Princes after great wars,
tribulations, and troubles, suffered for a long time, chose themselves one King
to Reign over them, to govern God; people, and to maintain and defend their
Persons and their goods in peace by Rules of Law. And at the beginning they
made the King to swear; That he should maintain the Christian Faith with all
his power, and govern his people by Law, without having regard to the Person
of any one; and that he should be obedient to suffer Right as well as his other
people should be.

And afterward this Realm was divided in Inheritances according to the number
of those Companions who then remained in the Realm, into parts, by Shieres,
and every one had a Shiere delivered unto him to keep and defend against the
enemies, according to every ones estate; That is to say.

Barkeshire Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire Cornwall Chestershire Cumberland
Dorset Devonshire Darbyshire Essex Barrickshire Yorkshire Norfolk
Not^inghamshire Northumberland Northamptonshire Oxfordshire Rutlandshire
Suffolk Gloucestershire Cambridgeshire Hertfordshire Herefordshire
Huntingtonshire Kent London Leicestershire Lancashire Lincolnshire Middlesex
Surrey Southampton Somersetshire Shropshire Staffordshire Wiltshire Westmerland
Worcestershire.
And although that the King ought not to have any Peer in the Land;
nevertheless because that the King of his own wrong if he offend against any
of his people, not none of his Commissaries can be Judge and Party; It was
behovefull by the Law that he should have Companions, to hear and determine of
all Writs, and Plaints, of all wrongs, as well of the King, as of the Queen,
and her Children; and of those especial where one could not have otherwise
Common Right: These Companions are now called Countees, Earls, according to
the Latin Comites; and so at this day are those Shires called Counties, in
Latin Comitatus; and that which is without these Counties, belongs to the
English by conquest.

Afer that time, these Companions, after the division of the Realm into
Shires, divided their people which they found scattering about into Centuties,
and to every Century they appointed a Centeyner, and according to the number of
the Centuries spoke every Shire; and to every Centeyner they assigned his part
by Metes and Bounds, to keep and defend the same with his Century, so that they
were ready to run to their Arms at all times when the enemies came, or other
needful occasion was. And these divisions in some places are called Hundreds,
according to the number of the first people; and in some places Tythings, or
Wapentakes, according to the English; (which is in French, taking of Arms)
These divisions they made, whereby the Peace, which consisted in charity and
true love, was kept and maintained.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 3. Of the first Constitutions made by the ancient Kings.
Of King Alfred.
FOr the Estate of the Realm, King Alfred caused the Earls to meet, and
Ordained for a perpetual usage, That twice in the year, or ostner, if need
were, in time of Peace they should assemble together at London, to speak their
minds for the guiding of the people of God, how they should keep themselves
from offenses, should live in quiet, and should have right done them by
certain usages, and sound judgments.

By this Estate many Ordinances were made by many Kings, King Ed. 1.
until the time of the King that now is; the which Ordinance; were abused, or
not used by many, nor very current, because they were not put into writing, and
certainly published.

One of the Ordinances was; That every one should love his Creator with all his
soul, and according to the points of the Christian Faith; And wrong, force,
and every offense was forbidden.

And it was assented unto, that these things following should belong to Kings,
and to the Right of Crown. Sovereign Jurisdiction.

The Sovereign Jurisdiction throughout the whole Land unto the midst of the
Sea encompasaing the whole Realm, as franchises, treasure found in the Land,
Waife, Estray; goods of Felons and Fugitives which should remain out of any
ones rights, Counties, Honors, Hundreds, Wards, Goales, Forests, chief
Cities; the chief Ports of the Sea, great Mannours; these Rights the first
Kings held, and of the residue of the Land they did infeoffe the Earls,
Barons, Knights, Sergeants and others, to hold of the Kings by the services
provided, and ordained for the defense of the Realm according to the Articles
of the ancient Kings.

Also Coronors were ordained in every Country, and Sheriffs to defend the
Country, when the Counties were dismissed of their Guards, and Bailiffes in the
places of Centyners. And the Sheriffs and Bayliffes caused the Free-Tenants of
their Bayliwicks to meet at the Counties and Hundreds; at which Justice was so
done, that every one so judged his Neighbor by such judgment as a man could
not elsewhere receive in the like cases, until such times as the customs of
the Realm were put in writing, and certainly established.

And although a Freeman commonly was not to serve without his assent,
nevertheless it was assented unto, that Free-Tenants should meet together in
the Counties, Hundreds, and the Lord Courts, if they were not especially
exempted to doesuch Suits, and there judged their Neighbors.

And that Right should be done from 15. days to 15. days before the King and
his Judges, and from month to month in the Counties, if the largeness of the
Counties required not a longer time; and that every three weeks Right should
be administered in other Courts; And that every Free-Tenant was bound to do
such suite; And every Free-Tenant had ordinary jurisdiction: And that from day
to day the Right should be hastened of Strangers, as in Courts of Pipowders
according to the Law-Merchant.

The Turns of Sheriffs and views of Free-pledges were Ordained; and it was
Ordained, That none of the age of 14. years or above, was to remain in the
Realm above forty days, if they were not first sworn to the King by an Oath
of Fealty, and received into a Decenery.

It was Ordained; That every Plaintiff have a remediall Writ to his Sheriffs,
or to the Lord of the Fee in this form. Questus est nobis C. quod O. etc. Et
ideo tibi (vices nostras in boc part committentes) precipimus quod causam
illam audias and legitimo fine decidas.

It was Ordained; That every one have a remediall Writ from the Kings Chancery,
according to his plaint without difficulty, and that every one have the
Process from the day of his plaint without the seal of the Judge, or of ths
Party.

It was Ordained; That Coroners should receive Appeals of Felony, and should
give the Judgments of Out-lawries, and should make the visnes in the Causes
aforesaid; And that all the next Towns should present to the Coroners in the
County the mischances of the bodies of the people, and the names of the
finders.

And that every Country should present Felonies, Mischances, and other Articles
presentable in the Eyres for offenses, that the Kings might send to summon them
to appear against the coming of the Kings, or of the Justices assigned to hold
all Pleas.

And for the great damages which the Commons suffer by Amercements issuing out
for Concealements, and for fault of these presentiments in Eyres it was agreed
unto; That these presentiments in Eyres should be by the Coroners chosen by all
the Commons of the County, and so the Coroners are as it were the Commons
Bayliffes as to these Charges: nevertheless they are the Kings ministers,
because they take an Oath to him. For personal trespasses, nevertheless the
Coroners are only punishable without any damage to those who chose them,
unless they have not sufficient wherewith to satisfy for their trespasses.

The Exchequer was Ordained in manner as follows; and the pecuniary penalties
of Earldomes, and Baronies certain, and also of all Earldomes and Baronies
entire or dismembered; and that those Amercements were afferred by the Barons of
the Exchequer, and that the Estreats of the Amercements be sent into the
Exchequer though they were amerced in the Kings Court.

It was Ordained; That after a plaint of wrong be sued, that no other have
jurisdiction in the same place, before the first plaint be determined; and from
the (...) came this clause in the Writ of Right, Et nist foreris vicecones
saciat.

It was Ordained; That every one of the age of fourteen years and above
should be ready to kill mortal offenders in their notorious sins, or to
follow them from Town to Town with Hue and Cry; and if they could not kill
them, the offenders to be put in exigent, and Outlawed or banished.

And that none should be Outlawed but for a mortal offense, and in no other
County but where he committed the offense.

It was Ordained; That the Kings Courts should be open to all Plaints, by which
they had original Writs without delay, as well against the King or the Queen
as against any other of the people for every injury but in case of life, where
the plaint held without Writ.

It was Ordained; That no King of this Realm should change his money, nor
impair it, nor inhannse it, nor make any other money but of Silver, without
the sssent of the Lords and all the Commons

It was Ordained; That Felonies should be tried by Appeals, and that Appeals
might sometimes be ended by Battle, and that Exigents of the Offenders should
continue by three County Courts before the Out-lawrie.

It was Ordained; That all Free-Tenants should be obedient, and appear at the
Summons of the Lords of the Fee, and if one caused a man to be summoned
elsewhere then in the Fees of the Avowants, or oftener then from Court to Court,
that they were not bound to obey such smmmons, if not at the charges of the
Avowants of the Summons.

It was Ordained; That Knights Fees should come to the eldest Son by
mecession of Inheritance, and that Socage Lands should be partable amongst the
Heirs rights, and that none might alien but the fourth part of his Inheritance
without the consent of his Heir, and that none might alien his Lands by
Purchase from his Heirs, if Assigns were not specified in the Deeds.

It was Ordained; That every one might endow his Wife Adestum Ecclesia, or of
the Monastery without the consent of his Heirs; that Heir Females, nor
Widows should not Marry themselves without the assent of their Lords, because
the Lords were not bound to take the Homages from their Enemies, or other
unknown Persons, and the same is forbidden upon pain of Forfeitures, whether
their Parents were cousenting thereunto or not; and that Widows in case they
Marry without the consent of the Guardians of the Lands should lose their
Dowries; That those also should be dis-inherited or lose their Dowries before
that they Married; Widows nevertheless this should not forfeit their
Inheritance for whoredom, and that the eldest Son should forfeit nothing to
the prejudice of his Ancestour, nor his Heirs living the Ancestour whose Heir
apparent he is.

It was Ordained, That the Lords of Fees might Summon their Tenants by the
award of their Peers into the Lords Courts or into his Counties, or the
Hundred at all times that they detain or deny to do their services in Deed,
or in Word, Ete contra, that is to say; The Lords against the Tenants, and
there they shall be acquitted or forfeit their Alegiance with the appurtenances
by the judgment of the Suitors, and all their Tenancy; and the Tortious or
outrageous Lords shall lose their Fees and the Services, and the Tenements
shall go to the chief Lords of the Fee.

It was forbidden, that none be destreyned by his moveable goods, but by their
bodies, or by their Fees, except in special Cases after mentioned.

It was Ordained that Infants should be in Ward; with their Lands and Goods,
and that the Guardians should answer for Trespasses done by their Wards, and
give satisfaction to those who were damaged, except of Felonies; and that their
Marriages should be to the Lords, and that should have Escuage Relief and
Aids of their Tenants which they held of the Lords, as to make the Heir of
the Lord Knight, and to Marry their eldest Daughters, and that the Heirs males
should do homage to their Lords, and the Females should swear fealty: and
that the Inheritance should descend to all the Children by warrant of right of
the possession, and that the male should bar the female, and the next the
more remote by warrant of right of propriety.

It was Ordained; That offenders guilty of death should not be suffered to
remain amongst the guiltless, and that the King should have the value of the
Lands and the rent for one year, and the wast of Felons Lands; and also that
he should have all Deodand; and that the Goods and Chattels of Usurers should
remain as Escheates to the Lords of the Fees.

Essoines were Ordained in mixed and real Actions, and not in personal
Actions, as after is said.

It was forbidden that any one should alien the profits of his Lands, or his
Rents to any one out of the Realm; and it was also forbidden, that none sold
Wine in the Kingdom but by Tonnell or Pipe.

It was forbid that no money was to be carried out of the Realm; and that none
should carry Wool out of the Kingdom, nor should kill Lamb, or Calf which
might live, nor Ox which was not gelt.

It was forbidden; That no Bishop doordaine Lay-m^n to the Order of Clerks
above the number which are sufficient to serve the Churches, whereby the Kings
Jurisdiction be destroyed: It was Ordained, That the poor should be sustained
by Parsons, Rectors of the Church, and by the Parishioners, so that none of
them dye for want of sustenance.

It was Ordained, That Faires and Markets should be in places, and that the
buiers of Corn and Cattle should pay Tole to the Lords Bayliffes of Markers
or Faires; That is to say, a false penny of six shillings of good, and of
less, less, and of more, more; so that no Tole exceed a penny for one manner
of Merchandise: and this Tole was given to testify the Contracts, for that
every private Contract was forbidden.

It was Ordained; That no action was receiveable to Judgment, if there was not
a present proof by Witnesses or other things; and that none was bound to
Answer to any Suite, not to appear to any Action in the Kings Courts before
the Kings Justices, before they found Sureries to Answer damages, and the costs
of Suite if damages lay in the C^se, except in four offenses; Diss^rsins,
Cirtification of Dissersius, Attaints, Rediffeisius and other Cases. To which
Ordinance King Henry the first put this mittigation in favor of poor
Plaintiffes, that those who had not sufficient Sureties present, should make
satisfaction according to their ability, according to a reasonable taxation;
and in the same manner in Summances, and in hatred of Perjury Attaints were
Ordained in all Actions.

It was forbidden; That no Merchant Alien should repair into England but at
four Fayres, and that none such should remain in the Realm above forty days.

Of the Courtesy of King Henry the first, It was granted; That all those who
survived their Wives who were with child by them, should hold their Wives
Inheritance for ever.

Many other Ordinances were made by them, and since have been made in aid of
the Peace, according as afterward shall be said.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 4. Of Offenses, and the Division of them.
THe division of Offenses is according to that which appears by the
punishment. Mortal, or Venial.

The mortal Offenses are these: Of Majesty, Falsifying, Treason, Burning,
Larcency, Burglary. Homicide,


Of the Offense of Majesty.
The Crime of Majesty is an horrible offense done against the King; and that is
either against the King of Heaven, or an earthly King.

Against the King of Heaven in three manners. Heresy, Venery, Sodomy.

Against the earthly King in 3. manners.

1 By these who kill the King, or compass so to do.

2 By those who dis-inherite the King of his Realm, by bringing in an Army, or
compass so to do.

3 By those Adulterours who ravish the Kings Wife, the Kings lawful eldest
Daughter before she be married, being in the Kings custody; or the Nurse, or
the Kings Ant, heir to the King.

Heresy is an evil and false belief, arising out of Error of the true
Christian Faith; under this offense is Witchcraft o^ Divination, which are
members of Heresy; and in case less notorious they come by presumptions of
ill works, which are by evil Art, arising from an ill belief; and sometimes
of a firmer belief they do wonders, and sometime they come by open confessions
of Error.

So Eresie is an Art to Divine.

Divination properly is taken in the ill sense as Prophecy is taken in a good
sense.

Divination used to be in many kinds, whereof one manner of Divination was
through an ill belief, by the which the Witch caused Samuel to rise, who
warned Saul of his death.

Another kind is Piromancy, which is done by fire.

Another is Areomancy, which used to be done by signs in the Air.

Another is Hydromancy, which is done by signs in the water.

Another is Geomancy, which is done by signs in the land.

Another is Negromancy, which is done by death, by making the dead to speak.

Another is South-saying, which was done by signs in the entrails and bowels
of Birds.

On the other part, some Diviners used to put trust in Lots, some in Songs,
some in Verses of Psalms; some in carrying Gospel and Charms about their
necks; some in Enchantments and Spells; some in signs in the entrails of
beasts, and in the palms of the hands.

Some were called Mathematitions, and Magij, and Divined by the Startes.

Others were called Arioles, who took their answers from the Devil by evil
men.

Others South-sayers, who numbered nights and days, and hours whereby they
ordered their business. There were many other kinds, all which manner of
Divinersate to be by the Word of God himself, and authority of the Church to be
excommunicated, and sobidden as much as Mahometry, and things against the true
Faith. And this S. Augustine proves by many Reasons; and hence it is, that they
who travel to Witches or Diviners to know things to give that to the creatures
which belongs to God alone. Wherefore these wicked doers are to be removed
from the society of Gods holy people, so that no good Christian be taken with
their Art, nor partner in their sins.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 5.
THe Crime of Majesty, or offense against the King is neighbor to many other
offenses; For all those who commit Perjury, whereby every one lies against the
King falls into this offense. As the Kings Ministers who are sworn to do
Justice, and forswear themselves in any thing, so those who disseise the King
of any of his Franchises, or of any manner of Right which belongs to the
Crown by Occupations, or Purpestures, or in any other manner although it be no
mortal offense.

Into Perjury fall all those Subjects of the King who appropriate to themselves
Jurisdictions over the King, and of themselves make Judges, Sheriffs,
Coronours, and other Officers to have Counsance of Law.

Into Perjury against the King fall all the Kings Subjects who appropriate to
themselves Jurisdictions of Counties, Honors, Socknes, Retorna brevium, or any
thing which may fall to his Inheritance; as Wards, Escheates, Reliefs, Suits,
Services, or Marriages, Faires, Markers, Enfang thef. Out Fangthef, Waife,
Estray, Treasure found in the ground, Warren in their own lands, or in the
lands of others, Tole, Pavage, Pontage, Chinueage, Murage, Carriage, or other
the like Customs.

Into Perjury against the King fall those the Kings Subjects who take
Abjurations of Felons, and Fugitives, and are no Coroner, nor warranted by the
King so to do; and those who put out any Indicted, or Appealed of any Crime
out of the Roll of the Coronour; and those Coronours who oftener then once
receive Appeal; of Aprovers, or procure that a man who is innocent be appealed
by an Approver. And those who have detained Appeals of Approvers of foreign
Acts, or whereby any forraigner is Appealed. And those Coronours who wittingly
suffer the goods and chattels of Fugitives to be less valued then they ought
to be of right; Or conceal them in part or in all, or detain them to their
own uses, to the damage of the King; or deliver them elsewhere then to the
Towns; or for lucre have taken more then they should in damage of the Towns;
Or suffered their Servants to have the garments, or other things which are to
be seized for the Kings use; or the garments of the dead, or delay to do their
office through covetousness.

Into Perjury against the King fall those Officers who pardon Fines and
Amercements which belong to the King, or any manner of penalty either corporal
or pecuniary without special warrant. And those Officers who by Summons and
Ad. journments make the people to travail in vain, as to Goal deliveries,
Assizes, Enquests, or otherwise; and all those Subjects who bear Arms against
the King, or run away from his lawful Army or Battle; And those Ministers
who unlawfully stop, or counsel the people that they go not into War with the
King, or that they are not bound to go, where they have reasonable summons;
and that the people be not made Knights but according to the Statutes of the
Realm.

Into Perjury against the King fall all those the Kings Subjects, who hold Plea
of Withernam, and have not return of Writs, or hold Pleas of Distresses, or of
any other thing which belongs to the Kings Jurisdiction only, without the
Kings special Commission; or hold Plea in case of life, of imprisonment, of
bloodshed, of false Judgments, or of any thing disavowable of right without
the Kings Writ, or Commission

And all those the Kings Ministers who maintain false Actions, false Appeals,
or false defenses.

Into Perjury against the King fall those Ministers, who deny to Plaintiffes
original Writs possessory, Attaints, or of Formedon; or otherwise do delay
their Rights; and those who wrongfully do delay, or disturb right Judgments,
and those who wrongfully favor wrongful Judgments; and all those who use
their Privileges or Liberties wrongfully, or too largely, contrary to their
knowledge.

Into Perjury against the King fall those Ministers who receive Fines to other
uses then to the Kings use for Treasure trove, for Wrerk, Waife, Estray,
Alliens for bloodshed, or impri^onment, Withernam, Reddissesin, or Dissesin;
or forswear themselves to resist, that a lawful Judgment have not execution;
for Usury, perpresture upon the King, or for any other thing whereof the
Counsance does belong to the King.

And those Receivers who pay not the Kings debts as they ought to do, and are
enjoined, or render to him part for satisfaction of the whole, and do not pay
the King the rest.

Into Perjury against the King fall those who Charge the King wrongfully. And
those who spend the Kings Quarries, Timber, or other things otherwise then in
the Kings Service without sufficient warrant.

Into Perjury against the King fall Escheators, who make wast of the Kings
Wards, or in his Fees, or unlawfully take Venison, Fish, or other goods; and by
their authority seize the goods of the dead, and for gain release them; or
endow Widows to the Kings loss; or make hurtful extents for the King
acompting for less then the very value to the King; Ot willingly suffer
possessions to remain in Mortmaine which ought to be seized into the Kings
hands, and whereof the King ought to have the profit, or which receive more of
their Bailiwickes then they answer to the King, ot who wittingly suffer
Feoffements of Lands, or of Advowsons of Churches prejudicial to the King, or
who suffer them to alien Wards or Marriages to the Kings prejudice, or suffer
the ages of infants to be proved in damage, or to the Kings prejudice take
Fines for Wards, or Marriages without Writ, or deceive any one by color of
their Office; or leavy money upon any upon his own proper Amercement.

Into Perjury against the King fall Sheriffs, who too high charge the People,
by a surcharge upon the people of Horses, or of Dogs, and who leavy Fines or
Amercements for escapes of Prisoners, or for any thing against Law before the
escapes be adjudged by the Justices in Evre, and who increase or diminish
Fines, or Amercements beyond the Wills of the Afferrors or Jurours, and those
Officers who conceal people deliverable to prison, and do not bring them to
Judgment.

Into Perjury fall all those Officers who are reproveable for the sufferance,
negligence, or consent to the alienation of the franchises, or of the right of
the King wrongfully, or to the occupying, or withholding of them.

And all those who elsewhere change old money which is forbidden for new, then
at the Kings change.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 6. Of Falsifying.
FAlsifying is done in two manners; by falsifying the Kings Seal, and his Money.
His Seal may be falsified in many manners. It is always falsified when a Writ
is sealed, whereof the engrossing, and the matter, or the form is not
justifiable by the King, nor by the Law, nor by the lawful Customs of the
Realm, which is not to be intended of every Writ abatable.

It is falsified if a man scale therewith after that the Chancellor, or other
Keeper thereof has lost his Warrant, either by death, or in any other manner.

It is falsified when a Writ, or a Patent passes against the Kings forbidding.
It is falsified by those who seal by ill Art, or by Warrants not justifiable,
and it is falsified by those who seal and have not authority to seal.

Of falsifying the Money. The Money was Ordained round and quarterable, and use
so to be made that the outward eircle was apparent through the whole, otherwise
it was not to be received; and that the 1. l. was of 12. ounces of sine Silver,
and it was assented unto that the King should have 6d. for the sealing of every
Writ, and for the coynage of every pound of money 12.d. and no more of moneys
current in the Realm.

The money is falsified by him who by evil covetousness makes it not
justifiable; and it is falsified by those who make it, and have not authority
or warrant so to do; It is also falsified by those who for evil gain put
more alay in it then of right there ought to be. And it is falsified by all
those who make it without the Kings coynage. And it is also falsified by all
those who by ill Art counterfeit it, and by those who clip or wash it for ill
gain.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 7. Of Treason.
TReason is not done but betwixt Alies, who may be by Blood, Affinity, and
Homage, Oath, and Service. By blood, as if one of Parentage do any thing to
another of his blood which is the cause of his death, or dis-inherison, or to
loss of homage; for the quality of Treason is the taking away of life or
member, or decrease of earthly Honor, ot the increase of villainous shame. And
in the same manner is this offense betwixt Aff^^^, as betwixt Sisters, Sons
in Law and Parents; sot as cosinage is a line of diverse percenets discending of
the same Stock, and drawn from carnal Copulation. In like manner Affinity is
a neernesse of Persons discending from carnal copulation where there is no
blood; and as this Office is done betwixt Affines, and Cousens, so it is also
betwixt Allies.

Alliance is sometimes by Service, Homage, and Oaths.

Which happens sometimes by reason of Fealty issuing from the service of the
Fee, sometimes issuing from the Oath of Service of the body, and as one of the
Allies, Parents, or Affines commit this offense against the other, in the same
manner may they do against them.

By Service; as if one who I have rewarded, to do me Fealty, and be seized in
demean of a Manor or other gift, or service, or Courtesy, falsify my
Seal, or ravish my Daughter, or my Wrie, or the Nurse, or the Ant of my Heir,
or does any thing which is the cause of my death by a Feionious compassing the
same, or to the great dishonor or damage of my body, or of my goods, or
discovers my Counsel, or my Confession, which he is charged to conceal.

And by reward is meant, Fee Possession, Robe, Church, Rent, or other gist; and
meat and drink curing the service.

And as such a one may commit Treason against me, who takes from me so much
that he is seized, in the same manner I may offend against him; by such Action
or demand he shall have against me, as I may have against him.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 8. Of Burners.
BUrners are those who burn a City, Town, House, Men, Beasts, or other
Chattels, Felloniously, in time of peace for hatted or revenge. And if any one
put a man into the fire, whereby he is burnt or blemished by the fire, although
he be not killed with the fire, nevertheless it is an offense for which he
shall dye. Under this offense sometimes fall those who threaten burning.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 9. Of Manslaughter.
Manslaughter is the killing of a man by a man; for if it be done by a beast,
or by mischance it is not Manslaughter.

This offense is two ways; either by the Tongue, or by the Act.

By the Tongue three ways; by Counsel, Commandment, or Denial.

By Counsel, as he who counsels another to kill; and so also is it by
Commandment.

By Denial; as he who denies sustenance to a man.

By Act many ways; sometimes by Striking, by Poisoning, by Necessity, by Will.

By striking, as it afterward appears in the Appeals.

By poison or venoming; as by secret felony, and fained friendship giving
poison to another to eat, or poisoneth or envenomed any thing, whereby a man
is presently or in time killed. Or by Imprisonment; as he who keeps the body
of a man in prison by color of Law, till he dies. By Chance; as by casting,
or drawing of a Vessel, or other thing, and some one is killed by mischance;
or by the falling of a Tree, and other the like cases. But you must distinguish
where the killing is justifiable by Law, for there it is no offense; and when
he does not that which he ought to do, and the party uses all the diligence
which he may, crying out, and defending himself, for then he does not greatly
offend; but he who does not so do, he offends mortally.

By necessity; where in you ought to distinguish whether the necessity be
avoidable or not, and if it be avoidable, it is a mortal offense.

By Will; and that may be either of himself, or of some other person.

Of himself; as in case when people hang themselves or hurt themselves, o^
otherwise kill themselves of their owner felony.

Of others; as by beating, famine, or other punishment; in like cases, all are
Man-slayers. Also this offense is done willingly; as by those who pain men so
much as ought not, or not so much as they ought, he offends mortally. But it
may be alleged; that by reason of the pain the dead does failly confess the
Felony; and sometimes by the Reward of the Coroners or Justices are destroyed;
and as it is of those who cast and leave Children and others who cannot go in
Deserts, or in such places and return not to them though they do now dye in
the Deserts, God succouring them. And also false Jurours, and Wunesses are
Menslayers, and those who appeal others, or scande^ously Indict them, or in
other manner falsely accuse them.

And also they fall under this offense who Imprison the people in such places,
or put them to such punishment, where it may be found by Enquest that by those
means place, or punishments they came fooner to their deaths.

Three ways was God himself killed; for Tongues killed him indeed, with the
other who Crucified him, or procured him so to be; By the Tongue Pilate killed
him, who Commanded him to be killed; By Will, the false witnesses, and all
those who consented thereunto killed him; And hence it is that the Evargelifts
differ of the hour of his death, in setting forth his Passions.

This offense does contain many branches: viz. Imprisonment, Mayheim,
Wounding, Battery, False Witnesses.


Imprisonment is the wrongful detaining of a man's body, and that may be in two
manners; either in a common Prison of the King; or in a private Prison which is
forbidden.

In a common Prison none ought to be put, if he be not attainted of an offense
which requires death; or especially appealed, or indicted, and by Judgment of
a false and wrongful Imprisonment.

A private Prison is 1. sometimes rightful and justifiable; 2. wrongful.

The same is lawful and justifiable, when a man who is Baileable, is taken and
put in custody till he has found Bail to do that which he ought.

People are in Custody in diverse manners; In one manner by the warrant of Law,
as it is of Enfants within age, Women in the Custody of their Husbands; men of
Religion in the Custody of the Abbots; or other Sovereigns of their houses;
and Villains in the Custody of their Lords.

In another manner people are in Custody by Common assent, as it is of Idiots,
of people wasters of their estates, of madmen, and of those who are drawn to
follow infamous, though pardonable offenses, who are to be in Custody in such
Cases.

Into the offense of Manslaughter fall all those by whom a man dies in
Prison; and that may be either by the Judge, who delayeth to do Justice, or by
durenesse of the Keepers, or by other unjustifiable occasion.

Into this offense fall all those through whose default people dye, being
forsaken of those who are bound to sustain them.

And those who kill a man imprisoned, by a surcharge of pain, in case when any
is adjudged to penance.

And all those who unjustly adjudge a man to death; and those who assent
thereunto, and false Witnesses who falsely restifie a mortal offense against an
innocent man.

Into this offense fall all Jurours, and false Physicians, and maintainers of
killing, and those who beat or wound a man, so so that he is sarre from
living, and nearer to his death.

Mayhem is the want of member, or the enseebling of it by breaking, or cutting
the bones o^a man, whereby he is less able to combare.

And Turgis says; That the loss of the fore-teeth is Mayhem, and of the
turning of the mouth, and of the little finger, and of the right joint; and the
taking away the toes of the feet is Mayhem, and the more reason where more
loss appears.

And Sennall said; That the loss of the eyes is Mayhem, if nature have not
taken them away; but the loss of the middle Teeth, or of the Nose, or the
Ears is not Mayhem, although the body are thereby reviled or dishonored.

And Billing says; That Rasure by turning the bones of the Head, or of the
Scull of the Head backward; is Mayhem, and also of other bones.

A wound is cause of death made by cutting of the hand, or the arm
felloniously, which is showed by the length, breadth, or depth; for the cutting
of a stone, or of a staff seldom becomes a wounding but a bruising.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 10. Of Larcines.
LArcine is the treacherously taking away from another movables Corporeal,
against the will of him to whom they do belong, by evil getting of the
Possession, or the use of them. It is said a taking, for bailing, or delivery
is not in the Case; It is said of movables Corporiall, because of goods not
moueables, or not Corporiall; as of Land, Rent, Advowsons of Churches there can
be no Larcine. It is said; Treacherously, because that if the taker of them
away conceive the goods to be his own, and that he may well take them, in such
Case it is no offense. Nor in case where one conceives that it pleases the
owner of the goods that he take them, but thereof there ought to be apparent
presumption and evidence. There be two parts of Larcine.

One which is done openly in the day by Robbery. The other which is done in the
night, or in the twilight.

Robery is done sometimes By 1. Thieves. 2. Tortious Distresses of Bayliffes
and other, who wrongfully extort from the people. 3. Extruders and Disseifors
who with force openly take the goods of others as before is said 4. By others,
who run away with other men's Wives, or Wards, and thei^goods.


Into this offense fall all such who take the goods of others by Authority of
the King, or of other great Lords, without the consent of those whose goods
they are.

Larcine is committed sometimes by open Theeve, sometimes by Treacherous; as it
is in diverse kinds of Merchandises, and as it is o^ Labou^er, who steal their
labors; and as it is of B^^iffes, Receivers, and Administrators of others
goods, who steal them in not giving their Accounts.

Into this offense fall all those who steal Purses or Cloke-baggs, or do any
other Larcine by increase or covetousness of themselves, and all their
favorers.

Into this offense fall all those who suffer Thieves to pass when they may
arrest them; those also who may take or hinder them, or warn them of malice
and do nor; and those who conceal them for love of Theef-boore; or other
reward, or wittingly receive their Larcine, or their persons.

Into this offense fall all those who steal by false measures, and false
weights, or in any other manner of treachery by color of Merchandise, and
those who wittingly suffer them where they may hinder them.

Into this offense fall those who wrongfully amerce the people with outrageous
Amercements, or outragiously afferre Amercements, or wrongfully condemn their
Neighbors either in damages, or penalties; and those who wrongfully detain
treasure found. Wreck, Waife, or Estray which belongs to the King; and those
who otherwise find them and do not restore them when they may, and know to
whom they do belong.

Into this offense fall all those who take wrongful or outrageous Tole in
Markets, Ciries, Boroughs, Towns, Mills, or elsewhere; and those who take
pavage, murage, chinniage, carriage, or other manner of Customs more then they
ought to do.

Into this offense fall those Bailiffes who do enquire in Turns and viewes of
Franck-pledges of more Articles then of personal offenses, and of wrongs done
to the King and his Crown, and of wrongs done to the common people, and those
who by extortion take moneys or Fines for Beaupleader, or for which the Jurours
are not charged; and those who amerce any of their own heads without
reasonable affirment of the people sworn thereunto.

Into this offense fall those who unjustly distraine, and those who sell
distresses for the Kings debt within the 15. days.

Into this offense fall all those Officers of the Exchequer, and others who
forbid to make Acquittances under the Exchequer Seal, to every one for so much
as he has paid; and who oftener then once cause a debt to be leavied; who to
take Rewards, whereby the Towns do not in due manner according to the
Constitution of Winchester; or who suffer that the people be not surnished with
Arms, according to Common appointment.

Into this offense fall all stealers of others Venison, and of Fish in Ponds,
and of Conies, Hares, Pheasants, Partriges being in Warrens, and otherfowl,
Doves and Swans, of the Eires of all manner of birds.

Into this offense fall all the Sheriffs, Bailiffes, and other the Kings
Officers, who unjustifiable by extortions take money of the people, as for
defaults unjustifiable, or for sheaves or other Custom unalowable, or for Plea
whereof the Judge has no jurisdiction; and those who take money to put men out
of Pannells of Juries, and put others in.

Into this offense fall all those who take Lands, Tenements, Horses, or other
things, and use them beyond the appointed for the loan of them; and those who
by the authority of their Bailiffes make unjustifiable Collections for moneys,
or other provisions, or Corn in Sheaves for Scottalls, or other Feastivalls,
or do to the people other unlawful grievance in the like case. And those
sworn Officers who cause Fines, or Amercements, or other m^nner of duty to be
oftentimes leavied upon one man, without making restitution; and those officers
who take of other then of the King, or of their Lords, to do their Office; and
those who oftener then twice in the year hold Sheriffs Turns, or who oftener
then once in the year hold views of Frankpledges in one Court; and those who
by unjustifiable Articles amerce the people; and those who at Mills or Markets
take outrageous Tole, and those who amerce the people by Presentiments not made
by the whole Decenry, or by others then of Freemen.

Into this offense fall they who do any thing upon another Inheritance by
evil covetousness, or for hatred.

Into this offense fall Counters who take outrageous Sallary, or not deserved,
or who are attainted of ill defense, or of other discontinuance, and those who
deny their Seals in Judgment, and those who make Contracts which are
forbidden.

Into this offense sall Usurers, who lend money or other things, through
covetousness to take the forfeiture. And those who rob, or steal the
Marriages of others, or run away with others Wives, or villains with the goods
of others.

And all Fore-stallers, by whom Victuals or Cattle are made dear.

They are Fore-stallers who within any Town or Franchise buy to engrosse, and
unlawfnlly to sell more dear; and those Butchers who sell unwholesome flesh for
wholesome; and those Fish-mongers who buy and sellagainst the established Law;
and all those of what Mysteries soever they be, who do deceitfully in their
trade or Mysteries.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 11. Of Hamsockne, or Burglary.
BUrglary by an ancient Ordinance is a mortal offense; for the Law is, That
every one be at peace in his own house.

This offense is not done only by breaking of a house, but is also done by a
fellonious assault of Enemies in time of peace, upon those who are in their
houses with intent to repose there in peace; whether the assault be to kill, or
to reb, or to beat those who are in rest within their houses. And although it
be that these offenders do not accomplish their purpose, if nevertheless they
make any breaking by their assault of the doors, windows, or walks, to enter
felloneously, they are guilty of this crime.

Into this offense fall all those who felloniously force their entry into
another house, and therein do any violence against the peace, although they
do not break the house, and that as well in the day time as the night; and
those who diffeise the people in such case, or cast them our of their houses,
and out of their peaceable possessions wrongfully.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 12.
RApe is done two ways, that is to say, of things, and of Women. This offense
is here put because King E. 1. by his Statute made it mortal, which is more
grounded upon the will, then upon diseretion; for one fortis Whoredom, another
Fornication, another Adultery, another Incest, and another Rape; but to speak
properly we are to distinguish of the offenses, whereof the first offense is
greater then the other.

Whoredom is the deslouring of a married woman felloniously.

Fornication is to ravish women not Married.

Adultery is to ravish another wife.

Incest is to ravish Cousens, Parents, or Affines.

Rape is properly the taking away of a woman for the desire of Marriage.

Rape nevertheless according to the meaning of the Statute is taken for one
proper word, given for every enforcement of a woman, of what condition soever
she be.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 13. Of the Office of the Coroners.
TO Coroners anciently were enjoined the keeping of the Pleas of the Crown,
which extend now but to Fellonies and Adventures.

There are 2 kinds of Coroners General and Special

To the Office of general Coroners it belongs to receive the Appeals of all
the County of Fellonies done within the year; to award the Exigents of
Contempts, and to pronounce the Judgments of Out-lawries; and more, to enquire
in what Pledge they were, or Decenery, or of whom Mainprized, and in whose Ward.

Special Coroners are Coroners of Liberties, and of privileged places.

To the Office of the one and the other it does belong, to view the Carcases of
the dead by Felony, or by mischance; or to see the burnings, and the wounds,
and the other fellonies, that is to say, every one in his Bailiwick; and to see
Treasure tothe^ and Wreaks of the sea, and to take the acknowledgements of
Felony, and to give the Abjuration to flyers to sanctuary, and to take the
Enquests of Felonies happening within their Bailiwicks.

As to the view of the Carcass of the body of a man, it is his office that so
soon as he shall be certified thereof, to send to the Hundred of the place to
summon sufficient able men of the next Towns, that at a short day certainly
named, they be before him at such a place, all which done the Carcass is to be
viewed; and if he find it there buried, that it be taken up, and to the
Coroner it belongs to Record the names of them who buried him; and if it has
been decreased or endamaged by ill keeping, or lain so long that it cannot be
judged how it came by its death, that the same also be Recorded, that this
negligence be punished at the coming of the King, or his Justices in Air into
those parts; and if the Coroner, with the advice of the people present be able
to judge of the death, then they are to present the manner of his killing,
whether he dyed of another Felony, or of his own, or by mischance; and if of
blows, whether of a staff, or a stone, or a weapon; and the the Coroner is to
Record in his Book the names of those who were summoned and appeared not, that
the same offenses of disobedience remain not nnpunished, whereby the Coroner
could not at that time do his office for want of Jurours.

In those Enquests lie no Exceptions, or Challenges to the Persons of the
Jurours; but he ought to make his Pannells of the discreetest, and of the
ablest and best of them, and to see that the Carcass be buried.

The Pannells are to be of Decenies; for Coroners at these Enquests, Sheriffs
at their Turns, Bailiffes at the viewes of Franck-pledges, Escheators and the
Kings Officers of his Forests, have power by authority of their Office to send
for the people, which none other have without the Kings Writ; and that is for
the keeping of the peace, and for the right of the King, and for the common
people.

The Articles are these.
YOu shall by your Oaths declare of the death of this man, whether be dyed of
Felony, or by mischance; and if of Felony, whether of his own, o^ of another;
and if by mischance, whether by the Act of God, or of man, and if of Famine,
whether of Poverty, or of common Pestilence; and from whence he came, and who
be was, and if he dyed of another Felony, who were Principalls, and who
Accessours; and if Hue and Cry were duly made or not; and whether the men fled
according to Law or not, and who threatened hun of his life or members, and who
were Sureties for the Peace; or whether he dyed of long Imprisorment, or of
pain, and by whom he was farther from Life, and neaver to his death; and so of
all prevading circumstances that can come by presumptions.

And in case where he dyed by hurt, or fall, or other chance by the Act of God,
so that he had not power to speak before his death; then you shall tell the
names of the finders, and of his next Neighbors, and who were his Parents, and
if he were killed there or elsewhere, and if elsewhere, by whom, and how he was
thence brought, and the value and kind of the Deodand, and to whose hands it
came; for in case a man dies by a fall, in such case according to Randulfe de
Glanvill, it is Ordained, whatsoever is cause of his death is Deodand; as it is
for whatsoever moves in the thing whereof be fell, as Horse, Cart, Millstone;
also Vessels are sometimes Deodands but not in the sea; the sums upon the
Horses, the goods lying in Ships, Mills, Carts, and Houses, are not acconnted
for Deodands.

And in case of another Felony, then the Jurours declare who were the Felons,
in what Pledge, Dosien, Ward, or Maineprize they were, and from whence they
came, and where they returned.

And if he was killed by false Judgment, then that the Jewry declare who were
the Judges, who the Officers to form the Judgment, and who Accessories; and
if of false Witnesses, who were they, and the Jurours.

And if he dyed of his own Felony, then that they tell the manner, and the
value of his goods, and the names of his Parents, and the Finders, and of the
Neighbors, and the value of the wast.

There are nine manner of Accessories.
1 Those who command. 2 Those who conceal 3 Those who allow and consent. 4
Those who see it. 5 Those who help. 6 Those who be partners in the gain. 7
Those who knew thereof, and did not interupt or hinder it by forbidding. 8
Those who knowingly receive. 9 Those who are in the force.

Of misadventures in Tournaments, in Courts and Lists, King Henry the 2.
Ordained, that because at such Duells happen many mischances; That each of them
take an Oath that he bears no deadly hatred against the other, but only that
he endeavors with him in love to try his strength in those common places of
Lists, and Duells, that he might the better know how to defend himself against
his enemies; and therefore such mischances are not supposed Felony, nor the
Coroners have not to do with such mischances which happen in such common
meetings, where there is no intent to commit any felony.

Coroners also ought to make their views of Sodomies, and of monstrous births
of Children, who have nothing of humanity, or who have more of other Creatures
then of man; and Coroners were to bury them. But the holy Faith does more and
more now daily confirm men, that they abstain to commit these horrible sins
which they used to do. Also they used to enquire of butnings, and who put to
the fire, and how; and whether it were by felony or mischance; and if of
felony, of whose felony, and who were the Principal, and who the Accesories,
and who were the threatners thereof.

It belongs to them at their viewes to enquire after Treasure privately
hidden, and found in the ground, and how the Treasure was found, and by whom,
and how much there was; and if it be all seized upon, or all carried away, and
who carried it away, and how much; and who were the finders of it, and the next
Neighbors.

At their viewes of Wrecks, they ought to enquire whether the Wreck came to
Land, what be the things, and how much, and the value of them distinctly by
parcels; and if a Man, Beast, Cat, or other living thing came with it or not;
and that by Divident it be delivered to the next Town, that they may answer
the Lord if he come to claim it, and receive it within the year.

At his view of wounds, it behooveth him that he view the Wound, and make a
Record of the length, breadth, and depth of it, in aid of the wounded if he
complain, in case the wound be healed, the Coroner of the County may help him
by the Record. Also it belongs to them to view Burglaries, and to enquir of
the names of the Felons, and what they have to live of, and from whence they
came, or whether they returned; and of the Menasors, and of other Circumstances.

The Jurours are severed into doziens, so that one dozien speak not with
another, but that every Jury answer by it self, and review the Presennnents,
and the Verdict, so are they chargeable, to accuse the Conspirators who procure
to save any Offendant, or to indict an innocent in such Enquests.

All the Verdicts before the Coroners as well of Accessories as of the
Principal are at the Commandment of the Coroners receiveable by the Sheriffs,
and the Principal and Accessories are to be taken and delivered to Maine
prisors, and in the presence of them and of the Sheriffs their goods movables
and not movables are to be seized into the Kings hands, and by a reasonable
Extent and Divident, the movables are deliverable for the finding of the
Prisoners, and for their needful and reasonable sustinance, and the King to be
answered the residue, saving, the right both to the Principal if they be
acquitted, and to the Accessories by Mainprise.

And if any one fly, or make resistance, and will not answer the Law, it is
lawful for every one to kill him, if he cannot otherwise apprehend him.

And Bermund awarded; That all goods of those that fled should remain forfeit
to the King, saving to every one his right, although that afterward he yield
himself to the Peace.

And Iselgram said; That he is no flyer who appears in Judgment before he be
Outlawed.

If any one fly to Sanctuary and there demand protection, we are to
distinguish; for ^^le be a common Thief, Robber, Murderer, Night-walker, and
be known for such a one, and discovered by the people, etc of his Pledges and
Deziners; or if any one be convict for Debr, or other offense upon his own
confession, and has sorjered the Realm, or has been exiled, banished,
Outlawed or Weyved; or if any one have offended in Sanctuary, or joined upon
this hope to be defended in Sanctuary, they may take him out thence without any
prejudice to the Franchue of Sanctuary. But in the right of Offenders, who by
mischance fall into an offense mortal out of Sanctuary, and for true
Repentance run to Monasteries, and commonly confess themselves sorrowful, and
repent, such offenders being of good fame, if they require tuition of the
Church, King Hen. 2. at Clarendon granted unto them, that they should be
defended by the Church for the space of forty days; and Ordained that the
Towns should defend such flyers for the whole forty days, and send them to
the Coroner at the Coroners view. It is in the election of the offender to
yield to the Law, or to acknowledge his offense to the Coroners, and to the
people, and to waive the Law; and if he yield himself to be tried by Law, he
is to be sent to the Goal, and to wait for either acquittall or Condemnation;
And if he confess a nortall offense, and desire to depart the Realm, without
desiring the tuition of the Church, he is to go from the end of the Sanctuary
ungirt in pure Sackcloth, and there swear that he will keep the straight way
to such a Port, or such a passage which he has chosen, and will stay in no
parts two nights together, until that for this mortal offense which he has
confessed in the hearing of the people he has avoided the Realm, never to
return during the Kings life without leave, so God him help, and the holy
Evangelists; and afterward let him take the sign of the Cross and carry the
same; and the same is as much as if he were in the protection of the Church.

And if any one remain in Sanctuary above the forty days, by so doing he is
barred of the grant of Abjuration if the fault be in him, after which time it
is not lawful for any one to give him victuals.

And although such be out of the peace, and the protection of the King. yet
none ought to dishearten them, all one as if they were in the protection of the
Church, if they be not found out of the high way, or wilfully break their
Oaths, or do other mischiese in the high way.

If he who is killed be unknown, in such case the Coroners ought to show the
murdered clothes, according to the Statute of King Kanute, who Ordained for
the safeguard of his Danes whom he lest in England; That if a man unknown were
killed, that the whole Hundred should be amerced to the King by the Judgment
of Murder. Four things excuse the Hundred from the Judgment of Murder.

1 If the Felon be known who killed him, for if the Felon be known, then may
he be attainted of the Felony.

2 Another, If the Felon be apprehended, or if he fly to a Monastery.

3 If the killing come not by Felony, but by mischance.

4 The fourth in case where a man is a felon of himself, and because there
could be no Murder of a man known, it belongs to the Coroners to enquire in
those Fellonies of what Kindred or Lineage those that were killed were, so that
one may know by their Parents whether they were of the English nation or not;
for if no man could name their Parents, it was great presumption that they were
Alliens. And thence it is that one calls that Parentage Englishire, where the
Parentage be found of the Fathers or of the Mothers side; and if no Englishire
be found, then that it has the Judgment of Murder.

To the Office of the Coroners it also belongs to receive the confession of
Felons in the hearing of Witnesses, whereby of a grand Felony done by many
offenders it came to pass in the time of King John, that one of the offenders
petitioned the King; That he would pardon him his life, for that he had accused
the other offenders who were his companions, and that the King Outlawed them;
and at the request of the King the Earls granted; That in Sanctuary; only it
should remaire for Law, that offenders having confessed the Felony might accuse
others; and that it was then Ordained; That the Coroners should take such
Confessions, and such Appeals but once, and not many times.

Women are not admitted to bring Appeals, nor Infants within the Age of 21.
years, no Idiots, nor men professors, not Clerks indicted or appealed of any
Crime, nor men attainted of false Appeal, not those who are vanquished in
battle, but those who have government of themselves.

The Appelees are to be seized upon body and goods twice in the year, that is
to fay; once after Michaelmas, and another time after Easter; And because
Sheriffs to do the same make their Turns of the Hundred, such visnes are
called the Sheriffs Turns; where it belongs to the Sheriff to enquire of
all personal Offenses, and of all the circumstance; of Offenses done within
the Hundred; and of the wrongs of the King and Queens Officers, and of wrong
done to the King and the Common people, according to the Articles aforesaid in
the division of Offenses.

The Appeals are to be seized upon body and goods as before is said; and if any
Forrainer be appealed who is out of the power of the Coroner, the Kings
Commisrary is to cause him to appear, or Outlaw him.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 14. Of the Exchequer.
THe Exchequer is a place which was Ordained only for the Kings Revenew, where
two Knights, two Clerks, and two learned men in the Law are assigned to hear
and determine wrongs one to the King and Crown in right of his Fees, and the
Franchises, and the Account, of Bayliffes, and Receivers of the Kings Money;
and of the Administrators of his Goods, by the oversight of one Chief who is
the Treasurer so England.

The two Knights usually called two Barons, were for to afferre the Amercements
of Earls, Barons, and of the Tenant; of Earldomes and Baronies, so that none be
amerced but by his Peers.

To this place there was a Seal assigned, with a Keeper of it, to make
Acquittances upon every payment to those who desired them, and to seal Writs
and Escheates under green Wax issuing from thence for the Kings Revenue.

In this place there are also Chamberlaines and many other Officers, who belong
not very much to the Law.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 15. Of inferior Courts.
FRom the first Assemblies came Consistories which we now call Courts, and that
in diverse places, and in diverse manners; whereof the Sheriffs held one
Monthly or every five week; according to the greatness or largeness of the
Shires. And these Courts are called County-Courts, where the Judgment is by
the Suitors if there be no Writ, and is by warrant of Jurisdiction ordinary.
The other inferior Courts are the Courts of every Lord of the Fee, to the
likeness of Hundred Courts; and also in Fayres and Markets, where right is to
be ministered without delay, whether the matter concern the Plaintiff or
Defendant, according to the first Ordinances; in which Court; they have
counsans of Debts, Covenant; broken, and of Trespasses, and of such small
things which pass not forty shilling; value; and also they have Counsans of
Trespasses, and forfeitures of the Fees betwixt the Lords Plaintiffes, and the
Tenants Defendants, Et e contra.

There are other inferior Courts which the Bayliffes hold in every Hundred,
from three weeks to three weeks by the Suitors of the Freeholders of the
Hundred. All the Tenants within the Fees are bounden to do their Suit there,
and that not for the service of their Persons, but for setvice of their Fees.

But Women, Infants within the age of 21. years, deaf, dumb, idiots; those
who are Indicted or Appealed of any mortal Felony before they be acquitted,
diseased persons, and excommunicated persons are exempted from doing Su^t, and
although it be that such Freeholders may do Suits at inferior Courts by
their Atturnies, nevertheless the Judgment is not to be given or holden for
foreign; and if any Plea be removed by Writ of Justities, Replegiatie, wast,
or of other nature, that enable the Jurisdiction from which the Writ is
originally sent, and returneable.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 16. Of the Sheriffs ^urnes.
THe Sheriffs by ancient Ordinances hold several meeting; twice in the year
in every Hundred, where all the Freeholders within the Hundred are ^ound to
appear for the service of their Fees; that is to say, once after Michael^as,
and another time after Easter; and because Sheriffs to do this make their
Turn; of Hundreds, such appearances are called the Sheriffs Turns, where it
belongs to Sheriffs to enquire of all personal offenses, and of all their
Circumstance, done within those Hundreds and of all wrongs done by the King and
Queens Officers, and of wrongs done to the King, and to the common people,
according to the points aforesaid in the division of offenses.

All Freeholders within the Hundred are not bounden to appear at these
Courts, for King Hen. 3. excused some persons, and said; That it was not
needful that Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, religious
Persons, nay such people, not other who were exempted to do Suit at inferior
Courts should appear in proper person, if their appearance were not necessary
for some other cause then only to make their appearance. And if any one has
diverse Tenements in diverse Hundreds, his presence is not to be excused
notwithstanding the Kings grant.

CHAP. 1. SECT. 17. Of viewes of Franck-pledges.
OF these first Assembly, it was also Ordained; That every Hundred do make a
common meeting once in the year, not only of the Freeholders, but of all
Persons within the Hundred, Strangers and Denizens of the age of 12. years and
upwards, except of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, teligious Persons,
and all Clerks, Earls, Barons, and Knights, Feme Coverts, Deaf, Dumb, Sick,
Idiots, infected Persons, and those who are not in any Dozien, to enquire of
the points aforesaid, and of the Articles following, and not by villainies, nor
by women, but by the afferment of Freemen at the least; for a Villain cannot
indict a Freeman, nor any other who is not receiveable to do Suite in
inferior Courts, and therefore it was anciently Ordained; that none should
remain in the Realm if he were not in some Decenny, and pledge of Freemen;
it belongs also to Hundredours once a year to show the Franck-pledges, and
the Pledgers, and therefore are the Viewes called the View of Franck-pledges.

The Articles are these.
BY the Oaths you have taken, you shall declare whether all they who ought,
do appear or not.

If all the Freemen of the Hundred, or of the Fees be present.

If all the Franck-pledges have their doziens entire, and all those who they
have in pledge.

If all those of the Hundred, or of the Fees of the age of 12. years and
above, have sworn fealty to the King; and of the receivers of others wittingly.

Of all Bloud-sheds, of Hue and Cry wrongfully leavied, or rightfully leavied
and not duly pursued, and of the names of the Pursuers; of all mortal
offenses, and of their kinds, and as well of the Principalls as of the
Accessories.

Of all Exiles, Out-lawes, Warves, and banished Persons returned, and who have
since received them, and of those who have been judged to death, or abjured the
Realm.

Of Usarers, and of all their goods.

Of Treasure t^ove, Wrecks, Waifes, Estreyes, and of every purpresture and
encreachment upon the King, o^ upon his Dignity.

Of all wrongs done by the Kings Officers and others to the common people, and
of all purprestures in common places, in the Land, or in the Water, or
elsewhere.

Of Boundaries remsved to the common Nuisance of the people.

Of every breach of the Assize of Breed, Bear, Wine, Clothes, Weights, Measwes,
Beams, Bushels, Gallons, Fills, and Yards, and of all false Scales, and of
those who have used them.

And of those who have bought by one kind of measure, and sold by another kind
in deceit of Merchants, or buyers.

Of the disturbers of f^aming lawful Judgments, and of the framers of
wrongful Judgments, and of the Abbettors, and consenters thereunto.

Of every wrongful detinue of the body of a mar, or other distress.

Of every false Judgment given by the View in the other Hundred, o^ in the Fee.

Of every Fore-stallment done in the common Highway.

Of wrongful Replovies, and wrongful Reco^sses

Of every outrageous Distress in another Fee, or in the Market for a foreign
contract.

Of all Bridges broken, and Causies, ways, common Bridges, and who ought for
to repair hem.

Of the makers of Clothes dwelling out of great Towns in places forbidden.

Of Tanners and Curriers of Leather.

Of Butchers, and who sell unwholesome flesh for that which is sound; and of all
those who sell corrupt Wine for sound Wine; or Bear, Ale raw and not well
brewed, for that which is good and wholesome.

Of small La eines.

Of cutters of Purses.

And of those who suffer people to use any Mystery for reward or Fee.

Of Receivers of Thies-boot.

Of makers and baunters of false Dice.

Of outrageous Tole-takers, and of all other deceivers.

Of all manner of Conspiraters.

And of all other Articles availeable for the destruction of offenders.

And the Presentiments are to be sealed with the Seals of the Jurours, so that
none by fraud do increase or diminish them; and that which cannot be redressed
there by these Presentiments, is presentable at the Sheriffs first Turn; and
those things which the Sheriffs cannot redress are to be presented by the
Sheriffs into the Exchequer.

All those who are Presented for any offense which is mortal, and banished
Persons who are returned, and their receivers, and those who are not in
allegiance under the King are to be seized upon, and their goods to be seized
into the Kings hands.

And although it be so that the Bailiffe can not hear and determine any Action
at the Leete, nevertheless if any one present be grieved by any wrongful
Presentment, and complain thereof; or if the Bayliffe or Steward have a
suspicion that the Jurours be in some case perjured by concealing of any
offense which is Presentable, or of any offender; It is lawful for the
Bayliffes (or Stewards) by twelve more disereet men, to enquire of the truth
thereof without delay; and although that the last Jurours joy that the first
are perjured, nevertheless because that no Decenery or Jurour is not
attestable with less then two Juryes; and because the latter Jurie is not
taken but ex officio of the Bayliffe, and not in the nature of an Attaint, the
first Jurours are not to be taken Attainted, but are only to be amerced.

And if any one profer himself to swear fealty to the Kings he is first to be
pledged in some Franck-pledgs and put in the Decenety; and afierwards sworn to
the King; and then he is forbidden to offend and common with offenders, and he
is to be enjoined to be obedient to his chief pledge.

And to take this Oath in those Views is none exempted who is past the age of
21. years, man or woman, Clerk nor Layman, except Alliens, Strangers,
Mossengers, or Merchants, and those who are in custody.

At these Viewes of Turns, and viewes of Franck-pledges Essoignes hold, where
the absence of those who cannot be there is excusable, and such Essoignes are
adjournable to the next Courts following, that the Essoigners have their
Warrants.

The Contents of the Second Chapter.
OF Actions. Of Judges. Of Plaintiffes. Of Rewards or Fees. Of Pleaders or
Countees. Of Attachments. Appeals, and to whom Appeal is given. Of Goales and
Goaters. Of Bayles in Appeals. Of the Appeal of Majesty. Appeal of
falsifying. Of Appeals of Tredson. Of Appeals of burning. Of the Appeals of
murder. Of the Appeals of Robbery and Larcine. Of the Appeal of Burglary. Of
the Appeal of Imprisonment. Of the Appeal of Mayhorn. Of the Appeal of
wounding. Of the Appeal of Rape, Of real offenses at the Kings Suit. Of
offenses personal at the Kings Suit. Of venial offenses and personal Suits.
Of the Assize of Novel dissesin. Of Distresses. Of Contracts. Of villinage and
Neifitie. Of Summons. Of Essoignes. Of Atturnies.
CHAP. II.
CHAP. II. SECT 1. Of Actions.
WHen it is said that Kings and Princes have the Government and Correction of
Offenders, with aid of the Prelates; and to that intent they are Gods
Vicegerant, on Earth, and to do the same they have Jurisdiction over the
offenders by pains, and chiefly those offenders which are under their
Jurisdiction; nevertheless Kings cannot not ought not to take notice of the
offenses of others without Actions of Accusers, which well appears by the
example which God showed when he was in his Consistory, and demanded who was
the Accuser of the woman-sinner; and because none presented himself an Accuser
against her, to give us a perpetual example that right Judgment cannot be
given without there be three persons at the least, viz. a Judge, a Plaintiff,
and a Defendant, God said to the woman-sinner, That she should go in peace or
quiet, since it belongs not to a Judge, to be both Judge, and Plaintiff; and
therefore it behooveth to speak of Actions, and who are and may be Judges, and
who Plaintiffes, and who Defendants.

An Action is nothing else but a lawful demand of right, and there are three
manner of Actions which have their Introductions by Writs, and by Plaints in
manner as follows, viz. Personal, Real, and Mixed.

CHAP. II. SECT. 2. Of Judges.
ALthose who are not forbidden by Law may be Judges. To women it is forbidden
by Law that they be Judges; and thence it is, that seem Coverts are exempted to
do Suit in inferior Courts. On the other part, a villain cannot be a Judge
by reason of the two estates which are repugnants; Persons attainted of false
Judgment cannot be Judges, nor Infants, nor any under the age of 21. years,
nor infected persons, nor Idiots, nor madmen, nor deaf, nor dumb, nor
parties in the Pleas, nor men excommunicated by the Bishop, nor criminal
persons; for God when he was upon Earth entered into the Consistory where a
sinner was to be judgeed to death, when God wrote upon the ground, and said to
the Suitors who came to Judge her, Who of you is without sin? and there gave
a Judgment as an example to Judges, who take upon them every day to Judge the
people, whereby he taught them, That none should take upon themselves so high
and noble a ^alling, as to sit in the Seat of God to Judge offenders, when
they themselves are guilty and Condemnable.

And those who are not of the Christian Faith cannot be Judges, not those who
are out of the King; Allegiance; next, those who have no Commission from the
King cannot be Judges, not none whose Authority is repealed, not any one after
Judgment is given in the Cause; an example thereof appeateth in the Writ of
Right, Et^nist ficeris, viceconnes faciat; not none after death, or the
Return; none whose warrant is vicious, not any one if his superiout will not
have him. A Judge Commissary has not power to Judge but according to the
points, and within the words of his Commission; and the original Writ, no more
then the Arbitrary Judge has power to go beyond the points of his submission.

CHAP. 2. SECT. 3.
PLaintiffes are those who pursue their right against others by plaint.

All may be Accusers or Plaintiffes who are not forbidden by the Law.

Infected Persons, I^iots, Infants within age cannot accuse, or be Plaintiffes
without their Guardians, nor Criminal Persons, nor an Outlawed; exiled or
banished Person, nor a woman wayve, nor a villain without his Lord, nor a Feme
Covert without her Husband, nor religious Persons without their Sovereigns,
nor Persons Excommunicate, nor deaf, nor dumb Persons without their
Guardians, nor the Judges of the Cases whereof they are Judges, nor any one who
is nor of the Kings Allegiance, so as he has been more then forty days within
the Realm, except Approvers who are suffered to accuse criminally people of
his own condition in favor of the peace.

How lawful men ought to complain.
They ought in friendly manner to show their offenders, that is to say, their
Trespassours that they reconcile or amend themselves toward them; and if they
will not do so, and the Cause be Criminal, then ye are to distinguish, for
if any one seek revenge, then it behooves him to bring his Action by Appeal
of Felony, and if he seeks only repa^ation of damages, then he behooves to
bring his Action by Writ which is to contain the name of the King, and of the
Parties, and the name of the Judge, and of the County, and the Plaint in the
demand, if the damages or the demand exceed forty shillings; and if not, then a
Plaint suffices without a Writ. And because all Suites of the Plaintiffes
could not be determined upon the first preferring of the Suits, nor the Suitors
or Plaintiffes presently releeved in their Suits. Therefore Kings used to go
from County to County every seven years, to enquire of Offenses and
Trespasses, and of wrongs done to themselves and to the Crown, and to the
Common people; and of all wrongs, errors, and negligences of their Officers,
and of all false Judgments; of pains pardoned or wrongfully Judged, or
outrag^ously; of Out-lawes returned, and of their Receivers, of the valewes of
Counties out of Hundreds, Towne^, Manners, and of moveable goods which belong
to the King, and to the Crown; of the Lands of Idiets, of alienators of Fees,
of offenses against the Kings Inhibition, of Privileges and Franchises
prejudicial to the Kings of Bridges and High-wa^e^, and of all other needful
Articles; and they used to do right to all Persons by themselves, or by their
Chief Justices; and now Kings do the same by the Justices Commisfaries in
Air, assigned to hold all Pleas.

Infant of such Eyres are Sheriff, Turns needful, and viewes of
Franck-pledges, and when the people by such Enquests were indicted of any
mortal offense, the King used to Condemnethem without Answers, which usage
still remains in Almaine; but of pity and mercy, and because that man by
reason of his frailty cannot keep himself from sin (if he abstain not from
it by the Grace of God) it was accorded that no Appelee or Indicter should be
condemned without answer. And Kings had no Jurisdiction but of mortal
offenses, and of the rights of the Crown, and of their own rights, and of the
wrongs of their Ministers, and of wrongs done against Common Law, and Common
Ordinances, and the Articles of Eyres.

CHAP. 2. SECT. 4. Of Rewards and Fees.
KIngs used to give Rewards to the chief of the Stock, and to all those who
faithfully served them; and from the Rewards of Kings others took example to
reward their servants; and because no Freeman was bouden to serve against his
will, by reason whereof none were bound to serve the King or any other but by
the service of his Fee, or by reason of his Residence or dwelling in another
Fee; some are bound to serve the King for a certainty by the year. And it is
not lawful for those Officers who take wages certain of the King, to take any
wages of the people.

But the Judges who serve the King, it is lawful for them to take twelve pence
of the Plaintiff after the hearing of the Cause and no more, although there be
two Judges, or two Plaintiffes in one Action: and the Pleader six pence, and a
Knight sworn a witness four pence, and every Iurour four pence, and the two
Sumners four pence

Nevertheresse in the time of King Henry the 1. It was Ordained and assented
unto; That Jurors sworn upon Enquests of Office, as in Assizes, Recognisances
of Assizes, Redissessins, ^ertisicates of Assize, and Attaints, and other the
like should not take Fees because they did the same Ex officio; and to answer
these moneys, and the damages are the Defendants chargeable, if Judgment be
given against them.

And to those who followed any Suit for the Kings profit, and were not any of
his Ministers, ^ing Henry the ^. gave to them the twentieth part of the profit
with their reasonable ^o^^, In like manner the Judge was not to hear the
Plaintiffes Cause if he put not in security to answer his Adversaries damages,
if he complain of him wrongfully.

CHAP. II. SECT. 5. Of Countorr or Plaaders.
THere are many who know not how to defend their Causes in Judgment, and there
are many who do, and therefore Pleaders are necessary, so that that which the
Plaintiffes, or Actors cannot, or know not how to do by themselves, they may
do by their Sergeants, Atturnies, or friends.

Countors are Sergeants skillful in the Laws of the Realm, who serve the
common people to declare and defend Actions in Judgment, for those who have
need of them for their fees

Every Pleader of others Causes ought to have a regard to four things. 1. That
there be a person receiveable in Judgment, that he be no Heretic,
Excommunicate Person, nor Criminal, nor a man of Religion nor a woman, nor
within the Orders of a Subdeacon, nor a Benificed Clerk who has cure of
Souls, nor under the age of 21. years, nor Judge in the same Cause, nor
attainted of falsity in his place.

2 Another thing is; That every Countor is chargeable by Oath that he shall do
no wrong not falsity contrary to his knowledge, but shall plead for his Cliant
the best he can according to his understanding.

3 The third thing is, that he put no false Dilatories into Court, not false
Witnesses, not move or offer any false corruptions, deceits, leasings, or false
lies, not consent to any such, but truly maintain his Clyents cause, so that
it fail not by any negligence or default in him, not by any threatening, hurt,
or villainy disturb the Judge, Plaintiff, Sergeant, or any other in Court,
whereby he hinder the right, or the hearing of the Cause.

4 The fourth thing is as his Sallery, concerning which four things are to be
regarded; 1. The greatness of the Cause. 2. The pains of the Sergeant. 3. His
worth, as his Learning, eloquence, and gists. 4 The usage of the Court.

A Pleader is suspendable when he is attainted to have received sees of two
Adversaries in one Cause; and if he say o^ do any thing in dispite or contempt
of the Court; and if he fall under any of the points aforesaid, besides the
exceptions which are to the person of the Pleader; for no man can be a Pleader
who cannot be a Plaintiff or Actor.

CHAP. II. SECT. 6. Of Attachments.
Personal Actions have their Introductions by Attachments of the body; real
by Summons and mixed Actions; first, by Summons, and afterward by Attachments.

The Law requires that offenders in case of death have not such mittigation or
favor that they be brought or summoned, or distreined to appear in Judgment
by taking of their Cattle if the offenders be known, and notorious, and the
Plaintiff pursue them to soon as he may. And if any one fly for such offense,
then according to the Statute of Winchester he was to be followed with Hue and
Cry, with Horn and Voice, so that all those of one Town who can are to follow
the Felon to the next Town; and if any such Felon be attaint and convict of
the felony, let him be killed if he cannot be otherwise apprehended. But it is
otherwise in felonies not known, for it is not lawful to kill the offender
without his Answer, if he may be taken alive.

And if any one would complain to have revenge, or to drive the offender to
the salvation of his Soul; let him go to the Coroner of the place where the
offense was done, and set forth his complaint there as he will prove it, and
the Coroner is to cause the same to be distinctly enrolled; and if he cause him
to record it as murder, being corrupted to destroy his Neighbor by his plaint;
so that he have Judgment; the like is to be done to him if he prove not his
plaint.

At the next Court after the Appeal is enrolled it belongs to such
Plaintiffes to recite their Appeals, and to find Sureties to pursue them, or
to remain in Prison till they have found Bail; and to the Maine-prisors such
Plaints are to be delivered by Coroners body for body, that they shall pursue
their Appelees, and to cause them to appear in Court to receive Justice when
they shall be demanded, if they do not prove their Appeals.

The Personal offenses are these: Imprisonment. Mayhem. Wounding. Battery.
Perjury. Usury. Rescusses. Forestallings. Breaking of Parkes. Resistance of
framing lawful Judgments. Executions of false Judgments, and all wrongful
offenses. Carrying away of Treasure trove, of Wrecks, Waife, Estrayes.


The Attachments of mortal offenders are by their bodies without Sureties, and
the Attachments of venial Personal offenders are also by their bodies, but
yet they are baileable.

Real offenses are those upon which are grounded Writs of right, of Cosinage,
of Dower; of right of Advowson, of Enter, of Escheate, Writs of Quo jure, of
Formedon, and of all Writs, feodalls.

Mixed offerices are those upon which these Writs are framed, viz. of Customs
and Services, of Villinage, of Covenant, of Homage, of rendering Distresses, of
Mesne and other Acquittances, of Escheates, and the like, and by reason of the
mixture of their Introductions, they are called Mixed.

CHAP. II. SECT. 7. Appeals, and to whom Appeal is given.
THe Action of Appeal is not given to all alike, but every one is allowed to
have his Action of Trespass to whom any Trespass is done, except such as
cannot have any Action at all.

Every one may have an appeal of Burning to whom the damage is done, and the
property of the thing burnt does belong.

Parents, Kindred, and Allies used to be admitted to bring Appeals of Murder;
but the Appeal of the Wife of the killing of her Husband is to be received
before all other; and yet not of all his Wives, but of her only who lies
betwixt his Arms, which is as much as to say in whose seisage he was murdered;
for if he had many Wives, and all were alive at the time of his murdet;
nevertheless she only is admitted to bring the Appeals of all the rest whom
he last took to be his Wife, although in right she be not his Wife; and the
reason thereof is because it belongs not to the Temporal Court to try, which
was his Wife of right, and which in Fact; and the Appeals of all other are to
be suspended, the pendant the same Appeal brought.

After the Appeal of the Wife is the Appeal of the Son lawfully begotten,
of the murder of his Father to be received before all other, it is (said
lawfully begotten) because a Bastard is not to be accounted amongst Sons, for
the Common Law only takes him to be a Son whom the Marriage proves to be so.

After the Appeal of the eldest Son, the Appeal of the next of blood is used
to be received, and so from one degree to another in the right Line of
Cosinage; and if the blood fail in that Line, then they of the Collateral
Line are admitted to bring the Appeal; or the Kinted where the blood fails,
according to the degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, and especially in the
Line of the Fathers side; but the Appeals of Murder were restrained by King
Henry the 1. to the four next degrees of blood.

And if any one within the age of 21. years do bring an Appeal; the
Defendant is not bound to answer so high an Action until he has passed that
age; and therefore such Appeals are to be suspended till both the Parties be
of full age, if exception in the case be taken to the Nonage.

Men and Women, Clerks and Laymen, Infants and others of what condition soever
they be may bring Appeals, except those who are not suffered to bring any
Actions; and although it be that many do bring Appeals, yet one nevertheless
is admitted to continue, and pendant that, all the others are to be suspended.
And in all Cases the Appeals against the Accessories are to be suspended
pendant, the Appeal against the Principal, be it one or many.

CHAP. II. SECT. 8. Of Process of Exigent in Appeals.
AT the first County the Coroner is to do no more but to enter the Pledges,
who properly are Main-prisors, and to Command that such take the Appeals, and
seize all their Possessions and their goods into the Kings hands, as before is
said; and if they be taken, that they be kept till due deliverance be of them,
and if they be not to be found; and the Plaintiff come at another County, and
recite his Appeal or Appeals, then are such Appelees demandable only by their
names, and by such names as they are best known by, that they appear to
Answer the Kings Peace, for if any one be Appealed as Son of the Father, and is
known by another Surname, the Appeal is insufficient, and by consequence
abatable at the peril of the Plaintiff; and at the third County they are to
be demanded in like manner as before; at which County Court if the Appelees
appear not, not are taken into Main-prise to appear at the next Court,
Judgment is to be given against them for their contempt by the Coroners; and
those who do appear before Judgment of the Coroner, are presently to be
delivered over to the Goal, where they are to be received without difficulty
of Fine, or request.

CHAP. II. SECT. 9. Of Goales and Goalers.
A Goal is nothing else but a common Prison, and as a Leper, or a man who has
a diseased body is not to be suffered to dwell or remain amongst men who are
sound; so mortal siune is a kind of Leprosy, which makes the Soul
abominable unto God, and therefore such mortal sinners or offenders ought to
be separated from the society of the people. And to the end that Innocents be
not infected with their offenses, Goales were Ordained in every County to keep
such mortal offenders in, there to remain till Judgment were given against
them in case the offenses were notorious.

There are 2 kinds of Prisons Common and Privite.


Every common Prison is a Goal, and none has a Goal but the King only.

A private Prison is another Prison, from whence every one may escape who can,
so as he do no other Trespass in the escape. None are imprisoned in a common
Prison but for a mortal offense, and therefore it was forbidden by King Henry
the 3. That none should leavy money for any escape in the Land, if the escape
were not adjudged before the Justices in Air, whether for the same a Corporal
or a pecuniary Punishment were awardable or not; and because it is forbidden
that none be pained before Judgment, the Law requires, That none be put
amongst vermin, or in any horrible not dangerou place, not into any other
pain; but it is lawful for Goalers to fetter those they doubt, so as the
Fetters weigh no more then 12. ounces; and to enable the keeping of those in
the Goal who are violent, outrageous, or do other Trespass there.

CHAP. II. SECT. 10. Of People Bayleable in Appeals.
SOme Appeals of mortal offenses, although they are not bayleable by Law,
nevertheless they are suffered to be bayled when they are brought into the
Goal; as namely, the Appeals of Murder, Robbery, Burglary, Larcine; or out of
Prison, where it is found that they are wrongfully Appealed, and for such case
was the Writ De odio and accia invented.

Those who are condemned to have Corporal punishment are not to be Bayled; but
it is otherwise of those who are imprisoned for a Fine, or any other pecuniary
penalty or punishment.

CHAP. II. SECT. 11. Of the Appeal of Majesty.
OF the Crimes of Majesty, not of falfifying, not of any thing which concerns
the Kings right, there lies no Appeal, but Actions, or Indictments.

For slanders of Sodomy, our ancient Fathers would never agree thus for the
scandalls of so doing, that any one should bring Actions by way of Accusation,
not Indictments, not would ever assent that they should be heard of in regard
of the abominablenesse of the sin; but they Ordained, that such notorious
sinners should be forthwith Judged, and Judgments framed against them.

Of the imagining of the Kings death, and of other kind of offenses of Majesty
against an earthly King, there were Accusations but for Indictments; for every
true Subject was with all expedition to show the same to the King, so that he
be not taken or seized upon by his long stay, or by great delay, in what cases
the Accusations are to be received; and in full Parliament let the Accuser by
himself, or by a Sergeant do it, according as it was done in this case in the
time of King Edmond in these words.

Rocelyn here says against Walligrot; That at such a day, in such a year of
the Reign of such a King, into such a place came the said Walligrot to this
Rocelyn, and found him to be in Counsel, and in assistance with Atheling,
Turkille, Ballard, and others, to Arrest, or to make Prisoner, or to kill our
Lord King Edmond, and to do the same they were sworn to keep Counsel, and
to commit this Felony according to their power.

CHAP. II. SECT. 12. Appeal of Falsifying.
THis offense is not openly done, it is seen by a false Writ, or false money
found in ones possession, and although that three Persons are necessary in
Judgment in this case, nevertheless it is Ordained; That the possessour of
ill things be by the Judge Ex officio driven to answer to the Title of their
Possession thereof, which is not so in all Cases.

And if there be any one who will not plead to Jugdement, then he is to be
returned to the Goal, and all his goods are to be seized into the Kings hands,
and to be seized upon as in all Criminal Actions brought by Appeals or
Indictments; also in venial Actions such contumacies used to be condemned for
not pleading, as by their pleading and lawful Attainder.

And if any one says that he came to the money lawfully, and does not know by
whom, not none o^fer themselves against him to prove the affirmative of the
Action; then it belongs to the possessour of the money to prove the
affirmative of his Answer.

And if any one says, that it came to him from a man certain, let it be as
after herein is said.

CHAP. II. SECT. 13. Of Appeals of Treason.
TReason is set forth in Appeals in this manner, according as it is found in
the Rolls in the time of King Alfred.

Bardulf here does appeal Dirling there for that, that in as much as this same
Dirling was the Allie of the same Bardulf, the said Dirling came such a day of
the year, etc. and during the Alliance ravished the Wife of the same Bardulf,
or counterfeited his Seal; or did him some other mischief. Or thus; Hakenson,
Father, or other Parent, or Lord, or Allie, this Dirling killed; or thus,
remained in Aid, and in Counsel with Daffray, the adversary of the this
Bardulf in speech which touched the loss of his life, or members, or of his
earthly Honor; or thus, discovered his Counsel or his Confession; or thus,
whereas he ought to have a lawful enrolement according to Law of such a Plea,
the same Dirling falsely enrolled the same to his dis-inherison, or otherwise to
his damage; or thus, whereas he was his Attorney in such a Plea, before such
Judges to gain or lose, and should have done him right, he lost by his
default, or by his folly, negligence, or collusion, or restored the thing in
demand, or did him such hurt. Or thus; whereas he should have excused him, or
essoigned him such a day, etc he suffered him to lose the Possession, or such
other thing through his default; or thus, whereas he ought to have truly spoken
for him in such a Case, the said Dirling did ill advise him, or speak against
him in such a Io^nt; and afterward thus, this Treason did the said Dirling
feloniously as a Felon, and traitorously as a Traitor, and if he will deny it,
Bardulf is ready to prove it upon him by his body; or as a mayhened man, or a
woman, or a Clerk ought to prove.

And although that advice be given to some, that it belongs not to the
Plaintiff to show the proof of his Action, until it be denied of the adverse
Party to hasten right, nevertheless such usage is suffered, as in this case
following, and others it is; as if any Sheriff or other, take one to be Bail
or Surety for another and he denies it, it behooves the Plaintiff to say that
he wrongfully denies it, and therefore wrongfully; for in such a year, such a
day, and before such a one, of his own will he became Pledge for such a one,
and the Plaintiff to hasten his business suffered to show the same in his
Declaration, and if he denies it, etc. the Answer of the adverse Party is
suffered to be taken, and afterward he is to go to proof by his Replication.

CHAP. II. SECT. 14. Of Appeal of Burning.
THe Appeals of Burnings are in this manner; Cedde here appealeth Harding
there (which he sit-names) for that, that whereas this same Cedde had one
house, or diverse; or a stack of Corn, or of Hay, or a Mill, or other manner of
goods in such a place; or thus, whereas Wetod, Father, or Mother of this Cedde
was in such a place such a day, etc. the same Harding came thither, and put
fire into the house, and burnt the said Wetod therein, whereof he dyed; and
this felony the said Harding did felloniously.

CHAP. II. SECT. 15. Of the Appeal of Murder.
OF the Offense of Murder, the Appeals are such, Knotting here Appealeth
Carling thus; That where Cady, Father, Brother, Son, or Uncle of this
Knotting was in Gods peace and the Kings, scil. in such a place, the same
Carling came thither, and the same day and year, etc. with a sword, or other
kind of weapon run him through the body, gave him such a wound, in such a part
of his body, whereof he dyed; this murder he did upon malice fore thought
feloniously, etc. Or thus, with a Hatchet, or with a Stone, or a Staff struck
the said Cady upon the head, or elsewhere, of which stroke he dyed such a day,
at such a place, etc. or thus, That where the same Cady was hurt, in such a
part of his body, of a curable wound; or had such a sickness, or curable
Disease, and put himself to curing of this Carling, who said he was a
Physician; the said Carling came, and took upon him the recovery of the said
Cady, who by his folly, negligence, etc. feloniously killed him; Or thus, so
long delayed his deliverance, whereby he killed him; Or thus, hung him, or
feloniously killed him; Or falsely Judged Regicald who first attainted the 12.
Jurors, Witnesses, who wrongfully hanged Gordian her Husband by 24. Jurors,
who afterward by several Appeals hanged the first 12. Jurors; Or thus,
pained him so much to make him confess, and to be an Approver, that he falsely
acknowledged himself to have offended, and made him to Appeal Innocents of
Crime, so that it lay not in Carling that the same Knotting was not adjudged to
death; Or thus; whereas the said Knotting lay mayhemed upon his bed, and was
reckoned so young; or so old, or so sick that he could not go, the said
Carling came and carried the same Knotting from such a place, such a day, etc.
to such a Water, Ditch, Marle-pit, or Defart, and therein threw him, and so
left him without help or sustenance, so as he did as much as lay in him, that
he was not there dead of Famine; this mischance he did unto him feloniously, as
a Felon, etc.

CHAP. II. SECT. 16. Appeals of Robbery and Larcine.
THe Appeals of Robbery are these? Osmond here appealeth Saxemond there, That
whereas this Osmond had a Horse of such a price, the said Saxemond came such a
day and robbed him of his Horse, etc. or of such a Garment of such a price
feloniously; or of two Oxen of such a price, or other kind of goods of such a
price, etc. he received the said goods so stolen, or was aiding, or consenting
thereunto.

Of La^cine thus: Armelwolde here Appealeth Oskerrill there: That whereas he
had such goods, namely, etc. he feloniouslly, and as a Theife stole them away.

In these Actions mere two rights, the right of the possession, as of the
thing robbed or stolen out of his possession who had no right in the property,
as of things taken from the Baylee, or Lessee; and the right of property as it
is of a thing stolen or robbed out of the possession of him who has the
property in the thing.

CHAP. II. SECT. 17 Of the Appeal of Burglary.
OF Burglary are these Appeals; Athalf here appealeth Colgrum there; That
whereas the said Athalf was in such a place in peace, etc. thither came the
said Colgrum, and with force and arms assaulted his house, and in such a part
brake it, or did such like other violence feloniously, etc.

CHAP. II. SECT. 18. Of the Appeal of Imprisonment.
OF the Appeal of Imprisonment thus; Darling here appealeth Wiloc there; For
that whereas the said Darling, etc, the said Wiloc came and arrested the said
Darling, and brought him to such a place, or at such a day, and put him into
the Stocks; or in Irons, or in other pain, or enclosure, from such a day
until such a day, etc. or thus; contrary to sufficient Bail offered by him,
in a case baylcable detained him, or after Judgment given for his deliverance
from such a day to such a day, this felony he did feloniously, etc.

CHAP. II. SECT. 19. Of Appeals of Mayheime.
Appeals of Mayheime are these; Umbred here appealeth Maimawood there; For
that whereas the said Umbred, etc. the same Maimawood came and made an assault
upon him of forethought malice, and armed in such a manner, cut off the foot,
or the hand of the said Vmbred; or with such a staff stroke him upon the head
whereby he pierced the scull of his head; or with a stone struck out his three
forereeth, whereby he mayhened him; this Mayhem he did feloniously, etc.

CHAP. II. SECT. 20. Of the Appeal of wounding.
OF Wounding are these Appeals; Barnings here appealeth Olif there; That
whereas the said Barnings, etc. the said Olif with such a weapon struck him,
and wounded him in such a part of his body, which wound contained so much in
length, so much in breadth, and so much in depth; and this wound he gave him
feloniously.

CHAP. II. SECT. 21. Appeal of Rape.
AN Appeal of Rape is in this manor; Arneborough here appealeth Atheling
there; For that whereas the said Arneborough, etc. the said Atheling came, and
with force cast her down, and in dispite of her feloniously ravished her, and
because that every Rape used not to be holden for a mortal offense, no Appeal
was thereof, if therein she did not say, and took away her Virginity.

CHAP. II. SECT. 22. Of Offenses real at the Kings Suit.
THere are many who seek not Absolution, notwithstanding they have offended
against the King mortally; and therefore because the King is bound Ex officio
to compel them to salvation, the King used every seven years to go through
all Shires in his Realm, to make enquiry according as before is said; further,
in aid of such Eyres were Coroners, Sheriffs Turns, Viewes of Franck-pledges
and other Enquests to enquire of those offenders as is said.

But because some are wrongfully slandered, King Henry the 1. Ordained, that
none should be arrested nor imprisoned for slander of mortal offense before he
were thereof endicted by the Oaths of honest men, before those who had
Authority to take such Indictments, and then they were first to be seized upon
by their bodies, and goods, as in Appeals, and to be kept in prison till they
cleared them of the infamy before the King or his Justices.

Of the Crime of Majesty in no kind was any Indictment but of Heresy or
Romery, whereof if any were indicted and brought to Judgment, let there be an
indictment for the King by some of his people in this manner, according to that
which is found in the Roles of ancient Kings.

I say Sebourge there is defamed by good people of the sin of Heresy,
because that he of evil Art, and belief forbidden, and by Charms and
Enchantments he took from Brighten by name, etc. the flower of his Alc,
whereby he lost the sale thereof, so that Judgment be not given of less then
three persons; or thus, Molling who is there defamed by good people, that such
a day he denied his Baptism, and caused himself to be circumcised, and became
a Jew, or a Saracen, or offered or sacrificed to Mahomet in contempt of God, to
the Damnation of his Soul; and this offense he did feloniously, etc. and so in
every like Case for the King; and if he will deny it I am ready to prove it
upon him for the King, as to the King it belongs to do; that is to say,
according as an Infant within age.

Of falsifying thus; I say for the King, that Mimunde there is defamed, etc.
for that he such a day, etc. falsified the Kings Seal, or his Money, in such a
kind, or such, etc.

Of Trespasses Indictments now cease; of Burnings thus, I say etc. that
Seabright there is defamed, etc. for that at such a day, etc. he set a fire
such a house or goods, etc.

Of Murder thus, I say etc. that such a one, with such a weapon struck Agole in
such a part of his body, by which stroke he is killed, etc.

The degrees of Accessories are to be showed after the Principalls according to
their right.

Of Larcine in this manner; I say, that Cutbert there, etc. robbed such a man
known, or unknown of his Horse, or of other kind of goods, etc. or
feloniously stole, or was consenting to the offense of such Thieves known, or
of unknown Thieves by taking of Theef-hoot which is a recept of Larcine, which
he wittingly took to suffer such a one to pass, or to stop Suit, or wrongfully
to procure his pardon.

CHAP. II. Sect. 23. Of Offenses personal at the Kings Suit.
A Personal offense is divived into two branches, whereof the one extends to
Persons, and the other to Goods.

The Venial offense which extends to Persons is divideable into great
offenses, and small offenses; and although the King have Counsans of all
offenses, yet he reserveth only the ordering of all gross offenses to himself,
and the Counsance of the lesser he leaves to all those men who have Courts
within their Demesnes; and upon this division of offenses has the King
established the Peace, so as such Lords and Bailiffs have the ordering of the
Peace for small offenses.

The Venial offenses Personal are these, Perjury when one tells a lie
against the King;, and Perjury of his Officers; The mortal offenses not
declared feloniously, as Imprisonment, Mayheim, Wounding, Battery, are to be
showed without Appeals, Allienation of old treasure sound, Diffesin,
Reddisseisin, and many others; the declarations of Personal offenses,
venialls, infamatories, are to be declared at the Kings Suit in this manner:

I say for our Lord the King, that Y there is Perjured, and lied against the
King; that whereas the said I was the Kings Chancellor, and was sworn that he
should not sell not deny right, not remediall Writ to any Plaintiff, the said
Y such a day, etc. and sold to such a one a Writ of Attaint, or other remediall
Writ, and would not grant it him for less then half a mark, etc. Or thus,
whereas he was one of his Judges assigned, and was sworn to do Justice, etc.
he in this manner, in such a Court gave Judgment, or awarded against such a
Party, or released such a Party, or usurped such Jurisdiction upon the King; or
made himself Judge, Coroner, or Sheriff, Bayliffe, or other Minister of the
Kings without Warrant; or thus, whereas he was Channcellor of the Exchequer,
etc. he forbad to give an Acquittance of so much as such a one had paid of the
Kings debt under the Exchequer Seal, or delayed to give an Acquittance from
such a day till such a day, and would not give an Acquittance unless he bought
it for so much; or thus, for that he holds Plea against the Kings forbiding,
or in prejudice of the King and his Crown, and the rather seeing it belongs
not to any Ecclesiastical Judge to hold secular Pleas, but only of
Testamentary and of Matrimony; or thus, he disturbed the giving of Judgment,
or surceased so to do justice by negligence, or by his consent.

In this manner are the Presentiments to be made at the Kings Suit, of Personal
wrongs of all his Ministers great and small; and also against all others not
his Ministers, of all wrongs done to the King by those who have sworn fealty
to him.

CHAP. II. SECT. 24. Of Venial Trespasses, and Personal Suits.
TO those who have cause of Action and will not pursue revenge according to
their rights by Actions of Trespass to recover damages for the Trespasses;
nevertheless ye are to distinguish where the Trespass is done to the person
of a man, and where to his goods.

And if to a man's person, every one may have an Action to whom the Trespass is
done, except those who can maintain no Action without their Guardians.

And if to the goods, then ye are to distinguish whether to his proper goods,
or to the goods which he has with others in common.

And if to the proper goods, then to distinguish if proper to a man, or
belonging to another thing, as to the Crown, or to any Church.

If to a man, then to distinguish if to a man free of himself, or to a man who
is in ward.

And if to a man free of himself he has several Actions, and if proper to
any other in ward, the Action belongs to the Guardian.

If to a man in ward, the Action belongs to the Guardian, or to the next of
Kin, Parent, Affine, or Alley of his name to the use of him who is in ward.

Of goods which are in common no several Action lies, and therefore of goods
which belongs to men of Religion, the Action belongs to the Sovereign of the
house, in his name for him and his Covent, or in his own name, and the name of
him who is in his custody, if the Action be an Action personal, venial.

And there is a difference betwixt Actions which are to cause death, and
pardonable Actions, for as much as to mortal Actions the Suit is to be brought
first against the Principalls, and afterward against the Accessories; and in
Venial Actions of personal Trespasses, all ought to be comprehended in the
Plaint in common, the Principalls, the Commanders, the Conspirators, and the
Accessories, for as much as a man shall not recover several damages by
several plaints thereof; nevertheless none of the Accessories is to plead to
the Action before the Principal has pleaded, or be condemned for his Contempt.

Personal Trespasses used to be heard and determined in inferior Courts of
Lords of Fees, and then the offenders were Attachable by their bodies, and they
used to keep them and bring them to Judgment, if they were not bayled,
without offending the Law.

The remediall Writ of Trespass requires bay^e to them, which whosoever could
not find was to remain in Custody without his Keeper, because they were bound
to acquit their Pledgers.

And if any nevertheless become Pledges of their own will in such cases, they
are to be taken; but if they are thereby endamaged by Nonsuit of the party,
they had no recovery against the principal Surety; a pursuing may be in diverse
manners, sometimes by Pledges, as it is of those who can find them; sometimes
by trusting them, as it is in case of Forraigners and poor, who have not
ability to find Pledges; and sometimes by the bodies of the Plaintiffes, as it
is of Appealees, who have no other Su^e^ies but the four walls of the Prison.

And for the durenesse which is used to be done to the bodies of offenders in
personal offenses, or venial, King Henry the 1. Ordained; That they should
arrest them first by their bodies, until they justify themselves by Bail;
and if they be not found, and if they do not discharge their Bail, they are
then to be distreyned by their Land; to the value of the demand, and if they
then make default, their Lands are to be delivered over to the Plaintiffes,
until they have made satisfaction by a reasonable Extent, if before they have
not acquitted themselves by Law.

Of Pledges, note that those are Pledges for pursuing who the Plaints affirm,
and those are Pledges who reprieve any other thing besides the body of a man,
for they are not properly Pledges, but Maineprisors, because they suppose that
those plevifables are delivered to them by Bail for the body.

The ordinary Declaration of Venial Plaints begins in this form; I show unto
you who am here; that E. who is there wrongfully delayed his Action, by a false
essoigne which he cast such a day, in such a place, etc. to the great damage of
the Plaintiff.

And of Trespasses done against the Kings Peace it is easy to show, and of
Trespasses done against Lords or Bayliffes, and in hatted of false Plaints,
King Henry the Ordained, that audience were forbidden to Plaintiffes in venial
Actions, and that none was bounden to answer such Actions, if they had not
present proof of a lawful Suit.

And there is such a difference between a Criminal Action in pleading and a
Venial, that if a Sergeant put these words, scil. (feloniously as a Felon,
etc.) in Declaration; of Venial Actions, the Declaration; are vicious and
abateable, because that no Judge has power by a Venial Plaint to determine
felony; and in the same manner is the Count vicious and abateable, where the
Count is upon the right of property, and upon the plea of Possession, Et e
contra, and there are some Actions wherein no Declaration or Count; as in
Disseisin, Redisseisin, Certifications of Assize, false Judgments and Attaints.

CHAP. II. SECT. 25. Of Assize of Novell, Disseisin, and Reddisseisin.
AMongst other personal Trespasses, it is not to be forgotten to make mention
of Dissesin, of which it is needful first to see to the Title, why it is
called Assize of Novell Dissesin.

An Assize in one Case is nothing else but a Cession of the Justice, in another
case it is an Ordinance of Certainty, where nothing could be more or less then
right; for the great evils which is used to be procured in witnessing, and the
great delays which were in the Examinations, Exceptions, and Attestations,
Randolphus De Glanvile Ordained this certain Assize, that Recognitions should
be sworn by 12. Jurours of the next Neighbors. and so this establishment was
called Assize. In the third case Assize is taken properly for an Action in
four manner of Pleas Possessories; Scil. Novel Dissesins Mo^ldamcester.
Darreis Presentment. Juris utrum.



But such Assize are called Petit Assizes, to make a difference from Grand
Assizes, for the Law concerning Fees is grounded upon two right, of Possession
and property.

And as the Grand Assize serves to the right of property, so the Petit Assize
serves to the right of Possession, and because such Petzi Assizes are to be
taken of the Counties where the Fees are, by the Statute of King Edward called
such Actions, Assizes, either for the general Cession of the Justices, and of
others, or from the propernames of such Actions.

It is called Novell, to put a difference from those which are ancient, for
anciently Kings used to go over the Shires to enquire, hear, and determine
offenses, and to redress the wrongs there, and that which was not brought in
such Eyres of personal Trespasses before remained to the Judgment of God
alone; and afterward by reason of the multitude of offenses, and that Kings
could not do all by themselves, therefore they sent their Commissaries who now
are called Justices in Air, who have not power to decree and determine a
personal offense, but for a thing brought and not determined in the last Air;
Then for as much as the Disseisin, or the personal Action was brought before
the Air, the Action or Disseisin was ancient; but if the Disseisin be done
since the last Air, then it is a Novell Disseisin.

Disseisin is a personal Trespass, of a wrongful putting one out of
possession, it is said wrongful to put a difference from rightful, which is
no offense; as if I take from my Wife, or my Villain, or from another who is my
Ward that which is my own; or if you take from me that which is mine, I take
it from you again, I do not offend, for I am warranted so to do by the Law
of Nature, seeing this usage is common to Men, Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, and
other earthly Creature;, but I cannot do so afterward; for if I take from you
forcibly any thing whereof you have had the peaceable possession, I do
disseise you, and I do wrong to the King, when I disseise him of his right, or
use force where I ought to use Judgment. On the other side, that which is
taken from me by the rightful Judgment of any Judge Ordinary, or Arbitraty,
is not taken wrongfully from me.

Wrong is here taken as well for deforcement or disturbance, as for ejection.

Deforcement, as if another enters into another Tenement, when the rightful
owner is at the Market, or else where, and at his return cannot enter therein,
but is kept out, and hindered so to do.

Disturbance is, as if one disturb me wrongfully to use my seisin which I have
peaceably had, and the same may be done three ways.

1 As when one drives away a distress, so that I cannot distreyne in the
Tenement liable to my distress, whereof I have had seisin before.

2 Another is where one does Repleive his distress by the Sheriff, or the
Hundred wrongfully.

3 As if one distreyne me so outragiously that I cannot manure, Plow, or the my
Land duly; in which Case it makes one an outrageous distreyner to disseise,
or for to eject the Tenant; as if any one eject me out of my Tenement, whereof
I have had peaceable possession by descent of Inheritance, or other lawful
title to the possession.

Note that all right is in two kinds, either in right of possession, or in
right of property, and therefore the right of property is not so determinable
by this Assize, as is the known possession, or as that which altogether
favors of a possessory right.

The remedy of Disseisins hold not of moveable goods, nor of any thing which
falls not into Inheritance, as Land, Tenement, Rent, Advowson of a Church,
and a house of Religion, Franchises, and the Appurtenances, and such other
rights, whether they are holden perpetually in Fee, or for term of life, or
years, according to the Contract, as well as the Land morgaged to such a one
and his Heirs until so much be paid to such a Tenant or his Heirs.

Eiection of a term of years falls into the Assize, which sometimes comes
by Lease, or Baylement, or Loan, and sometimes by right of Wardship by the
Nonage of some Heir, and to the recoverer it belongs to hold them according
to the Contracts.

Villinage in some Case falls into this Assize; as to Free-tenants who are
ejected or disturbed to continue their seisin of lawful Presentiments, and
whereof a Bargain is made betwixt any Doner, and any Purchaser, and although
that the Purchaser cannot present living the Clerk of the Doner instituted
into the Church; the Title nevertheless of Contracts barreth not altogether
the Donee, so that afterward he cannot present against the form of the
Contract, and if he do the Doner falls into this Assize, and the Bishop who
gave the Institution to him who is not presented, by him to whom the right of
presentation does belong in his own name.

Into this Assize also fall Donors and Purchasers, who make vicious Contracts
of Lands and Possessions, as also it is of Guardians, and of Farmers who Lease
their Lands for a longer time then their term endures, in prejudice of the
Lord of the Fee, or of him to whom the Reversion belongs, as it is of those
Lessors who have Fee rail.

On the other side fall into offense those the Kings Officers, and others who
disseise a man, or a Corporation of their Franchises, whereof they have the
Inheritance by lawful Title, if not through the default, abuse, or negligence
of those, or of their Bayliffes to whom the Franchises belong.

Into this offense also fall all Atturnies, who yield up the Inheritance, or
Freehold of their Clyents in Judgment, and the Justices also who yield to
them, and the Tenants also; for it behooves not Atturnies to lose their Clyents
rights, but it behooves them to defend them till a rightful Judgment be given.

Into this offense fall all those who commit any wast, exile, or destruction in
Lands, as that which is not justifiable by Law, as those who assign over Lands
to others, where in the Feoffments to themselves, or their Ancestors there is
mentioned but of Heirs only, and that may be two ways, viz. to Heirs
general, or to special Heirs, named as in Fee tail, or not named, as in
Franck-marriages.

This Action all Persons may bring, Men, Women, Clerks and Laymen, Infants and
others of what condition soever they be, who are not forbidden by the Law.

It is forbidden to Villains to bring this Action without their Lord, for as
much as they are in the Custody of their Lords; In the same manner to Feme
Coverts, and to others who are in Ward, and to those who were never Tenants in
their own names, but in the name of the Lord

The Law also denies the Suit to those who have withdrawn themselves from the
same action in Judgment, or have released or quit-claimed their right.

And note, that Retrahere, and sub-trahere is not all one, Retrahere does
acquit a man from those things which are in his Writ, or in his Action; but
neither the one not the other can utterly bar him, if he do not openly
declare the same; but subtrahere withdraw his Action, every Plaintiff may do
either by himself or his Attorney, whether he be present in Court or absent,
and although it be that one will not pursue his Action, yet he does not so
bar himself, nor withdraw himself, but that he may have a new Writ, and a
new Plaint, if he do not openly in Judgment say, that he withdraws his
Action; these remedies hold against a Disseisor, and where there are many,
against all those who appear in the force, or in the aid.

CHAP. II. SECT. 26. Of Distresses.
ANy Action rightfully grounded upon a Personal Trespass, accrueth to people
wrongfully distreyned, which is called a Distress; and because that none can
cover his Robbery, or his Latcine by Distress, it is 1 to be known what is
the division of Distresses.

2 Who may distreyne.

3 When, and of what things a Repleive lies.

A Repleive is nothing else but a reasonable distress.

A reasonable distress is to the value of the thing in demand without any
other fault, for no outrageous distress is termed lawful.

There are two manner of Distresses, a dead distress, as of Corn, Wine, and
other such Chattels; and a live distress, as of a Man, a Beast, and of such
like things.

No man can distreyne who is not warranted so to do by Law, or by some other
special deed.

1 By the Law, as for Damage feasance, and for Debts and Contracts of
Forraigners; for Forraigners are distreynable by their moveable goods, and
summonable because they are not free Tenants in the places where they are
destreyned; and for (as well) a Debt recovered as any other, and so for
Amercements of damages, and Arrerages of Account, or other thing.

2 By Deed, as if you grant me any Annuity, and do grant me to distreyne in
the Lands for the Arrerages of the same, or other service, and bind your
Possessions which are not of my Fee in whose hands soever they come to a
distress.

When and what things a man may distreyne.

A man may distreyne Cattle or other things so soon as he finds them damage
feasant, and not the day after, and after the time of payment, and not before,
and not every day; And in the night a man may not distreyne, but only in the
day time, but for damage feasant; for before Sun rising, or after Sun set no
man may distreyne but for damage feasant, where a man may distreyn in places,
or Lands within the Fee, liable to distress and not elsewhere. Of what goods a
Distress may be.

Of all goods which the Law forbideth not, the Law forbids that a man shall not
distreyne within the view, where he may have a sufficient distress in an open
Covenable place.

A Covenable dead distress is not by Armor or Vessels, by Robes or Jewels, by
Writings if there be found another distress sufficient in it self.

A Covenable live distress is not to be of Sheep which are guelt, Muttons, of
Dogs, Birds, Fishes, or by Savage Beasts when there is a sufficient distress
found of other Cattle.

A distress is to be carried, lead, or driven away at the will of the
distreyner, and in case any distreyner find not any distress but within some
enclosure, in such case he can do nothing, but to shut up the goods enclosed,
and so sequester them without doing any other violence, and if a man break up
such Pound, or the locks of it, or part of it, he greatly offends against the
Peace, and does Trespass to the King, and to the Lord of the Fee, and to the
Sheriffs, and Hundredours in breach of the Peace, and to the Party, and to the
delaying of Justice; and therefore Hue and Cry is to be levied against them, as
against those who break the Peace.

A dead distress found in a Covenable place, nor a live distress is not to be
led, or driven out of the Manor, or out of the Hundred, or out of the County,
not to be put in any pound or elsewhere, wherehe to whom the goods are
belonging cannot have sight of them, but is to be put into such a place where
the distress, and he who is the owner may be least endamaged.

There are two kinds of leading of distresses
1 One when a man leads away a live distress against sufficient Gages and
Pledges.

2 Another, when one will not suffer himself to be distreyned lawfully, and
the one and the other are Personal Trespasses against the Peace.

And then if any be wrongfully distreyned, ye are to distinguish whether it be
by those who have power to distreyne or by others.

And if by others, then lies an Appeal of Robbery, whereof Ha^lif gave a
notable Judgment; and if by those who may distreyue, then they ought to
deliver the distress by Gages and Pledges.

And if the distreyner, and the Plaintiff of the distress lead it away, then
the Counsans thereof does belong to the Kings Court, and so there is remedy by
a Writ of Replegiary.

Nevertheless, for the releasing of such distresses, and for the hastening of
the right, Randalf de Glanvile ordained, That Sheriffs and Hundredours should
take Sureties to pursue the Plaints, and should deliver the distresses, and
should hear and determine the Plaints of tortious distresses, saving to the
King the Suit, as to the leading, etc.

Two thing, fall in these Plaints; Plaints of taking, and of detaining; whereof
there are fouredegrees.

1 Where the taking is justifiable for lawful, and the detaining also, as for
a debt due, or debt recovered.

2 Where both are wrongful (as) such as are disavowable both in the taking and
detaining.

3 Where the taking is lawful, as in damage feasant, and the detaining
tortious, as against sufficient Gages and Pledges tendered.

4 Where the taking is tortious, as in a pound, and the detaining lawful, as
for a Debt confessed, and of no more have the ordinary Judges Counsans; but in
case where the Plea begins by Writ, Counsans ought to be made of the taking; of
the dedaining lies remedy by an Assize of Novel Disseisin.

The taking and the detaining are sometimes by Parties known, and sometimes by
Parties unknown, but although the Persons are known, nevertheless the names
of the detainors ought to be known; and according to that the Avowant or the
Plaintiff, or of his Bayliffe if he be not present, ought to frame his
Declaration, and the Plaint jointly against the Persons, and against the
detainers, or severally against one of them, and if against them both then
thus; A wrongfully took, and caused to be taken, by such a one known, or
unknown, etc, and drove, and carried away, etc. and wrongfully does detain
from him, etc. against Gages and Pledges, and is yet seized thereof: or thus,
wrongfully detained from such a day till such a day, that he delivered the same
to the Kings Bayliffe to his damage, etc. for these words (and yet is thereof
seized) leaves it to them, that they cannot have sight of the distress, and to
those who detain the distress by Avowrie of property.

CHAP. II. SECT. 27. Of Contracts.
AContract is a speech betwixt Parties, that a thing which is not done be done,
of which there are many kinds, whereof some are perpetual, as those of
Matrimony; others are temporary, as of Baylements, and Leases; and one kind is
mixed, as of Exchanges, which sometimes are for a time, and sometimes for ever;
and one special kind is an Obligation.

And because the Law does not entermedle with every Contract, we are to see who
may Contract, and of what things Contracts may be; every one may make Contracts
with all persons who is not forbidden by Law.

The Law forbideth that none Contract with the enemies of the King of Heaven,
nor with the enemies of their earthly King; not with any mortal offenders, not
with those who are not of the Christian Faith, not with Out-lawes, nor Waives,
nor with those who are known Felons, not Excommunicated, nor with any who are
in Ward, if not to the profit of those who are in Ward; nor with Deaf, nor
Idiors, nor Madmen, nor Appealees, nor Persons endicted of Crime.

Of what thing a Contract may be made.
Of all things not forbidden by Law. The Law forbids that a man do not make
a Contract of the right of another, although he offend not; the Law forbids
Contracts of Usury, Disseisin, hurting of the body, dis-h heriting, and of
other offenses or vices.

Contracts are forbidden which are to the damage of the Party gayning, by vice,
by forbidding mixture of offense.

Contracts are vicious; 1 Sometimes by intermixture of offense; 2 Sometimes by
intermixture of ill beleese; 3 Sometimes when they are made against that which
is absolutely forbidden; 4 And sometimes by false supposition.

In the first Case, as if I Contract with you, that if I do not such a thing,
or such a thing, that it shall be lawful for you or another to kill me, or to
wound me, or imprison me; Or of Usury, that you shall not demand of C. for 100.
l. or other thing, etc.

In the second, as if I give, or deliver, or leave a thing with you in hope
that you will re-deliver the same to me again, and you detain this thing from
me; Or if I devise in my Will, that you shall sell some of my Tenements to pay
my Deb^^ or to do other things with the money, and you being my Executer,
keep this money for ever to your own use, without doing of it; Or if I sell,
change, deliver a lease unto you to have so much of you at such a time, and you
keep from me that which you promised.

In the third Case, as if I make any Contract with those with whom it is not
lawful, Nevertheless the Contract of Matrimony is not forbidden betwixt
Infants, although it be used to be, but in case of Disparagements; for
disparagement is an offense which is greatly forbidden.

The fourth Case, as of Charters, or other kinds of Minuments, as it is of
Charters, and Feoffments made in the seisin of the Donors, and of Charters of
Quitclaime made out of the siesin of those who have them; for no Charter, no
Rent, nor gist remains good for ever, if the Donor be not seized at the time
of the Contract of two Rights, of the right of Possession, and the right of
Property; and as a Charter supposing a gist to be made without difference is
void, so is the Quit-claime of a thing whereof the maker of the Deed is not in
Possession of the thing Quitclaimed.

And as the Charters in the Cases aforesaid are nothing worth, so also are the
Warranties, and whatsoever belongs to such estates, which are without force
by virtue of such false supposition.

On the other side, suppose that a single Deed be false, which restifieth the
gist to be returned to the Donor, or to his Heirs, or in any other manner of
Condition; for agist is always simple, and not of the same affection of the
giver as to the right of the gist, that the thing given should remain to the
Purchasor without hope of Reversion.

A single Deed is a Minument without Indenture, and therefore the Law
requires, that Escripts, Testimonialls of Contracts conditional, supposing a
Reversion be Indented, and Chirographed.

Contracts are supposed false in taking Homage in deceit of the Law, as if I
take your Homage for other service then for the service issuing out of the
Tenure De Haubert.

The Law forbids also, that none let nor take any Land, nor Fee, not
Possession, nor term of years to come above the term of forty years, nor
that any Contracts be made in Fee farm for ever, nor for years, rendering
more Rent by the year then the fourth part of the value; nor that any be
endowed of Advowsons, nor any Allienation of Advowsons be made out of the
blood, if not in perpetuity, or Fee-simple, not that an Advowson be partable
amongst Parceners, but that it remain entirely to the next Heir of the
Ancestour, or that there be any Lease for years left, or Fee tail thereof,
for the Advowson of a Church is so much in the spiritualty that there can be no
Allienation thereof, but in Fee-simple.

In rights of Contracts of Baylement, and Administration of other goods and
moneys, it is lawful for every one wisely to dispose of his goods to whom he
will; and therefore it is advised that every one have Bayliffes, or Officers
who he conceives do well understand the Manor, and if he be endamaged by
any servant, or other hurt, that it be accounted his own folly, seeing he
took not sufficient surety of their faithfulness and discretion; and e
contra, for against him who has nothing the Law gives no recovery, nor other
remedy but revenge; nevertheless if there be any such Bayliffes who will not
render a true account to his Lord, he is chargeable thereunto by a Writ of
Account, which is a mixed Action if he have wherewith to justify himself; and
if he be not distreynable, nor a Freeholder, and deceives his Lord, and will
not render an Account for such disobedience, he shall have the said Action
personal mixed.

And according to the change of the natures of the Actions, the forms of the
remediall Writs are changed.

And although that such for their contempts are bantshed for a time, or for
ever, yet is no man to be Outlawed, or Imprisoned for the same; but if any be
in Arrerages to his Lord, ye are to distinguish thereof if he have any thing,
whereof satisfaction may be made by Judgment, to the example of a Debt
recovered, or otherwise.

CHAP. II. SECT. 28. Of Villinage and Neiftie.
AN Action of Villinage, or Neiftie is a mixed Action, grounded upon a Personal
Trespass done to another, when a man porsecutes a Freeman to enslave his
blood.

This Action is a Mixed Action in favor of Liberty, for very seidome will any
one depart from his Lords Manor, if he claim not himself to be a Freeman.

This Action has Introduction, by Summons, and Attachments of the Lands.

A Waive is nothing else buta Villainesse, and notwithstanding that according
to the Law of Nature all Creatures ought to be free, nevertheless by
Constitution, and by the Deeds of men, (are) they and other Creatures enslaved,
as it is of Beasts in Parkes, Fishes in Ponds, and Birds in Cages.

The Villinage of man is a subjection of such great Antiquity, that by the
memory of man no free Stock can be found thereof; which slavery according to
some is the Curse which Noah gave to Caanan the Son of Cham his Son, and to
his issue, and according to others of the Philistines, who became slaves at the
battle which was betwixt David and the children of Israel of the one party,
and Goliath the Philistine on the other part.

And as other Creatures are kept in enclosures, so are villains kept to guard
the Possessions of their Lords, and from thence are said Regardants; and so men
are villains by the Law of God, by the Law of man, and by the Cannon Law.

From Shem and Japhet come the Gentile Christians, and from those from Cham,
the Villains which the Christians may give away, or sell as they do other
Chattels, but not devise by Will, because they are Astriers, who are annexed to
the Francktenement, and of them there are many others.

Those are Villains who are begot of Villains and Neifts in servitude,
whether borne in Mattimony or out of Matrimony; those also are Villains who
are begotten of Villains, and borne of Free-women in Matrimony, and those are
Villains who are begotten of a Freeman and a Neife, and borne out of
Matrimony.

The other manner of Villains are those who are adjudged Villains by a Writ
of Not vo babendo, and their issue after them.

Villains become free many ways; some by Baptism, as those Saracens who are
taken by Christians, or bought and brought to Christianity by grace.

Some became Free by the Pope, as it is of those villains who by Bishops are
ordained into Orders of Deacon, and above; but norwithstanding the same a man
shall not lose his right thereby who will sue for them.

On the other part villains become Freemen if their Lords grant, or give unto
them any free estate of Inheritance to descend to their Heirs, or if the Lord
take their Homage for their land, or if the Lord eject them out of their Fees
and give them sustinance; or if he put them in a common Prison if it be not for
crime.

A woman after she is put in possession by her Lord, is never again to be
challenged as a Neife, notwithstanding she be sold.

And if the Lord suffer his Villain to Answer in Judgment without him in a
personal Action, or to be a Jurour amongst Freemen, as a Freeman knowingly,
and without the Lords claim; the Villain has this Plea to the Villinage if
he return not of his own accord.

Also a Villain becomes free through the Lords default in a Writ of Native
Habendo, as by his Nonsuit in the Writ.

Also by proof of a free Stock, or to have been borne of free Parents.

Also by the Lords grant in Court, and also by prescription; also for default
of proof, and also by the Lords negligence, as by the remaining of the
Villain within a City, or upon the Kings Demesnes for a whole year; Or if
wittingly he suffer his Villain to be a Suitor in another Court, or to be
sworn in Assize, or elsewhere amongst Freemen; if a Villain depart from his
Lord claiming free estate, so that he cannot seize him within the Manor
within the year, or out of his Fee, nor after his Writ of Nativo Habend.
brought, it belongs to the Lord that he bring again that Action which is
ViceCountiel, and pleadable in the County by Summons, and Distresses of his
Lands; for the Law requires that he do right, and use not force

The Parties being brought to Judgment in the County Court, and the Action
being declared in the Defendant by way of exception may plead that he is
Franck, and because that a free estate is of a higher nature then Villinage;
therefore because the Sheriff has not power to try so high a Plea by the Writ
of Nativo Hebendo, those Writs and such Pleas are suspendable till the coming
of the Justices in Air into those parts; but if the King Command not to the
contrary, those Pleas are not adjournable but from one County Court to another

Note that all Villains are not slaves, for slaves are said Regardant, as
before; they can purchase nothing but to the Lords use, they know not in the
Evening what ser^ice they shall do in the Morning, nor any certainty of their
services; the Lords may fetter, imprison, beat, or chas^^se those at their
pleasure, saving to them their ^ives and members, these may nor fly, or run
from their Lords so long as they find them wherewith to live; nor is it law
full for others to receive them without their Lords consent; those can have no
manner of Action against any man without their Lords, but in case of Felony;
and if those slaves hold Lands of their Lords, it is intended that they hold
them from day to day at their Lords will, and not by any certain services.

Villains are Tillers of Lands, Note by Villains in this place is meant
Copy-hol-ders.
dwelling in Upland Villages, for of Vill comes Villain, of Burough
Burgess, and of City Citizen; and of Villains mention is made in the Great
Charter of Liberties, where it is said, that a Villain be not so grievously
amerced that his Tillage be not saved to him, but the Statute makes no mention
of slaves, because they have nothing of their own to lose.

And of Villains are their Tillages called Villinages. Copyhold called Copy
holders.


And note, that those who are free, and quit of all servitude, become servile
by Contracts made berwixt the Lords and the Tenants.

And there are many manners of Contracts of Fees, as of Gift, of Rent, of
Exchange and Lease, which all may make for a time, or for ever, and quitment
without Obligation, and charge of service, and with charge.

And these Contracts (as all other) are made by Writings. Charters, and
Minuments, by solemn Witnesses, according to the example of Contracts of
Marriages, which ought to be a pattern to all other Contracts; according to
which Example were the first Contracts made by the first Conqueror, when the
Earls were enfeoffed of the Earldomes, Barons of the Baronies, Knights of
Knights Fees, Sergeants of Serjanties, Villains of Villinages, Butgesses and
Merchants of Boroughs, whereof some received their Lands without Obligation, or
service, or in Frankalmoigne; some to hold by Homage, and by Service for
defense of the Realm, and some by Villain Customs, as to Plough the Lords
Lands, to Reap, cut, and carry his Corn, or Hay, or such manner of service,
without giving of any wages, whereof many Fines were leavied of such services,
which make mention of the doing of these base services, as well as of other
more gentile services; and although it be so, that the people have no Charters,
Deeds, nor Minuments of their Lands, nevertheless if they were ejected, or put
out of their Possessions wrongfully, by bringing an Assize of Novell Disseisin,
they might be restored to their estates as before, because they could aver
that they knew the certainty of their services, and works by the year, as
those whose Ancestors before them were Asteries for a long time, in case
Disseisors were not their Lords.

And thereupon Sr. Edward in his time, Doom-day Book, Vt credo.
caused enquity to be made of all such who held, and did to him such services as
ploughing his Lands, etc. besides their lawful Customs.

And afterward the people less fearing to offend then they ought, many of
these Villains by wrongful Distresses were forced to do their Lord the
service of Rechat of blood, and many other voluntary Customs, to bring them in
servitude under their power, for which their remedy was a Writ of Ne investoe
vexes.

CHAP. II. SECT. 29. Of Summons.
THis Chapter makes mention of special Summons, to make a difference from
general Summons, where all Freeholders and others ought to come according to
the nature of the Cry whereof, and every one may Summon by a Common Cry; but of
this Summons this Chapter makes not mention.

A special Summons is a friendly admonition of an amendment of an offense, or
wrong; and because none is tied to Answer to any Action real or mixed before a
Summons, therefore it is to see;

1 Who have Authority to Summon. 2 Who are Summonable. 3 In what place he is
Summonable. 4 How far one is Summonable. 5 At whose Charges. 6 How often. 7
Who may be Summonors. 8 What is a reasonable Summons.
1 All who have Jurisdiction, have Authority to Summon.

2 All those who are not forbidden by Law are Summonable, none is to be
summoned for a personal offense, not any one who is not a Freeholder.

3 A man is not summonable in all places, for no man is summonable, nor bounden
to receive Summons out of the Fee of the Party who causes the Summons, nor
elsewhere but in the Manor appendant to such a Court where he ought to
Answer, nor in all places of the Manor, but only at the Tenement in demand.

4 How far one is summonable; not out of the Fee of the Court where one is to
answer.

5 At whose charges? at the charges of those who are the first causers of the
Summons, except in Juries and Enquests taken ex officio; for no Freeman is
compelable to travel, and appear in Judgments at his own charges,
notwithstanding that the Law requires that every Tenant obey the Summons of
his Lord.

6 How often one is summonable; but once in one cause, nevertheless
re-summoned holds place in some case.

7 Who may and ought to be Summonors; no man is compellable to be a Summonor if
he will not agree to it; nevertheless all those may be Summonors who will,
that are not forbidden by the Law. Women, not Villains, nor infants, nor any
infamous Person, not any one who is not a Free holder cannot be a Summoner.

8 It is a reasonable Summons, when it is testified by two loyal free
Witnesses, Neighbors to the Person, or to the House, or Tenement contained in
the Writ, with warning given of the day, place, party. Judge of the Cause, and
a reasonable respite at least of fifteen days to provide his Answer, and to
appear in Judgment. In Juries nevertheless, nor Enquests there need not be
so full time or respite given.

CHAP. II. SECT. 30. Of Essoignes.
ESsoigne is an excuse of a default by any hinderance in coming to the Court,
and lies as well for the Plaintiff as for the Defendant.

The Law of every Essoigne is; That the cause of the hinderance be enrolled
with the name of the Essoigner, so that if the diverse Party, or his Attorney,
or Essoignor will traverse the Cause, he is to be received so to do, that if
he be found false, then that the Essoigne be turned to a default.

All those may be Essoigned who are not forbidden by Law, uo Defendant in
personal Actions, not any after default can be Essoigned, not any present in
Court, nor does Essoigne lie in a Scire facias, nor in a Venire facias, nor in
a Recordari facias toquelam, nor in Admeasurement of Pasture, nor after the
Parties have joined issue in Judgment though the Jury appear not, nor in case
where the Plaintiff has not found Surety to pursue his Action, nor where one
has Attorney in Court, if both be not Essoigned, nor where the Summons is not
testified; nor after an Essoigne not warranted, nor to him who was not named in
the Writ, or in the Plaint, except in Warranties, nor any one who is
re-summoned in Mort-dauncester, and Darrein presentment, nor when the day is
not come, nor where the Essoigner comes too late, nor any one whose adversary
is dead, or any of his Parceners, nor he who is adjourned from day to day, nor
the Kings Officer as Officer, nor he to whom it is commanded that he appear if
he please.

No Essoigne is justifiable if it be not orderly cast, nor is it allowed to
Infants within age, nor to any who is in custody, nor to many having one right,
if the Cause be not diverse.

All may be Essoigners who the Law forbids not; it is forbidden to Women, to
Infants, to Villaires, and to all who are in Custody; to Madmen, to Idiots, to
Excommunicated Persons, to the Judges, and uo the Parties in the Cause,

Essoigners at other times not warranted, (...) ^^ainted of false delays, to
criminal Persons, and to those who are not of the Christian Faith, or in the
Kings Alleagiance, it is forbidden that they be Essoigners.

There are chiefly two kinds of Essoignes; the one of the Kings service, the
other of hinderance.

The first is dividable, either into the service of the King of Heaven, or of
the King on Earth; of the King of Heaven in three manners.

1 Either for the general passage of all to the Land of, etc. -- and this
Essoigne is not otherwise adjournable, but that the Parties go without day,
and are to appear again by Re-summons of the Plaintiffes, at the return of
the Defendant. This Essoigne is not allowable to Plaintiffes, nor to the
Defendant reasonably Summoned before his going from his house in a personal
action, nor in other, but in a Plea which touches Inheritance; nor but in a
Writ of Right Patent, but not of Dower, nor of Burgage.

The other Essoigne of the service of the King of Heaven, is of a common
Pilgrimage beyond Sea, toward the Holy Land, and this lasts for a year, this
holds not bu^ according as the other.

The third, of a Pilgrimage beyond Sea, as to Rome, or to Saint James De
compostella, and takes place for half a year and these Essoignees are to
appear the next Courts following the Terms adjourned.

After Re-summons holds place the common Essoigne De mal venier, and also
after the term of Adjournment, but this common Essoigne never holds place
before the Essoignes before said.

The Essoigne of the King on Earths service is in two manners.

1 The one is of those who serve as Soldiers, as Messengers, or as Ministers;
and this Essoigne is not respited but from Court to Court, or the common day,
to the example of a common Essoigne, if it be not warranted at the next Court
by the Kings Writ, it is to be turned to a default.

2 The other is of those who serve the King by Tenure of their Land for the
defense of the Realm, and he has no day; But the Plaintiff is with out day,
and the Plea is to be re-continued in the same Estate when his Adversary shall
be returned.

These latter Essoignes are allowable in Pleas, summonable to Plaintiffes and
Defendants, except in Dower Vnde nihil habet, Quare impedat, Darrein
presentment; nor to Women, nor to Infants, nor to Idiots, nor to Deaf, nor to
Dumb, nor Madmen, nor to any in custody, nor to any who is not free of
himself; nor to any Attorney, as Attorney, nor where the Essoigner
acknowledges the Cause in Judgment to be false, nor after any Cape, nor after
distress in the Land.

After the Essoignes of the Kings service lies an Essoigne of Malo veniendi,
but not e con^^a.

The Essoigne of disturbance or hinderance is dividable, either of sickness,
or of some other hinderance, as of those who coming toward the Court are
taken by the Kings enemies, and so hindered; or by Waters, Bridges, or enemies
discovered, or by Tempests, or other reasonable disturbance, so that they have
not power to appear at the day.

The Essoigne of hinderance and sickness is divideable, either of languishing,
which is called De malo lecti, and that holds place for a year; or of
sickness in the Journey, and that holds not but to the example of a common
Essoigne; in these Essoignes of hinderance are Essoignes De malo veniendi.

This Essoigne lies after every Summons, and general R^-summons upon Pleas,
except to Jurours, and those who are summoned for the commonwealth

But of Adjournments it is to distinguish; for in the Air of Justices the
Adjournement is for three days, or four at the most, or less according as
the places are ^eare, or contain; and to this Essoigne is respited fifteen
days at the least.

The Essoigne of sickness in passage lies before the Essoigne De malo lecti,
and also after the year of the languishing, and it lies before appearance,
and after appearance, except in four Assizes; and where it lies in Actions it
holds in Warranties.

This common Essoigne is not allowable in the cases aforesaid, but once after
the Parties have joined issue, not after the Parties have agreed to appear
without Essoigne, nor where a Bishop is commanded that he have or cause such a
Person to appear, nor there where many claim by one right, or are Tenants of
the same right, nor to a man and his Wife, not to all the paeceners; but if a
man dies without Heir after the Writ purchased and brought, the Writ is
thereby abateable, because at the day of the date the Plaintiff had no Action
against the other parceners which are alive, as to that of the Party.

This common Essoigne lies as well for Infants where they are impleaded of
their Lands, as for men of full age.

And as the same is allowed to the Tenant, so is it warranted where no
sickness is adjudged; this Essoigne is allowable from day to day, according to
the common Adjournments in Writs of right, till the sickness be Judged, if the
Tenant rise not before from his sickness; nevertheless none can do it in
such a case if not with the Plaintiffes leave, or by the command of the King if
the Plaintiff will not give him leave.

This Essoigne holds in the Writ of Droit Potent sent to the Lord of the
Manor, and in a Writ of Droit close of Lands holden of the Kings in Capite,
and in the Writ of Customs and Services, after that the deforceor has
pleaded, and said that the Batraile or the Grand Assize may be joined.

The Essoigne De malo Lecti is in Court for two years when the sickness
turns to weakness, this Essoinge lies not for the Plaintiff; and after the
sickness adjudged, it is adjournable by a year of respite to the Court of
London.

Weakness lies not in any Writ of right after appearance, but where Battle
may be joined, or the Grand Assize.

This Essoigne De malo Lecti was never allowable to any Attorney, nor to any
but those who had a Warrant before the common Essoigne cast by the Tenant, nor
to any after the weakness adjudged, nor without ^^sing; nor in Justi^^es, nor
in the Writs De quo jure, nor De rationabilibus divisis, nor Quo warranto, nor
Customs and Services before that the Court be certified that Battle might be
joined, or the grand Assize.

This Essoigne of De malo veniendi is called De malo villa, and this lies in
case where one appears the first day in Judgment, and is suddenly taken with
sickness in the Town, that he cannot the next day appear in Court.

This Essoigne may be cast the second day by one, the third day by another, and
the fourth day by a third; in which case the Judge ought to receive the
Atturnies of those who are sick, but this Essoigne lies not but there where
the Essoigne De molo lecti lies.

CHAP. II. SECT. 31. Of Atturnies.
BEfore a Plea put into Court by Essoignes by Attachment, or by appearance of
the Parties, none is to be received by Attorney, no more then a Plea is
removeable out of Court into a higher Court, where the Plaint or the Writ is
not brought, nor any is to be received by Attorney in a Plea which was, nor in
a Plea which shall be, but only in a Plea which is Pendant in the County
Court, or elsewhere, or is brought by the Kings Writ, and this Plea be
afterward removed into a higher Court. By this removing the Attorney is not
removed, for no Attorney is removeable unless he whose Attorney is come into
the Court in proper person and remove him, if not in case where one has
general Atturnies, for general Atturnies may appoint special, and remove
them, nor any can receive Atturnies after the Plea brought but the King, or
other warranted by a special Writ, if not in the presence of the parties.

All may be Atturnies which the Law will permit; Women may not be Atturnies,
nor Infants, nor Villains, nor any who are in Custody, or any other who is not
free of himself, nor any who is criminous, nor any who are not sworn to the
King, nor any in any personal Action, nor in an Account, nor in Nativo
habendo; Plaintiffes notwithstanding they have Atturnies, in personal Actions
are not to appear, not answer in Judgment by no Attorney, but he disseiseth
his Clyent when he does it.

The Contents of the Third Chapter.
OF Exceptions. What is Exception, and the division and order of excepting.
Exceptions Dillatories. Of Exception of Clergy. Exception of Bigamy. Exception
of the power of the Judge. Exception of time. Exception of place. Exception to
the person of the Plaintiff. Exception of Prison, and of Ward. Exception of
Summons. Exception of vicious Counts. Exception of Approvers. Excedtion to
Indictments. Pleas to Treason. Pleas to B^^ning. Pleas to Murder. To Larcine.
To Burglary. Of Rape. Of imprisonment. Of Mayhem and ^ounding. Juramentum
Duelli. The order of Battle. Exception of Personal Trespass. Of
Purprestures. Of Treasontrove. Of Wrecks. Of Usury. Of Driving. Of Obligation.
Of Attaint. Of Oaths. Homage. Fealty annexed to Homage, Common Oaths. Of
final Accords.
CHAP. III.
CHAP. III. Sect. 1. Of Exceptions.
IT behooves the Defendant to Answer the Plaintiffes Declaration, and because
the people commonly know not all the Exceptions in Pleadings; Countors are
necessary, who know how to advance and defend their Clyents Causes according to
the rules of Law, and the Costoms of the Realm; and the more needful are they
to defend them in Indictments and Appeals of Felony, then in personal or
venial Causes; and the better to help our memory, which every day inclines
to forgetsulnesse, it is necessary to show what is an Exception, and the
division of it, and the order of Excepting, or Pleading; for some account them
guilty who Plead not, or Plead ill, or not sufficiently; for example, If any
one Vouch one to warranty, and Judgment pass (if he tell not the year, or
before what Judges the Judgment passed) it is as if he had said nothing; and
so of other Cases, and although a Plea be requisire, nevertheless every one is
not received to plead; for some are admitted to Plead without Tutors in all
Actions, and some not, but in Felonies.

Every one may Answer without a Tutor who is not forbidden by the Law.

The Law forbids Married women to Answer without their Husbands, but then we
are to put a difference in the Cases; for if she be within the age of one and
twenty years, she is not admitted to Plead in any Case without her Husband,
but in Case where her dis-inheriting, or that which does amount to as much does
appear by the malice, or negligence of her Husband; and if she be of full age,
then she shall so Anawer alone in cases of death and Felony; and so it is of
men within the order of Religion, and of Villains, and of all those who are in
Custody, and are not delivered.

CHAP. III. SECT. 2. What Exception is, and the order of Exception, or Plea.
APlea or Exception is a thing alleged for Answer, either to delay or bar
the Action.

And there are two manner of Exceptions, Dillatories, and Peremptories.

The order to Plead is such, that the Peremptory Plea is in the highest degree,
or the Dillatory may have a recourse to the Peremptory, but not e contra. And
of Dillatories some are principal, and some are secondary, and from the
secondaries there is no recourse to the principalls, and according to their
degrees are they put in, partly to help out remembrance.

And some Exceptions are in Counts, in Replications, and Re-joynders, and so
forth until the truth be cleared in the proceedings of the Pleas, whereby one
may surely come to give clear Judgments.

Voucher to warranty lies not in personal Actions, although that averrements
by Record, and Minements, and Witneffes avails.

CHAP. III. SECT. 3. Exceptions Dillatories.
THere are many Dillatory Exceptions, whereof the first is to the Judge, and
that many ways; one unto the power of the Judge, and that may be in two kinds,
by reason of the two kinds of Jurisdictions, or because the King or his Judge
Deligate has no Power, or Counsance in the Cause, as it is of the person of a
Clerk, by reason of the Privileges of the Church; or because the ordinary
Judge has not power or Counsans of a thing done out of his Jurisdiction, nor
any one within a Franchise of a thing done in guildable, nor Kings, nor those
of one Country, or of one Land, of things done in another Land or Country.

CHAP. III. SECT. 4 Of Exception of Clergy.
FOr the Privilege of Clergy, as if a Clerk be ordered in Court before a Lay
Judge to Answer to an Action for a personal Trespass, and especially in a
Case criminal and mortal Plead that he is a Clerk, the Judge has no further
Counsans of the Cause, for the Church is so enfranchised, that no Lay Judge can
have Jurisdiction over a Clerk, though the Clerk will acknowledge him for his
Judge; and in such a case he is without delay to be delivered to his Ordinary.

Nevertheless to give Actions to Plaintiffes against the Accessories in
Appeals and Indictments, it belongs to the Judge Ex officio to enquire by
the Oaths of honest men, in the presence of the Clerk whether he be guilty or
not, and if he be (...) thereof, then he is without delay to be delivered to
his Ordinary, and the Plaintiff shall Sue against the Accessories in the Kings
Court, and in the Spiritual Court against the Clerk, and the Clerk after his
due Purgation made, shall without delay have all his lands and movables
delivered to him.

CHAP. III. SECT. 5. Replication of Bigamy.
THe Exception of Clergy is sometimes Counterpleadable by a Replication of
Bigamy in this manner.

Sit, he ought not to enjoy the benefit of this Privilege, for he has
forfeited the same by the sin of Bigamy, as he who has Married a widow, or
many wives; and note that Matrimony is the lawful Order of joining together of
a Christian man and woman by their assents; and as of the Diety and Humanity of
Christ there is made an undissolveable Unity; so was Matrimony, and according
to such Unity was such coupling found to be, and therefore none can remain in
that Unity who takes to himself a Plurality; and of a Plurality, arises this
offense of Bigamy, which offense draws Clerks nearer the Lay Power.

And note that Bigamy may be two ways; one by a Plurality of (...) Vives, as
he who Marries two wives or more, the one after the death of the other, or
outliving the other; the other is plurality of Husbands as well as wives, as it
is of a widow who suffers her self to be Married to another man, whether her
widowhood came by the death of her Husband, or by Divorce; and because it
belongs to say in what point a Clerk is Bigamus, the Bigamy is triable in
the Lay Court; if nevertheless the Jury doubt thereof, then the Ordinary is to
certify the same at the Command of the King, as in the case of Matrimony when
it is denied. On the other side, a Clerk is incounterable by other
Replications, as he is for being a murderer, or a notorious liar, or of such a
condition as the Church is not to protect him against the Kings Peace.

CHAP. III. SECT. 6. Exception to the Power of the Jadge.
AGainst the power of the Judge the Defendant may help himself by other
Dillatory Pleas in this manner; Sir, I demand the sight and the hearing of the
Commission, whereby you claim Juri^diction over me; and if the Judge do not
deny it, or cannot show it (notwithstanding that no Judge Deligate is
compelable to show his power) yet may the Party plead thus; Sir, I appeal from
this Commission, because it makes no mention of the Cause for which I was
brought to Judgment, or not of that point; Or because you have no Counsans in
such a point; or because it is vicious, and that may be diverse ways, as if it
be not sealed with the Kings Seal of the Chancery, for none is tied to yield
obedience according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm to the Kings Privy
Seal, or to the Seal of the Exchequer, nor unto any other Seal, but only to
the Seal which is assigned to be known of the common people, and especially in
Jurisdictions and Original Writs, if not for the King only. Or it may be
vicious because the Seal is counterfeited or falsified, or because the King is
not named in the Writ, he not being out of the Kingdom, not in Ward; or
because the Writ contains Summons in the Action where it is personal, or
Attachment where the Action is mixed or real, or because the Seal is not
fastened to the Parchment, but one may remove it, and take it from it at his
pleasure; Or because the Writ was brought too late, or too soon; Or because it
has rasure, or enterlining, and diversity of hands, and of words, or false
Latin; Or because the Writ is written upon Paper, or Parchment which is
forbidden; Or for default found in the Writ, as the omission or transposition
of a word, fillable, or clause, as it is of abatable Writs; Or because the King
dyed before the Writ was brought, or because the Writ is false in in the day of
the date, or because the Commission requires the association of one who is not
present; Or because the Writ was never sealed, or because the fact was not done
within his Jurisdiction, or in a place not there determinable, or because the
Judge has not power or Counsance either of the quality or the quantity of the
thing.

CHAP. III. SECT. 7. Exception to the Person of the Judge.
ALthough the Writ be good, and the Power be sufficient, yet there holds
Dillatory Exceptions to the Person of the Judge (as it is said) of such Persons
who cannot be Judges.

CHAP. III. SECT. 8. Exception to the time.
OTher Dillotories there are of time, of place, of hours, of manners, etc.

And note, there are three manner of times exempted from Pleas, in which no
Patries fit in Courts and give Judgments, whereof two are by Law, and the
other at the Will of the King.

One time contains two Months, viz. August, and September, which are
assigned to gather (...) the fruits of Corn, etc.

The other times contains the Feasts, and the Sundaies, which are appointed
Feastivalls for the honoring of God, and the Saints, which Feasts are these:

1 The day of the birth of Christ, of St. Stephen, of St. Silvester, and the
Epiphany, and the Purification of our Lady, Easter week, of the Rogations,
which contain three days; of the Assention, of Pentecost, of the Nativity of
St. John the Baptist, of the twelve Apostles, of St, Lawrence, and of the
Assumption of the Mother of God, and her Nativity, of St. Michael, and of all
Saints, and of St. Martin, with all such Feasts which all Bishops hold
Feastivalls in their Bishoprics, for that they are Canonized; besides these
the dales of Relics, of the Anunciation of the Mother of God, and of her
Conception, and of the invention of the Cross.

And note that whereas God Commanded to keep holy the Sabbath day; it was
Ordained, after the Resurrection, that we keep holy the Sabbath Days.

The third time is forbidden by the Kings Proclamation, of Hours may arise
Dillatories, for after the hour of Noone, or in the Night, no Plea is to be
holden.

CHAP. III. SECT. 9. Exception of the place.
OF the manner arise Dillatorie, for in Riding, nor in Walking, nor in
Tavernes, nor else where, but in known places for a Consistory can any Court
be holden.

CHAP. III. SECT. 10. Exception to the Person of the Plaintiff.
OTher Exceptions Dillatories arise from the Persons of some Plaintiffes, as it
is of those Persons who are rebukeable of accusations. Other Exceptions
Dillatories rise from the Persons of the Pleaders, or of the Atturnies, or of
the Essoigners, for none can do that by his Attorney which himself cannor
do, nor can any be an Essoigner, Attorney, or Pleader who may not be a
Plaintiff.

CHAP. III. SECT. 11. Exception of Person, and of his Custody.
OR he may take Exception against his own Person, and say that he is not
within the Kings Power, or if he be imprisoned for a greater offense, or
Appealed, or Indicted of Crime, or of a higher Crime; Or he may say, that he is
not bound to Answer thereunto, for as much as he is not brought to Judgment by
a right course, which wills that no man may be attached by his body, when he
is distreyneable by his Lands or other goods, if not for a personal offense.

Or he may say, that he is not tied to Answer to any Action which touches
loss of life or member, or right of property, until he be of the full age of
one and twenty years or more; and there are other Dillatories of the Persons
of the Answerers which ^ppearebefore.

CHAP. III. SECT. 12. Exception of Summons.
IN Pleas of Summons he may say, he ought not to Answer, because the Plaintiff
holds no Suit of Distress; nor has any other manner of proof present; Or
because the Plaintiff has not found Sureties to pursue his Plaint, or because
he was not summoned, or not reasonably summoned, or that he received the
Summons by no Freeman, or but by one Freeman; Or because he was summoned too
late, or because he was never summoned what thing to answer to, or because he
was not summnoned against the Plaintiff.

CHAP. III. SECT. 13. Exceptions of vicious Cou^^^.
AS Writs which are vicious are aba^^able, so also are vicious Appeals; as if
the Appeals be not brought within the year after the Felony done, or not
before the Coroner, or not in the County where the offense was done, or not in
a right place, or for variance, or for Omission, or Interuption, or because the
Plaintiff is batred against others in the same Appeal.

Sometimes it happens that the thing which is robbed or stolen is found in
the possession of a true man, against whom the Owner of the property, or of the
possession frames his Appeal, as he who is a Robber of another, in which case
there is a difference, for if it be found that such a thing was given, sold, or
delivered to him without Coliusion, in such case the possessor is acquitted, or
at least Bayleable until the next coming of the Justices; and when the
Justices come, the first possessor thereof is to be Arraigned, and he may show
how it came to him; nevertheless if he would vouch one to warrant it he
cannot, nor deny the Title of his possession, but in the name of Voucher he may
say, that it came to him by lawful Title, as that he bought it in such a
Market, or in such a place, without mentioning of whom; and the Sheriff is
thereupon to cause a Jury to be impannelled, and if the Answer be found true,
then he is acquitted, and if not, then to be condemned as before, as if the
Plaintiff had proved the felony.

And if any one appear, and justify the thing to be his, he is not to be
received as a Party, but the Cause is first to be tried betwixt the two first,
and afterward he may make the estranger a Party if he will; and if the case be
that the buying was within a place within a Franchise, and the Sheriff
return, that he cannot execute the Writ by reason of the Franchise of such a
man, or of such a place; in such case the Sheriff is to be Commanded that he
forbear not by reason of the Franchise, but that he enter and execute the Writ.

And if the Possessor says, That he came to the thing from a man certain, and
he be present, and will maintain the same without Collusion, he is to be
admitted thereunto, and the other is to be discharged; and if he deny the
Contract, this affirmative, and this negative are tryable by Battle or Jury;
nevertheless at the Kings Suit the possessor ought make title to the
Possession, or clear himself thereof; for two things are necessary,
Conscience for us, and Fame against others.

And that which is said of making of Title to the possession of things, in Case
where a false Writ, or false Money, or Larcine, or thing lost, or Estrey, or
other hurt is found at the Kings Suit, although that the last professor acquit
himself of the selony; if the Plainliffe nevertheless prove the thing to be
his, as of his possession, or stoll en from another, or otherwise lost, the Law
is, that he recover the thing without any payment for it.

Or he may have Exception Dillatory to a vicious Deed, for varience betwixt the
words of the Writ and the nature of the Action, and the Count, as if he have
omitted to Charge me, or if he Charge that in the Count which was not to be in
that Action, as felony in a venial Action.

And as the Defendant has a Dillatory Exception to abate a vicious Count, in
like manner has the Plaintiff a Replication against the Defendant upon a
faulty Answer; but because none is to be Judged for not Answering in Appeals
of Felony, it is sufficient for every one to deny the felony generally, though
he Answer not particularly to every word mentioned in the Appeal.

And in Cases venialls, where the Defendants say nothing in excuse of that
which is offered against them in Judgment, they are to be adjudged and
Condemned as not Answering at all; in the same manner is it where one Answers
not duly, or insufficiently.

CHAP. III. SECT. 14. Exception to Approvers.
TO an Approver one may thus Answer; Sir, I am a true man, sworn to the King,
and within a Franck-pledge; and this Approver is a Felon attainted by his own
confession, and our of the Kings protection, and by consequence out of the
Kings Peace, whereby he has lost his free voice, and lost every right, and
every Action, so as he is not to be admitted in any Action, no more then a man
who is Outlawed by Judgment.

Or he may plead, that he ought not ^o Answer him, because he did not Appeal
him in his first Appeal, or not before the Coroners, and if the Approver
cannot help himself by this Replication, as ^o say, that he is not any way
out of the Kings protection; the Defendant is bound to Answer him, but he is
not to be delivered to the Fee-pledges where he is in the Decenry; or to other
Main-prisors until he be appealed, or indicted.

CHAP. III. SECT. 15. Exceptions of Indictments.
THese Exceptions hold to Indictments, Sir, I demand sight of the Indictments,
whereby I may take exceptions against the persons of the Endictors, or to the
sorme of the Indictment, for no Villain can indite any man.

Or if the Indictment be not made by (...) whole dozien of Freemen, or by
(...) who cannot indict any man.

Or if the Indictment be not sealed with the Seal of the twelve Jurouts, or
(...) it is not the record of Judges (...) thereunto; Or if the Indictment has
not been within the year, or by people of credit, and of good fame, no man is
bound to answer to such an indictment.

Nor if the Indictment has not been made within the Neighborhood of the same
County, also if the Indictment be general, for a general slander defameth no
man, nor is he compelled to answer thereunto; as if the Indictment be such a
one is a Murderer, or a Thief, or wicked, without alleging any particular
offense therein, for to the common fame of the people an Indictment ought to
give no credit or belief.

Or he may say, that the Justices went the Air after the felony done, where
nothing was moved of this felony.

CHAP. III. SECT. 16. An Answer to Treason
DArling here denies all Treasons and Felonies, and whatsoever is against the
Kings Peace.

And as to the consideration he may say thus; Sir, notwithstanding the joint
Alliance betwixt us by Homage sometimes before this time, nevertheless when he
counted that I should commit this Treason, I had yielded up to him all the
Lands which I held of him, or I lost them by Judgment, or by Disseisin, which
the Plaintiff did to me, or he appointed them to come to others; in which case
the felony is barred, and the Plaintiff is condemnable.

And as to the consideration of present Fealty he may say, that this Alliance
the Plaintiff forfeited against him in such a point, or such a point; such
Fealty issued out of such Lands whereof the Defendant was not then Tenant,
neither in demean nor in service.

And to the Alliance of Courtesy he may say, that such benefit was not to
continue but until a time past before the time named in the Appeal, for
afterward he paid him nothing of such Pension, or other Courtesy but by
Judgment had against him, and in despite of him, O^ thus, before the time
named in the Appeal he yielded up to him his deed of the Pension, or released
the same unto him, or quitclaimed the same whereby the Alliance was destroyed.

CHAP. III. SECT. 17.
TO Burning he may say, that the mischief came by mischance, and not of a
premeditated felon.

CHAP. III. SECT. 18. Murder.
TO an Appeal of Murder he may plead, that the Action belongs not to such
women as the wife of the Plaintiff, because he was not killed in her arms, or
in her seisin. Or thus, Sir, the Plaintiff is to have no Action, for as much
as there is one nearer of blood who has brought his Appeal, and is a person
of ability so to do; Or he may say, that he is not bounden to Answer in
England unto an Act done out of the Realm, if the thing concern not the Kings
right, as his Person, or his Inheritance; nor in a Privileged place, where the
Kings Writ runs not of an Act done in a foreign place, nor e contra in a
Franchise, of an Act done in Guildable; Or he may say, that he did it not
feloniously, but by mischance, or by a lawful Judgment: or thus, not against
the Peace as a Fugitive, or as a known Felon, or as one who was not within
Allegiance to the King at the time of the killing.

CHAP. III. SECT. 19.
TO an Appeal of Robbery or of Larcine he may plead, that he wrongfully
brings this Appeal, for as much as the Plaintiff brought an Action of
Trespass against the same Persons of the same before such Judges; and if any
one would cover his Larcine by color of Avowry for an estray, or a Waife, in
such case it behooveth thathe show forth a Title allowable for such a
franchise; but this exception is counterpleadable by this peremptory
replication; Sir, such Avowry ought not to be of any force, because he
presently carried away the Estray, or Waife so found, or changed it, or sold
it, or killed it, or put it out of the View, or from the knowledge of the
neighborhood, whereas he ought to have publicly cried it in three Markets,
and Monasterles next adjoining, and keep it in a common place for a whole
year.

To the exception of Distress holds this Replication; Sir, such Avowry ought
not avail him, because he was not a known Bailiff in such a Hundred; or
because he did not any thing in the manner of a distress, as not in a due
time, nor had any warrant, but took it in the night time, or in such other
manner feloniously robbed him, and stole, etc. and in the like manner may a
Replication hold against a robbery made by color of disseisin.

CHAP. III. SECT. 20. Of Burglary.
TO Burglary he may say; That he entered into the Tenements without doing any
Felony, and not against the Peace, as in to his own demean, and freehold.

CHAP. III. SECT. 21. Of Rape.
IN Appeal of Rape he may deny the Felony, and say that he ravished not her
against her will, but that she assented, and that appears because she
conceived by him at the same time, and there is no presumption that she was
ravished against her will by fouling of her Garments, nor shedding of blood,
nor Hue and Cry made, or other manner of violence offered.

CHAP. III. SECT. 22. Of Imprisonment.
TO the Appeal of Imprisonment he may say, that he did it by force of a
rightful Judgment of such a Judge; but to that Plea is this Replication good,
that after there came a Warrant to him to deliver him, he kept him in prison
for the time named in the Appeal.

CHAP. III. SECT. 23. Of Mayhem and Wounding.
IN Mayhem he may demand the View thereof, for he cannot lawfully complain
when there is no Mayhem to be Judged of; and of Appeal of Wounding in the same
manner. By the death of the King all Pleas are suspended, all Goales opened, no
Judge, Bayliffe, or other Officer ought to entermeddle therewith for want or
warrant, and all Out-lawes, and all Waives, and those who have forjured the
Realm, and all banished Persons used then to return, except those who were
exiled and banished for ever; and if any recovered before for that he could not
have Dett, if he were not just^fied to the Peace; and if he be brought to
Judgment, and if he be accused of Outlawry, he may say that he is discharged
of the Outlawry by the Kings grant, Or he may say that the Outlawry ought not
to prejudice him because he was under the age of 2. years at the time of the
Outlawry, and therefore that he was not Outlawed for the felony.

Or because the felony was not done in such a County, or because he was not
Outlawed in England, or not within the Kings Dominion where the Writ runs;
for an Outlawry prouounced against a man in the Bishopric of Durham, or
elsewhere in the Land where the Kings Writ does not run, shall prejudice as one
in the Land where the Kings Writ runs, Nec e contra.

Or because the felony was not done in the time of this King, or not since the
last Air in that County; Or because the Process of the Outlawry was false, by
a false Warrant, or without any Warrant, or because he lay sick, and was
Essoigned De malo lect^, or because he is alive for whose death he was
Outlawed; or because he was Imprisoned the day of the Outlawry, or because he
was in the Kings service in the Holy Land, or within the Realm for the profit
of the Commonwealth.

Or because he had the Kings Protection, or because he was a Madman, or an
Idiot, or Deaf, or Dumb, or professed in Reliligion, in which cases if he
pray to be received to Answer, he is to be received.

And the Plaintiff was to be demanded, and it was to be proclaimed, that if
any one could show why he should not be enlarged, that he appeared at a
certain day.

All Parties in Judgment are necessary to be present, and they are to have
Oyer of the Writs, of the Original, the Plaintiffes Commission, the quantity
or the quality of his plaint. And the Disseisor or their Bayliffes, every one
of them for himself may say in this manner, he may Answer and say for
himself, that he has not done any wrong or disseisin, nor has any thing in
the Tenements put in the Plaint, and he may so Answer, and so of others till it
come to the Tenant in whose name the disseisin was; and he may Answer and say,
that he is not in by disseisin, but is in by D. who infeoffed him who is not
named in the Writ; and it may be that D. entered by E. and so there may be many,
according to diverse Feoffments betwixt the first Disseisor and the Tenant, in
which cases no Voucher to warranty holds place for a Personal Trespass, and
therefore every one is well to look not to make a Contract of a vicious thing,
and that he take Caution, and such Surety in the Contract that he may have a
recourse to recover if he lose the thing; and therefore the Lords used so keep
their Mannours that none could enter by Intrusion, Disseisin, or by other
vicious bargains, not otherwise unless the bargains were entered in their
full Courts, whereby the Lords could not have received their enemies into their
Mannours, nor have taken their Homage against their wills, nor any used to
enter before they had found Sureties to restore to the Purchasor or his Heirs
the value of the thing, if by rightful Judgment it belonged to him after his
thing lost for the offense of Allienation, or for his power of this warranty.

To the principal Disseisor it belongs to have a regard, if the Plaintiff
put more into his Plaint, that he Answer not but to that which he may avowe; he
may say, that there is varience betwixt the Original and the Commission; or
that the Writ is vicious, as it is in misprision of names, or fit-names.

Of names, as Renand for Harrand, Margery for Margaret, and such like; or he
may say the Writ is faulty for want of Sirnames, or if the names of Dignity be
omitted; as if a Bishop, Abbot, Prior, or other be disseised of any thing in
the right of his Dignity, and he makes his plaint simply of a Trespass done
only to his Person, and not to his Church or Dignity in this manner; A.
complains to you, wherea; he ought thus to make his Plaint. A Bishop of
London, and so it is of Disseisors; Or he may say that the Writ is vicious,
because the Plaintiff who is solely in the Plaint has no cause of Action, but
with another who is not named in the Writ.

Or it may be faulty if it be not contained in the Writ, Dissersivie eum, where
it ought to be Dissersivie eam, or eos, where it should be ewn or eam, ete
contra.

It is contained in the Writ, (wrongfully and without Judgment) etc. and to
that one may plead not wrongfully, but rightfully denying any other force.

And note that one may be disseised wrongfully and without Judgment, and
wrongfully and by Judgment; as it is of those who are disseised of their
Free-holds by the Judges who have no Jurisdiction, and nevertheless adjudge
men to be put out of their Possessions, and one may be rightfully and without
Judgment, as in the cases aforesaid; and further rightfully and by Judgment,
and thereof rise Exceptions, and so not without Judgment and yet by Judgment,
and that may be either by the Judgment of Judges Commissaries, or Judges
Ordinaries as were the Suitors.

Again, Writs may be vicious by misprision of the names of the Towns, as if a
Hamlet be named for a Town, or if the Town be not right named, or if the
Town be not distinguished where there are two Town, of like name in the same
County.

And from these words (after the Term) may arise Exceptions; as if not the
Term, yet he might have distreyned for, or the Arrerages of his Penson, or
special Obligation, exceptthat he had any wrong.

Or because another Writ for the same Action is yet depending betwixt the same
Parties, or he may say that he wrongfully complains, whereas at his one Plaint
he lost the same Tenement by a lawful Judgment against him; Or that he has
released or quit-claimed all his Right, or to the same purpose, or otherwise
rattified his estate, or because at another time he withdrew his Action before
such Judges.

Eor the helping of the peoples memories are Escripts, Charters, and Minuments
very necessary to testify the Conditions and the points of Contracts, for by
the Stature of Lenfred, who ordained that one might deny Contracts by waging of
his Law, and that Plaintiffes prove their Writings, otherwise their Charters
which are not denied, and not to be showed by Jurors in England for Foreign
Contracts, or of places Enfran, chised, or elsewhere, where the Kings Writs run
not by Coppies, or Collation of the Seals of others, or by Jurors, or by
Battle, according to the Plaintiffes Action.

To give matter and way to Exceptions in the aid of those who are to Answer,
one is to know the end and limitation of Actions, and of Pleas, so that the
Pleas may have an end, and therefore Prescriptions were ordained, whereof
Thurmond Ordained, That Criminal Actions for revenge should cease at the
years end, if they were not brought before, and the same time he appointed in
all Actions for Wrecks, Estraies, Waife, and of things lost; in Personal
Actions Venialls be appointed the Term after the last Air in those parts; in
real Actions and Mixed he appointed forty years, nevertheless as to the King
in the right of his Crown, and to a Francke estare Nullum tempus occurrit^.

To an Action of Account he may say, that he never was his Receiver, not
Administrator of his goods, nor of his moneys, whereby he was bound to render
him any Account, and that he received them of him under the title of Buying,
whereof he gave him a writing to surrender at a certain time. Or thus,
notwithstanding he was his Receiver or Administrator in a Franchise, or
elsewhere out of the Realm, or in a Privileged place, whereby he is not
bounden to give him an Account within the Realm, nor where the Kings Writ
runs, or in guildable, or e contra.

Or he may say that the Writ is vicious by false supposition, and falsely
supposes the Defendant to be a Fugitive, and besides not a Freeholder within
his Bayllwick to whom the Writ is sent.

Or he is not bound to yield him any Account for that he was never Receiver of
his own hand, or of his daily Receipt he gave him a daily Account; or that he
disbursed nothing, nor bought any thing but in the Plaintiffes sight, or of
some of his; Or for that the Plaintiff by Tallie; and other Roles has
discharged him of so much in value as the Defendant was to give an Account for.

Or because he has made him an Acquittance thereof, or because he was never
Guardian of his Inheritance as his Guardian, but was Guardian during the time
of the thing for his own proper use, or it belongs to him that is Guardian
of the Lands in the right of his Fee whether it be Socage or other.

To the Action of Villinage he may say, That he is a Freeman, and that he has
proved the same at another time by a Writ of Liberate probanda, that he is
quit from any Challenge by the Plaintiff for ever, if he have no reasonable
Counter-plea against it.

And as to the seisin of Villain Services he may say, That he did those
Services wrongfully, by Extortion, and duresse of him and his Baylisses, or for
the service of Villinage and Villain Land which he held of him, and not by
service of blood; and there are two other things, the one that if the Defendant
can show a free Stock of his Ancestors, either in the conception or in the
birth, the Defendant has always been accounted for a Freeman, although his
Father, Mother, Brother and Cousens, and all his Parentage acknowledge
themselves to be the Plaintiffes Villains, and do restifie the Defendant to
be a Villain.

The other thing to be noted is, That no more then the long Tenure of Copyhold
Land makes a Freeman a Villain, the long Tenures of Freehold makes a
Villain a Freeman; for freedom is never lost by prescription of time.

There are many manner of prooffs by the same Pleas, sometimes by Rewards,
sometimes by Battle, sometimes by Witnesses, sometimes by the Consessions of
the Adverse parties.

1 By Record, as in case where the parties do agree together upon some
enrolement, or to the Judgment of some Judge Ordinary or Assigned.

2 By Battle, for upon warrant of the Combat which the Judges took betwixt
David for the people of Israel of the one party, and Goliath for the Philistims
on the other party, is the usage of Battle allowable by the Law in England,
so that the proof of Felony and other cases is done by combat of two
according to the diversities of the Actions; for as there is a personal Action
and a real, so there is a personal Combat and a real; personal in
personal Actions, real in realls; and these Combats are differing in this,
that in a Personal Combat for Felony none can combat for another,
nevertheless in Actions, Personalls, Venials, it is lawful for the
Plaintiffes to make their Battles by their bodies, or by loyal Witnesses, as
in the right of real Combats, because that none can be Witness for himself;
and no man is bound to discover his real right, and although they make these
Combats for the Plaintiffes by Witnesses, the Defendants nevertheless may
defend their own right by their own bodies, or by the bodies of their
Freemen; and further they differ; for as much as in Appeals none can Combat
for another, but it is otherwise in real Actions, for if that one of the
Parties be hurt so as he cannot Combat, his eldest Son may wage the Battle
for him.

The Battle of two men suffices to declare the truth, so that the Victory is
holden for truth.

Combats are made in many other Cases then in Felonies, for if a man has done
any falsity to me in deed, or in word, whereof he is Appealed or Impeached in
Judgment, if he deny it, it is lawful for me to prove the Action either by
Jury, or by my Body, or by the Body of one Witness; and if it be of the false
Judgment of many, then the proof belongs only against the pronouncer of the
Judgment for the whole Court.

And so it is in case where you deny your Gift, Baylement, Pledges, Deed,
Seal, or other manner of Contract, or the words which you spoke, or the deed
which you did.

Nevertheless you are to distinguish of the qualities of the Causes, for in
Appeals of Felony none can Combat for another as is said but in Venial
Causes, although one be killed in the Battle he commits no Murder, but
only those vanquished, or their Clyents for them shall tender to the
Combitants vanquishing forty shillings in name of Cowardice, besides the
Judgment upon the principal.

And in case where Battle could not be joined, not there was no Witness, the
people in personal Actions used to help themselves by a Miracle of God in
this manner; If the Defendant were a woman, or of such a condition that she
could not join Battle, and the Plaintiff had no Witness to prove his
Action, then the Defendant might clear her credit by the Miracle of God, or
leave the proof to the Plaintiff; and in the contrary case the proof only
belonged to the Plaintiff.

At the day of the proof, or of the purgation, after the Benediction, and the
Malediction of the Priest, clothed with the holy Garments of the Mass, and
after the parties Oaths one used to keep the party; and he was to carry in
his hand a piece of burning Iron if he were a Freeman, or put his hand or his
foot in boiling water; if he were not Free, or to do some such thing which
were impossible to do without a Miracle from God; and if he was not hurt or
blemished the adverse Party remained as attainted; but Christianity suffered
not that they be by such wicked Arts cleared if one may otherwise avoid it.

Battle is not to be joined betwixt all people, for it is not to be joined
but betwixt equals, nor yet betwixt all equals, for not betwixt the Father
and the Son, nor betwixt Women, or Infants, or Clerks, or Parents, or Assigns.

Equals are not a man and a woman, nor a Holy man, and an Excommunicate
Petson, nor a Christian and an Infidel, nor a whole man and a sick, nor a man
of good memory and a Madman, nor a wire man and a fool, not a sound man, nor
a man mayhemed, nor a man and a child, nor a Clerk and a Lay Person, nor a
man professed in Religion and a Secular man, not a true-man and a Felon, nor a
man within the Kings Alleagiance, and out of his Alleagiance, nor the Lord, and
Tenant.

The smallness also of the thing in demand does hinder the Battle, and many
other Caus^s, as it appears in the Law of Fees; nevertheless if those who
are not receiveable to join in Battaise will Combat if the Bartaile be joined
betwixt them, it is no wrong to them who desire it.

And if any one offers himself to Combat with one armed, who before was not
brought by the Parties, and the adverse Party de nand Judgment for the default
of his adversary; as if he rendereth a Witness who offers himself to decide
the difference, and now he offers to furnish the Battle by another who was
not seen, nor heard in Court, and who cannot and ought not to try the
Battle: in such case it belongs to try the Exception as peremptory to the
Action, if the Parties will not agree unto it.

Chap. 3. Sect. 24. Iuramentum Duelli.
AFter the Battle joined, adjourned, and presented, and the parties duly
armed, First the defendant is to swear in this manner, Hear this you man who
^hold by the hand, whom you call N. by name, that I did never kill such a one
your Father, or said any such thing such a day, etc. So God me help; and the
holy Evangalist.

Afterward the plaintise ought to swear in this manner, H^are you this man
who I hold by the hand, That you who are called by your Right name N. are
perjured, because that you such a day; etc. felloniously killed, etc. Or said
such words or did such athing, etc.

Cap. 3. Sect 25. The Ordring of the Combatants.
AFter their Oaths be taken, it behooves to look that the parties be Armed
according to the ancient usage of what condition soever they be, Knighte or
others.

The Ancient usage to be Armed in all Cases of Combat is this; The Bodies
are armed without Seem cotu et baliea; And the heads and the necks and the
hands uncovered, the backs thyes, Legs and Feet armed which Iron, And each to
have a shield of Iron, and a staff ^orned of one Assise The Plaintise comes
into the List from the East, and the Defendant from the West, and on the place
they swear in this manner. That they have not about them any Charm, not
deceit, not have cat not drunk any thing whereby the truth might be disturbed
lessined, and the Law of the Divill enhaunced, So God them help and the holy
Evangelists. Then Proela nation is made that none disturb the Battle, and
Oyes is made, that there be no noise upon a Corporal punishment; And then they
meet together, and if the defendant defend himself till after the Sun setting,
and demand Judgment of the default of the Plaintiff, In that case, Judgment
shall be given for the defendant.

And if any fraud be found with one of the parties, as to be privily armed, or
there ^s;ound or other thing unallowable, and the fraud be adjudged, that they
be presently severed, and Judgment is present. ly to be given, and the
vanquished is to acknowledge his offense in the hearing of the people, or
speak the horrible word of Cravent in the name of Cowardice, or his left Foot
to be disarmed and uncovered in sign of the Cowardice, and that Judgment be
presently given against the Principal.

Cap. 3. Sect. 26.
AS to personal Trespass, in the Case this exception lies, Sir. He wrongfully
impleadeth me of this Trespass, for the same man impleaded such or such before
such Judges, in such a place of the same Trespass, and made me no party to the
suit, and for as much as that he then recovered by Judgment his full damages
against them named in his plaint, And this suit is not brought against me, but
to recover damages, and the Law is, That a man shall not recover double
damages, I demand Judgment of his Action.

As to the Allienations and Occupations of Franchises Reals Appendants to the
Crown, a man shall not vouch therein to warranty, not demand the View, not
prescribe in them, for of such dignities none can help himself by a plea of
long prescription, but such avowries of long Continuance, are accounted rather
prescriptions of wrong. then lawful exception, seeing nullum tempus occurrit
Regi, in his Franchises, but therein the King is like to an Enfant who can
loose nothing Although that for the personal trespass for the using of them, it
behooves every one to Excuse the wrong done to the King, or to any other, And
that may be done two ways, because his Ancester whose heir he is, died seized
theref, And so that he has enjoined the same by title of succession as a thing
annexed to his Land. Or because he of whom he purchased the Land to which the
Franchise belongs, was seized, as if he were the possessor thereof. But this
exception is counter-pleadable by this Replication, Sir, This Anowant cannot
recover (...) excuse himself. For although that such a one his Ancestors was
seized thereof, yet nevertheless he could not grant away this Franchise, for
the Kings never granted them so, that the Grantees could assign them over, or
make assigns of them.

CHAP. III. SECX. 27. Of Purprestures.
TO Purprestures if the Defendant may excuse his wrong, he need not to answer
thereunto without a Writ, no more then to the Action of Franchises; Not of his
own wrong of Land or Fees, or of the appurtenances against any other then
against the King; nor for the King but in his presence And if the wrong be not
originally, the Plaintiffes, he may vouch to warranty.

CHAP. III. SECT. 28. Of Treasure.
TO the Alienation of Treasure found, he may justify it if he be privileged
or authorized so to do. Or he may say; that he himself put it there, or such
other who he remembers; whereby no action accrued to the King.

CHAP. III. SECT. 29. Of Wrecks.
TO the Action of Wrecks he may Plead, That the King has no Action for the
same, because the year is not yet past; and in the same manner is it of
Estrayes, and of all other things found. Or because that he knows to whom the
goods belong who is alive. Or because the goods were taken far in the sea,
and were not cast upon the land by the waves of the sea.

CHAP. III. SECT. 30. Of Vsery.
TO Usery he may Plead, and swear that he lent his Corn in Winter, to
receive the same in September, according to the price as Corn should be
sold, which was dearer at that time; Or he may swear, he lent his monyes to
receive better money for the same for a year; and that the same is no Usery.

CHAP. III. SECT. 31. Of Hunting.
TO an Action of Hunting, Chasing, or Fishing, he may Plead, That he has done
no wrong, for it is his right to Hunt there, for to Chase; or it is his common
Piseary belonging to his Manor of such a place, etc.

CHAP. III. SECT 32. Of Obligation.
AS to Obligations (or Covenants) he may Plead, That notwithstanding that
Obligation be his Deed, nevertheless it ought not to bind him, because it is
vicious, or by false supposition; or because the Defendant never saw any money
or other thing to the value; or it is by mixture of offense or ill faith, as it
is said of vicious Contracts. Or he may Pleada Release or quit-claime; or that
it was contracted that he might do waste, or that he has done nothing to be
adjudged waste; or because he has taken nothing but reasonable est^vers for
house-boote or ^^yboote, or he may claim Fee in the Tenement by any lawful
Title.

CHAP. III. SECT. 33. Of Attaint.
IF any of the Parties say, That the Jurours have made a false oath, or any
Jurry; an Action of Attaint lies, which is to be tried by 24 Jurours, so that
every false witness be Attainted by two Juries. In which case it behooves the
Plaintiff to have the first Verdict present under the Kings Seal, or of the
party, or of the Judge, and the parties to the Plea, and that he declare in
what point they have made a false oath.

Or the Tenant may plead, That the Plaintiff ought not to be answered to this
attaint, because the first Judgment had not its full effect; or because that
the principal in all, or in part, or in right of satisfaction of the damages
remains yet to be barred.

Other Exceptions there are, as to the challenge of the persons of the Jurours,
as appears in the Chapter following.

CHAP. III. SECT. 34. The Ordinance of Attaint.
BEcause it belongs to the Plaint to prove his action, and to the affirmour
to prove his affirmation, and not to the denyer his negation; and that two
credible witnesses according to the Word of God are sufficient for witness.
The usage is, That the affirmative party in aid of the Court, cause the
nearest credible neighbors to appear in witness, so that there be 12 men at
the least of the Jury, of ancient time ordained to be of the Assize, of which
if two men are by false verdict of them, and of the other Jurours; or if by
good examination, if all the Jurours be not of one assent found convenable, it
suffices; And if not, or if all the Jurours say generally, that they know
nothing, or doubt of the matter, Or if they say not expressly against the
Defendant, or if they speak for the Defendant in such cases, it is to be
adjudged against the Plaintiff, that he proves not sufficiently his saying.
And although the Defendant would make other defense, he shall not be suffered
so to do.

Against Jurours hold challenges, as against witnesses in this manner. Sir,
this man is not a convenable Jurour, because he is one of those who Endicted me
of a mortal crime, so as he did as much as in him lay to destroy me, and so
he is my mortal enemy, Or for other cause of enmity.

Or because that he is Excommunicate, or Endicted, or Appealled of a mortal
Felony; or because he is not of the Kings Allegiance, or because he was at
another time Attainted of afalse oath, or suffered such corporal punishment
for his offenses, or otherwise, is infamous.

Or because he is friend, cosen, or allie, or of kindred to the other party; or
because he is a villain, or otherwise in custody; or because he is the
servant, or Proctour, or Tenant of the adverse party; Or because she is a
woman, or because he was Outlawed, or because he was forjured the Realm, or
because he procured himself to one of the Jury, or because he is within age,
or because he is a lunatique, or a madman, and many other exceptions of
challengers there are; of which if any be denied, the challenge is to be tried
by the Jurours, and according to the trial, the Jurour shall be admitted or
refused And if no Jury once appear for want of Jurours, he may have another.

CHAP. III. SECT. 35. Of Oaths.
Oaths differ many ways; The chiese Oath is that of Fealty, which is incident
to every Homage issuing out of Land, And sometimes there is the oath of Fealty,
of resients and dwellers in other Mannours, and sometimes remaining in others
service.

The oath of Allegiance was in these words. I will bear faith to such a King
of life and member, and Terren honor, against all those that from this day
forward, shall, etc. So God me help, and his holy Evangelist.

CHAP. III. SECT. 36. Homage.
HOmage is done in these words. I become your man for such Land; so that the
whose quantity be showed, and certainty specified; whereby the Lord well
knows both how he may warrant his Tenant, and for how much he binds his
Land to warranti; and that the Tenant know for how much he is his Tenant.

Cap. 3 Sect. 37. Fealty annexed to Homage.
THe Oath of Fealty annexed to Hem ^iage is in these words I shall bear Fealty
to him by name of life and Member, etc. for so much as I shall be his Tenant
against all, etc. saving the Oath of Fealty which I have made to such a King,
etc:

And if I swear Fealty to another then to the King, then thus, saving the
Faith which I ^wore to the King, and to my other Lords,

And if the Homage be done to the King or to another to whom the Tenant has
before sworn Fealty in these Cases, He needs not swear Fealty again, if
the Alliance in no case has bin broken.

Chap. 3 Sect. 38. common Oaths.
COmmon Oaths are in these words, I will speak truth in what you ask of me
in such a Case; So God me help, etc.

The Oaths in Assizes are in these words.

I will speak the truth of the Land of which I have had the view by Authority
of this Assise, or of the Land of which this Action of Reddisseision is
arraigned, or of the Pasture, or Feeor of the Nuisance, or of the Walt, or of
the Ditch, or of the Peel, or of the Water, or of the Church, or of the Rent or
of the service, and nothing shall hinder me that I shall not speak the truth,
etc.

Of Life and Member and Terren Hanour, he will do so much that he will never
assent that the King or his other Lord have damage of his life, or any of his
Members, nor will assent that his honor shall be overthrown in power, not
fame.

Cap. 3. Sect. 39. Of sinall Accoras.
NO Law forbids Pleas, nor Accords, wherefore it is lawful for overy one to
agree with his adversary, and to relcase and quit claim his Right, and his
Action.

Nevertheless after one bath once affirmed and brought his person all Action
whereby scandal arises, none can agree it without the leave of the Judge, so
as he may withdraw it For every Plaintiff in Actions of Scandal who attainteth
not his Adversary according to that as he bath brought, his plaint is
adjudged scandalous, as his adversary should be if he were attainted.
Nevertheless in favor to save a man from death, who is not attainted of
mortal Offenses, it is suffered that the Adverse parties do agree, After
Battle waged one of the parties nevertheless remains infamous.

None can accord or agree, who is (...) of the Age of 21. years, nor any who
is in custody, nor any by Attorney.

In custody are villainies, married women, men professed in Religion, Infants
within the age of 14 years, heirs Idiots, heirs deaf and dumb, heirs
deseased, and those who are in prison, and under Bail, and women who are in
the custody of the Lords, who have the marriage of them.

CHAP. IIII. The Contents.
OF Judgment. Odinance of Judgment. Of Jurisdiction. Of Paul.*s punishable. Of
Defaults. Of Personal Actions. Of Defaults in real Actions. Of Actions mixed.
Of Pledge and Maynpernors. Of Defaults after sommons. Of Champions. Of Pains.
Of Imfamies. Of Majests. Of Burning. Of Murdur. Of Pains in diverse manners. Of
false Justices. Of Perjury. Of the Offices of Iuctices in Air. Of the Articles
in Air. Of Prauchises. Of Satisfaction of Debts. Cases of Disseisin. Of
Amercoments. Of Amercements taxable. Of the Office rf Justices in Air.
CHAP. IIII
SECT 1. Of Judgment.
THe flower, and necessity of Law does depend in righteous judgment, without
which the Law can have no effect, nor any due end. And therefore it is fit
speak of judgments, which are not in all points here according to therigour in
the old Testament, and the usages used by Moses and the Prophets, before the
Incarnation of Christ, but they are mittigated to the temper of mercy of the
truth, and of the justice which Christ himselve used upon the earth, and
commanded to be used in the new Testament, and which the Apostles and their
successors have used since the Incarnation of Christ, and according to the
judgments of the ancient usages in Pleas, touching the Laws of this Realine.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 2. The Ordinance of Judgment.
Judgment comes from jurisdiction, which is the greatest dignity which
belongs to the King. And there are two kinds of junisdiction, Ordinary, and
Assigned. Every one has ordinary jurisdiction, if offense take it not away
from him; for every one may judge his own according to the right rules of
Law, But this jurisdiction is now restrained by the power of Kings, in as much
as none has power to held Plea of Trespass or of Debt which passes 40 s. but
the King. Nor any has power of Counsins of Fees without a Writ.
Nevertheless, it is lawful for every one to f. oust the mortal offender, for
committing of their offenses by good witnesses, by warrant of ordinary
jurisdiction, whether the offenders be Clerks or Lay people, of age, or within
age, and all others of what condition so ever they be; and in those coses are
those offenses called notorious offenses.

There are two kinds of notorious, nototious in fait, and notorious in right.

Notorious in fait is, where no contradiction lies, nor no oaths need to
justisie them, by reason of the witness of the people.

Notorious of Right, is where the offenders are attainted of their offenses by
themselves, or by the oaths of witnesses, or otherwise in judgment. This
jurisdiction assigned i^ that which the King assigns by his Commissions of his
Writs; for without a Writ he cannot by Law grant any jurisdiction, if not in
the presence, and with the assent of the parties.

None can give jurisdiction but the King, and the reason is, because he is not
sufficient to bear without help the charge which belongs to him to punish
the Trespasses, and to assoile the offenders which he has to govern.

And so our Ancestors appointed a Seal and a Chancellor to help the same,
to give Writs remediall to all Plaintiffes without delay.

That Writs used to be of this Assize, They were without raysure, without
enterlyning, without blots, without usual transposition, and without every
fault in the parchment and letters, and written in English with a known hand,
by a Clerk of the Chancery and used to contain the name of the parties and
the substance of the Plaintiff, and the name of the Judge, and of the King, or
other Test of the Writ, which sometimes were directed to the Lord of the Fee,
sometimes to the Bayliffes, sometimes to the Justices in Air, sometimes to
certain persons named, and sometimes to persons not named, as to Bayliffes,
Justices, and Sheriffs.

And every Plaintiff used to have a Commission to his Judge, by the Writ
Patent aforesaid.

And now may Justices, Sheriffs, and their Clerks forge Writs, thorough draw
loose amend or empaire them, without any prosecuting or punishment, because the
Writ are made close through abuse of the Law. By that Seal only is
jurisdiction grantable to all Plaintiffes without difficulty, and the
Chancellor is chargeable by his oath of allegiance to make such Writs, and
that he do not delay or deny justice, nor a remediall Writ to any one.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 4. Jurisdiction is a power to declare the Law.
THat power God gave to Moses, and that power they have now, who hold his place
upon earth, as the Pope, and the Emperor, and under them the King now has
this power in his Realm.

The King by reason of his dignity, makes his Justices in diverse degrees, and
appoin^eth to them jurisdiction, and that in diverse manners, sometimes
certain, especially, as in Commissions of less Assizes; sometimes in certain
generally, as it is of Commissions of Justices in Air, and of the Chiese
Justices of Pleas before the king, and of Justices of the Bench, to whom
jurisdiction is given to hear and determine Fines not determined, the grand
Assizes, the transations of Pleas, and the rights of the King and of the Queen,
and of his Fees, and the words of the Kings Writs, whether they be named
generally, or specially.

Besides, the Barons of the Exchequer have Jurisdiction over receivers, and the
Kings Bayliffes, and of Alienations of Lands and rights belonging to the King,
and to the right of his Crown. Sometimes jurisdiction is given to Sheriffs
for the defaults of others, as appears in the Writ of Right; where it is
said, That if he do not right, that the Sheriff of the County shall do it.

Sometimes to those who have the Return of Writs Returnables.

Sometimes jurisdiction is given to the Justices of the Beach by removing of
the Pleas out of the Counties, before the said Justices, and sometimes to
Record the Pleas holden in mean Courts without Writs, before the same Justices
of the Bench: But as those Records ought not to avail the Plaintiffes, if not
after judgment given, that the Pleers be Returnable until after their
judgments. And as the Pleas moved upon the Writs are to be remanded into the
Lords Courts, where the Lords have not failed to do right. In like manner are
the Pleas removed by Pone returnable in the Counties, in case where the parties
never appeared in Court for to Plead.

To the office of chief Justices, it belongs to redresle and punish the
tortious judgments, and the wrongs and the errors of other Justices, and by
Writ to cause to come before the King, the proceedings and the Records, with
the original Writs, and before such Justices are all Letters Pleadable
returnable, and to be ended, wherein mention is made before the King himself;
and the Writs not Pleadable, nor Returnable before the King, are returnable
into the Chancery.

And also it belongs to their office, to hear and determine all plaints made
of personal wrongs, within twelve miles of the Kings house, and to deliver
Goals and the prisoners from thence, who are to be delivered, and to determine
whatsoever is determinable by Justices in Air more o^ less, according to the
nature of their commission.

On the other side, there is a kind of jurisdiction which is called Arbitrary,
which is not ordinary, nor assigned, as is such which is by the assent of the
parties.

Of Jurisdiction comes Judgment, which has many significations: In the one,
judgment is as much to say as absolutions from offense; In another sense, as
sentence, which sometimes sounds well, as of discharge or acquittance from
punishment, and sometimes ill, as Excomengment: and in another sense, as the
end of the Plea, and the end of jurisdiction.

Jurisdiction assigned may be for a time, or for ever. For a time, as in some
exception dilatory, where the Action reviveth; for ever, as by a definitive
sentence upon the Action.

Judgments vary according to the difference of offenses. In like offenses,
nevertheless there are the like Judgments. For the mortal offenses according
to the warrant of the old Testament, were assoiled by death; For in the old
Testament it is found, That God commanded Moses, that he should not suffer
Felons to live. But before, more is to be spoken of punishments, it is to see
by what introduction offenders and contumacious persons are compellable to
appear in Court, and by what judgments.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 4. Defaults punishable.
DEfaults are punishable many ways. In appeals of Felony they are punishable
by Outlawry; which judgment is such, that after that any one has been
solemnly called, and demanded to appear to the Kings peace at three several
Counties for felony, and he comes not, that from thence forward he is holden
for a Woolfe, and is called Wolfshead, because the Woolfe is a beast hated of
all people; and from thence forward it is lawful for any one to kill him; as
it is a Woolfe whereof the custom was to bring the heads to the chief place
of the County, or of the Franchise, and according to Law, for every head of an
Outlaw, to have half a mark, and such Fugitives, Outlawes, forfeited for
their contempts, the Realm, Country, friends, and whatsoever belonged to the
peace, and all manner of rights which they ever had, or could have by any
Title, not only as to themselves, but to their heirs for ever. Also, all
confederations of Homages, of alliance, of affinity, of service, of oaths, and
all manner of obligations betwixt the Outlawes and others were broken, severed,
and defeated by such judgment. And all manner of Grants, Rents, and Contracts;
and all manner of Actions which they had against any manner of persons, were
void, not only from the time of judgment, but from the time of the Felony; for
which such judgment was given, and such persons could never again resort to
answer the Felony, if the Process of Outlawry were not faulty, if not by the
great mercy and favor of the King; Weomen were not plevisibles, and put in
dozens as men but were waves.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 5. Defaults.
IN personal Actions, venialls, defaules used to be punished after this
manner. The Defendants were distrained to the value of the demand, and
afterward they were to hear their judgments for their defaults, and for
default after default, judgment was given for the Plaintiff. This usage was
changed in the time of King Hen. the first, That no Freeman was not to be
destrained by his body for an action personal, venial, so long as he had
Lands; In which case the judgment by default was of force, till the time of
King Hen. the third. That the Plaintiff should recover his seifure of the
Land, to hold the fame in demeasure after default, until due satisfaction was
made, so as the defaults were more hurtful to persons in contempt, then
profitable.

Some Actions are personalls, and not mixed in the introduction, as of Neistie
of Acccompt; of leading away distresses: and some actions there are, that
although they savor of the personalty and realty, yet they hold not the rules
of those actions: As of Recognitions of Assizes, in which if the Tenants make
defaults, for that there is no distress nor seizure of the Land, or other
thing in the Kings hands, but the Recognitions are to be taken ex officio, and
the Judgments are to be pronounced according to the Verdict of the Jurours, in
respect of such defaults.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 6. Of Personal Action.
IN personal Actions, venialls, where the Defendants are not Freeholders, the
defendants used to be punished after this manner. First, Process was to be
awarded to arrest their bodies, and those who were not found, were put in
exigent in what Court so ever the Plea was, and were at three Courts solemnly
demanded and proclaimed; and if they appeared not at the fourth Court, then
were they banished the Lords jurisdiction, or the Bayliffes of the Court for a
time, or for ever, according to the quantity of the Trelpasses.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 7. Defaults in real Actions.
THe defaults in real Actions are punishable in this manner. At the first
default the plaintiff is there seized to the value of the demand into the hand
of the Lord of the Court, and the Tenants are sommonable to hear their
Judgments of defaults; Or after appearance, the seizure is to be adjudged to
the Plaintifes, to hold in the name of a distress, until by lawful judgment
he be ousted thereof. And if any one appear in Court, first he is to plenise
the thing in demand, and presently to answer the default; In which case he may
deny the Summons, because he was never Summoned, or not reasonably Summoned,
and thereof he may wage his Lawyer against the Testimoney of the Summoners,
although they be present, and if he wage his Lawyer, he is presently to plead
to the Action, or to the plaintiff.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 8. Of Actions Mi^t.
THe defaults of mixed actions are punishable in this manner, The defendants are
distrainable by all their moveable Goods and Lands, saving that they are not
put out of that possession from Court to Court, till they apeare and Answer,
and the issues come to the profits of the Lords of the Courts.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 9. Of Pledge and Mainpernor.
PLedges and Mainpernors are of one signification, notwithstanding that they
differ in names; But Pledges are these, who bail other things then the Body of
Men, as in Real Actions and Mixed Mainpernors are in personal Actions, only
those w^^ bail the Body of a Man; safe Pledges are those who are sufficient to
answer the demand, or the value, and are true men, and Freeholders to whom the
Plaintiff is, and in whose Court the Plea is brought; and if any one bring the
Body or his Fees by default, he is sufficient punished, though he be not
amerced, but then the Offender is first amerceable, when he is brought to
judgment, and cannot excuse his wrong or save his default.

And as none who comes before Summons is amecreable, so no Plaintiff is
amerceable, or his pledges, de prosequendo for Nonsuit, where the Tenant
appears according to the warrant of the Summons; or other wise makes
satisfaction for the same. As in Case where the King Commands the Sheriff,
that he command such a one to appear or to do; and if he do not; and the
Plaintifes put in sureties to prosecute his suit, then that he summon or attach
the defendant, etc. In which case if the Sheriff had not warned the Tenant to
appear or to do according to the points of the Warrant, if he take surety of
the Plaintiff to prosecute, he does him wrong: But the Plaintifes and their
pledges are to be amerced, when the defendants offer themselves in judgment
against them! and they make defaults by Nonsuit.

And also those Sheriffs do wrong who forbear to execute the Kings Commands in
as much as the Plaintifes have found sureties to prosecute their Plaints when
no mention is made in the Writts to put in sureties.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 10. Defaults after summons.
AS there is a default of persons, in the like manner there are of things; As
of services issuing out of Lands where the Lands are in service; and wherenot:
If Rent, Suit, or other service be behind to the Lord of the Fee, The Tenant
is not distraineable for the same by his moveable goods, but it behooves to
sommon the Tenants to save their defaults, or to make satisfaction, or to
answer wherefore those services due out of their possessions are behind to
the Lords, and if they appear not at the Sommon by the a ward of the suitors,
their Lands are to be seized into the Lords hands, til they justify themselves
by pledges. And if they be again summoned, to hear the Judgments for their
defaults; Although they come not at the second Summon, they are not to be
amerced, in as much as they came, they may render the Land, or allege a
privilege, or say something why they ought not to obey the Summons.

And if the Lord have not a proper Court, nor suitors, or has not power to do
Justice to his Tenants in manner as aforesaid; Then the same may be done in
the County or Hundred, or elce in the Kings Courts; Or at first by a Writ of
Customs and Services, and other Remediall Writts. And if any one has not any
thing to acquit himself, the Lord is not to loose his Right, although he be
delayed thereof, but the Lord may seize his Land as before is said, and the
Tenant is to recover his damages where he can, and it shall be accounted his
folly to enter or remain in another Fee, without the consent of the Lord.

And if any one oust him of his Land, and of his Tenement, and enforces
another person to hold of him, and makes himself mesne betwixt the Lord and
the Tenant, in prejudice of the Lord, in such a case, the law is used to hold
the course after said.

CAP. IIII. SECT. 11. Of champion.
IF any one do or say to his Lord of whom he houldeth any thing, which turns
to the hurt of his body, or to his dissinherison or to his great dishonor,
First by the Award of his Court, or of some other such a one is sommonable, if
he be his Tenant, and afterward if he make default he is destrainable by his
Land by the Lord, till he appear, and if he appear, and cannot discharge
himself, by his wager of Law, by 12. men more, or less according to the Award
of the Court he is to be disinherited of the Tenancie which he houldeth of
the Lord in such a manner by the Judgment of the Suitors, and so it behooves
that the Tenants leave their Lands, and that they come to the Lords.

And if any one denies his service which he ought to do, it may be said by the
Lords, that wrongfully he denies either part or the whole, and that to his
wrong, and so further count of seisin by his own hand, and that such is his
right, etc. as after shall be said.

And the Tenant may choose to try his Right by his own body, or by another, or
join issue upon the Grand Assise; And pray Conusans whether he has the
better right to hold such land specified, discharged of such service, as he
houldeth, or the said A. to have the same Land indemesure as he claims.

And if the Defendant will try his Right by the body of another, Then ye are
to distinguish. For if the Action be personal, the Suit need not be present;
and if the Action be Real, and the Tenant has his Champion present; Then may
the Plain^ife offer his Champion against the Champion of the defendant, or he
shalloose his Covenant or his Writ. And if the Defendant have nochampion, then
are the parties adjournable if they have joined Battle, that they have their
Champions ready at the next Court, as appears in the case of Saxeling to whom
Hustan was bounded in a Bond of 10. li. by a writing Obligatory made at Rome,
which the said Hunstan denied, That it was not his deed, To which Saxeling by
way of Replication Answered, That he wrongfully denied the same, and that
wrongfully, for that he sealed it with his Seal, or with the Seal of another
which he borrowed of him, such a day, such a year, and at such a place, and
that if he would deny it he was ready to prove it by the body of A. who saw it,
or by O. and C. who saw the same, and if any hurt come to them, he was ready to
prove the same by another, who could prove the same. And so it appears, that
it is not needful to have present Suit in such personal Actions the first
day, but the Parties may be ad^^urned as it is said.

And if any one who cannot be a fit witness, or who is a Champion be offered
by one of the parties to combat who was not named before to make the Battle
and the adverse party there challenge him, and demand Judgment of the
default, in such, such case the Judgment is to be given against the profferer.

And if any ill happen to any of their Champions where by they cannot combat
according to their proffer, none is resceiveable to try the battle for him but
only his eldeft son Lawfully begotten as by some is said.

And if the Tenants champion be va^^uished. The Tenant thereby loses all
Homage and all Alliance, and all Oaths of Fealty, and all Homage betwixt him
and the Lord, and the Lord is to enter therein and to hold the same in demesue
as if he had recovered by the Grand Assise, And if the champion of the Lord be
vanquished, that them the Judgment be, that the Tenant hold his Land for ever
quit of the service in the demand.

And if the King does any wrong to any of his free men, who hold of him in
chief, the same course is to be holden, The Earls of Parliaments, and the
Commons have Jurisdiction to hear such causes and determine them, because the
King cannot by himself, nor by his Justices determine the Causes nor pronounce
their Judgment, where the King is a party.

And as the Lords may challenge their Tenants of wrong, Or Injuries done to
them against the Articles of their Fealty, In the like manner are the Lords
challengeable of wrongs and Injuries done by them to their Tenants. And if the
Lords do not appear to answer their Tenants; Then are the Tenants to be
adjudged that^they do no service for their Lands, till the Lords have Answered.

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 12. Of punishments.
Punishment is a satisfaction for a Trespass or an Offense, There are two
kinds of punishments. Voluntary, and Violent.

Volantatie is that which binds the doer of his own accord, as it is in his
Compromises, to compel the people to keep their Bargains, But with such
punishments the Law medleth not with: Of violent punishment wherewith the Law
medleth, there are two kinds, Corporal, and Pecaniarie.

Of Corporal, some are Mortal, and some Venial, Of Mortal, some are by
beheading, some by drawing, some by hanging, some by burning alive, some by
falling from dangerous places, and otherwise according to Ancient privileges,
and Vsuages.

The Offenses which require punishment of death, are the mortal Offenses.

Of Venial punishments, some are by loss of Member; As the Felony of Mayhem
in case of wrong; Of Member; some by the loss of hand as it is of false
Notories, and of cutters of Purses with the Larcine of less then 12. d. and
more then 6. d. which King Rich. changed, some by cutting out of Tongues, as it
used to be of false witnesses, some by beating, some by Imprisonment, some by
loss of all their moveable goods, and not moveable as of false Judges, and it
is of userers attainted of usury after their decease, but not if they be
attainted thereof in their life, for then thy loose but only their movables,
because by penance and Repentance, they may amend and have Heirs. Some by
exile and abjuration of their Christianity, or of the Realm, of the Town, of
the Manor or the Land and their friends, as it is of those who are attainted
in personal Actions Venialls who are not able to make satisfaction, Some by
Banishment, as it is in contempts in personal Actions, Venialls, some by other
Corporal pains as it appears after its place.

And although one offend indeed, or in word, in all judgments upon personal
Actions, 7. things are to be weighed in the balance of Conscience, that is to
say, 1. The cause 2. The petson. 3. The place. 4. The time. 5. The Quality. 6.
The Quantity. 7. The end.

1. The cause whether it be mortal or venial, 2. The person, the plaintiff,
and defendant, 3. The place whether in Sanctuary, or not. 4. The time, whether
in day or in the night, 5. The Quality of the Trespaffe, 6. The Quantity
appears in it self, 7. The end; whether the taking were in manner of
distress by a justisiable importment, Or in manner of Larine, By Allienation
unjustifiable,

CHAP. IIII. SECT. 13. Of Insamous Persons.
ALL those who are rightful attained of an Offense, whereupon corporal
punishment follows are infamous.

Infamous ar all those who offend mortally or Fellouously, all those who are
perjured in giving false witness, All false Judges, All false Vsurours, and
all those who are attainted of personal trespasses, to whom open penance is
joined by enjudgment of Law.

Those who Imprison a Freeman against his will, or blemith the credit of his
Franchise by extortion, or by any purchase, Those who also bring attaints and
cannot prove the perjury, whereby honest Jurors are slandered.

And those who indite or Appeal a man who is innocent of Crime, blemishing his
credit or wrongful slandering him of any personal wrong, For those 3. Pleas
are held odious, the one because the Holy Scripture forbids vengance to men,
but the punishment of Offenders belongs to God; and God commands to show
mercy, and that is against the Appeal of Felony, The other of attainder of
perjury is odious ^or the Corporal punishment which followth thereupon; The 3.
because it is against the Law of Nature; which will not that any man should be
in slavery to another Creature.

Again those who combat deadly for reward, who are vanquished in the Combat
by Judgment berwix^ two men, those who withdraw themselves from Bartailes
when they have undertaken the Combat, if therein they make default; those who
keep Brothell-houses of loose women, those who take again their Wives after
their finne of Adultery is known to them, or keep those suspected of that
sinner; those who are Adulterours, those who Marry other Wives leaving the
first, those who are El^opours or Ravishers, those who take rewards to suffer,
those who cast out their Children to death, those who ravish their Cousens, or
Affines, those who Marry a Wife within the year after the death of their
former Wives, those who suffer themselves to be Married within the year after
the deaths of their first Husbands, those and they who Contract Mart^ages
elsewhere, leaving their Wives, or Husbands, and those who too soon purify
themselves, and many other infamous Persons are to be punished by Corporal
punishments in diverse manners.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 14. Of Majesty.
THe punishment of the mortal Sin of Majesty against the King of Heaven;
Sodomy is by burying the offenders alive deep in the earth, so that the
remembrance of them be forgotten for the great abomination of the fact, it
being such a sin which calls for vengeance from God, and which is more
horrible then the ravishing, of the mother; but this offense is not to be
brought before any Judge by way of Accusation, but the very hearing of it is
forbidden. The Judgment of Romery is by fire, either to be burnt or hanged.

The Judgment of Heresy is four fold, one is Excommunication, another
Degradation, the third Dis-inheriting, the fourth is Burning to Cinders.

The Judgment of Majesty against the Earthly King is by punishment according
to the Ordinance, and pleasure of the King.

The Judgment of falsifying, and of Treason is by drawing of the Parties, and
hanging them till they be dead.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 15. Of Burning.
THe Judgment of Burning is to hang until the Parties be dead, which used to
be by burning, and in case where the damageous burning is by increase of any
combustable matter; it was used to cast them into the fire when they found them
fresh in the doing of it.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 16. Of Murder.
THe Judgment of Murder is commonly by hanging until the Parties be dead, in
Felonies not notorious, and in notorious it is by beheading the Murderours,
nevertheless we are to distinguish, for some kill men and offend not, nor
deserve any punishment; some are Manslayers in signification and not by name;
and some are slayers of themselves.

The first are Lawful Judges, who by a right Judgment, and good Conscience
kill men; and the Ministers, or Officers who do Executions of such lawful
Judgment; and also as it is of those who kill without Judgment, and without
offense, as it is of those who are without discretion and kill men, as Madmen,
Idiots, Infants within the age of seven years, and those who kill men in
keeping of the Kings Peace, and of those who kill by Law, as of those
Men-slayers, who kill men in their mortal offenses, notorious in Fact, and as
in is of those who kill men in their own defense, who otherwise cannot save
their own lives.

The other sort is of those who have a desire to kill and cannot, as it is of
those who cast Infants, sick people, old people, in such places where they
intend they shall dye for want of help, and as it is of those who so pain
innocent men, that to avoid the same they confess themselves to have mortally
offended; those who Condemn men by corrupt Judgment, although that they do
not directly kill them; and as wilful Men-slayers, who Appeal or Indite
innocent Persons of mortal offense, and prove not their Appeals, or their
Indictments; and although these used to be Judged to death, nevertheless Ring
Hen. the 1. Ordained this mitdgation, that they be not Judged to dye, but that
they have Corporal punishment; and of those who wrongfully Appeal ye are to
distinguish, for if any one has appealed another so falsely, that there was no
color of Appeal by Judgment, or other reasonable proof, in such case he was
to be adjudged to make satisfaction to the Party, and afterward to suffer
Corporal punishment.

King Kannte used to Judge the Maineprisors according as the Principalls when
their Principalls appeared not in Judgment, but King Hen. the 1. made this
difference, That the Ordinance of Kanute should hold against Maine-prisors who
were consenting to the Fact, and the other should be adjudged against the
Plaintiffes, according to the example of the Principalls if they were present,
and against the King they were punished with a pecuniary penalty.

The third Case is of those who burn, hang, hurt, or otherwise kill themselves.

Again ye a^e to distinguish of other Men-slayers, as of Phifitians, Jurours,
Justices, Witnesses, of Idiots, Madmen, and Fugitives; for Physicians and
Chirurgions are skillful in their Fac^^ties, and probably do lawful Cures
having good Consciences, so as nothing fails to the Patient which to their
Art belongs; if their Patients dye, they are not thereby Men-slayers, or
Mayhemors, but if they take upon them a Cure and have no knowledge or skill
therein; Or if they have knowledge, if nevertheless they neglect the Cure, or
minister that which is cold for hot, or hot for cold, or take little care
thereof, or neglect due diligence therein, and especially in Burning, and
cutting off of members which they are forbidden to do but at the peril of
their Patient; if their Patients dye, or lose their members, in such cases they
are Men-slayers or Mayhemders.

Judges Judge men sometimes falsely to death wittingly, and sometimes out of
ignorance, in the first case they are Murderers, and are to be hanged by
Judgment, and not only those who gave the Judgment but the Accessories,
Abbettors, and those who hindered not such Judgment when they might have done
it.

Andin the second place ye are to distinguish; for one mannet of ignorance is,
as of a thing known had nor been known, and this kind of ignorance does
excuse; the other is of a thing not known which ought to have been known,
although he was not bound to know it, and this excuses; also the third kind
is, which comes of not knowing that which a man is bound to know, and this
excuses not; And note, that ignorance in its self is no offense, but this
neglect of knowing is an offense. The Judge does not offend so much that he
does not make the Law, but he offends in foolish undertaking upon him to
Judge foolishly or falsely. The fourth kind of ignorance is, that a man Judges
of a thing otherwise then rightful, and if such ignorance come of the fact it
excuses, and of the Law then it excuses nor. Or thus, there is one manner of
ignorance which one may overcome, and such excuses not; and there is another
kind of ignorance which one cannot vanquish, and such excuses whether it come
by nature, or by too much passion, or sickness, as of rage.

And that which is said of Judges is to be intended also of Jurors, and of
Witnesses in cases notorious, where many entermedle feloniously, and any one be
killed, and there be no cause to kill him; in case also where a child is
killed by too much beating, and in case where many have wounded one man, who
dies of one sole stroke, all of them generally are adjudged Men-slayers for
the apparent evidence of the fact; for none but God can Judge the intentions of
those that gave the stroke that it was to kill, nor who intermedled therein to
hinder that any hust were done, with a good intent; some who command what may
be for hurt, or may be for good; some which held the Parties, and others who
stroke.

Again ye are to distinguish of other Men-slayers, as some kill those who
enter to do a mischief, if such cases be not notorious their acquittance or
Condemnaon is in the discretion of the Suitors; also in case when people kill a
man in defense of themselves and their possessions, as it falls in diffeisins.

Again, if a man draw another to fence with him, or to shoot with him, and he
gives him such a wound as if he meant willingly to murder him, the same is not
to be Judged for murder, seeing men cannot Judge but according to Facts, and
not according to the intents or thoughts of the parties hearts,

Of Fools also ye are to distinguish, for all fools are accountable
Menslayers, as to have Judgment; but only Idiots, and Infants within age, for
a crime cannot be done, nor an offense but through a corrupted will, and a
corrupt will cannot be but where there is discretion, and innocence of
Conscience does save fools outrageous; and therefore Robert Volround ordained,
That Idiots being Heirs should be in the custody of the King, for their
Marriages, and for their Inheritances of what Mannours or Lords soever they
held their Lands.

Likewise ye are to distinguish of Madmen, for Frantickes and Lunatickes may
offend mortally, and so they are to be accounted and Judged for Man-slayers,
but not those who are Mad continually.

Of Infants also ye are to distinguish, of Infants Murderors, and of Infants
killed; the Murderors within the age of one and twenty years are not presently
to be Judged to death in a fact not notorious, before they be of full age.

Of Infants killed ye are to distinguish, whether they be killed in their
Mothers wombes or after their births; in the first case is is not adjudged
Murder; for that none can judge whether it be a Child before it be seen, and
known whether it be a monster or not; and to Infants killed in the first year
of their age the Counsance belongs to the Church.

Of Fugitives, and of those Defendants is the distinction which follows; he
who kills a Fugitive after that he submiteth himself to the Kings Peace in a
fact not notorious, he is to be adjudged to death as a Manslayer, otherwise
not; and he who kills a man defending himself, who might fly and avoid the
killing is also to be adjudged to death as a Manslayer, otherwise not.

Of the offenses of Robbery, Larcine, Burglary, where the damage exceeds 12.
pence where the offenders are taken in their offenses, the offenders are to be
killed by losing of their heads, if the people be present after the fact and
testify the felony; and in cases not notorious the Judgment is to be hanged
till they be dead.

And if the Defendant be a Woman ye are to distinguish, whether she has a
Husband or nor who is yet living, and also of the Action, whether it be mortal
or not, for if the be, and was sole without a Husband which she has married at
the door of the Monastery, and the Action be mortal she shall answer as a man
does; and if she be a Feme-Covert ye are to distinguish, for if she be accused
of a mortal Crime as principal, she shall answer, and if as an Accessory then
ye are to diflinguish; for if she be accused of consenting to the felony of
her Husband, or to any other, her Husband not knowing it, yet ye are to
distinguish of the Crime; os the offenses of Larcine, of Burglary, and of other
sinall offenses she may answer, That she was under the command of her husband,
and that she could not contract him; that answer is peremptory in Latcine, and
if without the knowledge of her Husband she shall answer: And if a Woman
without her Husband be accused to have been in the company of a Thief for a
minute, or a very small time, she may say, that she was not in his company but
as his Concubine.

Of mortal Judgments, of Outlawry, of Abjuration of the Realm, of vanquished
in Battles for mortal felony, and otherwise attainted of a notorious mortal
offense, or not notorious, the offense is such that the blood is corrupted; and
of the offenders the blood is extinct in every descent in right of blood, so
that nothing can descend from them to any of their Heirs either next or remote
by descent, but all shall remain to the Lords of the Fee, from the time they
committed the offenses, whoever were Tenants thereof in the mean time by what
Contracts soever; and all Fealties, Contracts, and Obligations are blotted out
thereby And of Fugitives it is according as it is with Out-lawes, and their
goods which remain (besides what belong to others) remain forfeited to the
King.

And the like in remembrance of their selonies, and in hatred of the felons it
is lawful to destroy all their mansion houses, to erradicate their Gardens, to
cut down and wast their Woods, to plow up their Meadows, or otherwise over
turn them, which King Hen. the 1. did moderate at the request of the Commons
in this manner, for the saving of the Lands of mortal felons in their hands,
of what Manor soever they were holden, that he should hold the same, and
should take the profits thereof for one year, and should do wast if there
were not other agreement made with him.

For the offense of Rape, the Judgment was to be hanged till he dyed, without
having regard whether the Woman ravished were a maiden or not, or without
distinguishing of what condition she was, and whether at the Suit of the
person, or at the Kings Suit; which offense before the time of King Edw. the
second, was by burning of them over the eyes, because the lust came in by eyes,
and the heat of whoredom came from the reins of the eacher.

Seven things do stay Judgment of Death.
1 False Judgment, or foolish Judgment.

2 False Testimony.

3 Default of better Answer.

4 The have of the King.

5 A woman with Child.

The first three Cases have respite by forty days, the fourth by thirty days,
the fifth by forty weeks, or more if the Child be not borne.

6 Want of discretion, as it is of Idiots, Madmen, and of Infants.

7 In Poverty, in which case ye are to distinguish of the poverty of the
offender, or of the thing; for if poor people to avoid famine take victuals to
sustain their lives, or clothes that they dye not of cold, so that they perish
if they keep not themselves from death, they are not to be adjudged to death,
if it were not in their power to have bought their victuals or clothes, for as
much as they are warranted so to do by the Law of Nature; and although the Law
has no respect but to the Souls of offenders, nevertheless King Edward
limited the quantity of Robbery and Larcine in this manner; that is to say,
that none should be adjudged to death, if the Larcine, or the stealing, or the
Robbery did not exceed twelve pence Sterling; and note that King Hen. the 1. by
Randulph de Glanvile Ordained, That in all mortal Actions, that where the
Action was encountered with an affirmative exception, that the affirmation was
first to be received in proof in favor of life, and thance it was that if one
man accused another of Felony, and he plead that he is not the man, the proof
was awarded to the Defendant to convince the other of lying, either by his body
or otherwise. And so it is if the Defendant say that he could not be at the
doing of such an Act, at the day, place, or year named in the Plaint, because
he was then in another place, where by presumption he could not do it, or that
he could not be there present; Or if he says that the thing came to him by
good title, in favor of life the proof belongs to the Defendant
peremptotily at his peril, to the overthrowing of the Action, and the
exception; but if the Defendant solye deny the Action, in such cases the proof
belongs to the Plaintiff

Of Out laws returned from exile, banished men, and those who have forjured
the Realm and returned, being taken and kept for a justifiable offense, the
Judgment is, that they be hanged till they be dead.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 17. Of Punishments in diverse kinds.
THe Corporal punishments of Death being past, we are to come to Corporal
punishments venialls, which are by open infamous Penances; and first of
punishments, Tallions, or (like for like) which are in three Cases, that is to
say, in May hem, Wounding, and Imprisonment, in which if the Pleas be brought
in by Appeals of Felony for reverge only, then belongs the Judgment
Tallion, or like Judgment, as Mayhem for Mayhem, Wound for Wound, Imprisonment
for Imprisonment.

And if pardonable in form of a Trespaffe, then these Judgments hold place,
that the offender make reasonable satisfaction to the Plaintiffes, and
afterward that they be adjudged to do open Penance according to the quantity
of the offense.

Open Pennances are these; amendments of Highways, Cawsies, Bridges, setting
them up in Pillories, or Stocks; Imprisonment, and abjuration of the Realm,
Exile, Banishment, either from off the Land, or from the Town; from entering
into such a place, or from going out of such a place, by Ransom of such a
penalty by pecuniary punishment, or by other Fine, and such other kinds of
Judgments penals. And if the offender; be Infants, or otherwise in custody,
that in such cases the Guardians be adjudged to make satisfaction of the
damages, and the Guardians to betake themselves to the goods of the
Trespassours; but the open Penance is to be suspended so long as they are in
Ward, so that according to the difference of the offenses and the offenders the
punishments were in manner as follows; and first of false Judges, who the
more greatly offend for as much as they are in a higher degree then other
people.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 18. Of false Judges.
OF false Judges Affigned, King Alfied Ordained such Judgment, that the wrong
they do to God whose Vicegerents they are, and to the King who is put in so
noble a place as is the Seat of God, and has given them so great Dignity as
to represent the Person of God, and the Counsance as to Judge offenders, that
first they be adjudged to make satisfaction to those they have hurt, and that
the remainder of the goods should be to the King, saving all other rights, and
all their Possessions, with all their purchased Lands should be forfeited in
whose hands foever they be come, and that they be delivered over to false
Lucifer, so low that they never return to them again, and their bodies that
they be punished and banished at the Kings pleasure, and for a mortal false
Judgment that they be hanged as other murderers; And for Mayhem, Wounding, and
Imprisonment, that they have like for like, and the same Law, and in the same
condition.

The Judgment of false Judges Ordinaties is not in venial Judgments so
penal, as it is of Judges Deligates before; but they are to make satisfaction
to the Parties Plaintiffes, and to the King they are punishable by a pecuniary
penalty, and disabled from all manner of Jurisdiction whatsoever; and in Cases
mortal, and Tallions, according as it has been said before of other Judges.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 19. Of Perjury.
PF^jury is a great offense, of whith ye are to distinguish either of Perjury
of false Testimony, or of breach of faith, or by each of the Oath of fealty; of
the first Perjury ye are to distinguish either of Perjury mortal, or venial^;
if of mortal, then the Judgment was mortal to the example of apparent
murderers.

And note that in all personal Actions there belongs such an award, that due
satisfaction be made to the Plaintiffes, and that the offenders be punished
with corporah pains, which pains are to be bought out by ransom of money;
and if of venial perjury, then that they be banished for a time, or for ever;
and that their Woods, Meadows, Houses, and Gardens be erradicated according to
the example of murderers, saving that their Heirs do not remain
dis-inherited.

Of the other Perjury ye are to distinguish as breach of faith to the King, or
to another Person, and if to the King ye are to distinguish whether as his
Tenant or not; and if the Oath of Fealty be in respect of Land, and the fealty
be broken in any of the points, then lies the Process and defaults aforesaid;
and if of an Oath not in respect of Land, ye are to distinguish whether of the
common Oath of Fealty sworn to the King, for the remaining in his Fee, and
then only Corporal punishment holds place, which passes the punishment
which should be adjudged to others not the Kings Offices, according to the
Kings pleasure.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 15. Of the Offices of Justices in Air.
THe Presentiments of offenses are Ex officio by Coroners, by Sheriffs and
Bayliffes in Turns and viewes of Franck-pledge; by Enquests, and special
Justices, and by Kings Ex officio, or by their Chief Justices, or of their
Justices generals; and because that the one have not power to determine the
presentiments of such offenses, nor to punish the Trespasses, and the other who
can will not, or do not that duty which of right they may do; or punish the
innocent, and spare the guilty. It was anciently Ordained that the Kings by
themselves, or by their Chief justices, or by general Justices to hear and
determine all Pleas, should go Circuit every seven years through all Shires,
to receive the Roles of all Justices assigned, of Coroners, of Inquirers of
Eschetors, of Sheriffs, of Hundredours, and of Bayliffes, and of all Stewards,
of all their Judgments, Enquests, Presentiments, and all their Offices, and to
examine those Roles whether any had erred therein, either in the Law, or to the
damage of the King, or to the grievance of the people; and those things which
they found not determined that they should determine them, and in the Air they
should redress the Officers, and punish the negligence of them according to
the Rules of Law, and that they should enquire of all offenses which belonged
to the Kings Suit, and to his Jurisdiction. And note, that notwithstanding the
King had the Suits of all mortal offenses, and of wrongs done to the Law, and
to the right of his Crown, it is not thereby to be understood that he should
have the Suit of all offenses; but if any one be Plaintiff and does not
proceed in his Suit after the same is affirmed, ye are to distinguish, if it
be of a personal offense (...) it sus^^eth for the Defendants, for the
Nonsuit of the Plaintiff does suppose (...) of the damage; and if it be of a
mortal offense yet the King has nor the (...) warrant of Appeal, or
Indictment, wherein it behooveth to the Appealees and Enditees that they make
haste to acquit themselves, for none is bound to Answer to any manner of Action
brought by them, because they are barred by an Exception of mortal infamy, by
being Appealed or Indicted.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 21. Of the Articles in Air.
EVety Shire usedto be warned by forty days at the least, by general Summons
of the Kings coming, where after the Effoignes adjourned, and the Assize of
Victuals set, and the Ordinances proclaimed, and those of Franchises adjourned,
and the Jurours called, Sworn, and Charged with their Articles; and the
claimers of Franchises, and the Rolls of the Justices, of Coroners, and of all
Sheriffs, and of all other manner of Pleas, and Presentiments after the last
Air taken and received; the first thing was to enquire, hear, and determine
the Articles presented and brought in the last Air which were not ended, and
afterward to determine Writs and Plaints, to deliver Visnes, to examine the
Rolls, to redress the errouts, and all other wrongs by right Judgments,
without respect unto any person.

All the Judges Ordinaries, and Assigned Sheriffs, Bayliffes, and Stewards of
Lords of Mannours, and all other who claimed Jurisdiction which any one could
attaint of any wrong done against the right rules of Law, were condemned for
the wrongful Judgments, with regard to the distinction of the Parties grieved.

Coroners, Eschetors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, and other Ministers doing wrong to
the King, or to the people, used to be punished according to the example of the
other, and further according to the Kings pleasure.

The offenders which were found using false Scales, and false Measure, and
gaining by breaking of any Assize, either of Bread, Wine, Ale, Cloth, or other
Merchandises used to be set in the Pillory, and Women in the Tumbrell, and
afterward; were not suffered to Merchandise at any time, not could they depart
from the place or Town to any Liberty, because the usage was contrary to Law.

Cut-purses taken De facto in their notorious sins used to be hanged, and for
the cutting of Purses and stealing of other goods under the value of twelve
pence, and less then six pence one of their ears used to be cut off without
carrying them to Prison, or before any Judge Assigned, and to banish them from
the Town, or from the Mannot for the second offense.

And for their ^arcine under the value of (...) pence they used to set them in
the pillory for the first offense, and to banish them for the second.

In the Judgments of Personal Trespasses, venialls, as to the taxing of the
damages put in plaints, Martin De Pateshall used this course, the Judge used to
enquire ex officio of the Jurors, by whom any principal Trespass was
adjudged before him, the names of all these who were guilty in the first
degree, and of the Accessories, and therein he proceeded to Judge the damages
according to the number of the Endictors, so that no Plaintiff should recover
no more entire damages by plurality of Plaints for one sole trespass against
the Trespassours severally.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 22. Of Franchises.
OF Franchises note, that because the King does not hold his Rights and
Dignities of his Crown but as an Infant, nor a grant from him of any
franchises is so established that Kings cannot repeal them again, so as he
give satisfaction to the value as by warranty; and it is lawful for every one
who finds himself grieved to Sue for the King, to seize every Franchise
forfeited for contumacy; as if the Bayliffe of a Franchise do not execution of
the return of the Sheriff according to the Command of the King, by any abuse,
as by using his fr^nchife too largely, or not duly; by a Writ ensuing, it is
commanded that the Sheriff enter into the Franchise, and the King does recover
the seisin thereof, and so the same becomes guildable which was before a
Franchise.

And all those used to forfeit the Franchise of keeping of a Goal in Fee, who
by title of Franchise of Infangthiese, or of return of Writ; hurted not without
delay, the Persons taken in the places within the Franchise for Felony done in
Guildables, and send them into the Goal in Guildable, so that the King do not
lose the Goods and Chattels of the Felons, nor his other rights; for the King
gives no Franchise to his own prejudice, nor to the prejudice of others,
especially of return of Writs, nor to have the custody of a Goal. An example
may be as betwixt two Neighbors in a Franchise, the one cannot keep a Prison
to the prejudice of the King, and if he do he forfeiteth the Franchise.

And it also appears, that Jurors came out of Franchises before the King and
his Commissioners to Guildable and elsewhere at his command, as well upon
criminal Actions as upon realls.

And if any one receive a Felon wittingly into his Franchise, the same is now
challengable.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 17. Of satisfaction of Debt.
IF a Plaintiff recover against many by Judgment he shall have but once
damages, as in this case: If many Persons owe one Debt, and every one be bound
in the whole, if one of them make agreement for the same, although he do not
make a special agreement for all the Debtors, all of them nevertheless are
discharged, because satisfaction has respect to the Debt, and not to the
persons.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 18. Cases of Disseisin.
IF the Jurors in Petit Assizes are agreed that one shall give their common
Verdict for all, and if they say that they know nothing, nor that the
Plaintiff shall receive nothing because he proved not his Action; and if they
be of diverse opinions they are not therefore to be threatened, nor imprisoned;
but they are to be severed and diligently examined. And if two Jurors be found
to agree amongst all the rest, it suffices for him for whom they speak, and
they are not to be examined upon the title of the possession, but it is
sufficient for the Judge to know if the Plaintiff were disseised of his Land,
whether it were rightful or wrongful according to the Plaint; for though it
were right, nevertheless it was tortious, because the Tenant used force where
he should have used Judgment, and for that he made himself a Judge therein.
Judgment is to be given for the Plaintiff, so as he shall recover seisin,
such as it is, saving every right by another Writ; for an Affize lies not upon
Assize of the same Tenement, betwixt the same parties, not an Attaint upon an
Attaint; and if the Jurors for him, whether they were sworn upon the Action,
or upon the Exceptions, Judgment goes for him, and they behoove to enquire of
the others named in the Writ, and if the Disseisors came in with force and
Arms, although they hurt no persons body, all of them nevertheless are to be
adjudged to Corporal punishment, according to the quantity of the offense; and
if they cast him our of his dwelling house, or out of his Demesne, the felony
of this Burglary is punishable at the Kings Suit, or at the Suit of the Party,
for none is to be cast out of his house where he dwells, and which he has
used as his own for a year without Judgment, although he has no title
thereunto but by Disseisin, or intrusion, and it suffices for fotce and Arms,
only the showing of Arms for to hurt the Adversaries; and under the name of
Arms are contained B^wes, Artowes, Sawes, Lances, Speeres, Staves, Swords,
and Targets of Iron.

The Jury ought to enquire of the damages, that is to say, of the profits of
the Tenements done since the Disseisin, and to whose hands such profits after
came, and of the Charges, Costs, and reasonable expenses which the Plaintiff
has sustained in his whole recovery, and in all things, and how much he is
endamaged in distress of his goods, and in his honor; and the damages being
assessed, it is to be awarded that the Plaintiffs recover his seisin, such as
it is, according to the view of the Recognitors, and the damages; and the
Disseisors are punishable according to the points of the offenses.

For the goods found in the Tenements whereof none can know the value, as
Charter, Writings, Royal Treasure, and such things locked up, the Plaintiff
has an Action by Appeal of Robbery, or by a Writ of Trespass.

In Judgment of ^atcine veniable satisfaction is to be made to the (...)
in^ffes, to the double of the value of (...) which are stolen; and in case of
(...) the value (4 double) or four (...).

CHAP. IV. SECT. 25. Of Amercements.
A Pecuniary pain we call an Amercement, which follow real offenders and
m^^t, and sometimes are certain, and sometimes uncertain. An Amercement is
certain. sometimes according to the dignity of the Persons, as it is of Earls
and Barons; for he who holds an entire Earldoine is to be amerced one hundred
pound when he is least amerced; And a Baron for a Barony entire one hundred
Marks, and he who holds less, less; and more, more; according to the
quantity of the Tenure.

And sometime; by a certain Assize in another case, as it is of Escapes of
people imprisoned, in which case ye are to distinguish of the place, as where
one escapes out of the Kings Prison, or out of the Prison of another; out of
the Kings Prison ye are to distinguish of the cause, whether it be mortal or
venial, and if mortal, then distinguish if the cause were adjudged or not,
and if adjudged by norory of fact, or of right, then the Corporal punishment
is uncertain; for if the Keeper, or more be assenting to the escape,
punishment of death follows thereupon; and if the cause was not adjudged, and
the Keeper was not the Kings Officer, nor assented to the escape, then the
Assize of punishment is so many Shillings sterling or more, according to the
usage of the Country, or of the place, or of the person.

And if the Cause he venial, then the escape is not punishable.

And if the escape be from the prison of others, then ye are to distingu^sh of
the cause, and of the caption, whether the cause be mortal or venial, and if
mortal then the pecuniary pain aforesaid holds place; and if the cause be
venial, there is no punishment for the escape.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 26. Of Amercements taxable.
COmmon Amercements are Taxable by the Oaths and A^^erments of the Peers, of
those who sal in misere cordia, according to the constitution of the Charter of
Franchises, which wills that a Freeman be assessed when he falls into an
Amercement according to the quantity of his offense, a Merchant saving to h^^
his Merchandise, and a Vi^^aine saving his Wainage; and these Aff^rrors are to
be chosen by the assent of the Parties if they will, but the Kings Officers are
the more grievonsly to be Amerced for the breach of their faith, etc.

Many cases there are where Corporal punishments are brought in by Fines of
money, and such are called Ransomes, which is as much as to say, Redemption
from Corporal pains; whereof some Fines are common, as for Murders, other for
personal Trespasses of Towns and Commonalties, which Fines King Edward
Ordained, that they should be assessed in the presence of the Justices, so as
the names of them be put into the Roles of the Justices, so that the Estreates
may come to the Sheriff to leavie the same by parcells, and not by total
Summons.

And in case where one recovereth Debt or Damages, King Edward enacted that it
should be in the election of them to do execution by leavying such Debt, and
damages of the moveable goods of the Debtors at the very value, to the value of
the thing in demand, except the Oxen, and Beasts of the Plow, together with the
moiety of Lands, and Tenements of the Debtors, if the goods be held sufficient
by a reasonable Extent until the debt and damages be leavied.

Those who are Appealed and Endicted of Felony, and are not to be found, it
behooveth that they be proclaimed, and especially before the Kings and his
Justices Errants, and if they be found guilty, then they are to be commanded to
put them in exigent, so that the first county after the Air be the first day,
and so they be demandable at three Counly. Courts until they be Outlawed, if
they ^ender not themselves to the Peace.

CHAP. IV. SECT. 27. Of the Office of Justices in Air.
TO the Office of Justices in Air it belongs especially to enquire by
Jurors, and by examination of the Roles of the Coroners, of all that were
Outlawed after the last Air, and after Certificate of their names they are to
enquire of the names of their Pledges, that is to say, whether they were in
Dozien, or in Franckpledge, and if their Pledges be in the same County then are
the Pledges punishable by a pecuniary pain because they brought not those they
took in Maine-prise to appear; and if they were elsewhere in Dezien, then
they are to enquire in whose Main-prise they were, and they are punishable
according to the example of the Pledges for the same cause.

To help the memories of the people are Escripts, Charters, and Minements very
necessary to prove the conditions and the points of Contracts, Gifts, Sales,
Feoffments and other things.

By the Statute of Leuchfred it was Enacted, that one might deny nude ^ontracts
made by words, and it was Ordained, that Plaintiffes should prove their
Writings which were denied, and not proveable by Neighbors in England, and for
foreign Contracts by Battle, or by the setting to of other Seal, or by
Jurors at the election of the Plaintiffes.

If Jurors have obscurely or doubtfully, or not sufficiently given their
Verdict in any Action or Exception; or any of the parties be grieved thereby;
there is remedy by a Commission of C^^tisicate to make the Iurour come again,
and the Parties who are the Plaintiff, ought to have under the Kings Seal, and
of the Judge, and of the Parties, the proceedings of the Plea before, and show
the defect, and the offense of the Jurors; in which case if the Judge by
examination find it doubtful, the said doubt is to be reduced to certainty,
and the obscurity to cleernesse, and the error into truth; and so the first
Judgment is to be redressed.

The Contents of the Fifth Chapter.
A Busions of the Common Law. The defects of the great Charter. The
reprehensions of the Statute of Merton and Marle-bridge. The reprehensions of
the Statutes of Westmister, 1. The reprehension of the Statute of Wesim. 2. and
of Gloucester. The reprehensions of Circumspecte agatis. The reprehensions of
the new Statute of Merchants.
CHAP. V.
CHAP. V. Sect. 1. Abusions of the Common Law.
THere are many who say, That although other Realms use a written Law, yet
only England uses her Customs, and her Usages for Law not written; but
betwixt rightful and tortious usages there is a difference, for tortious
usages not warranted by Law, nor suffered by Holy Scripture, are not at all to
be used: as for example; those of Thieves, whose usages are to rob and steal.

And to show some abuses holden for usages, which are frauds to the Law, and
repug^ants to right, and which are not found justifiable by Holy Scripture, is
this Chapter made of a Collection of part of the abusions of the Law, and of
persons erring from the knowledge of the right of Law, and from lawful usages.

Abusion is a disuse, or a misuse of right usages turned to abuses, sometimes
by contrariety and repugnancy to Law, sometimes by too large a usage thereof.

1 The first and chief abusion is, That the King is above the Law, whereas he
ought to be subject to it, as it is contained in his Oath.

2 It is an abuse, that whereas Parliaments ought to be for the salvation of
the Souls of Trespassors, twice in the year at London, that they are there
but very seldom, and at the pleasure of the King; for Subsidies and
Collections of Treasuree and where the Ordinances ought to b^ made by the
assent of the King, and of hi Earls, they are now made by the Kin and his
Clerks, and by Aliens, and others who dare not contradict the King but de fire
to please him, and to Counsel him for his profit, though the Counsel be not
Covenable for the common people without calling the Counties thereunto, and
without following the rules of Law, whereby it follows that many Ordinances
are grounded more upon pleasure then upon Law.

3 It is an abuse that the Laws, and the Customs of the Realm, with their
occasions are not put into writing, whereby they may be known, so as they
might be known by all men.

4 It is an abuse, that force holds in Disseisins after the third day of
peaceable seisin, for as much as he is not worthy to be aided by the Law who
flies from Judgment, and uses force.

5 It is an abuse, that Justice is delayed in the Kings Court, more then o^se
where.

6 It is an abuse to suffer any to be in the Realm above forty days who is of
the age of fourteen years, English or Alien, if he be not sworn to the King
by an Oath of Fealty, and in some Pledge and Dozien,

7 It is an abuse that Clerks, and Women are exempted to make the said Oath to
the King, seeing the King takes their Homage and Fealty for Lands.

8 It is an abuse to hold an escape out of Prison, or the breach of the Goal
to be a mortal offense, for that usage is not warranted by any Law, nor is it
used in any place but within this Realm and in France, for as much as one is
warranted to do it by the Law of Nature.

9 It is an abuse to suffer so many forms of Writs to be pleadable, and
therein especially that the Writs are Close, and not Patents, as the Writs of
Right; and in that they are made with interlinings and rasure, and otherwise
vicious.

10 It is an abuse that the money is not quarterable, that it is not Silver,
that it is held payable if the foreign circle be not whole, to allay the Money
per 18. d. and make paying of Lead to every, etc.

11 It is an abuse that the King takes more then twelve pence for the exchange
of twenty shillings in the pound.

12 It is an abuse that no pound is suffesed to weigh twenty five shillings, or
more then twelve ounces.

13 It is an abuse that Treason is not adjudged more by Appeals then it is.

14 It is an abuse that a man who has done Manslaughter of necessity, or with
the Peace, or not feloniously, is detained and kept in Prison until he has
purchased the Kings Charter of pardon of death, as it is for mischance.

15 It is an abuse to hold the moveable goods of flyers forfeited before they
be attainted of the Felony by Outlawry, or otherwise.

16 It is an abuse to Outlaw a man before it has been enquired by the Oaths
of Neighbors.

17 It is an abuse to suffer a man attainted of Felony to be an Approvers, and
to have a voice as a true man, and that Clerks, Women, Infants, and others who
cannot Combat are suffered to be Approvers.

18 It is an abuse that others receive the Appeals of Approvers, then
Coroners, and that they are suffered to Appeal oftener then once, or by
distress or otherwise, or in any manner falsely.

19 It is an abuse that the Justices drive a true man to be tried by his
Country, where he profereth to defend himself against the Approver by battle.

20 It is an abuse to force people Appealed by Approvers to Acquittalls, where
the Approver put in his Appeals, if he be not thereof elsewhere endicted, or
after the lying of the Approver attainted, or after the death of the Approver.

21 It is an abuse to suffer an Approver to live, after he shall be attainted
of a false Appeal.

22 It is an abuse to suffer Thieves, and known and notorious Felons to be
defended in Sanctuaries.

23 It is an abuse that those Felons who are forjured the Realm are not
suffered to choose their Port and passage out of the Realm, and to limit their
Iournies.

24 It is abuse that they enter into the Sea, and from the Sea, the Church next
the Sea. and that enteries into great places are denied them, and that they
have not the privilege of Pi'grims.

25 It is abuse to adjudge Murder for default of En. l. shire, since Murder
ought to be the English punishment of an Alian.

26 It is an abuse that Acquittances of paiments made to the King in the
Exchequer are by Tallies, and not by the Seal appointed for it.

27 It is abuse that the Kings Officers of the Exchequer, have Jurisdiction of
other things then the King, Moneys, of his fees, and of his Franchises without
an Original Writ out of the Chancery under white Wax.

28 It is an abuse that the Kings Debts lie Dormant, and are delayed to be
leavied by Estreates, since the Arreates of Sheriffe^s, and of other the Kings
Receivers are to be leavied without delay upon those who preferte them, if they
themselves be not sufficient, and the Arrerages of the Debts of others are to
be leavied upon their Sureties where the principalls are not sufficient to pay
the Arrerages; the Amercements are liable upon the Assessors if the principalls
are not sufficient, and so it is of Fines, and all other the Kings Debts,
whereby it appears that no Debt ought to be much behind; is so much as some
think that none are chargable with an old debt if not of malice, or by
negligence of the Kings Officers.

29 It is an abuse that they of the Exchequer, or others receive Atturnies, or
hold Counsans without an Original. Writ out of the Chancery, which none can
do without Jurisdiction.

30 It is an abuse that Freemen, and Freeholders have ordinary Jurisdiction,
but in the Courts of Lords of Mannours, or of Hundreds, or Counties.

31 It is an abuse to Amerce any man by reason of a Presentment in personal
Trespass, in as much as no man is to be Amerced but for the offense in a real
or mixed Action.

32 It is abuse to Amerce any man by a Presentment made of less then twelve
sworn Freemen.

33 It is an abuse to assesse an Amercement certain, without the afferment of
Freemen sworn to it.

34 It is an abuse to afferre Amercements in the absence of those who are to be
Amerced.

35 It is an abuse to Charge the Jurours with any Article touching wrong done
betwixt neighbor and neighbor.

36 It is abuse to believe any one has Jurisdiction, if a Commission give it
not.

37 It is an abuse to obey the Judge who is appealed of doing wrong, the
example whereof appears in the old Writ of right, Et nisi feceris viceoemes
faciat.

38 It is abuse that a Freeman be made the Kings Officer by any election
against his will.

39 It is an abuse, that the salaries of Pleaders be not certain.

40 It is an abuse that the Defendants have not amends of wrongful Plaintiffes.

41 It is abuse that Pleaders are spared of Oaths according to the points.

42 It is abuse to suspend a Pleader if he be not, attaint of a Trespass, for
which he is condemnable to Corporal punishment.

43 It is abuse to Summon 2 man for 2 personal offense.

44 It is abuse to adjudge a man to death by Suitors, if not in cases so known,
that there need no Answer.

45 It is an abuse to bring the Appeal else where then before the Coronet of
the County, and that appears by the Writ of Appeal, as a Writ grounded upon
error.

46 It is abuse to letto bail a man Appealed, or indicted of a martial
offense by Pledges.

47 It is an abuse to determine the Appeals of felony by Judges, Ordinaries,
Suitors.

48 It is abuse that all persons are commonly receiveable in Appeals of felony.

49 It is abuse that all Infants within age are in Ward.

50 It is an abuse that people may Alien their Inheritances from their Heirs
further then the grants, or their purchase of Lands make mention, for none can
make an Assignee if it be not specified in the grant.

51 It is abuse that the Inheritances of Heirs females are held in Ward
(though it be of Knights service) as of Heir Males, since a woman is at age at
14. years.

52 It is abuse that Goalers or their sovereigns plunder Prisoners, or take
from them other things then their Arms.

53 It is abuse that Prisoners or others for them pay any thing for their
entries into the Goal, or for their coming out.

54 It is abuse that a Prisoner is laden with Irons, or put to pain before he
be attainted of the felony.

55 It is abuse that the Goales are not delivered of the Prisoners who are
deliverable without delay, without a Writ.

56 It is abuse to make a man to Answer to the Kings Suit where he is not
indicted, nor appealed.

57 It is abuse to imprison any other then a man indicted or appealed, without
a special Warrant, in case for want of Pledges or Maine-prisors.

58 It is abuse that Justices deliver Prisoners not taken before the date of
their Warrants, since the Kings intention was not but of those who are then
kept in Prison.

59 It is abuse that the Writ of Odio and Atia take no place but in Murder.

60 It is abuse that that Writ lies for Endictees.

61 It is abuse that Appealees or Endicters of mortal Crime are got out of
Prison by Bail, or those who are condemned to Corporal punishment before they
do their Penance, or that they have bought in the same by Fine and Ransom.

62 It is abuse that the Writs Sicut alias, and sicut pluries pass the Seal,
in case where it should make those Officers inobedient of right, and to the
King, and should charge others to do such Commandment.

63 It is abuse to put these words in Writs, Nisi captus sit per speciale
perceptum nostrum vel Capitalis Justiciarii nostri vel pro forresta nostra,
etc. for no special Commandment ought to exceed the Common Law.

64 It is abuse to suffer the Judges to be Plaintiffes for the King.

65 It is abuse that Aliens, or others who have not sworn fealty to the King,
or infamous persons, or Indicted or Appealed of mortal Crime, or who have not
an able Commission, or after any wrong done, or after Judgment given, be
suffered to have Jurisdiction, or to Judge out of the points specified in their
Commissions.

66 It is abuse that in Appeals by Pleaders are the P^aces, and the Countries,
and the hours of the days, and that it is against the Peace, since every
offense is against the Peace, and such other words needless.

67 It is abuse to abate sufficient. Appeals, according to the Statute of
Gloucester.

68 It is abuse that the remediall Writs are saleable, and that the King
Commands the Sheriff, that he take Sureties to his use for the Writ, for and
by the Purchase of these Writs one may destroy his eremy wrongfully; and
because that such Fines and Penalties ^un in Estreates, though they do nothing
but hurt to the Purchasor theref.

69 It is abuse that Forraigners are not receiveable in Actions by Su^^ties of
Freemen, who have not wherewith to find Pledges.

70 It is abuse to distreire in personal Actions, where the profit of the
Issues comes to the King, and no profit accrueth to the Plaintiffes.

71 It is abuse that any Plaint is received to be heard without Sureties
present, to testify the Plaint to be true.

72 It is abuse, that it is said that Villinage is not a Franck Tenement, and
that an Assize lies not of an ejection for term of years, as well as it does
of a Franck Tenement for term of life, or in Fee; for a Villain and a Slave
are not all one, either in name or signification, for as much as every Freeman
may hold in Villinage to him and his Heirs, performing the services and
charges of the Fees.

73 It is abuse to hold that seisin accrued not to the Purchasor when the Donor
left his goods, for as a Contract of Marriage is good by the consent of the
wills of men and women, although that one of them repent, and after the
Marriage would withdraw himself, but he cannot thereby dissolve the Contract;
so as well it suffices to make the Contract by the delivery of seisin as by
the celebration of the Marriage, although the Purchasor have no other seisin by
taking the Esplees, nor any Deed. nor writing to testify the bargain; and if
it were that a Woman after the Marriage were ravished and consented thereto,
and the Husband repleeve her, and the ravisher answering to the Contract say,
That the Husband had no right nor action, because he was never sully seized by
taking the Esplees; nor had no Deed: or said, that he was never out of seisin
of the Woman because she was clothed with his Robes, and by her robe she
remained in his seisin; this Exception nothing avails him to excuse his wrong
no more then in this case. If a man buy a Horse, and agree with the seller, and
the seller deliver the ^^ne to the buyer, notwithstanding that the seller
repent of the bargaire, and forceably take back the Horse, although the buyer
has no Action for the same, because he remained always seized thereof at
will; such Exception is not good.

74 It is abuse to think that Contracts for goods not movables are otherwise
then for moveable goods.

75 It is abuse to think that seisin accrueth not as soon to a Purchaser of
his Purchase, as to an Heir of his Inheritance, since the Law requires but
three things in Contracts. 1. The agreement of the Wills. 2. Satisfaction to
the Donor. 3. Delivery of the possession and gift. If a trans^^tation of seisin
be given to the Purchaser by the Donor at the hour of one of the Clock, and
the Purchaser dies at the hour of three of the Clock he dies as well seized
of the Tenement as he should be of a Woman, or a Horse, though the Donor have
not departed with and removed his Chattels and it shall never be a good Plea
for him to say, That the Freehold after the transmutation of seisin by a
simple Livery remained in the Donor, after this Livery of the Tenement; but if
the agreement of the Donot be not performed according to the Contract, then he
may (...) thereby.

76 It is abuse to (...) at are cannot recover a (...) P^^^entments to Church
(...), since many Reasons (...) to Reddissesors.

77 It is abuse that (...) are not granted in Chancery without difficulty, to
Attaint all false Jurours, as well in all other Actions Personalls, realls and
mixed as in Assizes brought.

78. It is abuse to drive a Distress out of the Hundred.

79 It is abuse to make the view of the Distress to Bayliffes, in that a
Plaint will suffice, and a Court, and that he is yet seized thereof.

80 It is abuse that we do not sue for a Tortious Distress by way of Felony,
and that one attaint not these Robbers at the Kings Suit.

81 It is abuse that vicious Contracts are by agreements maintaied by Law, as
forbidden of offense. Is not Usury an offense? is not Imprisonment an offense?
how can one bind himself to Usury, or to Imprisonment, or a Disseisin, if he
do not offend.

82 It is abuse that Advowsons of Charters are aliened by Law for years in
Morgage, or to ferine, or are partible.

83 It is abuse that Leases of Fermes are not longer then forty years, since
continuance of seisin by length of time does dis-inherit no man.

84 It is abuse that no Land is let to ferme or in Fee, or for years rendering
Rent by the year, more then the fourth part.

85 It is abuse to Oat-law a man for a default, in case where the principal
cause is not felony.

86 It is abuse that Auditors are appointed by the Lords to hear Accounts
without the assent of Bayliffes.

87 It is abuse that Bayliffes have no recovery of damage; from Tortious
Auditors.

88 It is abuse that regard is had to the persons, when such Law is not for
Bayliffes against their Lords, a^e contra in the right of Debts due by the one
to the other.

89 It is abuse that a man may challenge one for his Neise to whom he never
found sustinance, in as much as a Villain is not a Villain but so lorg as he
remaireth in custody; and since none cara challenge his Villain for Villinage
though he be in his custody, if he find not sustenance to his Villain, or
send him to some Land in his Manor where he may gain his living, or
otherwise retain him in his service

90 It is abuse that Villains are Frank, pledges, or Pledges of Freemen.

91 It is abuse that others suffer Villains to be in their Viewes of
Franck-pledges.

92 It is abuse that the Lords suffer their Villains to plead, or be impleaded
without them, for a Villain is not Amerceable in any other Court because he
can lose nothing, as he who has nothing proper of his own.

23 It is abuse to hold Villains for Slaves, and this abuse causes great
destruction of poor people, great poverty. and is a great offense.

94 It is abuse that a man is Summoned who is no Freeholder.

95 It is abuse to Summon a man elsewhere then in the Land contained in the
demand, if it contain Land.

96 It is abuse that a man travail at his own Charges, by any Summons
personal.

97 It is abuse that a Justice or other make a Summons who is not a Freeholder
within the County.

98 It is abuse to Summon men without giving them reasonable warning upon what
to Answer.

99 It is abuse that false Causes of Essoignes are admitted, for as much as the
Law allows falsity in no case.

100 It is abuse that an Essoignor is admitted in a personal Action to the
Defendant, since one is Maine-prised to appear in Court by Maine-prisors.

101 It is an abuse to receive an Essoigne cast in by an infant within age.

102 It is an abuse to receive an Atturny, where no power so to do is given by
Writ out of the Chancery.

103 It is abuse to receive an Attorney, where the Plea is not to be judged in
the presence of the Parties, if not in case where one makes an Attorney
general.

104 It is abuse that none can make an Attuoney in personal Actions, where
Corporal pnnishment is to be awarded.

105 It is abuse to receive Exceptions in Judgments if they be not
sufficiently pronounced, for from the Order of the Exception early arises
clear Judgment.

106 It is abuse to allow a warrant of Voucher to a Theife, or in other
personal Action.

107 It is abuse that Judges Assigned show not the parties pleading their
Warrants, or of his power when they demand it.

108 It is abuse that Justices and their Officers, who kill people by false
Judgment be not destroyed as other murderours, which King Alfred caused to be
done, who caused forty four Justices in one year to be hanged as murderours
for their false Judgments.

He hanged Darling because he had Judged Sidulf to death, 1 Darling.
for the retreat of Edulfe his Son, who afterward acquitted him of the fact.

He hanged Segnor, 2 Segnor.
who judged Vlfe to death after susfficient acquittall.

He hanged Cadwine, 3 Cadwine.
because that he judged Hachwy to death without the consent of all the Jurours,
and whereas he stood upon the Jury of twelve men, and because that three would
have saved him against the nine, Codwine removed the three, and put others upon
the Jury, upon whom Hachwy put not himself.

He hanged Cole, 4 Cole.
because he judged Jve to death when he was a Madman.

He hanged Malme, 5 Malme.
because he judged Prat to death upon a false suggestion that he committed the
felony.

He hanged Athulf because be caused Copping to be hanged before the age of one
and twenty years. 6 Athulf.


He hanged Marks because he judged During to death by twelve men who were nor
sworn. 7 Marks.


He hanged Ostline because he judged Seaman to death by a-false Warrant, 8
Ostline.
grounded upon false suggestion, which supposed Seaman to be a person in the
Warrant which he was not.

He hanged Billing, 9 Billing.
because he judged Leston to death by fraud, in this manner he said to the
people, Sit all ye here but he who assisted to kill the man, and because that
Leston did not fit with the other he him commanded to be hanged, and said that
he did-assist, where he knew he did not assisted to kill him.

He hanged Seafoule because he judged Olding to death, 10 Seafoule.
for not answeri^g.

He hanged Thurston because he judged Thurguer to death by a verdict of
Enquest, 11 Thurston
taken Ex officio without issue joined.

He hanged Athelston, 12 Athelston.
because he judged Herbert to death for an offense not mortal.

He hanged Rombold because he judged Lisil^ld, 13 Rombold
in a case not notorious without Appeal, and without Endictment,

He hanged Rolfe, 14 Rolfe
because he judged Dunston to dye for an escape out of prison.

He hanged Freburne because he judged Harpin to dye, 15 Freburne
whereas the Jury were in doubt of their Verdict, for in doubtful causes one
ought rather to save then to condemn.

He hanged Seabright who judged Aihebbrus to death, 16 Seabright.
because he condemned one by a false judgment mortal.

He hanged Hale because he saved Tristram the Sheriff from death, 17 Hale.
who took to the Kings use from another goods against his will, for as much as
any such taking from another against his will, and Robbery has no difference.

He hanged Arnold because he saved Boyliffe, 18 Arnold.
who robbed the people by color of Distresses, whereof some were by selling
Distresses, some by extortion of Fines, as if betwixt extortion of Fines,
releasing of tortious Distresses, and Robbery there were difference.

He hanged Erkinwald because he hanged Frankling, 12 Erkiu. wald.
for naught else but because he taught to him who vanquished by Battle
mortal to say the word of Cravant.

He hanged Bermond because he caused G^^bolt to be beheaded by his Judgment in
England, 20 Bermond
for that for which he was Outlawed in Ireland.

He hanged Alkman because he saved cateman by color of Disseisin, 21 Alkman.
who was attainted of Burglary.

He hanged Saxmond because he hanged Barrold in England, 22 Saxmond
where the Kings Writ runs for a fact which he did in the same Land where
the Kings Writ did not run.

He hanged Alflet because he judged a Clerk to death, 23 Alflet.
over whom he had not cognizance.

He hanged Piron because he judged Hanting to Death, 24 Piron.
because he gave judgment in Appeal before the forty days pendant, the
Appeal by a Writ of false judgment before the King.

He hanged Diling because he caused Eldon to be hanged, 25 Dilling.
who killed a man by misfortune.

He hanged Oswin because he judged Fulcher to death out of Court. 26 Oswin.


He hanged Muclin, 27 Muclin.
because he hanged Helgrave by warrant of indictment not special.

He hanged Horn, 28 Horn.
because he hanged Simin at days forbidden.

He hanged Wolmer because he judged Grant to death by color of a Larcine of a
thing, 29 Wolmer.
which he had received by title of baylement,

He hanged Therberne because he judged Osgot to death for a Fact, 30 Therbern.
whereof he was acquitted before against the same Plainetiffe, which
Acquittance he tendered to aver by Oath, and because he would not aver it by
Record, Therberne would not allow of the Acquittall which he tendered him.

He hanged Wolstor because he adjudged Haubert to death at the Suit of the
King, 31 Wolstor.
for a fact which Ha^bert con^est, and of which the King gave him his pardon,
but he had no Charter thereof, nevertheless he vouched the King to warrant it,
and further tendered to aver it by enrolement of the Chancery.

He hanged Oskitell because he judged Catling to death, 32 Oskitell,
by the Record of the Coroner, whereby Replication allowable the plea did not
hold. And the case was such, Catling was taken and punished so much, as he
con^est he had mortally offended, and that to be quitted of the pain; and
Oskitell adjudged him to death upon his Confession which he had made to the
Coroner without trial of the truth of the pain, or the fact. And further, he
caused the Coroners and Officers accessories to be apprehended, who hanged the
people, and all those who might have hindered the false Judgment, and did not
hinder the same in all cases; For he hanged all the Judges who had falsely saved
a man guilty of death, or has falsely hanged any man against Law, or any
reasonable Exception.

He hanged the Suitors of Calevot, 33 Suitors of Calevo^.
because they had adjudged a man to death in a case not notorious, although he
were guilty thereof; for no man can Judge within the Realm but the King, or
his Commissaries, except those Lords in whose Lordships the Kings Writ does not
run.

He hanged the Suitors of Dorcester, 34 Suitors of Dorcester.
because they Judged a man to death by Iutours in their Liberty, for a felony
which he did out of the liberty, and whereof they had not the Counsance by
reason of forrainty.

He hanged the Suitors of Cirencester, 35 Saitors of Cirencester
because they kept a man so long in Prison, that he dyed in Prison, who would
have acquitted himself by Forraigners that he offended not feloniously.

In his time the Suitors of Doncaster lost their Jurisdiction, 36 Su^ors of
Doncaster.
besides other punishments, because they held Pleas forbidden by the Customs
of the Realm to Judges, Ordinaries, and Suitors to hold.

In his time Colgrin lost his franchise of Enfangtheise, 37 Colgrin.
because he would not send a Theife to the common Goal of the County who was
taken within his Liberty for a felony done out of the Liberty in Guildable.

In his time Buttolphe lost his view of Franck-pledges, 38 Buttolphe
because he charged the Jurors with other Articles then those which belonged
to the View, and Amerced people in Personal Actions where one was not to be
amerced by a pecuniary punishment. And accordingly he caused mortal rewards to
Criminal Judges for wrongful mortal Judgments, and so he did for wrongful
Judgments venialls. Imprisonment for wrongful Imprisonments, and like for
like with the other punishments; for he delivered Thelweld to Prison, because
he judged men to Prison for an offense not mortal.

He judged Lithing to Prison, 39 Lithing.
because he imprisoned Herbote for the offense of his wife.

He judged Rutwood to Prison, because he imprisoned Old for the Kings Debt.

On the other side he cut off the hand of Hanlf, because he saved Armocks hand,
who was attainted before him that he had feloniously wounded Richbold.

He judged Edulfe to be wounded, because he judged not Arnold to be wounded,
who feloniously had wounded Aldens.

In lesser Offenses he did not meddle with the Judgments, but dis-inherited
the Justices, and removed them according to the points of those Statutes in all
points where he could understand that they had passed their Jurisdiction, or
the bound; of their Delegacy, or of their Commission; or had concealed Fines,
or Amercements, or other thing which belonged to the King; or had released or
increased any punishment contrary to Law, or procured the exercising or
pleading without Warrant. either in the property by warrant of Writ, or of a
plaint of the Possession, or e contra; Or in the venial Actions by words of
felony, or e contrai, or had sent to no Party a transcript of his Plea at the
Jo^ney, or any of the Parties wrongful, grieved, or done any other wrong in
dis-allowance of a reasonable Exception of the Parties, or to the Judgment.

In his time every Plaintiff might have a Commission and a Writ to his
Sheriff, to the Lord of the Fee, or to certain Justices assigned upon every
wrongwhichwas done.

In his time Law was hastened from day to day, so that above fifteen days
there was no default nor Essoigne adjournable.

In his time the parties might carry away the parts of their Pleas under the
Seal of the Judges, or the adverse parties.

In his time there was no stay of Writs, all remediall Writs were grantable, as
of Debt by virtue of an Oath.

In his time the Judges used to take twelve pence of every Plaintiff at the
journey.

In his time Plaintiffes recovered not only damages of the issues of the
Possessions, and of the Fees, but recovered Costs as to the hurts, and as much
as one might lawfully Tax, by the occasion of such a fact.

109 It is abuse that such a multitude of Clerks are suffered to be made,
whereby the Kings jurisdiction is overthrown.

110 It is abuse that Clerks have Leases of that which belongs to the
Temporalty, and hold Lay Fees.

111 It is abuse that Pleas hold upon Sundaies, or other days forbidden, or
before Sun rising, or in the night time in dishonest places.

112 It is abuse that none answer to a Felony, or other personal Action of
trespass or scandal before his age of one and twenty years.

113 It is abuse that when the Action is affirmative to take the proof against
the Answer; or Plea affirmative.

114 It is abuse that a man be accused of life and member, ex officio, without
(...) or without indictments

115 It is abuse that the Justices show not the Endictments to those who are
endicted, if they require the same.

116 It is abuse that no man in England does answer for a thing done out of the
Realm Et e contra, or in a privileged place, where the Kings Writ runs not
for a thing done to a Forraigner et e contra, or within a place within a
Franchize, for a thing done in Guildable

117 It is abuse that Rape is a mortal offense.

118 It is abuse that Rape extends to others then Virgins.

119 It is abuse to Outlaw a man if not for felony.

120 It is abuse that one take in England any one Out lawed in Ireland, or
elsewhere out of the Realm; or that one is put out of his Fee by judgment of
Law of Judges Ordinaries, Suitors

121 It is abuse to count of so iong time, whereof none can restifie the
hearing or seeing, which is not to endure generally above forty years.

122 It is abuse that a man have an Action personal from a longer time then
the last Air.

123 It is abuse of the Writ of Account, for which every one may imprison
another wrongfully.

124 It is abuse that one is bound to render an account of issues of Land
whereof he is Guardian by title of Law.

125 It is abuse that the Writ of Ne cui just vexces is so out of use.

126 It is abuse that Battles be not in personal Actions as well as in
Felonies.

127 It is abuse that proofs and purgations be not by the Miracle of God where
other proof fails.

128 It is abuse to join Battle betwixt persons who are not admitted to wage
battle.

129 It is abuse that a Knight is otherwise armed then another man in a Combat.

130 It is abuse that Judges have Cognizance by original Writ, or warrant by
Vouchers, or in others to which his jurisdiction extends not.

131 It is abuse to suffer a Voucher to warranty in the Kings Writ of Quo
warranto.

132 It is abuse that those who are sound Usurers by indictments after their
deaths are suffered to be buried in Sanctuaries, and that the Lands do not
escheat to the Lords of the Fees.

133 It is abuse that vicious Obligations drive the Authors to personal
Damages, in as much as they are voidables.

134 It is abuse to compel Iuronts, Witnesses, to say that which they know not
by distress of Fine and imprisonment after their Verdict, when they could not
say any thing.

135 It is abuse to use the words (to their knowledge) in their Oath, to make
the Jurors speak upon thoughts, since the chief words of their Oaths be
that they speak the truth.

136 It is abuse that one examine not the Jurours, though they find at least
two to agree.

137 It is abuse to put more words in the doing of Homage; but thus, I become
your man, for the Land which I claim to hold of you.

138 It is abuse to Answer or appear by Attorney.

139 It is abuse to make Justices such parties without the Writ in the Kings
presence, if not with the assent of the parties.

140 It is abuse that the Writs of Audita quareta, and Conspiracy and others
contain not the substance of the plaints.

141 It is abuse that the Justices of the Bench meddle with more Pleas then of
wrong done against Fines, Grand Assizes, translation of pleas out of lower
Courts, and of Darrein presentment, and of the rights of the King, Queen, and
their Allies.

142 It is abuse to use a Pone when their Causes are discussed, if the parties
challenge the same, for a lying purchasor ought not to have benefit of his
leasings.

143 It is abuse to sue forth Grand Distresses in Pleas of Attachments, whereof
the defaults are to the profit of the King, and not of the Plaintiffes.

144 It is abuse that Trespassours who have nothing are not banished from
Towns, Counties, Manours, and Hundreds as they used to be.

145 It is abuse to hold that a Petit Cape makes other title but to save every
right in real Action, not in others.

146 It is abuse that the issues of Grand Distresses in mixed Actions come not
to the profit of the Lords of the Fees, and others who have Courts, as they do
to the King of Pleas, moved in his Court upon the same Actions.

147 It is abuse to think the same punishment is to be to Maine-prisots as to
Principals who make default, whereas they are amerceable only in Courts.

148 It is abuse to amerce a man in plesive of Fee, or of service, going out of
the Land by default in a personal Action or real; for Outlawty or loss of
Land is sufficient punishment.

149 It is abuse that Sheriffs do not execution of Writs Vice Conntiels, in
as much as the Plaintiffes have found Pledges De proseqnend. where there is no
mention to take Sureties.

150 It is abuse to distreine for Ar^erages of services issuing out of Lands
moveable goods, whereas no distress ought to be but in the Land only.

151 It is abuse that the Tenant may without punishment enfeoffe a third person
of the Land, of his Lord in prejudice of him, or do other thing, or say any
thing against the points of his Oath of fealty.

152 It is abuse to suffer a man who is a Champion to be a witness.

153 It is abuse that none have recovery of wrong done by the King, or the
Queen, but at the Kings pleasure.

154 It is abuse to judge a man to diverse punishments for one Trespass, as to
a corporal punishment and to a ransom, since ransom is but a Redemption from
corporal punishment by payment of a fine of money.

155 It is abuse that people defamed of offense are not barred from making
oaths, and of their dignities, and of their other Honors.

And diverse other abuses appear by those who well understand the Writ before
written.

CHAP. V. SECT. 2. The defects of the great Charter.
SEeing how the Law of this Realm sounded upon forty points of the Great
Charter of Liberties is damnably dis-used by the Governors of the Law, and by
Statutes afterward made contrary to some of the points, to show the defects or
defaults of the points aforesaid; and the errors of some Statutes I have put
in memory this Chapter of the defect; and reprehensions of Statutes, and first
of the defects of the points of the Great Charter.

To the point, That the Church of England shall have all her Rights and
Liberties inviolable; for first it were necessary to ordain a Corporal
punishment, and namely to the Lay Judges, the Kings Ministers, and others who
Judge Clerks for mortal Crimes to Corporal punishments, infamatories, and
do detain their goods after their purgation, and to those Secular Judges who
take upon them Cognizance in causes of Matrimony, and Testaments, or other
special things.

The other point is, That every Freeman of the Realm inherit the Liberties
of the Charter, and whereof every one is disseised as of his Freehold, which
is not adjudged according to the points following, there lies no recovery of
damages by the Assize of Novel Disseisin.

A third point seems to be defective, for as the releife of an Earldome
entire was to decrease in him who held less, so it seems that that
certainety was to increase as much if an Earl held more, so as he who held two
Earldoms, and who held an Earldome and a Barony, shall pay as an Eardome and as
a Barony; and so of other Fees if they be not expressed in the Charter, that
the Fine of one hundred pound be not an Eirldome for no point oncreased, and so
of other certainties.

The fourth point is defective (for although it be that such a point be
grounded upon Law, to bind the Lord of Fees to warranties by taking of such
Homages, whether they took them of the right Heirs or not) because it is not
expressed whoshould be Guardian of the Fees in time of vacancy, and have the
issues in the mean time in case where the right Heirs fly from their Lords, or
cannot or will not do their homage.

In the points of Wards it is defective, for as much as no difference is
expressed between the heirs Males, and the heirs Females, for a woman has
her age when she is fully of fourteen years, and the seven years besides
were not ordained first but for the Males, who before the age of one and twenty
years were not sufficient to bear Arms for the defense of the Realm.

And note that every Guardian is chargeable to three things: 1 That he
mainetaine the infant sufficiently. 2 That he maintain his rights and
inheritance without waste, 3. That he answer and give satisfaction of the
Trespasses done by the infants.

The defect of the point of Disparagements appears amorgst the Statutes of
Merton.

And the default of Franckbenches and Widows in the same manner, in which
point it is sufficiently expressed that no woman is dowable if she have not
been sollemnly espoused at the door of the Monastery and there endowed.

In the point which requires that the City of London have its ancient
Liberties, and her free Customs, it is to be interpreted in this manner; That
the Citizens have their Liberties whereof they are inherited by lawful Title
of the gifts and confirmations of Kings, which they have not forfeised by any
abuse, and that they may have their Liberties and Customs which are sufferable
by Law, and not repugnant to the Law. And where it is said (of London) that the
interpretation be as well of the Cinque Ports, and of other places.

The point which forbids tortious Distresses for Fees is Covenable in it
self, but the same shall not grieve any man of the Realm who has Tenements,
that it is no Trespass in him, or by his Ministers, as appears in the
Chapter of Nativo habendo.

The point which forbids that Common Pleas follow not our Court, is to be
interpreted in this manner; That the people shall not travail to Sue in the
Kings Household in the Country as they used to do. But this point wills,
that the Plaintiffes have Commissions to Sheriffs, to Lords of Mannours, and
to Justices assigned, so that right be done to the parties in certain places,
where the Parties and Jurours may be the less travailed.

Although it be that the Chapter command that Petit Assizes be taken in their
Counties, being made for the ease of Jurors, yet it is disused, in as much as
the Justices make the Jurours to come from the furthest marches of the
Counties, whereas it were better that the Justices Rod from Hundred to Hundred,
then so to travail the people.

The point of Amercements is misused by Justices, Sheriffs, Bayliffes,
Stewards, Cap. 14.
and others who amerce the people in certain in this manner, putting such a
one to so much for a Contempt or other Trespass withont a personal Trespass,
and without the afferment of the people sworn to it, and without specifying the
manner and the quality of the Contempt.

Again, where the Afferrours ought to be chosen with the assent of those who
are amerced, and in a common place, the Lords make the Afferrours to come to
their houses to asser the Amercements according to their pleasures.

The point which forbids that Rivers be defended is dis-used, Cap. 16.
for many Rivers are now appropriate and gotten, and so put in defense, which
used to be common to Fish in in the time of King Hen. 1. Cap. 17.


The Chapter which forbids that Sheriffs, Constables, Coroners, nor
Bayliffes shall hold Pleas of the Crown seems not needful, for appeals of
felony are not here to be brought before Coroners, and the exigents and
Judgments pronounced, and therefore this point had need to have had more words
to have expressed the meaning of it.

For the end of the Chapter of the moveable good; of the dead, it appears
that the Action accrueth to the Widows, and to the Children to demand their
reasonable parts of the goods of their Father taken away.

That which is forbidden to Constables to take is forbidden to all men, Cap.
19, 20.
in as much as there is no difference betwixt taking from another against his
will and liberty, whether it be Horses, Victuals, Merchandises, Carriages, or
other manner of goods.

The Chapter for holding the Lands of Felons for a year and a day is out of
nse; for whereas the King ought not to have the wast by Law, or but the year
in the ^^ame of Fine for safeguard of the land from spoil, the Kings O^^cers
take both.

The defense of the Precipe is not holden in that they do it without Writs of
possession of Farms every day, that the Lords lose the Cognizance of their
Fees, and the advantages of their Courts.

The point which commands that one Measure be throughout the whole Realm, and
one Weight is dis-used by Merchants, and Burgesses, using for the pound the old
Weight of twenty shillings of right Assize, and also of Else and other measures.

The defense which is made of the Writ De odio and atia, that the King be not
Chancellor, nor take any thing for granted, the Writ ought to extend to all
remedial Writs, and the same Writ ought not extend only to the felonies of
Murder, but it ought to extend to all felonies, and not only in Appeals but
in Endictments.

The point which forbids that no Bayliffe put a Freeman to his Oath without
Suit, is to be understood in this manner, That no Justice, no Minister of the
King, nor other Steward nor Bayliffe have power to make a Freeman make Oath
without the Kings Command, nor receive any plaint without Witnesses present who
testify the plaint to be true.

The point where the King grants that he will not disseise, nor imprison, nor
destroy, but by lawful Judgment, which overthrows the Statute of Merchants
and other Statutes is to be interpreted thus, that none be arrested, if not by
warrant grounded upon a personal Action, for if the Action be venial, no
Imprisonment is justifiable, if not for default of Maine-pernors. And so it
appears that none is imprisonable for Debt. And if any Statute be made
repugnant to this point, either for the Kings Debt, or for the Debt of any
other, it is not to be kept. That (none be Outlawed) is to be meant, if not for
mortal felony, from which one is saved by the Oath of Neighbors, ex officio,
as it is the use in Eyres; and therefore that destroys the Statute of
Outlawry of a man for arrerages of Account, and all other the like Statutes;
and that which is said, that none be (exiled nor destroyed) is to be
interpreted in this manner, that every one have an Action to appeal all
Persons, all Suitors, all Assessors who destroy men against the right course,
and against the rules of Law.

On the other part, where the King forbideth that none be disseised of his
Freehold, of his Liberties, or of his free Customs is thus to be understood,
that one shall recover by Assize of Novel disseisin every manner of Freehold,
and all manner of Possession real of Lands, or of Franchises whereout one is
cast, if it be not by lawful Judgment; and these words (if it be not by
lawful Judgment) refer to all the words of this Statute.

The point which the King grants to the people, that he will sell no Right, or
hurt nor delay Justice, is misused by the Chansellour, who se^ls the remediall
Writs, and calls them Writs o^ Grace, and by the Chansellour of the Exchequer
who denies Acquittances of payments made to the King under Green Wax, and all
those who delay right judgment or other right.

The point concerning leave for the staying of Merchants, Alliens, is so to be
understood, that it be not prejudicial to the Towns, not to the Merchants of
England, and that they be sworn to the King if they stay longer then forty
days.

The point which forbids that none Allien his Land in prejudice of the Lord
of the Fee, is to be interpreted in this manner, that no Tenant allien the Fee
of his Lord without his consent, or to hold in chief of the Lord without
increase of new service.

The point of the custody of Abbeys, and of religious places when they fall is
thus to be understood, that every Lord have the keeping of his Fee during the
Vacation.

The point that none shall be taken or imprisoned upon the appeal of any
woman, for the death of any other then of her Husband, is to be meant of such a
woman which the Husband last held for his wife, if in case there be many wives
alive.

The points concerning Sheriffs Turns and Viewes of Franck-pledges are
disused three ways; the first that Sheriffs, Bayliffes, and Stewards take
extortion of Fines, in that they make the people to fine for what they are not
occasioned which they call for Beaupleader. The second, that they amerce the
people for Presentiments upon personal Actions. The third is, that they charge
the Jurors with Articles touching Trespass done by Neighbor to Neighbor, or
of Tenant, or of other Lord then to the King.

The point which forbids religious persons to purchase Lands, overthrows
the Statute afterward made at Westminster of the same, for as much as the
Action of the chief Lord is limited in so short time, to hasten the Kings
Action in prejudice of the Lords of the Fee.

The last point is of such virtue and of such meaning as that the King has the
Cognizance of Trespasses done in such manner, as that the Fee-Tenants have
their Courts, and the Cognizance of Trespasses done within their Mannours, and
also as well of real Actions, and Personalls, as of mixed.

CHAP. V. SECT. 2. The Articles upon the Statute of Merton.
SOme points are reproveable amongst the Statutes made at Merton after the
Great Charter made, and namely the point of Redisseisins. Since the Law does
not attaint any Trespassor by enquest of Office, and because Pleas may perhaps
avail the Tenants, and should be by Law allowable, Assizes lie to the example
of Novel Disseisin; and where it is said, that Redisseisors be arrested and
kept in Prison, and afterward that they be released is but an abuse of the
Law, which requires that every one who is attainted of a personal Trespass
be punished by a Corporal punishment, if he cannot ransom it by money; and
that which is said of this Statute is to be understood of all Statutes made
after the Great Charter, made in the time of King Hen. the 1. for it is not
Justice that he should be punished for one fault with Corporal punishment, as
imprisonment or other, and further by a pecuniary pain, or by ransom; for
ransom is nothing but a buying out the Corporal punishment.

The point of Improvements of Wastes is reproveable as being too general, for
it ought to distinguish of Commons; for in some places the Commonors are
infeoffed in such manner that the whole Common is only in the Tenants, so that
the Lords have nothing but the soil, and in such case that Statute is
prejudicial to the Commoners, and repugnant to the Great. Charter, which
wills that none be cast out of his Freehold, not the appurtenances without
lawful judgment.

The point of Rape of Marriages is reproveable, in as much that it has an
Exception of Persons of Laymen, and of Clerks, for there is no more Law that a
Clerk should offend without punishment then a Lay man.

Other points are repugnable; If the Tenant do damage to his Lord, or e
contra, for they are not punishable according to the Statute, but they are
bound by their Homage and Fealty betwixt them, as it is before said amongst the
judgments of defaults.

The points of making Atturnies in Suits at Hundreds is to be understood in
this manner; That although a Suitor by this Statute may make an Attorney for
him to save his default, yet none can give Judgment by Attorney; nor is a
Woman named in this Statute, because that no judgment is to be given by a
Woman.

CHAP. V. SECT. 3. Of the Statutes of Marle-bridge.
SOme points of the Statutes of Marle-bridge are reproveable, and namely the
first five points, because that every personal Trespass is punishable by a
Corporal punishment if the Trespass be not bought in by ransom according to
the quantity thereof.

The Chapter which commands the Great Charter to be kept in all points is
defective for want of addition of punishment, and it seems cross to make
constitutions not holden.

The Chapters remedialls of Lords of Fees is reproveable in the mittigation of
punishment: For all those who do defraud the Law are punishable by a Corporal
punishment, and not by a simple Amercement.

The point of Proclamation of Wards is reproveable, as that which is founded
upon Error, as it appears in the Chapter of defaults.

The Chapter of Redisseisors is reproveable, for that no special command ought
to exceed Common Right, not any pain of imprisonment is judgeable but for a
wrongful imprisonment.

The Chapter of days in dower is reproveable, since the Law hasteneth right
more in the Kings Court then clsewhere.

The Chapters following of Attachments and Distresses are reproveab^e, for in
pleas of Attachments no Essoigne is allowable for the Defendants, nor any such
order of distresses is to be holden according to Law.

The Chapter which forbids that none make his Tenants Jurours is
reproveable, because that no punishment is therein ordained, and because it
has no Exception; for there are many Cases where the people ought to be
Jurours though they come not by the Kings Command, as before Justices of
Forests, before Coroners, and before Escheators, and as in Courts of Sheriffs
and Viewes of Fraukpledges, and as Afferrours, and at Goal deliveries.

The Chapter which commands the arresting of those who are bound to Account
is reproveable, since the Action is mixed, and requires Summons, and not
personal Arrests.

The Chapter of wasters of Farms is reproveable, for waste is a personal
Trespass, and requires a personal punishment, and not a simple Amercement.

CHAP. V. SECT. 4. Articles upon the Statute of Westminster, the first.
MAny Chapters are reproveable of the Statute of Westminster. For the points
touching religious Persons are matter to gain moneys, and a purchase upon a
foundation of covetousness, more then for their advantage.

The Chapter of Clerks found guilty of felony is reproveable, for for want of
addition of punishment these Clerks are not to be delivered to Ordinaries, but
at the pleasure of the King, and of his Justices.

The Chapter of Wreck is reproveable, in as much as the finder is forjudged by
the Statute to have part thereof, whereas he ought to have part of the profit,
and so it is reproveable, as to the awarding of the punishment.

Of the points of Amercements is before spoken in the Great Charter.

The point of takings of distress is much reproveable, Cap. 9.
as before is said.

The Chapter concerning pursuing of Felons to maintain the Peace is
reproveable in the punishment, for he is consenting to a Felon who does not
apprehend him when he may.

In the same manner is it of the Chapter of Coroners, contained in the Articles
following.

The point of Election of Coroners was not needful to have been ordained, Cap.
^
for it behooves more the Electors to have wise and loyal Coroners then to the
King, and it had better have been enacted that the Coroners do present the
points of their Office under the Seals of the Jurours, then Sheriffs should
make counter parts of the Rolls.

The point of Enquest of Odio and aria is reproveable, Cap. 12.
for London and other places in Liberties where there are no Knights.

The point of putting people found guilty of felony, who will not put
themselves upon the Country to penance, it is out of use that one kill them,
without having regard to the conditions of the Persons, and therein it is
reproveable, since one may perhaps help and acquit himself otherways then by
his Country, and in as much as none is to be put to Penance before he be
attainted of the offense for which he ought to be pained.

The Ordinances of punishments of long imprisonment are to be reprehended as
before is said.

The point of the order of Outlawry of the principalls before the Accessories
is no Statute, but a revocation of error.

The point of Replevisalls is reproveable, according as it is said of Actions;
the punishment of long imprisonment contain Error as is said before.

The punishment of Heites males Married, as against the King, without the
consent of their Lords, betwixt 14. years and 21. years is reproveable, for
then the King should have amends for that, for which he has not any personal
Suit for the amends.

The point of Heirs females contains Error, as appears in the
reprehension of the point of Marriages in the Great Charter.

The point of tortious Distresses ought to contain the punishment for the
robbery.

The punishment of Ministers, Disseisors by color of their Office is
reproveable for the smalnesse of it, as appears amongst the Judgments.

The point which forbids Sheriffs that they take no rewards is reproveable
in as much as the King takes of them, and they take nothing of the King.

The point of Fines of Clerks, and the officers of Justices in Air is
reproveable, for the common grievance of the people without taking of profit.

The points of imprisonment are reproveable for the reasons aforesaid, and the
point of Tolls for the punishment of imprisonment, and because Tolls are not
established certain.

The point which wills that those who dis-use Marriages should lose them, was
not needful to have been made, for the Law is, that he shall lose his
Franchise who uses it not.

The point of the Receivers of the Kings moneys and not rendering the same is
reproveable, for the smallness of the punishment, according to that which
appears before.

The Errors of taking of Carriages and other goods appears sufficiently by
the reasons before.

The point which forbids Judgment to be given by Strangers in Counties is
reproveable, for no Judgment given by another then an ordinary Judge assigned
is to hold.

The point which makes mention of Robbery, or Disseisins is reproveable, for
all those are to be seized upon who the Jurours indict of Robbery, according to
the example of Thieves and other Felons.

The point of Attaint is reproveable, for it should not extend to one case, but
it ought to comprchend all Oaths taken by twelve men if one of the Parties
complain thereof.

The point of limitations of Actions is reproveable, for the reasons in the
Chapter given upon the same matter.

The point which forbids falsities and abuses used in Courts before this
time to false Judges, who used not the Law by sufferance of falsities.

The point of Champions is reproveable, for no Champion is to be receiveable as
a witness.

The point of not allowing Essoignes in Assizes after appearance, is
reproveable by the Assize of Novel disseisin, where no Essoigne is allowable
for the Tenants no more before appearance then after, not in no other personal
Action.

The other points of Essoignes are reproveable, for no false cause of Essoigne
ought to advantage any man.

The point of delays in Pleas of Attachment is reproveable in many points,
accordingas appearethin the chapter of defaults.

The point to plead upon the surcharge falls in prejudice of Sheriffs, and
of Lords of Fees, and of Liberties; and although the two points of Disseisins,
that is to say, that every one may avoid the damages in the point of personal
trespass done to his Ancesters in as much as his Action lies, of what age
soever the Parties be, yet is the first reproveable, for as much as the
Plaintiffes have no recovery for the damages done to their Ancestors, not any
Action, but to have restitution of the possession.

The other point is reproveable for the smallness of the punishment, but
according to common right this punishment should have time, that he should
never do Homage betwixt them for the Lords forfeiture, when he begins to
dis-inherite his Tenant contrary to the right of Homage.

The Prayer of the King is reproveable, because he ought to ask nothing
contrary to Law, but it is the prayer of the Justices who desire always to
have much to do.

The point that if he who is vouched to warranty ought not to warrant, although
he be bounden by the deed of his Ancestor whose Heir he is, in case he allege
that nothing descended to him from that Ancestor by whose deed he is ^ouched is
reproveable, for according to the old Law, Lands remained liable to the Debt of
those who acknowledged it, to whose hands soever the Lands afterward came.

In the same manner it used to be in all other Contracts, where the Contracts
were adjudged or granted; and although nothing descended to the Heir for that
he lost not the Tenements for want of Acquittance, and if he who bound himself
to warranty would not warrant the Land, not vouch over, it appears thereby
that the Ancestor was Tenant by a naughty title, and that he was possessor
thereof by an ill way; and if the Heir had nothing whereby to discharge him,
the Tenements bound to warranty should be recovered. And if the Heir had
nothing whereby to discharge, not no Land is found bound to the warranty, if
the Purchasor lost his purchase it was at his own peril, and accounted his
own folly, the better at any other time to look to his assurance.

CHAP. V. SECT. 5. Articles upon the Statute of Westminster, 2.
THat which is said of the Statute of Westminster 2. which fails in many
cases is now to be understood, for against all Trespasses is the Law made
although it be dis-used, or controuled by those who know not the Law.

And the three first Chapters are not Statutes, but are the revocations of the
Errors of negligent Judges, for the Law permits not that a man make a better
estate to another then himself has, but requires that every lawful Contract
be made according to the wills of the speakers; and that which is in the
Statute, that if a Fine be leavied in deceit of right, that the same be null is
reproveable; but it might have been better said, That for that Fine, that no
man be barred of his right, for the Fine leavied cannot be rightly said null,
but it holds in force, and barreth at the least the Donor of his Action.

The point if Distresses does not repeal any Error, but affirm them, as
before appears in the second beoke.

And that which is said in the second Statute, that Suitors in Counties have no
Record, is but abusion, since every lawful restimony is a Record, and every
false testimony is a lie; and as lawful may other people testify as the
Justices assignned. Is not the same Writ abused, to grant to Counties Records
in Outlawries, Pledges, Maine-prises, Battles, Grand Assizes and other Cases,
and not other points, and to deny that the Sheriffs or Lord of the Fee, or
other to whom the King sends his Writ, has not as well Record of Process
before him, as those whom they call Justices, is but Error?

And as to the causes of Writs of pains is suffered great Error, that that
which is not warranted in the Accessory, that he may (...) in the principal,
since the Law permits that none be aided by a lie or a vicious Writ.

Of the other side, because there is more realty in the Statute then
personalty, as more Attachments are awarded in personal Actions then in mixed
and realls.

The point of Measnes is reproveable, as to the Proclamation, and as to the
non-acquittance of those who hold by less service then the Measnes, for be it
that B. hold one hundred pound Land of D. by the service of twenty pound per
annum, and the same B. give the moiety thereof in Frankalmoigne, or Frank
marriage, or to hold by the service of a Rose to C. if it happen that the same
B. forfeited what he has, by this Statute no remedy is ordained for C. who was
purchasor from B. and therefore the old course is to be holden which is said
before in Judgments.

The remediall Statute of the right of the Wife lost by the default of the
Husband is reproveable, for the old Law was, that a woman after the death of
her Husband should repleeve her Inheritance or purchase so lost, summoning the
Tenants, for a Cape is not, but a distress and ejection of seasin saving every
right; and it is lawful for one of the Tenants in common to defend his right
where he is damnified by the negligence or the non ability of his Partner. In
the same manner may a Woman according to Law in the right of her Husband;
neither does the Law give to Widows Action to demand Dower in the cases named
in the Statute, but in all cases the Law enables her to be received by Lawful
reversing of the Judgment.

And that which is contained that Tenants may vouch to warranty, is but abuse;
how holds voucher place where a Writ lies not; yet is it understood with a
saving, that no jurisdiction of a Judge assigned extend to other Persons then
those who are named in the Writ, and that none shall vouch more then in the
same Writ are named, by Writ of Replegiare, and therefore are warranties
attainable and determinable by Writs.

The Statute following, which Ordains new Writs remedialls after defaults, is
prejudicial to Lords of Fees, who lose the advantages of their Courts, because
that Writs of Right are forbidden in such cases where they wont to be used.

Presentiments to Churches ought not to be but in the names of those to whom the
mere right of the Advowson does belong, according as is said before in
Contracts; and it is error and abusion of Law to endow women of Advowsons, or
to Lease them to Farm, or for the term of another life, or in
Frank-marriage, or in Mortgage, or in Fee-tayle, or otherwise then in
Fee-simple.

And those who receive Clerks presented to Churches, in prejudice of those to
whom the mere right in Fee does appertain, are bound to make restitution of
the damages, and those who have recovered to Jurours by whom they were
certified of the right of the personage; and so it appears that the
punishment lies more against the Bishops then the presentors.

And that which enacteth long Imprisonment for a punishment, is but abuse;
since none is imprisonable if not for a wrongful imprisonment.

The Statute of Warranties is but a revocation of Error used against Law.

The Statute of Admeasurement is reproveable in many points, as to the
Proclamations, since admeasurement and surcharge are to be by Jurours.

The Statute of Measnes is reproveable in many points, as it appears in the
Chapter of Distresses, Contracts, and defaults, and the same appears in the
end of the Statute where the Plaintiffes know not a set fine.

The Statute of suspension of Writs in Eyres is reproveable, as repugnant to
the great Charter, which says, we will sell no Right, nor detain it, and
wherefore are Writs rebuttable from heating but for the multitude of Writs
which are, and for the small number of Justices the right of many perish.

The Statute of obligees in Account is reproveable in many points, one as to
the exception to the Persons, for the Masters is ordained recovery, and to
Sergeants not, when Auditors are assigned without the consent of the servants.

The other, that the Auditors are not tied to allow any thing but at their
pleasure without punishment.

Another, that the recovery is ordained by detinue of the servants, and not
against the Surety, not the goods.

Another, that the Lords are not to be Attested according as of the servants.

Another, that the wickedness of Auditors remains unpunished.

Another of Outlawry, for none is to be imprisoned if not for a tortious
imprisonment.

The Statute of Appeals is reproveable in two points, one in the specialty of
the Corporal punishment, and of the Plurality punishments, since the
redemption by a pecuniary pain is but the buying out of the Corporal
punishment.

The other to have jurisdiction against the Abettors without original Writ.

The Statutes of Waste are founded upon Error since waste is a personal
Trespass, and requires other manner of Processes, as appears in the Chapter
of defaults; and to defend a personal Trespass by Writ is but a vain labor.

The Statute of not allowing a false cause in the Essoigne De malo lecti is
defective, for in no Essoigne for no Party is any false cause, or any falsity
to be permitted, not ought to be profitable to any.

The Statute of Debt and Damages recovered is defective, for not only should
such remedy be in the Kings Courts, but it ought to comprehend in all other Lay
Courts.

The Statute of those who are dead without Wills is defective, for it ought to
comprehend Felons, and Fugitives as well as true men; and the King, and all
others into whose hands their goods come as well as Ordinaties, for none can
forfeit the right of another.

The Statute for allowing one manner of Exception in the like Actions was not
needful to have been made if not for the negligence of Justices, for every
affirmative is encounterable with his negative at the peril of the party.

The Statute of detinue of service is a novelty daugerous to Lords of Fees, as
appears in the Chapter of defaults.

The Chapter of making new Writs had not need to have been made, if the first
Ordinances of Writs were observed.

The Statute to have remedy by Assize, of Novel disseism is reproveable, for as
much as it comprehends not Lands charged with Villain Customs, not Lands
holden for term of years.

The point needed not have forbidden false Exceptions, if the Pleaders held
themselves to the points given in charge.

And as to the point of Imprisonment, the Statute is reproveable for the
reasons aforesaid, and also as to the pain of double damages, for the Law
gives a man no more then is his demand.

And that which appears in the Statute of false Appeals is more error then
right in the enacting the award of amends to Defendants, whereas it is not to
the Plaintiffes.

And as to the Writ to the use of Sheriffs in Disseisin, it is no Statute, but
it is a thing at pleasure, and a wrong.

And that which is used to grant Damages in part, or in all to Justices, or to
Clerks, or to Ministers, or others should be forbidden, as a usage very full
of damage to the people.

And as punishments are reproveable in Novel Disseisins, so are they in the
Statutes of Disseisins, Corporal punishments nevertheless hold in such
personal Trespasses, but in Reddisseisins more then in Disseisins.

The Statute which forbids that Writs of Oyer and Terminer be not Ligirment
granted is not founded upon any Law, Easily.
as being repugnant to the words of the Great Charter, We will not sell or
delay Justice to any man; but comes rather from the remporall Judges, who
cause the same for their advantages, as desiring to embrace all Pleas.

The Statute of Caption of Assizes thrice in the year is reproveable, as to
the adjournment of the Parties out of the Counties before the Justices of the
Bench, who have no jurisdiction over those Pleas, since the Commissions are
given to Justices assigned.

And as to take Iuries and Enquests in their Counties, so the Statute is not to
destroy the Authors and indamage the people.

The Statute which forbids Justices that they cause not Jurors say, but
their advice is defective, as appears in the Chapter of Jurors.

The Statute of Exceptions allowables rebutted by Justices is not founded upon
Law, as appears in the Judgment of false Justices, but is when it is in no
part fixed.

The Statute of Rape is reproveable, for none can ordain by Statute that a
venial punishment be turned into a mortal, without the consent of the Pope,
or the Emperor.

The Statute that the King has the Suit in Rape, or in Ellopment of women
Married is reproveable, for none is bounden to Answer to the Kings Suit if not
by Appeal, or by Indictment.

And that which is contained in it, That Women should lose their Dower for the
sin of Adultery, ought also to comprehend all Adulterours, who claim to hold
the inheritances of their Wives by the courtesy of England, so that there be
no exception of persons.

The imprisonment of the Alloppors of Nuns and their ransom is no Law, but
is an error in a double manner, as before is said in many places.

The imprisonment for two years or more, ordained for a Corporal punishment
to Ravishers of Marriages is but error, for no Corporal punishment ought to
be ordained but for common profit, as before appears of open Penances.

And that which is ordained of Proclamations in personal Actions is but abuse
of Law, as it is said in the Statute of Moignes.

The Statute which awardeth Ransom is reproveable, for Ransom is nothing else
then the redemption of Corporal punishment.

The Statute of Distresses made by Baylisses unknown is distinguishable, for
in torrious Distresses without warrant the Judgment of Robbery holds; and by
warrant is every one receiveable, whether known or unknown.

The Statute of Jurors is reproveable, for the Law wills that the Plaintiffes
have the aid of the Courts to cause the Witnesses to appear, whereby they may
the more lawfully help themselves without distinction of persons.

And that, that jurisdiction is granted to Justices assigned to Oyer and
Terminer Plaints, without a special Commission is but abuse.

The Statute which awardeth that Writ of Judgment be made without warrant of
original Writ is nothing else then a License to falsify the Kings Seal.

The punishment of Sheriffs ill answering is reproveable, as to the
punishment; for dis-inheritors of the King offend of the crime of Majesly, and
are by consequence punishable by death, which ought not to be in such cases.

And as to issues the Statute is reproveable, for no issues are awardable but
after defaults in Actions mixed, and not to the Kings use, but for the profits
of the Plaintiffes.

The defaults made of the Statutes of Clerks, Cryers, and other Officers of
the Court are but idle, because they a^e not kept at all.

The Statute that Cognizances and Enrolements which are made in the Chancery,
the Exchequer, and before Justices be established is an Authority of great ill;
for by false enrolements might every one in Authority destroy those he pleased,
which should be a great inconveniency. Again, by this Statute Authority should
accrue to Authority to the Chancellor and others to falsify the Kings Seal by
Writs, to give judgment without original Writs.

And therefore note, that none but the King can receive Arturnies in the Kings
Court, nor recognitions bitwixt Parties without warrants of original Writs.

The Statute of improvements of wastes and commons of Pasture is reproveable,
and distinguishable according as has been said before.

The Statute to have view of Lands is but a wrongful delay of the right of the
Plaintiffes; for the View appears sufficient by the Certificate of the
Summons, upon what Tenements the Tenants are summoned.

The Statute which forbids that no Officer of the Court take any presentment
of any Church, not other thing which is depending in Plea, or in debate is not
kept.

Reprehensions upon the Statute of Gloucesier, 16. E. 1.
THe Statutes to recover Damages in Pleas of possession enacted at Gloucester
or else where, and of the horrible damages in waste are reproveable, for that
the Law gives one no more then is his demand, and therefore it behooveth that
the damages be mentioned in the Writs if damages shall be awarded; for a Judge
cannot exceed the points of his Commission, and so it would be needful to use
it according to the first Ordinance of Writs.

And the Statute of Tenements alliened of Lands in prejudice of others is
reproveable, for the remedy ought to be such as of Guardians allienors, to the
dis-inherison of the right Heirs.

The Statute of Trespass pleaded in Counties is reproveable for want of
distinction, for small Trespasses, Debts, Covenants broken, and such other
kinds not exceeding forty shillings. Suitors have power to hear and determine
without Writs, by warrant of jurisdiction Ordinary, and by Writs granted
afterward; for Sheriffs have more jurisdiction in their Writs vicontiell then
Justices of the Bench by the Pone.

And as to the recovery of twenty shillings or more in right of Essoigne of the
Kings service not warranted the Statute is reproveable; for that Essoigne might
be cast where the Defendant would make default by the adverse Party, and so he
should have advantage of his malice.

The Statute which forbids the abatement of Appeals is not observed.

The Statute which awardeth an innocent man to remain in Prison, or to have no
manner of punishment for necessary Manslaughter; or by mischance, where no
offense is found, is but an abusion.

The Statutes making mention of London ought to extend commonly throughout the
whole Realm.

CHAP. V. SECT. 6. The reprehensions of Circumspecte agates, An. 13. E. 1.
THe first point which says, That the Kings prohibition holds not in
correction of mortal offenses where a pecuniary pain is enjoyneable by
Ordinaries, is founded upon open error, and usage to enjoyne a pecuniary pain
for a mortal offense, notwithstanding to destroy the King; jurisdiction.

The other points to compel the Parishioners by corrections to enclose
Churchyards, to offer, to give Mortuaries, Moneys for Consessions, Chalices,
Lights, Holy Vestments, and other adornement of Church; are more grounded upon
interest then amendment of souls; and note, that after that they are offered
to God, that they are so spiritual that they are to be expended but in Alms,
and spiritually, for they are never to be converted to Lay uses.

And then if any Parishioner for the hurt of the Parson of the Church keopeth
back his Tithes, or steals them away, or does not pay them duly or fully, the
same is not punishable by a pecuniary pain, but by a corporal punishment.

For the Excommunicate no pecuniall pain was to be for restitution or
satisfaction, no more then of a Pagan or a Jew, and if they do demand a
pecuniary pain, there the Kings Prohibition lies, and much more in the demand
of Pensions, or of damages of Trespass, or of defamation; but of Pleas of
correction where one Pleades only Pro salute anima, the Kings prohibition
lies not.

CHAP. V. SECT. 7.
THe new Statute of Debts is contrary to Law, as it appears in the Chapter of
Contracts; for every imprisonment of the body of a man is an offense if not for
tortious Judgment, and the Law will not suffer any Obligation, or vicious
Contract by intermixture of offense, and therefore it was to be avoided as
grounded upon an offense; for no honest man ought to agree to such a Contract
which causes him to offend, or to be punished.

Again, it is contrary to the Great Charter which enacteth, that no man be
taken, nor imprisored if not by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the
Law of the Land.

Here ends the Mirror of Justices, of the right Laws of Persons according
to the ancient usages of England.

The end of the fifth Chapter, and of the whole Book.

FINIS.
THE BOOK Called, The Diversity of Courts, And Their Jurisdictions.

Written by an unknown Author in the time of King Henry the Eighth, in the
French Tongue.

Wherein many necessary and profitable things ate contained.

Translated out of the French Tongue into English for the use of many.

By W. H. of Grays Inn Esquire.

Imprinted at London for Matthew Walbancke, and are to be sold at his Shop at
Graies Inn gate. 1646.

The Book called, The diversity of Courts, and their Jurisdictions.
IT is to be understood that the King is the fountain of Justice, and to that
purpose ordayneth Judges, that Justice be administered to all his Subjects.

The King himself for the excellency of his Person may fit and give Judgment
in all Causes personal or real, betwixt Party and Party, but he cannot fit in
Person in Judgment in any Cause where he himself is Party, or where the
things of his Crown or Dignity are concerned, as upon an Indictment of
Treason, or upon as appeal of Murder or Felony, or upon an Action brought by
himself, as Formdon of Land, of which the right is descended to him from a
colaterall Ancester, or in an Action of Debt, by reason of the affection moving
him to be favorable to himself; and therefore he makes his Judges to sit and
hear such matters in difference, and to do justice to the parties.

And the place where the Judges sit to minister Justice are called Courts,
which are of diverse kinds, and the Judges thereof have several Authority.

Of the Court of Marshalsey.
ANd first, the Court of Marshalsey is an ancient Court, and made for the well
government and ordering of the Kings house, for the preservation of the King
and his Servants; and this Court has its bounds within which it has
jurisdiction, and not without.

The Judges of this Court are the Steward and Marshall of the Kings house, for
in them under the King is the ordering of the household, etc.

The title of the Court is, Placita Corone aula Hospitii Domini Regis leat
coram seneschalle and mareschallo hosp^^^i Domini Regis, etc.

And this Court has power to enquire of Treason, Murder, and Felony, and to
take Appeals of them, and of Mayhem if they be done within the Virge, betwixt
persons who are of the Kings house.

And if one of the household Sueth another who is not of the household, he may
plead to the jurisdiction of the Court; and if they will not allow of the Plea,
he shall have a Writ of Error, and the Judgment shall be reversed in the
Kings Bench.

And if one of the household sueth another of the household, and the Plaintiff
be put from his service depending the Suit, the other shall show the same and
abate the Writ; but quere if it be so, if in case the Defendant be removed out
of service, etc.

The Coroner of the Marshalsey shall fit with the Coroner of the Country upon
the death of a man, and if the Plea may be determined before the King remove
out of the Virge it shall be; otherwise it shall be at the Common Law.

The Kings Bench.
THere is another Court of high Authority called the Kings Bench, and the
Judges of that Court have Authority to enquire of, hear, and determine Pleas
and things touching the Crown; as High Treason, Murder, Manslaughter,
Robberies, Felonies at the Common Law; and by Statute Law, Mayhems, Trespasses,
Burglaries, and all deceits and falsities whatsoever; but they have not
authority to hold Plea betwixt Party and Party by original Writ but in
special cases.

They have power to proceed in and determine Indictments, and Presentiments
taken within any County within the Realm where the Kings Writ runs, if it
be certified by Certiorare, or be delivery under the hands of the Justices of
the Peace, or other Justices before whom the Indictments or Presentiments be;
whether it be of Treason, Felony, forcible enter, Riot, or any other thing
against the Peace; and they have Authority to reverse Judgments given in the
Common Pleas by a Writ of Error, or before Justices of Assize, and in
Liberties and Franchises but not in London; for a Writ of Error, of a
Judgment given before the Sheriffs of London shall be reversed before the
Major in the Hustings.

And erroneous Judgments given before the Major in London shall be reversed at
St. Martins before special Commissioners assigned to that purpose; and
thereupon a Writ of Error shall be directed to the Major to have the Record
and proceedings thereof, and the Record shall be certified by the Recorder, etc.

And it is said, that if an erroneous Judgment be given in Ireland, it shall
be reversed in the Kings Bench by a Writ of Error, for that in Ireland the
Laws of England are used.

And if an erroneous Judgment be given in the Cinque Ports, it shall be
reversed in the Kings Bench, and the Writ shall be directed to the Warden of
the Cinque Ports, and he shall return the Writ and the Record, etc.

The King may have a Formdon in the Kings Bench, Debt, Detinue, and every other
Action, and a Quere impedit at his pleasure. And a common Person may bring an
Action of trespass Quare vi and ermis in the Kings Bench, and Actions for
forging of false Deeds, maintenance, Conspiracy, Actions of deceit upon the
case, or supposing any falsity and deceit, where the King shall have a Fine,
etc.

And note that there are some Actions upon the case which shall be sued in the
Kings Bench, and some not; as an Action upon the case against one supposing
that the Defendant has sold Land to the Plaintiff for a certain sum of
Money, and that he covenanted to infeoffe him by such a day, and not by any
Deed, etc. Or to build a house such a day, and did not do it, ande. such
actions shall be brought in in the same Court; but there are other Actions upon
the case, which shall not be brought in the Kings Bench; as if a Horse be
stolen out of the common Inn, an Action upon the case lies against the
Hosteler, but not in the Kings Bench, as it is said. And so it is where a man
is so bounden to keep his fire, that the same hurt not his Neighbors houses,
etc.

And note, that the chief Justice of the Kings Bench is made by Writ, and not
by Patent, and it is to this effect; Rex dilecto and fidel. fuo. I Fitz-Iames
Saltem, Quia volumus quodvos sitis capital. Iusticiar. noster ad placita corem
nobis tenenda vobis mandamus qnod officio illi intendatis, but he shall be
sworn by the Chancell or of England before he take upon him his office.

The other Justices of the same Court are made by Patent, viz. by these words;
Constituimus etc. unwn justitiorum nostr. ad placita little no bis tenenda,
habend and occupand officium illud quam diu nobis placuerit.

And if a King makes a Judge to hold and enjoy the said Office by himself, or
his sufficient Deputy for life, the grant is void as to the Deputy, and if the
grant be to him and his Assignees, he cannot make an Assignee, etc.

The Common Pleas.
ANd note, there is another Court called the Common Pleas, which Court has
jurisdiction to hold Common Pleas, as well personal Pleas as real, or any
other Precipe quod reddant, of Lands or Tenements, etc, of Debt, Detinue,
Account, and other personal Actions; and they have power to hold Plea of any
of those Actions, which may be brought in the Kings Bench as Actions of
Maintenance, Conspiracy, Forgery of false Deeds, and Actions upon the case, and
trespass against the Peace, of such Actions wherein the King ought to have a
Fine, and also of Attaints; but they have not power to hold Pleas of Appeals
of Murder, Rape, Felony, Mayhem, nor to enquire of them, nor of Riots.

And it is said, That one may Sue the Peace against another before the Justices
of the Common Pleas, and if the Party be in the Hall, or in the Place, or
within their View, they may send the Warden of the Fleet to bring the party
before the Justices to find Sureties, or else commit him to the Fleet; and the
reason why they may so do is, that good order, and the Peace be kept about the
Court; but the Justices have not power to award Process to the Sheriff to
Arrest the party to appear in the Court where the Common Plea is; but it is
otherwise of the Kings Bench, as it is said, etc.

And it is said, That the Justices of the Common Pleas have jurisdiction in
some things which touch the Crown, and to enquire and hold Plea of some felony,
and also of misprision, and of deceit done within the Court, and within the
Record thereof.

And if one imbesell a Pannell after the Enquest passed, and Judgment given in
the Common Pleas, by which the Judgment is reversable by Error for want of
that Pannell; the Justices of the Common Pleas have power to enquire of the
embeselment of the Pannell by 12. of the Officers and Atturnies of the same
Court, and they shall be sworn before the Justices to enquire of that default;
and if they endite the embesselors they shall be Arraigned thereupon, and shall
be compelled to answer thereunto as other Felons, etc. and if they be attainted
they shall forfeit their goods and chattels, tamen quaere, etc.

And if one be condemned in Debt, or trespass in the Common Pleas, and he be
in the Hall, the Justices at the prayer of the Plaintiff may send the Warden
of the Fleet to bring him before them, to satisfy the party the money, or
otherwise commit him to the Fleet.

And when he appears and will deny that he is the same person, then Quaere
what shall be done, if the Justices may commit him to the Fleet or not? And
some say not, for that they know him not as Judges, but as other men by
information of the parties; and the Plaintiff cannot mainetaine that he is the
same person, because he comes not in but by information of the party
Plaintiff, and not by Process of Law; Quaere what is to be done in that case?

And see another difference betwixt the Judges of the one Bench and of the
other, for it is said, That if the Judges of the Kings Bench do award Process
in a Formedon, a Writ of right, or execution of Land recovered in value, the
Sheriff ought to execute the Writs although they have not any jurisdiction
therein. But if the Judges of the Common Pleas will grant Process of Treason,
etc. out of their place, the Sheriff ought not to execute the Process, for
that authority is only of Common Pleas, etc.

The chief Justice of the Common Pleas is made by Patent, viz. by these words-
Constitutimus i^^^mcapital. Iusticiar. nostrum de Coi Banco, etc. Habendum
illud own feodis vadiis and regardiis, eidem officio debit and con^suet. And
the other Judges of the same Bench are made by Letters Patents, etc.

The Chancery.
ANd note, that the Court of Chancery is a Court of a high nature, out of which
Court issue all original Writs, and there a man shall traverse Offices and
such things; and in that Court women who are widows to the King shall be
sworn that they shall not marry without the Kings License, before the time
that they be endowed; and it is said, That of error there upon a Patent, or a
Traverse, the same cannot be reversed else where but in Parliament, Quaere etc.
And in that Court a man shall have remedy for that which he has no remedy at
the Common Law; and it is called by the common people, The Court of Conscience.

And therefore see of matters in Conscience, how the party shall have remedy.

If a man has Feoffes to his use, and makes his Will, and thereby wills
that his Feoffes should make an estate to I. for term of his life, the
remainder to C. in Fee; if the said I. will not take the estate what remedy is
for him in the remainder, in conscience, and how he shall help himself in
Chancery, etc.

A man shall have remedy in Chancery for Covenants made without writings, if
the party have sufficient Witnesses to prove the Covenants, and yet he is
without remedy at the Common Law, etc. And for Evidences, when a man knows not
the certainty of them, nor in what they are contained; it is usually to be
releeved in Chancery, for he is without remedy by the Common Law, etc.

If a man infeoffeth another of certain Lands to his use, and the Feoffee
sells the Land to another, if he gives notice to the Vendee at the time of
the sale of the intent of the first Feoffment, he is bounden to perform the
will of the first Feoffer, as it seems in the Chancery.

A man was bounden unto another by Obligation in a certain sum of money, and
the Oblgee brought an Action upon the same Deed in another County then where
the Obligation was made, and had Judgment to recover; and the Obligor in
Chancery sued to be releeved, and it was surmised that by that foreign Suit
he was outed of diverse Pleas which he might have had, if the Action had been
brought in the County where the Obligation was made, and it was conceived a
good matter to releeve him in equity.

In the Court of Chancery a man shall not be prejudiced by mispleading, or for
want of form, but according to the truth of the Cause judgment ought to be
given according to equity, and not Ex rigore juris. And note that there are two
jurisdictions, Ordinary, and Absolute; Ordinary is as positive Law, and
Absolute is Omnibus modis quibus veritas sciri poterit.

If a man be bounden by Obligation unto two men unto the use of one of them,
and one of them viz. is he to whose use it is not, releaseth to the Obligor all
Actions, so as the Obligation is discharged, he to whose use the Obligation was
made has good remedy in Chancery by Subpoena against his companion who
released him, but against the Obligor it seems he has no remedy, for every
man is bounden to help himself, and it is lawful for a man to get a
discharge of that which he is charged withal, and in danger to others.

And if a man has recovered against another debt or damages, and he has paid
the same without any Acquittance, or without having a release, and
notwithstanding the party takes execution against him upon the same Judgment,
he shall have no remedy by the Common Law; and it was then said by the
Chancellor that he shall not have any remedy in equity in this case; and if the
same should be remedied in equity, then every Record should be examined before
him, and thereby the Common Law overthrown.

And if I do infeoffee one upon trust, and the Feoffee does infeoffee another
of the same Land upon trust, Quaere if I shall have a Subpoena against the
second feoffee, but where he is infeoffed bona fide, there the first Feoffer is
without remedy against the second Feoffee, as it seems.

It is said, That the Chancellor of England wheresoever he shall be in England,
has power to command a man to prison, and he shall not be bayled; Quaere
whether the Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, out of their Courts
have the same authority or nor.

The Exchequer.
THe Court which is commonly called the Exchequer, is properly for Accomptants,
Sheriffs, Escheators and the like, and there they are compellable to make
their Accounts according to the usages and customs of the same Court, etc. and
it seems to be a Court which is much for the Kings profit, for there all
remedies are provided, how the debts and duties to the King shall be levied.

And in that Court the Barons are Judges betwixt the King and his Subjects, and
they are sworn thereunto; and Fines, Issues, and Amercements which are
assessed in other of the Kings Courts, the estreates shall be made thereof to
the Court of Exchequer, and there they shall write forth Process against the
parties to answer thereunto, and to satisfy the King what is due to him, and
of diverse other matters they have power and authority by reason of their
Office, etc.

The Cinque Ports.
THere are also diverse other Courts, and inferior places where Justice is
ministered, and in those places they have Judges, as in the Cinque Ports, and
such places which have Counsans of Pleas, and also in Court Barons, in which
Courts is Justice done according to Law, etc. And although they of the Cinque
Ports ought to be empleaded of their Lands within the jurisdiction of the
Cinque Ports, yet that holds only where the Tenant shows the same, and
takes advantage thereof if he be impleaded in the Kings Courts of things which
are within that jurisdiction; but if the Tenant be sued in the Common Pleas for
Lands within the Cinque Ports, if the demandant does recover by default, or if
the Tenant appear, and plead any matter which is found against him, so that
the demandant has judgment for to recover the Land, that judgment shall bind
him for ever, etc. But the Tenant might have alleged, That the Land was
within the Cinque Ports, and by such Plea the Kings Courts should be outed of
the jurisdiction, etc.

And so it is of Lands within an ancient demeasne, if a Writ be brought thereof
in the Common Pleas, if the Tenant appears and pleads, and does not take
exception to the jurisdiction, and the Plea be found against him, so that the
demandant recovereth, the Tenant shall not reverse the judgment by a Writ of
Error, because the Tenant might have taken exception to the jurisdiction of
the Court, and it should have been allowed, etc. But yet the Lord may reverse
that judgment by a Writ of deceit, and shall make the Land ancient demeasne as
it was before, etc.

And if one has Counsans of Pleas in a Town, or in a Manor, and a Writ is
brought in the Common Pleas of the same Land, and the Tenant pleads, and
judgment is given against him, the recovery is good, for it is within the
power of the King, and the Writ of the Common Pleas does take place there; and
if the Bayliffe, or Lord does not demand Cognusans the judgment is good. But
in another Action the Bayliffe shall have Cognusans for that the nature of the
Lard is not changed, and so see that where a man has counsans of Plea, etc. it
ought to be demanded by the Bayliffe, or the Lord, and the Tenant shall not
demand the same if he be impleaded in the Kings Court; but of the ancient
demeasne there it behooves the Tenant to show the same, and plead to the
jurisdiction, etc. if he will have advantage thereof, etc.

And so note, that in the Cinque Ports there is such a liberty that the Lands
and Tenements are pleadable there before the Barons, etc. and yet if one be
impleaded at the Common Law of Lands within the Cinque Ports, the Barons shall
not have Counsans of the Plea, but the Tenant may plead the same to the
jurisdiction in abatement of the Writ, etc.

The Court Baron.
NOte also that there is another Court which is called Court Baron, in which
Court the Suitors are the Judges, and not the Steward; and they hold plea of
Contracts within the jurisdiction, etc. and yet it is said by some, That the
Defendant shall not show that the Contract was made out of the jurisdiction,
and pray that the Plaintiff be examined as in a Court of Pipowder.

The Judges of the Court Baron have Authority to hold plea before them of Debt
upon Contracts, or Detinue, but not of detinue of Charters, nor Actions of debt
upon a judgment in a Court of Record, but otherwise I think it is of a
recovery in the same Court; nor shall they hold plea of Maintenance, forgery of
false Deeds, of deceit, not of Decies tantum, not of pleas of Accounts, for
they have not authority to assign Auditors. They shall not hold plea of Debt
above the sum of forty shillings, unless it be by prescription; and they
shall not hold plea of Freehold by plaint, but by a Writ of right they may.
But if a judgment be given of Freehold upon a plaint, it is said it is good
until it be reversed by a Writ of false judgment, tamen quaere, etc.

And note for what Suit a man shall be judged in a Court Baron, and it is said,
That it is where a man is seized of Lands in Fee-simple, and which he holds
by service of Suit at the Lords Manor, that Suit is properly Suit-service,
and for such Suit he shall be judged in a Court Baron, and for no other Suit as
it is said, etc.

And quaere also, when erroneous judgments are given how they shall be
reversed, viz. when by Writ of false judgment and when by a Writ of Error.
And some say, That in all Courts where the party might remove the plea by a
Recordare upon a judgment given, in such Courts a Writ of false judgment
lies; as in ancient Demeasne, Court Baron, County Court, and Hundred; but in
other Courts which are of Record the plea shall be removed by a Certiorare, and
upon judgment given in such Courts which are of Record, it shall be reversed
by a Writ of Error, etc.

And if a man recovereth in a Court of Record by erroneous judgment, and Sueth
not Execution, some say, That a Writ of Error lies, and the party shall have
a Supersedeas if he will prey the same; but if a man has judgment in a Court
Baron, and takes not forth Execution, no Writ of false judgment lies: Quaere
the reason thereof, and what the Law is in that case.

And note that sometimes the Sheriff is Judge, as in Reddisseisin, Wast, and
Admeasurement, and the Process shall be served by the Baily as is said.

And note that the Sheriff is an Officer ^o the Kings Court, to execute the
Process thereof; yet sometimes the Coroner is the Officer to the Court where
defect is found in the Sheriff, etc. so that he cannot by Law indifferently
execute the Process as for diverse apparent causes, yet if the Sheriff dies
the Process shall not go to the Coroner, but shall stay till another Sheriff
is chosen, etc. And because the Sheriff is an Officer appointed by the Law to
attend the Kings Courts, a man shall not take an Averment against the return
of the Sheriff directly, and the reas^n is, because where Justice ought to be
ministered and executed, those who have the Government of the Law ought to
repose trust and confidence in some person, and if every one might aver
against that which the Sheriff does, then Justice should not be executed, but
should for ever be delayed, etc.

The means and the remedy how a man may come to his due, and to that which is
wrongfully kept from him, and that is by plea, and this word is general, and
has diverse effects employed therein, and may be divided into diverse branches,
viz. Into pleas of the Crown, as appeals of Death, Robbery, Rape, Felony, and
diverse other things, etc. and into Actions real, whereby Lands, Tenements,
Rents, and other hereditaments are demanded, as Writs of right, Formed on, etc.
Or Actions possessory, as Writs of Enter, Assize of Mortdamester, Cosinage and
the like, etc. And it may also be divided into Actions personals, as Debt,
Trespass, Detinue, etc. and into Actions mixed, as into Assizes, and Actions of
wast which are as well in the realty as in the personalty. A personal plea may
be divided into two parts, one into a mere personal plea, as an Action of
debt, detinue, where none has interest but the parties themselves; the
Plaintiff and the Defendant. And the other part is mixed in the Crown, the
Plaintiff and the Defendant have not the sole interest in those Actions, but
the King has an interest in them also to have a fine; as in an Action of
Trespass, Vi and armis, and that is an Action mixed with the pleas of the
Crown, etc.

And note that in matters of the Crown, for such for which a man shall suffer
death, some may be principalls and some accessories, as Murder, Felony, Rape,
and the like; but in High Treason I conceive all are principalls, and in petit
treason there may be principal and accessory as well as in felony

In a Praemunire all are principalls, and in cutting out of Tongues, and putting
out of Eyes there may be an accessory as well as a principal, as is said, etc.

In Robbery all are principalls who are present at the time of the Robbery
done, otherwise it is in Mur^et; for if one be present and does nothing he is
an accessory, and not a principal, etc. In Mayhem some say, that all are
principalls, as well he who is comforting and abetting as he who gives the
Mayhen; as it is in Trespass, tamen quaere, for I conceive the Law to be
contrary, etc. And it was said, That if a man be present at the death of a man,
and moves another to kill the man, that he is a principal, notwithstanding
that he gives him not any stroke, and notwithstanding that the Count in every
Appeal is, That every principal did mortally strike and wound him, etc. but
those are words of form, and the blow of him who struck is the stroke of him
who commanded him when he was present.

And it is to know that for such things for which a man deserves death, there
are two ways to bring him to answer the same; one by Appeal, which is at the
Suit of the party the other is by way of Indictment, which is at the Kings
Suit, etc. And for a Mayhem the party shall have an Appeal of Mayhem, wherein
he shall recover damages, and no death shall follow, etc. and see the Appeal
following, and first of the Appeal of the death of a man, etc.

An Appeal of Murder.
IH. hic instanter appellat W. F. de morte H. C. fratris sui, per eo quod cum
predict. H. fuit in pace Dei and Dom. regis apud D. tali die, hora, and anno.
tibi venit W. F. uti felo Dom. Regis, in assultu premeditat vi and armis, etc.
Et in ipsum H. ad tunc and ibid. felonice insultum feoit and cum quodam gladio
precii 12. d. quem ipse in manu sua dextra ad tunc and ibidem tenuit predict.
H. super caput sunt percussit and unam plagam mortalem in longitudine duorum
poduwn in auteriori part Capitis suo usque ad cerebrum eidem H. adhunc and
ibid. felonice dedit, de qua quidem plaga pred. H. per 3. dies kunc proxime
sequentes languebat and tunc ibid. obiit; or imediate obiit. Et sic idem
Ichanes ut felo Dom. Regis pred. H. folonice interfecit and mundravit contra
pacem dicti Dom. regis, Coronam and dignitatem suas, and quod hoc feo it
nequite, and ut felo contra pacem Dei and Dom. Regis, pred. Johannes offert hoc
disrationar prout curia Dom. Regis hic censideravit, etc.

And it seems the Appeal of Murder ought be be brought within the year and a
day after the death of him who is murdered; and in an Appeal the party has
two issues, to put himself upon the Jury to try if he be guilty or not, or to
wage Battle, and to make the Battle with the Appellant; and if he do gage
Battle he ought to design the battle in his proper person, and by no
Champion. But it is otherwise in a Writ of right, etc.

And there are diverse causes to ouste the Defendant in the appeal of Battle,
for it is said, That if an Infant within age brings an Appeal, and the
Defendant shows that he is within age, etc. the Justices have been of opinion
that he shall be put to answer the Appeal of the Appellant being within age,
and the Defendant has lost the advantage to wage the Battle, because it was
his own Act. And I conceive that if a Woman brings an Appeal of the death
of her Husband against another, the Defendant shall lose the advantage of
Battle; for he cannot Combat or deraigne the Battle with a Woman, etc. And
if a party be indicted of the Felony or Murder, etc. he shall not wage battle.

And see that in an Appeal of the death of a man against two, the one as
Principal, and the other as Accessory, and they waged Battle, and the
Plaintiff demurred upon the plea, and it was said, That the Accessory should
not be put to answer till the Principal was attainted or acquitted; yet it is
said, That the Accessory should answer presently, but the issue should not be
tried till the Principal were attainted or acquitted; and if the Principal be
acquitted the other issue should not be tried.

And I conceive that in every case of Felony where a man is indicted as
Principal, and afterward has his pardon, or forjureth the Realm, that in
those cases and the like the Accessory shall not be arraigned, because that
when the Principalls life is pardoned in what manner soever it be, the Felony
is determined, and by consequence acquitted, and by the same reason the
accessory is discharged. But Quaere what the Law is if the Principal have his
Clergy.

And see that where there are three Brothers, and the middlemost kills his
eldest Brother, the youngest Brother shall have the Appeal, and yet he is not
his Heir. The same Law where the eldest Brother kills his Father, the
youngest shall have the Appeal if there be but two Brothers. And where the
Wife kills her Husband, the Heir shall have the Appeal as it is said.
Quaere what the Law is in the cases before, etc.

And the Process in an Appeal of death is one Capias, and one Exigent, etc.
but in an appeal of Robbery, an appeal of Rape and Mayhem, the Process is
two Capias, and one Exigent, etc. And note that a man can never have an appeal
of Robbery, Rape, or Mayhem by descent, for the same shall never descend; but
it is otherwise of Murder.

And also note, that the appeal shall not abate, if in the Declaration be the
year, day, and other time when the Felony was done, and it shall not abate for
want of Fresh-suit, if it be not within the year and the day, and that is by
the Statute of Gloucester, etc.

In an Appeal if the Defendant plead that the Plaintiff is a Bastard, and he
is certified to be mulier, yet the Defendant shall be received to plead not
guilty, because at the beginning when he alleged Bastardy, he might have
pleaded over to the Felony, because he demanded another trial, for the one is
tryable by the Record, and the other by Enquest. But of such matter which is
tryable by Enquest if he pleads to the Felony, all the same shall be tried by
one Trial, and by one Enquest. In an Assize, if the Tonant allege Basterdy in
the Plaintiff, and the Bishop does certify muliarity, yet the Assize shall be
taken to enquire of the seisin and disseisin; quaere.

And quaere if a man in an appeal plead a plea which is tryable in another
County, if he shall plead over to the Felony, because he demands two Trials.

Appeal of Robbery.
THe Writ of Appeal of Robbery begins thus:

A. B. nuper de London generosus, attackiatus fuit ad respondendum, R. F.
generoso simal cum D. nuper de F. in suburbiis London, de robberia and pace
demini regis nunc fracta, unde eos appellat, and sunt plegii de prosequend. A.
D. et C. Et unde idem R. in propria persona suo instanter appellat pred. C. A.
de eo quod ubi idem R. fait in pace dei et Domini Regis nunc apud London, viz.
in parochia sancti Dunstani in Fleetstreet in suburbiis Londonj or, apud talem
villam in tali Comitatu, 20. Octobris Anno Regni Regis nunc 17. circa horam
septimam post meridiem ejasdem diei venurunt tam pred. W. I. et K. qui modo non
comparent, quam pred. A. qui modo comparet, felonice ut felones Dom. Regis nunc
insidiando et insalt praemedatas contra^ pacem Regis nunc coronam et dignitatem
suns die, anno, hora parochia, et wardo pred. or villa et com. prelict. Et
pred. W. unam galeam precii 26. s. 8. d. et unam crateram argenteam et
deauratum precii 40. s. de bonis et catallis pred. R. ad tunc ibid. invent.
felonice furatus est, caepit et asportavit. Et pred. C. A. et I. K. die, anno,
parochia et warda pred. or vile et comitatu pred. felonice confo^taverunt,
sustentaverunt et auxaliaverunt pred. W. ad feloniam pred. in forma pred.
faciend et perpetrand ac eum tunc et ibidem ad feloniam illam factam, sciente
eum feloniam illam sic fecisse receptaverunt. Et quam cito idem felones
felonias, predictas in form^ predicta fecissent, fugierunt, predictus R. eos
recenter insequitus fuit de warda in wardam (if the Appeal be brought in
London) or de villa In villam, (if it be brought in any County) usque ad
quatuor wardas propinquiores. Et alterius quousquae, et c. Et si predictus felo
qui modo comparet feloniam predictam vult contradicere, predict. R. hoc paratus
est verificare et versus eum probare prout curiae, etc.

And the like Declaration is in burning of Houses, and of Burglary, mutatis
mutandis.

And the Defendant in this Appeal shall have the same trial as he shall have
in the appeal before rehearsed, to put himself upon the issue tryable by the
Enquest, or to wage Battle if he pleases.

But there are certain things which shall put the same from that advantage,
that he shall not wage Battle, etc. viz. If the Defendant be indicted of the
same felony, etc. and if the Plaintiff be may hemed by the Defendant, or by
another as I conceive; or if the Defendant be taken in the manner, or if the
Plaintiff be within age, or above the age of forty years; or if the
Plaintiff be a woman or the like.

And note that if the appeal of Murder, Robbery, or Rape be brought in the
Kings Bench, and issue be taken before the Justices of Assize, if the
Plaintiff be nonsuit they have not power to arraigne the Defendant; but if
the appeal be brought before them, and afterward the Plaintiff is Nonsuit,
it is otherwise as it is said.

And there is another difference when a man is arraigned at the Kings Suit, and
when at the Suit of the party; for if he be arraigned at the Kings Suit, he
shall be put to answer the Felony, whether he be of that name or of another
name; and it shall be no plea for him to say, That he is not of that Surname,
nor known by such a name, but by another name; for if a man kills another
and is indicted thereof, he shall answer to the Felony, and shall not be
admitted to plead misnosiner; but if it be at the Suit of the party it is
otherwise, as if a man bring an appeal against another, there he shall be
admitted to have the plea, and that is the difference.

Note that if a man brings an appeal of the death of a man who has lawful
cause to have the appeal, and after Declaration he is Nonsuit, the Defendant
shall be arraigned a new at the Kings Suit; but if the Heir of the dead sueth
the appeal, his Wife being alive, and after Declaration the Heir is Nonsuit;
the Defendant shall not be arraigned a new at the Kings Suit, because that none
could Sue the appeal but the Wife, and so the Declaration was with^^t warrant.
And quaere how that matter may appear to the Court.

And if one be acquitted in Appeal, or indictment where in there is no error
in the Original; he shall be arraigned De novo at the Kings Suit, although
that error be in the Capias or Exigent. But if error be in the Original, and
he is acquitted, he shall be arraigned De novo at the Suit of the King, because
that his Arraignment was never warranted but without warrant; for when the King
is assertained of a Felon, and of the day and year, if the Felon be not
lawfully acquitted of the same Felony he shall be arraigned at the Kings Suits.
But if he be once lawfully acquitted of the Felony, he shall never put his life
in hazard again for the same Felony, if it be not for Murder, in which case it
is said, That if a Murderer be acquitted within the year at the Kings Suit, he
may be afterward in an appeal arraigned within the year at the Suit of the
party, etc.

And if an appeal of Murder be brought before the Sheriff and Coroner in the
County, it is said, That it may be removed into the Kings Bench by a Writ,
which shall be directed to he Coroner, and not to the Sheriff, because that
the Coroner has the Record; yet I think the Law is otherwise.

And if one be indicted for Murder, and afterward an appeal is brought
against him, and after Declaration the Plaintiff is Nonsuit, the Appellee
shall be arraigned at the Kings Suit upon the Declaration, and not upon
indictment, as it is holden in 4. E. 4.

Note that it was said by some Justices in times past, That in every case where
the Defendant pleads a matter, whereby he proves that the action does not
lie for the Plaintiff as Bastardy, or never accoupled in loyal Matrimony,
etc. there he need not to answer to the Felony; but if he pleads a release in
Bar, then he ought to plead to the Felony, because it is not denied by him that
the Action once lay for the Plaintiff, for when he pleads to the Felony then
he confesses that the Plaintiff is such a person who can maintain the
action; yet it was said to the contrary, That he shall not plead to the Felony
infauorem vite, where otherwise if the plea were found against him he should be
attainted, and the Felony not enquired of, and that seems to be both reason
and Law, etc.

And note, that when a man is found guilty for Murder, or Felony, etc. for
which he suffers death, he may pray his Book to save him if he be a Clerk,
and shall have it if he can read. But if that Bigamy at another time convicted
be alleged against him, and proved, then he shall not have his Clergy.

And it was said, That if the Ordinary refuses a Clerk generally, or
specially, that the Judge may compel him to accept the felon. But the old Law
was, That if the Ordinary had refused him specially, as to say, Non habet
vestem Clericalem, non habet consuram; yet the Judge might compel him to
accept of him. But if the Ordinary do refuse him generally, the Judge cannot
compel him to accept of him, because there may be some cause wherefore the
Ordinary by the Law of Holy Church ought not to receive him. But that opinion
as it was said, was altered in the time of William Hussy, and his reason was,
That if this Judge be his Judge where the Ordinary refuses him specially, it
is as great reason that he shall be his Judge where he refuses him generally.

And see, that those who are so attainted of Murder, or of other Felonies, and
for such things as they shall suffer death, they shall forfeit their Lands and
Tenements, and their goods and chattels for ever, and the King shall have the
Lands for a year and a day, and then the Lords of whom the Lands are holden
shall have them. But he who is attainted of Treason, the King shall have all
his Lands, as well those which are holden of other Lords as those which are
holden of himself, etc. And if a man has Land in the right of his Wife, and
is attainted of Felony, the Land shall be forfeited for the term of his life;
and it was said, That if before the Attainder, he and his wife were disseised,
and afterward he were attainted and restored to the Kings peace; yet they
could not have an Assize, Tamen quaere.

Appeal of Rape.
NOte also that the Appeal of Rape begins thus:

Robertus Wood nuper de A. in Comita^^ Salop Clericus, dict. R. W. nuper de A.
in comitatu predict capellanus Rector Ecclesie patochialis de A. in comitatu
predict. Or thus; Nuper de D. in comitatu predict gent. alias dict. R. S. nuper
de D. in com. predicto yeoman attach^atus fuit per corpus saum, ad respendendum
Alicie. G. de rapiu ipsius Alicie, and pa^e Dom. regis nunc fracta, unde eum
appellat. Et sunt plegii de prosequend. A. D. de C. in commit. C. gentleman, and
E. I. de M. in comitat. C. yeoman, etc. Et unde eadem Alicia in predict persona
sua instanter appellat predict. R. W. de eo quod ubi predict. Alicia fuit in
pace dei and Domini Regis nunc apud A. in predict. in commit. Salop, 8 die
mensis Maii ann. Regni Them. Regis, 17. circa horam sextam post meridiem ejusdem
diei, ibidem venit predict S. felonice ut felo predict. domini regis nunc
insideand. and insultu premedita contra pacem ejusdem dom. regis coronam and
dignitatem suas, die, anno, hora, and loco in comitatu predict. and in prefatam
Aliciam ad tunc and ibid. insultum fecit, and ipsam ad tunc and ibid. de
virginitate defloruit contra volu^tatem suant raduit and carnaliter cognovit,
and sic predict. R. S. predict. Aliciam modo and forma predict. rapuit, and
quam cito idem felo feloniam and raptum predict. fecissit, fugiit, dictaque
Alicea ipsum recenter insecuta fuit de villa in villam usque quatuor villas
propinqiores, and ulterius quousque etc. Et si idem felo felontam et rapt um
predict in forma predict. imposit didicere velit, predict Alacia hoc parata est
verificare et versus eum probare, prout curia, etc.

And if a man Sueth an Appeal of the Rape of his Wife, although she be not his
Wife in right but in possession, yet the Appeal does well lie as is said;
otherwise it is in an Appeal of murder brought by a woman of the death of her
Husband, for there it is a good plea, that they were never lawfully coupled in
Matrimony.

Appeal of Mayhem.
SEE also that the Appeal of Mayhem is as follows: viz.

I. N. in propria persons sua hic instanter appellat W. de F. de eo quod cum
idem, quaere tali die and anno fuit in pace dei, et Dom. Regis nunc, etc, apud
talem villam in tali comitatu circa horam sextam, etc. Ibi venit predict. W. vi
et armis, viz. baculis ut felo domini regis nunc insid^and. et ex insulta
premeditete ad tunc ibid. indiction I. insultum fecit et ad^tunc et ibid. own
quodam baculo precii, etc. quem predict. W. in manibus suis ad tunc et ibid.
tenuit, predict. querentem super brachium dextrum felonice tunc purcussit, per
quod vene et necui brachii sui perdict. restricti fuerunt ac neci, et
mortisicat d^venerunt; Or, cum quodam gladio, vel cultello precii etc. quem
defendens in manibus suis ad tunc et ibid. tenuit manum dexteram, vel policem
manus dextere, vel aliud membrum, vel auriculam, vel aliquam juncturam membri
querentis felonice amputavit, vel oculum suum evulsit, vel dentes suos
anteriores fregit et deposuit. Et sic idem defendens ut felo Dom. regis
predict. quer. ad tunc et ibid. felonice mayheymavit, contra pacem dicti Dom.
Regis Coronam et dignitatem suus. Et si defendans hoc velit dedicere, querens
hoc paratus est versus eum probare, prout curia Dom. Regis de eo
consideraverit, etc.

And notwithstanding that the Plaintiff declare in an appeal of Mayhem, that
the Defendant has mayhemed him feloniously, yet the Defendant shall not suffer
the punishment of death, but shall answer damages according to the greatness
and grievousnesse of the offense, etc. And if the Plaintiff declares in an
appeal of Mayhem, etc. and the Defendant prays that it may be viewed if it
be a Mayhem or not, Quaere, if the Justices say, That he is mayhemed, if it be
peremptory to the Defendant, so that he shall not be afterward receiveable to
plead not guilty to it, or any other bar. And I conceive it is peremptory,
etc. And in an appeal of Mayhem the Plaintiff declared, That the Defendant
stroke him upon the head, so that he had lost his hearing, and because the
Justices talked to him, and well perceived that he could hear they said that
the Plaintiff should be fined, etc.

And see that if the Defendant in in an appeal of Mayhem says, That the
Plaintiff at another time brought an Action of Trespass against the same
Defendant, and sued forth the same Mayhem, and recovered damages for the same,
and sued execution, if the same be a good plea or not, etc. And it was said,
That by an appeal of Mayhem a man shall not lose his Action of Trespass, but
contrariwise; he shall not have an appeal after he has once recovered in
Trespass for the same Mayhem. Quaere what the Law is.

And in an appeal of Mayhem against two, the Plaintiff declared against one
as Principal, and against the other as accessory, and it was challenged
because that all ought to have been principalls, and the Court said, It was in
his election, so that the Declaration one way or the other was good enough. And
it was said by some, That it is no Mayhem to cut off ones Ear, whereby he
loses his hearing, etc. but the bearing out of his Teeth is a Mayhem, because
he may by them defend himself in Battle. Quaere if in the first case it be
not a Mayhem, etc.

Indictments.
THere are also Indictments upon which a man shall be arraigned, upon which if
he be found guilty he shall be executed, etc. and first see Indictments upon
the view of the body raken before the Coroner in the County.

Inquisuio indentenda capta apud B. in Com. N. 20. die mensis Maii annoregni
nunc Regis Henrici, octavi 20. coram I. W. uno Coronatorum Dom^regis nunc Com.
predict. et super v^sum Corpotis cujusdam I. F. ibid. jacentem interfect. per
Sacramentum, I. S. W. C. etc. Qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum. Quod quidam I.
N. de London gent. 20. die, etc. Ann. etc. vi et armis, viz. gladiis beculis et
cultellis animo felonico et ex malitia procogitata in prefatum, I. F. apud B.
predict. insult. fecit et ipsurn ver ber avit, vulneravit et male tractavit, ac
dict. I. M. cum quodam cultello vocat a wood knife precii 12. d. quem ipse in
manibus suis ad tunc tenuit, prefat. I. F. ^d tunc et ibid. usque ad medium
corporis sui felonice percussit atque invasit in profunditatem december pollic.
dans ei plaguam mortalem, de qua quidem plaga dict. I. F. infra unam horam tunc
proxime sequent. ad tunc et ibidem obiit, et sic predict. I. N. eundem I. F. ad
tunc et ibidem felonice interfecit et mardravit, contra pacem Dom. Regis, etc.

And it was said, That the Coroner has not power to take any Enquest of the
death of a man if not upon the view of the body, and if he do it in other
manner, all that he does is void.

And it has been used in times past that the Coroners might record the
breaking of Prison by the Prisoners which are in them, and if the Prisoners
were in for felony, they were put to execution without further answer; but
quaere if any such Law be now in use.

And a Coroner might take an appeal of an Approver, of felony done in any
County of England, and in the same manter he might make abjuration, if he
assested the felony to be done in another County then in the County where the
Coroner dwelt. And the reason was, because by that confession they shall be
attainted. But he cannot so do in an appeal of Robbery, if the felony be not
done within the same County.

There are also diverse Indictments, as of Robbery, Burglary, and other felonies
which are mentioned in sundry books, and the course of them is well known,
becausethey are common, and in daily use and experience.

If a man be indicted that he feloniously cut down Trees, etc. in such a place,
and carried them away, the party shall not be arraigned upon such indictment,
because it cannot be said to be felony.

A man was indicted for that he traitorously, etc. had made 100. s. of Alchamy
to the likeness of the Kings money, and it was moved that the indictment was
sufficient, because it was not put certain what money he made, groats or pence.

A man was indicted, That whereas another man was indicted of felony who was
put into the Stocks, etc. that he entered into the house without breaking of the
same, and set him out of the Stocks, and set him at liberty, and it was said,
That it remained in the pleasure of the King, whether he should have perpetual
imprisonment, or other pecuniary punishment according to the Kings Ordinance,
but he shall not be hanged, etc.

And see that it was the use in times past, that the party should not be
restored to his goods upon an Indictment of Robbery, unsesse it were found that
he made fresh-suit, if he were not appealed, yet that Law is altered and
changed, and the party shall be also vestored to his goods where the felon is
arraigned upon an Indictment as well as upon an Appeal, if the party gives
evidence against the felon at the time of his Arraignment, and he shall not be
put to circuit of Action to sue his appeal, and it seems to be good Law.

Note, that the Writs are the principal and first thing in our Law, whereby a
man shall recover that which is wrongfully detained from him, and they are the
foundation of every Suit; and therefore look when a man begins his Suit
that the Writ be good, else all which follows will be nothing worth; which
Writs are ordained by Law according as the matter is.

And there see first the Writ of Right and the nature of it, because it is a
Writ of a higher nature then any other Writ can be; and the chief things and
Articles of that Writ are, the deforcement, the quantity of the Tenements in
what Town the Tenements are, and that the demandant has a lawful estate in
fee by his own Purchase, or of the seisin of his Ancestor, or his own seisin,
the taking of the Explees and the seisin thereof, in the time of what King, and
in the time of peace, and the tender of the Demi mark a good descent, and in
wha manner he has right, and the averment.

And note that the Explees ought to be of the Demesne or of the Services, and
in a Precipe quod reddat of the manner of Explees in Services, etc. and of the
Demesnes in Sheep, and Corn, in Pasture in feeding of Cattle, of Wood, in
selling of the Wood, Gardens, in selling the Apples, or Grass, of Villain, is
in base service to his profit, and in seisin of those of his blood; and for a
Chaplain, or findeing of poor men, the Explees are alleged in Masses, and
Prayers, etc. and of a Gorge in taking of the Fish; of a Mill, in taking of
Tole: And generally, a man shall allege Explees according to the matter in
demand, and the nature of it.

And the trial in this Writ of Right may be two ways; the one by the Grand
Assize, and the other by Battle; but if the right be to be determined by the
Battle, it shall be done by Champions, and not by the parzies themselves, as
it is said; and the reason is, that if any of the parties be killed, Judgment
of the Land cannot be given against a dead person. Quaere if that be the reason
or not.

And it was said, That a man cannot have a Writ of Right of a Rent, but only
of a Rent-service, for that other Rents are against common right, etc.

And see that a Writ of Right does differ from other Writs in pleading, for in
a Writ of Right the Tenant ought to conclude upon the right: To conclude, so
that he has more right to have the Lands, etc. then the demandant, and not to
conclude Judgment of Action, as the conclusion is in other Writs, yet the same
holds not in every case; for if the Tenant in a Writ of Right plead a release
collateral, etc. without warranty, there the Tenant shall conclude Judgment
if Action, and not otherwise as it seems; for the demandant has more right
to the Land then the Tenant has, but by reason of the warranty the demandant
shall be barred of his Action.

And note, that in a Writ of Right upon the Trial no attaint lies, and yet in
a Writ of right of Dower an attaint lies, which is, a Writ of Right; but the
reason is, because the Trial thereof shall not be by the Grand Assize, nor by
Battle, but by a Common Jury, etc.

And note, that there are diverse Writs of Right; a Writ of Right which is
triable by Battle, or by Grand Assize, as a Writ of right of Land, or a Writ
of Customs and Services, a Quod permittat in the debet Writ of right of
Advowson, etc. and the like. And there are other Writs of the possession mixed
with the right, as a Writ of Escheat, Cessavit, rationable part, etc. and the
like, but in those no Battle nor Grand Assize lies.

In a Writ of Customs and Services, the effect thereof is the wrongful
deforcement in not doing of the Services which ought to be done to the
demandant out of the Land, and the Land ought to be showed, and how he holds
by such Services, and show seisin in him or his Ancestors of Fee and Right, and
allege the taking of Explees, and the Averment.

The Articles and things which are material in the Writs, appear in the Writs
themselves, and in the book of Novel Tales, and in other books, and therefore
they need not to be here mentioned, and for that cause I omit them here, etc.

An Indictment upon the Statute of 8. H. 6.
JVrator present. pro Dom. rege, quod cum instatuto in Parliamento Dom. nuper
Regis Henriet Angliae sexti, post conquestum ap^d Westminster. anno Regni sui 8.
tent. edit inter cetera ordinatum sit, quod si aliqua persona expulsa sit seu
dissesita, de aliquibus terris et tenementis modo forcibili aut pacisice
expulsa sit, et postea manu forti et armis extra teneatur contra justic. pacem
vel post aliquem talem ingressum aliquod feossementum seu discontinuatio aliquo
modo inde factum sit ad jus possessor defraudend. aut tollend. quod pars in ea
part gravata habeat assissam nove d^sseisine aut breve de transgress^one
versus hujus disseisttorem, et si pars gravata recuperaverit per assisam vel
rationem transgr. et preveredictum alio modo per debitain legis formam sit
compactum quod pars defendens in terras e^ tenem. vi imgressusfuit, aut ea per
vim post ingressum tenuerit, quaerens reciperet versus defendentem d^nna sua ad
triplicem et ulterius finem faciet Dom. Regi, et redemptionem pro ut in statuto
pred. before continetur, etc. Quidam tamen L. C. de E. in com. pred. generosus
snnul cum quinque personis juratoribus pred. ignotis statutum illud minime
ponderans, die Dom. 20. die Januarii circa horam 9. post meridiem ejusdem diei
anno Regni Dom. regis nunc 12. manu forti ac vi et armis, viz. Baculis et
cultelltis in unum messuagium, unum gardinum ducent as acras terre, 40. etc.
prati, et 30. arras basvi cum pertinetii quorundum E. K. Armigeri et L. M.
armigeri etc. scituat jacen et existen in perochia de L. juxta T. in com. pred.
ingressus fuit, et inde ipsas E. K. et L. M. vi et armis, viz. baculis et
cultellis ac manu forti dissertivit. Et ejus inde statum et possessionem sic
per disseissinam illam habitam et obtent, cum pred. personis ignotis usque in
crastinum diem sequentem, viz. 13. diem mensis Januarii continuavit. Quo quidem
13. die Januarii H. L. de M. in comitatu pred. yeoman, W. B. de pred.
Husbandman, et I. C. nuper eisdem villa et com^tatu laborer apud L. pred. in et
super tenta pred. una cum prefato T. C. manu forti ac vi et armis, viz. baculis
cultellis, gladiis scutis, arcubus et sagittis se assemblaverunt, et eadem
tenementa vi et armis pred. a pred. 12. die Januarii hucusque inrurius ipsius
T. C. et ipsum T. pretensa tenuerunt et prefat. E. K. et L. M. etc. inde
hucusque extra tenent in dicti Dom. Regis nunc contemptum ac contra formam
statuti pred. et contra pacrm dicti Dom. Regis, etc.

When the Parties are at issue in their Actions the common Trial thereof in
our Law is by Verdict of 12. men, who shall be sworn upon the Book to speak
the truth according to their conscience. And sometimes the matter shall be
tried by the Bishop, and not by Verdict of 12. men; as general Bastardy
alleged in any of the parties it shall be certified by the Bishop, and in a
Quaere impedit if the issue be joined upon the institution it shall be tried by
the Bishop, for the same is in a manner a spiritual thing. But induction shall
be tried by Jury, and also in a Quare impedit, if issue be taken upon Plenary
it shall be tried by the Bishop; but whether the Church be void or not void
shall be tried by the Jury. And if the Parties be at issue in a quare impedit
upon the ability of the Person, whether he were sufficiently learned or not, it
shall be tried by the Bishop during the life of the Clerk, but if the Clerk
be dead it shall be tried by Jury. And it is said, That if Bastardy or other
the like thing be alleged upon a thing which is not but dillatory, it shall be
remanded to the Bishop to be tried, etc.

And a man in an Action of Debt brought against him upon a Contract may wage
his Law, to swear upon a Book that he owes not the Plaintiff the money
which he demands, nor any penny thereof; and he ought to have with him 11.
more to swear with him, that they believe in their Conscience that he says
truth, and so he shall be discharged; but if the Action be brought upon any
specialty, or upon matter of Record, or upon a thing touching Land, etc. he
shall not help himself in that manner, but shall put the same upon the trial
of the Jury, but he himself shall not be admitted to swear, etc.

And note, that an Oath ought to have three Companions, Truth, Justice, and
Judgment, and if they be wanting it is no Oath but a Perjury; for if a man be
forced by constraint to swear, that for many years he quiely held such Lands,
etc. it is Perjury, not in him who swears, but in him who compels him to
swear, Reum non facit nist men's sit rea. Nemo se circumveniat aut seducat. Qui
per lapidemfalse jur at perjurus est. Quacunque art verborum jur at aliquis,
Deus ita accipit sicut ille qui jur at intelligit. Et minus malum est per Deum
falsum jur are veraciter, quam per Deum verum jur are fallaciter. Quanto enim
id per quod juratur est magis sanctum, tanto magis est penals perjurium, etc.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
ABusions of the Common Law, from 124. to 151 Accords final. 171 Account. 155
Acquittance. 155 Accessories. 42 Action. 58.89.182,183 Afferment nnd afferrors.
49 Allienations. 11.14 Amercements. 90.218,219 Approvers. 61.142,143 Appeals
and Appealers. 48.61.69.303 to 316 Articles of the Coroners Enquest. 40.41
Articles in the Leet. 53 Articles in Air. 211 Assize of Novell Disseisin.
94,95,96,97,98 Attaints. 166,167 Attachments. 66 Atturnies 97.124
B
Bail. 73 Barons of the Exchequer. 49 Beaupleader. 34 Battle 141.157,158,159
Bigamy. 132 Burning and Burners. 16.78.146.193 Burglary. 36.43.79.148
C.
CEnturies and Centiners. 5 Circuits. 62 Charters, Deeds, Minuments. 154
Clergy. 131 Clerks. 131 Champion. 186,187,188 Chauncery. 293 Cinque Ports. 297
Combets and Combattors. 157 Contract. 104,105. to 108 Contempts and
Contumacies. 76 Coroners. 7.287 Courts. 10.50 Court Baron. 299 Common Pleas.
290,291 Countors or Pleaders. 65 Coin. 10 Counsans. 131 Copy-holds and
Copyholders. 113.156
D.
DEfaults. 180,181 Defects of Magna Charta, from 251. to 260 Divination and
Diviners. 17 Dillatory Pleas. 130 Disseisins. 93,94.153.215 Distress and
Distresses. 95.99.100.101 102,103,147 Doomesday Book. 114 Dower. 11
E.
Earls. 5 Earldome. 96 England. 3 Englishire. 47 Escape. 73 Essoignes and
Essoigners. 117. to 124 Exchequer. 9.49.296 Exceptions. 128 Order of them. 129
Exceptions of time, persons, and place. 137, 138
F.
FAires and Markets. 14 Falsifying. 23.75 False Latin. 152 Festivalldaies. 136
Forfeiture. 44 Franchises. 163.213
G.
Goal and Goalers. 72 Grand and Petit Assize. 93
H.
Heresy. 16 Homage and Fealty. 169.170 Hunting. 165 Hue and Cry. 10.67
I.
INformers. 64 Imprisonment. 82.149 Indictments. 84,85,86.143.227 317. to 323
Jurours. 43 Judges and Judgment. 59.64.133,134 135.207.172,173.287,288,289
Judgment of death. 203 Jurisdiction. 7.177,178,179 Justices in Air. 209
Infamous persons. 192
K.
KIng. 3 Kings Bench. 287 Knights Fees. 11
L.
LAw. 1 Larcine. 31,32,33,34,35.79.147
M.
MAjesty. 16.74.193 Mainprisors. 71 Mainpernors. 184 Marshalsey. 288
Manslaughter. 26.28 Mayhem. 82.149 Merchants. 15 Misadventures. 42 Misnosmer.
152 Murder. 47.79.146.194. to 202.
N.
NAtivo habendo. 112 Neifty 109. 181 Ne injuste vexes. 115
O.
OAths. 169, 170. 325 Oath of the King. 3 Oath of Countors. 65 Oath of
Battle. 161 Obligations. 166 Offenses and the division of them. 15.68
Oflences real and personal at the Kings Suit. 84.86 Offenses venial. 86
Office of Coronors. 48. to 38. 67. Office of Justices in Air. 221 Ordination
of Clerks. 14 Ordinary. 131 Ordering of Battle. 161 Out-lawes and Outlawry.
149
P.
PArliaments. Perjury. 18,19,20,21.22, 208,209 Permancies. 205,206. Poor. 14
Pleas, and pleadings. 78.129 Pledges. 90,91.184 Power of the Judge. 133
Presentiments in Air. 9 Proof. 14 Prison and Prisonors. 29 Principal and
Accessory 44 Prerogative. 154 Protection. 150 Process in Appeals. 71
Purprestures. 164 Punishments. 190.205
R.
RApe. 37,38.148 Receiver and Receipt. 155 Replications. 139,140,141,142
Rerpards or Fees. 63 Reprebensions of the state of Merton. 621 262 Of
Malbridge. 262,263 Of Westminster. first. 264 to 270 Of Westminster. 2. from 270. to 279 Of
Gloucester. 283,282 Of circumspecte beatis. 282 Robbery. 32.79.147
S.
SAllery. 66 Satisfaction of Debt. 215 Sanctuary. 44,45,46 Seals. 49 Sheeres
and Sheriffs. 16 Summons and Summonors. 11. 67 115. 116. 139. 185 Sureties.
14, 15 Suit and Suitors. 50,51
T.
TEnent by the conrtesie. 15 Treasure trove. 7.43.144.165 Turns of Sheriffs.
8.51.62 Treason. 24.76 Trespasses. 88,89,90 Trial. 324 Trove 135
V.
VAriance. 142.152 View. 149 View of Frankpledges, 8.52,53 Venial Trespasses.
88 Voucher. 140 Villinage. 96.109. to 165 Usury. 165
W.
Waive. 109 Wages. 64 Wager of Law. 154 Wounds and wounding. 43.83 Writs
remediall. 8 Wrecks. 43.164,165
FINIS.

