THE DIVINE WOOER; OR A POEM, Setting forth The Love and Loveliness of the LORD
JESUS, and his great desire of our welfare and happiness, and propounding many
Arguments full of weight and power, to persuade Souls to the faith and
obedience of him; and Answering diverse Objections that are made there-against,
and that hinder many therefrom.

Composed by J. H. a servant of God in the glorious Gospel of his well beloved
Son.

Psalm. 45.1. My heart herein a good thing does indite,
The things pertain to Christ which here I write:
A ready writer's pen may my tongue prove,
Imprinting on the Readers heart Christ's love.
Psalm. 34.8, 11. O taste and see how good's the Lord, and just,
O happy man that makes him his trust!
Come children unto me, give heed, I Will teach
You how to fear the Lord, his grace I preach.
Quis leget haec!

Persius. Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci,

Horat. A verse may find him, who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight in^^ a sacrifice.
Herbert LONDON, Printed for R. Tailor, and T. Sawbridge, and are to be Sold in
Little-Brittane, 1673.

THE DEDICATION.
LOrd I would dedicate this work to Thee,
For its materials are mainly thine;
And those endowments too, thou gav'st to me,
Through exercise whereof it became mine;
But yet that exercise of mine is so short
Of what ought to have been, that thou may abhor't.
II.
I do confess that unto Thee I owe,
My self, and all that I am, or can do;
For all that is good in me Thou did bestow,
And in my wants it is to Thee I go:
Therefore it is meet, that I devote to Thee,
My self, my works, and all that is in me.
III.
But I Am a very sinful dirty thing,
So much defiled in heart, mind, head and hand;
That I no offering meet for Thee can bring;
Naught that before Thee thou may bear to stand:
If Thou do look upon it with pure eye,
And mark its many swervings narrowly.
IV.
O wash me in the fountain of that blood,
Which thy most blessed Son for me has shed:
Renew me with thy grace, that can make good
And clean, both heart, and mind; both hand and head.
Then shall I better offerings bring to Thee,
Than either I, or this my work now be.
V.
The spring whence flowed out those streams, which here
Together gathered I have by study:
Is with what flows therefrom, both pure and clear,
But ah! the channel they ran through is muddy.
Thy words are all most pure, but in my mind
While they received are, there dirt they find.
VI.
Mistakes, and earthiness, carnal desires,
And selfish ends, therein so frequent are;
That what results therefrom, greatly bemires
The heavenly liquor, and it almost marres:
Yet Lord let not thy wine be thrown away,
Though of the cask something it relish may.
VII.
But let the Readers such good strainers find,
Of piercing judgment, as to separate
What Is mine from thine, so as what is thine to mind,
And nothing thereof for my sake to hate;
Yea, what in them or me thou see amiss,
Pard'ning and purging, to us both it bliss.
VIII.
Oh cause both me, and them who read or hear,
Of what is here writ of thy beloved Son;
The truth thereof behold so bright and clear,
As unto him at all times we may run:
And unto him resolve so fast to cleave,
As him by no means we may ever leave.
IX.
And O might all the musings of my mind,
And words, or writings, which from thence proceed;
Be such as may with Thee acceptance find,
And useful be, to who them hear or read:
To what is good therefore, Thou my strength, Lord be,
And from what ill inthrals me set me free.
TO THE READER.
THere is a Proverb, says, Blessed is the wooing,
That is soon over, or not long in doing:
This Proverb has its truth and verity,
In this same woing; which unto thine eye,
And mind, I here present, if we respect
The party wooed. He that dont' reject
Christ's profer'd kindness, or his patience tire,
But quickly yields himself to his desire;
Without excuses or delays is Blessed,
And sooner of much happiness possessed.
Whereas He that stands dallying long, and gives
Frequent denyals, of much good deprives
Himself mean while, and many griefs sustains,
While between two, He in suspense remains:
Yea and endangers the Great Wooer too,
To turn away in anger; and then woo
And anguish will succeed; for there is none
With whom the soul can live well, but this One.
Though in respect of him that is wooed, its well
That Christ upon his suit long time does dwell:
That He Is not quick to anger, but does wait
To show his mercy, even to such as hate
To be reproved, and do long resist
That grace of God, without which none is blist.
That He vouchsafes to call, and knock, and stay,
At the long-closed-Heart, from day to day;
Till by his goodness and long-suffering, He
Subdues its unkind hardness, makes it see
Its folly; Him so to oppose, in whom
All good and happiness to it does come:
And without whom it must sustain such woe,
As it can neither bear, nor get therefro.
Which patience and long-suffering, does commend
This Wooer much, that He will so attend,
Upon such sorry persons, and so long
Before He leave his suit. His love is strong,
Which led him hither through so many trials;
And leads him too to take so often denials:
When as He is so Great and perfect too,
That He no need has any one to woo;
Nor is there any worthy of his love,
Or to enjoy him; He Is a match above
The Highest creature; none in Heaven or Earth,
Can equal him in greatness, goodness, birth.
But who is that that is wooed? whom does He court?
Is It only some of the more wealthy sort?
Is It only the brave gallants? or is it those
Whose wit and breeding other men's out-goes?
Or is it such as are set up on high,
Invested with some great Authority?
We might suspect indeed, that He some such
Would take to him, that in these matters much
Come nearer to his greatness. But alas!
For none of all those things He ought does pass.
Nor do they make those who them have to be,
Any whit nearer to him in degree,
Than those who have them not: they bear no sway
With him at all; that more of his heart they
Then others should obtain: but whosoere
Do heartily him love, to him are Dear.
It Is any soul in general that He
Does call and Woo, that saved it might be;
To whom He by his works and words does show,
His truth and goodness that it them may know;
And by his holy Spirit, them evidences
In any measure. But men often their senses
So stupifie with pride and lust, that they
Do not perceive what he to them does say:
But do neglect his voice till He them leave,
The fruits of their own folly to receive.
But wheresoere men hear him, and do heed
Those heavenly words which do from him proceed;
Believing on him, He them all does take
Into a nearer union, and does make
An everlasting Covenant with them,
Their sins to pardon, their souls not condemn;
He Will be their God and guide, their portion great,
Their Head and Husband; they with him shall eat,
And drink, and rest, and dwell, and see his face;
He will them dearly love, He Will them embrace:
He Will kiss them, satisfy their souls with good;
He Will over flow them with a mighty flood
Of peace and happiness; and they remain
Shall ever with him, ever with him reign.
The Soul of Man like to a female is, Anima. f. (...)

And its desire is strongly after bliss;
And to some other thing, as to its male
It does subject it self; for it would fail,
If left alone as by it self to dwell;
For then it does sink down to death and Hell;
And many things there are like Males to it,
To which it turns it self, seeking to get
From them its pleasure and subsistence, and
Subjects it self too unto their command.
The World (or Spirit of it, Mundus. m. (...)
that magnifies
The things below, and such virtue as lies
In them) that courts the soul, which nat'rally
Since it from God is fallen, sets its eye
Upon its pleasures, pomps, riches, and fare,
And what the objects of its senses are.
To this it turns it self, to this it flies,
On this for peace and safety it relies.
For this it lusts, and its embraces wishes;
Opens it self thereto, likes well its kisses.
In it delights, and to it it self yields,
Desires its gifts of Money, Houses, Fields;
What ere may please it and protection give,
And make it in good plight and rank to live.
But this World's empty, fading, false and vain,
And if the Soul match to it 'twill prove its bane.
The Wicked one, even the soul spirit, Diabolus. m. (...)
that sets
The heart on Mischief, when He therein gets
Possession; stirs up unto strife, debate,
Oppression, violence, pride, envy, hate:
He courts the Soul too, and its often beguiled
By him, and with those wicked seed's defiled;
Conceiting sweetness often in any thing,
Which unto other men may mischief bring.
A Spirit of error and false Prophecy
Is He ofttimes, to Heaven; but by a lie,
Pretending, and in diverse shapes appears,
And some great (how and port He often bears,
As if he came from Heaven and led thereto.
Yea usually the name of Christ also
He can assume: though it is but in deceit,
The unwary Soul the easlier to cheat.
For He does always turn the Soul away,
From the true Christ, who down his life did lay
For our offenses, and from that good word,
The Apostles preached, and what it does afford;
Not singly leading it to Christ, that He
Its Lord and Savior in all things might be:
On him to trust, his counsels to observe;
But to some fancy leads it to swerve;
Or else some other work, law, power, or name,
Does join with Christ; Adultery with the same,
Leading the Soul to practice, whereby it
Misseth Christ's blessing, and his wrath does get.
For Christ, indeed the only one is, Chirstus. m. (...)
who
Has power received from God, the Soul to woo;
And He alone that for the Soul has done,
And that can and will do for it, that none
Besides him could or can; and therefore He
Alone its Bridegroom worthy is to be.
He all things has that may the Soul enrich,
Content and cherish. He from all things which
May danger it, will safely it defend,
And bring it to an happy glorious end.
But naturally the Soul does not Him know,
Nor what a one He is, but looks below
To things unto its senses manifest,
Thinking in their enjoyments to be blessed.
And if it see a need of any thing
Beside, to after-Bliss it for to bring;
Then usually it plays the wanton whore.
Some form of godliness it will adore;
Wherein the World and Devil too, it may
Have fellowship withal, and with them play,
And sport it self, and yet be godly too,
And some fine easy outside service do.
Or if some stricter course it yields to take
(As it can be at cost and pains to make
It self a graven Image: as of old
The Israelites to make a Calf of Gold,
Would with their Jewels part) its the design
(While with the Spirit of error 't does combine)
To be its own Redeemer, or to get
A righteousness or Name, wherewith commit
Adultery it may; for often with more
Than one false Spirit, the Soul does play the Whore.
But only Christ is worthy it to have,
Who from the Heavens descended it to save,
From Sin and Death, and power has all to give,
Which may make Soul and Body both to live.
And He by's Word and Spirit, and those in whom,
These are, and work, unto men's Souls does come,
Inviting them to him; but not that He
With other things only should partner be,
In their affections and their worships; but
That all things else from the heart being shut,
He might alone the Sovereign power obtain,
It to command, and over it to reign.
That it to him its love and confidence
May singly give, in the belief and sense
Of his great worth and goodness; and submit
In all things to his wise dispose of it.
The Spirit of Wisdom which comes from on high,
And does of Christ and his things testify;
And into their hearts who have him received,
Inspired has the Truth to be believed:
And by them wrought such miracles, as none
Besides them in the World have ever done;
He calls men unto Christ, his voice is, Come
To Christ for Righteousness, and for Wisdom,
For Pardon, Peace, for Strength, for Holiness,
For Freedom from all evil, for all bliss.
The Church, or Spouse, the Bride of Christ who knows,
And singly to him cleaves, she him forth shows,
And not her self (as the false Church) she wooes
For him alone. Yea every one his voice
That hears, and in his goodness does rejoice,
Is both allowed, and bid to call men to
This Blessed one, and them for him to woo.
It Is only the false Church, that magnifies
Her self, and hides his glory from men's eyes.
Oh come ye, come ye then to Christ, I pray;
Come all that thirst, all that want help and stay,
Support, life, comfort, guidance, righteousness,
And what may satisfy the Soul with bless.
All that are heavy laden and oppressed,
Come unto Christ, and He will give you rest.
Come, come, here is a Fountain open set,
Exposed to you all, whence you may get
Freely what good you want. Here Is what will make
You fully happy; Come these waters take,
Here Is no restraint, ye may all come and buy,
Wine, water, milk, without price or Money.
Only let go your lusts, your Idols, and
What with the love of Jesus will not stand.
Part with your sloth, with diligence attend,
At all his posts and pillars; in the end
Ye shall him find, and whatsoere ye want,
That is good for you, He will freely grant.
He Is full, and free, and none will turn away
That come to him, and on his Name do stay.
To Him I call thee Reader, Thou art He
Who art invited, and spoke to by me,
Who ere thou art, rich, poor, wise or unwise,
I call Thee unto Christ, do not despise
What I present Thee; though as it is from me,
Thou many weaknesses therein may see.
Yea Christ does call Thee by me; in the main
It is his language, do not it disdain;
Slight not his love, it is He that does Thee woo:
I Am but his spokesman, but the Trunk where through
He sends his voice to Thee, do thou it hear:
Peruse this Book, and mark well what is there
Propounded to Thee; Read it to the end,
And much good do it Thee; so desires, Thy Friend
April 30. 1673. JOHN HORN.

Another to the READER, of the Contents of this BOOK.
1. REader, If thou do look, into this Book
For wit, and for high strains, Thou Wilt loose thy pains.
2. It was not my intent, strains to invent,
Or witty phrases which some men count rich.
3. 'Twas not thy lust to feed, while thou do read,
Nor yet to satisfy a vain fancy.
4. But 'twas thy Soul to win, from vice, and sin,
And woo thee unto Bliss, that I writ this.
5. The mind and fancy have their lust, and crave
Food for their pleasure too, which may undo.
6. But here they will not find, their sails with wind
To fill; I do not ride in state and pride.
7. My wit runs plain and smooth, yet does not sooth,
Nor lull thy Soul a sleep, to fall in the deep.
8. I do not soar, or fly up loftily,
In words and phrases where all Stars appear.
9. I go low near the ground, both sure and sound;
My lines are not too heady, but square and stedy.
10. The matter which I write, does want no height,
But mounts up very high, 'bove Stars and Sky.
11. It opens Heaven to thee, where thou may see,
Such excellencies as man's wit do pass.
12. It treats of his high love, who is from above,
And who above is gone, and's on the Throne.
13. Yet by the way does tell, the woes of Hell,
And warns thee for to keep, from that sad deep.
14. It shows the lovely face, and glorious grace,
Of Heavens high heir in part, to take thy heart.
15. Though who can him declare, He is so fair?
No pencel can set forth his wondrous worth.
16. These great things to express, I sought no dress
Of flaunting eloquence, nor great expense
17. Of wit and art: for they cannot display
Their glory more but hide, their native pride.
18. Is not his labor lost, and all his cost,
Who would the Sun make fine, and gild its shine?
19. The finest cloth of Gold that may be sold,
Yea Pearls and Diamonds sure would it obscure.
20. Rich lines, with rich wits suits, such tree such fruits,
Such as I have I give, read well and live.
An Apology for writing the following Poem in Verse, and at such a time as
wherein I left my living, it being writ in Anno 1662. after August 24. therein.
What Is hear! (thou wilt say) A Preacher turned a Poet,
A married man in's Elder days to woo it?
What does He dote? Is this a time for him,
When He has lost his Living to go rhyme.
As if He was well satisfied and pleased,
That He of Fourscore pounds by the year is eased?
Alas! He is not for a Poem fit,
His scull's too thick, He wants both Art and Wit.
What can this Babbler say! can ought proceed
From him that worthy is that we it read?
To this I something briefly answer shall,
And then commit it to thy perusal.
TO Poetry I do not much pretend,
Though at that time I found my Genius bend
Somewhat thereto when this I wrote: my skill
Is small, having but little dipped my quill
In those still waters, which do qualify
The soul best for the Art of Poetry.
Yet to my inclination at that time,
A little I gave way to write in rhyme;
I scarcely can tell why, but I did find
That sort of Spirit, or Muse to court my mind.
To which it having sometimes by the by,
Yielded it self a little amorously,
And yet divinely too; at length it fell
Upon this subject, wherewith it did swell;
Till far beyond what I did first intend,
It did this large production here forth send.
Wherein that happened to me, which sometime
Befalls young mayds or women in their prime:
Who while they tick and toy, and to young men
(Perhaps their lovers) they do now and then
Yield up themselves after a wanton sort,
To taste the pleasures of the Nuptial sport;
Not thinking or desiring (although wild)
Thence to conceive, and to bring forth a child.
Yet after sometimes scaping (which does make
Them bolder of those pleasures to partake)
Before they are aware they 're often deceived,
Begin to swell, and find they have conceived.
Even so it fared with me (saving that I
In my attempts did act more honestly,
And therefore not ashamed of what I did,
I have not sought to keep its product hid;
As is their wont, who acting sinfully
Are filled with shame, and therefore seek to fly
From peoples knowledge of it) but while to
That Spirit which my mind sometime did woo,
I somewhat pleasingly my self inclined,
It did insinuate into my mind.
That though I thought but only by the by,
To exercise my wit, yet suddenly
I felt my self to swell, grow big and sick
Of my conceptions; that I see I quick
Was proved before I thought so, and perceived
That something from that Spirit I had received,
That had the nature of an heavenly seed,
And this same Embrio in my mind did breed.
Which as it dropped into my mind in verse,
So I in meeter do it here rehearse.
A way which holy men have sometime took,
As may be showed from Gods holy Book:
They holy things conceived and pend in song,
Which their sweet singers did sing, among
The people at their solemn meetings often,
As in the Book of Chronicles we 're taught.
Unto the pure all things be pure; and they
May any gift of God use, any way
May take, he leads them to, thereby to draw
Themselves and others more to mind his law.
And this of verse does some men more delight,
Then if the same in prose peruse they might.
For I conceive that something there is found,
In most men's minds that does of music sound:
That its much wrought on by, and suiteth best
With what in measured numbers is expressed.
And some where we are willed to our King,
Not only praise, but skilful praise to sing.
The holy Spirit of Wisdom judges it,
A practice also for him not unfit;
To condescend to men in any ways,
Whereby He them from Earth to Heaven may raise.
And leads his servants to be All to any,
That they thereby may unto God win many.
That I should go a wooing now may be,
Perhaps an unbeseeming thing for me.
Except it be in that more doleful sense,
So as men do when they use penitence.
But if it be well minded, for to woo
In the more pleasant sense agrees well too
With my profession, for what other is
A Preacher, who does Christ set forth with his
Excellencies, and men to him do call;
But such a wooer! and such wooers all
Right Preachers be, what else have I been doing,
All the time I have Preached but been so wooing?
If any thing beside almost, a miss
I did, which matter of Repentance is:
Which I am sorry for, that I have not
So loved the Bridegroom as I ought; nor got
So many Souls to him espoused, as
I might have done, since I a Preacher was.
For my neglects wherein, He justly may
Have ord'red to me as at this day;
That such things were imposed by those on High,
As did occasion my laying by:
Wherein his goodness too I do adore,
In that He since as well as heretofore,
Has me supplied and kept with such content
And safety, as I don't at all repent
My loss of honor, or estate, or ought
That of advancement my Church living brought.
Oh that my heart to him were more upright,
So as in him to take my whole delight.
And more to give my self to do his will,
And as I may my ministry fulfill:
Trusting him with my self, to do with Me
Whatever pleasing unto him shall be.
While I his work do, obey his command,
He can me save, because He in his hand
Has all, both things, and persons; and can do,
What ever his Wisdom directs him to.
However let his will be done for it
Is good, and to it I submit.
Only I crave his mercy, wherein I
May any thing herein, that is too high
For me have written; or if ought there be
Therein contained, which his eye does see
To be amiss, in manner, or in matter,
For I do not my self so vainly flatter;
As to conceive I so divinely write,
As nothing may be therein but what is right,
Or at the least, that as it came from me,
Has nothing whereby it defiled may be.
That I his glorious person personate,
And introduce as one that does relate;
The doleful waylings of the damned throngs,
Or represent the just's melodious songs,
And great rejoycings; when on sentence past,
They shall possess those dooms that ay shall last.
Therein I pardon crave, if any thing
There Is therein found, that is unbefilting
His greatness, or their glory; what I writ
Therein, was for my exercise; as fit
I did conceive those things that are to come,
To contemplate, both good and bad men's doom.
Endeavoring to express them, as may well
Consist with what thereof the Scriptures tell:
And unto others so them to present,
As might them best awaken to repent.
And that such as are just may still be so,
And never may the ways of truth forgo.
And much refreshing it unto me brought,
While I unto those things, my mind and thought
Did exercise; nor has there any time
Befallen me, wherein to verse and rhyme
I found my self disposed more; for though I
My Living parted with then, yet thereby
My Conscience I kept free, from what would
Have more disturbed my mind, had I made bold
To act above its liberty, for then
Though I more elbow room, might amongst men
Have had, and some more money in my purse;
Yet I was fearful that my soul, much worse
Would then have been at ease; which now has not,
It to disquiet, upon it this blot.
That I for living sake did that profess,
Which I conceived not to be blameless.
Not that I do condemn, what they above
Have judged needful, or well to behove
For future peace: or that I fault all those
Who, with what I did scruple at, do close.
To their own Master they must stand or fall,
By whom at last we must be judged all.
But I no cause find to repent that I
Feared to offend the Lord, but quietly
Bearing my cross and burden, to be glad
I was preserved from what I judged bad.
As for this Treatise, what is therein, to Thee
Who read'st it, I leave censured to be.
Read and Consider it, no more I say,
But only God to thee it bless I pray.
J. M.

A Commendatory Epistle to the Reader.
Written by a lover of the Reverend and Judicious Author of this BOOK.
ALthought this Poem does not stand in need
Of my poor Commendations: which indeed
Are of small value, since I am, and seem
One of so little Learning or Esteem,
That small regard, or credit, given will be,
To ought that is expressed here by me.
Touching his Book, which is not Mean, nor Weak,
But fully able, for it self to Speak,
And to command Respect, in spite of them,
That shall the same through prejudice contemn:
Yea, to convince, or put to silence, Those
Who shall presume, or dare it to oppose:
All which might be as Reasons, why I should
My hand and pen from this employment hold.
Yet notwithstanding, when I did peruse
That Heavenly Dialogue, which here ensues
And is the subject of this following Tract,
Observing too, how well it was compact
And firmly built upon God's Holy Word,
With which the substance of it does accord:
Giving the Reader much good help and light,
The Scriptures for to understand aright,
In those most weighty and important things,
Which to the Soul, most good and profit brings;
Clearing away those Fogs and Mists which rise,
To cloud and hide Christ's beauty from our Eyes;
Whose kindness, goodness, love, and loveliness,
Incomparably he does here express;
And his good will to us so far imparts,
As well might make our hard and frozen hearts
Melt into Tears; and willingly embrace
Our dear Redeemer's proffered love and grace,
Which is most rich, and free, as does appear,
And is as richly represented here.
I also heeding how industriously
He labor's and indeavour's to unty,
And break those snares the World, and Devil makes
To hold us Prisoners; and what pains he takes
To set us free: and earnestly does strive
Our much deluded Soul's to undeceive;
And also with what Scriptural replies
He answers all those Reas'nings, which arise
In our vain carnal Atheistick heart;
As causes why we are so loath to part
With our false lovers, and our selves betake
To Christ, who only can us happy make:
Declaring how absurd, and reasonless
It is for men to seek their happiness,
In ways which do so much debase the Soul,
Namely, to live as Beasts without control,
Only to feed their sensual appetites,
With worldly, sensual, perishing delights.
And how he by plain reason, overthrows
The Atheistick Principles of those
Vain, foolish Worldlings, who in heart deny
The Power, and Providence of the Most High,
Who Made and Rules the World, and will likewise
Most certainly cause all the Dead to Rise,
And come to Judgment. At that dreadful Day,
When Christ most infinitely will repay
His friends, and foes, far otherwise then here
They ever in this World repayed were.
A glimpse of which Reward and Punishment,
He does beforehand lively here present:
Showing what dreadful Horror shall surprise,
All who to Christ, and his, are Enemies:
And have them Persecuted, scorned, or slighted.
How such shall stand amazed and affrighted,
At that strange turn, and (though 't will naught avail)
Their former foolish, sinful ways bewail;
And with most bitter lamentations, rue
That they, their lusts and pleasures to pursue,
Should God neglect: and what might have prevented
Their being so unspeakably Tormented.
And how the Saints in their most blessed state,
Their dear Redeemer's praise shall celebrate,
With Songs of Triumph, reigning gloriously,
As Kings with Him, to all Eternity.
And then from both does strongly reinforce
His former suit, that we would take the course
Which he persuades; namely, with Christ to close
Unfainedly; not fearing wants or foes.
Which fears and doubtings, in us to prevent,
Christ to us he again does represent,
As all-sufficient to preserve and guide us,
And all things necessary to provide us.
Showing Christ's tender love, and special care,
Which he for all his Servants will declare;
That they shall have no reason to repent
Their choice; and then gives great encouragement
That though we many strong corruptions have,
Christ's grace shall us from those corruptions save;
That we over them, through him, shall conquest get,
And also over whatsoever let,
May interpose: And that the only thing
Which Christ desires is, that we be willing
To give our selves wholly to him, and then
He will give back himself to us again;
And with himself whatever good thing he
Shall needful for our souls and bodies see,
This and much more (our hearts for to allure)
The Author does In The Name of Christ assure.
These, and many other things, no less
Remarkable then these, which to express
Or over them particularly to run,
Were but to light up candles to the Sun;
Since you in Reading may them find and see
More fully, then if hinted here by me.
On which (I say) when I had cast mine eye
Observing also how judiciously,
Full and compendiously he does express
Each thing; me thought that I could do no less
Then leave some small memorial of my love,
To signify how highly I approve
The Authors Labor in this following Book,
Although I know not how it may be took,
Only i will hope the best; desiring thee
Who Read'st this Book, thou would not tired be,
Nor grutch thy labor, though it seems long,
Lest in so doing thou thy self do wrong,
And to thy shame declare, how little thou
Esteem'st of Christ: Whose Excellence to show,
This Author much more time and pains did spend,
As knowing none can him enough commend,
By all the Words, or Books that can be writ;
Considering also there is enough in it
To Recompense thy labor, if thou have
A Spiritual heart, to relish and to taste
Those Spiritual dainties, and that Heavenly cheer,
Which by this Author is presented here.
Or if as yet thou have not, yet through grace,
Whilst thou herein behold'st, with open face,
As in a glass, that Glorious Love Divine,
Which in this Sun of Righteousness does shine;
Who courts, and wooes thee here, with him to wed:
Thou may (I say) be Metamorphosed
Into that Glorious Image, whence we fell;
And then, I know, such Books will please thee well,
And to thy soul much joy and solace bring,
Yea, thou will in a feeling manner sing,
That Song of Loves, p. 257
composed by this thy Friend;
And from thy own experience Christ commend,
As far more lovely than thou can conceive,
Which wishing to thee, I shall take my leave.
March 10. 1672. R. T.

If you would know my NAME, This Accrostick shows the same.
Reader, this Book presents a Match unto thee,
One of great Worth, who for his Bride would have thee,
By this his Servant, earnestly does woo thee,
Eternally to dignifie and save thee:
Refuse not then, but take him at his word,
The whole World cannot thee such a Match afford.
Think not his terms proposed, too strict and hard,
Or that he bids thee to thy loss; But know
Without him, thou art quite undone and marred,
Since none but he can pay what thou do owe,
Or stand thy Friend, at Death and Judgment day;
No more will he, except thou him obey.
By Another.
SIR, I have read your ex'llent wooing fit,
And find it coucht in plain but soaring wit.
The truest wisdom, Sir, your lines unfold,
How to make Christ the Husband of our souls.
Let Momus carp, let Sycophants revile,
At this thy plain but Heaven aspiring style:
We'll leave them as they are, and wave their scorn,
In his good time God will exalt his Horn.
Jn this thy heavenly wooer thou have shown,
Our Saviors mercy and his love in one.
Here soul thy Christ to thee proposes Heaven,
Nay he does woo thee to it, let not sins leaven
Harbor in thee to obstruct thy way to bliss.
O Soul admire that Christ thy wooer is!
Render him thanks for this his mercy great,
Never refuse so glorious a seat.
Eternal horror will be thy retreat.
On the ensuing Poem.
THis Author minding God's great Love to us,
Was thereby moved to represent it thus:
No flaring dress nor gaudy Robes here worn,
And yet enough to keep his Muse from scorn:
Not a-la-Mode, yet handsome, neat and spruce,
To gain respect, and stop or dam the sluice
Of that profaneness, which licentious rimes
Sets open, in these our sad declining times;
The wooing here Divine, no complement
Needed nor used by way of supplement,
It treats of high and heavenly mysteries,
Brought down to suit meanest capacities;
The heir of all God's first begotten Son
Is here commended, yet when all is done
That all is too short, his praises to set forth,
Much here is expressed, but more admire his worth:
Praised be God for this sweet Melody;
Thanks also to that Instrument whereby
The Match is here advised, well may he speed
In such endeavors, and at every need,
Find such supplies of mercy from the Lord,
As he has promised in his Holy Word,
May they, too, profit who shall read these Songs.
Praise be to God, to whom all praise belongs.
James Horn.

On the foregoing Commendations of the following Poem.
OThers affect that by some Learned men,
Some Doctors, Students, Preachers, or the pen
Of some great Person, what they put to Press
Should be commended; or delight to dress
It with some curious Frontispeice: my mind
In good men's approbation more does find
It to content; that such as God believe,
And his instructions likewell to receive
Who godliness endeavor after, fleeing
What ever things are therewith disagreeing,
Commend my studies and endeavors: for
Such Persons praises God does not abhor.
By such he will be commended, when by those
Who to true godliness are real foes:
(Though great, and rich, and learned too they be)
To be extolled, much disdaineth he.
Nor did that Kingly Poet David, whose
Praises were great in songs, who did compose
The sweetest Poems, unto him invite
The great or Learned Persons, that they might
Turn in to him and his Companions be;
But such as feared the Lord, thereto did he
Invite and call: they in God's mysteries
Have the best judgment, are the truly wise.
Nor God nor good men for their poverty
Do any such despise, why then should I?
Better by one poor good man praised to be,
Than by a thousand bad of high degree.
In such (though mean men in this World) God's treasures
Have often been put, and they of divine pleasures
Have often the largest deepest draughts; the Saints
Or holy men (what ever outward wants
Have them attended) Christ's inheritance
With all its glorious riches does advance.
If such then like my works, if what I Have penned
Those that be truly pious do commend,
It is enough; if they be pleased, I much
Pass not for their accounts that are not such.
Though that is the lot of goodness too, that often
Some such it praise too, who themselves are naught.
Such virtu's beauty that it often attracts,
Their eyes and tongues, who yet refuse its acts.
Who loving sensual pleasures, cannot endure
Themselves unto those labors to inure
Whence those good fruits are reap't, which who so taste,
Shall joys enjoy which evermore shall last.
Such forcedly, though the act not, praise what is right;
But virtues foll'wers praise her with delight.
J Horn.

THE Divine VVooer.
Canto. I.
A wake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light,

Ephesians. 5.14.
The Call.
The man upon his Soul does call,
To view it is state original,
And what it is now through Adam's fall.
The Soul it is bad estate espies,
And ready to despair out cries:
A Minister thereto replies.
Directing it to Christ, He shows
Of him the gladsome heavenly news;
Yea Christ himself for its love sues.
Declares his worthy facts, his love,
And what to close with him might move;
And shows what does it most behove.
Then warns it of it is subtle foes,
Who seek to bring to it great woes;
And there this Canto has it is close.
Man. ROwse up thy self my Soul, consider well
What of thy state I herein do thee tell;
What was thy first condition, what it is now,
That what behooves thee, thou may better know.
Good was thy state at first, before thy fall,
For thou from God had thine original:
A pure offspring of his heavenly breath;
Thou wast; not subject unto sin or death,
Or grief, or fear, or any thing might harm thee,
Till the old Serpent from thy God did charm thee.
For we in Gods own image and likeness,
At first were framed, and he did express
Great love and bounty to us, he withheld
Nothing of good from us; our state excelled
All creatures here below, for to us he
Gave the Dominion over Land and Sea,
And all that in them were; yea all above
He made also for us, such was his love.
A pleasant Garden, even a Paradise
Of pleasures also, full of rarities
He for us planted, and therein a Tree
Of life, by which we might from Death been free.
Yea whatsoever might yield us delight,
To Soul or Body, touch, or taste, or sight:
He therein did provide, with different sex,
For more content, and offspring, naught did vex
Or cause disquiet then; yea thou did know
The nature of all things, and could it show;
And such agreeing names on them impose,
As might their inward properties disclose.
Yea even with God himself, thou to converse
Wast fitted, and his praises could rehearse.
And had thou still obeyed his just commands,
And had not broke by Sin, the sacred bands*
Of friendship wherewith to himself he tied thee,
Nothing should ere have power had, to divide thee
From his affections: nor should any thing
Befaln thee, but what good to thee should bring.
But now alas! thy state is altered,
Since thou by sinning from thy God have fled.
By listening to the Serpents subtlety,
And giving heed to his false glozing lie.
Of all the good thou had thou art berest,
And naught but what is bad now in thee is left.
The Image of thy God wherein did stand
Thy chiefest glory, thou have marred, and
Like to the Beasts that perish, now have made thee,
And Satan's lies to ruin have betrayed thee.
His poison has thy heart infected so,
That naught but wickedness therefrom does flow.
So that of God thou naught deserve but hate,
Yea and all creatures thee to ruinate
May well conspire; since thou so wretchedly
Have turned away from God, their enmity
Against thee is but just; that as before
Thou waft Heavens favorite, and all things bore
Respect unto thee; now they should neglect thee,
And unto answerable woes reject thee,
To what thy blesses were; for oh! my Soul,
Thou art become a Dungeon very foul;
Nasty, and dark, and loathsom^sin, and evil,
Have got possession in thee; and the Devil
Has thee enslaved so to his will and lust,
That thou art full of all that is unjust,
And hateful unto God; who therefore has
From Paradise expelled thee in his wrath,
And unto Death has thee condemned so,
That from the force thereof thou can not go.
Of unclean Birds thou art become a cage,
Thy lusts and passions in thee rule and rage,
And drive thee to and fro, and thee expose
Unto the Malice of Infernal foes.
All thou do mean, think, love, or joy in now,
What is it but what is vain and brutish? Thou
In whom Gods Wisdom sometime had delight,
Art now become a very loathsome sight;
Wholly for her pure fellowship unmeet,
And for his service; for from Head to Feet,
Thou full of sores and ulcers art. In thee
Nothing that is right or lovely can He see.
Thou neither know him, nor thy self, nor how
Thou may thy self recover; nor can thou
His favor re-obtain by any thing,
Which thou by way of offering can him bring.
For unto him no real love thou have,
Nor any virtuous thing; of all good waste,
And empty now thou art: To Satan's power,
And to Gods wrath, obnoxious every hour.
Oh then how sad's thy state? where ere thou go,
Thou art in danger of eternal woe.
While thou art in thy sins, over thy Head
Gods wrath does hang; his wrath whom Angels dread,
And all the Creatures; and whose furious ire,
When poured forth is like devouring fire.
So as the Rocks are thereby rent, and fall
Asunder; for it is able to turn all
Into its Ancient Chaos, and to bring
The whole Creation to a mere nothing.
Bethink thee then my Soul what course to take,
Is there no way thy peace with God to make?
Is there no way his wrath to pacify?
To escape his vengeance? that thou may not die?
Not die for ever? while thou yet have space,
May thou not seek for and implore his grace?

Soul. And is it so indeed? is this my case!
Does sin in me Gods image so deface,
And render me so loathsome in his eye!
Is his wrath so provoked! am I to dye,
By his just law so doomed! oh whither then
Shall I betake my self! what can we men
Devise or do, whereby his anger we
May pacify that saved we may be
From his destroying hand? If I Am so vile,
That all I think or do, sin does defile.
How is it possible that any thing
I can perform, that may me safety bring?
If I had all the World at my command,
To offer up to him, naught at my hand
Needs He to take, whose all things are; nor could
I it so bring, as He accept it would
From me that am so vile: but alas! I
Have nothing of mine own, but misery
And sin; I must therefore lie down forlorn,
Bewailing that sad day when I was born;
And wishing that some Hills or Mountains might
Fall on, and cover me from his dread sight;
That He might not how sinful I am see,
Nor I Him, who so angry is with me.
But oh alas! these bootless wishes are,
Naught they avail me, nothing but Despair
Remains as my sad lot; in wretchedness
To perish evermore without redress.
O woe is me! what shall I think or do?
I am undone, I sink, I perish: Oh!

Minist. Despair not Soul: But hear and listen well,
Unto a true story that I shall tell;
Tidings of joy and gladness I do bring;
Tidings of peace, that well may make thee sing.
Incline thine ear therefore and bend thy mind,
That of my words thou may the comfort find.
Though thou most wretchedly, from thy Creator
Have run, and played vile prevaricator
From his just laws; have sinned against him still,
And have not set by his most holy will;
Unworthy art of love, most worthy wrath,
Yet He to thee a strong affection has;
Loves thee intensively and thy welfare,
To bring about no cost or pains does spare.
One only Glorious and dear Son has He,
Begotten of him from eternity.
The brightness of his Glory, light of light,
The Image of his person, His delight.
His word eternal, his wisdom most pure,
By whom He all things made, and makes to endure.
Yet him did He send forth when He saw fit,
To expiate the sins thou did commit;
To ransom thee from thrall to Death and Devil,
To raise thee up, and free thee from all evil:
To bring thee from thy woeful lost estate,
In which thou must else lain time without date.
And thee restore again unto his grace,
That thou might see his sweet and glorious face;
Enjoy his favor, sit under his wing,
And his high praises evermore might sing.
That glorious splendour of his Majesty,
Who in his Bosom was eternally;
According to his will determined,
Was born of a poor Damsel, espoused
Unto a Carpenter of mean degree;
Laid in a Manger, where there use to be
The Ass or Oxen feeding, other room
The Inn affording not for his welcome;
When that poor Damsels time was come, that she
Of this unheard of birth untwin'd should be.
Even like as if some mighty Prince by birth,
Should quit his Fathers Palace, and the mirth
He there enjoyed: should lay his robes aside,
His Princely robes; and the better to hide
His highborn dignity, and great degree,
With Pilgrims or poor beggars rags, should be
Meanly attired and so himself betake,
To travail through great dangers, for the sake
Of some of his poor subjects; who allured
By some false Traitor had his Realm abjured:
Joined themselves in confederacy, to
His Fathers and his own most hateful foe;
Till thereby they upon their heads had brought,
By means of that rebellion they had wrought,
Some dreadful punishment, and deadly thrall,
Indangering the ruin of them all.
That He might in that strange disguise unknown,
Vanquish those foes who had them overthrown;
And unexpectedly a pardon bring,
Unto them from their own much injured King.
And by such love declared, win their mind
Unto himself, that they with him combined;
Might from those Traitors who had them seduced,
Into his Fathers Kingdom be reduced;
Under his conduct as their Prince and guide,
Whose love and care of them they had so tried.
Even so this mighty highborn Son of God,
Into this World down by a path untrod;
Descended in a garb unknown, wherein
He wore the badges of our loathsome sin;
Clothed with great poverty, infirm and weak,
Filled with reproaches which his heart did break.
Through swelling Seas of sorrows travailed He,
In the strength of his love to seek up thee;
And save thee from that wretched state wherein,
Thou ready wast to perish in thy sin.
In this disguise made under law, and so
Exposed to endure that curse and woe;
Which was thy due, when he was set upon
By all the powers of Hell, the field He won
In an unusual manner; not by strength
But weakness rather: where through He at length
After some combats yielded up to Death,
His spotless body, and his blessed breath.
Wherein the laws demands He so fulfilled,
That it is condemning power thereby He killed;
For so the bonds He canceled, and the debt
Discharged, that bound thee ore to death; and set
Thee free from under Satan's power and force,
That thou may now again have free recourse
To thy Creators presence; for He has
By this his pilgrimage and Death, the wrath
Of his displeased Father pacified,
So that his anger He has laid aside;
And holds thee now no longer as a Foe,
Bound ore to Death, but freely lets thee go;
Keeps thee not at a distance any longer,
But calls thee back; and by his Son, who stronger
Is then thine enemies (as by the way
And leader too by whom the weakest may
Strongly and safely walk, against the worst
Endeavors and resistance of that cursed
Infernal crew, who seek to keep thee back)
He thee invites, and prays thou will not slack
Thy pace unto him, but return again
Into his heavenly Kingdom there to reign;
Over thine enemies in glorious state,
For everlasting time beyond all date.
That safely to him thou might back be brought,
This Royal Prince of glory, who thee bought
From thraldom by his blood, does thee invite
To hear his pleasant voice, behold his light
In which he sets himself, in glorious state
Before thy view, beseeching thee to hate
Those enemies who did thee overthrow,
And brought thee from so high to be so low.
And Him to listen to, believe, and love,
Who for thy sake descended from above;
And worst of Deaths and dangers did sustain,
That He might thee restore to life again.
He with his words puts forth his mighty hand,
To turn thee and to make thee understand;
To give thee strength to lean on him, and go
The good way after him which He does show.
He loves thee dearly, wooes thee with his heart,
Entreats thee from thine Idols to depart,
Which will undo thee ore again, if yet
Thou will thy self to their advise commit.
Beseeches thee to save thy self, or rather
Be saved by him, who came forth from his Father,
To save poor sinners; bring them safe and sure,
Unto those joys which ever shall endure.
He condescends unto thee, though thou be'st
Viler then any thing that here thou see,
As in thy sins, unworthy of him, yet He
Disdains not to address himself to thee.
Incline thine ear O Daughter, give good heed
Unto those gracious words, which do proceed
From his most holy lips, in such like wise
As here does follow, do not them despise.

Christ. Dear Soul, the price of my most precious blood,
Which I have shed for thee, and for thy good;
For I my self a ransom gave for all,
And now I to repentance do thee call.
Hearken to me, and to my voice give ear,
Turn not away from me; why should thou fear
To listen unto me: I am thy friend,
Thy Lord, thy Savior, did not stick to spend
My life and blood for thee; and now I have
Through painful cross, and through the silent grave,
Obtained my Fathers Kingdom; am ascended
Unto the throne of glory; where attended
I am with millions of the heavenly Host,
The glorious Angels, yea the Holy Ghost,
Immeasurably upon me does rest,
And with all heavenly blessings I am blessed.
I Am heir of all things, yea in me does dwell
All fullness of the Godhead: Heaven, and Hell,
And Earth, and Seas, and all things else that be,
Are put into subjection under me.
And all that I have suffered and sustained,
'Twas for thee, and thy good; all I have gained
Thereby, I gained for thee, thee to possess
Of endless joys and everlasting bless.
Behold me then, behold me, turn thine eye
From other objects; see what Majesty,
What glory, and what beauty are in me,
What riches, and what fullness, and how free
I am, the same to all those to impart,
Who me embrace, and love with all their heart.
Behold me then, dear Soul, and wistly view
My matchless virtues, see how good, how true,
How powerful too I am; I Am rich to all
In mercy, who sincerely on me call.
None that repair to me do I cast by,
But them relieve, and cure their misery.
I Am alsufficient, able every way
To make thee happy to an endless day.
Turn then away from empty things thine eye,
From lies, from falsehood, and from vanity,
Which cheat thee, and deprive thee of all good.
Oh turn to Me, who for thee shed my blood;
Look toward me, dear Soul, behold and see,
Has any other such things done for thee
As I have done? has any condescended,
And stoopt so low? has any else expended,
And laid out so much, to obtain thy love
As I, that came to the earth from Heaven above;
And laid down all my riches and my life,
That I might thee redeem from all that strife
'Twixt God and thee, and take thee for a Wife?
That I might free thee from the infernal foe,
That held thee captive, and fills thee with woe?
Can any give to thee such gifts as I?
Can they advance thee to like dignity?
Can any so enrich thee as I can?
Can any thee so satisfy? what man
Or Angel may with me compare?
Can or will do for thee as I will do?
Oh turn thee unto me my darling dear:
Open thine eye on me, incline thine ear;
Give me thy heart, it is thy love I seek,
And I deserve it; I am lowly, meek,
And merciful; no one is like to Me,
Yet I have set my heart and love on thee.
See, See, I that am heir of all things, and
Have Sovereign power, and all things do command:
I who thee can save or destroy with ease,
Can make or break thee, or do what I please;
Who happy am without thee, and no need
Have of thee, or of ought that can proceed
From thee; do suit and court thee, and request
That thou will love me, that thou may be blessed.
It Is not to be by thee advanced, made great,
Or rich, or safe, that I thy love entreat:
But it is because I love thee, and do wish
Thy everlasting happiness and bliss,
It Is not because that thou art fair and fresh,
For thou art all deformed, thou art but flesh;
Defiled with sin as with a Leprosy,
Of which unless I cure thee thou will die.
I can without thee live and happy be,
For I my Fathers joyful face do see;
Where fullness of delights I have, and where
Dwells neither want nor grief, danger nor fear.
But thou poor wretch can not without me live,
It Is I alone that life to thee can give:
Yet I am free to give my self, and all
I am to thee, or that as mine I call.
A Covenant I with thee will gladly make,
An everlasting Covenant thee to take;
And love and live with thee as mine, for ever
To be thy Head and Husband; none shall sever
'Twixt thee and me. I will thy portion be,
And want of good things thou shall never see.
For here and for hereafter, I Will take care
Of thee; and as my life I did not spare,
Thee to redeem from Death and Hell: so now
I will withhold nothing from thee, that thou
May want or need. I Will wash thee from thy dirt,
I Will make thee clean and handsome; I Will thee girt
With robes of glory, and with rich attire
(My righteousness and virtues) thy desire
I Will fill and satisfy. Thou shall be fed
With finest of the wheat, with Angels bread,
With honey from the rock, butter and oil;
The choicest things of Heaven, and thou the spoil
Of all thine enemies shall take, and wear
Them as thy Ornaments; and thou shall bear
My name upon thee, shall my consort be,
Thou shall in Me rejoice, and I in thee.
I will thee jointure in my portion great,
And set thee with me on my Royal seat:
Bring thee unto my God and Father, He
Will entertain, embrace, and welcome thee
In and with me: He Will the same love impart
To thee, wherewith He loves me in his heart.
He and all his is mine, and all shall be
Thine, that is mine if thou wilt accept of me.

Minist. Oh matchless match! Oh peereless Prince of life,
That wilt accept of such a homely Wife.
Come then, dear Soul, since Christ himself will give,
Give him thy self too and for ever live.

Christ. I Will feed thee with my flesh, and blood, my heart
And body too, I will to thee impart:
And no good thing will I withold from thee,
But freely give't, if thou wilt accept of me.
Behold I stand with patience great and wait,
With much long suffering, at the closed up gate
Of thy hard heart, where I behold and see
What is within, and whom thou have with thee.
How with thy mortal foes thou make a rout,
Sporting thy self, while me thou keep out.
While I with patience stand, I call and knock
For entrance in, but thou the door do lock
And bolt against me. Both by works and words,
I call and knock; my very rod affords
Lowed calls unto thee; if thou will me hear,
And open unto me my Sister dear,
I Will come in unto thee: I Will soon drive out
That wicked company, that rebel rout,
Which now oppress thee, and do wound thee sore,
Urging thee, against Me, to shut thy door.
Yea I will soon subdue them unto thee,
And thou from their dominion shall be free,
If thou will hear, and open unto me.
I Will come in to thee, I with thee will sup,
I Will spread thy Table, I will fill thy cup,
I Will put thee to no charge; I Will bring my meat
And freely give to thee, that thou may eat
And drink abundantly of that blessed wine,
Which will thee satisfy with joys divine.
Open therefore to me my Sister dear,
Open thy heart to me, Oh taste my cheer.
Give me thy self, let me thy body have
And heart also, I will them bless and save.
It Is all I ask of thee, I crave no more;
Give me thy self, do but thou me adore.
Give me thy love and thy affections, and
Be thou but subject unto my command.
Cleave to me with thy heart, put all thy trust
In me; believe in me, for I am just,
I will not fail or leave thee. But thou none
Must entertain besides me; I alone
Challenge thy love and service, and it is fit
That none besides me, none from me them get.
I parted for thy sake with all I had,
To ransom thee from thy forlorn and sad
Condition; and I, all that I again
Received have of my Father, not disdain
Upon thee to bestow; my self I gave
To ransom thee; my self I give to save
Thee too; and therefore I alone deserve,
That thou should me alone both love and serve.
The Devil and his works thou must forsake,
Thou may not serve him, his suggestions take
For truth, use divinations, witchcrafts, charms,
Enchantments, times observe for good or harms;
Consult familiar Spirits, believe his lies,
Ask counsel of the dead, Idolatries
Practice, or what ere crafts He does devise.
He in the disobedient bears sway,
Enticing them to sin and go astray
From my right paths. Thou must resist him, and
In nothing yield thy self to his command.
Thou must forsake this wicked World likewise,
Not listening to their counsels, who despise
Me and my doctrine; nor associate
Thy self with them, who my good ways do hate.
It Is pomps and pastimes, shows and braveries,
Vain customs, fashions and formalities,
Thou may not dote on; neither may thou take
My gifts or Ordinances, and them make
Idols, as is the guise of worldly men
Who do despise me, and my laws contemn.
Their Silver, Gold, their Riches, Houses, Lands,
Their Kings and Governors, and their commands
They Idolize; while after them they lust,
And in them secretly do put their trust:
Prefer them before me, and fear them so,
That in my straight ways often they durst not go.
The flesh with it is desires also thou must
Renounce, even every sinful cursed lust.
Thy brutish appetites to satisfy,
In Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Gluttony,
Excess of Riot, Sports or rich Attire,
Or what else thy corruptions do desire.
My words thou must receive, and them hold fast,
No Article of them thou by may cast.
But howsoere thy reason they may pose,
Thou in thy heart must truly with them close,
And firmly them retain: My holy will
Take heed unto, that thou may it fulfill.
No Gods but Me in my sight may thou have,
However secretly; for none can save
Thee, but the holy Trinity, who all
Do meet in me; on none else may thou call,
Or look, or trust to; nor thy Conscience
May yield to them upon any pretense.
No image may thou to thy self invent,
Nor may thy heart or knee thereto be bent.
No false imaginations of me, or
Devised worships, for I them abhor.
But worship God in Me, and as my Word
Does thee direct, for I Am a jealous Lord.
Thou may not take my holy Name in vain,
Nor it with Blasphemies or false Oaths stain:
Or with a vain Profession, without fruits
Produced thereby, such as with it suits;
Or blemish it with any sinful way,
For I Will not such hold guiltless. The seventh day
Thou must observe, in me to take thy rest,
Who am the substance by that day expressed,
That I may sanctify thee, thou be blessed.
To Father and to Mother while they live,
And to all thy superiors thou must give,
Due honor and subjection too in me,
Giving to Caesar what things Caesar's be.
To all men owing nothing, but to love
Chiefly those loving who are from above.
All Murder, with all Malice, Envy, Hate,
See thou avoid, with all Strife and Debate.
Thy body keep in Chastity thou must,
Flee Fornication and unlawful Lust.
Thou must not others Wrong, or from them take,
Ought that is theirs, nor them Calumniate.
But yield thy self to Me, and be content
With Me, and what I give; letting no bent
Of Avarice, possess or stain thy mind,
Thou shall in me all satisfaction find.
All which I certainly will work in thee,
If thou will but yield up thy self to Me.
I put on thee no hard nor grievous task,
What I require, I Will give too, if thou ask
It of me, and for it on me depend;
My Spirit to work it in thee, I will send.
And wherein thou through weakness go astray,
The virtues of my blood shall take it away.
Be thou but upright, and chaste unto me,
I am and evermore will be for thee.
If thou refuse this offer, thou must die,
And perish in thy sins eternally.
None other Lords or lovers can thee save,
What ere they be, or seem they never so brave.
For they be vanities of vanities,
Their strength is weakness, their promises lies:
Their words are wind, and all they meditate,
Is from a feined love, a real hate.
Their smoothest language is false flattery,
Their best embraces are but treachery.
Their kisses of thee are but like to his,
Who sometimes me betrayed by a kiss.
And when he said Hail Master, yet even then
He me delivered up unto those men
That sought my life; to whom he had me sold,
For thirty pieces not of yellow Gold,
But whitely silver: or like his who while
He feined love to Abner did beguile,
And smite him with a Weapon on his side,
Under his fifth rib, that thereof he died.
And on another time, as one well verst
In that accursed craft, Amasa pierced
With warlike Sword to the heart, while friendlike He
Saluted him; and as one with him free,
Did with his right hand take him by his beard
And kissed him, till his blood him all besmeared.
Such are the soft embraces of those foes
To thee and Me, who do my words oppose;
Suggesting to thee that I am austere,
And put upon thee more then thou can bear.
That they are thy best friends and wish thee well,
And many pleasing stories to thee tell.
As that thou art whole, strong, wise, holy, just,
May live without me, may follow thy lust.
That to deny thy self of thy desire,
Is foolishly thine own death to conspire
With me, who love thee not, but wish thy loss,
And take delight to bring thee to the cross.
Where like unto my self thou may be made,
A public scorn amongst those that drive the trade.
Of robbing by the high-way-side, or those
Who unto Kings and Magistrates are foes.
Rebelling against them and their commands,
And seeking in their blood to wash their hands.
Or else amongst such Heretics most vile,
As make it their great business to beguile
Unstable Souls, leaving them in the lurch,
To perish in contempt of God and's Church.
Or those who God blasphem, and thereby draw
Upon themselves the sentence of the law.
To be exposed to ignominious shame,
And unto after ages bear the Name,
Of some seditious Traitor, Heretic,
Blasphemer, Schismatic, or some such like:
And in the mean time, for sometime to lie
In some vile prison, and at length to dye
Upon a rack or gibbet, at a stake,
Or some such vile accursed end to make.
That by such ways conformable to me,
To whom such things befell made thou might be.
They therefore thee advise, my company,
And my instructions totally to fly;
As tending to thy ruin, and to embrace
Their better counsels; utterly deface
The Image of my words out of thy mind,
That so thou pleasure, all thy days may find.
Oh! see, say they, the glory and the wealth,
The sweet delights and pleasures, both by stealth
And openly, which those brave men enjoy,
Who turn their backs of God, naught does annoy
Their calmer life; they quietly do sail,
On fortunes streams; with what a prosperous gale
Of popular applause, and smoothest air
Of most respective language, void of care,
Of melancholy dumps, of faces sour,
Of nipping blasts which make the Soul to lowre,
Of scorns, and scoffs, reproaches, and derisions,
Of persecutions, nicknames (as precisians,
Roundheads, or Puritans, or Sectaries,
Or such like names, as witty men devise
To brand my followers with) as they did use
My well deserving person to abuse;
When I in weakness amongst men did dwell,
Often they me Devil called for doing well.
Or a Samaritane (or misbeliever)
Or glutton, wine-bibber, or a deceiver.
Beware of them, for upon thee they will throng,
Thee to inchant with their bewitching song.

Canto II. Temptation.
Your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring, Lion, etc.

1 Pet. 5.8. See that ye walk circumspectly,

Ephesians. 5.16.
The Soul consid'ring what is said,
Is somewhat cheered, but yet afraid
To entertain the motion made.
And while loath to part with its lusts,
Flesh, World, and Devil, on it thrusts,
To blow 't away with their strong gusts.
Presenting baits of diverse forts,
Whereof each one to sin exhorts;
Christ warns of them, and gives supports.
Himself, and Minister declare,
What falsehoods in their speeches are,
And how they seek the Soul to snare.
God's Being, and his Providence,
And diverse other things from thence,
The Soul against its foes to fence.
They diversely to it do clear,
And that all is judgment is not here,
And so the Canto breaks off there.
Man. Come Soul, what think thou of what thou have heard?

Soul. The tidings I confess my heart have cheered,
For now I see there is hope I may be saved,
Though hitherto I much have misbehaved
My self in diverse ways: though yet I fear
Least all should not be true in what I hear.
Can God so much good mean me? or if so
I know not how my pleasure to forgo,
Which I in other objects often have found;
But hark me thinks I hear another sound,
Flesh, World, and Devil, all rush in,
Strongly enticing still to sin.
Hark hither Soul, do not those pratlers hear,
For they all happiness from thee will tear.
Listen to us, we are thy friends: and tell
To thee the way wherein thou may do well.
See thou not plainly those wise men, who are
The Worlds professed adorers; and take care
Of no Religion, further then may stand,
With the professed Laws of every Land;
And has an humane stamp upon it set,
Whereby it public countenance does get;
And is attended with the friendly love,
Or those in every age which are above:
How they besides the Rocks of Shipwreck ride,
And sail securely both with Wind and Tide.
They know not what the prison bands do mean,
Nor are they in those places often seen.
They weaken not their strength by taking care,
Least they should fall into the Devils snare;
Or sin against the Lord; or else by keeping
God's ways, or by temptations, fasting, weeping:
But their strength does abide, they quietly
Do pass their days in wealth, until they dye.
Such troubles as those godly ones sustain,
They prove not; neither feel they any pain,
But what is to nature common: they will be sure,
For Conscience toward God they will naught endure.
And yet they serve God well enough, for He
Does give them good success, as all may see.
Their eyes with fatness often out do stand:
What their heart wishes for, with bounteous hand
He gives them; for they live and become old,
They get great power; they Silver have and Gold,
Houses and Lands, and plenty of all things,
That either Earth, or Sea, unto men brings.
They children do beget, a prosperous breed
Often they see, that does from them proceed.
Their Houses and their Families are sure,
And free from fear; for why? they dwell secure,
And they be freer from the angry rod
Of God, then they that talk so much of God,
And careful are his favor to obtain;
They have less losses, sickness, grief, or pain:
Their Bull does gender, and he does not miss,
Their Cow does calve, and not abortive is.
Their Corn and Cattle thrive, and they send out
Their little ones, who dance and play about.
They take the Timbrel and melodious Harp,
Joy in the Organs sound; nothing that is sharp
Or bitter them befalls, in mirth they spend
Their days, and when they dye, like Lambs they end.
Thou fool, see thou not plainly with thine eyes,
That these Men are no fools but truly wise!
Will thou be singular, and tread a path,
Which but few walkers in it always has?
That Is full of difficulties, hard to find.
Has many cross turns in it; about does wind:
Is full of Briars and of pricking Thorns,
Beset with Lions, Bears, and Unicorns;
Dogs, Wolves, and Tigers, Serpents, Dragons fell,
Where Poverty, Reproach, Disgrace do dwell?
Who would his safety for such dangers sell?
Is it not better that thou keep the road,
And walk with company in a way broad,
And smooth and pleasant, strewn with flowers sweet,
Where thou shall have innumerable feet,
Of Kings and Counselors, Learned and Wise
Of Politicians, and of such as rise
Unto the top of honor; low and high,
Both rich and poor; the generallity
Of all estates, degrees, and all Languages
Of Nations, Families, both graver Sages,
And younger Sparks; where thou shall never want
Such men, as in thy way will thee warrant?
Oh will thou foolishly such a way balk,
In a wild howling wilderness to walk,
Where few have wandered? in a path untrod,
Under pretense of worshipping their God
After his own mind? where (except a few
Which this Worlds greatness and breeding near knew,
Nor were up in a way of Learning trained,
Nor by fames trumpet ever have obtained,
To be emblazon'd with men of renown,
Or rank't amongst the worthies who the crown.
Have worn upon their Temples, which she uses,
To give her favorites by the nine Muses.)
Scarce any's found, except some two or three,
Who rank't among the greatest Hero's be,
For some strange facts which are of them recorded.
And yet their present ages scarce afforded
Such honor to them; because they did foil
Their actions, by that humor which does spoil
All it possesses, because it declines
The common road where the Worlds glory shines:
Though they the hap had by the after ages,
To be inrol'd among the wiser Sages.
But think thou that the World is now the same,
It was before it had the Christian name?
Nay sure, for then it was not as yet drencht,
In that religious water which has quenched
Its former fiery Meteors, and has taught,
How men may freed be from all that is naught,
Though yet they practice it; for being wet
With that same water, they a new form get.
For that suffices any to make clean,
Especially if they the golden mean;
Of moral virtue joined with policy,
And a prudential conformity
Unto the most and greatest therewith hold,
And to reprove their faults be not too bold.
Now the broad way is best, though heretofore
When men were blinder and did stocks adore,
The narrow way was best. The case is not
The same it was, because we now have got
God and the World in one so reconciled,
That nothing may be counted now defiled,
But what the common road does go beside;
Yea now the World it self is Deifi'd:
Its power, its ways, its pleasures, all are Gods;
What now is joined in one, set not at odds.
Bow down and worship therefore without fear,
The power, the greatness, and the customs here.
Do as the most do, and as those that be
The greatest in esteem, and thou shall see,
Nothing but good betide thee; what dissents
Therefrom avoid. Be sure thou make no rents
In that great body, nor to other spirit
Incline thine heart, then what it does inherit.
Swim down the tide, fear not but it runs even,
And carries thee the direct way to Heaven.
Think of no other Heaven or happiness,
Then what the World does now and shall possess.
Dream of no other power of God, then what
Does in the Worlds great persons terminate.
Nay give thy heart and senses scope, enjoy
What pleases them, avoid what does annoy.
Come do as we do, be not overwise
To think of things unseen, believe thine eyes.
It Is a fanatic fancy to believe
In, and for things that thou can not perceive
By verdict of thy senses and thy Reasen,
Against their Sovereignty commit not Treason.
Still those loud noises then, that thou do hear
So frequently to sound in fancies ear;
Alluring thee to mind strange things unseen,
Which they do promise thee; there never has been,
Nor shall be greater happiness and bless,
Then what thou now in this life may possess.
For sinee the old Fathers have fallen a sleep,
We see all things their wonted courses keep.
And all those glorious things they promised,
Appear but fancies of some doting head.
Let not vain hopes into thine heart intrude,
And of thy present comforts thee delude.
Nor let vain fears prevail upon thee, so
As to cause thee those pleasures to forgo,
Which here thou may enjoy; while thou do gaze
After unseen enjoyments, and amaze
Thy self with dismal fears; while Heaven and Hell
Thou think on, thou thereby away do sell
Those opportunities the World does give,
A merry pleasurable life to live.
Take hold thou fool of the opportunity,
And be not gul'd so as to pass it by.
Go join thy self with yonder gallant boys,
Go hawk and hunt with them, go taste their joys.

Roysters. Come on, young man, with us, cast in thy lot;
Do as we do, come, take a pipe and pot.
Let Us lay in wait for blood, let us take a prey,
Let Us rob some innocent that rides this way.
We'll swallow them alive, whole as the pit;
Rich spoils and booties to our selves we'll get.
We shall all precious substance catch, and find
Such booties as will satisfy our mind.
Cast in thy lot amongst us, lets have all
One purse, in whatsoever shall befall
We'll share alike; come, we shall such fruits reap,
As will rejoice our hearts and make them leap.

Christ. Take heed, dear Soul, avoid them, do not go,
In the same way with them, it leads to woe.
However sweet and profitable, it
May seem to thee, thou there wilt ruin get:
For they do lay in wait for their own blood,
They Will loose their Souls in stead of getting good.

Roysters. Come let us feast and frolic, let us dine
At yonder Tavern, there is a cup of Wine,
Most rarely brisk, it moves it self in the cup;
It Is generous Wine, and says come drink me up.
Let Us have a game at Billiards, or at Cards;
Be merry now, think not of afterward.

Christ. Take heed, dear Soul, mind what will be the end;
Thou may thy self a while in pleasures spend,
But in the end thou will it sadly rue;
Be warned by me, what I say is true.
The Drunkards and the Gluttons poor shall be,
They shall be clothed with rags. Look not to see
The color of the Wine, or whatsocre
To sight or Taste delightful may appear.
It Will sting thee as an Adder at the last;
Bite as a Serpent when the pleasure's past.
Woe, sorrow, and contentions, and babbling;
Wounds without cause, redness of eyes 'twill bring;
Hardness of heart too, so that on thou wilt go,
And nothing fear, till thou art drowned in woe.
They that love pleasures, will be poor at last;
And they not rich, who love good cheer to taste.

F.W.D. While life, and youth, and strength, and wit do last,
Do not thou them in Melancholy waste.
In thinking of a God, and Heaven, and Hell,
And such strange Objects, as on man can tell
What kind of things they be; embrace the breasts
Of this brave World, frequent her costly feasts.
Let not the pleasant flowers of the Spring
Pass by unpluckt, away thy fancies fling.
Possess the joys this present World affords:
Break thou the bands and east away the cords,
Which that religious Spirit does bring, to bind
Thy Soul withal so strait. Set not thy mind
On those conceits it does to thee suggest,
Shake out those blacker motions from thy breast.
See yonder is a brave Damsel, a spruce Lass,
Ready to court thee, can thou let her pass?
See what an amorous look she has, her eyes
Sparkle like Diamonds, beauty in her cheeks lies;
Her lips drop Honey, and her mouth's like oil;
No Wen or blemish, her fair face does soil.
Her very garments sweet perfumes do breath,
Sure she is more delightful underneath.
What do thou think, that witty nature, made
Thy senses and thy members to be laid
Aside as dead, and stupifi'd, while yet
Thou art alive? shall such a fancy get
Possession of thee, as thy self to make
Like to those images thou do forsake?
That thou should eyes have, and naught with them see;
Ears, and not hear the things that spoken be;
Or what may please thee? shall thou have a tongue,
And not say what thou will, or right or wrong?
What Lord should thee control? what have a nose,
And is it not made to smell, the sweetest Rose,
The bravely sented posies, sweet perfumes,
Which may disperse such vapors, as consumes
Thy vital spirits; or that do bind them, so
That they are not at liberty, to go
After those objects which may please the sight,
And ravish all thy senses with delight.
Which nature does present thee with! what have
Thou Nerves and Sinews, Flesh and Blood, to waste
In melancholy dumps, religious frames;
In dwelling upon words, adoring names?
Were they not made to touch, and taste, and feel,
The pleasures of the Flesh? ar't made of Steel
Or Stone, that thou should not affected be,
With what Dame Nature does present to thee?
That patiently thou up thy self should yield,
To bear those burdens, which thou well might wield
Thy self from under? as if thou were made
To be an Ass, or like some Hackney Jade?
Listen to that fine spritely Lass, and hear
Her court-like language boldly, do not fear.

Harlot. Well met, sweet Sir, I Am glad to see your face;
I love you at my heart, come let us embrace:
Let Us join our lips, fear not; I Am all-ore sweet,
Nothing but pleasures dwell from head to feet.
I have peace-off'rings with me, I a feast
Have ready made for thee; where is not the least
Thing wanting, that may give thy heart delight,
Come let me have thy company to night.
I have prepared my bed, with Tapestry
And with fine Linen, there let us softly lie,
And take our fill of Love; perfumed it is
With Myrrh, and Cinnamon, and Aloes.
Come then let us take our fill of Love and Pleasure,
There Is none to interrupt; we may have leisure,
The good man's gone from home, nor will he yet
Return again; we time enough may get
To satisfy our selves, with all delights
Which Love afford us may, these days and nights.

Chr. Take heed, dear Soul, to my good counsels; Let
That Harlots speeches no advantage get
Upon thy heart; give me thine eyes and heart,
Let not my words out of thy mind depart.
For Harlots are deep ditches, narrow pits,
He scarce gets out again, that in them gets.
Her lips drop like the Honeycomb, her mouth
Is smoother then the Oil, but yet in truth
Her latter end more bitter is then gall.
Unhappy Man who into her does fall;
His after-misery no tongue can tell,
For why! Her guests are in the Depths of Hell.
Look off from her to me, far better I
Thy hearts desires and wants can satisfy.
If thou love beauty, beauty dwells in me;
I Am fairer then man's children: Look and see,
I Am white and Ruddy; God and Man in one,
With me to be compared there is none.
If pleasures thee delight, with me is pleasure,
My ways are all delightful above measure.
For I those that embrace me do possess,
With rich assurance of eternal bless.
The pleasures of this World, in endless pain
Do end, my pleasures evermore remain.
They do give Life in Death, and ever dwell
With mine when raised again; when those in Hell,
Shall ever more lie down who me despise,
To everlasting torments they shall rise.
Let neither riches, honors, pleasures, or
What ere this World can give inchant thee; for
With better riches, honors, pleasures, I
Will satifie thee to Eternity.

F.W.D. Poor Man! what can thou hope for after death,
When nature spent with sorrows, shall thy breath
Yield up into the gentle air to vanish,
And thy dead corpse, the living men shall banish
From their society to lie and rot,
Within its grave till it be quite forgot?
Think thou it possible that after it,
Unto the Earth or Sea men shall commit,
And there it is consumed to slime or mold,
Or eat of Worms or Fishes, rise it should?
Or that thy vanished breath and rotted flesh,
Can life resume again, and live a fresh,
Either in joys or pains? Let Reason rule.
Let not fond faith, worse then the Horse or Mule
Thee make, by giving credit to such things,
As from deluded fancy only springs.
For they enjoy those pleasures and contents,
Which bounteous nature unto them presents.
Shall man alone who capable was made,
The World more to enjoy, be so betrayed
Into a fancy, by too light belief,
With his own senses so to play the theif;
As them to rob of all those pleasures rare,
Whereof above all other things they are
Most apprehensive? Oh no! stop thine ear,
Against those sounds, that thou so often do hear
From that same Spirit, which often is Wisdom styled,
Of such as by her sayings are beguiled.
Come, give thy self the reins, and do not fear,
Come, come, we say, and taste the dainty cheer
The World presents thee; Waters stolen are sweet,
Pleasures they have, who Bread in secret eat:
Who satisfy their senses to the full,
And please their appetites, until they lull
Their minds a sleep from those fanatic fears,
Which make men spend in grief their youthful years.
This World's the Paradise, where grow all fruits
Fit for delight, and thy desires best suits.
Come pluck, and take, and eat of them thy fill,
None other after these succeed there will.

Christ. Thus oh my Dear, thy subtle enemies
Suggest unto Thee, setting forth their lies
With fair pretenses both of love and reason:
But trust them not, their words are full of Treason.
These are the same that thee at first de^eved,
Oh let them not be any more deceived.
Unto thy misery they Thee betrayed,
And like to Beasts which perish they thee made;
So that unless I had thee ransomed,
Thou in their snares had wholly perished.

Minist. Their voice and language does of him proceed,
Of whom in the beginning thou do read;
The subtle Serpent who of old allured,
Mankind unto his snares, and so procured
His utter ruin; drew him into sin,
By which a flood of miseries came in.
By him was hatched and begot in man's mind.
A spawn or seed like to himself in kind,
Whose Head's the carnal mind, its Heart is lust,
These with the old Serpent combined do thrust
Men into mischief; and while these to guide
Him do presume, they lead him quite aside.
For they are void of truth, a hellish light
Possesses them; like unto that in the night,
Which William with a wisp some men do call,
An ignis fatu^s, which leads to fall
Into some dangerous downfall, ditch, or pit,
Those who as their sure guide do follow it.
Such error is, or Fleshly Wisdom which
Stepped up in place of truth, both poor and rich
Misleading to their ruin; because blind
It is, and knows naught of Gods holy mind:
And yet conceits it self the only wise,
And that it sees aright with open eyes.
And knows what is good, what is evil, and can tell
A man the way how he may prosper well.
Especially if it improved be,
And somewhat more then ordinarily
Enlarged, with learned Sciences, and Arts,
Which when they added be to natural parts,
Do much adorn a man, and make him shine,
And lift him up, as if he were Divine,
Both in his own esteem, and others eyes,
Who as a Demi-God account him wise;
Though when all this subserves the flesh and evil,
It brings men to be fitter for the Devil.

Chr. This carnal wisdom's that that does mislead
The world; this the false Prophets which are dead,
Misguided, and seduced, while thereon
They leaned, and learned therefrom their vision:
The which while unto others they it told,
They led them into mischiefs manifold.
Yea it is no other then that foolish Woman,
Which Solomon speaks of, which does undo Man.
The worldly spirit that is clamorous,
And loud, and subtle, and industrious,
To call in passengers, who go right on
The path that leads to Salvation,
To her deceits; which though she nothing know
Aright, pretends unto men to show
The better path: Yea the old Serpent, by it
Deludeth those that simply magnify it.
And who with these possessed are, hearten on
Themselves, and others to destruction;
While by their fond inticements, and their rude
Examples, wicked counsels, and most lewd
Temptations, many poor Souls they draw in,
Into the snares and false deceits of sin.
To turn their backs on me, and on my calls,
Despise my counsels, and leap over the walls
And bounds I set, to keep them from the ways
Which lead to utter ruin, all their days.
But oh, dear Soul, beware and take good heed,
Of all the flatt'ries which from them proceed.
They speak of pleasant things, their words are smooth,
They tickle thee, and in thy sins thee sooth,
Their way is easy, broad and wide; but mind
And I will tell thee what an end thou wilt find,
If thou adhere to them they will deceive thee,
And of all happiness they will quite bereave thee;
And to eternal woe they will surely bring thee,
And to provoke me quite away to fling thee,
Into that lake prepared for those that scorn
My Counsels: Better thou had nere been born,

Minist. That thou may this believe, I will thee show
Wherein they do abuse thee, and what is true.
Attend unto me therefore yet again,
And mind how we the matter do explain.
Do thou not hear, how they in their discourse
Do talk of nature, thereby to enforce
Thee to conceit that there is no God: but that
All things that are, do happen by some fate
Or fortune, or some other way, which by
The name of Nature they call wickedly.
Though sometimes too, the word God, they do name,
The better thee to ensnare their talk to frame.
Lift up thine eyes, Behold the Heavens above,
The Sun, the Moon, the glistering Stars, which move
In their due constant motions, and do give
Their light and influence to all that live.
See what great glory is on them. How rare
Their beauty, and their comely order are.
Does not their glory, beauty, order, all
Their motions, and their influences call
Thee to confess a greater power, which gave
Them what Beings, and what virtues they have?
Look down below, behold the Earth which bears
So many various creatures on it, and wears
Such party colored garments, and brings forth,
Upholds, and cherishes of diverse worth,
Innumerable things, inanimate,
Stones, Metals, Minerals, and animate;
Endued with various forms, and different
Degrees of life; (which both the continent
And Isles produce) either Vegetative,
As Plants of diverse kinds, or things alive,
Which Sense and Loco-motion have, as Beasts,
And Birds, and creeping things, things reasonless.
Behold the Seas, their ebbings, flowings, waves,
Where many thousands often have made their graves;
Where fishes of all sorts do swim and play,
Where many gallant Ships do find a way,
Through diverse dangers all-about to coast
From port to port, to seek out where the most
Advantage to their owners they make,
For all the pains and hazards they do take.
Behold thy self, and mankind, who obtain
An higher excellence of life, the main
Endowments of a reasonable Soul,
And understanding whereby to control
The greater creatures, which both Land and Sea
Produce; and into all the things that be
Assay to pierce, and there about discourse
And descant, which is better which is worse.
From whence are all these things! who to them gave
Those various forms and properties they have?
Can be so blind, as not clearly to see
By all these things, that there is a Deity?
An unseen Power and Mind that is most wise,
And is Almighty too? that could devise
So glorious and so great a Fabric, and
Them in that order set wherein they stand?
What! can it be believed to be true,
That by some Atoms which together flew,
By some strange hap, their Beings they received!
Whence came those Atoms! or cannot be believed
That these things could each other make! whereas
We see that Man can nothing bring to pass,
Or make of nothing; though he greater be
Then any other thing that thou can see;
In active power to contrive and do
Such things as the other cannot attain unto?
Nay he can neither life give, nor preserve
Unto himself or others; they much swerve
Who think there is not some thing far above,
Which does him marvailously in his love
Uphold, and save through all the dangers great,
Which death and ruin often to him threat.
Now if thou this believe, which all things Preach,
That there is a glorious God; (which to impeach,
Is the great thing thine enemies endeavor,
That so they might thee wholly from him sever)
Consider well, why should He man endue,
With such like faculties by which, what is true,
What Is false, he may inquire and search into,
And understand, as it is given also?
By which also he is capable of choice
And may obey or disobey the voice
Of such a law, or rule as may impose
Upon him to do these things, forbear those?
At least when, and so far as he is set free,
From such intanglements as on him be.
Is it not, that as he has power to give
Laws to himself and others: He might live
Under the Law of that great power Supreme,
Which over all the rest advanced him?
When he commands his fellows, shall not he
By his Creator too commanded be?
Shall he receive from him such benefits
As to oblige him, and be lawless? Its
But meet he should acknowledge him, from whom
His life, strength, reason, and his knowledge come.
And who all things daily provides and gives,
Of his mere bounty whereupon he lives;
Seeing he is made capable thereof
As no creature besides is. Is It enough
That he live as the Beasts, after his will
And brutish appetite, who has the skill
To act much higher, and has such a spirit
As may be made Religious, may demerit
Gods bounty by ingratitude; or can
So well or ill act toward God or Man,
As to offend his maker, or obtain
Approvement from him? shall it be in vain
That he is capable to understand
And to receive of God divine command?
Why should it not be believed be, that when
God such capacities has given to men,
He should so further gracious to him be,
As to reveal himself to him, that he
Might exercise his heart and mind, to have
The pleasure him to know, who to him gave
Those other excellent endowments, which
Do him above the rest advance, enrich,
And dignifie? that unto him he should
His will and his commandment unfold;
That he might ordered be by him, and give
Obedience to him, so as he might live?
Does it not God become to be so good
To mankind? or shall it be understood
To be an happiness to man, to be
Lawless and from engagement Godward free?
That he like to brute Beasts without control
Be led by Lust, and so debase his Soul,
And rob it of its glory, which consists
In fellowship with God. Oh how great mists
Do overspread their minds, who do account
The way unto the top of bless to mount;
Is to live like the Beasts, to satisfy
Their appetites a while, and then to die;
At most to use their reason like to men,
In things humane and earthy like them, when
They capable are of Divine converse,
And may after a sort their minds immerse
Into the things of Heaven? Oh crooked minds,
And void of judgments, which such pleasures finds
In things that perish, and contemn the prize
Which would immortalize them, were they wise!
But mind again, how they in all they said,
Have the old Serpents head further bewrayed,
Whose grand design it was with man at first,
That he might make him like himself accursed;
Into man's mind to insinuate amiss,
That God who made him did envy his bliss.
As if it had bondage been, to be forbid
To do the thing, which when done, him undid.
What else do they, when they do represent,
As if it were matter of discontent,
Not to have liberty at will to use
Thy parts, and senses so as them to abuse,
By serving lawless brutish lusts, which take
Thy mind and soul from him, who did thee make.
As if they were as dead and useless quite,
Unless they be exorbitant, and might
Have liberty to do, and act those things
Which God offend, and men to ruin brings!
Do they not therein, greatly injury
Gods goodness, and great liberallity;
While wickedly they from thy view withhold
Those many uses more then can be told,
Which God affords to man, in all those things
Which to God glory, and to man good brings;
Both unto other men and to himself,
What! is there noting else besides the pelf,
And garbish of the World, for mind, and senses,
And members to be used in? vain pretenses:
God gives the hearing, taste, smell, touch, and sight,
Both for necessity, and for delight;
Though not to satisfy that brutish lust,
Which dwells within man and makes him unjust.
May thou not see the wondrous works of God,
And use thine eyes to look out all abroad
Upon them? may thou not with them his words
Peruse, which lively instances affords,
Both of the ways and ends of good and bad,
How well good men have fared, and how sad
The end of evil men? may not thine eyes
Behold thy way and work, and see what lies
Before thee, or discover foes or friends!
What to thy welfare, or thy ill-fare tends?
May thou not with them too, bewail with tears
Thy many sins, and misspent days or years?
May thou not use thine ears, God's words to hear,
And such instructions, as unto his fear
May thee provoke; and his commandments too,
Which show thee what thou should, or should not do;
That from destruction they might keep thee, yea
Both what divine are, and what moral be?
Are not thy other senses too allowed
Of God, for to distinguish in that crow'd
Of objects, which present themselves unto thee,
What is good for thee, or what may undo thee?
What thou may choose as things that wholesome are,
And what refuse as things that may impair
Thy health or safety? so thy palate meats
Distinguishes; thy feeling, colds, or heats,
Soft, hard, rough, smooth, and other properties
Which diversely in diverse bodies lies,
And render them as good and grateful, or
As things may hurt thee, and thou them abhor.
Thy nose and smell is given thee, that thereby
Thou may distinguish things which differently
Do smell, that thou may this choose, that refuse.
How many ways may thou thy senses use,
With God's allowance to thy benefit,
And give him thanks and praises too for it!
Great use them to every thing he gives,
Which in the World, endued with them lives.
But unto mankind for more noble ends,
Then other creatures can have, to what tends
Unto God's praises and man's happiness,
To seek and walk in the way unto bless.
Yea man perceive may from the use of his sense,
That there is a good God, and wise providence.
As also man his mind, his heart, his brains,
May exercise in what to bless pertains.

Christ. Yea God who all things made for man at first,
And blessed them to him, till the cords he burst
Of such engagements as between them were,
By casting from him God's most holy fear,
Has by my Death and Blood again restored,
That use of all things to him, may afford
Much benefit unto him many ways,
And give him cause with joy his Name to praise.
All things are cleansed now by my dear Blood,
And lawful made for man to do him good,
God him allows a sober use to have,
Of all things which at first he to him gave,
According to the uses he ordained
Them to at first. He only has restrained
The lawless use, which goes beyond the bounds
Which he has wisely set, and so confounds
Men's properties and rights, to what he gives,
And so each other of their right deprives;
Or what does cherish his concupiscence
And hellish lust, which (as experience
Does often show) both leads into excess,
Robbing God of that part he should possess;
And dangerous diseases breeds, whereby
Man's days are shortened, and he worse does dye.
How many men through a voluptuous life,
Giving themselves to pleasures; or through strife,
Which love of riches or ambition breeds,
And such pursuit of them as right exceeds,
And bounds of due sobriety, have brought
Innumerable troubles on them often?
And have by diverse Deaths with greater pain
Been snatched away, then many do sustain,
Who suffer for the truth of God, because
They dare not violate his sacred laws.
Is it not now become an usual word,
More perish by the Throat, than by the Sword.
And yet of those who by the Sword do dye,
Most perish by some lust most usually,
By which they pull it on them, with more shame
Oftimes too, then the men who for my Name
False judgment undergo; and what more just,
Then that they who through voluntary lust,
Have hated all my counsels and commands,
Should meet with such like measures at my hands?
Which yet is but a very small pittance,
Of that sad doom and most direful vengeance,
Which hangs over the scorners; as I may
Further declare, in what I have to say.

Canto III. Providence and Judgment.
The Lord is known by the judgments that he executes,

Psalm. 9.16.
Of Providence and Judgment too,
This Canto fullyer does show,
That men must reap as they do sow.
Which by examples manifold,
Both in the bad and good is told,
Where all God's justice may behold.
Yet that nor good nor bad have here,
Their full rewards, is here made clear,
Till Jesus Christ to judge appear.
Which that he shall is here expressed,
The Resurrection, and the Rest
Of the just too made manifest.
IT being reasonable, that the Lord
Who does such eminent favors afford
To man, should give to him a holy law,
Requiring that of him he stand in awe;
Him worship and obey with thankfulness,
For all the love he does to him express:
He will too (as with men its usual)
Him in due time forth unto judgment call,
And render to him as his works shall be
Rewards and punishments; as ye may see
All Laws and Governmens are guarded so,
By promising rewards, and threatening woe;
To those that under them do live, as they
Those laws do either keep or disobey.
To what good purpose should laws ordered be,
If they who break them may yet escape free;
And not for any thing they do, sustain
Due punishment by either loss or pain;
And if the observers thereof be neglected,
And nothing better be therefore respected?
Even so God who his laws unto man gave,
Observes too how men do themselves behave:
Whether they do submit their necks unto them,
Believe his sayings readily to do them;
Or whether they the reins to lust do give,
And to themselves and their corruptions live.
And them accordingly he will reward,
As they regard him, or him disregard.
See thou not this discovered oftentimes,
While evil men who do commit great crimes,
Though they do think themselves to be secure
Are brought most heavy judgments to endure?
Is not God by his righteous judgments known,
While wicked men are thereby overthrown
In their devises? witness that great flood,
Which overflowed the old World, and which stood
Above the highest mountains, when the World
Which wicked was, was into ruin hurled;
For those abominations which they
Committed stubbornly from day to day;
Refusing by good Noah to be warned,
Yea me in him they set at naught; and scorned.
For it is I the Wisdom and the Word,
Of the Almighty and eternal Lord,
Who by my Spirit do dwell in holy men,
And lead them forth with boldness to condemn,
And fault the Worlds great wickedness, because
They take no heed unto my righteous laws.
It was my judgment executed in
Those five great Cities famous for their sin,
Sodom and her near neighbors overthrown,
By Fire and Brimstone, so as never was known
Before or since; because they cast away
My counsels from them, would not me obey,
The Word and Wisdom of my Father high.
Who to the sons of men do use to cry.
To show them what is right and what is wrong,
What does to them, and what does not belong.
My words those sinful Cities thrust away,
And after strange flesh vilely went astray:
Pride, idleness, and riotous excess
Was in them, and the poor they did oppress;
And lewdness they committed, therefore I
In flames of Fire from Heaven did make them fry.
What should I mention Egypts haughty King,
Who proudly my commands away did fling;
And with his people, badly did entreat
My people, and did them abuse and beat?
How did I judge them and with plagues them break,
Because their bad ways they would not forsake,
Making them warnings to all Tyrants, that
In after ages me and mine should hate?
I Plunged them strangely into that great flood
Or Sea, whose waves mean while on both sides stood
Of my Elect, whom I had chose to be,
A special lot or people unto me?
What should I speak of Saul, and Haman, and
The Jewish Nation? for in every Land
Such monuments of judgment often have been,
In whom and what befell them, 't may be seen
That there is a God above, whose eyes behold
The proud who him contemn, and are so bold
To break his laws, and walk in their own pride.
Naught can them from his powerful vengeance hide.
Whereas on the other side He does protect,
And show his favor unto his Elect,
His worshippers, all such as do him fear,
And to my wholesome counsels do adhere.
Though He be pleased their faith sometimes to try,
Them from the dross of sin to purify.
And diverse ways to exercise them, till
His gracious purpose He on them fulfill;
That so their virtues might more brightly shine,
And God more fully show his power divine,
In their support, and in that inward might,
Wherewith He them indues in the Worlds fight.
When all the old World, who from me had swerved
Was drowned, how was righteous Noe preserved,
And in an Ark was with his household kept,
From that great deluge, which the wicked swept
Away without escape? so Righteous Lot,
When Sodom was consumed was not forgot;
But by an Angel was delivered out,
From that strange shower of fire, which round about
All things burnt up, so soon as he from thence
Was carried out. And what a sure defense
To Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob too,
Was the Almighty Lord when they did go
Into strange Countries, few, and strangers? how
Did he defend them, because they did ^ow
To him, and his words keep? yea how did God
Rebuke Kings for their sakes, and with his rod
So frighted them, that they durst nothing do
Against them, which their harm might tend unto?
How did he help chaste Joseph, and him keep
In those great sufferings, and those dangers deep,
To which his envious brethren did him sell,
And by his wanton Mistress him befell,
Who falsely him accused, because he did
Refuse her unclean lust, of God forbid
To satisfy, at her unchaste request,
Preferring a clean conscience in his breast,
Before the amorous kisses of a whore,
Which would have ruined him for evermore?
How did the Lord in him his power display,
And goodness too, both in the time he lay
In prisonhouse, where irons pierced his Soul?
(God gave him patience in that sad, and foul,
And painful trial, and was with him so
As that he favor found, the Jaylour fro)
And when God from the prison him released,
Having him thereby tried as he pleased?
For unto such great honor he him brought,
As never by him could have been forethought.
To make him Ruler over all the Land
Of Egypt, that all men might understand,
That though God try his friends, and them prepares
Thereby for mercies, yet he for them cares.
And when they fitted are, he them advances
Above their foes designs, and all bad chances.
Did he not Israel in Egypt too,
And in the Wilderness cause him to know,
To be their mighty helper, and their aid,
Their strong Redeemer from those griefs, that made
Them sigh and groan; and from those dismal fears,
Which them encompassed for may years?
How did he bring them out, from that hard Land
Of bondage, by his great and mighty hand?
What wonders wrought he for them at the Sea
And in the Wilderness? what things did he
In leading them there-through, by day and night,
Both by a shady cloud and fiery light?
In giving them from Heaven Angels bread,
Wherewith for forty years they were all fed?
In causing flinty Rocks to give them drink,
When they through thirst seemed to be at pits brink?
How did he by a Serpent made of brass
Erected, heal their wounds? and made them pass
Safely through midst of swelling Seas and floods,
Drove out seven Nations, and their lands and goods
Divided to his people to possess,
That they his Name for evermore might bless:
And all might see, That they who serve God, have
A great preserver, who them all will save,
And recompense with good? and that To Bliss
The only certain way to serve God is.
How did he ruddy David while a youth,
Because he served him in upright truth,
Take from the sheep-folds, and with oil anoint him,
And to rule over Israel appoint him?
And though he from Readiness envy suffered much,
While he Gods favor did unto him grutch,
And many dangers too of death sustained,
Before the Crown and Kingdom he obtained;
Yet how did God him keep, uphold, and save,
In many a desert, mountain, hill, and cave;
Till having humbled him, he his promise
Remembered, and cut off his enemies;
Gave him the Sovereign power and government,
So that he ruled long with great content;
Enlarged his Territories, and increast
His power among the great ones of the East?
Till in his great prosperity, he fell
Into the sins whereof the Scriptures tell.
When that it might appear, that God regards
Men's actions, and unto them gives rewards
And punishments, according thereunto
He met with sad corrections, and much woe;
Though mixed with mercies manifold, because
He did through grace repent, and to my laws
Return. How strangely did he Mordecay
And the Jews help, whom Haman sought to slay,
Turning upon his Head, those evils which
He for them had devised? into the ditch
He for them dig'd; he himself was cast down,
That thereby both Gods favor and his frown
He might at once declare. How helped he
Those worthies which are called the children three?
They walked in midst of fiercest flames, no smell
Of fire their garments had, when they down fell
Dead at the furnace mouth, who east them in.
Such difference is 'twixt righteousness and sin.
How helped he Daniel in the Lions den,
And him delivered, when those very men
Destroyed were, who devised his ruin? How
Did he often help his servants when brought low,
In times of Macchabees, and all along
When they dispersed were, and suff'red wrong?
How helped he the holy men that died
In faith of me, whom the World crucified,
Through many Storms and Tempests, by the rage
Of persecutors raised in every age?
For love of me, they willingly did yield
To Death, so as by Death they won the field.
Triumphing over every worst torment,
That was devised by the cursed Serpent,
And his enraged instruments; until
By their deaths and their doctrine, they did fill
The World with fruits, and made proud error fall,
Before the truth confessed by them all.
For those same ignominious Deaths and crosses,
Those heavy sufferings, and most grievous losses,
Whereat the World does stumble, and whereby
They with the Devil in confederacy,
Endeavor to affright thee from my Word,
More comfort and more glory far afford,
Then all those pleasures, and those braveries,
By which they do bewitch the mind unwise.
Yea many have more peace and joy expressed
In cruel Deaths through me, then they who rest
And quiet in the World enjoy, as far
As a glow-worm's exceeded by a Star
Of greatest magnitude; or by the Sun
Which with great glory does its courses run.
Which moved Moses, though both Learned and Wise,
The riches of all Egypt to despise,
And all its pleasures, to take part with those
Who suff'red great oppressions from their foes
For sake of me; because he well perceived
That greater glory then can be believed
Is thence received; yea more then can be found,
Form all the best enjoyments of this Round.
Who are more honored in this World's esteem,
Then they who do their life and blood out teem;
And many watchings, fastings, combats great,
And hardships suffer, which each hour them threat,
To do their Country service, or maintain
Its liberties, or greater rule to gain
Unto it? and shall those, who for the sake
Of their most high creator, undertake
His truth and Kingdom to assert, be thought
The only persons to be set at naught?
Or be the worse accounted, because they
Do many cruel things sustain all day?
Are they not therefore far more worthy praise,
For suffering so great things so diverse ways;
The worst of Deaths and Torments, that the wit
And malice both of Men and Devils, knit
Together could devise; and bear the shame
Of vilest imputations for my Name?
Shows it not forth their greater love to me?
And is it not meet I should so loved be,
Who for their sakes my state of glory left,
And suffered my self to be bereft
Of all things, even of life; and to sustain
The greatest agonies in Soul, and pain
In body, even the dreadful curse to bear,
Of God's most righteous Law, because they were
Thereof the breakers, and thereby concluded
To be from Gods most joyful sight extruded?
Is it not too, a commendation to
My person and my kingdom, that they so
Dare suffer for them? for therein they show,
That they such excellencies in them know,
That for the sake thereof they do contemn,
The greatest mischeifs can be done to them,
Rather then be thereof deprived? yea sure
The patience too wherewith they do endure;
Their gloryings also and great joys therein,
Which often in that case expressed has been;
Unlike to those who suffer otherwise,
Some excellency clearly testifies
In what they suff'red for; and that they found
Some such strong satisfactions to abound,
As nothing in this World can them afford,
But only the Divine power of the Lord.
And sure if they who for their Country dye,
With Monuments and Trophies gloriously
Are honored; and the more by how much they
More willingly, and greater sufferings may
Have undergone: those ignominious things
Which the confession of my doctrine brings,
Through Sathan's and the World's malice upon
My followers (as often times it has done)
Their glory, and their praise esteemed should be.
And so they are esteemed too of me
And of my Father, who will recompense
Such glory to them, as such patience
And love to him and me may challenge; yea
According as of us they taken be,
Of our great grace and favor, who account
Them worthy of such glories, as surmount
All humane merit, and (though they do owe
Such service to us, yet) great things bestow
By way of recompense; such as surpass
All humane understanding, as far as
The Heavens exceed the Earth, or the Ocean large
Exceeds the compass of some Boat or Barge.
For it is the glory of the Majesty
Of God to give rewards exceeding high.
As Kings give gifts like Kings, and not like those
Whose greatest riches is a suite of clothes.
Min. For though the righteous God his judgments now
Both on the good, and on the bad does show;
Yet they are but a small part of that Doom,
Which shall at length to either of them come.
A little demonstration of a Judge,
And of a judgment, which shall them that grudge
Against Gods Being and his Providence,
(Which both of good and bad has perfect sense)
Wholly confute and strike into silence.
A Judge who judgment too does execute,
According to men's doings and their fruit.
But yet that all the Judgments does not here,
Pass upon Good or Bad may hence appear.
Firstly, for that all those who wicked be,
And whose great wickedness all men may see,
Receive not here condign punishment
For their offenses; but often having spent
Their times in vanity, the poor oppressing,
And widows of their rights too dispossessing;
Contemning God, yea who blasphemed his Name,
Women and Maids defiled, and in the same
Have gloryed, and many other crimes
Have perpetrated, yet such oftentimes
Are taken hence with no such stroke as may
It evidence that God on them does lay,
The punishment of their offenses great;
But they dye quietly in their own seat:
Even as that gluttonous rich man, who fared
Deliciously each day, and never spared
To satisfy his lusts, but yet the poor
Suff'red to lie neglected at his door;
Even he his days in pleasures spent, and when
His time was come to dye, like other men,
He died, and was buried in great state,
So as men could not therein see Gods hate.
Can it be thought the righteous Judge of all,
Will suffer those whom he does wicked call,
And against whom his wrath's upon record,
To escape unpunished and break his word?
Will he be partial? punish but a few,
The greatest part dispense with of that crew?
No verily; There is a time to come,
When every wicked man shall have his doom.
Again, when every wilful breach of law,
Does dreadful punishments upon men draw;
Who so offend and are impenitent,
Can it be judged to be sufficient
For millions of such sins, that one such stroke
Should take away the sinners, who provoke
God every day to strike? shall such an end
As something of just vengeance does portend.
Not very much beyond the common fate
Which all mankind abides, be for the hate
Of God and goodness, which they always bear
From day to day; yea oftimes many a year,
Full recompense? for how much greater pain
Did Pharaoh, when drowned in the Sea sustain,
Or Haman when he was hanged up on high,
Then is the common pain of all that dye?
There was some public shame and sodainness,
And some such violence as might express,
A righteous hand of God; but yet the same
Occurrences of violence and shame,
Are but what men by their laws oftentimes
Do judge men to, for some such heinous crimes
As treason and rebellion against them:
And shall such persons as do God contemn,
Sustain no greater punishment then they
Deserve, who mortal men but disobey?
Nay verily, but as God greater is
Then greatest men, so they who do amiss
Against his law and government, shall such
Great punishments sustain, as do as much
Exceed the punishments from men, as he
Exceeds them in his power and high degree.
And what befalls them now, is far from all
The punishment that shall upon them fall.
Besides, though they who serve God, find supports
In their afflictions, and have great comforts
From him, when they are persecuted for
His name and truth confessed by them: or
For trial of their faith, or for increase
Of virtue, or to cause that they may cease
From what offends him, though they do sustain
Much trouble and affliction, grief and pain:
And though ofttimes he signally them save
From greatest dangers; yet they sure shall have
Far greater things then those, a recompense
Beyond what here they have; for they go hence
Ofttimes with great reproaches, crosses, shame,
And dye reputed worthy of great blame:
Yea are cut off by cruel Death, because
They durst not violate Gods holy laws.
Can it be thought that that great God, whom they
So constantly through so great griefs obey,
Will not their service and their love regard,
So as the same openly to reward;
With such rewards as with his greatness suite,
And may to all eternity confute
His enemies, that do blaspheme his Name,
And put his service to rebuke and shame?
Yes verily, as his with patience
Bear greatest troubles, with great confidence
Of an after reward sufficient,
To recompense the blood which they have spent,
And all that they have parted with and born
For his Names sake, a Crown that shall be worn
By them to all eternity, a Crown
Of heavenly glory, eternal renown;
A recompense beyond the thoughts of man,
Yea such as no Angel express it can,
They shall receive from him; who notice takes
Of all their sufferings, and inquiry makes
After their blood. He Will not their hope deceive,
But give them even beyond what they believe.

Christ. Know then dear Soul, that there is another day,
A time when Heaven and Earth shall flee away,
When God shall judge the World in righteousness,
And give to them who here his truth confess
Unspeakable rewards; and the unjust,
Into eternal fire and torments thrust.
Unto which purpose I who was abas't,
And suffered so great things for to lay waste,
The power and kingdom of the enemy,
And for the sakes of sinful men did dye,
And being raised up, went up on high,
And am set down in royal Majesty
On Gods right hand, shall in great glory come,
To execute the judgment and the doom,
Of my eternal Father, and to give
Rewards to men according as they live.
Those who with hate repay me, I Will destroy
And fill my lovers with eternal joy.
And who so fit as I man's Judge to be,
Who am both God and Man, and all things see
In God and Man? Being Gods glorious Word
Made of man Flesh, and am made sovereign Lord
Of Men and Angels, and do fully know
What God has done for man, what man does owe
To God again? Man may be sure I will
Not undeservedly him destroy or kill,
Seeing I his most loving Savior am,
Who him to save down from my Father came:
Yea into Death and Hell went down, that I
Might thence redeem man, and l^ft him on high.
Nor can I be unrighteous, both for that
I Am one with God, and all unright things hate:
And 'twas unrighteousness for to destroy
That I appeared; in righteousness I joy.
Yea it is a just reward, that I who were
Unjustly judged and condemned here,
Should be exalted to that glorious height,
To sit as Judge of what is wrong, what right,
And judge my Judges; yea since I thereby
The power have to forgive sins; who as I
So fit to judge? To which in Gods season,
I shall appear in glory on the Throne,
With honor and with Majesty bedeckt,
When all before me without all respect
Of persons, I shall call both quick and dead,
And give to them as here they have lived.

Minist. For whereas thy malicious foes suggest,
Among the other things they have expressed,
That it is a fancy to conceit, that they
Who in their graves are quite consumed away,
Should ever possibly be raised again,
To live in glory or to suffer pain;
It Is like the rest of what blind error says,
Leaning to its own thoughts, devoy'd of faith,
By which the reason should be rectified,
And which in all things it should make its guide.
For as man's things, only man's spirit can know,
So none but God's spirit can his matters show.
But when the fallen fool says in his heart
There is no God, how can he but depart
From that divine light of his holy Word,
Which right direction only does afford?
But seeing there is a God, a power divine,
As all things both in Heaven and Earth combine,
To manifest a glorious power, that made
The Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, and them has stayed,
And held up to this moment; can it be
Unreasonable thought by men, that he
Should act like to himself, and such things do
As may his power and greatness clearly show?
And is it a greater or unlikelier thing,
The dead and rotten back to life to bring;
The 'twas at first all things to make of naught?
Can any thing for God too hard be thought?
For him that is Almighty? is it not right,
To think that Greatest things become his might?
Yes verily; It Is like himself to do
Such mighty things, as far surpass and go
Beyond the shallow model of man's wit
To comprehend; and what can be more sit,
For his Almighty power to bring about,
Then from their graves to make the dead come out
To judgment? and such recompense bestow,
As may his height and greatness greatly show?
And seeing it may well supposed be
That unto man (as was foreshewed) he
Would give his precepts, and his mind declare,
With motives to obey him, such as are
Great, and his Greatness do become, why should
It once be doubted of what he has told,
But that it is true and right? what is it because
They are so great things that he says? why, pause
A little on it again, and see if that
Can any just ground be to stumble at:
Such declarations, promises, and threats,
Because they may be rank't among the Greats.
As if with Greatness, great things did not suit,
Or such a Tree could not bring forth such fruit.
Nay verily those things God best become,
That are so great as wholly to strike dumb
The mouth of Reason, and to pass the mind
Of men and Angels their method to find.

Chr. Believe it then dear Soul, that there shall be
A Resurrection of the Dead, by me
Who am the Son of God, and do possess
The fullness of his power and happiness.
I by my Death have so the law fulfilled,
Which bound men over to Death, that I have killed
Its power to hold men under; yea I have
Not only my self risen from the grave,
But have a passage also from it made
For all mankind; because the sin that laid
Mankind so low, I have destroyed so,
That it shall not them hinder thence to go.
Yea being raised and gone up on high,
I have received highest dignity
Over all things, in Heaven, in Earth, in Hell;
The fullness of the Godhead does all dwell
In me. I have the keys of Hell and Death,
All things above, and all that is beneath,
Are subject to my power, and as I have
Destroyed by my Death both Death and Grave,
So I can them command, and in due time
Will do it also: Neither Grace nor Crime
Shall thereby be from their reward back kept:
But at my voice who ever there have slept,
Or yet shall sleep, shall from their graves come forth,
Even from the East, and West, and South, and North.
They shall not keep my worshippers, and them
Who for my sake their own lives do contemn,
That they should not receive those great things which
I promised, wherewith them to enrich,
And gloriously to honor and advance,
Even an everlasting inheritance,
Where they in glory great shall ever shine,
And shall possess the Kingdom that is mine.
Shall me behold, and with me joy for ever;
Where mixture of adversity shall never
Impair their happiness, or it abate.
Where they shall be void of all strife and hate,
Of enmity, and envy, death or pain,
And without all disturbance ever Reign;
Fullness of joy and glory in the sight
Of God they shall enjoy, with full delight.
Rivers of pleasures shall them satisfy,
Of which they all shall drink eternally.
No tongue can utter, no heart can conceive,
The joy and glory which they shall receive,
And have for ever who on me believe.
When I that joyful sentence utter shall
Come oh ye blessed of my Father all,
Inherit ye the Heavenly Kingdom, now
Before the World's foundations for you
Prepared: for when I hungered ye me fed,
When sick and imprisoned ye me visited;
Ye gave me drink when thirsty, intertain'd me
When I a stranger was, and men disdained me.
When in my members thus it was with me,
Even with my meanest Brethren here that be,
Ye showed me favor. Come therefore possess
My Kingdom now in everlasting Bless.
The World despised you, and thrust you away,
Accounted you accursed; often ye lay
In Streets, and Prisons, poor and thinly clad.
But now the time is come, wherein I glad
Will you for ever make; ye shall be now
Exalted high, when they shall all lie low.
I Will feed you with my fat things not disdain you,
But in joys and glories entertain you.
My glory shall you cloth, and ye in white
Shall with me walk, because ye did the right.
Now you shall no more thirst, for I Will you make
Of the fountains of living water take
And drink your fills; nor shall you hunger more,
I Will feed you at my Table; nor be poor
For I Will enrich you. And ye who were strangers
Wandering about, exposed to many dangers,
I Will take you now to me, and sit ye shall
Upon my throne of glory eternal.
Oh come ye Blessed of my Father, now
Possess the Kingdom sore-prepar'd for you.

Canto IV. The Dreadful Canto.
The last judgment and Doom of the Wicked.
Our God will come and will not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him,
and it shall be very tempestuous round about him,

Psalm. 50.3.
This Dreadful Canto does relate
The doleful Doom and sad estate,
Of such as God and goodness hate.
How Christ and his shall laugh at them,
As they with scorn did them contemn,
When he to woe does them condemn.
What horror at the glorious sight
Of Christ, and his shall on them light,
And how it shall them all affright.
What doleful wailings they shall make,
When they go down into the Lake
Of vengeance, which none ere shall slake.
NOR on the other side shall Death, or Grave,
Or Hell, be able those my foes to save
From my just judgments, who my counsels slight,
Hate my reproofs, and my good Spirit despite.
Who do the World and their own Iusts prefer,
Before me and my grace, loving to err
From my good ways, refusing to return:
They shall be raised again, and judged to burn
In that eternal Lake of wrath and woe,
Which was prepared for the Infernal foe;
The Devil and his Angels who seduced
Them to rebel, and not to be reduced.
Before my dreadful judgment seat, they shall
Stand trembling then, yea then both great and small
Shall judged be; and when my Saints rejoice
Then they shall weep and wail, hearing that voice
Depart ye cursed; ye who have refused,
My profer'd grace, and all my love abused:
Who would not come to me when I did call you,
Though I did tell you then what would befall you.
Ye who then put Me from you, and to me
Did say Depart, for we desire not thee
Us to instruct or teach, or to reprove us,
We care not whether thou do hate or love us.
We value not thy love, nor fear thy wrath;
We will not know thy ways, nor tread thy path.
Thy words do cross our wills, we'll break thy cords;
Thou shall not reign over us, for we are Lords;
We Are owners of our selves, and all we have:
We need not thee, nor like that thou us save
From our corruptions; for we like them so,
We take thee that reprov'st for our foe.
Thy company we like not, nor that sort
Of frantic fools, who do with thee comport,
Pressing thy laws; we hate them in our heart,
And put them from us, let them too depart.
They are a burden and a trouble to us,
And we'll destroy them, least they should undo us.
This then your manner was to me and mine,
Ye were contented we should starve or pine.
When we were hungry, ye would not us feed;
Nor would ye give us drink, when we did need;
Nor when we wand'red, would ye take us in;
Nor cloth us, when we naked were and thin;
When we were sick or cast in prison, ye
Neglected us to visit or to see.
Nay ye did thrust us from you, ye did beat us,
And by your cruelties did slay and eat us.
Ye mocked our counsels, because being poor,
We trusted in the Lord, did him adore:
Depart from me therefore ye cursed crew,
And from my lovers. Take ye now your due,
With your cursed Counselors, the Devil and
His wicked Angels, whose will and command
Above mine ye preferred. For ever be
A separated company from me,
And from all mine, in that great dreadful lake
Of Fire and Brimstone; where I Will vengeance take
For all your wickedness, and great despite
Ye showed against me, and those who did right.
Ye trod me under foot, my blood ye slighted
As common, and my spirit of grace despited.
Now I will tread you in my wrath (for I
The wine press of the wrath of God mighty
Do tread) I Will in my fury trample you,
And all to pieces crush and squeaze you now.
What! think you now a share with us to have,
Whom ye thrust from you, when we counsel gave
To leave your evils, and with us take part?
Ye judged our counsels over sharp and tart,
To your pride and corruptions; when ye were
Ashamed of me, and my reproach to bear;
Ashamed of my followers, because they
Reproached were, poor and despised lay,
Would ye now fain your selves insinuate
With us, when we are glorious? It Is too late:
We will not own you now, but are ashamed
Of such accursed caytiffs, who are named
Ungodly, wicked, unclean, hypocrites,
Ambitious, worldlings, proud men, Sodomites,
With many another such like wretched name,
As into my Book of life never came.
Away ye Caytiffs, as ye sowed, now reap;
As ye have brewed, now drink. Go howl, and weep,
Lament your folly, cry now Fools we are,
Who counted us the fools, and did not spare
To make us cry and weep, and sigh and groan,
And unto God make our complaint and moan;
When ye us slighted and abused so,
As made us with sad grieved hearts to go.
Solace your selves together in those flames
Of dreadful fire, which all proud rebels tames.
Ye laughed at us, and in our griefs took pleasure;
Now we will mete out to you the same measure.
When we were from our houses haled and outed,
Of Synagogues for righteousness, ye shouted;
When we were mocked and scorned by men, ye houted,
And when we answered for our selves, ye flouted.
When we condemned were, and cast in bands,
Then ye rejoiced much and clapped your hands.
When we were hanged, and burned, and crucified,
Then ye did triumph over us, us deride.
These trusted in the Lord, ye used to say,
These were the persons used much to pray.
In houses to that purpose they would meet,
And often of God be talking in the Street;
Let Us see now where their God is, and what he
Can and will do for them to set them free.
Let Us see if he them from our hands can save,
Let him deliver them, it them he will have.
Now we again do over you rejoice,
At your distress we now lift up our voice.
We triumph over you, and do deride
Your folly, madness, stubbornness, and pride.
Now we your confidences boldly flout,
And over your destruction we do shout;
To see our mortal foes who were so stout,
From God and all his holy ones thrust out
Into eternal torments; we'll now taunt
Your Idols, and those places ye did haunt,
To work your wickedness; where be your Gods
Whom ye did use to worship, and with odds
Prefer before your Savior? what is become
Of all your stocks and stones, and Idols dumb?
Where are those mighty men, under whose wing
Ye put your trust? of whom ye used to sing?
Whose power and greatness ye did magnify,
Trust in and fear, and lift up to the sky;
Whose Laws, and whose commands, ye did prefer
Far before me and mine! ye did deter
My people from their service to me, setting
Their greatness and their threats before them, getting
Commissions from them us to persecute:
Why do ye not to them now make your suite,
And pray them to befriend you in your needs,
And bear you out in all your wretched deeds;
Ye acted against God, and against us,
For which ye stand by me condemned thus?
Where are your potent Kings and Emperors?
Your Popes, your Cardinals, your great Doctors?
Your gallant Lords and Ladies, Learned men
Of whom, and whose authority ye then
Did make your boasts, and with their names us frighted?
And in whose countenance ye much delighted?
Where are their Crowns? their Scepters? and their Miters?
Their crosier Staves? their Councils? and their Writers?
Their dreadful weapons which they often abused
Against us, from those ends they should have used
Them to (as against theives and highway robbers,
Seditious persons, felons, and disturbers
Of public peace by wicked acts, abusers
Of Gods good creatures, and of men mis-users.)
What is become of all that greatness now,
Before the which ye used your selves to bow,
And flusht with which, and leaning whereunto
Ye did your pleasures, sought us to undo?
Let them arise and help and save you now,
But ah alas! themselves too are brought low.
They Are turned off from the stage, and their high looks
Are humbled, all their weapons, and their books
Of Learning, Wit, of Merriment, of Laws
(In which they being searched, many flaws
Were found) are all consumed and quite burned,
And they themselves too, many of them turned
Into destruction with you, and their pride,
Their pomp, and their high looks we now deride.
Their gallant garbs, their feathered caps, their train
And pompous equipage are now all vain.
All naught avails them, but they must abide
The due deserts of all their lordly pride,
Their riots and oppressions, wantonnesses,
Their beastly lusts, and all their great excesses,
With whatsoever they have done amiss.
Now they may see their folly, now we hiss
At all their madness, whereby they abused
Those many mercies they enjoyed, refused.
The bless they might have had, and walked in
Their brutish lusts, and wallowed in their sin;
Rejecting and conteming me and mine,
And would not to my words their ears incline.
Where now are all those treasured heaps of store,
Your Lands and Lordships upon which ye bore
Your selves in your abuses? where now are
Your silver and your gold, and jewels rare?
Your stately palaces, or seiled houses?
Your down beds, gay attire, and your fair Spouses?
Your pomps and pageants? yea your punks and whores,
With whom you lost your souls, and often with sores
Did mar your bodies? where is your hawks and hounds?
Your monstrons oaths, your Damm'es, blood, and wounds?
Where are your great attendants? where those laws
By which ye us condemned and killed, because
We cleaved to our God, and would not start
From his commands; or 'cause we did depart
From that excess of riot, or false way
Of worship, wherein ye did go astray?
Where are they all become? will none of them
Help you at this strange turn, when we contemn
And slight you? where be all those men of law,
Who could by their fine subtle pleadings draw
And wrest the laws to speak what ere they pleased?
Have they not now a word whereby you eased
May of your torments be? what are they dumb,
And mute, and tongue-less at this turn become?
Can ye not bribe them now, as ye did use,
When many a poor man ye did abuse,
Oppress, impoverish, and undo? we fear
The sight of other Angels, now do blear
Their eyes, that they cannot behold your case,
Or they 're afraid to look the Judge in the face.
They Are found so false, that they 're turned over the bar,
Or what befalls them, that they are so far
From pleading now your cause? what do they know
The Judge is so impartial, that how now
To bribe or to pervert him they are posed?
Or is the air so cold, their tongues be froz'd?
Where are those flaunting Preachers? smooth Divines,
Those witty fellows, who use with the times
To turn their tongues, and fond distinction find,
Their own and other Consciences to blind?
Dispense with my commands great men to please?
Cast burdens upon others, themselves ease?
Make oaths to bind or loose as they see good?
Or as it with their own preferments stood?
Loosed subjects from their due obedience
Which I required of them unto their Prince?
And Princes often provoked to persecute
My people who with their wills can not suit.
Made error pass for truth, and truth for error?
Made void my threats, and filled their own with terror?
Made sad the hearts of my poor servants by
Urging men's precepts, and the authority
Of their old councils against them, to make good
The doings of those men who sought their blood?
Can they not now allege some Fathers old,
Some Council, or some custom, why ye should
Not be thrust down to Hell? can they not find
Some good distinction now my eyes to blind?
Can they not now pervert some Scripture, to
Make void my judgment and prevent your woe?
Is all their skill and Learning laid a sleep?
Or are they fain themselves to howl and weep,
Because they minded not my work to do,
To seek, that they themselves my grace might know,
And others thereof might with them partake,
But their lusts minded, and my laws did hate?
Where are your lofty looks? your grievous words?
Your strength of hands? your ponyards, and your swords,
Wherewith ye used to terrify us, and
Obtain your pleasures, or force your commands?
Can ye not now out-brave the Judge, whom ye
Did vilify and scorn, when him ye see
Both in himself and members, at the bar
Of your Injustice stand? whom ye did mar
With spittings, taunts, and many foul affronts?
What have ye now at length left off your wonts?
Can ye not lay about you, beat away
Your enemies? for so we are to day,
This day of vengeance; because formerly
Our friends ye would not be, but did deny
Me, and mine hate. Can ye not with strong hand
Defend your selves, or break that chain or band
Of God's most righteous and most dread Decree,
By which bound to perpetual woe ye be?
Were ye not wont to boast your selves, and say
Our tongues they are our own, and what Lord may
Control us or command us? what is become
Of those your lawless tongues? are they quite dumb?
What? not one word to say, wherefore ye should
Not be thrust down, into that dreadful hold
Of damned Spirits, whose suggestions ye
Preferred and followed far before me.
Some of you did suppose your fleshly birth
Of Abraham or others, who on Earth
Were godly persons, or were men of might,
Would help you now, although that which was right
Ye put away; and others of you thought,
Because ye did some good works; as ye taught
My laws or heard them, or professed my name,
Or built some Hospital for blind and lame,
Or did a Chanter found, or give a gift
To build a Church or it adorn, you shift
Might off my judgment; though I did foretell
That they would naught avail, unless ye well
Demeaned your selves. Can ye not those pleas now
Make good? or what before ye would not know,
Do you now well perceive at length I cannot
By any thing, a liberty to grant
To sin be bribed? did ye think such things,
As often times blear'd the eyes of mortal Kings,
And of their Judges (as affinity
Or gifts, or some great services whereby
They might oblige them) would with me prevail,
So far as to give leave without all fail,
Some secret sins to harbor in your breast,
And that nevertheless ye might be blessed?
And therefore you presumed unrighteously
To live and practice, and my words cast by.
Where they against some of your lusts did stand,
Or something which ye liked not did command.
Thence many of you did the poor oppress,
Sought your own glory, lived in covetousness;
And thought to escape my judgments, if you gave
Part of your unjust gain your souls to save.
Some of you Preached my Statutes, but refused
Them to obey, but all my grace abused.
Or if in some things ye seemed to obey,
Somethings forgive, or give, or fast and pray;
Yet secretly ye did your neighbors cheat,
Oppress your servants, wrongfully them beat;
Defraud the laborers of what they earned,
Took part with theives when ye have them discerned,
Or kept a whore in secret, or did love
To practice closely, what ye did reprove
More openly in public; sought the praise
Of men in what ye did; did slanders raise
Against your Brother, thereby to deprive
Him of the comfort, which he did derive
From the love of his neighbors, while he kept
That credit with them, which ye from him swept.
And think ye, that I who for all sins died,
And in my word against all testified;
To nourish any of them would give way,
Or that the workers of such evils may
Endure in my pure sight? ye 're much deceived
If any such things of me ye believed.
I did not come to save by halves, and make
Clean of some spotts, procure that men forsake
Some evils, and retain some other; no
I came and taught, that men should all forgo,
For love of me and righteousness; and I
Afforded that effectual grace, whereby
Ye might have perfectly been purified,
And all ungodliness and lusts denied?
Which seeing it has not been done by you,
I from my presenee you for ever throw.
Oh what amazement, and what horror, then
Shall seize on, and surprise those wretched men,
When they shall see me in my Majesty,
(Which then shall visibly to every eye
Be manifest, though now they will not see,
What of it in my works and words may be
Discerned by them) when they shall behold
That all is true of me that they were told;
Yea that it shall many degrees exceed
All they had heard, and by what they did read
Recorded of me, either could conceive,
Or firmly of me in their hearts believe.
When in my Fathers glory, they me see
Attended with those Angels, all that be
Mighty in power, and in holiness
Complete! oh who their horror can express!
When me they see in so great glory, as
The pomp of all this World does more surpass,
Then does the Sun in all its brightest shine
Exceed the smallest rush-light; and when mine
Whom they in scorn contemned, and spitefully
Entreated, they shall see exalted high!
How shall they gnash their teeth for envy, and
For grief, that their own light did stand.
And for a little seeming joy and pleasure,
A puff of honor or some earthy treasure,
Which then are past and gone, never to be
Recal'd again; and which they then shall see
Were naught but vanity and lies, and bubles,
Affording little when they were but troubles:
And nothing then but anguish in the thought,
That by such empty things they should be caught;
And should so foolishly such glory sell,
For such poor toys as leave them then to Hell?
Yea when they see my angry face, my brow
Against them knit, and call to mind how now
I like a Lamb behave my self, and wait
With much forbearance, at the clos'd-up-gate
Of their hard hearts, and do all meekness show;
Great evils passing by, to anger slow:
And see me armed with vengeance, and appear
In flaming fire; and when the voice they hear
Of that most dreadful sentence fore-exprest,
Who can conceive what anguish in their breast
They then shall feel? what griefs shall them possess,
Or what shall be their doleful wretchedness:
When sore against their wills thrust from me, they
Down to the Lake shall go, and such things say.
Oh woe, woe, woe, woe, woe, and well-a-day,
Woe, woe, oh woe, woe, woe, woe, woe, who may
Our misery conceive? oh wretched state,
What heart can reach it? what tongue it relate?
Woe worth the time that ever we were born!
Woe worth the time that ever we did scorn,
And turn our backs upon the word of God!
Hated to be reproved, slighted his rod!
Woe worth the time that ever it was said
Such and such men were born! oh had we made
Our graves within our Mothers wombs! or that
Our Mothers or our Nurses had forgot,
To give us nourishment! or else had dashed
Our heads against the Stones, and out had pasht
Our wretched brains, by which we did devise
Those ways of sinning those deceits and lies;
Which we preferred before Gods holy truth,
Which we heard or might have heard, from the mouth
Of God and of his servants; oh accursed
Those times in which, those ways by which we burst
The cords of God's law, and his love asunder!
Oh might we hills and mountains now lie under,
And bear their weight upon us, might we be
Hid from that angry face which now we see!
Accursed be those eyes wherewith we saw,
Those vain delights and objects which did draw
Our minds from God, and from his word and ways.
Oh had we rather been blind all our days!
Accursed those objects all, accursed too
Out ears, wherewith we heard those things, that do
Increase our misery; refused to hear
Those things which might have moved us God to fear,
And kept us from sustaining torments here.
Accursed be those falsehoods did us snare;
Woe, woe, accursed be those who did spare
And not destroy us in our infancy.
Accursed be our tongues which used to lie,
And swear, and brag, insult, blaspheme, deride.
Oh had we plucked them out: woe worth our pride,
Our lust, our wantonness, our avarice,
Accursed our ambition, and all vice.
Accursed be our lewd companions in
Our wickedness; accursed who to sin
Did us entice, encourage, or compel.
Accursed the places wherein we did dwell
And act it; cursed be our hands which wrought
Iniquity; accursed our feet which brought
Us to the Taverns, Whore-houses, and Plays,
In which we spent our times, consumed our days.
Accursed all our members and our parts,
But above all accursed be our hearts;
The magazines of mischief, where we framed
All sorts of wickedness that may be named
Which thence to every part and member flowed.
Woe, woe, they be accursed, had we bestowed
Our riches on the poor we had done well,
For our abuse of them we be in Hell.
For them we swear and ly'd, and strove, and fought;
For them we ran, and rode; for them we wrought.
For them we spent our time, and strength, and lost
Our wretched souls, which to redeem them cost
The blood of Christ; they helped us to be proud,
They lifted up our hearts, to them we bowed.
They were the Gods we worshiped, and for them
God's word, and ways, we did slight and contemn.
We talked of God sometimes, and outwardly
We worshipped him with lips and body;
But it was riches which possessed our heart,
And moved us from God's truth to depart.
Or else our pleasures, or our dignities,
Our honors, and preferments. But they lies
Do now appear to be, oh woe to us
That we for such things fooled away Heaven thus,
And plunged our selves into this woeful Lake,
Where we this doleful lamentation make.
Woe worth the time, that we despised those
Who us admonish't, counting them our foes,
When with their hearts they sought to do us good.
Had we them heard we might have understood,
That goodness in Gods ways, which would have made
Us for the sake thereof, aside to have laid
Our sins. But woe is us, we fools them counted,
But now we see how they on high are mounted:
Whereas we fools in midst of flames do lie,
Dying perpetually yet never dye.
Woe worth the time that we did slight the poor,
Neglecting them when they were at our door.
And to the hungry did not deal our bread,
Nor cloth the naked, nor sick visited.
Woe worth the time we slothful were, and spent
Our time in idleness and merriment:
And thereby gave advantage to the Devil,
To rob us of all good, fill with evil.
Woe worth the time we did our selves content
To hear, or Preach God's word, but never meant
It to obey; or else therefrom we fell
Through carelessness, when we had begun well.
Woe to the pomps and wordly vanicies
Which did bewitch our hearts, our ears, our eyes.
Woe worth the time we closed our eyes, and when
Our hearts we hardened; cursed be the men
Who did mislead us, and contemn the truth,
Or that perverted us, debaucht our youth,
Or any other ways were instruments
Of bringing upon us these punishments.
Woe worth such Kings, and Counselors, as made
Us to commit such things as have betrayed
Our souls to Hell, while we them judged wise,
And flattered them we did God's laws despise.
We took them to be Gods on Earth, their will
We thought a law, which we ought to fulfill,
Without considering whether their command,
Did or did not with Gods law and will stand.
Woe worth the public places of resorts,
Woe worth the Chancery, and the Innes of Courts,
The Universities and places where
We learned to gent it, and our selves up bear
By our great breeding, learning, learned pride,
To contemn honest Christians, and deride
The simple meaning man, whose care it was
To fear the Lord and their time well to pass.
Woe worth our curious Arts, Opinions,
And thoughts that we alone were wisdoms sons:
Alas! we see for all the Learned Schools,
We were simplicians, and did play the fools.
Woe worth contentious Lawyers, who did set
Us upon strifes, our moneys for to get.
Fomenting differences and causless Suits,
Whereof we with them now do reap these fruits.
Woe worth the foolish fashions and devices,
Which Satan introduc't to nourish vices.
Woe worth the play's and interludes, that we
Did take delight and spend our time to see:
Where we did learn much wantonness and lust,
And how to scoff at honest men and just.
Woe worth the Taverns, Alehouses, and Innes,
They were the shops where we did trade in sins.
Woe worth the pleasant Wines, strong Ale, and Bear,
And other liquors, wherewith often we were
Made like the Beasts; and wherewith flusht, we sung
Our songs against good Men, making them dung.
Woe worth the Whores and Harlots, with whom we
Consumed our estates, and woefully
Misspent our times; debaucht our selves, and spent
Our bodies, and our strengths, with great content.
Woe worth their rolling eyes, their wanton glances,
Their flattering speeches and lascivious dances.
Their smoother foreheads, and their painted faces,
Their light behaviors, their flanting laces.
Their beautiful eye lids, their cheeks so fair,
Their naked bosoms, and their well set hair.
Accursed their temptations, and their Arts,
To take our minds, and draw away our hearts.
Accursed their allurements, and embraces,
Their whorish foreheads, and impudent faces.
Woe worth our wanton hearts, and wandering eyes,
That were allured by such vanities.
That looked upon such objects, and did lust,
Such things with them to do as were unjust.
That by our wanton carriages and doings,
Our painted speeches, and our earnest woings,
Did draw poor silly women into snares
And oftentimes surprised them unawars.
Woe worth those flames of lust wherein we burned;
Woe worth us that therefrom we never turned.
For now we burn in Hell, in endless flames,
Of such a vengeance as our lust quite tames.
Woe worth our ceiled Houses, rooms so warm,
Our costly furniture, they helped to charm
Our hearts and our affections them unto,
That we could not abide them to forgo;
When we were called for Christ's sake them to leave.
Our love to such things helped us to bereave
Of better satisfactions, where we see
Yon then despised men in glory be.
Woe worth unrighteous laws, and them that did
Them wickedly devise, us to forbid
Christ to confess according to his will,
And armed us with power his Saints to kill.
Branding them as Male-factors, or as those
Who did their lawful Governors oppose.
Woe worth Seditious persons, who did band
Themselves against the powers of the Land,
Ordained of God to govern, on pretense
Of Reformation using violence.
Sheathing their Swords in Kings and Rulers sides,
Or it assaying; by which means the tides
And floods of high severity was raised
Against such quiet innocents, as praised
Both righteousness and truth, and prayed for
Redress of evils, but yet did abhor
Rebellious courses thereunto to take,
Or any such disturbances to make;
Only from such defilements they abstained,
As being practiced would their souls have stained.
Whether by custom or authority
Commended or commanded, though thereby
They being also looked upon as men,
Who did the lawful Governors contemn,
Were by us sundry ways wronged and abused,
Imprisoned, persecuted, and misused.
And godliness was for the sakes of some,
Who themselves misbehaved, made to come
Into suspicion, and neglected so
As with the stream of vice we chose to go,
And to assure those over us, that we
From all seditious practices were free,
Of false mifguided zealots who did not
Christ's doctrine follow, but it quite forgot,
And his instructions (not by carnal sword
To force his kingdom up; but by his Word,
And by a patient suffering, whatsoere
For his Name sake they should be made to bear)
We thought it best for us to Swear and Rant,
Carouse or Whore, or Warrants out to grant
Against Religious persons, because they
Did meet in private often to hear or pray:
Whereby we ran into the other extreme,
And made our selves as bad or worse, then them
Seditious persons, with whom now we bear
This dreadful Doom to be tormented here.
Accursed be those persons who presumed
Upon their greatness; and thereby assumed,
To Lord it over our poor Consciences,
And bow them to their wills on vain pretenses.
Woe worth also those persons who were styled
The Ministers of Christ, and yet beguiled
Our now lost souls by their great ignorance,
Their blindness, and their supine negligence;
Feeding themselves, and vexing us with Suits,
Or bringing forth many unrighteous fruits:
Neglecting us to teach or Catechize,
And by their life and doctrine make us wise.
By their perverting of the Scriptures, and
By their false glosses, bearing us in hand
That if we were Elect we must be saved,
However we our selves then misbehaved.
And that some men were then rejected so
From all eternity, and unto woe
Destined that for them there was no grace
Nor possibility to have a place
Amongst the saved ones; which made us bold
Our sinful courses and vain ways to hold,
Believing that if saved we might be,
We must be turned in irresistibly:
And if not so, we should but toil in vain
Against the stream, from vices to abstain;
And to obtain the Kingdom of the just,
For do we what we could perish we must.
Or otherwise their life and doctrine did
Imbolden us to do the things forbid.
They made us to believe, that because we
Baptized were with water, we must be
Happy at last, if we did but comply
So far with the Churches authority,
As therein to be kept: though we did rest
But in formalities, we must be blessed.
Or if but once we true believers were,
We could never fall away, of that no fear
However we might sin, and do such things
As upon others swift destruction brings.
Woe worth false Prophets who have us deceived,
While we them as true Prophets have believed;
Because they were the men that had the voice
Of those that were empowered to make choice
Of men to teach us; and had publicly
Approvement by humane Authority,
Though they were Ministers only of men
And knew not God, how could they teach us then
Gods truth sincerely? They were but time-servers,
Men pleasers, and from God's good doctrine swervers,
And of the Souls of men they were the starvers.
Woe worth them that they did not us reprove
When they did see us sin; they no such love
Had to our Souls; but seeking gain from us
They soothed us up, and now we are lost thus.
Woe worth the loose Professors, Hypocrites,
Who often laid stumbling blocks before our sights;
While they did their profession foully stain
By falsehood, cheating, or behaviors vain;
Which made us all Religion to detest,
And think those who had none to be the best.
Woe worth our manifold Idolatries,
Wherein, forsaking God, we worshipped lies.
Made Idols of the Angels, Devils, Men,
Both dead and living: yea and now and then
Our fancies, bellies, works, them bowing to,
And other creatures looking help them fro.
Our worshipping the Beast and his Image,
Our beastly wills, and those in every age
Who lording it over our Conscience,
Imposed on us their own will and sense.
Woe worth those superstitions, and devised
Ways and conceptions, whereby men disguised
God and his worship, causing us full low
To those things God forbad, our selves to bow.
Woe worth our taking of God's name in vain,
By oaths and perjuries, and by profane
Abuses of it, and formality;
While resting in the forms, we did deny
The power os godliness, and not such fruit
Bring forth, as with that worthy Name did suite.
Woe worth our breaches of Gods Sabboaths, and
Our disobedience to the command
Of Kings and Princes, which they lawfully
Imposed on us: that Authority
We did despise, contemn the Magistrates,
Seditions, and Rebellions, wrought in States.
Our Parents disobeyed, or did not give
The honor due to them while they did live.
Woe worth our envy, murder, strife, debate,
Our malice, slanderous words that sprung from hate.
Woe worth our fornications, uncleanness,
Our thefts, oppressions, bearing false witness.
Woe worth the time that we were discontent
With what God of his goodness to us sent,
And coveted our Neighbors; woe that we
Did in our selves trust righteous to be;
Did justify our selves in our own eyes,
Thought our selves wise and good, Did Christ despise.
Accursed be these wicked wretched Devils,
For they enticed us to all these evils.
Accursed be the Heavens over our head,
Accursed the Earth whereupon we did tread.
Accursed the Sun that gave by day its light,
By which such objects were unto our sight
Made visible, as moved us to do
The things that have occasioned this woe.
Accursed also be the Night and dark
Thereof, wherein what places we did mark,
In The day time we brake through, or went unto,
The deeds of darkness therein for to do.
Accursed the bread we eat, the nourishment
Our food afforded; oh him that it sent,
Who made the Heavens and Earth, and Seas, and all,
And-suff'red Adam into sin to fall;
And gave such laws as would not sin permit,
And that does now so greatly punish it.
Oh wretched Caytiffs that thus blaspheme God!
Because we feel his just deserved rod.
Oh it is our selves that we may blame for this!
We, we were wicked, and we did amiss.
God we despised, his will we contemned,
We lifted up our selves and him condemned.
All might have been to us too for mercy,
As well as unto those that are on high.
God gave us Heaven, and Earth, and Seas, and all
The creatures that therein were, great and small,
Of his great bounty for to do us good,
But we abused them and against him stood.
We loved them more then him who gave them, and
Priding our selves in them, we his command
Did disobey. Him who is infinite
In greatness, and in goodness, we did slight;
Did choose what wrong was, and refused the right.
Against such things 'twas just there should be laws,
The penalties are just also, because
He Is infinite in greatness we abused;
And his infinite goodness we refused.
Yea he was infinitely merciful,
For he his Son sent down, us for to pull
Both from our sins and miseries, and he
Was ready us to succor. But we, we,
Neglected him also, his help we scorned,
Slighted his mercy; and though oftn warned,
We would not be admonished by him, but
His gracious counsels all we from us put.
Oh what good days, what opportunities
Did he afford! but we did them despise.
At such a time, in such a place, we heard
What us almost persuaded to regard
His counsels: but we stopped our ears and quenched
Those motions, often we went our ways, and drencht
Our wits in Wine or Ale, or went away
Unto our Farms, our Merchandise, our play.
We were not well at quiet, or at rest,
Till we those motions had shakt from our breast,
Which we did hate like Serpents; oh had we
Been willing to have let them there to be.
Had they abode with us, they might have brought
Us to repent of those bad things we wrought.
When we should have God's word heard, often we went
To other places, and our times misspent:
Or if we went and heard we did not mind,
That we God's gracious will therein might find.
We soon forgot it, or did rest in knowing
But practiced it not, as nothing owing
Of duty; when we should have prayed and wept,
We turned away, or laid us down and slept.
At such a time we did our ways discern
And see their vileness, and began to learn
The knowledge of the Lord, but liked not
It to retain, and therefore soon forgot
Those things again; we threw the glass away
That showed our spots: Woe, woe, and well-a-day,
It Is we, it is we are guilty; oh what sense
Have we now of it in our Conscience!
Oh how it gnaws us as a worm, and tears
Our bowels worse then Lions teeth or Bears!
Oh now we see that God was good indeed
In all he did! our woes from us proceed.
It was not long of him or of his creatures,
Their parts, their sweetness, beauty, goodness, features.
Nay, Nay, these Devils though they at us thrust,
By their inticements moving us to lust;
Are not the reason of our punishment,
For God against them did us so prevent,
That had we him but minded and obeyed,
We had resisted them also, and made
Them flee away. But woe, woe unto us,
We were the reason why we perish thus.
Though it be true that we in Adam fell,
Yet we are not for that damned to this Hell.
Though thereby we fell into death and grave,
Yet Christ from that Destruction did us save.
So as from them we were raised up again,
And shall not those things any more sustain;
That Death and Hell have given us up, and we
Now in a worser pit tormented be.
Though we were dead in sins and trespasses,
And could not our selves quicken or redress.
Yet Christ who died for us, and does live,
Did by his quickening Spirit such power give;
When he did call us in the day of grace,
That then we might been able to embrace
His counsels and instructions. 'Twas our will,
Our wilful choice of evil did us kill.
The creatures which we sinned by were good,
Had we by Christ's assisting power, withstood
Our lusts, and the temptations of the Devil,
Christ would us have defended from all evil.
Oh had we now again those things which we
Abused to our destruction, we would be
More thankful for them! and would better use them,
And not as we have done before abuse them.
How would we serve the Lord with all our store
Which we unjustly kept or spent before!
Oh we would be more righteous and more just!
Deny our selves, and would not serve our lust.
Oh had we but those opportunities
We have misspent before, we would be wise!
How would we hear and read, and fast and pray,
Watch against sin, our Idols cast away?
None should by force or flattery, withdraw
Our hearts and service from God's holy law.
We would obey the Laws and Magistrates,
So far as in the Lord we might. Debates
And strifes, and hatred, avarice and lust,
We would detest with all that is unjust.
Oh how would we serve God! we would him fear,
And have a care never to come more here.
But now it is too late, the Door is shut,
The time of grace is past, and we are put
Here by an irreversible Decree
Whence never more delivered we shall be.
This is that Tophet prophesied of old,
It Is large and deep indeed, for it does hold
Innumerable more then may be told.
And for the King, the greatest sinners it
Prepared was, and they are in this pit.
The cursed Serpent with his Angels all,
Who did from their first habitation fall.
And mightyest men who mightily have sinned,
Most mighty miseries do herein find.
The mighty Spirit of God, his mighty Power,
Like to a stream of Brimstone, every hour
Does seed these dreadful flames; while it does show
And make us feel, that we do justly owe
The bearing of these torments: because we
Rebel'd against his light and would not see,
But wilfully reject his profer'd grace,
Would not his counsels nor his love embrace.
Which things he does to us so evidence,
And set so strongly on our conscience,
That we cannot now out of our breasts them shake
As we were wont; Oh none these flames can slake,
These flames of wrath! God's wrath did burn before
But Christ did quench it by his sufferings sore.
But we by our rebellions, have again
New kindled it, and we must bear our pain:
No other Sacrifice does now remain,
For Christ will no more dye for us: Oh we
Must bear for evermore God's just decree.
Had we been but admonished before
The time of grace was out; before the door
Of mercy was barred up, we might have lived;
But now of all hope we are quite deprived.
Now we be helpless, hopeless, easless too,
Nothing can now avail that we can do.
Nothing is here but wrath, nothing of love;
No help, nor hope of help now from above.
And all our earthly comforts are quite fled,
With which we all our days sins committed.
While we did live on Earth, we had our health,
Meat, drink, cloth, fire, warm lodgings, houses, wealth.
Yea many of us rich attire did wear,
Had great attendance, lived without fear.
And if at any time we were not well,
Yet many mercies still with us did dwell.
We had our beds to ease us, neighbors and
Friends oftentimes were ready at our hand.
Servants to wait upon us and attend us,
Chyrurgions and Physicians to amend us.
We had our mitigations, intermittings,
Changes of postures, lyings, walkings, sittings;
Varieties of meats or drinks, to see
Whether with this or that we pleased might be.
But now alas! these comforts all are gone,
And mitigation of our pains here is none.
No variations here to lessen grief,
No intermissions, nothing for relief.
We used to guzle down excessively
Cup after cup, but now we are thirsty
For something to refresh and cool the tip
Of our now flaming tongues; but none may dip
His fingers end into cold water, but
All means of easing us are hence out shut.
We cannot now call for this or that meat,
This or that cooler to allay our heat.
No sweet perfumes, or odoriferous smell,
Nothing but Brimstone and the fire of Hell.
Immixed wrath, and which does yet extend
Our misery, there is thereof no End.
Eternal punishment, eternal grief;
Oh never, never end, never relief!
Oh might we live ten thousand years as slaves,
Might we but then go back into our graves!
Or twenty times ten thousand years might lie
In these most dreadful flames might we then dye!
Were we but mortal as we were before,
But oh this Endless Woe, this Evermore,
It sinks and breaks us; Yet we cannot dye
To sense of torment to Eternity.
This us up swallows; it is the Hell of Hell,
And passes all things else that we can tell.
Woe, woe, woe, woe, oh woe and well-a-day,
Woe, woe, unto us; woe, woe, woe, who may
Our misery conceive; oh doleful state!
No heart can it conceive, no tongue relate.
Oh doleful state of those that wicked are!
Hear oh dear Soul, be warned, and keep thee far
From what does lead thereto; be ruled by me,
And this Condition thou shall never see.
Canto V. Or the Joyful Canto.
The joys of Heaven, and Songs of the Righteous.
Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust,

Isa. 26.19.
This Joyful Canto does declare
The happy state, and great welsare,
Of those that in Christ's joys shall share.
What songs may fit that happy state,
Though their enjoyments then so great
Will be, as no pen can relate.
First songs the Father chiefly eyes,
The second the Son magnifies,
And praises his great victories.
The third songs wholly to this tend,
The Holy Spirit to commend,
And then this Canto has an end.
BUT on the contrary the Righteous men
Shall have great pleasures and rejoycings, when
They go into eternal life; then they
Shall shout and sing, and well they may thus say,
Oh, oh, oh, Hallelujah! oh this day!
Oh, oh, Hallelujah, Hallelujah! who may
Our happiness conceive? oh happy state
What heart can reach it? what tongue it relate?
Minist. Yea well they may as Harpers strike their string,
And with great triumph thus, and better sing.

I.
HAllelujah, oh happy day,
That ever we were born!
Oh well are we that we do see
This everlasting morn!
II.
Oh what are we
That we should be
Thus lifted up on high?
We did not merit
Thus to inherit
Honor and dignity.
III.
Blessed be the Lamb
That here we came
Raised up from Death again.
It Is by his blood
We have this good
Ever with him to reign.
IV.
Blessed for all that did befall
Be God for evermore:
Oh blessed be, that one in three,
Whom ever we adore!
V.
Who can set forth
His wondrous worth?
It does all things surpass.
It does exceed
All that we read
And all that ever was.
VI.
Oh happy we who do him see,
Who all perfection is.
No Potentate, no Monarch great
Ever had joy like this.
VII.
Rivers of pleasures
Beyond all measures,
Unto our lot does fall.
No mixture is
In this our bliss,
But it is blessing all.
VIII.
All things we have
That heart can crave,
And more then heart can reach:
None ever could
This joy unfold,
None ever could it preach.
IX.
Our joy surmounts
On all accounts,
All that we could believe:
All praise is due
To God most true;
He did us not deceive.
X.
Oh glorious sight!
Oh great delight!
None ever did behold
So rare a sight,
A light so bright;
Our glory cannot be told.
XI.
All Is infinite,
All is delight;
We have no sorrow here.
Nothing of dark
No fading spark
All is most bright and clear.
XII.
All, All is love,
All things above,
And all that is below:
We see no evil,
We fear no Devil;
Nothing but good we know.
XIII.
Nothing but joy,
Naught to annoy,
Here we are void of fear.
For we are sure
We shall endure
For ever happy here.
XIV.
Oh Majesty!
Oh glory high!
What one is like to thee?
We 've our desire,
Thee we admire.
To all eternity.
XV.
Our blessedness
None can express;
It is an ocean great:
All that excels
For ever dwells
In this most glorious seat.
XVI.
Blessed be the Lord?
Blessed be his Word.
Blessed be his holy Spirit.
How happy we
In this One-Three
Our portion to inherit.
XVII.
Oh mighty King
Everlasting
Beginning thou had none.
When nothing were,
Then thou wast there;
Thou wast thy self alone.
XVIII.
In thy self blessed
Thou had thy rest,
Of us thou had no need.
Thou did possess
Full happiness,
You Are happiness indeed.
XIX.
Of thy good will
It to fulfill,
The Worlds foundation sure
By thee was laid,
Thou it up-stay'd
At thy will to endure.
XX.
The Word thou said
All things thou made.
Oh blessed be that Word,
Which did Being
To every thing
In thy good time afford.
XXI.
Blessed be that love
That did thee move
Before the World was made;
To be the seat
Of thy works great
Or its foundations laid.
XXII.
To think of this
Eternal bliss
And it prepare for us.
Oh what were we
That then by thee
We should be cared for thus.
XXIII.
Blessed be that thought
That us out sought
And our great happiness;
We do admire
The great desire
Thou had us thus to bless.
XXIV.
Could we be dear
Who nothing were
Unto thy Majesty?
Thou did possess
That word express
Which was with thee on high.
XXV.
All things were made
By him, and laid
On their foundation fast.
That they might stand
At thy command
And at thy will might last.
XXVI.
'Twas for his sake
That thou did make
Invisible Beings;
The Angels, Thrones,
Dominions,
And all visible things.
XXVII.
That him thou might,
And his great height,
Most gloriously display:
And his fullness
Thereby express,
That others know it may.
XXVIII.
But chiefly man
When thou began
Thou graciously did view:
From him all which
The Seas did rich,
And on the Earth that grew.
XXIX.
Yea the Heavens bright,
With all their light,
And all the hosts therein;
Thine hand did frame,
And gave the same
To serve and honor him.
XXX.
Whom thou in thine
Image divine
Did good and upright make:
And from his side
Did frame a Bride,
Whom he to him did take.
XXXI.
A comely pair,
And very fair,
For though they naked were,
They found no shame
While void of blame,
Nor had they any fear.
XXXII.
A Sabboath day,
For rest had they
The seventh, when thou did rest
From thy works all,
Both great and small,
And therefore thou it blessed.
XXXIII.
A day wherein
They without sin
Might with thy Majesty
Have sweet converse,
Thy praise rehearse,
And view thy great glory.
XXXIV.
A Garden sweet,
With pleasures meet,
Thou put'st them in also,
Wherewith delight
Thy will they might
Learn of thee and it do.
XXXV.
Of life a Tree
Was given by thee,
That they might live for ay.
A River large
Which did discharge
Its streams forth every way.
XXXVI.
All things that might
Give them delight
Thou on them did bestow.
One only Tree
Withheld by thee
Was, good and ill to know.
XXXVII.
Thou gav'st them food
Was only good;
Not good and evil both.
If both they would
Know, thou them told
Thou would with them be wroth.
XXXVIII.
Thou death did threat,
If they would eat,
That so thou might them scar:
That free from ill
They might live still,
And from death keep them far.
XXXIX.
Yet them to try
Thou prov'dst them by
A Serpent subtly wise:
Who thee did fault
Them to assault,
And cheated them with lies.
XL.
The Woman first
The bonds did burst
Wherewith thou did them tie
Unto thee fast.
The Man did taste
By her means; both did dye.
XLI.
How happy a state
Did thou create
And set them in, while they
Were innocent,
Without intent
Thy laws to disobey?
XLII.
Man then was Lord
Of what thy word
Created for his sake:
Of all things he
Had leave from thee,
But one Tree, to partake.
XLIII.
Pleasures he had
To make him glad,
Sabboath and River too:
A spotless Wife,
A Tree of Life,
What should thou for him do?
XLIV.
How great his good!
How might he stood!
How was he bound to thee!
His glory much;
No creature's such.
But oh more happy we!
XLV.
Our state exceeds,
Beyond all needs,
There was a Serpent there:
They did aspire
To be yet higher;
But here is no Tempter here.
XLVI.
We are not in
Danger of sin
Nor need we to aspire:
Here Is enjoyment
Of all content
We nothing more desire.
XLVII.
Tempted we were
But before here
We came to be thus blist:
Our tryal's past,
Sathan's down cast,
And we his snares have mist.
XLVIII.
Now we do rest
For ever blessed
From all temptations free:
Our danger's past,
Our joys shall last,
To all eternity
XLIX.
This is the day
That we did pray
And wrestle to obtain:
From sin set free
With thee to be
And never part again.
L.
Nothing we want
That thou did grant
To Adam heretofore:
Yea he far less
Then did possess
Then we now evermore.
LI.
We have a Rest,
A day that is blessed
A Sabboath day to be:
With thee we are blessed,
Thou art our Rest,
And change we never shall see.
LII.
Hallelujah,
Oh blessed day!
Who can thy glory speak?
This Sabboath we
Perpetually
Keep, and it never break.
LIII.
Therein we sing,
To thee our King;
Thy glory we behold.
Our work is this
Thy Name to bliss,
Thy praises to unfold.
LIVE.
A Paradise
Wherein there lies
All pleasures sweet and great:
With liberty
Perpetually
Thereof to take and eat.
LV.
An Heavenly Tree
Of life have we
Which does us ever feed;
It does us give
Ever to live
And nothing can we need.
LVI.
A River pure
Of Waters sure,
Does clear as Crystal run,
We with it meet
In every Street:
Our City needs no Sun.
LVII.
God is our light,
He shines most bright,
No Cloud does him obscure:
All things we see
Just as they be,
Our knowledge is most sure.
LVIII.
Its always full,
Its never dull;
Our comforts ever flow.
Our Suns bright beams,
Our Rivers streams,
No damp, no ebb, do know.
LIX.
All manner fruits
Which with us suits,
And may give us delight;
Our Tree does bear
Throughout the year,
Most pleasant to our sight.
LX.
All is most sweet
With which we meet;
Here Is nothing sharp or sour.
Pleasures we have,
We cannot more crave;
They Are constant every hour.
LXI.
We need no Wives
To make our lives
More comfort us afford:
We never dye
Nor company
Need we at bed or board.
LXII.
No different sex
Nothing to vex,
Nothing to tempt we know.
All perfect is,
All Is full of bliss,
Our tides are never low.
LXIII.
We do all reign
And Lords remain
Over all creatures:
We never shall
From our heigths fall,
Our Kingdom ever dures.
LXIV.
We have no night
Nor borrowed light,
No Moon or Candle here:
For it always
Is perfect day
The Sun is not so clear.
LXV.
Oh blessed King
From whom does spring
This state of happiness;
We'll sing thy praise
All our All-days
Thy goodness we'll confess.
LXVI.
When Adam fell
What tongue could tell
What was our misery?
In him we were,
He did us bear,
And in him we did dye.
LXVII.
Branches were we
Of him the Tree,
The root wherefrom we grew
A flood of woe
Did us ore flow
When his fall made us rue.
LXVIII.
Our root did rot
Having forgot
The hand that did it plant,
The branches must
Then turn to dust
For they their life did want.
LXIX.
In him we fell
As low as Hell;
Death upon us did seize.
Woes in us bred,
Away quite fled
All comfort, joy and ease.
LXX.
Great was our fault
At one assault,
And when engaged thus;
God to reject
And in effect
To thrust away from us.
LXXI.
Great misery
Therefore did lie
Upon us by desert;
Of good bereft
To be quite left
To utmost grief and smart.
LXXII.
We were beguiled,
Sin us defiled
And had so filthy made,
That God and we
Could not agree:
Of him we were afraid.
LXXIII.
Mortallity
Did by and by
Seize on us; oh what pain
Did we procure
For to endure
Till dust we turned again!
LXXIV.
Yea God we lost
Which was the most
Sad loss could us befall:
His wrath also
We fell into,
And into deadly thrall.
LXXV.
We lost that light
Which gave us sight
And ceast to understand:
And led by lust
Became unjust
Subject to sins command.
LXXVI.
The old Serpent
A false light lent
Which made us judge amiss,
And in vain things
To seek the springs
Of everlasting bliss.
LXXVII.
By those enslaved
We misbehav'd
Our selves in every thing;
We acted evil,
We served the Devil,
Took him for guide and King.
LXXVIII.
Lust was vice-King
That was the spring
Of actions light and grave,
Our subtlety
That was the spy
Which us false counsel gave.
LXXIX.
These did conspire
To make us higher,
In our false fond conceit:
For Heaven the showed
False pleasures strow'd
And therewith did us cheat.
LXXX.
Oh woeful plight!
Oh ruful sight!
This was our fallen case:
In thraldom dwelt
Seldom it felt
But took it for solace.
LXXXI.
In darkness deep,
In dangers steep,
Perplexities and fears:
In depths of Hell
Then did we dwell
And spend our woeful years.
LXXXII.
God was but just
Us out to thrust
From him, we left him first:
And then a Hell
Of woe befell
Because of him accursed.
LXXXIII.
In which sad state
Objects of hate
And enemies to God,
Without his sight
And destroyed quite,
We ever had abode.
LXXXIV.
But that the Lord
Though he abhorred
Then fellowship with us,
Yet pitiful,
In love did pull
Us out, and help us thus.
LXXXV.
The mighty Word
Of this great Lord
By whom he did us make;
Tha Wisdom high
Our sins did spy,
But not with them partake.
LXXXVI.
A fountain pure
He did endure,
In whom God took delight;
He was beloved
And well approved,
For he did always right.
LXXXVII.
Angels some fell
And down to Hell
Were thrust 'cause they rebel'd:
God past them by
And let them lie
In chains of darkness held.
LXXXVIII.
But he by whom
All good does come,
Most holy did abide.
By him God now
His love did show
And mercy glorified.
LXXXIX.
Him he decreed
In this our need,
That saved we might be,
To be sent forth
This one of worth
Able to set us free.
XC.
The Woman's seed,
Of David's breed
To be: He was ordained
A man of grief
To bring relief
That we might be regained.
XCI.
Oh loving Lord!
Oh mighty word!
The source of all our bliss!
To be adored
With one accord
For evermore in this.
XCII.
This grand devise,
Ground of our rise,
Let men and Angels praise:
Angels admired
And much desired
This to behold always.
XCIII.
This we admire
This with desire
Now fully satisfied
We look upon,
We make our song;
Its praise we cannot hide.
XCIV.
Here fully we
Behold and see
Gods admirable love;
And perfectly
We here descry,
All his perfections move.
XCV.
In this we live,
This all does give,
Which we enjoy and have.
Can we forget
To set forth it
Which did us help and save?
XCVI.
This God fore-teld;
This all forth-held
Both Law and Prophets too.
This all upheld,
This we beheld
To raise us up from woe.
XCVII.
This with a blow
Did overthrow
The Devils Kingdom quite;
This did destroy
What did annoy,
What kept us from the light.
XCVIII.
This to declare
Let us not spare;
This is the mystery
We now behold
And can unfold
With all its treasury.
XCIX.
With eye to this
The God of bliss
Ere since our dreadful fall,
Before it was
Yet brought to pass
In act, did order all.
C.
What mercies we
Received, we see
Proceeded all here-fro:
We that have bliss
They who did miss
Beholden were hereto.
CI.
Though justice them
Who did contemn
And slight it does destroy;
To us that live
Mercy does give
And Justice too all joy.
CII.
Mercy did all
Respect in the fall
And help for them provide;
They who refused
And it abused
His justice must abide.
CIII.
Those things that we
Could not so see,
While mortal flesh we had,
(For then our sight
Was not so bright
Though we saw what did glad).
CIV.
These things we now
Do clearly know
Their reason now we see.
Our vails are gone,
Darknesses none
Within our hearts now be.
CV.
We see it is true
In time most due,
God sent his only Son
Of woman made,
As he had said,
As never before was done.
CVI.
Angels it see
And did agree
With joy it to declare:
Angels and we
Agreed now be,
And knit together are.
CVII.
Though in our flesh
Us to refresh,
It was that Christ appeared:
For us to dye
Our death thereby
To vanquish which we feared.
CVIII.
Angels had not
Our flesh, or spot
Of sin therein, as we:
Yet they who stood
In The truth were good
And joy'd our good to see.
CIX.
Under the Law
The Word us saw;
Under the Law came he;
That he that way
Our debts might pay
And by Death set us free.
CX.
Our bands to break
He did them take
And with them he was bound:
God's cords we burst,
Christ was accursed,
That he might heal our wounds.
CXI.
We were condemned
Who had contemned
God's holy Word and will:
He was contemned,
Misused, condemned,
Our evils did him kill.
CXII.
For us he dyed,
Being crucified
Sustained a cruel death:
Was broke with grief
Used as a thief,
Till he gave up his breath.
XVIII.
His grave was made
And body laid
With the rich and unjust:
His honor high
Despised did lie,
All covered up with dust.
CXIV.
Oh wondrous sight!
Oh love most bright!
Never the like was seen.
That one so high
So low should lie
Poor caytiffs to redeem.
CXV.
Of men what one
For men undone
His Son would so abase?
For enemies
That him despise
That they might be in place!
CXVI.
Yet such a love
The Lord above
To us when poor did show:
For bankrupt us
He made him thus
To pay what we did owe.
CXVII.
His wisdom here
Did strange appear
The World was posed hereby:
Its eye was blind
And could not find
Hereof the mystery.
CXVIII.
This it befooled,
This it quite gulled,
This cross so cross did lie;
They stumbled here,
And could not bear
That 'twas God's Son did dye.
CXIX.
It did deride
And crucified
This mystery again;
As if that he
God could not be
That such things did sustain.
CXX.
This wisdoms height
Did dim the sight
Of The Serpents eye so sore,
He could not see
Those heights here be
Yet did against them roar.
CXXI.
This brake his head,
This down did tread
His craft and power, who
Had man brought down
And quite ore-thrown
Into a pit of woe.
CXXII.
Here wisdom we
And power did see
When God did clear our eyes;
The law fulfilled
Its curse was quel'd
Whon Christ from grave did rise.
CXXIII.
For here it was
That God did pass
Sentence upon our sin:
He judged it here.
Christ did it bear
For us who fell therein.
CXXIV.
This vanquished Death,
Appeased wrath,
Did justice satifie:
Pardon for more
Then Adam's score
Was purchased hereby.
CXXV.
Great pleasure here
(As did appear)
God took, who the third day
Without delays
Did him up raise
From the grave where he lay.
CXXVI.
And did him take
Even for the sake
Of what he suffered
To be on high
In his body,
And of all power the Head.
CXXVII.
Here God did lay
A certain stay
And sure foundation
Of all his acts
And mighty facts
For man's salvation.
CXXVIII.
Of all our hope
The under-prop,
While we had not attained:
Of all the bless
We do possess
Now we the end have gained.
CXXIX.
Here lay the ground,
Here God did found
Our slidden hearts and feet,
Hence all the flood
Of all the good
Wherewith we ere did meet.
CXXX.
Yea on this ground
God did new found
The Earth and World again:
Both as it was
Till it did pass,
And as it does remain.
CXXXI.
Here he fulfilled
What was forth-held
Of a prepared Feast.
All ready here
That might us cheer
So as no want in the least.
CXXXII.
The holy Spirit
As he did merit
Fully God did him give.
That for his praise
He might us raise
From Death, and make us live.
CXXXIII.
From darkness great
Wherein we sat
From Death to Life, from Thrall
To Liberty,
Of his mercy
Thereby he did us call.
CXXXIV.
He sent forth light,
He gave us sight,
And turned our hearts to mind
What he held forth,
That so its worth
And goodness we might find.
CXXXV.
He gave his speech
And did beseech
Us to consider well:
He gave an ear
That we might hear
The things that he did tell.
CXXXVI.
Full often when we
His light did see
We winked with our eyes:
It did displease us
It did dis-ease us
Faulting our vanities.
CXXXVII.
Ofttimes we heard
But then we feared
Least what we heard should mar
Our false pretenses,
Wrong confidences,
And put it from us far.
CXXXVIII.
Ofttimes we felt
The power that dwelt
In him and in his truth:
Almost we turned
And yet often spurned;
Thus dealt we from our youth.
CXXXIX.
Oh how we loved
What he reproved!
How loath with it to part!
From idols vain
How loath t'abstain
Although they caused us smart.
CXL.
But oh his love!
That did him move
To pass by our misdeeds.
He did forgive,
And made us live,
His gratiousness exceeds.
CXLI.
In misery
That we should dye
He had no will at all.
He interceded
And for us pleaded;
And yet again did call.
CXLII.
His patient
Good deportment,
His lamb-like gentleness,
His suffering long
Our many a wrong,
Oh what tongue can express!
CXLIII.
How often his love
Did our hearts move
And make us to him look?
How often did we
Look back to see
The Idols we forsook?
CXLIV.
It was the strength
The power and length
Of his dear love unto us,
His words of grace
His pleasant face
His constancy to woo us.
CXLV.
His excellence,
His love immense,
The freeness of his grace
Which caught our heart
And made us part
With all him to embrace.
CXLVI.
Oh had he not
Ofttimes forgot
Our great unkindnesses:
And looked away
From what each day
We acted quite amiss.
CXLVII.
If with his eyes
Iniquities
Against us he had marked,
How we rebel'd
Our lusts fast held,
The light he gave us darkt.
CXLVIII.
We had been then
Like yonder men
Who cast out of his fight,
Do yell and cry
Most hideously
Throughout their endless night.
CXLIX.
But there is none
Save him alone,
None like him constant is;
His constancy
Was our safety
And brought us to this bliss.
CL.
Can it be told
How manifold
Our stubbornesses were?
Our great neglects,
And disrespects
Committed year by year?
CLI.
How much to do
He had to woo
Before he did obtain?
How often in heart
We did depart,
When wooed, from him again?
CLII.
What vanities
Did draw our eyes
From looking him upon?
How often we
Refused to see
His great salvation?
CLIII.
How dull we were
His voice to hear,
How often we stopped our ears?
How we gave way
Day after day,
To lusts, or cares, or fears?
CLIV.
How often, when he
Had cleans'd us, we
Did us again defile?
How often confessed
Yet not redrest?
How much we hid through guile?
CLV.
A spring of sin
We had within
Running continually;
No good in us,
How marvailous
Was his love and mercy?
CLVI.
To each good deed
That did proceed
From us through his good grace
Sin did adhere
And it besmear
Such was our wretched case.
CLVII.
But oh his love
Did not remove!
But constantly abide;
Love made him blind
And not to mind
Our sins but them often hide.
CLVIII.
So as that God
Ofttimes his rod
Forbore on us to lay:
And passing by
Iniquity
He turned his wrath away.
CLIX.
A fountain great
He open set,
And there us purified.
And if he chode
Yet love he showed
And did not always chide.
CLX.
Sometimes he hid
His face, and did
An angry countenance show.
That he might make
Us sin forsake
And be to him more true.
CLXI.
Often by some cross
Some grief or loss
He made us him to seek,
And then we felt
His love to melt
How gentle he and meek.
CLXII.
His loving mind
Unto mankind
Appearing did us save.
That did us make
Those things forsake
Which did us fore-inslave.
CLXIII.
Nor did he grieve
Us to receive
When unto him we came.
But readily
Did justify
And wash us in his Name.
CLXIV.
He by his power
Us every hour
Did keep in his great love.
Which every way
He did display
As he did see it behove.
CLXV.
What he did by
Pleading on high
God's mercy to obtain;
And what from thence
He did dispense
Made us with him remain.
CLXVI.
To him to cleave
Him never leave:
Or if we went astray,
Our good shepherd
Did us regard
And reduce to his way.
CLXVII.
His love us drew,
And made us true,
And hid us when we failed:
Him to forgo
Who loved us so
Nothing with us prevailed.
CLXVIII.
To him we naught,
That good was, brought,
No good thing we could do:
He who us bought
All in us wrought
And helped us against our foe.
CLXIX.
What we did want,
He did us grant,
We could but ask and have;
Askig aright
And in his light,
Yea much unaskt he gave.
CLXX.
He to us clave,
He did us save
Or else we had been gone;
He did begin
And never lin
Till all things he had done.
CLXXI.
He in his arms
Kept us from harms
He did us safely bear:
He did us feed,
Keep, save, and lead,
Until he brought us here.
CLXXII.
Something we wore
On Adam's score
As we from him did spring:
So long as Death
Held us i'the' Earth
From whence he did us bring.
CLXXIII.
The Serpents seed
Which he did breed
Within us and without,
Did dog us too
Us to undo
And compast us about.
CLXXIV.
Through Christ our shield
We won the field,
He was our Captain brave:
Down fell our flesh
We sprung up fresh;
He brought us out from grave.
CLXXV.
Oh faithful friend
Unto the end
Who did us never fail?
Through him we stood
Against all the flood,
He made us to prevail.
CLXXVI.
Our Prophet he
Who made us see
The way of truth and right.
He sent that guide
That did abide
With comfort, strength, and light.
CLXXVII.
He did as Priest
Upon his Breast
Us in the Heavens present:
Our good procured,
Our weal assured;
Our evils did prevent.
CLXXVIII.
He was our King,
All good did bring:
Gave Laws, made us them chose.
Ruled with his arm,
Kept us from harm,
Subdued all our foes.
CLXXIX.
Yea all our wound
He up has bound
As our Physician good.
Our maladies
With remedies
He cured by his Blood.
CLXXX.
Yea Prophets he
Made us to be,
And Heavenly Priests and Kings:
To offer praise,
And reign always
Over all other things.
CLXXXI.
Oh happy we
This day that see
When nothing does annoy!
We have no pain
Nor grief sustain;
But we are filled with joy.
CLXXXII.
Oh blessed be he
By whom this we
For ever do possess,
Let creatures all
Before him fall
And him for ever bless.
CLXXXIII.
But we much more
Will him adore
Who are his choice delight:
Whom he does fill
Of great good will
With pleasures in his sight.
CLXXXIV.
Were every part
Of us a heart
Yet he should have them all.
Were each a tongue
And his praise sung
By each, 't would be too small.
CLXXXV.
To this our King
Who did us bring
To this All-Happiness,
Let Us sing a song
Eternal-long
His praises to express.
Hallelujah.
Another to Christ.
I.
Oh holy glorious King
The Mighty Prince of Peace!
Thou art the Lamb, by whom we came
From sin to have release.
II.
To thee we owe our selves,
To thee all praise is due:
To thee O King, we'll praises sing
A song of praises new.
III.
Oh mighty Word of God,
Gods dear and only Son!
Thou did us know when we were low,
When we were quite undone.
IV.
Thou had no need of us,
For thou were God above:
And we nothing to thee could bring,
And yet thou did us love.
V.
Thou in the form of God
Wast high and rich indeed:
Therefore of us who were but dust
Thou could not stand in need.
VI.
Thou, thou, all glorious art,
The Father thee possessed
When he began his works, even then
Thou laydest in his Breast.
VII.
Before his works of old
Were either framed or wrought,
The ancient hills, or fruitful fields,
Or Earth, thou wast forth brought.
VIII.
The Father purposed
His purposes of old
In thee; who art, and do impart
His wisdom manifold.
IX.
When he the Heavens prepared,
And the foundations laid
Of the vast Earth, in joy, and mirth,
Thou ever by him stayed.
X.
Before the World was made,
The day, or darksom night;
Fountain or deep, or Mountain steep,
Thou, thou wast his delight.
XI.
By thee the Worlds he made,
And all things more or less;
Without thee naught to pass was brought,
Thou worthy art of bless.
XII.
By thee he made us men,
And in thine Image clean;
All things we see, were made for thee,
And all the things unseen.
XIII.
Thou art the heir of all,
And in thee all things stand,
The Life that lasts, and Death outcasts;
Thou all things do command.
XIV.
Thou art the eternal truth,
The everlasting light,
The unity; all without thee
Be falsehood, strife, and night.
XV.
The Angels thou did make,
Those which did not abide,
Worthily fell down into Hell,
The recompense of pride.
XVI.
We by thee made, fell too
By listening to the lies
Which the old Serpent, did first invent,
Aspiring to be wise.
XVII.
Wisdom we had in thee,
And wise thou did us make;
Wiser to be foolishly, we
Presumed thee to forsake.
XVIII.
While we thy holy Word
And thy command divine
Departed fro, and our selves to
The Serpent did incline.
XIX.
Great was the misery
Which we were plunged into,
For from thee gone God we had none:
Our state was full of woe.
XX.
God gave us what was meet,
And that whereby we might
The Tempters wiles which did beguile us
Have all avoided quite.
XXI.
Our fall was of our selves,
It did not come from thee:
We willingly the way to dye
Did choose; but thou were free.
XXII.
Yet blessed be that will
That did permit our fall:
And whatsoere permitted were
To any of us all.
XXIII.
For now we see 'twas well
That God did so permit,
And not withhold that Serpent old
From tempting us to it.
XXIV.
For hereby he has showed
His attributes most clear:
How foolish we, how dear to thee
And unto him we were.
XXV.
That so we in our selves
No more might put our trust,
Or listen to what led us fro
Thee, to fulfill our lust.
XXVI.
Yea thereby to himself
Our hearts he does indear,
While we do see what for us he
Has done, while such we were.
XXVII.
And so it has engaged
Us wondrously to thee:
That thou so high vouchsafest to dye
To set such caytiffs free.
XXVIII.
When we all helpless were,
And hopeless were become,
Thou did us save, our foes out drove,
Brought us to thy kingdom.
XXIX.
There Is nothing in these acts
But big with love it is;
From first to last, we love do taste,
And thee for ever bliss.
XXX.
No shorter date can be
Sufficient to express
Our hearty sense of so immense
A love, and it confess.
XXXI.
Yea wisdom too we see
In suffering that our fall
It was, O King, glory to bring
To thee in our recall.
XXXII.
That thou might be made known,
And the Father in thee;
That thy love might shine forth most bright,
And we more happy be.
XXXIII.
We never can express
Our thanks sufficiently,
That thou O King did back us bring,
And to that end did dye.
XXXIV.
Let Us then strike up our strings,
As Harpers full of skill,
And sing our song All our ay-long,
Till we do sing our fill.
XXXV.
What one is like to thee,
Oh holy glorious one!
What did thee move us thus to love,
When we were all undone.
CXXXVI.
Thou in thy self wast blessed,
Thou character express
Of Gods person, his only Son,
His Glories full brightness.
XXXVII.
It was exceeding love
And goodness to us when
In The dust we lay, and were but clay
To make us living men.
XXXVIII.
In thy divine Image
And to be like to thee
A living soul, and to control
All things in Earth and Sea.
XXXIX.
How could the dust deserve
To be preferred so?
It was only thy pleasure high
Thus thereunto to do.
XL.
Yet as it did no good
Such favor to procure,
So it no bad within it had;
For all thy works were pure.
XLI.
Whereas we not only
Void of all goodness were;
But had done ill, yet 'twas thy will
Favor to us to bear.
XLII.
All those expressions great
Of love, when we were dust,
We valued not, but quite forgot
To satisfy a lust.
XLIII.
The Serpent, who no good
Had done for us at all,
Far before thee preferred we
When we from thee did fall.
XLIV.
For without any show
That it was true he said
We took his lie, threw thy truth by;
Thy love aside we laid.
XLV.
Oh great ingratitude!
Folly and madness great!
So easily to throw thee by,
And suffer such a cheat.
XLVI.
Whereby we were defiled
And made thine enemies:
Very unjust and filled with lust
And all things good despise.
XLVII.
Yet that thou might us save
Thou wast content to be
For us made flesh, in our likeness,
Such sin except, as we.
XLVIII.
Thou did not take the form
Of some great King or Lord:
Like a servant, poor and in want,
Thou we'rt of men abhorred.
XLIX.
In which abased form
Great grief thou did sustain;
Yea for our good to shed thy blood
Thou did not disdain.
L.
Oh wondrous love indeed
That one so great and high,
Who did proceed from God, should bleed
And for us sinners dye.
LI.
Besides reproaches, blows,
Abuses, shame and scorn,
Thy bloody sweat, agony great,
Whereby thy life was worn.
LII.
The curse which was our due
Thou also did endure:
In the grave lay, till the third day
Our freedom to procure.
LIII.
Yea also thou went down
Into the lower Hell
As one bereft of God, and left;
Thy griefs no tongue can tell.
LIVE.
It was no gain from us
That thou could get thereby;
When we most had we could not add
Unto thy Majesty.
LV.
But how much less when we
Had lost what thou did give,
And nothing had, but what was bad
And were unfit to live!
LVI.
Oh what was sinful man
That thou should him so love?
At such a cost to save the lost
What pity did thee move?
LVII.
How can we but confess
That thine of right we are?
Since thou us made, thy life down laid,
Us when sinners to spare?
LVIII.
And yet that was not all,
Thy love did so exceed;
'Twas not only least we should dye
That for us thou did bleed.
LIX.
Thou like to us was it made,
And our deserts did bear,
That we might be made like to thee,
Thy robes of glory wear.
LX.
Oh depth! oh height of love!
None may compare with thee;
So low to lie, that we so high,
Who were so low, might be.
LXI.
Which thing to bring about
God raised thee again;
For pangs of death, or Hell beneath
Could not thee long detain.
LXII.
Because thou art the life,
The life eternal, and
Against that life no mortal strife
Of Death or Hell could stand.
LXIII.
The Serpent and his slaves,
Did strive thee down to hold;
But all in vain, thou rose again,
As was of thee foretold.
LXIV.
Oh mighty conqueror!
A glorious conquest here,
Thou o^^^ evil, sin, World and Devil,
Triumphantly did bear!
LXV.
This was the glorious fight,
This was the day indeed
Which God did make for his Names sake,
This did from him proceed.
LXVI.
These were the wars of God,
A battle bravely fought,
'Twixt the innocent, and the Serpent,
Whereby our peace was wrought.
LXVII.
No war was like to this,
This the foundation laid
Of all the blows and overthrows
Upon the foes since made.
LXVIII.
Those were the mortal foes
Of God and mankind too;
Against God's glory and Man's safety,
Their malice thy did show.
LXIX.
Oh Prince of might elect,
God's dear and only Son,
Thou them withstood unto thy blood,
Wherethrough the field was won.
LXX.
This field for us was fought;
Their helpless prey were we.
But thou them foiled and their plot spoiled,
Ransomed we were by thee.
LXXI.
We were thy lawful prize
And thou our lawful Lord;
Oh happy day then all did say
Who did believe thy word.
LXXII.
How deadly was that thrall
In which before we lay!
No Tyrants fell be so cruel
To use their slaves as they.
LXXIII.
Here was the coming in
Of all our future good:
Our hopes of all that since did fall
On this foundation stood.
LXXIV.
We never had come here,
Or this glory possessed,
Unless thou Lamb had overcame
And given us this conquest.
LXXV.
Here through thou took'st the spoils
Of all thine enemies;
And went on high triumphantly
With those thy victories.
LXXVI.
Oh who this victory,
This Conquest gotten thus,
Can so set forth as suits it is worth?
Here Is work enough for us.
LXXVII.
Thy mighty arm O Lord
Did to thy self obtain
This vishory, though we thereby
The benefit did gain.
LXXVIII.
Thy glorious Father who
Had chosen thee to this;
Who thee beheld, and in it upheld,
Then took thee up to bliss.
LXXIX.
Oh how his soul was pleased
To see this field thus won:
Such conquest got, over that plot,
Which had us all undone!
LXXX.
Oh how he did delight
Thee to receive up then!
Placing thy Throne his right hand on
Above Angels and Men.
LXXXI.
And as he had thee chose
This battle for to fight;
So did he choose thee still to use
In all his acts of might.
LXXXII.
He made thee to be Lord
Over all things low and high,
That they should be subject to thee
To all eternity.
LXXXIII.
And that thou might us bring
To all this happiness,
Thee he appointed, and eke anointed
To glorious Offices.
LXXXIV.
A Prophet he thee made
To us to prophecy:
To show the way which to thee lay
And guide us in it safely.
LXXXV.
And our High Priest to be,
Having such sacrifice
Up-offered, so accepted
As God will ne'r't despise.
LXXXVI.
And that thou may always
Before his face appear,
For men to plead and intercede,
Their sins away to bear.
LXXXVII.
And be the way whereby
We might an access have
To the holy place, to see God's face;
And fully us to save.
LXXXVIII.
And also to be King
Of Saints and Nations too:
Such to protect as be subject,
And all their foes ore-throw.
LXXXIX.
To all which Offices
As Man he thee ordained,
As a reward of that most hard
Service which thou sustained.
XC.
And that unto all these
Thou might well furnished be;
That his fullness thou should possess,
He granted unto thee.
XCI.
Of which he did thee judge
Most worthy, so do we
Angels and Men, both now, and then
That thou should highest be.
XCII.
Thou only worthy art
Oh Judah's Lion stout!
To take that Book and on it look
That Is sealed within, without.
XCIII.
The Book of Prophecy
Or of God's counsels deep,
That none unseal 't could, or reveal 't,
None now have cause to weep.
XCIV.
Thou Lamb was it found most meet
To open it and read:
It to unfold thou may be bold
Who for our sins did bleed.
XCV.
And by thy blood us bought
From every Land, to be
God's Priests and Kings; and over all things
On Earth now reign do we.
XCVI.
Yea all the Angels too
Fully agree to this;
That thou who was it slain for us, have
Most worthily all bliss.
XCVII.
Power, wisdom, riches, strength,
Who may like thee possess?
Thou art worthy Kingly glory,
And as a Priest to bless.
XCVIII.
That what thou did obtain
Thou may distribute too;
Such honor bear as every where
Thy Fathers will to do.
XCIX.
For such was this exployt
In which thou won'st this field,
That every thing to thee as King
All honor well may yield.
C.
And worthily thou have
In all thy power behaved
Thy self in all did since befall,
Wherein thou have us saved.
CI.
For other battles yet
Remained for thee to fight
In which thou too thy love did show
Thy wisdom, strength and might.
CII.
When thou had won that field,
And right to us had got;
Such yet our state we did thee hate
Or to thee yielded not.
CIII.
Although the Serpent had
No right to us at all,
His arms were gone, law he had none,
To keep us still in thrall.
CIV.
Yet by his subtlety
He still did hold us fast,
And to him we subject would be
And freedom would not taste.
CV.
For what we had from him
Received formerly,
Did yet remain in every vein
Working effectually.
CVI.
We yet were ignorant,
Error our minds possessed:
Lust in us lay and bare the sway,
No good was in our breast.
CVII.
For yet we knew no thee,
Who such things for us wrought,
Yea falsely we conceived of thee
In our vain mind and thought.
CVIII.
Oh what a do had thou
To gain us to thee here,
For through the lies of the enemies
We much bewitched were.
CIX.
So much a^hored we
To their false flatteries,
Our eyes we closed, our selves opposed
Against thy verities.
CX.
Against us then to fight
We caused thee, that we
Our foes might leave, and thee receive
Our God and guide to be.
CXI.
Though not against us so
As what did us mislead,
And us detained fast bound and chained
Did thou therein proceed.
CXII.
It still was thy design
Our sinful souls to save;
But to destroy what did annoy
Our souls, and them inslave.
CXIII.
A double edged sword
Proceeded from thy mouth,
One edge killed sin, and did us win
To love thee and thy truth.
CXIV.
The other edge cut down
Those who held fast their lust,
Cleaving to it into the pit
Of wrath thou them have thrust.
CXV.
And such our folly was,
Our loathness sin to leave,
That with the unjust we might been thrust
Our portion to receive.
CXVI.
But blessed be thy love
The spring of all our good,
And blessed thy truth which from thy mouth
We heard and understood.
CXVII.
And blessed thy patience,
And thy forbearance great,
Away to throw us thou wast slow,
But thou did for us wait.
CXVIII.
Oh had thou been but quick
Our many faults to mark,
We had our lot with those forgot
Who perish in the dark.
CXIX.
And blessed thy holy Spirit
Which ^o thy truth displayed
That by his hand it to understand
At length he us all made.
120.
Blessed be thy wisdom too
And thy great skilfulness,
In ordering all that did befall
In all occurrences.
121.
Thou have the Learned's tongue
In skill thou art expert,
Both to embrace and hide thy face
To kill and to convert.
122.
Thy way is in the deep
Thy footsteps who has known?
Had thou nere frowned and us nigh drowned
We had been overthrown.
123.
By Chastisements, Reproofs,
Darkness and waters deep
Thou have us often fought out and taught,
And us from Hell distd keep.
124.
By them thou us have often
So nurtured from our youth,
As us inclined and bowed our mind
To listen to thy truth.
125.
Which through thy gentleness
And grace therein displayed,
Though often withstood yet 'twas so good
As us 't obedient made.
226.
Thou rod'st on prosperously
In meekness truth and love,
Which did us melt when we it felt
And our hearts to thee move.
127.
Such were the ways whereby
Our hearts thou did subdue;
Error expelling and Satan quelling
And making us anew.
128.
Though diverse methods thou
With us was pleased to take,
As thou did see might meetest be
Thy people us to make.
129.
When thou did us espouse
To thy self by thy grace,
Us in thee planting, and to us granting
To have a fixed place.
130.
Wherein thy love was rich
Surpassing every thought,
That we of thee branches should be;
Who formerly were naught.
131.
For we deserved ^^ave been
Cut down and wholly cast,
Into the fire, to have the hire
Of all our evils past,
132.
Herein thou did again,
A noble conquest make:
Us from our sin we lived in,
Unto thy self to take:
133.
Oh noble Conqueror,
Thy power and might we see;
Oh Lord of Hosts throughout all coasts:
What one is like to thee.
134.
Herein we do admire
The force of thy great love,
Our stubborn hearts, and bad deserts,
Which got so much above.
135.
And here began our bliss,
Our happy state, in which
Thou did us bring unto a spring,
And Fountain sure and rich.
136.
Here our new life began,
Because we planted were;
Into a stock which did not mock,
But made us fruit to bear.
137.
A Root most free of Sap
And living juice where from,
We did inherit both Life and Spirit,
Yea all good thence did come.
138.
A Root which did us bear,
And give us living fruit;
Thy word declared it, thy Arm unbar'd it,
And made us with it suit.
139.
Thence all our Springs were found;
And all our fruits were good:
For all our own away were thrown,
Being unfit for food.
140.
Oh what an happy state,
Were we advanced to,
When into thee planted were we;
And made in thee to grow.
141.
We one with thee became,
And of thy bliss partook;
Better we had, and what did glad:
More than what we forsook.
142.
God pittyed us before,
But now he did us own,
He in his love, did us approve:
And of him we were known.
143.
The special love that was,
Thy lot thou did impart,
Gods loving face, that secret place
Which thou had in Gods heart.
144.
This was a happy Change,
While we in Adam were:
Our case was sad, and very bad,
But now 'twas blessed here.
145.
We had not God before,
Because we had not thee;
In whom he is and gives his bliss:
Then wretched men were we.
146.
For though thou were the hope,
And help of lost mankind:
Yet without Thee, hope had not we:
Nor solid peace of mind.
147.
But when in Thee thou gave,
Sure title to all good:
Because in Thee, the living Tree,
And Root of life we stood.
148.
We were to Thee espoused,
And Thou our Husband were:
In thine Estate, for love and hate:
We thenceforth had our part.
149.
Thy Father ours became;
Thine Angels were our guard:
Thy Riches ours, thy Wisdom Power:
And thine was our reward.
150.
Thine Enemies thence were ours,
And thy friends our friends too;
In Thee Elect God did respect,
And favor to us show.
151.
Yea hence is all the joy,
And glory we possess;
Hence Worlds abuse, and Gods good use,
In joy and happiness.
152.
Thence God us took for Sons;
All former things were gone:
No wrath abode, his love He showed,
His face upon us shone.
153.
But Thou had other fights,
Wherein a share had we;
At thy command, with Thee to stand,
Against the Enemy.
154.
In which Thou were our help,
Our Captain and our Guide:
Thy grace and love, they did us move,
Still with thee to abide.
155.
The same that did at first,
Our hearts to thee subdue;
Was it prevailed when Joes assaild,
And made us to Thee true.
156.
In which thy grace supplied
What in us wanting was;
Our weaknesses, Miscarriages;
There throught thou by did pass.
157.
Doubtless had thou not been
So clothed with Charity;
Our many halts, Retreats, and Faults:
Had made Thee cast us by.
158.
But none is like to Thee,
No Captain so will bear,
His Soldiers faults, retreats, and halts;
Or can their hearts so cheer.
159.
Thou wast the prize for which
We fought, thy prize were we:
Our Enemies Plot was us to have got
Quite out again from Thee.
160.
Therefore they us enticed,
To leave the Faith wherein,
We one with Thee were made, and free
Were set from all our fin.
161.
That was the bed of love:
The bond of Amity.
Therefore from that, to separte
Us sought the Enemy.
162.
By many a Stratagem,
He did us often assail,
By flatteries, and batteries,
Yet could he not prevail.
163.
Although he had the world
As a great Magazine,
Of fiery Shafts fit for his Crafts
Our souls to undermine.
164.
From whence on either side,
He did us often assault,
With pleasing sights, or dreadful frights;
Yea we had many a fault.
165.
From which he oft-times raised,
By his great policy
Such over casts and dreadful blasts,
As made us like to fly.
166.
Oft-times us to allure
To take part against thee,
Pleasures He brought into our thought,
Or glory made us see.
167.
And sundry other things,
Which with our flesh did suit,
From Trees to sight fit for delight,
Moving to pluck the fruit.
168.
Sometimes to puff us up,
That down he might us throw;
Our godliness, gifts, parts, graces,
Or works he would us show.
169.
Sometimes again by Cheats,
Which he thereto abused:
Some crooked way, He forth would lay,
Which was of Thee refused.
170.
Sometimes this art he used,
The easly'r us to take,
As if of light, an Angel bright
He were, He show would make.
171.
Oft-times He also showed,
What dreadful things should be,
From instruments of his intents,
If we would cleave to Thee.
172.
The world he stirred to wrath,
Against us for thy sake;
So that of mocks, Scourges or Stocks,
Often times we did partake.
173.
Yea many hardships thence,
He pressed us withal;
By many losses, and diverse crosses,
Moving from Thee to fall.
174.
Not only our Estates,
He sometimes from us caught;
But even our blood, like to a flood,
Was powered out full often.
175.
But Thou by thy good grace,
And help which thou did give,
Our Enemy, did make to fly,
And made our Souls to live.
176.
Armor of righteousness,
On each hand us did fend:
Thy glory bright, stood on our right;
OF the eft wrath without end.
177.
If to Thee and thy Word,
Thy right and perfect ways;
Firm we would cleave, and not thee leave,
Thou shew'dst us endless praise.
178.
But if Thee we would leave,
And turn to van^^ie;
For worldly good, or fear of blood,
We endless torments see.
179.
Which things eternal while,
Thou made us keep in view,
Things temporal, we slighted all;
And not from Thee withdrew.
180.
Thou were our strength and stay;
Our help was of thy grace:
Through thy defense, no fond pretense,
Did move us out of place.
181.
Here also Thou did get.
The conquest over our foes:
The victory, and the glory,
Unto thine honor goes.
182.
We had been wholly foild,
And driven from Thee again;
But that our heads thou covered'st,
And did our hearts sustain.
183.
To thee we give the praise
Of our safety until,
Through manifold perils untold,
Our days we did fulfill.
184.
When yet one combat more,
Abode us generally:
To yield our Breath, passing through death,
And in the grave to ly.
185.
Nor had we any might,
Against that Enemy:
Give way mus we, to Gods decree;
That mankind once must die.
186.
Whereto by several ways,
We did arrive at length:
Diseases some made thither come,
Or some decay of strength.
187.
By persecutions some,
Through many deaths, much pain,
Who for thy name, slaughter and shame;
Did valiantly fustain.
188.
For every one of which,
Praises to God and thee,
The lamb, by whom, all that did come,
Well ordered was we see.
189.
Through thee it was for good,
That such things we did bear:
Yea sins also whence griefs did flow,
As they permitted were.
190.
By our unrighteousness,
And our offenses sore,
Thy righteousness, was more express,
And our engagements more.
191.
Thou turnst them all to good,
Though from us they were ill:
And thou thy praise from thence did raise,
By thy great power and skill.
192.
It was for good that Death
Thou did to us ordain:
Diseases, pains, and such remains;
As brought to dust again.
193.
For by the thoughts thereof,
And sights, and feelings too;
Thou did us wake, more have to make,
To escape from endless woe.
194.
They moved us the less,
The flesh and world to mind:
And unto thee the more to flee,
And seek thy Grace to find.
195.
They made us less to prize,
What did from thee allure:
Death did present, their enjoyment
Falling and unsecure.
196.
They made us less to dread,
What men us scared by;
While Temporal, we see them all,
And that no way but die.
197.
Yea while we also see,
That common Death no less;
Torments had often, then what down brought,
Those that did Thee confess.
198.
Yea further, Death and grave,
This good unto us brought;
They gave us rest, from what oppressed,
When all our work was wrought.
199.
We bless thee for them all,
For all together wrought;
For our great good, even death and blood,
And more joy to us brought.
200.
While greater proofs we had,
Of thy great faithfulness:
How great each hour, thy love and power,
To help our weaknesses.
201.
For as our trials did,
Thereby abound and grow;
So thy supports, and our comforts,
Did more upon us flow.
202.
Oh happy was that time,
Happy the means by which;
Persuaded we, became by Thee,
To take a course so rich.
203.
Thy words to intertain,
And thy servants to be;
Sustain the loss, and bear the cross,
And follow after Thee.
204.
Oh blessed be that grace,
That power, and truth, and love;
Which did us draw, and keep in awe,
Notletting us remove.
205.
For herein also Thou,
Our mighty Captain stood;
Our Enemy foild, his Armies spoild,
And filledst us with good.
206.
For though our flesh fell down,
And Death it overcame:
And Fire or Grave, did it outbrave,
Yet we received no shame.
207.
Yea more than Conquerors,
In all those things we were:
Through thy great love, which did Thee move,
Our sin and Death to bear.
208.
This was our victory,
The faith we had in Thee:
That turned to meat, what did us eat,
And made us life to see.
209.
But yet the full conquest,
Over that Enemy;
Thou did not make, till thou did take,
From Grave our dead Body.
210.
Though when Death had us seized,
And Bodies dead did ly,
Our Spirit with Thee, thou took'st to be,
In thy joy and glory.
211.
Where safety thou us gav'st,
And freedom from all ill.
In peace to rest in thy sweet breast,
Our rising time until;
212.
Yet Death and grave had so,
Our Bodies quite depraved:
As that it seemed not to be deemed,
That thence they could be saved.
213.
Such transmutations they,
Did so long time sustain,
They were so jumb'd, dispersed and crumbl'd
How could they rise again?
214.
But all this made but way,
For greater glory yet*
And to complete thy Conquest great;
Which thou could not but get.
215.
For by thy powerful voice,
The Graves and place all,
Where we lay hid, presently did,
Yield us up at thy call.
216.
They had no power and might,
Against thy power and will;
Us to retain, and make remain:
Under corruption still.
217.
Thy Angels thou sentst sorth,
And gatheredst thine Elect:
That we by thee might honored be,
With great love and respect.
218.
And now we do enjoy,
The Kingdom gloriously,
With Thee we reign and shall remain;
To all Eternity.
219.
Oh what a Warrior stout,
Art thou, Thou meekest Lamb!
There Is none could stand against thy hand;
But thou them overcame.
220.
And Thou have given to us,
Thy Victories each one;
Our Enemies all, thou made to fall;
And would not reign alone.
221.
Thy Conquests now are full;
The field is fully clear:
There is no more, left any foe;
Not one does now appear.
222.
For now thou have them all,
Destroyed totally,
They down are gone, where help is none;
In endless flames they fry.
223.
And we, we reap the fruits,
Of all thy wars so great:
We have the end we did intend;
Thy pleasant fruits we eat.
224.
Now we are fully saved,
From all our miseries:
Broke is the Net, and we are set;
Above our Enemies.
225.
All praise is due to thee,
Thou all things have well done:
Thou first and last, have all outcast,
Now sorrows we have none.
226.
A toilsome path we trod;
A tedious journey had:
A Wilderness of great distress,
But now thou'st made us glad.
227.
In all our Pilgrimage,
And great temptations thou;
Did with us bide, have us supplied,
And we be happy now.
228.
Oh happy now our state,
Our joys who can express,
Well sing we may, Hallelujah;
And thee for ever bless.
FINIS.
Another to the same Tune.
1.
A New triumphant Song,
Filled full of mirth and praise;
To Thee our King, now will we sing;
Extolling thee always.
2.
And well we may rejoice,
Over all that wretched crew;
Who took delight, with great despite;
Our ruin to pursue.
3.
Where are they all become,
That did us sore oppress;
They all are gone, left there is none,
That may impair our bless.
4.
Where is that old Serpent,
That dreadful Dragon fell?
Hallelujah, he is not to day,
For He Is thrust down to Hell.
5.
He and his Angels all,
That vexed us full sore;
Lying in wait, for us with hate,
Destroyed are evermore.
6.
That dreadful burning Lake,
Of wrath so large and deep;
They Are thrown into, to bear their woe,
Where Sinners wail and weep.
7.
Where are those dreadful Beasts,
That were his instruments;
With horns and heads, so full of dreads,
Breathing out punishments?
8.
Where is their pompous train,
Their Names of blasphemy?
There Is not a Crown, unfallen down,
There Is none of them on high.
9.
Where now is the false Prophet,
Who all the World deceived;
Who up did cry, and magnify,
The Beast and him believed?
10.
Who did him worship give,
And to his Image fall?
Name, Image, Mark, are all 'th' dark;
And their Adorers all.
11.
Both Beas and Prophet false,
Are gone into the lake;
To bear their hire, in that great fire,
Whose burnings never slake.
12.
Where is that painted Whore,
Which rode in Pomp and State?
Her gilded Cup, which was filled up,
With poisonous liquors late?
13.
Whom Earthly Kings adored,
As if she sure had been;
The only fit, in State to sit,
As Sovereign Lady-Queen!
14.
Who sought and sucked out blood,
As if it had been sweet;
Greatest and least, she caused the Beast,
To trample under feet.
15.
Because we liked not
Th'intoxicating wine,
Which from her Cup, the World sucked up,
As if 'thad been divine.
16.
Where is she now become,
She and her Lovers too,
Who did commit, what was not fit,
With her, and whoredoms do?
17.
Alas they are long since,
Burnt up and quite destroyed:
Their Market's gone, and they did moan,
Who in her greatness joy'd.
18.
Yea all the train of foes,
Who in our sorrows laughed,
Who Thee refused, and us abused,
Destruction has them caught.
19.
Thou have them overcome,
O Lamb, of Kings the King:
Well may we say, Hallelu-jah,
And praises to Thee sing.
20.
Where now is all that lust,
That had in us a hold!
Its subtle Heads, Delights and dreads,
And branches manifold?
21.
Which service challenged,
And over us would reign:
Did us molest, and often oppressed,
And cau'd us smart and pain.
22.
And where is the carnal mind,
That subtly did devise,
To draw us in, to commit sin,
Through its deceits and lies.
23.
And where is the whorish heart,
Which often withdrew from thee:
And did us cheat, with many a feat,
Making us sorrow see?
24.
These foes are all destroyed,
And we from them are free:
By thy sharp sword, thy powerful word,
They all consumed be.
25.
No error in our mind,
Nor ignorance has place:
Our hearts retain, nothing that is vain,
Thanks therefore to thy grace.
26.
Nothing of unbelief,
Or of unlovingness:
No envy, hate, strife or debate,
Pride, falsehood us possess.
27.
Thou have us made so clean,
That in us there is no spot:
No wrinckled skin, no jot of sin,
Nor weakness in our lot.
28.
Thou our good husband art,
Who did our faults so bear;
And them reprove, with words of love,
As made us Thee to hear.
29.
And what we heard of Thee,
Did wash us wondrously:
But now thy sight, makes us so white,
No blemish thou can spy.
30.
Hallelujahs we sing,
Sin us no more annoys:
Hallelu-jah, Hallelu-jah,
We no^ have perfect joys.
31.
Where is mortality?
All our Diseases, pains;
Our Massiness, which did us press?
Naught of them now remains.
32.
Oh death where is thy sting?
Grave where is thy victory?
Where be our fears, wrings, strains and tears,
And all that made us cry?
33.
Where are our often complaints?
Our brui^es, breaches, wounds?
Our sighs and moans? Our sobs and groans?
Our famtings and our swounds?
34.
Where are our sleepless nights?
Where are our toilsome days;
Our ghastly siglus Or ^udain frights?
And what (...) us amaze?
35.
Where be our lamenesses?
Deafness and Dumbness too?
Dimness of sight, our want of light,
Crutches wherewith to go?
36.
Where are our pangs and throws?
Our cruel ach's and smarts?
Our weary beds? Our dizzy heads?
Our sad and doleful hearts?
37.
Where are our Prison bands?
Fetters? and Pillories?
The hurtful stocks? The taunts and mocks?
And furious outcries?
38.
The Gallows and the racks?
The Gibbets? Beasts? and Fire?
With whatsoever, did rend and tear,
Or did us ver and tire?
39.
Where is that rottenness,
That after Death took hold?
The stinking smell? The jaws of Hell?
And what else may be told.
40.
Not one of these appears,
They are all fled and gone;
Hallelu-jah to Thee we say;
For it is from Thee alone.
41.
All enemies thou subdu'dst,
Oh who is like to Thee?
Thou Lord of Hosts, art in all coasts,
And thou have made us free.
42.
Thou the stout Warrior art;
In Battle mighty strong:
The man of War, by whom all are
Subdued; Thou art our Song.
43.
By Thee we have escaped,
Whatever ill befell;
By Thy goodness we now possess,
Such joys as none can tell.
44.
Thou from the midst of foes,
Have brought us now to be;
With Angels bright, in Heavenly light,
Companions with Thee.
Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27, 28, 22. 45.
NOw we may sing and say,
What one is like unto;
Jesuruns God, In The Heavens who rode,
To save us from all woe?
46.
The Eternal God Thou were,
Our refuge; and thine arms;
Under us were, us up to bear,
From all dangers and harms.
47.
Thine everlasting arms,
Whose strength does rever fail:
With them the unjust, thou out have thrust,
And made us to prevail.
48.
Thou have destroyed them all,
Who did us injury:
And now there is none, we dwell alone,
And are in great safety.
49.
New Heavens and Earth have we,
A Land of Corn and Wine:
You Are our fountain, and Thou do rain,
on us thy dew divine.
50.
Oh happy Israel,
What one is like to us:
Saved by the Lord who is the sword,
And shield most mavelous.
51.
To which our foes are all,
At length as Liars found:
Their planes high, where in safety,
They dwelt, we have trod to the ground.
52.
How glorious now our State,
Praises to Thee therefore:
Who can express, the blessedness,
That we have evermore?
53.
Our Body is become,
All glorious like to thine:
Thy glory bright, more than the light*
Or Sun does make us shine.
54.
Like Angels now we be,
With whom we do converse:
As nimble, and light, as pure and bright,
And through all things do pierce.
55.
We need no Marriages,
More than they for increase:
Our Company can never die,
Our joys shall never cease.
56.
Nay now we Angels judge,
Such is to us thy heart,
Thy very Throne, which Thou sit'st on,
Thou do to us impart.
57.
Our pleasures now are full,
Immived, pure and clear:
We feel no cold, we wax not old,
Nothing our strength does wear.
58.
No Winter time we have,
No withering or decay;
No Frost nor Snow, No storms do blo^,
We have all Summers day,
59.
Yet without parching heat,
Or ought that may annoy:
No scorching Sun o^^e us does run,
Naught to allay our joy.
60.
Great joy we also have,
In our society:
Each one in other, as in our Brother,
Have great felicity.
61.
Here Abel we enjoy,
Who suffered first for Thee:
Enoch, Noah, and all thy way,
Who kept, our Partners be.
62.
The holy Patriarks,
Before and since the flood;
Father renowned, with glory crowned,
And all their children good.
63.
Thy holy Messengers,
Martyrs and Confessors:
Who faithful were, with us are here,
Of life inheritors.
64.
But above all the rest,
Thy presence glorious;
Does satisfy, eternally,
And make us triumph thus,
65.
Like a City compact
And fully one are we:
Where without rent, or discontent,
We perfectly agree.
66.
And perfectly we joy,
In one another good;
All perfectly, Thee glorify,
Who for us shed'st thy blood.
67.
In Thee for evermore,
We all have full content;
Thee to behold, Thee to unfold,
Is all our merriment.
68.
No one does seek himself;
Or in himself delights
But every one, is fixed on,
Thy glorious beauty bright.
69.
Thou art our All; in whom,
Father and Spirit both;
And all good else, with us now dwells:
Thy glory does us cloth.
70.
In Thee we were complete,
And had all good before:
Completely we, now enjoy Thee,
And thine for evermore.
71.
All excellencies which,
In the Creation were;
From Thee they flowed, and Thee they showed,
In Thee we have them here.
72.
Thou the beginning art,
Of Gods Creation good:
The ground most strong and firm, whereon
All things were built and stood.
73.
Thou art the perfect LIGHT,
Thou our of carkness shone;
And made us see, things as they be.
Light out of Thee there is none.
74.
In earth, Thou art the Plant,
Of honor and renoun:
The righteous root, whence issued out,
What ever God does own.
75.
Thou Root of David art,
Whence all his hopes did spring;
Of that Kingdom, which now is come,
Whereof Thou art the King.
76.
Thou art the fruitful Vine,
That does that grape forth bear,
Which God and man, heartily can,
And have refresht with cheer.
77.
Thy full obedience,
And precious blood out shed;
Relieved our hearts, in all our smarts.
And God fully pleased.
78.
Thou art the stately Palm,
And Olive fresh and green;
With weights oppressed, thou grewst up best,
You Are always lively seen.
79.
Thou art the green Firt-Tree,
Whence all our fruits abound,
And the Apple Tree, where under we,
Have fragrant shadow found.
80.
Thine Apples oftentimes,
Have us most cheerful made:
Flagons of Wine, from Thee our Vine,
Often times our hearts have staid.
81.
Like Cedar tall and strong,
Which uses not to rot:
Such is thy reign, which does remain,
Firm and decays not.
82.
The stone of Israel,
And aged Rock thou art:
The precious stone, Foundation,
To stay and strength the heart.
83.
Thou art the Pearl of price,
For whom we all things sold:
The Silver of strength, whence days of length,
You Are the most precious Gold.
84.
Among the waters thou,
The Sea and Ocean art:
Whence all do flow, to which all owe,
The good they do impart.
85.
All good from Thee proceeds,
And unto Thee again:
It is but meet, that all retreat,
Who do all good contain.
86.
Thou art the Fountain too,
And Spring of waters pure,
Which run and live, Thou all do give,
Thy Streams are allways sure.
87.
All other things beside,
Are Cisterns, Pipes, and Pools*
Who Thee forsook, and of them took,
Were all deluded fools.
88.
Thou art the Life indeed,
All Life from Thee does flow:
The Life and love, wherein we move,
We wholly to Thee owe.
89.
For we were dead in sins,
No living act could do:
Till thy fresh sent, did us prevent,
And reach our souls unto.
90.
In Heaven the Morning Star,
Which in our darksome night;
When helpess we, No hope could see.
Arose and Brought us light.
91.
Thou art the glorious Sun,
Light, Heat, and life from Thee;
To all to whom, thy virtues come,
Sweetly imparted be.
92.
The Sun of righteousness,
Which has upon us rose:
And in thy wings, all healing brings,
And all our wounds have closed.
93.
Oh what were we if Thee,
We did not now enjoy?
Sure like to those, who are thy foes,
And whom thou do destroy.
94.
Its glorious to behold,
Thy glorious countenance;
It gives us sight, fills with delight,
And does our souls advance.
95.
In thy light we do live,
And walk for evermore:
In Thee we play, and joy all day,
Hallelu-jah therefore.
96.
Amongst those things on Earth,
Thou made to live and move;
Like to the tame and harmless LAMB,
Thou were in thy great love.
97.
Gods Lamb most innocent,
Most meek and spotless, who
Clothing and food, affordest good,
And ill did undergo.
98.
With greatest patience,
Not answering again;
Though Thou defiled wast, and reviled,
By men, and put to pain.
99.
Gods Lamb indeed thou were,
That sacrifice whereby;
Our peace was made, wrath aside laid,
And we received mercy.
100.
Thy flesh thou gav'st for food,
Thy blood was drink indeed:
Feeding on that, we comfort gat,
And strength in every need.
101.
Thy righteousness us clothed,
And thy virtues so high;
And most divine, do make us shine,
Always most gloriously.
102.
Thou art the Lion too,
For strength and power: so those
Thee often have found, unto their wound,
Who were thy mortal foes.
103.
In thy great strength Thou have
Upon them roard, whereby
They were thy prey, and behold they,
Torn and devoured now ly.
104.
Oh it was well for us,
That Thou our General:
A Lion wer'^, else we like Hearts,
Had soon been r^uted all.
105.
Thou art the UNICORN,
Thy Horn is stately high:
Thy power and might, alone to flight,
Has put the Enemy.
106.
Thou art the Glory, and
The sum of all the rest.
The Man thou art, who have the heart,
With understanding best.
107.
For Thee were all things made,
And they were given to Thee:
In Heaven and Earth, above beneath,
And in the Ocean Sea.
108.
Thou art the Male to us,
And we thy Femal be:
Thou the Husband, us to command,
And we the spouse to Thee.
109.
For Thee we framed were,
And of Thee secretly:
While thou did sleep, a sleep so deep,
As for our fins to die.
110.
Out of thy flesh we are,
And out of thy bone too:
One Soul we have, which thy Breath gave,
Thy Heavenly things to know.
111.
In us thou take delight,
And our delight thou art;
Thou with thy grace, do us embrace,
And lay'st us in thy heart.
112.
While thou did us embrace,
And we submit to Thee;
There did proceed, from Thee that Seed,
Which made us fruitful be.
113.
Which in thine own Image,
Thou did beget, we bear;
Thy Company, makes us happy,
All our eternal year.
114.
Thou art the Angel too,
The Messenger by whom;
The Heavenly grant, Gods Covenant,
Down unto us did come.
115.
Yea all the things of weight,
We in the Scriptures read;
Completely be, fulfilled in Thee,
As might be mentioned.
116.
The Sabboath or the Rest,
Thou art, and Thou do give:
Thou art our rest, God has Thee blessed,
Joyful in Thee we live.
117.
From all his mighty works,
God ay in Thee does cease:
Thou art the end, whereto they tend,
Thou art our Rest and peace.
118.
In Thee by us enjoyed,
Our works are ended all:
No travail more, or labor sore,
Or grief shall us befall.
119.
We also are thy Rest,
For now that us thou have:
Thy works are over, for evermore,
Thy labors all are past.
120.
Thou the sweet Garden art,
The Garden of delight;
The Paradise, where pleasure lies,
And what does please our sight.
121.
And we thy Garden are,
In us thou pleasure take:
Us to possess, Taste of and dress,
Thou often thy business made.
122.
Thou art the TREE of LIFE,
Which pleasant fruits does bear:
Whereof we leave, have to receive,
And Death we cannot fear.
123.
The River too thou art,
Of living waters pure:
Thy streams go out, and run about,
With joys both full and sure.
124.
Thou have been unto us,
The ARK; wherein we were
Shut up and kept, not to be swept,
Away, with floods of fear.
125.
Thou art the Covenant too,
Made between us and God:
In Thee we be, for ever f^ee,
From fears of future flood.
120.
Yea Thou that Covenant art,
In which we are the Lords:
And God our Tower, by his great power,
All bless to us affords.
127.
In and with Thee He has given
The everlasting Land:
Whereof we be, The heirs with Thee,
In whom our lots do stand.
128.
In Thee from all our flesh,
We circumcised were:
The Blessed seed, thou art indeed,
Whence we be blessed here.
129.
Thou art the high Father,
And we thy Children be:
We are the Kings, and the offspring,
Proceeded out of Thee.
130.
Thou art the Isaac,
The heir of promise, who
Our laughter art, Thou make our heart
Rejoice after our woe.
131.
Thou art the Israel,
The Prince with God and Man:
By both assailed, thou have prevaild,
With both the field thou wan.
132.
Thou the true Joseph art,
First by thy Brethren sold:
To sufferings by, their great envy,
Exposed manifold.
133.
But from those great sufferings,
Thou were exalted high;
To have the store: to Thee therefore,
All had resort to buy.
134.
Thou the meek Moses art,
Drawn out of waters great:
Whom also thy, People thrust by,
And badly did entreat.
135.
Thou unto us wast sent,
A Prophet, Priest and King;
From dreadful thrall, us out to call,
And hither us to bring.
136.
Thou shewd'st thy mighty signs,
On Pharaoh and his Land;
The Dragon fell, to us cruel,
And who with him did stand.
137.
Thou brought us forth from thall,
And lead'st us through the Sea:
Of troubles great, which though they beat,
Thou made a wall to be.
138.
A means of safety from,
The Dragon who pursued;
Thou did us save, where they their grave,
Did make, by thee subdued.
139.
Thou ledst us through the wide,
And howling wilderness:
Thou us stoodst by, led'st us safely,
Through fears and great distress.
140.
Yea there thou all things were,
To us that they enjoyed;
The Paschal Lamb, Through thee we came,
From the world undestroy'd.
141.
Even through thee crucified,
Besprinkled with thy Blood;
Through faith we eat, thy flesh as meat,
And in all slaughters stood.
142.
Thou our Lawgiver were,
A Law of Life and grace:
Thou gav'st from on, the Mount- Sion,
Thy high and holy place.
143.
Which in our fleshly hearts,
Thou too imprintedst so;
That we clave fast, unto the last,
And would not from thee go.
144.
Thou that great Prophet art,
By whom the Father did:
Those things reveal, which under Seal,
Lay in his bosom hid.
145.
Thou wast our Ark of strength,
Gods presence in thee was:
By Thee we were, safe in each fear,
And safely on did pass.
146.
Thou wast that Tabernacle,
Where God with us did dwell:
He would in Thee worshipped be,
And there his mind did tell.
147.
Thou wast the Sacrifice,
Our sins to take away;
Us to atone, and make at one,
With thy Father for ay.
148.
Yea Altar and Incence,
And Mercy-Seat thou were;
Laver and Priest, Shoulder and Breast,
Thy holy Priesthoods part.
194
The Light and Candlestick,
The Table and Shewbread;
Thou to us were, though Thou impart,
Thy glory as our head.
150.
Thou were our Manna while,
In Wilderness we were;
Daily did we, partake of Thee,
Till we arrived here.
151.
And often we guilty were,
Of slighting Thee through lust;
Which made us crave, such things to have,
As were for us unjust.
152.
Through which sometimes we did
Gods wrath upon us bring;
So as to send, the fiery Feind,
Our Souls to vex and sting.
153.
Against the which Thou were,
Our Brazen Serpent sure:
While we betook, ou^ selves to look,
To Thee thou did us cure.
154.
Thou art the Rock from which,
By Moses Rod, when smore;
By curse of Law, Thy blood to draw,
Fresh waters issued out.
155.
Even Heavenly Doctrine,
And Heavenly comforts sweet,
Where with in all, that did befall,
We every where did meet.
156.
Nay all the Types were short,
Of thy perfections great;
Thou did exceed, and do indeed,
All things that thee forth set.
157.
Moses did fail and die,
Before the peoples rest:
But thou do live, and to us give,
The land that's ever blessed.
158.
For Thou our Joshuah art,
Who Finishedst our way:
Thou dry'dst the River, Even Death for ever,
And here thou make us stay.
159.
Thou our Great Captain art,
By thee and thy command,
Our battles fought, and we are brought,
Into this pleasant Land.
160.
This glorious Land of Rest,
Where we all fullness have:
What ever thou, did promise, now,
W'injoy, and more cannot crave.
161.
You Are our Deliverer,
The Judge who did us save:
By thy just Doom, we here are come,
This glorious Rest to have.
162.
Where all in and with thee,
We have this endless day:
Therefore O King, to Thee we sing,
Hallelu-jah always.
163.
Thou the true David art,
Over all Israel set:
His Royal Throne, Thou first upon,
Thy Kingdom's very great.
164.
To which Thou art advanced,
From Sheol's dreadful hand:
From suffering by, the great envy,
Of those that ruled the Land.
165.
Thou art the Anointed King,
That have beat down our foe:
A City great and built complete,
Thou have us brought unto.
166.
Where thou the beauty art,
The Sun and glorious Light:
For here we thee, enjoy and see,
Thy Majesty most bright.
167.
In Thee we God enjoy,
And his Sons fully are:
With us he dwells, our joy excels,
Our City is most rare.
168.
Its Gates are precious Pearls,
Its Streets are finest Gold.
All things are pure, precious and sure,
And glorious to behold.
169.
For Gods own glory here,
For evermore does shine:
And us to fill, with pleasure still,
All things do here combine.
170.
O happy glorious state,
Who can it all declare?
Beyond all wishes, beyond all blesses,
Our happinesses are.
171.
Thou art our Solomon,
In peace and glory, raign'st:
B^ none disturbed, for thou have curbed,
All that rose thee against.
172.
And in this Kingdom we,
As Kings with thee do sit;
In Stately seat, and glory great,
As thou have thought it fit.
173.
That glorious Pomp and State,
Of Solomon of old:
Though it was found, greatly beyond,
All that of him was told,
174.
Yet was but a short type,
Of this thy glory high;
In which thou raignst, beset with Saints,
In glorious Majesty.
175.
In which ten thousand fold,
Ten thousand times nombred;
Thou do regard, us to reward,
For all we suffered.
776.
Our sufferings were but light,
And momentany; but
They Are weighty Crowns, endless renouns,
Which Thou have on us put.
177.
Thy Wisdom too exceeds,
Wise Solomon's by far:
Thou all things know, and clearly show,
None may with Thee compare.
178
That stately Temple which,
By Solomon was made,
Thou do excel, in whom does dwell:
All fullness of the Godhead.
179.
All his perfections here,
Are gloriously displayed;
And we them see, beyond what we,
Ever heard of them said.
180.
Yea Thou to us impart'st,
This glory too: for we,
An holy place, for Gods good Grace,
Are builded up by Thee.
181.
Thou the foundation art,
And precious Corner Stone:
Thou do us bear, and cause to adhere,
To God and every one.
182.
Through Thee God also dwells
With his perfections pure;
In us always, to his great praise,
For ever to endure.
183.
And that is the top and height,
Of all our happiness;
That God with us, we enjoy thus,
The Fountain of all bless.
184.
All which we have in Thee,
And with Thee perfectly;
Who can Thee reach, or who can preach,
All thy perfections high?
185.
Oh thanks for evermore,
To God and to the Lamb:
Through Gods grace good, and the Lambs blood,
It is that here we came.
186.
Where sulness of al^ joy,
And pleasures evermore;
Our portion be, therefore we Thee,
For ever do adore.
187.
The Scriptures we need not,
In dark they were our light:
Thou art our book, on Thee we look,
And all things see aright.
188.
Tou art our GENESIS,
In Thee we were create:
You Are our Beginning, without Beginning,
And End beyond all date.
189.
By thee we out of dust,
Or naught our beings had:
All things in Thee, to us are free,
And we have nothing bad.
190.
Thou art our EXODUS,
Our goings out of thrall.
Thou did us save, deliverance gave,
By thy high heavenly call.
191.
Thour't our LEVITICUS,
Through Thee to God we clave:
Through thy Priesthood, and offerings good,
He never did us leave.
192.
We also to be Priests,
Were all by thee anneald:
Our Leprosy, is cleans'd by Thee,
And all our issues healed.
193.
Thou art our NUMBERER,
In thee inrold we be:
Where God does own, in thee is shown,
Our Genealogy.
194.
Thou art our Second LAW,
A perfect summary:
Of Gods mercies, and our duties,
We do in thee descry.
195.
Thou art our JOSHUAH,
Our Savior, Judge, and King:
What we omitted, or else forgetted,
Thou to our mind do bring.
196.
Its thou in EPHRATA,
That have done worthily:
Poor Gen isles thou, when they did bow,
Have lifted up on high.
197.
Thou art the perfect Scribe,
The writer of Gods Law:
Freedom declared, and all repaird,
By thee, we also saw.
198.
The poor and patient JOB,
Made poor and rich again,
Who thee oppressed, at thy request,
Yet mercy did obtain.
199.
Thou the sweet Singer art,
The chief Musician, who:
The Instrument, did first invent,
And play'st upon it too.
200.
Thou art our PSALM and Song,
Our hearts and tongues always:
Thou through thy love, do tune, frame, move,
To fing forth all thy praise.
201.
Thou only fullness have,
All without thee is vain:
Thou art the Preacher, and heavenly Teacher,
Who do in Salem Reign.
202.
You Are the Beloved one,
The swift Roe, or young Heart:
The Song of Songs, to Thee belongs,
Who its chief Subject art.
203.
Thy Testimony is,
Of all the Prophets old;
The quintessence, and thou the sense,
Of Proverbs do unfold.
204.
Thou from a low degree,
Have raised us to the Throne;
The Righteous seed, Thou have all freed,
Here Is Lamentations none.
205.
Thou art the Gospels sum,
The tidings of great joy;
Blessings have we, and peace in Thee,
Nothing does us annoy.
206.
Thou Gods Epistle were,
His mind in Thee He writ;
When we absent were, he thee sent,
And Thou discoveredst it.
207.
Thou art the end of all,
In Thee God does unfold;
And has revealed, what lay concealed,
In Thee we All behold.
208.
Thou all art, and in all:
ALPHA and OMEGA:
Wherefore to Thee, ever do we,
Sing, Oh Hallelu-sah.
To the Holy Spirit.
1.
ANd yet again we will sing: and strike our strings,
We Will show forth whence the spring
Of joy that makes us sing,
Oh it is a glorious Fountain whence it springs!
2.
It is the Holy Spirit which he inherits,
Who did redeem us when,
We all were but lost men;
And purchased us to God by his great merits.
3.
The Spirit of Life which has, filled up our Faith;
And quenched all our griefs,
With his Cordial reliefs:
He Is Author of our good, rejoiced us has.
4.
He fills us with divine life, as with wine:
And always flows into us,
And does such glory show us;
That to rejoice we jointly do combine.
5.
And cannot but rejoice, with pleasant voice:
And that continually,
And to Eternity;
With joys and gloryings in him rare and choice.
6.
That holy Spirit we will With utmost skill,
Set (...) and magnify,
And (...) his love glory:
By whom God and the Lamb did all fulfill.
7.
He one is of the three in whom do we,
Live, love, and whom we do,
Worship and bow unto;
Whose glory it is our happiness to see.
8.
The glorious Father wild the word as skild,
(Being that deep wisdom,
In which the will does come)
Dev^'d, the Spirit of might it all fulfilled.
9
The Father and the word with one accord,
Decreed, devised to give,
Being to all that live,
And was the Spirit that being did afford.
10.
He is the mighty hand which the command,
Of the Father and the Son,
Which did through all things run,
Effected: gave the world to be and stand.
11.
He the Heavens high out spread and adorned,
According as Gods will,
Holy and wise in skill;
Pleased to determine: He them fashioned,
12.
The very crook't Serpent, to his intent,
He formed; and all beside
That was or does abide,
According to Gods great commandment.
13.
He man to understand, and to command,
All things in Earth and Sea
That he did make to be;
Did form and fashion by his mighty hand.
14.
He is the fullness which is the most rich,
Forth-going of the High,
Father and Son whereby,
All things He built, and as a tent did pitch.
15.
In him there is no less then all the bless,
And blessed virtues high,
Which do dwell perfectly
In God and in the word, and they possess.
16.
The fullness of all good like a great flood,
From the Ocean going,
And all overflowing;
Yea fuller it is than can be understood.
17.
He from God and his word, (with them one Lord)
Searches the things most deep,
Which God in Christ does keep;
The knowledge of them it is he does afford.
18.
One with them tw^^^ was He (As well know we,)
In all their councels old,
Most high and manifold;
Therefore they all by him declared be.
19.
Blessed be that Spirit of grace who in its place,
Did both a body frame,
For the Word, and th same
Sanctify, that no sin might it deface.
20.
The eternal Spirit the same who did us frame,
Seeing us in sin dead
And helpless, pittyed
Us all: and (blessed be his holy Name.)
21.
He that we might from sin, be freed wherein,
We lay condemned, prepared,
(As He had fore declared)
That blessed body unto us a kin.
22.
And filled it with his power that in the hour,
Of death and darkness He
Upheld was, did not flee;
From that great cup of vengeance sharp and sour.
23.
To which he by this Spirit that he might merit,
For us Redemption,
Accursed the Cross upon;
Did yield himself that we might Life inherit.
24.
Thou Spirit most blessed did raise within three days,
That body up again,
(Loosing of Death the pain)
To justify us (for which we thee prasse.
25.
And for those infinite perfections bright,
That are in Thee; and all
Thy works both great and small)
Thou carryedst up that body to heavens height.
26.
To glorious dignity and Majesty,
And him also thou do,
Fill full (oh holy Ghost,
The fullness of the Godhead) bodily.
27.
Through him Thou gifts did give That we might live,
Even Thou from him sent forth,
Gav'st heavenly gifts of worth;
Whereby men through thy grace error outdrive.
28.
And 'twas all times before Upon that score,
Of that great sacrifice;
Which Thou did fore-promise,
That thou did testify the love God bore.
29.
Thou blessed Spirit forth came And in Gods name,
The spirit of Truth thou did,
What before time lay hid:
Take, and unto Men did declare the same.
30.
Yet not to all that were Did thou so clear,
Their minds, and manifest
Gods councels ever blessed,
But unto some as thou pleas'dst did appear.
31.
Through Christ the Father did, his counsels hid,
By thee declare to some,
To whose minds thou did come,
And with whom as thou pleasedst thou abid.
32.
And those things to be writ, thou did commit
Moving those thereunto,
To whom thou did them show;
According as thou wisely did judge fit.
33.
Though Thou did also go convince and woo,
The world of mankind bad,
When they by their sins had
Themselves destroyed in a great overthrow.
34.
Thou art the wisdom high Of God whereby,
All called were to turn,
Though many men did spurn;
Yea we rebelled also grievously.
35.
That Spirit which did strive with men alive
Before the flood of old,
With reproofs manifold;
Who did their souls of happiness deprive.
36.
Of that sweet peace, comfort and great support,
Thou gave'st to those that closed
With thee and not opposed;
With them thou dealt'st after another sort.
37.
Thou would not strive with them who did contemn,
Thy counsels always, but
Did give them up, and shut
Them up in blindness; yea did them condemn,
38.
But unto those that turned (though they had spurned
Sometimes against thee too)
Thou did declare and show,
The secrets of the Lord with love that burned.
39.
Thou art the Spirit of love From God above,
Who Is love it self: and from
The Word, his only Son,
And thou in great love did reprove and move.
40.
That thou to good might move thou did reprove,
And where thou found'st a way,
(Thou man'st it) did convey;
Thy grace like waters, even thy sweetest love.
41.
'Twas love thou shew'dst from God when as his rod
Sometimes upon our bace,
(Because we were so slack
To goodness) he did lay, in love thou chod;
42.
Thou art that power and strength whereby at length,
We (though we stubborn were)
Were brought to approach near
To God, to see and hear him. Thou gav'st strenght
43.
Thou wrestled'st with us so (Oh there is no,
Such wrestler as thou art)
That thou o'recame'st our heart.
And made'st us from our sins depart and go.
44.
In and from thee we felt Gods love to melt,
And bow our hearts, and draw
Them when they frozen were. In thee power dwelt
45.
And dwells for evermore Thou heald'st our sore,
For 'twas by Thee, our Lord
In and by his good word,
Did heal us: we thee laud and praise therefore.
46.
As thou gav'st forth Gods mind (Thou did it find:
Also) in this good word
So, it was thou O Lord;
That made it of such force, to break and bind.
47.
Thou made it powerful to convince us so,
That what we were as we
Were in our selves, we see
That we did nothing rightly see or know.
48.
Nor that we could that do that us unto
God, might bring back; or keep
Us from the dreadful Deep
Of Hell: or us again redeem therefro.
49.
Thou therein did display, and before us lay
The glorious things of Christ,
(Worthy ay to be blist)
So as thou made our hearts on him to stay.
50.
'Twas thou, and Christ in Thee, whom so long we
Provck't and made to wait
Upon us at the gate,
Of our hard hearts. Blessed let that patience be.
51.
It was thy long-suffring that did us bring
Salvation: while thou there
Our many faults did bear,
Thou brak'st our stiffness, well we may thee sing.
52.
Had thou been, quick and rough T'had been enough,
To have destroyed us quite:
For cause enough thou might
Have found to have destroyed us, much bad stuff.
53.
But 'twas thy truth, thy grace, and that sweet face
Of Christ which thou did show
Which did prevail to bow,
Us to thee: while thou gav'st us such good space.
54.
Thou were that strength and power whereby each hour,
We were supported all,
And kept from that sad fall,
Which would us have destoy'd. Thou sweet'st our sout.
55.
Thou art that strength whereby the victory
Over our Enemies,
We gat and did arise,
Up from our foiles and falls; and did not die.
56.
Thou were our Comforter, by thee we were
In all our sorrows cheered;
By thee our eyes were cleared,
Thou did us in thine arms carry and bear.
57.
All good from Thee we had, (for we were bad)
Love, joy, peace, patience,
Meekness, faith, abstinence;
All our good fruits, and all that made us glad.
58.
'Twas thou that drew us so as made us go,
After the Lamb, although
Through much sorrow and woe;
Losses, crosses, and what the world could do.
59.
Thou art that Spirit of hope, which at the scope
Did make us look: the Rest,
And great reward possessed
Now by us, Thou did shew't beyond all trope.
60.
Thou shew'dst it, and our eye it to espy,
And wistly to behold,
Whereby we were made bold
Thou did direct and fix continually.
61.
When Death had seized upon, Our flesh and bone
And grave had unto dust
Converted us, Thou just
And holy Spirit, raisedst us alone.
62.
By the Good will of God and him that trod,
The grave down in his strength
Thou did us up at length
Raise and revive, Thou art the mighty God.
63.
Thou art that River claer that free from fear,
Have set us fully, and
Make us firmly to stand;
With joy in presence of the Lamb most Dear.
64.
A mighty River pure constant and sure,
Thou with thy sorce have thrown
All oppositions down;
Ans Thou us fill'st with joys that shall endure.
65.
With joy, with peace, with good (as with a flood,
Fed from the Ocean great,
The mighty Throne and seat,
Of God and of his Lamb which shed his blood.)
66.
Thou fillest us for ever: for they can never
fail, or abate, but flow
Without all end, no low
Ebb shall befall us Naught from God shall sever
67.
Naught from that Ocean, and Sea without Sand;
Those wates Christalline,
Most pure and most divine;
In their enjoyments we shall ever stand.
68.
For Thee in every heart, evern thee who art
The eternal powerful spirit,
We do ard shall inherit;
A band so firming us as we cannot part.
69.
From God or Christ or each by any breach,
From other, thou do give
Us without change to live,
Eternally; and ever Thee to preach.
70.
Thy glory's infinite, thy glory bright,
Oh Fountain of de ight!
Oh Ocean infinite;
Oh infinite Light, might, love infinite!
71.
To Thee oh Trinity in unity,
Eternal happiness,
Eternal endless Bless!
That art without all change eternally.
72.
We sing and shout always Hallelu-jah,
Praise thee we will always
Throughout our endless day,
And sing with height of joy: Hallelujah, Hallclujah.
Such things, but far more pure and excellent,
Then any humane tongue or pen can vent;
Or any heart of man, while here alive,
Can by all he may hear or read contrive;
Conceive or think of; shall those gloriously
Blessed persors utter, when they shall their high
And everlasting Kingdom have and hold.
For their great joys and glories cannot be told.
They Are far above what mortal man can speak.
Thine heart to apprehend them is too weak:
For never any since the World began,
Has ever heard, no nor Angel nor man:
Has by the care perceived, or by their eye
Have seen the greatness of the dignity,
Or brightness of the glory foreprepar'd,
For those who unto God give due regard:
Who love him and, for his appearance wait,
None but God see's and knows their happy state.
Canto VI. The Worlds Vanity.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, etc.

Matthew. 6.33.
In the sixth Canto Christ presents,
In brief the former two's contents;
The Damneds woes, Saints merriments.
Persuades the Soul to chase the best.
The Man consults with his own breast;
Cou^s^ls the Soul the way to rest.
Chri^^s Servant does the same persuade,
The Soul inclines, but is afraid;
To its Objection answer's made.
By Christ and by his Minister,
Christ does himself and Name declare:
Gives Counsels which the safest are.
Renews ^ is suits with earnestness,
With arguments the Soul does press;
Him more to value, the World less.
And by some instances it is plain,
That their both ways and ends are vain;
Who judge this world to be the Main.
Chr. SEE I have set before Thee good and ill,
I say not, choose whither of them thou will;
But choose the Life and good that thou may be
Happy for ever, and destruction flee.
Think on these things, the doleful state of those;
Who do rebel against me, and oppose
My truth, and my most equal government
How dreadful then will be their punishment.
Think, if thou can be able to endure
So woeful torments as sinners procure,
By sin unto themselves; think how great bless,
If me thou closest with thou shall possess.
Accept my profer'd kindness, me embrace;
Submit unto my Doctrine, so my grace
And favor thou shall have, and never know
The woeful plight of them that ly below.
Oh be persuaded now to let go all,
That does pollute Thee, and obey my call.
Follow my counsels, let me have thy heart;
Thou shall have mine, and il'le never from thee part.
I Will be thy friend for ever, thou shall have
More happiness, than thou can think or crave.

Man. Have thou not heard, my Soul, what thy great Lord
Proposes to thee in his holy word?
Such things thou there have heard, will thou not then,
Unto his wholesome Counsels say Amen?
Consider with thy self how bad thy state
In Adam was, how thou deservedst hate:
What sinfulness unto thee yet does cleave;
How good the Lord has been who did not leave
Thee in thy fallen state, but such an one
Has sent forth for man, even his only Son.
What he has done for thee, how he thee woes
Unto himself that thou with him would close.
How in his word and what it does contain,
He answers the Objectors cavils vain.
That unto Atheism would thee fain move;
Shows what will be hereafter: do approve
His profer'd love? Will thou of him accept?
Part with thy Idols! or shall they be kept?
Without all doubt its best to let all go,
To close with Christ who does thee love and woo.
Consider with thy self, if thou him slight,
All besides him to help thee have no might:
For they are poor sorry vanities; cannot give
Thee solid comfort; or cause thee to live
For ever: or with full content while here,
They cannot satisfy thy soul, not cheer
T^y drooping Spirits, when Death shall draw nigh,
And summons thee to yield thy breath and die.
Alas how short; and how uncertain be
The lives of men as we may daily see.
How many die while yet their bones are moist,
With marrow? Even while they have much rejoy^'t
In their firm strength! while milk was in their breast
How suddenly has pale death them oppressed?

Mini. If thou an Atheist were and could not tell
Whether in truth there be an Heaven or Hell,
Yet were it not far better so to think,
And seek for Heaven, than only eat and drink:
Enjoy this world a while, and then down ly
In a forgotten dark obscurity?
For if there be such things as thou have heard,
If Heaven be never sought for, Hell never feared,
Gods way and word despised, his truth neglected,
And all his profer'd love and grace rejected.
Thy case must needs be sad, for it does tend
Unto those miseries that never end.
And that there may be such things, reason cannot
Any good warrant fancy not to grant,
Seeing the being of the world and all
Therein, with many things that do befall
Evince a Deity, and what so great,
But may be well conceived, as well as that
This so great world a being given it had?
He that sees and believes this, sure is mad
To think impossible what e're beside,
Is as from him that made it testified.
Whereas if no such things should be (which yet,
Who can suppose except that he can get
All principles of Reason blotted out,
And wholly all those things which round about
He sees so great, deny to be) yet then
What shall he loose who them believes, when
He comes to die ^ it is but uncertain joys,
Which when Death comes, men look upon as toys.
Some poor and fanc^^d enjoyments, which
Do either ly without men, and the pitch
Of inward worth does naught advance; nor give
Increase of quietness while men do live.
Yea often increase disquiets, fears and troubles.
Or if they something add within, it is bubbles;
Which swell a little and a while appear:
And then if looked for, they are not there.
When as also they that persuaded be,
To choose Gods ways, and trust in him we see
To live as well oft-times in outward state,
As they that mind this world, and Gods ways hate.
And commonly express more inward peace,
When they afflicted be, and when they cease
Here to abide in life, with joys far more
Depart, than they who have themselves up-bore
By worldly riches, honors, enjoyments
Of pleasures, or of any Earth-contents.

Man. Sure, it is the best, mysoul, with him to close
Who with such love, and promises thee wooes.
Seeing such bless he gives as none besides,
Can give even bless that evermore abides.

Soul. I do his promises like well, and what
He says unto me, they are very great.
Its my desire him to embrace and take,
No better choice or bargain can I make.
But here is a world so hard that if I do
Him choose, and after his advises go;
How shall I live? for I have heard that He,
Has told his followers that they shall be
Hated of all men, and shall troubles find:
The world will perfecute, oppress and grind
Them all to pie^es. How then shall I live?
Or what can comfort in such cases give?
Besides I many things for this Life want,
A Wife or Husband; Riches, Honor, shall not
I first look after these, and have a care
I don't deprive my self of things that are
Most reedful for, me here? I hope I may
First seek these things for my support and stay,
And afterward seek after God and find him:
But till I have those things I cannot mind him.

Man. But mind, my Soul, what He who does thee love
And suits thee s^^ll-hereto, it does behove
Thee well to weigh whither against these things
He any Antidote sufficient brings.
Lord cause my Soul to understand and know,
What to such fears and cares thou do us show.

Chr. Dear Soul, confider me, life up thine eye
From what is about thee there, and see what I
Am, and have done for thee, and then mind well,
What to assure thee of welfare I tell.
I am the WONDERFUL, and wondrous things
I have effected whereof the World rings:
Such as none else besided the i^, (...)
Both God and Man hypostatically
Or in one person. The Immanuel.
God so in me, as in none else does dwell.
Such things I Have done and do as none else did,
My worth and name, though much d^^ ar'd, is hid,
So that it cannot all seen or known be,
None but my Father fully knows the.
I am the Counselor, with me is skill,
And Wisdom how to manage what I will.
I know what things have been, what are and shall
Hereafter unto any man befall.
I know thy mold and temper, what thou art
And what thou want, whither what is sweet, or tart
Be better for thee, what is in thy mind:
And wherein thou felicity may find.
What or who are against thee, who befriend thee,
What may endanger thee, and what may mend thee.
How Harm thon may incur; and how avoid it,
What this or that would be if thou enjoyed it.
There Is nothing hid from me! I, I can tell
How to dispose of Thee, and thy things well.
And I Am so good and faithful that nothing
I will advise Thee but what good may bring.
I am the MIGHTY GOD, all power I have
To order and dispose, to kill or save.
None greater is than I, because in me
All fullness of the Godhead dwells, and he
With all his power and glory does me fill
So that I can do what soer'e I will.
My Fathers will is mine, and mine is his,
But one will only in us both there is.
And I can execute it all with ease,
Because I can do whatsoer'e I please
All power in Heaven and upon earth is mine,
I can make all things together combine
To bring about my purpose. Angels, men,
Yea and infernal spirits I can, when
And as I please, make use of and employ,
To bring about thy sorrow or thy joy.
For I Am the ALL-MIGHTY GOD, and I can do
Whatever I do purpose, there is no
Thing to be done, or word that I do say
But I can do it too: and in what way
I please; whither with many or with few,
With means or without means. I can renew,
The heart though it be foul; (...) and rain:
And I can raise thy ^^dy up again,
When dead and turned to dust and rottenness,
I can do all things: my power is boundless.
And I Am the LORD of Hosts, all things below (...)
Be put, and do their best obedience owe me.
All that my Father has is mine; and I
Invested am with full authority
Over all things, the earth is mine and all
That is therein; and I can for them call:
And use them and employ them as I will,
Even the whole World, what heaven, Earth and Seas sill.
And I the Everlasting Father am,
Though as a Child into the World I came:
Born of a Woman, given a Son to be
To mankind ^ comfort unto them and Thee
That I might bring; yet from Eternity
I was brought forth, and lived in great Glory.
Yea on me now the Government, as made
A Child and Son for man, is wholly laid.
And both for ancientness, wisdom and care,
To see and to provide for thy welfate,
I may a Father from of old be stild,
And Thou on me depend may as a Child.
For I Am the Faithful God, the Amen am
Who never fails my friend, not tell a ly:
But speak in righteousness, and am upright,
And Truth, and Uprightness are my delight,
Falsehood and lies, I perfectly do hate,
Deceit and wickedness abominate.
There Is nothing wreathed or perverse from Me.
No guile defiles my heart, no flattene
Proceeds from my lips; what (...) I say,
For just and true all men believe it may.
I Am full of goodness and of mercy too;
I Am Love it self, and all in Love I do.
To those that listen to me all my ways,
Are Truth and Mercy, every one does praise
Me, and my works, and doings who me know;
And all my Saints my worthiness do show.
For I Am the PRINCE of PFACE too, by my blood
I took away what against mankind stood.
To keep him out from God, fin, law and death:
And I create Peace by my holy Breath.
What ever is man's trouble or his sear,
If he will obey me, I his heart will cheer.
I will dispel his dumps, errors, mistakes,
And what annoys; my powerful word it makes
Peace and gives quiet. I the floods control:
And I with goodness satisfy the Soul.
My works declare my Name, they clearly show
My wisdom, Greatness, Goodness; that I Am true
And kind, and loving. See what I for Thee
And all have done. Let my works speak for me.
I for man's sake, and for thy cause came down
From Heaven, laid by my Royal R^bes and Crown;
Was made a man, yea poor and full of grief:
Sustained your curse and death, that so relief
To thee and mankind I thereby might bring,
Oh many griefs and agonies did wring,
And pierce my Spotless soul I passed through
Many temptations: way both smooth and rough.
To Grave, and Hell; that so I might obtain,
Freedom there from for you^ I rose again,
And up to Heaven ascended, there to be
With and from God a SAVIOR unto Thee.
There I appear for the an HIGHPRIEST great,
To intercede for mercy, and entreat
Gods favor toward thee, thy sins to cover,
And to obtain that God may pass them over.
A Merciful High Priest who mercy can,
Show forth and exercise to sinful man
Tender his weakness, and conpassionate
Those that are in a poor afflicted State.
Yea I did therefore suffer, and did prove
Many temptations is it did behove;
That so the tempted and the miserable
To succor and relieve I might be a^le.
All which of my mere merey did proceed;
For of mankind I had at all no need.
By which means seeing I the conquest (...),
Over death and hell, and overthrew the plot
Of the old Serpent subde and crasty,
Let those my doings of me testify.
They show my love, my power, and wisdom too;
And they my faithfumess and truth do show.
Would I have (...) in any thing I say
Sure it would there have been wherein there lay
So many diffi^^^^ties in my way.
Behold me then, dear Soul, and duty mind
What I am and have done, and thou ^halt find
Encouragement enough against these things
Which do occasion those my wavering^.
Why do thou (...) or care for things below;
Seeing thy wants and dangers all I (...)
And I can any thing on thee best^^^?
What if men should thee hate and (...)
And band themselves against thee (...) I
Secure thee from all harm that may befall
To thee or thine from any of them (...)
Are they not in my hands ^ their (...) hears;
I can dispose and order, all their part,
And power, and time, and breath are in my hand,
And I can that of (...) way the^^ command,
And If thou mindst ^^y love, thou may be sure,
That in obeying me (...) thee (...)
From what may harm thee although, because I
All-wise am, I shall thy security
And safety in such manner prosecute
As may best with thy after we sare suit,
In which, because tho^ childish art, or blind,
Or foolish, and can not in thy wear mind
Discern or comprehend my ways, or see
The method of my walkings toward thee;
Nor can well judge what may be for the best,
And that the rather because in thy b^est,
Lust bears so great a sway (which covers,
After those things that ^^nd unto thy death.
Shrinking away from that wherein thou may
Find more felicity) if then thou stay'st,
Thy self upon me, and on me sely
Plucking quite out and casting by that eye,
(Though thy right eye which seeing things amiss,
Moves thee to stumble at my ways, in this
Or that thing which I order; and suspect
That I do not things for the best effect,
Thou shall do wisely. And thou may, me trust
With thee and thine (...) since I am just
And righteous: and sind^ I love thee too,
And being to order thing to thy best good,
As may in what in said; be understand.
If thy ways please (...), I thine enemies
Can and will make thee to befriend their eyes
Shall toward thee be good, thee for to spare,
For their affections too in my hunds art,
If great men hate thee, I can safely hide
Thee from their malio^. I can curb their pride,
Or break their power, or take away their breath,
Or thee from them (for by such ways I Death
Make mine befriend) or else I can divert,
Their enterpriser (as when Saul begirt
Poor David, I the Philistines, did send,
To find Saul other work, and so befriend
My persecuted Servant) or I can,
(And often ime^ I do) the wrath o^ of man
Turn to my praise, and that that does remain,
Beyond what may me praise I can restram.
See how the Sparrows though of value small
Among the Birds of prey do live: ^^one fall,
No not one of them, to the ground, (...) by
My Fathers pleasure, though they often (...)
In midst of dangers If my Father has
Such care of ^parrows where is then thy says
To crossed me with thy safety, and him who
Does value and esteem of mankind so:
As all the Birds and Bea^ts too never were
As what ^suff'red for you makes appear?
Trust me then with thy safety; verily,
Except I see it good thou shall not die;
Or suffer by the hands of men, I will
Be shield end Buckler to thee ^ and thee still
Will hide and (...) so that though men fret
And do themselves also against thee ser;
They shall not harm thee. But if, I do (...)
That it will for thy good be, that I thee
Deliver up into their hands to (...)
Imptison, banish, take away the right;
Or kill thy body, do thou them not fea^,
For all their malice shall be ended there.
For more they cannot do then kill the (...):
And when that is done I Will raise it up (...),
And seeing I so love thee, thou may know
For certain that if me thou do follow,
I will not let them ^ill (...), except
Do see I may advantage thee thereby.
For such my pow'^ is, that even Death and Hell,
And all their torment I can easly ^^^ll;
Make them ser^^ my design those to advance,
To glory who are my inheritance.
Fear nothing therefore of what may befall thee
But yield thy self and go where ere I call thee,
And do my service cheatfully, with Thee
I, I thy Savior evermore will be
I that Almighty am and can desend thee,
I that do love thee well will succor send thee.
Thou shall not be alone, I will not leave thee.
I will go with thee and will not deceive thee.
I Will strengthen thee to bear what shall befall thee;
I Will thee support and ^^ear, where ere I call thee.
In all afflictions my love that's better
Then wine thou shall rast of. I that am greater
Then all against thee will in my arms bear thee:
And mitigate the sense of what may dear thee.
I gave my self for thee, and grief sustained;
A bitter death I bare in love unfeigned
For thee and for thy sake, fear not to give
Thy life and body to me, as I live
I Will take the care of them. I will thee cherish,
And no hair of thy head shall from thee perish.
In life and death I will be faithful to thee:
And notwithstanding Death ^onor I Will do thee.
I Will make thy sufferings bearable and sweet;
And with my good spirit thou shall surely meet,
If I into deep waters do thee lead,
I will go with thee and bear up thy head,
So as they shall not overflow, or drown thee,
No though they should no every side surround the^
Into the fire if I do lead thee, yet
No damage thou from its fierce flames shall get.
For I Will safe keep thee, bear thee in my arms;
And I Will secure thy soul from all ill harms.
Fear none of those things then that unto thee
By Satan or his Servants done may be.
Though into prison they ten days thee cast,
And there with chains of Iron make thee fast:
I will be with thee there, and bring thee out;
Be confident of me, my love don't doubt.
Be faithful unto me, and I will give
A Crown of life to thee: and thou shall live.
And as for other things why should thou care.
Seeing my Father for thee did not spare
To give me up to Death, and gives me too
To be thy Head and portion? How can thou
Suspect or fear that any thing He will
Withold from thee that is good. No. He will fill
Thy cup, with what is who some for thee to drink,
If thou away from my words do not shrink.
All things are mine, and what I have shall be
Thine: and I Will give of them what is good for thee.
The Earth with all it is fullness mine is: and
Subject they be to my will and command:
And all that is mine, is the Irs who are in me,
And I will thereout to their welfare see.
Why take'st thou care for meat or drink? Behold
The Birds of Heaven (though more than may be cold)
They neither plow, nor ^o^e, not reap, nor get
Laid up in Storehouses provisions, yet
My Father does for each of them provide,
So that in hardest (...) they wide.
And can thou fear that he with thee neglect,
Since unto man he has showed such respect,
As far surpasses all the care he has,
Of Birds and Beasts. Oh thou of ^^tle says!
And why for raiment ^^^'st thou thought, as fearing
God will not give thee clothes fit for thy wearing
Behold the Lillies or the Tulips fine,
How bravely they be colored, how they shine,
Though they do neither ^oy^, nor spin, not do
Any thing which their clothing tends unto;
Yet they so gallantly assayed are,
That Solomon himself they cutted (...)
In bravery: though he for Ornament,
And Royal garments was most ominent:
As having Gold and Silver, precious stones,
And whatsoever they that sit on Thrones
Do highly prize and porgeously array!
Themselves with, their height and worth to display:
And can thou be so faithless as to fear.
That God will not vouchsafe thee clothes to wear;
If thou do yield thy self to serve him, and
Be ready to obey my just command?
Seeing those fairest flowers be naught but grass,
Whose form and beauty soon away does pass;
And though to day they flourish, yet to morrow
They Are burnt in the Oven, or wither in their furrow.
Wereas He Thee, and Mankind, so does prize,
As cannot be declared in any wise.
Take thou no thought therefore for those things: but
For them and all things thy trust in me put:
And first Gods Kingdom and his right coufness
Seek after; and be sure He will thee bless.
And all things for this life, as them for thee
He sees meet administered shall be.
Its not thy way first to seek other things
And afterward me, that confusion brings,
And many mischiefs to those who so do;
And much pro^^^es me and my Father t
To just displeasure: because foolishly
They undervalue things that are so high
Yea and what can be more preposterous,
Then that men do themselves disorder thus
Shall not the better things be prized most,
And greatest care be had they be not lost?
What shall some poor and for^y painted cloth,
Which is grown old and eaten with the moth,
Be so esteemed, as the chiefest care,
When the house is on fire, shall be to spare
It from the burning while in the mean time,
For want of care upon the house to climb,
And quench the fire that is breaking out in it all,
The stately building likely is to fall,
And be consumed? especially when too,
In case the liouse be safe, the fire can do
No hurt unto the paited cloth ovithin;
Or were it lost, one might much sooner spin
Or buy a better cloth and with less cost,
Then to rebuild the house if that be lost.
Is not my love and (...) better ^^rn
Then all the best enjoyments on earth are:
I happy make the soul that does me find:
I fill their (...) fures; satisfy their mind,
Who me embrace. I give them lengch of days;
Eternal life, peart is in all my ways.
Riches and honors, pleas^^^ sweet and true,
And lasting they shall have whom I renew.
All things thou canstsdefire are far below
Me and what I on my lovers bestow.
Fullness of joy they shall enjoy who come,
To be inheritors of my Kingdom.
Rivers of pleasures shall them satisfy,
At my Fathers right hand (...).
Whereas wives, hono^^^s, pleasures, friends, riches:
And what the world can give, men may possess
And yet be miserable, they may die
Soon, and go down to hell for wretchedly.
Live if they live, so as small joy they shall
Have, much less what (...) satisfy, from all
Those their enjoyments: foe of times some moth
Or worm breeds in those earthly things which does
Eat out the pleasure; or fill with such grief,
As there against no earthly thing relief
Can give, and at the bestin D^^th they fail,
And in the dread full judgment naught avail,
Beside, we cannot take it well, to see
Our love so slighted. He is not of me
Worthy, who will not all things else forsake
For love of me: Seeing that I to make
Him safe and happy, all forsook that I
Enjoyed with my Father in glory.
And I alone the man that does me take,
Do so enrich, that I him happy make
Noting with me may be compared. Beside
This very often has been proved when tried,
That while men other things use to prefer
Before me and my grace, and so defer
Till those things they have got, to seek for me
With those things they prefer, their hearts so be
Besotted, and ^^^ar'd; that afterward
They never find in their hearts to have regard,
Unto my words to seek me seriously,
But vainly spend their days until they die.
And it is a just reward from God, that they
Who me so ^^ght, as that they will not obey
My counsels, but do hearden their own heart,
Should hardened be so as never to convert
But fall into destruction, though so full
Of mercy is my Father, as to pull
Sometimes such men too out of those their snares
And dangers Which their foolish lusts and cares,
Run them into, because no pleasure He
Does take that wicked men destroyed should be:
But its a dangerous presumption
To slight his grace when offered, upon
A thought uncertain that they after may
And will do better on some after-day.
How often is it found that God justly
Does give such over to believe a ly,
And always to presume that afterward,
To morrow and to morrow they will regard,
And turn to him; but never that time find,
In which they seriously do set their mind.
To seek him till Death suddenly them take,
From hence, and then in hell their beds they make.

Min. It is the nature too of lust in men
As often times it has been proved, that when
It gets its head into men's hearts, Its tail
It draws in after, and does so prevail,
That when in one thing its fulfilled, it brings
Other new lusts forth: and as twere by strings,
Draws on a whole throng one after another,
Till all desires of good they wholly, smother;
Choking the seed was sown, that never it
Takes root or perfect fruit does e're beget,
He that now wants a wife and must her have
Before he can attend on God and crave,
And seek his Kingdom and his righteousness,
Thinking could He that one desire gossel
He nothing elss should want; but be at ^easure
To seek the Lord, and in his wans ta^e pleasure.
But when on such accounts He God neglects
And more the getting of a Wife resnects,
If (as sometimes it does fall out) his life,
Be not first gone before He gets his Wife
But he obtains his wish: yet many things
He then wants not fore-sees, with her she brings
A many other wants or sond desires,
Now she his company and heart requrires;
Now he her will must sarisfie; his pleasure
With her must take, so that he, has no leisure
Now left to seek the Lord; on her to wait
And her to hu on it sit and char or prate
With her he must, or else go walk or ride:
Go build her a fair house maintain her pride;
This thing to alter, or that thing to mend,
In Gardning, Planting building his time spend.
Take care he may maintain her in good fashion:
Take heed he put her not into a passion,
By taking of such courses God to find,
As cross her principles, disturb her mind:
He must think how to live; his Family
Provide for: Children get and multiply;
So bring them up and get such means for them
As credit they may have, none them contemn.
So that he who would not attend before
To seek and walk with God, has now much more
To keep him back: and thinkd he may excuse
Himself when bidden, and the feast refuse,
Whereto God calls him. He may stay at home,
Send word, I have a wife, I cannot come.
As if he badly might obey the call,
Before: but now he cannot come at all.
So it is with women too; if they cannot
Mind to seek God till they have husbands got;
Conceiting then they shall be be ter fit,
The knowledge of the Lord to seek and get.
They do deceive themselves, for when they have
An husband, then his consent they must crave;
They must seek him to please and not offend.
This for him they must make; and that thing mend.
Do nothing that may not (...) with his mind,
For fear they make him unto them unkind:
Unless (as it is sometimes the Woman's guise)
Thinking themselves for their Husbands too wise.
They scorn to be ruled by them. Strive to get
The Master-ship as for them far more fit.
They must conceive in ^o^^ows, and bring forth
With pain and anguish, such as often woe worth
Those pleasures brought those pains they happily cry.
Yea, many things they need to make or buy
Before the Birth-time, have many (...) bo^^ts,
Bufie themselves to make their Children Clouts,
Trim up their houses, after nurse their young,
Gossip sometimes their neighbors too among.
Often times conceive again; bring forth another,
Before the former children can call Mother.
That now less time they have to hear and mind
The Word of God, and seek his grace to find,
Then formerly, and such things doubtless made
The Apostle to advise such as were stayed
And could contain themselves, rather to abide
In single life than change their state and bride.
So likewise when a man must riches get,
Before he can in serious manner set
His heart to seek the Lord; he either never
Attains to riches, though he them endeavor,
(At least to what he riches thinks and calls)
Or if he does, yet usually he falls.
Into so many snares, and foolish lusts,
By them, while secretly in them he trusts,
And makes then as his Gods, and takes delight
To have them often in his thoughts or sight;
Or is so filled with cares how them to keep,
Or fears of losing them that often his sleep
He thereby breaks; and fills his Head and heart,
With many cumbring thoughts and pa^^ful smart
He must when rich now all things else provide
Suitable to his state. He now must ride
On a well m^^^ed Steed, must at his hand
Have one or two to be at his command.
He must enlarge his house, or it new build,
And garnish; all thing both in house and field
Must be in form and figure. He must get
Acquaintance with such persons as be fit
For his now better company; and them
He then must humor, least they him contemn.
He must now keep such correspondency
With greater persons, as he may thereby
Some reputation in the world obtain,
He must take heed of too godly a strain.
Least he thereby his riches should neglect,
Or purchase with the World some disresnect.
Yea riches fills his head, his heart, his hands,
With so much caercise; often as it stands
Not with a serious giving up his mind,
To seek to know the Lord and him to find;
Or in the knowledge of him rightly walk,
For his estate to save he often must balk,
Such uprightness as grace would lead him to,
And make such shifts as bring his overthrow
His house, his landy or living now does bind,
Him so unto the earthy his heart so wind;
Into the love of them that very often
He is away from God for ever caught.
So that while men do think to mend the matter,
And make their cases better, they but flatter
Themselves with vain pretenses; and will find
That they have much mistaken in their mind:
And what they thought, were they but pleased there
Would further them, does now a let appear.

Chr There was a certain rich man who had ground
The fruits whereof, when grown, did so abound,
That he far more then for the present year
Provided was: yet did not his heart there,
Find such content as that with thankfulness,
To God because his Grounds he did so bless
Receiving what was sent: and laying by
What thereof might be fit for his supply
He what beyond his room for it was more,
With cheerfulness divided to the poor.
And gave himself on Gods word to attend,
And so receive as his life to mend.
And yield himself to serve the Lord: nor sought
How he unto his Kingdom might be brought.
But on the contrary, finding that he
Should want some room wherein his fruits might be
All stored up; perplered was in mind,
How room sufficient for them all to find,
And after many thoughts thereof at last,
Thus for his satisfaction he forecast.
I Will pull my Barns down, thinks he; and I Will build,
Far bigger up: where what my lands do vield
I Will treasure up in safety, and though 'twill
Take up some time this purpose to fulfill,
And put me to some cost and trouble; yet
When that is over, I this fruit shall get.
I Will then compose my self to rest and ease,
Eat, drink, be merry; and so I will please,
My soul for all its troubles. I will say,
Soul thou have goods laid up for many a day;
Nay here is enough to serve thee many a year,
Thou may all further care and toil forbear;
No fear of want: but in the mean time, lo
A voice from God came this rich man unto,
Which thus bespeaks him. Ah thou silly fool,
Thou shall not live another day, thy soul
(For which thou only have provided here,
Upon the earth, and naught in heaven where
Wise men for it provide) this night shall be
By my grim messengers required of thee.
And then who shall all those thy fruits possess,
With thoughts whereof thou do thy soul so bless.
And with the cares whereof thou now thy soul,
So exercisest like a silly fool.
And such a fool is every one who makes,
Much of the creature and the Lord forsakes.
For what advantage can it be unto,
The soul when it its body shall forego,
That it had Wife or Husband, House, or Land,
Riches, Honors, or pleasures at command,
Yea Crowns and Scepters while the body it
Inlive'ned! Oh what profit will it get
From any or from all those things when in
The depths of Hell oppressed with its sin
It shall have its abode? can they relieve
Its misery, when it shall mourn and grieve
And wail its folly? No alas! too gross
For it a Spirit they are; its sad great loss
Of me and of my favor cannot be
Made up by any thing it here could see.
For then no drop of comfort can it have
How ever earnestly it may it crave.
This that thou may the better see, mind well
Another true story that I shall tell.
There was a certain rich and wealthy man
Who fared deliciously each day that ran
Over his head: was clothed with the best
And finest silks and linnens; wherewith dressed
he glittered bravely, and all things he had,
Which this world could afford to make him glad.
There also was a poor and piteous man
Called Lazarus, a Cripple, lean and wan
And full of sores, who used to resort
To the rich man's door, and beg for some comfort,
His hunger-starved body to relieve:
But the hard hearted Churl would little give.
His dogs more kind, than he, would very often
His sores lick gently Death at length hence caught
Poor Lazarus, whom Angels did attend,
To guard his soul from every evil Fiend.
And carred him to Heaven, where he did rest,
With great content in Father Abraham's breast.
Soon after 't came to the rich man's turn to die.
And leave the world, for no satiety
And fullness of this world could always keep
Him here alive; but the black dismal sleep
Of Death surprised him: when a quiet end
He seemed to have, circled with many a friend,
Amending on him till his life did fail,
When they did seem his death much to bewail.
Although his heirs were glad enough at heart,
That they might share to each of them a part
Of those vast heaps which he had laid in store
For after times, and witheld from the poor:
From all which now they bear him to the grave,
Where rich and poor like intertainment have.
Save that they on his Funeral bestowed
More cost and worship: and his greatness showed
On a more stately Tomb or Monument,
Whereon they ingrav'd his name, to the intent
It might not be forgot, but before then,
His wretched Soul was hurried to the Den
Of damned Spirits: even to the pit of Hell,
Where what his torments were what tongue can tell?
This wretched man stripped of his pomp and state,
And all his riches which he had of late.
Lay then in flames of fire, tormented sore
Because he had abused his wealth before
Spent it on's lusts, relieved not the poor.
Had slighted God, his truth and grace contemned:
Therefore to torments he was there condemned.
Where not one drop of water could he get,
Whereby he might allay the burning heat
Wherein his wretched tongue, that used to boast
Great things, blaspheme God, curse the poor, did roast
And fry in flames, which caused him to cry
And howl, and roar, and yell most hideously.
When lifting up his woeful eyes aloft,
He 'spyed that poor Lazarus (whom often,
He had disdained to behold before
When he lay lame, and begging at his door)
In Abraham's bosom full of peace and joy,
Disturbed with nothing, that might him annoy.
Then calling out to Abraham he did cry:
Oh Father Abraham hither turn thine eye
For I was of thine offspring; and from thee
And thy blessed stock derived my pedigree.
Father show forth thy pity now, behold!
I ly in torments here that cannot be told.
My Soul is on a flame with scorching wrath,
Nothing in it now ease or quiet has.
That tongue wherewith it secretly did speak,
More wickedness than ever forth did break
From out my bodies lips, see how it fries,
And flames, tormented in these miseries.
Dear Father Abraham even for the sake
Of those thy bowels whence I issued, take
Some pity on thy child, and Lazarus
Send from thee, to help me, tormented thus.
Oh let him but one drop of water fetch,
One drop of comfort me to ease poor wretch!
Oh might he but the very end and tip,
Of one poor finger in cold water dip,
And to the tip of my scorcht tongue apply,
Which flames of fiery wrath do wondrously
Afflict with sharpest pains; 'twould mitigate,
Somewhat these woeful torments, 'twould abate
My heat a little. Oh dear Father send,
That Beggar hither me now to befriend.
To whom that good old Patriarck replied,
Ah Son (for that thou wast so 'ts not denied)
Remember how thou did thy self abuse,
In thy life time; and Gods good gifts misuse.
When this poor man lay begging at thy doors,
Unpitty'd by thee, hungry, full of sores.
Thou had enough wherewith to have relieved
His penury then, yea therefore thou received
Gods gifts of bounty, but thou letst him ly
Neglected then, thou scornd'st his poverty.
Now therefore he with me does rest possess:
And thou have torments now without redress.
Yea now a gulf is fixed twixt us and thee,
So that though we each others state may see
We cannot change them; so as that we may,
Pass hence to you your torments to allay,
Nor can you come to us, us to molest,
Or take part with us in our endless rest.
We joys have whereof you may not partake,
You endless burnings which we may not slake.
Your riches now have end, your pleasure's past,
Your torments and your miseries shall last.
Learn hence that; it is not riches nor great State,
Nor any fleshly privilege will bate,
Nor yet preserve from endless misery,
Those persons who in sin do live and die:
Who me neglecting and my gifts abusing,
And my now profer'd grace and love refusing,
Prefer their lusts and riches thereunto,
And in vain worldly ways do choose to go.
All their now present enjoyments shall fail them:
And after death none of them shall avail them.
Be now advised by me, Dear Soul, therefore
If thou would happy be for evermore.
Seek first Gods Kingdom and his righteousness.
So shall thou have them and therein Gods bless.
Accept my profer'd love: embrace my grace;
When I say seek the Lord, seek thou my face.
Get wisdom; get true knowledge in thy heart,
Receive my words, and let them not depart
Out of thy heart and mind, but let them ly,
Between thy tender breasts continually.
Then other things as they will lead thee, thou
May better look for and shall find them too.
It is but reason that I do propoud:
No better course can for thy good be found.
For if thou seek first the world, or what
Of it thou likest; before thou have got
That which thou seek thou may chance to die
And perish from my presence endlesly.
As in the former parable even now,
I did for admonition to thee show.
But if thou have me first thou happy art,
When or however thou do hence depart,
Yea and I power have every other thing
As I see good for thee to pass to bring.
If Husband, Wife, or friends or riches I
Do see thee want, I can thy want supply.
They Are all at my dispose, thy way lies fair,
If thou wilt be rich be married to the heir.
All things are theirs who have me theirs to be
They heirs of all are by virtue of me.
Men,, Angels, Paul, Apollo. and Cevhas,
World, life, Death, things that are, and what to pass
Shall come hereafter though it is in my dispose
And they may not take any thing of those
But as I give it them, even as an heir,
To some great Lord though under Age and bare
As to his own possession, yet has all
In's Guardians dispose, and he may call
Or ask for what he wants, but he must have
His Guardians grant for that which he does crave.
And may not take but what he will allow,
Who being wise and's Father well does know
His Childs desires and needs, and consident,
The Child may be of's Fathers good intent.
In all he does, and that he will supply
Him with what is good in his necessity;
And give what he does ask: or else what he,
As wiser than the Child, does better see.
So that the child may well himself submit
Unto his Fathers will, judging what is fit
For him he will give him and nothing deny
(If pleased with him) that good is in his eye.
Such is the case between my Father and
Those that me loving obey my command.
Or as the Wife who from the Dunghill base,
Naught having of her own, if by the grace,
And special favor of some Prince she is took
Into the bond of marriage, well may look
On his estate as hers especially
If he a jointure has her made whereby
He has her interessed in it all
And may it thenceforth also hers well call
And thence expect to be maintained too
And have her wants supplied all; although
Her Lord do its dispose keep in his hand
And will have her depend on his command
For the receipt of all supplies, and not
Turn out his Tenants, take away their Lot
Or rights therein; and do here pleasure; but
Go to him for allowance, to him put
The ord'ring of her maintenance, even so
An interest thou shall in mine have, though
I the dispose keep in my hand, and thou
Must come to me for what I will allow;
Resign thy will up unto mine, and pray
Thy will be done, Give me Lord day by day
What needful is, and there is no cause to fear
I will thy needs regard; thy prayers I Will hear.
I Will give thee what is meet, do but thou me,
Embrace and follow and then thou shall see
I will be thy good Lord; a husband loving
That will deny thee nothing that is behoving.
May thou not trust me, seeing I did give
My very lise for thee, that thou might live
And when thou wast of me most ignorant
And did not love me, I to thee did grant
The knowledge of me, can thou think that I
Can any thing that's good for thee deny
When thou to me art reconciled, and
Espoused too? surely that cannot stand
With my good honor. Nor think thou it will
Be any hindrance to Thee to fulfill,
My good advise and pleasure, it will be
A very great advantage unto thee,
Like as if some poor woman would have all:
Her wants supplied: should a rich man call
Her to him and make tender to espouse her,
Unto him for a wife, and with him house her;
Could her accepting him an hindrance be,
To the supplies of her necessity?
Nay were it not the best way them to obtain,
Far better than with Vagabonds and vain
Poor Raskals her self to associate
Thinking by them to get a good estate?
Even so thy seeking first my Kingdom and
My righteousness, will excellently stand.
With thy best having other wants supplied
For I am rich in grace, and on thy side
I then shall stand, and give thee what is best
For thy enjoyment, that thou may be blessed
I wise am too, and better understand,
Then thou thy self do what in Sea or Land
May be best for thee, and I power have too
What ere I see best for thee that to do.
Does not that child do better who does take
His Father to be with him and to make
Cho^se of a Hat or suir, then for to go
Without his Father and his own will do?
Especially if he be weak and childish,
Or led away by vain men being wildish;
Or have to do with cheats who will a prey,
Make of him and get from him what they may
But has a Father loving, wise and willing
To choose the best for him and for his shilling?
Such is thy case here, for I have more skill,
To know what is for the good or bad; what will
The consequent of this or that thing prove,
And as I often have said I do thee love.
Whereas thou led by blind affection, art
In danger to run upon thine own smart:
And this most wicked world is false and double,
And where it pleasure promises gives trouble.
WISDOM with an Inheritance is good,
But an Inheritance not understood
Or without wisdom, proves the hurt and harm
Of him that has it and of times does charm
Him into snares and troubles which undo him,
While into diverse noysom lusts they throw him.
Besides all things remain in my dispose,
Whither thou do with me or do not close.
Thy folly may thy self indammage, but
It hurts not me, nor possibly can put
Me our of my possession, thererefore I
Can and may justly, if thou me deny,
Give or deny thee what thou do prefer,
Before me and my love in mine anger
To be a snare, and by what thou do choose
Can punish thee, because thou do refuse
My guidance and my blessing, as I did
The Israelites, who often times with me chid,
And would have meat their lusts to satisfy,
I gave it them, and punished them thereby.
And when a King they would from me extort,
Against my mind after the Heathen sort:
A King unto them in my wrath I sent,
To be unto them for a punishment.
Alas! I can thee blast in thy enjoyments,
And curse thee in thy ways and thy employments,
If thou neglecting me thine heart do set,
Upon the things below how them to get.
I can give thee a wife may make thee poor,
A sickly, costly wife, an arrant whore.
If thou for beauty choose preferring that
Before my grace, I can give one shall hate
Thee, and her self to others prostitute,
There Is many a Crab that looks like pleasant fruit.
I can an husband give if one thou wilt have
Without me, that shall prove a very knave.
Riches with snares, vexations suits and trouble,
Or pleasures mixed with griefs and forrows double.
I can give children, if thou must them have
That may, as Rachels, bring thee to thy grave.
And I can give those things in mercy too
And unto them that fear me, often do.
Or if I do those things deny unto them,
By those denyals greater good I do them.
For it is in my power to blast or bless,
I can do what I will be it more or less.
Yea if all things thou have to thy desire,
And have not me, they will fit thee more for fire:
Even for that endless misery which shall,
On all such as rebel against me fall.
And therefore its thy best to follow me,
Walking in my good paths, for so I thee
Will care for, and will guide in all thy ways,
To do the thing which shall tend to my praise
And to thy profit. I to thee will give
What shall be for thy good while thou do live;
And fit thee for the world to come also
That into life eternal thou may go
Seek then my favor first, to Godliness
Addict thy self: for that the promises
Of both lives has, both this and that to come;
So that thou may most certainly me from
Expect all good for both: Be thou upright
I Will be thy Sun and Shei^d. I Will give thee Light
And I Will defend thee too. I Will cheer and warm thee
And keep thee in my ways from what might harm thee
Both grace and glory I will give, nothing
Shall be witholden from thee; that may bring
Advantage to thee; and conduce unto
Thy having that great bless to which I woo.
Give up thy self to me, and so I will
Thy wishes and thy prayers all fulfill,
So far as is good for thee; and naught shall
That may be prejudicial thee befall.
If with bad Wife or Husband I thee try,
Ill Neighbors, losses, or with poverty,
I Will turn those waters of afflictions too
Into the Wine of comfort. I will do
All for thy good, thou shall not need to fear
That I will harm thee, if thou will me hear.
Deny thy self and lusts, yield up to me,
And my salvation thou shall surely see.
In stead of what thou lustest after I
Will give thee what is good assuredly.
Better a little with my love then more
With my displeasure, hear thou me therefore,
In me put all thy trust and do what is good,
Thou then shall surely have both house and food
Delight thy self in me. I Will satisfy
Thy soul with good; and all thy needs supply.
Commit thy way to me, wholly depend
Upon me and I Will always thee defend
And bring thee to great glory in the end

Canto VII. Or the closing Canto.
I will say of the Lord, he is my Rock, my Fortress, my God, in him I will
trust,

Ps. 91.2.
The Soul approves what is said, yet adds
Some other fears, and what yet sadds,
But in his answers Christ it glads.
The difficulties in the way,
How easily it may go astray,
How its corruptions do it sway;
These be its fears. But Christ replies
What helps against all those fears lies,
In him and what his grace supplies:
The Soul prevailed with at the last
Complies with Christ, on him does cast
It self, and praises him full fast.
Prays for his further favor, He
Accepts it and most willingly,
Receives it his Consort to be:
Yet tells it that he must it try;
That so He may it purify,
Before the full solemnity.
The Soul submits, only do'h pray
His love and help in all his Way:
And then to have the Marriage day.
Soul. LORD I have heard thy words; and they be good
So far as yet I have them understood.
By which I also verily believe,
That they much better be than I conceive.
But there is another thought yet in my breast,
Which has me often times with sad fears oppressed.
The things which thou requir'st and call'st me to
Are very difficult for we to do
The way is narrow, and I quickly may
Step out of it aside, and go astray.
Yea there so many false pretenders be,
Which take thy name and come in stead of thee;
And I so weak and foolish am, that I
May easily be cheated with a ly,
And take it for thy truth. I hear the gate
Which leads unto life is very straight.
I must deny my self: mine own right eye,
Where it offends pluck out and cast it by.
Cut off my right hand, or right foot when they
Prove an occasion that I go astray.
Yea thou so pure and holy art, thou do
Require of me to part with every lust.
A God thou art of eyes so clear and pure,
That no iniquity thou can endure.
But on the other side I am so bad,
That on my lusts and Idols often I Am mad.
My lasts do stick so to me that they are
As dear or dearer then my life I care.
Not it to hazard sometimes them to spare.
I am so weak, I cannot go the way
Wherein such difficulties find I may.
Yea I am dead in sins, dead to all good
How can I serve thee then against a flood
Of violent assaults of sin and Devil,
And world on all hands tempting me to evil?
Thou say thou loving art, and just and wise,
Will thou require impossibilities?

Chr. Be not discouraged Soul, though weak thou be
And sinful too, there is help enough in me.
Though straight the gate, though narrow be the way
Fear not, for yet through me enter thou may.
My power is seen in weakness, it is my praise
Even sinful souls to save, the dead to raise.
It is a true and faithful saying, and
Worthy to be received on every hand
That I into the world did therefore come,
That I might sinners save; the chief of whom
I often have saved too, my glory lies
In doing of impossibilities.
Such things as be beyond the strength of man
And Angels too, and none but I do can.
For sinners and for dead men I did die,
And over sin and death the victory
I have obtained, and now I am become
A quickening Spirit. I raise the dead, the dumb
I make to speak, the deaf I make to hear,
Blind men to see, the timorous not to fear.
I am the chosen one, my God upheld me,
In all my agonies: and now has filled me,
With all the fullness of the Spirit; which He
Has caused for evermore to rest on me.
Because he has appointed me, that I
Should in his Sovereign Authority
And power, unto the Gentiles (void of skill
And judgment to discern and do his will)
Judgment bring forth, and cause them to discern
His excellencies, and his ways to learn:
That all his pleasure I might do, and it is
His will that my beholders I should bliss.
That who submits to me should never perish;
But I should evermore him love and cherish,
Work all his works in and for him till I
Make him complete, and save him perfectly.
And I am faithful: I do never fail;
I Am not faint hearted; nothing shall me quail.
Naught me discourage which in him I find,
Of death or weakness who my words does mind
Such a Physician I am as can cure
The sickest patient, and can endure
To bear their frowardness, for I am meek,
And with all gentleness their welfare seek.
I neither cry, nor lift up angry voice
Against dull Scholars, but I do rejoice
To take pains with them, them to teach and show
My Doctrine, till I cause them it to know.
The bruised Reed I break not, though it be
Weak and unprofitable unto me,
Nor quench the smoking wiek or snast, but strive
With all long-patience to keep it alive.
I can the smoke and stanch of it endure
Until I blow it up and do it cure.
For power and meekness, skill and faithfulness
None like to me there is, none in distress
Or can so pity, or can so pass by
What they discern may of iniquity.
None is so blind as I that perfect am
And who to open blind eyes hither came.
I many things do see yet don't observe:
It Is not because I cannot see men swerve,
(For I see all things perfectly what e're
They be: both good and bad to me are clear)
But it is because I love them, and no mind
Have causes of destruction for to find,
In and against them, for should I with eye
Too vigilant their many sins espy.
Who then should stand before me, and avoid
By my most heavy hand to be destroyed?
Do but thou then yield up thy self to me
I nothing else desire or seek of thee.
Be but thou willing and obedient,
And I shall therewith fully be content.
I Will keep thee through all dangers in the way,
I Will overcome in and for thee what may
Thee hinder, or in danger thy perdition:
I Will bring thee to a fully safe condition.
Though the way narrow be, thou shall not err
I Will be thy guide therein, and I Will confer
My Spirit, do but thou heed my commands;
Keeping them he shall keep thee in his hands
Yea in his arms shall carry thee. I Will show
My truth to thee, and thou my ways shall know.
So as no false Christ's, or false Prophets shall
Prevail to make thee e're from me to fall.
Be but upright in what I make thee see
Not winking with thine eye, putting from thee,
My heavenly light and truth made known away,
And I will keep thee that thou shall not stray.
And though the gate be strait so as into it
Thou can not of thy self, though crowding, go, yet
I Will so put forth my hand and pull thee to me,
That there is nothing shall withold thee fro me;
Remember what I said before, that I
Came to save sinners. not only stand by
And bid them save themselves: do but thou yield
Thy self to me and I will win the field.
I Will take away that greatness in conceit
That makes thee for the gate of life too great.
I Will circumcise thee, take away that mass
Of flesh from thee, that will not let thee pass.
I Will make thee such as through the gate thou shall
Most safely enter. Nor shall any fault
Deprive thee of my Kingdom, for I will
Not fail my Fathers pleasure to fulfill.
I Will pardon what is past, and I will make
Thee for the future clean, thou shall forsake
Thy sins and Idols that so dear are to thee,
And which if cleaved to will quite undo thee.
If thou will hearken unto me there shall,
No strange God be in thee, I Will rid them all
Out of thee: those false thoughts which do so hold
Thy soul in bondage, while I do unfold
My truth and grace unto thee, I Will destroy,
So that they shall not thee thenceforth annoy
Or captivate, my truth shall make thee free,
To leave thy sins, to follow after me.
And if I set thee free thou shall indeed,
From what does now imbondage thee be freed.
I Will soon subdue thy foes within thee that
Do war against thy soul, and those that hate
Both thee and me bring under, and I will
With choicest bread thee feed; thy soul I Will fill
With sweetest honey, wisdom thou shall find
More sweet by far then honey to thy mind;
That I may make thee pleasing unto me,
I Will wash thy stains and spots clean off from thee.
I Will take the pains to make thy soul as white
As snow or wool, as pure as is the light.
Thou do mistake thy self to think it shall
Be left to thee and unto thy lot fall
To bring thy self to Heaven, or to make clean
Thy heart in thine own strength. I don't so mean.
The difficulties in the work are mine
I came to do them, do but thou incline,
Unto my words thine ears, and yield to me,
And thou with patience all well done shall see.
When I by Joshuah did my people lead
Into the Land of promise, thou may read,
How they were to pass over Jordans stood,
When as above the banks the waters stood.
Yet while my Priests who bare the Ark did but
At my command into the waters put
Their Feet-soles, by my power I made the flood
Give way unto them as I thought it good
So as before them that great stream became,
Dry land, so that most safely through the same
My people marched over, that so I
All others might instruct and teach thereby
To follow me with courage wheresoever
I shall them lead, and not to doubt or fear,
Draw back through unbelief, or halt or stay
Demurring at what may seem in the way
Too hard or dangerous for them to do;
But only me obey, after me go.
The like I did when Pharaoh did before
Pursue them with his Chariots in his sore
Rage to reduce them, when before they had
The Sea to hinder them: yet when I bad
Them march into it, it to them gave way
And was a means of safety too that day.
Standing as walls on either hand, while through
Its waves as on dry land they past; which rough,
Growing against their foes, which them pursued,
Destroyed and drowned all their multitude.
Never did any that my voice obeyed,
By any thing of danger that afraid
Might make them, or impossible might seem
In my way ever perish: but I them
Have ever helped in their obedience, and
Removed their obstacle at my command.
Dispute not but obey, Look not what thou
Art or can do, but do thou mind me, how
I am accomplished those things for to do
For which I call thee to me and thee woo.
Have I not power to make a Cammel pass
Even through a needles eye, to whom there was
Never any thing too hard? cannot I guide thee?
Shall I thee woo and shall not I abide thee
If thou accept? art thou not now to day
As bad and fowl as may be? does that fray
Me from seeking thy love? if thou consent
Can think that I my bargain will repent?
I Am not like poor blind men that things pursue,
With eagerness which afterward they rue.
Because they knew not how they should them find,
Or were themselves unstable in their mind.
I Am not like man that I should so repent.
Therefore obey me and yield thy confent
Unto me wholly: I will surely do,
What needful is for thee. I Will wholly to
My self conform thee, for although thou be,
Or weak or dead there is life enough in me,
Who am the Resurrection and Life too,
So that though men be dead yet if they do,
Believe on me, I Life to them will give,
And living and believing they shall live
For ever, why do thou thy weakness plead
To this or that; or tell me thou art dead?
There Is the more need on that account that thou
Yield up thy self to me: down thy self bow
To my dispose, who all things fully have
That may supply thy wants and thy soul save,
I know you are weak and dead, and all that is naught:
I need not what is in man by Thee be taught.
Nay I do therefore woe thee that I may
By curing thee remove those things away.
If such a one thou were not, then no need
For me so seek thee, or that thou take need
To me to save thee, but if thou wilt be mine
(As I have often said) I will be thine:
And what is mine shall be thine also, and sure
My things are able thy weal to procure.
My wisdom thou sha^t have the way to show
And thee to help we^lthy concerns to know,
And to direct thee how to make thy choice
In every thing, do but thou hear my voice.
My strength shall strengthen thee to walk my way
Enter the straight gate, and my will obey.
Though thou be weak and in the strength tha^s thine
Can not do this or that, can not in mine?
I Will be thy holiness; my Spirit I Will give
To thee that therein thou may act and live,
Or rather acted be and live, cannot
My holy spirit fetch out every spot,
That cleaves to thee, and so display my love
As thee from all thy Idols to remove?
Its not in thine own self that I require,
Thee this or that to do or ought desire:
Its in me and what is mine which I therefore
Freely thee give because I know you are poor.
Naked, and dead, and weak and wretched too
Nothing that's good have, naught that's good can do.
I Will be thy husband; and I am so good
I Will bear with all thy badness, till my blood
And grace has betterd thee: I will (thou wilt see)
Demean my self so gently toward thee
That with my gentleness I Will break thine heart
And make thee cleave to me, and to depart
From all thine Idols, do but thou consent;
My Grace shall be for the^e sufficient.
The fountain of thy sin is great indeed,
But of my grace the fountain does exceed.
No weakness, death, or badness that is in thee,
No difficulties in the way that be,
Shall hinder thee from bliss: If thou wilt but give
Thy self unto me freely, thou shall live.
Oh take my yoke upon thee, it shall bow thee
And bear my burden, it shall not ore-throw thee.
For my yokes easy, give consent and go
Forth in my strength: all things for thee I Will doe^
In all things be for me and then I will
Be for thee too and and all thy works fulfill.
Lean on mine arm or shoulder I Will sustain thee;
And though thou homely be I Will not disdain thee.
As upon Eagles wings I will thee bear
And carry thee through all, do not thou fear:
Only yield unto me my voice to hear.
Through all the Wilderness I will thee guide,
In every danger I Will from ill thee hide.
I Will never, never, leave thy soul until
All my good pleasure I in thee fulfill.
All things are ready: only yield thy will.
Incline thine ear and hear me, do not stop
It against me, and I Will my doctrine drop.
So thereunto, that even thy very heart
It shall make willing and thy soul convert:
And cause thee from thy Idols to depart.
Do but so hear me as to know my name,
That known thy heart to trust in me will frame.

Soul. And is it so dear Lord, then what shall let
But that to thee I yield my self and set
My heart upon thee, wholly I refign,
My self up to thee to be only thine.
Help me herein for thou art good indeed.
None is like to thee, while thy words I heed
Marrow they are and and fatness to my taste:
Oh thou my soul, affected with thee have.
Seeing thou came to save even sinners chief,
Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief.
None is like thee, thou art the only wooer,
You Are worthy love, oh thou most worthy doer!
Oh take my heart, dear Lord, for thou alone
Art worthy of it, and besides thee none.
There Is none has done for me such things as thou,
There Is none besides has made me such things know,
There Is none so lovely or so fit for me
Therefore, dear Lord, I yield my self to thee.
I Am thine to love and praise thee, and thee serve,
Oh never let me from thee stray or swerve.
Oh thou art very fair, the white and ruddy,
None may with thee compare, make it my study,
Thee that I may more know, and more delight in
My self to thee I ow, Me thou have right in.
When I was damned to^dy thou did redeem me,
And though unworthy I Thou did esteem me,
So as thy self to give for me a ranlome
That so my soul might live. I am unhandsome
Worthy great shame and blame, but though I naught be
Yet blessed be thy name thou have upsought me.
Oh that I knew thee more, and more did love thee
That I might thee adore, as't does behove me.
Oh show thy self to me, make me to know thee.
Make me thy f^ce to see, and to follow thee.
I am a sinful man, unworthy of thy love
I nothing good do can, but what thy wrath may move
Yea what of thy good grace thou give'st me power un^o
Sin has in me such place as otherwise I do.
Yet seeing I am thine, though I am nothing worth,
Do thou my heart incline after thee to go forth.
Set thou my heart and eye with all intensiveness
Upon thy Majesty, that without pensiveness
I may go wheresoever thou go me before;
May unto thee adhaere, and ever thee adore.
Thou all art and in all. Thou gav'st thy self for me
And whatsoever befall, its meet I be for Thee.
It was thy pleasure, Lord, so for my soul to do,
Oh do thou yet afford, thy heavenly grace thereto.
Those lusts that be in me, and which do thee offend,
Drawing my heart from thee, subdue, and meamend.
For I am much amiss; and very full of spots,
That I thy Name may bliss, purge thou away my blots.
Remove my sins away, that I to thee may cleave,
Let me not go astray. Do thou me never leave.
I cannot trust my heart, it is so full of deceit
Its apt from thee to start, it is a very cheat,
Do thou it recti^^e, make it to thee upright
That I may heartily love thee, in thee delight
And though I wretched be, do not thou me disdain:
Since thou have loved me let me thy love retain.
Thou art the All in all: stay my soul upon thee;
And let me never fall by my iniquity.
My hope is all in thee; and in thy great goodness:
I nothing have in me that may deserve thy bless.
Help me thy name to praise, as it is right and due:
Do thou thereto me raise thy goodness for to view.
Dear Lord, thou worthy art of all my heart and love:
Oh let me not depart from thee my Lord above
Unite my heart to thee that I may fear thy name:
And let me never be put to rebuke and shame.
Oh flow thou into me. Thou art an Ocean.
Though I a poor one be Thou art the wealthy man.
Set my heart toward thee: and make it open stand,
Come thou Lord into me and wholly me command.
Oh do thou live in me, and fill me with thy grace;
That I may joy in thee; and ever see thy face.
Thou art the lovely one: all things are black to thee:
Fix mine eye thee upon, make me thy beauty see.
Thou only fullness art. I am an empty thing,
Do thou thy grace impart; and me unto thee bring.
Be evermore with me where er'e thou make me go:
Let me thy glory see; and thy will ever do.
Thou art the mighty God, thou can subdue my foes,
Thou have them all down trod, all things that thee oppose.
Thou art the holy one. Thou can me holy make:
Make me love thee alone; and all for thee forsake.
Oh be thou all to me, who rothing have that is good:
Oh frame my heart to thece; whshing it in thy blood.
Oh there is none to thee. Thou all things do excel.
What er'e is good for me, does in thee fully dwell.
None ever served thee but thou them satisfied:
None thy grace ever see but they it magnified,
Thou Lord art far above all I can say of thee,
Thou art the God of love. All praise be unto thee.

Chr. Dear soul I do accept thee: and thou art
Most welcome to me, it does glad my heart
To see a soul it self unto me yield
More than when some stout Champion wins the field,
And takes the spoils of all his enemies,
Which up against him used in arms to rise.
Since thou thy self to me do yield be sure,
My love shall ever toward thee i^ dure.
Be but thou constant, nothing shall me draw,
Those to reject that cleave unto my law.
I Will order over thee my government,
So as thou ^ere shall have cause to repent
Of thy submission to me, every thing
Which I shall do to thee shall blessing bring.
Thy forepast sins I blot out and remit,
And of them all I wholly thee acquit.
How many or how great so er'e they were.
Thou may me freely serve without all fear
Of my impu^ing any of them to thee:
I pass them by, and they shall not undo thee.
I own thee as my own and thee present
As in my self to him who me forth sent,
Even as a Branch in me into whom now,
Thou art ingraffed and henceforth shall grow.
Or as a member of mine own body,
Which is recast of curse and mi^ery.
I am thy Head and Root unto thee I
Henceforth will minister all full supply
Of grace and spirit, nothing shall thou want,
What may be good for thee I will it grant.
Open thy mouth and ask of me I will,
All thy petitions verily fulfill.
What ever thou shall in my name desire,
Or of my Father for my sake require,
So be thou do to me adhaere and cleave,
And firm in me abiding do receive
And keep my words within thee asking so,
And for such things as they direct thee to.
Thou shall receive it, and thou may be bold
To come and ask; for why, mine eyes behold
Thee, and thy needs and wants, and unto thee
And all the righteous mine ears open be.
I will do more for thee than thou can ask,
I Will help thee every where. I Will put no task
Upon thee but what I shall easy make,
Do but in me abide; my counsel take.
I am thine Head and Husband; lean on me:
My grace thou shall enjoy; my glory see.
To me thou art most welcome, very dear
Be confident of me, and nothing fear
But to neglect my counsels: for as me
My Father loves, so do I love thee.
I who for thee did shed my precious blood,
Will naught deny that may for thee be good.
Since thou art come to trust under my wings
I interest thee in all my good things.
My Father is thy Father too, and He
That my God is, thy God likewise will be.
My Angels shall thee guard for thy welfare,
And of my glorious Kingdom thou shall share
And all the endless joys thereof, my merit
Is thy rich stock day pledge thy holy Spirit,
Whom I will pour on thee, and in thy heart
Will put, that from me thou may never start.
He will conduct thee safely till thou have,
All dangers of destruction wholly past.
He shall abide with thee and to thee show
My things, inlightning thine heart them to know.
My goodness, and my glory, what I have
Done for and to thee that I might thee save.
What is in me for thee; what things are mine
And how in and with me they all are thine.
Yea He shall wash, make clean, renew thy heart;
And keep thee to me; and to thee impart
My grace and blessing, therefore do not fear:
Only to him attend, to him adhaere.
He shall thy works work in and for thee, and
Strengthen thee that thy foes thou may withstand.
He shall thee comfort, fill with peace and joy;
And keep thee safe from what may thee annoy.
I Will do all things for thee; I Will be thy lot
Thy portion, and thy riches; fear thou not.
He who thee touches, touches me; for I
Tender thee as the Apple of mine eye.
My heart is larget to thee than the Sea:
Or then by any words expressed (...) be.
Fear not Dear soul, thy state is happy now
Since thou thy self do to my scepter how.
Only I must inform thee that I must
Take such a course with thee as may thy lust
Destroy; and make thee suitable to me
That thou partaker of my joys may be.
I must thee sometimes try, that so I may
Prove whither Thou indeed wilt me obey.
I will into a Wilderness thee lead
That so I may thee to thy Idols dead:
And that when stripped of them I more may show
My grace to thee; and make thee it to know
To be sufficient for thee, do not fear
For I Will not leave thee, nor forsake thee there.
I will be with thee, and be all supplies
To every one of thy necessities.
I will be better unto thee than all
Egyptian Fleshpots wherefrom I thee call.
I Will there speak comfortably to thy heart
And make thee know how dear to me thou art.
I Will give thee there in all thy way mine arm,
To strengthen ^he^ to walk on, and from harm
I Will thee protect and keep, until I see
It meet to take thee hence to be with me.
But thou must follow me, and not look back
As did Lo's Wife, thy pace thou must nor slack,
For fear thy love grow cold and so decay,
That thou from after me turn quite away.
Thou must thy flesh ^ield up to be subdued
And mortified by me because its rude;
And full of stubbornness, and often has broke,
Both of my laws and of my love the yoke.
Yea so rebelhous against me it is,
And has led thee so much to do amiss,
And with so high a hand (...) had I not,
Been merciful to thee; as (...) to Lot,
When he in- Sodom lingered ^eath to part
Therefrom when called; (thou there through have thy heart,
So often hardened) thou destroyed had been,
Through it much hurt and forrow thou have seen.
I must therefore for thee it came, that it
May not grow rank sti'd and make thee unfit
For fellowship with me, who holy am,
And unto thee to make thee holy came.
But if at my reproof thou wi^t let go,
Its lusls, the less grief I shall put thee to.
Oh yield it up, Dear soul at every turn,
Be not offended that I parge or burn
It o^t of thee, thy self now offer up
A sacrifice to me, drink of my cup,
I give to cleanse thee from thy filth within,
And from what ther^e breaks forth upon thy skin
Like to a Leprosy, and does defile,
Thy person, and dotli make thee very vile.
Yield but thy self to me, and i^le thee cure,
I Will make thee like my self both white and pure.
So shall I in thy beauty much delight,
And thou shall always dwell in my blessed sight.
And therefore do not fear, I will not harm thee
But only cleanse thee from thy filth; and arm thee
Against what may destroy thee. I must prove thee,
And humble as my spouse because I love thee.
That so I may thee fashion to my mind,
Make thee fit for me: and that thou may find
More favor in mine eyes. I may be for thee
And that thy fil^h may not make me abhor thee.
But fear not: when I have thee fully tried,
Thou shall with me also be glorified.
Fear not, l'th wilderness I will thee feed,
And by my right hand I will there thee lead.
And by thy right hand too I will thee hol^,
Nothing shall harm thee. I thy frame and mold
Do fully know, and will not on thee lay,
More than what by my strength endure thou may
Only resign thy flesh and self to me;
And thou shall my Salvation surely see.
I now unto my self do freely spouse thee,
But I shall not as yet so fully house thee
As I intend here fter, thou must tarry,
And wait a while before I fully many
Thee to my self, before unto that place
Those royal Mansions, which for thee my grace
Has fitted I thee take; where I receive,
And entertain all that in me believe.
Thou have been very whorish, and thou art,
Polluted with thy whoredoms at thy heart.
Thy flesh and body is defiled with what,
Thou from thy lovers whoredoms often have got
And I cannot into my Bride-bed take thee,
Till I first wash thee white, and clean do make thee.
Thou must the time of purifying stay,
Before our solemn joyful wedding day.
In the mean time constant to me and chaste,
Thou must abide and thou may not make have.
After enjoyments of delights so that
With other pleasures thou thee satiate;
And turn thee from me to some other lover
Thee to content, thou may let none be over
Thy heart and conscience, besides me who am
Thy only Lord and Savior: that meek Lamb
Who bought thee with my blood, and thee did call
To me that I might be thy All in All
If thus thou do then I will be for thee,
And all I am and have it thine shall be.

Soul Dear Lord, thy words in every thing are right,
My soul approves them, finds therein delight.
Make me them more to know further to see,
Into the wondrous things that in them be.
Thy love is wonderful, worthy receipt,
And to be fed upon more than our meat.
Its better far than wine, does me refresh,
Although it relish not unto the flesh.
Who would not such a lover as thou art
Embrace with both his arms with all his heart?
Who can like blessings give, like comforts bring,
Above all GODS Thou art the mighty KING.
Oh who can fathom, who can comprehend
The greatness of thy love? there is no such friend
Or lover as thou art, none can forgive
The soul its sins like thee, or make it live.
Oh who am I, that I should welcome be,
Or be accepted unto life by thee?
That thou shuld'st call and woo me, and embrace
Me in thy arms, cause me to see thy face
Thy pleasant face, and own me as thy own,
And in thy words thy love to me make known?
Yea both thy words and love cause me to know
To draw my heart from off the things below
And fix it on thy self and things above!
Oh there is no sweetness to that of thy love!
Its tastes at present most delightful are,
All other pleasures it surpasses far.
But as if all at present was but small
Thou holdst forth such a portion too as all
For future time, yea to eternity,
For ever to enjoy thy Majesty.
I less am than the least of thy mercies
Which thou do give, wilt not thou me despise.
But passing by all my unworthiness,
And many mighty sins such love express
As passes knowledge? Oh that I again
With my whole heart thy love may intertain.
And love for love return perpetually
And never shrink from thee, no, though I die.
Oh Lord thy love ingages me to be
Wholly devoted and given up to thee.
For its but meet that I be wholly thine
And for thy sake give up all that is mine
Who for my sake did not the cross decline.
Its meet that I a sacrifice should be
Wholly devoted and given up to thee,
A living holy sacrifice, whereby
Thou may be glorified and lift on high.
For great thy love to me is I confess,
Nor can I by my tongue or pen express
The great des^r^s of love and service too,
Which far beyond all my returns I ow.
I do acknowledge too thy words be true
In all they say of me, that nothing's due
To me of praise or approbation, for
I am so loathsome thou may me abhor,
I am polluted with a whorish heart,
So as I jealous am least I depart
Away from thee, it oftentimes indeed,
Has played the Harlot and brought forth a breed
Of hateful Monster full of venom fell
Against thy purity. The brats of Hell
Unchaste desires and lusts, self-love and pride,
Ambitious thoughts, a loathness to be tied
Up to thy just commands an evil eye
Of envy against such as I could spy
Preferred before me, often at them fretting,
With covetous desires to be getting
More of this worlds enjoyments; profits, pleasure;
Slothful, mispending of that time and leisure
Thou have afforded me for better things,
From which much other mischief often times springs:
Such things my bowels often have eat, and vexed
Me with disquiet, and my soul perplexed.
That brutish lust that dwells in me I fear,
Least it prevail against me, and me bear
Away from that subjection to thee due,
And cause me with much sorrow it to rue.
I am indeed nolluted and ore-spread
As with a leprosy from heel to head.
Diseased within and full of sores without,
I am more vile than any menstruous clout;
Have need to be renewed made white and clean,
And yet when all is done, I am too mean,
To be so honored by thee and exalted,
In every thing I Am worthy to be faulted.
Worthy to be disdained and rejected
Unworthy utterly to be respected,
By thy so glorious eye that puter is
Then to behold and like iniquities.
Should thou then treat me like some royal Queen
As if for thy consort I bred had been?
Oh it is a dignity above me far,
I fitter am that thou should me debart,
From coming near thee, meddling wih thy Name,
Least I pollute it and expose't to shame.
As too much I have done already. Oh
I don't deserve to be respected so.
But if thy pleasure be me so to love,
Well may thou take such course as 't does behove,
Tha thou may fit me for such dignity,
As thou confer'st, and for thy company
Which thon vouchsafest of thy wondrous grace,
To me who am of pedigree but base.
It is but meet that thou should make we white.
And clean, that thou in me may take delight.
That thou should cure those sores and ulcers great,
Which make me ugly and for thee unmeet.
Yea and its wondrous grace that thou will take,
Such pains with me, me whole and clean to make.
Oh what am I that thou should stoop so low,
To do such offices such love to show?
Thou rather might throw me out of thy sight,
Than so to make me meet for thy delight.
Who meeter am that thou should make me dwell,
Among that cursed crew that be in hell.
Its meet also that there a time should be
For purifying, before unto thee
Thou do receive me with thee to remain,
In those high Mansions where thou and thine reign.
It needful is that thou me separate,
From all those Idols which thy Soul does hate.
And that thou should purge out my dtoss, although
A fire thou make and me into it throw.
I Am thine, and meet it is that thou should do,
What ever is thy pleasure, Lord even so
Be it as thou do please, thou art so just,
So kind and careful that I well may trust.
My soul and body with thee; and yield up
To take out of thy hands what ever cup
Thou see it meet to temper and to give,
In cleaving to thee I shall surely live.
Thou who have loved me, and done such things,
As everlasting consolation brings.
And gives good hope through grace, wilt doubtless do,
Nothing unto me which may cause my woe.
Do with me as thou will: for I am thine
And thee to love I do my heart incline.
Through thy good grace, do thou incline it more
Making it chaste to thee, thee to adore.
For I can nothing do that may thee serve,
Delight or honor as thou do deserve.
I Am thine: Lord save me; and me sanctify.
Unite my heart to thee continually.
Unto thee evermore make me adhaere
That I thy holy Name may love and fear.
May lean upon thine arm, thy Spirit mind,
So as I may his help at all times find
Through thee I any thing may do (...),
But in my self have only cause of (...)
No fears shall (...) pleasures me (...),
If thou do hold me and (...)
And cure. Its mee^ I (...) thee and I
Desire I may my self thereto apply
My Cross up taking (...) Dear (...)
How thrald I am furthe then thou (...)
How I the least good thing (...) not perform.
Nor stand upright against the mild ^^^storm
Of troule that unt^^ my lot may fall,
I need that thou should be my ALL in ALL.
I Am poor and blind, naked and wreteched, and
My heart's dece (...), will not to thee stand,
Unless thou me (...), and keep so
In thy strong (...), as not to let me go
Unless thou purge out my hypocrisy,
Make me sincere, give me a single eye.
Unless thou be my strength, my goodness and
Do hold me to thee by thy mighty hand.
But seeing thou appointed art, dear Lord,
To look to and thy saving help afford
To those that come to thee, and on thee trust,
And thou art loving, faithful, kind and just,
And all-sufficient for me I resign;
My self unto thee. I am wholly thine.
Thou wiser art than I, thou know best
What to my good pertain^, and thou art blessed;
Dear Lord thy will be done in every thing,
Take thine own course me unto thee to bring.
Only do not me in thy wrath chastise.
But let my soul find favor in thine eyes.
Yea thou so good art, and so gracious too,
That thou all things wilt for my profit do.
Oh cause thy face upon my soul to shine,
And my heart unto thee allways incline.
Oh kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth:
Oh bliss me with the blessings of thy truth:
Inspire my heart with thy good spirit, and breath
The breath of life into me, things beneath
Cause me for to despise, the things above,
To seek and to affect and thee to love.
Let me thy love taste, better it is than wine,
Its full of comfort, courage, life divine.
'Twill cheer the hear^, 'twill make the lips of chose
Who taste it talkative, free to disclose
Thy heavenly virtues, let me thereof taste,
Forgiving all my mis-demeanours past:
My undue loves which unto other things,
And persons I have born, which to me brings
Both grief and fear when thereupon I think,
Least they should make me in thy nostrils stin^^.
And cause thee to abhor me, oh forgive
All forepast follies, and that I may live
Let me enjoy thy loves, and taste how sweet
And ravishing they be, oh let me meet
With them; with them be filled, that I may
In thee delight my self; and on thee stay
And fix my soul no other pleasures so
Affecting as from thine to them to go.
Thine ointments wherewith thou anointed art,
And unto those that love thee do impart.
Most odoriferous are, oh they do smell,
Unto the upright hearted wondrous well.
Let me them find and smell, thy precious Name,
An ointment poured forth is, that good fame
And great renown thou have, oh it is most sweet,
And spread abroad that we with it may meet.
And therefore thee the Virgins Chaste do love,
Thy Name their hearts desires to thee does move.
Oh make me know it, and its sweetness find,
That it may draw me with a single mind
Unto thee. Draw me, Draw me, we will run
After thee, though I somewhat have begun
Toward thee to incline, my mind does stick,
Yet to my Idols, so as it is not quick.
Enough toward thee, oh let that sweet sent,
Of thy good ointments, thy Name excellent
More strongly draw, me, oh I am too slack,
In seeking thee, yea woe is me I (...)
From thee have run apace, since I begun
To move toward thee. I Am too apt to run
Toward my Idols, in the ways of sin.
Yea Lord thou know how since I did begin,
To court thy favor I have run apace,
In wicked ways wherein had not thy grace,
And mercy me prevented I had been
Over thrown forever, this day never seen.
But oh my pace toward thee is so dul^,
That need I have that after thee thou pull
My sluggish Soul, oh bring thou me into
Thy Chambers of defense and delight, so
As in thy love I such delight may take,
As never thee any more to forsake.
Let me be so enclosed as with walls
Of sure defense, that whatsoever befalls
I never may again from thee withdraw,
But allways may thee fear and stand in aw,
Least I offend thee, oh that I to thee
May swiftly run with all that upright be,
And in thy Chamber may with them abide,
Where thou do all that love thee safely hide.
We Will then be glad in Thee, and much rejoice,
Oh King we will sing thy praise with cheerful voice.
We Will think upon thy loves which do excel
The choicest Wine. Oh we remember well,
The sweetness of its taste, who be upright,
They do thy person love, in thee delight.
Not in themselves, their parts their gifts, nor yet
Those pleasures only that from thee they get.
Like to the Concubines which love to be,
Delighted with thy loves; courted by thee;
But thee and thy concerns do slight; neglect
To seek thy glory; don't thy name respect
Sincerely, but make thou me upright so
As my heart wholly after thee may go.
Oh thou whom my soul in some measure loves
Do thou me show what me to know behooves.
Tell thou me where thou feed'st thy flock: and make
Me go upright. Let me not thee forsake,
With sinners in their dainties to per^ke.
Let me not turn aside from thee to go,
After the flocks of thy companions who
Lift up themselves into equallity
Of power or worth unto thy Majesty:
But show me thy good ways and make me see,
The thing that is acceptable to thee.
Stay me with flagons of thy love: and let
Me of thy apples too the comforts get,
For I desire thy love, oh do thou show it
And cause thou me more clearly yet to know it.
Under my head put thou thy left hand, and
Therewith support me, and let thy right hand
Embrace my soul, and keep me safe, until
I have fulfilled my course, performed thy will.
And oh that then thou would make have unto
My soul: and be thou swifter than a Roe:
That so our union may completed be;
And I may full fruition have of thee.
Make have oh my beloved like a Roe;
Or a young Heart that on the Mountains go:
That leap upon the Mountains and over Hills
Come skipping. Thou art he alone that fills
The souls of those that love thee with delight,
And make them fully happy in the sight
Of thy most glorious person, do not tarry
Help me to have to thee, then have to marry
Me to thy self; that I with thee may dwell
Who do in all excellencies excel.
And in the mean time make me chaste and true
Unto thee, what opposes thee subdue.
Working my works in and for me, yea al
Thine own good pleasure whereto thou do call
And counsel me, the work of faith with power,
That I may persevere unto the hour,
And in the hour of death; till unto thee,
Thou take me up in joys for a^e to be.
I leave my self to thee oh do thou what
Is good for me.

Chr. I will so, fear not that.

Amen. HALLELUJAH.
FINIS.
A Song of Loves.
Lord grant that in a right renewed mind,
I may such love to thee and thy things find;
As to say of and to thee this behind.
1.
I Am my well beloveds,
My well-beloved's mine:
He is a person lovely,
Excellent and divine.
2.
For he is the Immanuel,
Both God and man in one:
The Mighty God, the wonderful;
And like him there is none.
3.
His excellence surpasses,
What one may it declare?
Or who among the mighty,
May with this one compare?
4.
Oh all ye that in love are,
Your lovers who commend;
Is any of them able,
To match with this my friend?
5.
Has any of them ever,
So great things for you wrought!
Or is there any of them,
Has you so dearly bought?
6.
Is any of them so high,
Either in Rank or birth?
No, there is none so glorious
Either in Heaven or Earth.
7.
There Is none of them is so great:
There Is none of them can do,
So great things and so wonderful,
Or can enrich you so.
8.
As this my Lord and Savior
Can and will do for me;
If I be upright with him,
And do not from him flee.
9.
Ye that in Kings and Princes
And mighty Potentates
Do make your boasts, come tell me
Has he there any mates?
10.
Can any of them match him?
Nay they are all below:
The greatest of those great ones
Their service to him owe.
11.
They Are short in understanding,
Their power also is less:
Their rule extends not so far,
Nor yet their happiness.
12.
They are but men as others;
Their lives are but mortal:
Their breaths must pass out of them
And then they perish all.
13.
But this my Lord and Lover,
Does live for evermore:
His understanding's perfect,
All creatures him adore.
14.
Nothing for him too hard is:
For he can all things do,
Nothing from his eyes hid is;
For he all things does know.
15.
He rules over all things,
Both in the seat and land:
Yea and all things In heaven be,
Subject to his command.
16.
He heir of Heaven and earth is
He is lord of all glory:
His brith's above all creatures,
There Is none can match his story.
17.
His excellence excels all
That Is either hard or seen:
One half of what is true of him
Never declared has been.
18.
Go glory of your Princes,
And Benefactors great:
Tell of their great majesty,
Their royal train and seat.
19.
I none of them shall envy,
This one's mcuh better far
Whom my soul has desire to:
They cannot with him compare.
20.
He has far greater glory
Than any one of them:
Though yet he is so lovely,
That none he does contemn
21.
Though they be poor and little
If unto him they flee.
He none of them disdaineth
But they accepted be.
22.
Those whom ye use to boast of
Be proud and lofty too;
And often in words and carriage
Great haughtiness they show:
23.
Though they be far below him
Who my beloved is;
And like to meaner persons,
He them re^roves I wiss.
24.
For in his hands they all are,
To do with as he please;
And he can make or break them,
Or change their state with ease.
25.
Oh there is none so lovely
As this Beloved one:
In pity, love and goodness,
Like to him there is none.
26.
He higher than the Heavens is,
Or brightest Angel there,
In dignity and glory;
Yet he appeared here.
27.
(That he might save us sinners)
Like to a Servant poor:
Where of our miseries too,
The liveries he wore.
28.
Yielding himself to death up
And great indignities,
To ransom us from ruin:
Nor does he now despise.
29.
The meanest that obey him,
To take into his grace:
Though he on high's ascended
Unto his holy place.
30.
He such invites unto him;
With him they may be bold:
His secrets he unto them,
Most free is to unfold.
31.
Whoever him does follow,
Shall see his pleasant face
He Will not disdain their lowness,
But kindly them embrace.
32.
He Will not despise their prayers,
Nor turn away his ear:
But being full of mercy,
He their complaints will hear.
33.
The sweetest of all persons;
Better than all is he.
The meekest and the gentlest,
Fairer then men's sons be.
34.
The highnest and the lowest,
The white and ruddle one.
In greatness and in goodness,
Like to him there is none.
35.
Come ye Queens and Princesses,
Whose Birth is great and high,
Who think yuor happinesses
Do reach unto the sky,
36.
Because your Lords be great ones
And have a great command;
For that their rule extends,
Both unto Sea and Land,
37.
Do ye not highly extol
Your great good fortunes here?
Do ye not use your selves too
Often up thereby to bear?
38.
Do ye not think your great Lords,
To be so great and high,
And such advancements to you,
That ye for them could die?
39.
Or else endure great hardships
For them and for their sake,
With whom in their high honors,
So greatly you partake?
40.
Behold ye him whom I praise
And whom my soul desires,
As its friend to delight in
Can give what it requires.
41.
Lo, Ho is much more noble,
In Birth and in degree:
And there is not any Monarch,
Who Is of his gifts so free.
42.
Nor are the gifts which they give
So precious or so rare,
They all are but his Stewards,
And cannot with him compare.
43.
Himself above all gifts is,
The Richest pearl of price,
His love cannot be valued
The soul it satisfies.
44.
Oh he my love deserves more,
And to be followed,
Through every condition
Whereto by him its led.
45.
Then any of the greatest,
And highest Potentates,
Who have the largest Empires,
And rule the greatest states.
46.
I Am his by way of purchase,
Who made and bought me too;
By that most precious blood, which
Did freely from him flow.
47.
Which he also discovered
And called me of his grate,
There through, that I might know him,
And might him too embrace.
48.
And him I own to be mine,
My Lord and Savior.
And his I am to care for
And serve in every hour.
49.
My soul and body his are
And whatsoever I have:
And he is mine to give me,
What good for me I crave.
50.
Oh that I were more truly
And heartily indeed,
Given up to love and live to
Him who does so exceed
51.
All other lovely objects
Be their worth never so great!
I should need not to fear then
What ever may me threat.
52.
For I am his and of me
He has the care and charge,
And his disire toward me,
Is very full and large.
53.
He Is able to protect me
From what may do me harm
And's ready to infold me
Within his mighty arm.
54.
Oh that I were devoted
More unto him, and were
More willing to be always
To him chaste and sincere!
55.
I Am his not sins and Sathins;
That them I should obey;
Oh that when they entice me,
My heart might always say
56.
Christ is my well-beloved
He must my service have:
He Is only worthy of it,
Who only does me save.
57.
For He, He also mine is
A portion may suffice,
To satisfy me always,
Your promises are lies.
58.
I Am his: and not a Servant
Unto the world or men;
That I should yield my Conscience
To be enslaved by them.
59.
I may not to their pleasures
My life and will compose,
To follow their desires:
So I my self might lose.
60.
For they cannot protect me
When my Lord shall appear:
If he should then reject me,
They cannot me upbear.
61.
No, no, I Am his who loves me
And bought me by his blood,
From all that conversation
Which is not just and good.
62.
He Is mine too to command me,
And be my sure defense
Who certainly will keep me,
And glad my Conscience:
63.
For he will give assistance,
Of safety in his love,
And hold me in his hand so,
As nough shall me remove.
64.
He only may do with me;
What unto him seems best:
For He has right unto me,
And will lead me to rest.
65.
Oh that he would embrace me,
And give my soul a kiss
Whose love than wine is better,
And fills the soul with bliss.
66.
His love the love of women,
Surpasses very much;
How ever pleasing that is,
Its pleasures are not such.
67.
No nor is strength not servour;
Much less its beensitt;
As those that he that is loved
Of this Beloved (...).
68.
Their love to this is empty
Its pleasores be but short:
Although they are prerry creatures
And (...)
69.
Their favor is deceitful;
Their beauty's but a blast;
Their kingnesses soon vanish;
Their sweetness does not last.
70.
Their embraces are bruises;
Their kisses often are bites:
The vanity that's in them,
Exceeds often their delights,
71.
The love of Christ excels;
Its constant, firm, and sure:
Its very full of comforts,
And pleasures that endure.
72.
His words are full of kindness,
Yea when they are most taste:
Yet grace and love is in them,
Which flows from his heart.
73.
His kisses and embraces;
Are full of ravishment:
Filling the soul with goodness,
And riches of content.
74.
His beauty never changes;
His strength does (...) never decay:
He is the same for ever,
Yesterday and to day.
75.
Oh that my Soul were fitted,
His kindness to receive!
That I by my unkindness,
His Spirit might not grieve!
76.
Oh may he count me worthy
Of his inamourments;
Forgiving all my follies,
Causes of discontents!
77.
His soul it is spiritual
Most holy, just and pure
All wickedness he hates,
He can it not endure.
78.
But I poor wretch am sinful
And full of vanity:
How can I be delightful,
And pleasing in his eye?
79.
Dear Lord I am unworthy
To be owned of thee,
That thine I should be styled,
And thou accept of me.
80.
Yet do not thou disdain me;
Do thou me lovely make:
That so thou may embrace me,
And pleasure in me take.
81.
Be thou mine, me to purify
And to make (...) and white:
Make me more thine, and cause me,
In thee to take delight.
82.
Prepare my soul unto thee,
That I may thee embrace;
And give thee intertainment,
And the^ may me s^late.
83.
Lay thou me in thy bosom,
And keep me in thine arm,
So shall I rest securely
Void of all fear of harm.
84.
Oh cause my soul to kiss thee,
And lay thee in my heart:
That thou may me embracing
Thy loves to me impart.
85.
And all the night of darkness
May lodge within my breast:
And I in thy embraces
May find sweet peace and rest.
86.
Oh make me subject to thee,
That thou may be above:
Uniting me unto thee,
And fill me with thy love.
87.
And let, my loving kindness
Such love again beget,
That I my heart and bowels
May open to thee set.
88.
And thou thy Word put in me,
As an immortal seed,
Filled with that Life and Spirit
Which does from thee proceed.
89.
That thou may make me fruitful,
With fruits of righteousness;
An offspring which thine Image
May livelily express.
90.
That thou thy pleasure in me,
Subject to thee may take;
And I have pleasures in thee,
Which may me cheerful make.
91.
Oh make thou me so lovely,
That thou may count me meet
For such communion with thee
As is so pure and sweet.
92.
That chaste I may be to thee,
And content in thee find,
That none else I may look to,
Or covet in my mind.
93.
May never go a whoring
From under thee my Lord;
But may be fully pleased
With what thou do afford.
94.
Nor only let me love thee
Like to some Concubine,
So as for pleasures only
Me to thee to incline.
95.
But as a Spouse and chaste one
Though thou should them withhold,
Yet I may love thy person
And virtues manifold.
96.
And thine affairs take care of
As things that are mine own:
And faithfully observe what
Thou shall to me make known.
97.
Leaving it to thy wisdom
Those pleasures to impart,
Which cannot but be pleasing,
And satisfy my heart.
98.
But let me not love pleasures
So as if thou delay,
Thine to impart unto me
I should to others stray.
99.
But make me ever willing
To stay and wait for thee:
Who when thou see it fitting
Will thine impart to me.
100.
Thou art the only worthy
To be loved and obeyed:
Oh that my heart upon thee
More fixed were and stayed.
101.
Oh sanctify me to thee
And my soul purify:
Bless rods and mercies to me
That I to sin may dye.
102.
And unto all that from thee
Would steal my heart away:
That I may live unto thee
In what I do and say.
103.
Thou art the lovely portion,
Riches and honor dwell
In thee, with whatsoever
Delights and does excel.
104.
Oh were my heart reduced
To that simplicity,
That I might choose and love thee
And cleave to thee only.
105.
I would not change my lot there
For any of the heigths,
Of highest greatest persons.
My earnest groans and sighs
106.
Shall reather be through sufferings
To have thy company,
Then live else where without thee
In greatest jollity,
107.
With all the greatest fullness
This World to them affords,
Who live in its embracements
As high and mighty Lords.
108.
Yet thou have room for them too
In thy high palaces,
Oh make thou them acquainted
With thy sweet embraces!
109.
Oh make them see how empty
All things without thee are!
That they may flock unto thee
Seeing thee only fair.
110.
All honor be unto thee
Thou only worthy one,
For it is due unto thee
And unto thee alone.
111.
In oneness with the Father
And with the holy Spirit,
Thou worthy art all blessing
For ever to inherit.
112.
To thee it is my desire
To leave my self and all
I am, with whatsoever
I through thy gift mine call.
113.
Lord pardon my abuses
Of thy great love to me:
And make my soul both upright
And constant unto thee.
114.
So that thy blessing ever
May on my soul remain:
And cleanse me so as that thou
May not my work disdain.
115.
Purge out what does offend thee
And make me white and pure,
That thou may ever own me
And I be ever sure.
116.
Of thy love and thy favor
Which life does far excel,
And in thine heavenly mansions
May with thee ever dwell.
Amen, and Amen.
FINIS.
A Posie Improved.
UPON THE POSIE of a RING, Love, Love, Love. EPAVCIS MVLTA.
I.
AMongst the pretty Poseys I have seen,
Which either friends or lovers have invented,
I have on none to discant tempted been,
Nor has any my fancy more contented,
If rightly 't be applied, then this above,
This one word thrice repeated; Love, Love, Love.
II.
What man it was who did the same invent;
From whom; or unto whom the token came;
Whether some Love; to his Love it sent;
Or for what other cause some did it frame
It matters not; nor what they did thereby
Intend unto their friend to signify.
III.
Perhaps some young man who his Mistress loved.
Or else some Mistress who did love her Friend,
And want of love again, or feared, or proved
In them they loved, did this token send
Their love to quicken, and their constancy
To them the better to provoke hereby.
IV.
Like as some person who while he assays,
To do, or reach for something, and does fall
Into some danger, whence he cannot raise
Or save himself, most earnestly does call
Help, Help, Help, tripling it vehemently,
As like to suffer greatly else thereby.
V.
So possibly some lover, while he sought
The pleasing object of his love to gain,
Being into some doubt or question brought
Thereof, or meeting with slights or disdain,
Might in his earnestness cry as above,
As one else like to perish, Love, Love, Love.
VI.
Perhaps some wanton who had lust mistook
For love, seeking his lust to satisfy,
Might send it to his Harlot, to provoke
Her fond affection unto him, thereby
Exhorting her to love, love, love again,
That often his will with her he might obtain.
VII.
Perhaps some person, who had loved too much
Some other person, and loves flames had felt
Sadly to scorch him, when they did him touch,
His folly wailing on this subject dwelt.
As crying out upon a thing so hot,
Whence He much heart smart, and much hurt had got:
VIII.
That carnal love I mean, wherein the creature
Is made the object of a blind affection,
Doteing upon its beauty, parts, or feature;
Which when it meets with slighting and rejection,
(As often its foolishly misplac't on what
Either's unlawful, or repays with hate.)
IX.
Brings forth instead of pleasure, doleful grief,
Stinging the soul with fears and sad despairs,
Distractions, jealousies without relief,
And many fruitless dumps and waking cares;
Causing such one out of this love to cry,
Bewailing thus his fortune bitterly.
X.
Love, Love, Love, thou art a most cruel thing,
When fixed on some disdainful one you are found,
Thy sweets are bitter, thou leave many a sting;
Infusest venom, and the heart do wound.
Oh had thy fond deceits my soul never tainted!
Oh had I with thy force never been acquainted!
XI.
Love, Love, Love, that fond thing which men so call,
Woe worth the time I did thee intertain,
Expecting sweetness where I meet with gall,
And pleasures where I nothing find but pain.
Unhappy soul that longedst after fruit,
That may not be obtained by any suit.
XII.
Would I had hardened against thee my heart,
And made it harden thon the flinty stones
Against thy flatteries, then should no dart
Of thine have driven me to these sighs and moans.
Let none be tempted by thy speckled skin,
Or slily windings more to let thee in.
XIII.
Oh had I fixed mine eye and heart, upon
Those happy objects where no love is lost!
Had I been ruled by discretion,
Then had I never with these blasts been tossed.
Who loves unduely's rightly thus rewarded,
The more he loves, the less to be regarded.
XIV.
Who loves inordinately, puts his heart
Into another hands it to command;
Who when they list may play a Tyrants part.
Who love's in measure keeps't in his own hand:
And if it is flighted he can then withdraw't,
And place it beeter then on thing of naught.
XV.
And yet it is better, when love's badly set
Upon unlawful objects, to have it crossed,
Then that its satisfaction it should get:
For then the soul 's in danger to be lost.
Who can the mischiefs number which ensue,
When unchaste love injoys pleasures undue?
XVI.
What guilt unto it self the soul contracts?
What stings of conscience, frightful fears of Hell?
What horror, shame, reproach, spring from such acts?
What other mischeifs, where is the tongue can tell?
Hoe many loose not only name and place,
But even their lives, seeking to shun disgrace?
XVII.
How many have been cast down wounded sore?
How many strong ones hereby have been slain?
How many rich ones has this love made poor?
How many sober ones has it made vain?
Yea Cities through unchaste love have been sacked,
And Commonwealths, and Kingdoms hereby wrackt.
XVIII.
This brought the Deluge on the World of old,
And Sodom and her Sisters over-turn'd;
So as the like beside was never told,
By fire and Brimstone from Heaven being burned.
This many thousand Graecians did destroy,
While they beseig'd the here-through ruined Troy.
XIX.
On this I more enlarge, all men to warn
How they their loves misplace, and let them run,
Least they do gather thence both scath and scorn,
And wail too late when it has them undone.
Give God thy heart in the first place; there is great odds
'Twixt putting 't in a creatures hands and Gods.
XX.
Perhaps some friendly soul, whose heart was knit
Unto his friend, or neighbor, in loves bands,
Desiring love again this posie writ,
And engraved it on a ring, that on the hands
Of his friend worn, or by him read, it might
Their hearts in mut'al love firmly unite.
XXI.
Perhaps some man who true love's worth admired,
And found thereof within himself some want,
Cried out thus as a man that love desired,
Invoking love her self to him to grant,
Making his moan as if he thus should say,
Love, Love, Love, come and make with me thy stay.
XXII.
Perhaps some living in this frozen age,
And seeing charity to be waxt cold,
Himself and others thereto to engage,
Did grave these words upon a Ring of Gold.
But be it as it will, I hope I well
May good instructions to my self thence spell.
XXIII.
This threefold mention of this word to me,
Love's excellency rightly may imply,
That there is nothing in the World may be,
So good as hearty love and charity.
If other things with true love we compare,
Its excellencies superlative are.
XXIV.
Love (not that thing which springs out of dust,
And on some outward gloss does fix the eye,
Which wantons call Love, but the Scriptures lust,
For that is full of sin and vanity;
Chaining the soul to things that do it harm,
And often to their destruction men does charm.
XXV.
But) that Divine and Heavenly frame of soul,
Which fills it full of goodness, and inlarges
Its motions; and does lead it to control
What 'ere as evil a right judgment charges.
A pure and heavenly flame inkindled from
That holy fire that down from Heaven does come.
XXVI.
Which at the good of the beloved aims,
And not a man's own will to satisfy,
To all good offices the mind it frames,
And leads it all mischeivousness to fly.
Faith, hope, joy, patience, meekness, fortitude,
And justice good are; Love does all include.
XXVII.
Love both believes, and hopes, and long indures,
With courage bearing and performing all
That the beloveds good or praise procures,
Strongly resisting all that cross does fall.
Love joys to do what is right, hates to do ill,
Yea love the law it self does all fulfill.
XXVIII.
Love has its rise from He'ven, and Heaven's its seat,
Where on a stately throne its placed on high;
Needs must the worth of love be very great,
When such its birth is, and its Majesty.
Yea God himsld who all things is above,
Is not called power, or strength, or faith, but Love.
XXIX.
Love is a virtue therefore pure and clean,
That from all filthiness and vice is free,
Producing all that is good; the heart cannot mean
Ill, where love rules; for love could not be
A child of Heaven or there its seat retain,
If free it were not from all spot and stain.
XXX.
Needs must it also unto God be pleasing,
Since it in him has its original,
And to the heart it dwells in, its most easing
Of all d'sturbing passions that inthrall.
To self, and others, it is a very spring
Of every wholesome advantageous thing.
XXXI.
Yea Love's eternal, seeing in the breast
Of God, from everlasting 'twas conceived;
And it for evermore shall be possessed,
When other virtues have their end reciv'd.
So long as God is who does live for ever,
Love shall abide, and end it shall have never.
XXXII.
When what we now believe, and hope for, we
Shall fully have, and nothing more expect,
Yet we shall love, and ever loved be,
We never shall God, or God us, reject:
Nor one another, but eternally
Shall live in love and perfect unity.
XXXIII.
When all out sufferings shall be over and past,
And patient courage have no further place,
Yet Love shall flourish and for ever last,
Therefore then Love there is no choiser grace,
After all virtues press we, but above
Them all lets follow after fervent Love.
XXXIV.
But yet again this thrice repeated word,
Love, Love, Love, has another mystery;
At least to me, methinks it may afford
This observation not unusefully,
That of right Love, there are right objects three,
God, neighbors, and our selves should loved be.
XXXV.
The first Love God respects; Love God, for He
Above all other things our Love deserves;
If any other thing more loved be,
Our love from its right order greatly swerves:
God far above all other things excels,
Because in him all excellency dwells.
XXXVI.
If lovely beauty may our love attract,
And cause our eyes and hearts thereon to gaze;
Such lovely beauty dwells in him, in act,
As may with admiration us amaze.
A perfect fitness for to satisfy
Our souls with goodness to eternity.
XXXVII.
Beauty does stand in a just symmetry,
A fit composure and proportion due,
Of parts and of appearances to the eye;
Such as a loveliness presents to th'veiw.
Such justice, wisdom, power and goodness, are
In God, and so agreeing, None's so fair.
XXXVIII.
Behold his lively image, Chirst our Lord,
Where God himself unto us does present;
He Is white and ruddy, his face does afford
What ever may our souls like and content.
Power, wisdom, greatness, riches, glory, grace,
And all that suits our wants dwells in his face.
XXXIX.
What ever we can wish, desire, or crave,
That may promote our hearts content, or ease,
In God we may behold it, and it have,
Yea so as perfectly our hearts to please,
When healed so as we can see aright;
All beauty's far below his glory bright.
XL.
If love and bounty may challenge, as due
Affection from us: He the first is there.
God loves so, and his favors old and new
Are such, as none like them there ever were.
We nothing have that is good, but He it gave us,
We no ill escape, but He therefrom does save us.
XLI.
Oh who God's love and goodness can set forth!
Who can his benefits justly repeat?
Their number's numberless, and such their worth
As cannot be expressed, it is so great.
Behind, before, about us look we round.
Above, beneath, we see his love abound.
XLII.
Where shall we first begin? where make an end?
If with the world's beginning, that is too late.
Before the World God did us good intend,
Sure then his love is of an elder date.
And it is his desire we should do well for ever,
His love's eternal then, and ends never.
XLIII.
When God did make this World, and Being give
Unto each thing therein, it was for man
That He might be well, and contented live.
Yea h's thoughts to make it before it began,
Were with an eye to us, that we might Be;
And might his goodness and his glory see.
XLIV.
What a well furnished house did God provide,
With all accomodations that might make
Our lives most comfortable! yea beside
We of his heavenly Image did partake.
God gave us power and rule over the rest
Of creatures; and with fitness for it us blessed.
XLV.
Wisdom he gave to manage such a power
And such a manly courage, majesty,
And countenance, as well might make them lowre
That would but dare to oppose his Sovereignty.
Yea male and female, for each other meet
He made us, that our converse might be sweet.
XLVI.
Yea further, he did also us create
Capable with himself converse to have;
And did his mind to us communicate.
What could we more of him desire or crave?
How great his love and goodness to us then,
When we were innocent and upright men?
XLVII.
But yet his love he showed forth more sully,
When we by sin were fallen into woe,
And sins cursed fruits did soul and body sully,
And we deserved he should have been our foe.
When we were helpless and had ever perish't,
Unless his love had us relieved and cherish't.
XLVIII.
When the whole World could not relieve our case,
But more then a whole World it did require,
To ransom us from ruin, that his face
We might behold with joy and 'scape his ire.
Then more then all this World he for us gave,
(Oh how he loved us!) that he might us save.
XLIX.
He to redeem us sent his only Son,
Clothed with our flesh and blood, made poor and weak,
Made sin and curse for us, as one undone,
That he the power of sin and curse might break.
He him delivered to death on the cross,
That by his death he might repair our loss.
L.
Yet neither did his love, and goodness, here
Take up and cease, but knowing that we wanted
A quickening power us up again to rear,
And keep from death, that quickening power he granted.
For raising up his Son again from dead,
He filled him with all fullness of the Godhead.
LI.
Set him upon the throne of Majesty;
Made him a quickening spirit, and so gave
Him clothed with power and all Authority,
To bring us back again from sin, death, grave;
Yea rescue and defend us from the Devil,
Fill us with blessings, free us from all evil.
LII.
His Son, his only Son, by whom he made
This World and all therein; he thus did give
A gift beyond the World, it cannot be said
How great a gift he was, that we might live.
For he a person is excelling far,
All things that by him either were of are.
LIII.
Through him he daily does us feed, and cloth,
And bountifully lade with benefits;
Upholds us in our trials, don't us loath,
Though bad requitals often from us he gets.
Yea Heaven he opens to us, and displays
His glory to us, thither us to raise.
LIVE.
Through his dear blood he has prepared a way:
And grace affords, that we his Sons may be.
Enjoy his favor, see his face always;
Be satisfied with good, from ill be free.
Yea and in glory over other things,
Reign to eternity with him as Kings.
LV.
The good, and glory, which he has prepared
For us unworthy, sinful, wretched men,
In our return to him, cannot be declared.
Oh what a lover of us, is He then!
Yea all his rods and chastisements do tend,
To bring us to those joys that have no end.
LVI.
And to impow'r and move us to repent,
And close with him, his Spirit does us give
With that grace and those means which us prevent,
That we though dead may hear, and hearing live.
So that but yielding our obedience to him,
He Will work our works, and naught shall pluck us fro him.
LVII.
He calls us to him; bids us ask and crave,
What ever good we want us to supply,
Cleaving to him we shall it surely have;
For naught that is good for us will he deny.
Yea much he freely gives unaskt, that so
To hope in him, and ask he might us woo.
LVIII.
And more then we can ask or think, he will give;
Yea more then now our narrow hearts can hold,
If we believe on him, and to him live:
The glory he will give cannot be told.
What love's like his? or where is such a lover
Amongst all persons that we can discover?
LIX.
There Is none in Earth beneath, nor Heaven above,
That loves like him, his love if we do heed,
'Twill us convince, that him again to love
It Is meet; yea love to him in us 'twill breed.
The first love to him then rightly belongs;
Let him be first in all our praising songs.
LX.
Yea he is so worthy love, that well we may
Treble the exhortation with respect
To him; and to our selves, and others say,
Love, Love, Love God, who ever we neglect.
He Is worthy, and we are backward him to love,
Need therefore fervently thereto to move.
LXI.
Yea, love's his due in the highest degree,
Because his goodness is superlative:
With all things that we have, with all we be,
He Is worthy love, so long as we are alive.
Love God therefore with all thy mind, heart, soul.
Love, Love, Love, and let naught that love control.
LXII.
Love God with all thy mind, to him attend;
Consider what of him we hear, and find:
Yea set our selves to seek to know him, bend
Our thoughts to him, and keep him in our mind.
With greatest earnestness his praises view,
To think on him, bid all things else adieu.
LXIII.
Love God with all thy heart, as him we know;
Let our affections close with, and embrace,
Him freely, fully; all things high and low,
To the enjoyment of him must give place.
Resign our wills to him, on him rely,
Joy and delight we in his Majesty.
LXIV.
Seek his approvement, fellowship, and grace,
Joy in his word and service, and adhere
Firmly unto him, seek his strength, and face,
Above all things, and the loss thereof fear.
Yea love the places whereon be his name,
His paths, posts, statutes, and frequent the same.
LXV.
Love God with all thy soul, the life and might,
Which soul united with the body gives.
To put forth all our strength, it is but right,
Seeking and serving him who ever lives.
Remiss and slothful seeking him, implies
That our love to him's cold, and cold love dies.
LXVI.
Yea yet again, we may be thrice put on
To love the Lord, because a Trinity
There is in him: He Is three, though yet but one,
As Scriptures do expressly testify.
Love God the Father, Son, and holy Spirit,
For each of them thy fervent'st love do merit.
LXVII.
For each, and All, are love in one; and have
Jointly, and severally, their love expressed
To us poor mortals; that they might us save,
And that our miseries might be redrest.
In love the Father sent the Son unto us;
In love the Son came, and the Spirit does woo us.
LXVIII.
In love the Father his Son yielded up
To be made flesh, and poor, despised, and dye:
'Twas He that gave to him that bitter cup,
Which wrung his Soul with many an agony.
In love to us he raised him up again,
And has exalted him on high to reign.
LXIX.
In love to us the Son our flesh and blood,
Did at the Father's just appointment take;
And in our room, and stead, as surety stood,
And by his dying did atonement make.
And rose, and off'red up himself on high,
Living to plead for us continually.
LXX.
In love to us he sent the holy Ghost;
And gifts did give to men as he thought good:
That so by them his Name in every coast
Might be proclaimed, and his grace understood.
And unto those who do his grace retain,
He Will come in glory, and raise them to reign.
LXXI.
In love to us the Holy Ghost comes forth,
In Christ his Name, and does his truth make known:
Showing the things of Christ, and their great worth;
Wooing us to him, that we might him own.
Waiting with patience for our turning in;
Ready to wash and cleanse us from our sin.
LXXII.
He guids us into truth, he gives support,
Strengthens in services and sufferings;
Unto our fainting Spirits, he gives comfort;
Yea he all life and blessings to us brings.
Will raise us up from death, and grave, and give
In glorious bodies us with Christ to live.
LXXIII.
Love, Love, Love God therefore intensively,
Who was, and is, and who is yet to come.
Love every person in the Trinity:
Oh that he had in my heart all the room!
Thus in the first place, love to God is due;
But let us now a second Object view.
LXXIV.
Love secondly our Neighbor; for the Text
That bids us first of all to love the Lord,
Tells us the second precept (which is next)
Is love our Neighbors, and we in God's Word
Good reason for it find; because they are
Our brethren, though with God they cannot compare.
LXXV.
All men are sprung from out one common stock;
Branches of the same root, made of one blood;
Raised from one common mold, chips of one block;
Framed by one hand, capable of one good.
We had at first the same original:
And must at last into the same dust fall.
LXXVI.
Indeed there is in us such backwardness,
To love our Neighbors, that this thrice repeated
Word, Love, may be applied with earnestness,
That our cold hearts to love them may be heated.
God we so little love, our selves so wrong;
That Neighbors get not what to them belong.
LXXVII.
'T would be as good for them happy to be,
And to be miserable full as sad;
As to be happy will be good for thee;
And to be miserable for thee's bad.
Seek to promote their good, prevent their woo:
Do to them as thou would be done unto.
LXXVIII.
Especially fince it is God's good will
And precept, that thy Neighbor thou should love:
And that he might thee move it to fulfill,
His own example gives thee from above.
He has both loved thee, and others too;
As he has done to thee, to others do.
LXXIX.
God's love to thee obliges thee again,
Readily what he bids thee to obey.
To Love thy Neighbor then do not disdain,
Whatever lust of thine thereto say nay.
Though of thy love unworthy he does seem,
Worthy of thine obedience God esteem.
LXXX.
But who is our Neighbor? surely every man
Distinct from us, at least till filled with evil
Any we find, that clearly see we can,
That they are thereby made one with the Devil.
For they that are God's enemies so far,
Out of our loves we lawfully may bar.
LXXXI.
But for all others, they should loved be,
Whither they be our friends, our foes, or strangers:
Their good we should endeavor, joy to see;
Defend and seek to rescue them from dangers.
Grieve for their harms, and do what in us lies,
Their happiness to further any wise.
LXXXII.
Me thinks, three sorts of Neighbors I espy,
God's friends, our own, and they that neither be;
Respectively to whom this trinity
Of love-commands, again apply may we.
Love those that love God, love friends and allies;
Love other men, strangers or enemies.
LXXXIII.
Love those that love God, for they are worthy love;
In that they do the thing that is good and right:
They are God's friends, he loves them, that may move
Thee therefore in them to take much delight.
They love not God, who do not love his friends,
And they are faulty, who ever them commends.
LXXXIV.
For in as much as any loves God, He
God's image in him in some measure bears:
They are Christ's virtues which in him we see;
God's and Christ's liv'ries he upon him wears.
And he that loves not God, as seen in's brother,
Loves not, but hates God, howe'r he it smother.
LXXXV.
If God thou love and seek'st desirously,
Acquaintance with, he with his people dwells:
In cleaving to their heavenly company,
Thou shall meet with him as the Scripture tells.
If thou have no desire his face to know,
Thou love him not, what face so ever thou show.
LXXXVI.
Amongst all men, they the first place should have
In our affections, because God's in them;
They Are nearest to him, what they of him crave,
He Will give, for he their prayers will not contemn.
They then who him neglect, and them despise,
He needs must take to be his enemies.
LXXXVII.
They be Christ's favorites, he does them own
As his dear friends, his Mother, Sister, Brother;
They of him in a special sort are known;
They Are honored of him far above all other.
How can he brook it from us, if we them
Who are so near and dear to him contemn?
LXXXVIII.
Them as his Pearls and Jewels he reputes,
His lot, his portion, his inheritance;
His garden of delights, which pleasant fruits
Bring forth to him, and he will them advance.
Yea he is their lot and portion too,
Nothing he thinks too great for them to do.
LXXXIX.
Love them therefore as thine own choicest friends,
Consort with them, and walk in their good ways;
Do for them all that to their welfare tends;
When they are cast down, seek them up to raise.
Spare not for them thy wealth, strength, life to spend,
For that is the way to make the Lord thy friend.
XC.
For such an unity with him they have,
That he does take what ever to them thou do,
As done unto himself. It Is he does crave
Thy charity, when they be almost lost,
Through want of some relief, or in some danger;
If thou neglect them, thou make him a stranger.
XCI.
Grace teaches thee to love God's friends, yea all
In whom man's nature savable is found:
Nature does teach thee to those thou do call,
Thy friends and kindred in love to abound.
If Gods, and thine, they are both, a double tie,
To love them dearly, upon thee does lie.
XCII.
Grace, natural affections, don't destroy,
But rectifies, making them clean and right:
To love thy friends and kinsfolks, and to joy
In their prosperity, it does excite.
And it allows and leads thee soberly,
With them to sorrow in their misery.
XCIII.
Yea usually more then in other folks,
Because more nearly knit and joined to thee.
Grace, love from every several tie provokes;
Where it does find more grounds, it makes more free.
Who loves not all is short in grace, his friends
Who loves not, grace and nature both offends.
XCIV.
Yea grace will lead to love, both strangers to us;
(As God us while to him we strangers were:)
And enemies who labor to undo us,
Seeking all comforts from us quite to tear.
For God us loved while his enemies,
And while we did him and his laws despise.
XCV.
While we against his truth and holiness
Did act continually, and him so hated:
That in our hearts we liked nothing less;
Yea could have wished him annihilated.
'Twas then his kindness to us, that did slay
Our enmity, and it remove away.
XCVI.
That any are our enemies, it is not
Essential to them, because men they be:
But it is because error of them has got
The mastery, or ill in us they see.
Endeavor them to cure, our selves to mend,
And then their enmity will have an end.
XCVII.
And if our love will cure them of their ailments,
And turn their hearts to us, we gainers are:
Our friends they will be, because we so their failments
By love have cured, and had of them such care.
Who hates his enemy, but makes him worse,
And makes himself too partner in the curse.
XCVIII.
Who loves his enemies, does imitate
The God of love, who us his foes to save,
Laid down for us his life; and naught does hate,
But that corruption which does us inslave.
Where love does conquer, men best get their ends;
Their foes they overcome, and make their friends.
XCIX.
Oh noble love! who while thou make men yield
Unto their foes, in all may do them good;
Not overcome of ill, do win the field,
And oftimes draw'st thine enemies heart blood:
Not to be shed in anger to their guilt,
But boil in love, and for their good be spilt.
C.
Thus Christ did conquer Saul, while he did spare
His life and soul from ruin, and employ
Him in the ministry; a conquest rare
On him he got, wherein they both had joy.
And he who is life did forfit, as Christ's foe,
In love to him did freely it forgo.
CI.
Thus thou thy will upon thy foes may have,
If thou do conquer them by charity.
However thou that way thy soul shall save;
And if not their's they shall more sorely dye.
Them and thy self by hatred thou may kill,
And near-the-less may fail to have thy will.
CII.
Love's the best weapon wherewith we can fight,
Against what ever persons us oppose;
While it in their welfare seeks its delight,
We may them conquering win, and naught shall lose,
But what shall be repaid and hundred fold,
With that which far exceeds the choicest gold.
CIII.
Oh that of that blessed Lamb who lost his life!
And powered forth his dearest precious blood;
That by his love he might o'rcome our strife,
And his fierce persecutors bring to good;
We willing were to learn this lesson well,
To strive in love each other to excel?
CIV.
That others evils may not quel our good,
But we with goodness may o'rcome their ill;
That though of mischiefs they cast out a flood
Upon us, we may seek their welfare still!
Who lives in love, and love entirely keeps,
Shall laugh when he who lives in hatred weeps.
CV.
But yet a third time love may lead us, yet
After another object to inquire.
Love we our selves: Can we our selves forget?
Or can we fail our own good to desire?
We are not bid to love our selves, because
It is supposed we'll do that without laws.
CVI.
That we should love our selves, God does imply,
When love unto our neighbors bid does he.
Making love to our selves, the rule whereby
Love to our neighbor measured should be.
To love our Neighbors as our selves, what is that?
But if we hate our selves them too to hate.
CVII.
And yet so brutish we our selves have made,
That other things we love, our selves neglect:
Yea all our times and strength are often out laid,
On what our own destruction may effect.
The love wherewith we love our selves, is hate
Indeed, though love we it do nominate.
CVIII.
For there is a love to self, that often destroys
The soul; which God therefore forbids to us,
Branding self love as sinful; 'cause 't annoys,
And in the consequent does but undo us.
When so our selves, and what is ours we affect,
That God, and Neighbors, we to love neglect.
CIX.
Of such a love to self, the World is full;
And every where it is fruits are to be found:
It Is that which from all goodness men does pull,
And makes them in all wickedness abound.
Men so themselves, and their own lusts, do mind,
It Is rare an honest godly man to find.
CX.
Some men their wisdom, goodness, strength, and parts,
So much do overween and magnify,
That unto God and Christ, their minds and hearts,
For grace and mercy they do not apply.
Yea and what wholesome counsels unto them
Others do give, they proudly do contemn.
CXI.
Some men their will and purpose cleave to so,
That what God does require, they don't regard:
Yea every one they do account their foe,
Who their will cross, or their designs retard.
Yea many one that he may have his will
Cares not God to blaspheme, and men to kill.
CXII.
Some men their praise with men, and reputation
With fools so love, that so they may them get,
They Will shape their manners into any fashion,
And faith and conscience too to sale they will set.
Turning their backs on all that God prescribes,
Rather then bear therefore some taunts or jibes.
CXIII.
Some for their honor so ambitious are,
That rather then they will loose a cap, or knee,
They Will fret and sum, yea for it they don't care,
A Man's, or Nations ruin if they see.
Because unto proud Haman, Mordecay
Would not bow down, he all the Jews would slay.
CXIV.
Some men for their enriching are so set,
That so they may but their estates increase,
Though by oppressing others, they it get
By lying, cheating, breaking of the peace,
They matter not; nay they will for money sell
Both God and Heaven, and give themselves to Hell.
CXV.
Some men their own delights, their pleasures, ease,
So love and value that they matter not,
For God or men, so they themselves may please,
And have their belly-chear, punk, pipe and pot.
Give them their hawks, hounds, pastimes, sports and plays,
They matter not what God's laws, or Man's says.
CXVI.
Some folks their forms and handsomeness so prize,
That all their care is wholly thereon set,
How they some pretty fashion may devise,
Their hair trim, or their cloths in the new cut get.
Yea so thy be but fashionably fine,
Their souls may perish, and the poor may pine.
CXVII.
Some men their own inventions so set by,
Or their own fancies in Religion,
That of true godliness the heart may dye,
So be their ceremonies go but on.
Let others rack their conscience, let them kill
Their bodies, loose their souls, they will have their will.
CXVIII.
Nay many who do honest men appear,
And from gross acts of wickedness are free,
Who by no means will lie, be drunk, steal, swear,
Yet their own things so mind from God they flee.
Their Oxen, Farms, Trades, Merchandise, or Wives;
God of their Love, Heaven of their Souls deprives.
CXIX.
But this unto men's selves is no right love,
But hatred rather it may well be styled;
Beause their hearts from God it does remove,
And their souls are thereby of life beguiled.
A man's soul is himself; who that neglects
Himself does hate, what ever he respects.
CXX.
It Is something else that men do love indeed,
In this false self love, it is a self of sin,
Which did from Satan at the first proceed,
And at this motion Adam first let in.
Sin so in man dwells, and's with him so one,
That is as a man's self is often spoke on.
CXXI.
Thence we are bid our members on the Earth
To mortify; when he that bids us so,
Uncleanness, fornication, lawless mirth
Therein forbids, and what may us undo.
It Is this indeed that man so likes and loves,
And it is the love of this that God reproves.
CXXII.
The true love to our selves it is implied.
In that which God requires of us; as that
The Lord we seek, love, serve, his will abide
With patience, love our neighbors, all ill hate.
Himself he truly loves, who does endeavor,
For what his soul will happy make for ever.
CXXIII.
He that regards not God's holy Word,
To hear and learn, and carefully obey:
Who seeks not to know, and have the Lord,
His Father, friend, his comfort, help and stay.
Who hates his neighbors, and does love his lust,
Loves not himself, but's to himself unjust.
CXXIV.
He that does truly love himself, does take
The course that tends directly to his good:
Does seek to know it, does inquiry make
For it, not resting till it is understood:
Above his sense, and body, loves his soul,
And whatsoere would harm it does control.
CXXV.
Who loves himself, indeed does hate all sin,
In love to Christ, his lust he will deny;
Will walk in all good ways: the World to win,
Would not offend God, or men injury.
Commits himself to God, on him does stay;
And from his holy fear turns not away.
CXXVI.
Thus if this posie thou do understand,
Thou may do well to bear it in thy mind:
Yea did thou wear it then upon thine hand,
And practice it, thou thence much good might find.
Love not thy lusts, the world, or worldly pelf,
But love God, love thy neighbor, love thy self.
CXXVII.
But if God thou neglect'st to love, and for
True love to others, and thy self do place,
Some blind affections to their friendship, or
Their proper stature, fair or comely face.
Which being of the flesh, though green and fair
They now do seem, but grass and flowers are.
CXXVIII.
Or if thou thine own wit and parts adoring,
Thy will, thy pleasures, beauty, strength, or ways,
Or with thine own invention go a whoring,
Or dot'st on thine own honor, name, or praise;
Or any like affection, in the stead
Of true love placing, do this posie read;
CXXIX.
Then thou this posie do not well apply,
Nor need'st such iterations to incite
Thy love; but rather need'st that to deny,
Then to foment, because thy love's not right.
Love not, love not, love not, well may we say
When ours or other men's affections stray.
CXXX.
Love not the World, nor things thereof, so says
The holy Ghost: from fleshly lusts abstain;
They fight against our souls, lead from the faith,
Deprive us of all good, and make us vain.
Lord all unlawful love purge out of me,
And make me love my self, my neighbors, Thee.
Another POSIE, O. M. W. R.
God first does try, then satisfy.
I.
HOW wondrous are God's ways?
He is most worthy praise.
His counsels all are very deeply laid,
The fool cannot in his mind,
His methods see or find.
Who of his judgments may not be afraid?
Through Seas and Wilderness his ways lie,
Yet when he has tried, he does satisfy.
II.
His works are so in the dark
To us, who can them mark.
Till he does bring them forth unto the light?
Though he in the dark begin,
Yet does he never lin,
Till by his luster he dispel the night.
Then they who feared and sorrow'd, may espy
How much they erred, and praise him heartily.
III.
This is that way of God,
With all his Saints often trod.
As at the first light out of darkness sprung;
So through much darkness, he
Has made his people see
The light of life, where-through thy often have sung.
Christ fills his vessels first with water, and
Then waters turns to wine by his command.
IV.
And this he does, that so
He might make us forgo
Those lusts and Idols whereunto we cleave.
And those sins mortify,
Which else would make us dye.
He proves whether for him we them will leave;
And may we not when tried, as dross be found,
God will us save, and our joys shall abound.
V.
God tried Abraham,
When out of Vr he came,
From's kindred and his country made to go:
But yet he did him save,
And better lands he gave,
Then that was which he called and brought him fro.
An heavenly country he before him set,
Which caused his mind the earthly to forget.
VI.
And his dear Sarah too
Who out with him did go,
Beside her many wanderings, trials had,
Twice she did scarcely escape,
From Heathen Kings a rape,
Her barren womb, and bond-mayd, made her sad.
Yet when by many trials she was taught
To trust in God, she brought forth, and she laughed.
VII.
Though Jacob was decreed,
To Lordship as we read,
Yet how great hardships did he first sustain?
Through Esans great hatred,
He unto Laban fled,
Where as a servant he did long remain.
On the cold earth, on an hard stone he slept;
Converst with God, yet afterward often wept.
VIII.
He saw Heaven opened,
Whence God himself preached,
From top of ladder greatest blessings to him:
Which before he enjoyed,
Great sorrows him annoyed,
How many griefs sustained he like to undo him?
Yet in the close of 's trials he did meet,
With many an heavenly satisfying sweet.
IX.
That chaste and pious lad,
Joseph, after he had
In dreams great dignity unto him showed;
Was by his brethren sold,
And sorrows manifold,
Sustained in Egypt, by his Mistress lewd.
Many a doleful heart smart, stinging grief,
Prisons and irons, small hopes of relief.
X.
Yet when God had him tried,
He him well satisfied:
Raised him to honor, made him to command,
With great Authority,
Over both low and high,
Next to the King throughout all Egypt's Land.
Thus God through trials manifold prepared him,
And after with great honor did reward him.
XI.
Moses in rushy boat,
Did on the waters float,
Before he was received in Pharaoh's Court:
Whence put to flight again,
He was in Midian fain
To act the shepherd in an homely sort.
Yet thence God brought him to be Isreal's head,
By whose hand out of Egypt he them led.
XII.
Where they had strangers been,
And great oppressions seen,
After the promise of the pleasant Land.
Brought whence at length they were
Through Wilderness fear,
Seas, flood, and many trials with high hand.
And after all at length they did possess
The Land of promise with great quietness.
XIII.
That Ruddy youth, the sheep
Of Jesse that used to keep,
He was anointed King of Israel:
But before he did reign,
Great griefs he did sustain,
In Caves and Mountains, through what him befell.
Yet God at length his enemies destroyed,
He reigned in state, and in God greatly joy'd.
XIV.
Behold we Christ our Lord:
How much was he abhorred
Of men? a man with many sorrows tried.
In's birth laid in a stall,
His Life and Death with gall
Was filled, with malefactors crucified.
He as in the wine press of God's wrath was trod,
Yet now is glorified, worshipped as God.
XV.
Then let it not offend us,
If God, that he might mend us,
Do exercise us after any sort:
Let us but to him cleave,
He never will us leave,
Till he has satisfied us with comfort:
Since this his method is, he first does try,
(And so prepare for bless) then satisfies.
XVI.
Yet every one that is tried,
Is not so satisfied,
But they who trials patiently abide:
Continuing in God's way,
And trusting in him, they
Shall with a crown of life be dignified.
They who through unbelief, impatiently
Depart from God, deprive themselves and dye.
XVII.
In Israel of old,
They who had manifold
Proofs of God's love and graciousness received,
And yet through unbelief,
Put his good spirit to grief,
And turned aside, thereby themselves deprived.
Not patiently abiding to the end,
They perished in those judgments God did send.
XVIII.
They had not been overthrown,
Had they this truth well known,
And kept in mind, that this is God's good way,
By trials to prepare
Those that his people are,
And then his satisfactions to convey.
This ruined them that being tried, they thought
God hated them, and their destruction sought.
XIX.
But God did never fail,
Those where grace did prevail,
To make them patiently to him to cleave.
Though failings often they had,
Yet God did make them glad;
Pard'ning their sins, he never did them leave.
It Is not infirmities, and failings many,
Where men are true to God shall deprive any.
XX.
Then let us courage take,
And never God forsake,
For whatsoever trial us be^al:
Our sins let us bewail,
And hope, though thoughts assail,
Since God through trials led his people all.
Only when God does try us, us to prove,
To try our selves too it does us behove.
XXI.
That we may see what dross
We yet retain; which loss
Will bring unto us, if not purged out:
And when seen, with it part;
So God will fill our heart
With heavenly satisfactions without doubt.
And let none leave God's way, because they are tried;
Who keeps it shall at length be satisfied,
When by their trials they are purified.
To a Stationer who being asked for a Bible, replied, Will you have one with
the Service in it?
SIR,
Whether you ask't this question in a jear,
Or seriously you have my Answer here.
MY Service is not bound up in a Book;
For then I might sometimes have it to look.
For so some man might put it in his pocket,
Or lay it in his desk, and from me lock it,
So that I might not get it when I should
Perform it; or it might in time grow old:
It might be lost, burnt, dirty'd, rent or torn,
Or be with too much thumbing quite out-worn.
At best as closed up in a Book it is dead,
And so not such as should be offered
Unto the living God; who now requires,
A living sacrifice, not dead desires,
A reasonable service unto him,
And such a service he will not contemn.
My service Sir I Would bear it in my heart,
Whence it may issue out to every part.
It is the yielding of my whole body,
To do God's will, or bear it cheerfully.
That is the service we ought to perform,
And not our selves to this World to conform;
As in the twelfth to to Romans you may read,
The World it self and its service is dead.
They like to serve the Devil with their hearts,
Their tongues, hands, heads, and all their other parts;
To give their bodies unto lust, or pride,
Their mouths to curse, boast, scoff, jear and deride,
Blaspheme and lie; themselves they sacrifice
To drunkenness, whoredom, or avarice.
And yet they think they serve God bravely too,
For they their service in a Book can show.
Their service is a thing that lies without them,
And they can carry it sometime about them,
Unless their Book's too big, or lay it by
When they have said it over, and let it lie.
They can present it unto God in the morn,
And all the day beside his counsels scorn.
Or else perhaps present it but one day
In six or seven, and all the week else lay
It at a distance; giving God what is dead,
While with what liv's their lusts are worshipped.
Oh gallant service! like to the Idols old,
Which Heathens made of Silver or of Gold:
Which might be carried from place to place;
And had the appearance of an humane face:
But yet were life-less, void of inward breath;
And could not keep their worshippers from death,
Either of body or of soul, though they
Did do their service to them every day.
Dead fouls with dead things suit; the living God
Who quickens what is dead, and with his rod
Corrects the Nations, living things likes best;
Even living groans of an inspired breast.
The World such living service cannot perform:
It hates the power and only likes a Form
Of Godliness; which they may leave or take,
Use or lay by, as for their turn 't does make.
Mistake me not herein, as if I thought,
Or else intended to judge, all prayers naught,
That are taught by a Book; or as if none
Might pray acceptably, who pray thereon.
It is the Worlds bad guise I here reprove,
Who serve God with pretenses, their sins love:
Which many too may do, that pray without
A Book; and so too many do no doubt,
Delight themselves in their own gifts and parts,
While yet their lusts they love with all their hearts.
Witness the pride or avarice of some,
Who yet as Saints into God's presence come.
I know a Book that service may hold forth,
Which God requires and shows to be of worth.
And so each sacred Bible does declare,
What worship God requires of praise and prayer,
Or other ways of service; but no ground
Of any such distinction so is found.
As if some Bibles did not show the way,
How we should serve God, and unto him pray.
I do suppose it was some other thing,
That you did signify in your saying.
Likely those Form's of Prayer you meant thereby,
That are enjoined by Authority.
If so, pray know, that I the words of them
Do not except against, much less condemn.
The Prayers are pithy, Orthodox and good,
More gen'rally if rightly understood:
And such as whereto I Amen can say
Heartily, when with them I hear men pray.
And so may others too I think; although
Some few things there among scruple I do.
Unto the pure all things are pure and good,
But that must warily be understood.
For what I am not satisfied in,
I cannot say I am, without my sin;
Nor would I thereby stain my Conscience,
Or unto others give cause of offense,
But why you, Sir, those Prayers the Service call,
I cannot well tell, nor much inquire it shall.
I call them not my Service, they that do
May lay them on the Altar, I think so
They might be off'red up, although they there
Should lie untouched, or unread all the year,
As a sum of the Churches prayers and praise,
And so less grief to some men they would raise.
And they the same are, and as pithy too,
Though never read, as when men read them do.
Though I the reading of them too allow,
To such as please, if any would them know;
Or in those words would their desires express,
I can mine sometimes too with readiness.
Though I profess I never could find it yet,
In any passage of the holy writ,
That God requires, or holy men did use
To read their prayers to God; but pray excuse
That passage in me, I leave others free;
Let others leave me so, and we agree.
Sententious Verses of an unknown Author.
COnfession is to cure our sin,
A very present Medicine.
Thy Savior on his Cross did choose
To save thy life, his own to loose.
Our Savior cried, Repent, Repent,
As John who, fore our Savior went.
Blessed be the Name of Jesus,
Who tormented was to ease us.
The grace of Jesus is to me,
The only true felicity.
Christ's Cross my Crown, I do esteem,
What ever earthy men do deem.
My hope in Christ is fixed sure,
Who wounded was, my wounds to cure.
My hope shall never be confounded,
Because my hope on Christ is grounded.
My soul cleave fast to Christ above,
For naught on earth deserves thy love.
Fear not my soul, be not dismayed,
For Jesus Christ thy debts has paid.
The Death of Christ is life to thee,
If thou a Christian truly be.
Faith is not faith, unless it be
A faith that works by charity.
Christ is by marriage knit to thee,
If thou to him by Sanctity.
Admire my soul, the mystery
Of Jesus Christ's nativity.
Christ was conceived in the Virgins womb,
That thou might a Son of God become.
Christ unto thee, if thou be his,
Both light, and food, and Medicine is.
If thou polluted art with sin,
The fountain's open, enter in.
He that does eat and drink by ^aith,
Christ's flesh and blood, salvation has.
Be wise, do not too far inquire,
For what thou rather should admire.
Christ is ascended up on high,
And we must up as Eagles fly.
God seals by his holy Spirit,
As many as shall life inherit.
Great is the Churches dignity,
That chosen is Christ's spouse to be.
In Christ we are of God elect,
What Is out of Christ God does reject.
Our prayers do pierce the starry sky,
And fetch down blessings from on high.
The Angels of the Lord protect,
All those that are the Lord's elect.
The Devils treacheries who knows,
A thousand ways he seeks our woes.
He Is only wise who God does know,
And does by life his knowledge show.
To live it is not, but to dye,
To live in sin securely,
Christ's life must be a Rule to thee,
If Christ's Disciple thou will be.
Thou from thy self must first depart,
Before thou can in Christ have part.
Thy soul can nothing satiate,
But God who did the same create.
Labor to have thy conscience pure,
When all things fail that will endure.
What is a bubble? such is man,
Whose life in length is but a span.
The man that Covets, is but poor,
Although he riches have great store.
The sign by which the Saints we know,
It is by love their faith to show.
The soul that chaste is, is Christ's Spouse,
His bed of rest, his lodging house.
The life of man's a rolling stone,
Moved to and fro, and quickly gone.
Love not the World, the World is vain,
But love the things that will remain.
The Palm Tree grows the more pressed down,
And crosses prove the Churches crown.
Take up thy cross and it endure,
Then of a crown thou shall be sure.
Let not tentations cast thee down,
For perseverance will thee crown.
Think every day to be thy last,
And when that is come thy life is past.
Grieve not when Christian friends do dye,
They gain by Death eternity.
Remember that Christ Jesus shall,
Thoughts, words and deeds, to judgment call.
All earthly things tread under thee,
And let thy thoughts in Heaven be.
The Saints are Pilgrims here below,
And toward Heaven their country go.
If thou be here a child of grace,
Amongst Angels thou shall have a place.
If into Hell thou would not fall,
Think daily on it and mind God's call.
The pains of Hell do far extend,
Beyond all time, World without end.
Does Adam dye, Christ in thee live?
Christ shall eternal life thee give.
Upon the carelessness and covetousness of some that regard not to Read,
much-less are willing to buy good and useful Books; and the wickedness of
others that traduce them.
Quis leget, aut emet haec.
SEE here my friends, that which with much expense
Of time and money (if without offense
I may suggest it) I prepared have,
Your good to further, and your souls to save:
Is here exposed to you; will you read it,
So as with seriousness to mind and heed it?
Will you with little charge and cost that buy,
Which does me in far greater charges lie?
Your pains in Reading it will be far less,
Than mine it to Compose, and in this dress
To make it ready for you; and your gain
Will far exceed your cost, if it remain,
Upon your Reading it, in memory:
And if unto the practice, you apply
Your hearts, of what it tends to, as you ought,
You will not then repent that you it bought.
But I observe it some men's humor is,
To slight and undervalue things like this.
They Will rather idle Ballads buy and read,
Or such bad Books as vice do breed and feed;
And what their souls tend to spoil and destroy.
For pride or belly cheer, they will employ
Their time and money: and it is a grief
To find such humors in some men so brief.
To see no more regard, to what with pains
And cost prepared is for their endless gains.
Yea sometimes I with such could angry be,
When such like carriages in them I see.
Or marvail at their stupidness to slight,
What their own welfare much advantage might.
But then when I look higher, and reflect
Upon the sad regardless disrespect,
That too too commonly we all express
To God and Christ, who far more for our bless
And endless happiness, than any man
By all his study and expenses can,
Have done and have prepared, and tender to us,
Whereto with much long suffering they do woo us.
It does allay my grief and wonder too,
As to my labors, or what others do
Of like import; for what am I, or any
Who labor in such studies, whereby many
Might benefitted be, with him compared,
Who has eternal life for us prepared
By such a costly way, as by the Death
Of his dear Son, who for us spent his breath,
And's life and soul exposed to many a grief,
To bring unto our souls endless relief.
Find we not Christ himself sometime complain,
That he had labored and his strength in vain
Had spent, while they among whom he had wrought,
Did all his love and labor set at naught.
Though he does freely tender all the good
Which he has bought by his most precious blood,
For mankind, unto whosoever will,
Accept thereof, and take thereof their fill.
Yet because something he again requires
That men do value, and which their desires
And love are bent upon, they should forsake,
That of his better things they might partake;
Because he bids us of him his things buy,
Men do refuse them too too generally.
Though all he does require us to forgo,
Or unto him to offer up, that so
We might be happy in what he does give,
And might with him in joys for ever live,
Is nothing worth; nor worthy to be eyed,
Compared with what he gave, when as he died
For us and for our sins; his life and blood
More precious far than can be understood.
Or else compared with what he gives again,
Even joys and glory that ever remain.
If we resent it if our labors be,
And cost neglected; Oh then what may he?
With whose both pains and cost, if we compare
Any or all of ours, they nothing are.
His labor and his patience very great,
Beside his agonies and bloody sweat:
He went about by Land and Sea, that good
He might do unto those who shed his blood:
Which he most freely poured out, that we
Drinking thereof might blessed for ever be.
Yet amongst men how slender his reward,
How few his love or labors do regard?
Such is the Worlds guise, such it constantly
Has been, to cast their best concernments by,
While vanity they love, and follow after
Mere leasings, or fond things of mirth and laughter.
Yea not only such things they disrespect,
As tend their greatest weal most to effect.
But often repay with hatred and disdain,
The greatest love, and things of greatest gain.
Whereof, as Christ himself the Sovereign Lord
Of glory, so his choice servants afford
Sufficient proof and evidence: how great
Their pains and labor, the World to entreat,
To save their souls! how great their diligence
By Preaching, Writing, Travail, Patience,
In good and bad reports! and yet how bad
Their intertainment every where! how sad
Their ill requitals! oh at how great cost
Have we our Bible truths! how many lost
Their precious lives, laid out their strength and time,
That we might know the way whereby we climb
May, up to Heaven and happiness! yet who
Will even for Heaven it self their lusts forgo?
Well then may I not grutch at cost or pains,
Nor grumble at any neglects, disdain,
Or what like things me for my labors shall
From any man, at any time befall.
Yea, if I for my labors disrespect
May meet with, it may make me to reflect
Upon my self, and smiting on my thigh,
To say, Thus, thus too much and often have I
Requited God, Christ, and the holy Ghost,
And those his servants who unto our coast
With pains and travail God's truth carried forth;
Truths of unspeakable and boundless worth.
Why then should I complain, if I should find
Such disrespects as suit less with my mind?
Or why should I expect, respect, or look
For better likement unto any Book,
Than usual is for all good things to have!
Hatred they must expect, who souls would save.
When I and others mend and better be
To God, they will deal well enough with me.
AN EPITAPH UPON Mr. THOMAS LILLY Of South-Lin.
I.
THou that go by, cast here thine eye;
I sometime walked there.
I was a Flower, I stood my hour,
And now I Am fallen here.
II.
I in my time was of the prime
That lived in this Town;
A Lilly fresh, but I was flesh;
And Death has cut me down.
III.
ALl flesh is grass, it is grace does pass;
The best is but a flower:
The stoutest man do what he can,
Must dye when it is his hour.
IV.
If riches could Death's force withhold,
I had not dyed yet:
Riches good store I had, Death's sore
Yet thence no cure could get.
V.
I thought of this, I sought for bliss,
I good attention gave
To what I heard; the Lord I feared;
And as I sought I have.
VI.
O man thou must return to dust
What ever now thou art,
Dust was thy breed, and it is decreed
Thou and the World must part.
VII.
Yet thou may live, if thou do give
Good heed to mend thy ways.
For though thou dye, yet certainly
God will again thee raise.
VIII.
For Death came in by loathsome sin,
But Christ for all did dye,
And unto those who with him close,
He Will give the victory.
IX.
Nothing beside will long abide,
But soon will fade away.
Consider well; Take heed of Hell,
Think on thy dying day.
X.
So farewell friend, and God thee send
To live so holily,
That Heaven may be a place for thee
When it is thy turn to dye.
FINIS.
Reader there be too many mistakes of Words, Letters, and Points; the chief of
them thou have here a note of and how thou may correct them, viz. as follows.
IN the Title page verse. last for inot r. into. In the Epistle p. 1. verse. 14.
for. too r. two. v. 16. r. woe. In the Apology p. 3. l. 32. r. such woers. p.
4. l. 36. r. I my self submit. In the body of the Poem. p. 2. l. 30. put out
the full stop at bands. p. 5. l. 30. r the vile. p. 6. l. 33. for to r. so. p.
8. l. 14. put out the stroke of the parenthesis, and put it in l. 17. after
back. p. 11. l. 22. r. the better, and their talk. p. 34. l. 13. r. they may
make. p. 39. l. 14. r. good God. p. 42. l. 30. r. naught. p. 44. l. 20. for vow
r. bow. p. 54. l. 14. for left r. lift. p. 58. l. 10. r. in my joys. p. 60. l.
20. r. reprov'st us. p. 65. l. last, for can r. did. p. 66. l. 1. and 3. for
make r. made. p. 69. l. 24. r. that they in their. p. 72. l. 34. r. fill us. p.
111. l. 14. for whom r. when. p. 131. l. 4. for once r. over. p. 139. l. 17.
for abhorred r. adhered. p. 138. al. 140. l. 33. for to r. so. p. 148. l. 9.
for is r. if. and l. 29. put out is. p. 151. l. 30. r. fading. p. 161. l. 15.
for nosh r. now. p. 164. l. last r. do pierce. p. 167. l. 14. r. showed. p.
172. l. 15. for best r. blessed. p. 181. l. 24. for but r. by. p. 186. l. 15. the
word Lamentations should have been in a great and different character, as also
diverse other words in the foregoing pages. p. 211. l. 22. r. death, honor. p.
224. l. 33. r. between. p. 228. l. 5. for thy r. thee. p. 232. l. 26. for caret
r. care. p. 234. l. 16. r. stinch. p. 235. l. 6. r. though. p. 244. l. 30. r.
thy pledge my holy. p. 243. l. 27. for fashion r. fathom. p. 254. l. 6. put our
the stop at so. p. 259. l. 27. r. heart. p. 256. l. 22. r. ay. p. 260. l. 4.
for. lovely r. lowly. p. 264. l. 4. for this r. his. p. 267. l. 28. put out
not. p. 268. l. 7. for soul r. love. p. 276. l. last for often r. often. p. 295. l.
6. r. and their portion.

Other mispointings I leave to thy discretion to observe and rectify in thy
Reading.


