The Complete FENCING-MASTER: In which is fully Described the whole Guards,
Parades and Lessons, Belonging to the SMALL-SWORD; AS, ALSO The best RULES for
Playing against either Artists or Ignorants, with Blunts or Sharps.

TOGETHER With Directions how to Behave in a Single Combat on Horseback:
Illustrated with Figures representing the most necessary Postures.

By Sir W. HOPE, Knight.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the King's-Arms in the Poultry, 1691.

TO THE YOUNG NOBILITY AND GENTRY Of the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I HERE present to You a SCOTS Fencing-Master, who going to appear publicly in
the World, cannot but at ^is first outsetting expect some Enemies, ^ntil his
Art make him more Famous, and therefore he humbly adresseth himself to you, as
the fittest persons to defend him from the Censures of these his evil Wishers,
because he knows that it is by such Young Persons as you, that he and his Art
must be Maintained and Defended, for if such hopeful Youths as You are
encourage not his Art, it were then altogether in vain for him to offer his
Service to the Public; But upon the contrary, if you do, he hops that in a
short time his Ability in this Art will be so well known, that there shall be
but few in the Kingdom who will not enquire after him. And, My Lords and
Gentlemen, I the more earnestly recommend him to you, because he is my intimate
Acquaintance, and of whose Abilities I have also certain Proofs; therefore if
there be any thing to lay to his Charge, let your Complaint be to Me, and if I
be not able to answer for him, let not his Ignorance be imputed to him, but to
Me, for I am the occasion of it; But I hope I need fear no such Complaints; I
am also to let you know that he has so much Respect for the rest of the
Fencing-Masters of this Kingdom, that he pretends to do nothing without their
Concurrence, for he will accept of no Scholars (except such as are of an
extraordinary Capacity) until they be at first grounded by the other Masters of
this Kingdom, for I know he has Lessons which would not be well understood by
many altogether ignorant of his Art; and therefore I thought fit to advertise
you, that it is fittest to begin with any oother Master you please, and to make
him your last, who will, I assure you perfect what the others have begun. I
might here say something in Commendation of the Art he professes, but I shall
do that in another place; S^ all I crave of You now, My Lords a^ Gentlemen, is
that You would do me the F^ vour to receive Him into Your Protection^ and take
a Trial of Him; If He please You^ I have my Design; if not, it will make M^
the more warryin time coming, to put either You or My self to the like trouble;
but however at this time I hope You will look Favorably upon Him, and
encourage his Employment, seeing he is so earnestly recommended to You by Me,
who will take it as one of the greatest Obligations imaginable done to

My Lords, and Gentlemen, Your Humble, and Obedient Servant, WILL. HOPE.

TO THE READER
LEast I should be thought singular, I shall say something by way of Preface,
wherein I shall answer some Objections which it is like may be made both
against the Subject I treat of, and against Me for treating of it, as being a
work altogether of no use.

The first Objecteth against the Subject I treat of, Object. 1. against the
subject.
(which is of Fencing, or the Art of Defending Ones self with the Small Sword
from their Adversary) and says, it is not worth the while to understand it;
because says he, if it be a Man's Fate to be killed, his understanding of this
Art will never save him.

Any Rational Man will laugh at this Objection, and think it not worth the
Answering, Answer.
but yet I will take the pains to convince them, (if possible) who over they
are who will have the confidence to make such an Objection, of the contrary by
Reason; I deny not but what ever Providence ordains is unevitable, yet we are
to use all the means imaginable to preserve our Lives as long as we can;
otherwise we should be careless and not provide for our Subsistence, nor in any
manner defend our selves, which is a thing most ridi^ulous, and the contrary of
which we see daily practiced; For when one Country or Kingdom comes against
another, do they not now a days endeavor to fortify their Cities, that they
think lie most open to be attaqued, with all the Art imaginable; As also, do
they not endeavor to bring as well trained Men to the Field as possible, that
so they may defend themselves with the more ease by their Art, and fight with
the less confusion: I am sure any man that would deny the use of Fortification,
or the bringing of well Disciplined Men to the Field; and would maintain that a
Company of Rabble would come as soon to their purpose, and defend themselves as
well; If I be not deceived, such a person would be accounted very ridiculous.
Therefore seeing through all the World almost, Art is allowed to one Kingdom
against another, and to one Country against another, I know no reason, and
certainly there is no reason, why it should not be allowed to one single Man
against another.

But says he, Object. 2d:
what Advantage have those who have practiced this Art, of others who
understand nothing at all of it, seeing that we daily see that the understanding
of this Art has but little effect; for as often, yea oftener, those who
understand this Art, are worsted by Ignorants, then the Ignorants by them, and
therefore I think a Man is as well without it as with it?

I think no rational Man will deny, but when two Men of equal Courage are
engaged one against the other, Answer
and the one has Art and the other none, but it is ten to one, That it is an
advantage for a man to understand Fencing.
that he that has no Art be worsted, seeing no rational Man can say, that a
Man's Art in any manner takes away his courage. I confess that a complete
Artist will not be so rashly forward as a rude Ignorant, and the reason is,
because when he pursues he does it with Judgment, and waits an apportunity,
which the other cannot; for although he did wait for an opportunity of
pursuing, yet not having Art, he would be as far to seek after he has got it,
how to make use of it, as if he had not got it at all, and it is upon that
account that most part of Ignorants pursue furiously and irregularly, because
they know they can have no Advantage by not doing of it, and by chance may have
advantage by doing of it, if they have to do with one who is but half an
Artist, you may see by this that the Ignorants rash forwardness proceeds from
his want of Art; and the Artists deliberation from his having Art: Now seeing
Art takes not away Courage, then certainly the Artist has this Advantage of
the Ignorant (being as I supposed of equal Courage with the Ignorant) that his
Art makes him to defend himself a great deal better, then the other can be
expected to do and also to pursue better when he has an opportunity, which the
other being ignorant cannot do; and therefore I say being of equal Courage, it
is ten to one but the Artist master the Ignorant, although the contrary may
fall out; for there is nothing certain in this World. Now I will reduce the
Reasons why that sometimes falls out unto Three.

First, Reason 1.
There are but few good Sword Men to be found, and many get the name of Artists
who are really but Ignorants; The reasons why ignorants sometimes overcome
Artists.
For if a Man has been but a month or six weeks at a Fencing School,
presently he is said to understand this Art, and when such a person as this is
engaged against an Ignorant, in stead of having any Advantage by what he bath
been taught; I can assure you he has rather a disadvantage, because what he
has Learned has put away his Natural and forward Play, and makes him
understand the hazard there is in being too forward; And therefore taking
himself to the Defensive part which he is not master of, O
he finds himself in a confusion, because to pursue the little Art he has
makes him to know the hazard that he runs, in doing of it, and to Defend he
cannot, because he has not as yet had practice enough to be master of the the
Parade, so that he has the disadvantage of the altogether Ignorant, in so far
as he is not so forward, because he knows the hazard of it; whereas the
others ignorance makes him more forward, and so is the occasion of his
mastering the other, who gett^th the name of an Artist; and indeed is neither
altogether ignorant, because of his being a little grounded in the Art, nor an
Artist, because he had not the Time, or at least took not the pains to perfect
himself in it. And therefore he is rather the worse of that little Art which he
has, then the better, and that for the Reasons I just now told you; and such
an accident as this makes this Art undervalued, because an Ignorant has
overcome one that understood this Art, as they call him. But there is a great
difference betwixt a Man that is but grounded, his playing with an Ignorant,
and ones playing that really knows how to make use of his Art with judgment:
I say if an Ignorant meet with such a person, he will find that he has but too
too great Advantage of him, if be come to make use of Sharps: Yet Ignorants
will sometimes overcome those who understand this Art very well; and my other
two Reasons which I have yet to show you, are the Reasons why that falls out.

2 If he that has Art be in drink, and the Ignorant sober, Reason 2.
then undoubtedly the Ignorant has by far the Advantage of him, because
although the other has Art, yet he has not his Judgment about him, to make
use of it; and if they be both in Drink, then still the Ignorant is in equal
terms with the other; And so as the Proverb is, Let it fall upon the Feyest;
for neither Art nor Conduct can be made use of by persons the one of which is
Ignorant, and the other wants the use of his Senses.

3 Now the next and last Reason why Ignorants are in equal terms, Reason 3.
or have the Advantage of those who have taken the time really to practice this
Art, and understand it, (and really this is a chief Reason, and I wish from my
Heart that Men could master their Passions more then they do, that so they
might prevent it;) is that when it is the humor of such Artists to be
passionate, then they are at the very fight of their Adversary so transported
by their Passion unto a Fury against him, that they cannot take the time, nor
have the Patience to make use of their Art, but rushes headlong to their own
Destruction; so that in such a case a Man's Art signifies just nothing, because
being in passion he is not master of himself, and consequently not master at
that time of his Art, which upon such an occasion he stands most in need of.
For if a Man intend that his Art should do him Service, then his Judgment must
go along with it, otherwise his Art will signify unto him but very little. I
think what I have now said, sufficient to convince any Rational Man, that it is
an advantage, (and that no small one) to have Art, if he that has it knows
how to use it. But for such who will undervalue this Art, although they can
give no Reason for it, and who will not be convinced of the Advantage a Man
has by it; I wish that one day to their sad Experience and Cost they may not
be forced by their Ignorance (when it will be too late to help it,) to
acknowledge its usefulness.

The following Objections are against my self, and there are three of them;
Object. 1. against my self.
the first is, that although the Art be very useful, yet this Treatise of
mine, is of no use, neither can it be of any, to such as never had a Master.

The Second is, Obj. 2.
That I should have offered to Treat of a Subject that has been already fully
Explained by others, and who it is like understood this Art better then I do.

And the Third is, That I should have made it by way of Dialogue, Obj. 3.
and not in a continued Discourse. In answering of which Three Objections, I
think there is no great difficulty.

As to the First then, Answer to the first Object:
That this Treatise is of no use to those who never had any Insight in this Art
from a Master. I confess it, The design of putting out this Treatise.
for the Design of putting out this Treatise is not upon such Persons account,
for it is like had I thought, that this Treatise would have supplied the place
of a Master to those who never had any Insight in this Art; I never had been at
the pains to make it public, seeing all who know me, know that I have a greater
kindness for these who profess the Teaching of this Art, then to do any thing
to prejudice their Calling: and to tell the Truth, people here are ready enough
of their own Accord to neglect, and undervalue a Fencing-Master, without a Man's
setting out (...) Treatise to show them, that they may be mad^ Masters of this
Art, without the help of one (...) so now the main design, and use of this my
small work, is not for those who never had any insigh^ in this Art, although
such persons will be a great deal the better of having it by them in their
Chambers, when they are at a Fencing School for when they come home from the
School, they will find their Lessons explained in this, which will be a great
help to their Memory, and also i^ they follow my advice, make them become
sooner Masters of this Art, then perhaps otherwise they would My Advice is,
that what ever Lesson in this small Treatise they would put in practice, that
they would get it exactly by heart; if they observe this Direction, they will
in a short time find what advantage they will reap by it: But as I said before,
it is not so much for the use of such Persons, as for the improvement of these
who are already grounded, or Masters of this Art, who when they have been out
of practice a little, will find a great advantage in the very reading of it
over, for it will bring the Theory again to them which it is like they could not
have so well, nor easily attained without the help of a Master, the advantage
of which many cannot have in the Country, Yea, nor in many Cities in this
Kingdom, there are so few in it, and yet more then are well employed, which is
a great dis encouragement to them; and the Reason why we have so few of them.
Also I thought that such a plain piece as this falling into such persons hands,
who far from having ever seen any thing of Fencing, it is like perhaps did
never so much as know what it meant, this piece I say, falling by chance
amongst their hands, I thought it might be a means to cause them be more
earnest after the understanding of this Art, and so mind them of enquiring
after Fencing Masters of whom we have very able Ones in this Kingdom, so that
we need not be beholden to our Neighboring Nations for the perfecting of our
Youth in this Art, seeing we have it most exactly taught in his Kingdom, and
although it be not taught perhaps with so good a grace, as abroad, yet I say,
if a Man should be forced to make use of Sharps, our Scots play is in my
Opinion, far before any I ever saw abroad, as for security; and the Reason why
I think it so, is, because all French play runs upon Falsifying and taking
of time, which appears to the Eyes of the Spectatours to be a far neatter,
and Gentiler way of playing then ours but no man that understands what secure
Fencing is, will ever call that kind of play sure play, because when a^ Man
makes use of such kind of play, he can never so secure himself, but his
Adversary (if he design it) may Contre-temps him every Thrust, now our Scots
play is quit another thing, for it runs all upon Binding or securing of your
Adversaries Sword, before that you offer to Thrust, which makes both your
Thrust sure, and your Adversary incapable of giving you a Contre temps, if you
understand this Method of play, as you should: and I appeal to any rational
Man, who has really been taught, seen, and considered, both Methods of
Playing, if what I say be not true as to the security of a Man's Person, which
is a main thing to be considered in Playing with Sharps. I shall insist no
longer upon this, it only coming in be the by, only I shall tell you
ingenuously, that I had really no other Motive, for giving this small piece to
the public, but as I have before told you, that I thought it might be a means
to cause our Youth ply it more earnestly, and so encourage the Fencing Masters
to bring this Art to a greater perfection if possible; That so Our Youth may be
perfected in an Art, of which at present (and really it is a disgrace to our
Nation) they are so Ignorant of, it being of so great use to Mankind; But more
especially to those who pretend to have the Name of Gentlemen. Because,
ordinarily they stand more in need of it then others, and therefore it is most
proper, that they above all other people should understand it, also it was upon
their account, that I was at first moved to writ of this Subject, which I am
very sensible deserves a far abler pen then mine, to Explain it.

As for the Second, which is, Answer to the second Objection.
That I put my self to an unnecessary trouble, in treating of a Subject that
has been already treated of by others, and who it is like understood this Art
better then I do. I say it is hard to light on a Subject that has not been in
some manner treated of by others, but I only beg that this small work of mine
may be compared with others of this kind, and then I am confident you will find
a great difference betwixt them and this, for in them (at least in all of them
that ever I saw) you will find a great many things ill Explained, and almost
unnecessary, besides that there is such diversity of Lessons, with their
contraries, and so many of them, that it is impossible without a great deal of
pains, and a vast memory to remember them all; whereas in this there is
nothing but the very grounds as it were, and the Lessons upon which this Art
depends, so that I account a Man that understands not the Lessons I have here
given him, but an Ignorant, because they are in effect the Quintescence of this
Art; But upon the contrary, if he understand them, and know exactly how to put
them in practice, I account him an Artist, because once knowing the grounds by
which he is to walk, he will of himself find out diversity of Lessons,
together with their contraries to play upon such as are engaged against him,
which will be of greater use to him then if I should have set him down more,
which its like would have Emberassed his judgment, whereas his own are more
natural to him; and providing he observe the Directions I shall give him, as
good. And for those Authors who have treated of this Subject before their
understanding of this Art better then I do. I shall not deny it; First, because
(as I told you before,) I am perhaps more sensible of my own weakness then you
are. Secondly, although I had a better opinion of my self then really I have,
yet I have more of good manners then openly either to discommend them, or
commend my self; But this much I will say for my self, that what I have here
given you in this small Treatise, I am sure will be approven of by all who
understand what Fencing is; so that I undervalue what Ignorants can say of it,
seeing it was not for such Criticizing Ignorants, that I was at the pains to
write; For such Ignorants will endeavor to find faults where there are none,
neither are they capable of making any amendment, if there were any, and it is
upon that account that I undervalue any thing they can say, either against my
self, or against what I have here write.

But now, Lastly, The Reason of my putting it in a Dialogue, and not in a
continued Discourse, was that after I had thought what would be the easiest
Method I could take, Answer to the third O ction.
for to make those of the meanest Capacity understand my meaning; (which is no
small trouble) I found this of Dialogue in my Opinion to be the best and
plainest; First, Because young Beginners, or who ever it be, that is to peruse
this Treatise, will understand by the Scholars Questions, the Description of
the Lessons better then if I had only discoursed of them. Secondly, the Scholar
in his Questions, beingeth in many things very pertinently, and useful to a
Beginner, which had I used any other Method, could not have been brought in so
to the purpose; But to tell the truth it is a matter of indifference, for this
Method I thought best, and therefore made use of it. It Is like their may be as
many of my Opinion, as of the contrary, but however let not such a trivial
Matter as this make you undervalue the Work, for if it do, it is a sign that
neither Dialogue, nor Discourse, would have pleased you.

I need make no Apology for my Style, the Subject of which I treat requiring
but a Course, Plain and Easy one, so all that I am to beg of you Gentle
Reader, is that when you are perusing this small Work, you would not be too
critical, but if you meet with any thing a miss, which I am hopeful you will
not, pass it over, considering the pains I have been at, is for your
improvement which I am confident will Answer both our Expectations, providing
you seriously consider, and observe the Directions which follow.

ADVERTISEMENT
I Must here before I proceed further let you know, that all the Directions for
the Lessons which are described in this following Treatise, especially in the
Lessons Offensive, are for one Right handed-Man against another, for the
Lessons Defensive, or Parades are to be done the same way by Lest-handed Men as
by Right, and therefore the following Directions will serve for both, in the
Defensive part: but that you may with the more ease, whither you be either
Right or Left Handed, understand what follows in the Offensive part, I shall
here give you some few Directions which in my Opinion will make the following
Discourse of more use to you then otherwise it would.

First then, if you are a Right Handed-Man, and are to ingadge against another
who is Right-Handed, you must as near as possible observe all the following
Directions, for the more exact you are in observing of them, the better
Sword-Man will you be.

Secondly, if you are a Right Handed-Man, and are to ingadge against one who
Left Handed, you must know that that which is called within the Left
Handed-Mans Sword, is the distance betwixt his Left-Arm and his Right, when he
has presented his Sword with his Left Hand, and that which is called without
or above the Sword (...) that part of his body, which when he ^oldeth his Sword
toward his Right side is ^bove it the whole breadth of his Body; and ^ou must
remember this one general Rule ^hen you are playing against a Left Han^ed-Man,
(for I think I need give you no other, because by a little practice and
experience you will find them out) that when you give in a Thrust within his
Sword you must give it with your Nails in Terce, and let your head lie under
your Arm as you give in the ^hrust, when you play the single Feint at the Head,
see plate 5. figure 2. and when you give it without the Sword, then you must
give it with your Nails in Quart, and Quart your head well, see plate 3. figure
2. This direction is just contrary to what ye are to observe in playing against
a Right Handed Man; now what Quart and Terce are you will find explained in
page 4th: so that any other difference betwixt playing with a Right-Handed Man
and a Left, you will as I said before with a little practice easily find out.

Thirdly, If you are a Left-Handed-Man and are to engage against a Right, then
you must also observe the preceding Direction, which is, to give the Thrust
within the Right-Handed-Mans Sword in Terce, and without his Sword in Quart,
what within and without the Sword of a Right-Handed-Man is, you will find it
explained in Page 5. Any other difference I leave it to your own Judgment to
find out, because it would be too Tedious in this place to set them all down,
but this one which I have given you is the most important.

Fourthly and Lastly, if you are a Left Handed Man and are To engage against
another who is Left Handed, then you must both of you observe the following
Directions as exactly as if you were both Right-Handed, and the Truer you play
the following Lessons, in so much less danger will your Body be of being hitt
by a Contre-Temps, what a Contre-Temps is you have it shown you in page 9. I
doubt not but by their few lines you will understand the following Directions
better then if I had ommited them, especially if you be Left Handed.

THE ART OF DEFENSE and PURSUIT, With the Small-Sword.
Described in a Dialogue between a SCHOLAR and a MASTER, of that ART.

Scholar. GOOD morrow Sir, I am glad that I have once found you at home, for I
have called several times for you, and till now, could never have the good
Fortune to meet with you.


Master. I am sorry Sir that you should have been at that trouble, but now,
seeing we have met, What Service have you to command me with?


Scholar. Sir, I hear you profess the Art of Fencing, and the great love and
defire I have for that noble Art, made me desirous to be acquainted, with you,
that I might be instructed in it.


Ma. Sir, Seeing your enquiring for m^ is for that end, I shall with all
diligence, and plainess explain, and demonstrate to you the principal grounds,
requisite to be exactly understood by any who intend, either to profess, or
understand this useful Art, of defending ones self, with the single Rapier from
their Enemy.


Sch. I pray you do so, and you shall be well rewarded for your pains.


Ma. Sir I do not in the least doubt that.


Sch. Which is the first thing then you will show me?


Ma. The first thing I intend to show you, is the Division of the Sword.


Sch. I pray you let me hear it.


Ma. A Rapier then is Generally divided into two parts, The general division of
the Sword.
viz. The Hilt. A. B. C. And the Blade. C. D. E. as you have them marked in the
first figure of the first Plate.

The Hilt is divided into three parts, viz. the Pomell, which is the Little
ball at the far end of the Hilt, The Particular division of it, and first of
the Hilt.
which in the forenamed figure is marked with the Letter A. and is sometimes of
a round, and sometimes of an Ovall-shape. 'Its use is to keep the rest of the
Hilt fast, and to make a Sword well Mounted, That is to say light before the
hand, the Handle marked B in Plat i
For page 2
Fig i
Fig: 2
F

Fig: 3
G

the same figure, and which is that part you hold in your hand. And the Shell
which is that part of the Hilt, next to the Blade marked in the same figure
with the Letter C. and serves to preserve your hand sometimes from a thrust or
blow.

The Blade is divided into two parts, viz. the Strong part, and the Weak, the
Fort, Secondly Of the Blade.
and the Feeble, or the Prime, and the Second. The Strong, Fort, or Prime, of
the Blade is Measured from the Shell C to the middle of the Blade D, and
because it is the storngest part of the Blade it is therefore made use of in
Parieing, or putting by thrusts and Blows, the Weak, Feeble, or Second part of
the Blade, is measured from the middle D. to the point E. and being the weakest
part of the Blade, it is therefore made use of, in offending, or, in giving
thrusts, or blows, and this much for the division of the Sword.


Sch. What is the next thing you are to show me?


Ma. The next thing I will do, will be to Explain some terms belonging to
this Art, which otherwise, might seem somewhat difficult to you, or any new
beginner to understand.


Sch. Which are they?


Ma. They are these which follow.

A Guard.Is a posture which a Man patteth his body into for the better
defending of himself from his Adversaries thrusts, or blows. See the Figures
of the Second, Tenth, and Eleventh Plates. To Parie. Is to put by a thrust, or
blow, so that you are not touched with it. As you see in the Third Plate where
the first Figure is pateing the second, or in the three following plates, where
the figures giving in the thrusts are Paried by the figures opposite to them.
Quarte. When a Man holds the Nails of his Sword hand quite upwards, which the
2. Figure of the first Plate represents at the letter F. then he is said to
hold his hand in Quarte. Terce. When a Man holds the Nails of his Sword hand
quite downwards, which the third figure of the first Plate represents at the
letter G. Then he is said to hold his hand in Terce. Within the Sword. It is
that part of your Body which (when our right-side is toward your Adversary)
(...) betwixt your Sword, and your left Breast, and is marked in the first
figure of the third ^late with the distance, A. B. Without the Sword. Is that
part of your Body, which (when ^o^ hold your Sword toward your left side) ^s
above your Sword, the whole breadth of your Body, and is marked in the second
figure of the eleventh plate with the distance, C. D. To Approach, or Advance.
A Man is said to Approach, or Advance, when being out of his Adversaries reach
or at a pretty distance from him, he comes nearer to him. To Retire. A Man is
said to Retire, when being within his Adversaries reach, he goes out of it
either by stepping or Jumping backwards from his Adversary upon a Straight
line. Measure. Is the distance betwixt a Man and his Adversary, which should be
exactly observed, that when he is Thrusting at you, You may be without his
Measure or Reach, as the first figure of the third Plate is without the Reach
of the second figure, and when you are Thrusting at him, that your thrust may
be home, and not short of him when you are at your Elonge, as for example, the
distance betwixt the right foot of the first, and the right foot of the second
figure of the second Plate, is called the Measure betwixt these two Figures. To
Break Measure. Is just as your Adversary is thrusting at you, so to judge the
distance he is from you as that his Thrust when he is at his full Elonge, may
be short of you, because you are out of, his Measure or reach as the first
Figure of the third Plate, is without the reach of the second Figure, for I
suppose that the first Figure, to make the Thrust of the second short of him,
has broke his Measure; the way of doing it shall be taught you hereafter. To
Elonge. Is to Streatch forward ones right Arm, and Leg, and to keep a closs
left Foot. This a Man does, when he gives in a Thrust; and when he does it, he
is then said to make an Elonge, which is represented by the second Figure of
the third Plate. Respost. Is when a Man has given in a Thrust, and before he
recovereth his Body receives a Thrust after his Adversary has Paried his,
then he is said to receive a Thrust upon the respost or back of the Parrade,
which is the Safest thrust that a Man can give, for it is not possible for him,
upon that Thrust to receive a Contre-Temps, which shall be immediately
explained what is. Feinting, or, Falsifying. Is the deceiving of your
Adversary, by causing him believe that you are to give your Thrust in one
place, when you design really to give it him in another. Beating. Is the
striking of the Feeble of your Adversaries sword with the edge, and Fort of
yours, either with one hand, or with the help of your left hand, joined to the
blade about a foot from the Hilt, as in the second figure of the 11. plate, to
cause the Beat have the greater spring or force. Battery. The difference
between Beating, and Battery, is, that Battery is the striking with the edge
and Feeble of your sword, upon the edge, and Feeble of your Adversaries,
whereas beating as I just now told, is done with the fort of your sword upon
the feeble of your adversaries, and therefore secureth your Adversaries sword a
great deal better then Battery does. Binding. Is the securing your Adversaries
sword, with 8. or 10. Inches of yours, upon 5. or 6. of your Adversaries.
Caveating, or Dis-engaging. Is the slipping of your Adversaries sword, when it
is going to bind or secure yours. To take time. Is either never to thrust, but
when you have a fit opportunity, or otherwise it is the thrusting at your
Adversary just as he is making of a Feint, or the slipping of him and giving
him the thrust when he is either going to bind, or beat your sword; as you may
see in plate 9. where the second figure has taken time upon the first.
Contre-Temps. Is when a man thrusts without having a good opportunity, or when
he thrusts at the same time his Adversary thrusts, and that each of them at
that time receive a thrust. Quarting upon the straight Line. Is the keeping
very much back of your head and shoulders from your Adversaries sword, when you
are giving in a thrust within the sword, which is represented by the second
figure of the third plate. Dequarting, Or Quarting off the straight Line.Is the
throwing of your left foot and body, backwards off the straight Line toward
your Adversary, and keeping your right foot fast, which is represented by the
second figure of the 9. plate. Volting. Is the leaping by your Adversaries left
side, quite out of his measure. These are the terms of Art which ordinarily
young beginners understand not.



Sch. Are those all the terms of Art you have to explain to me?


Ma. Yes these are all the terms which I think need explaining, any other
being easily understood without it.


Sch. What then do you intend to teach me in the next place?


Ma. Because you are still asking me that question, and that you may not put
your self to the trouble of asking it again, I will show you the method I
intend to follow in teaching you this Art. And first I will teach you how to
hold your sword in your hand, secondly, how many Guards there are, and how you
are to stand to your Guard, Thirdly I shall explain to you the lessons
defensive, which are called the Parade, Fourthly the Lessons offencive,
together with their contraries, by showing you how they must be played, Fifthly
I shall teach you how each of the Guards are kept and how every one of them is
to be pursued, your Adversary keeping any of them, or defended your Adversary
pursuing you after you have taken your self to any of them, Sixthly, I shall set
you down some general rules to be observed, when you are playing either with
blunts, or sharps, against those who understand, or against those who are
altogether Ignorant of this Art.


Sch. Sir you have thought upon a very good Method, and I beg that you would
be as plain in the discribing of the lessons you are to teach me as possible.


Ma. Sir I shall to the outmost of my power obey your desire.


Sch. As to the first then, how am I to hold my Sword in my hand?


CHAP. I. How a Man is to hold his Sword. See Plate I. Figure 2d.
Of holding the Sword.
Ma. You must hold your Sword after this manner; hold your Thumb upon the broad
side of the Handle with your Fingers quite round it, as in the second Figure of
the first Plate marked F. and not as some do, who put their foremost and middle
Fingers through the two arms of the Hilt, thinking that by doing that, they hold
their Sword firmer, some use only to put their foremost Finger through, which
the Spainards did of old, and many even to this day do it; but both ways are
most ridiculous, and dangerous.


Sch. I think any Man of common sense may perceive that, for when a Man holds
his Sword in that fashion, with his Fingers through the arms of the Hilt, he is
in danger of having his Fingers broken, if his Adversary should enclose with
him, and offer to force the Sword out of his band, for holding it that way he
cannot so easily quit with it, as he should, and therefore will infallibly in
my opinion be in hazard of losing his Fingers, if not his life in the cause.


Ma. Sir, You have found out exactly the hazard that a Man is in, in holding
his Sword after that manner, but when you hold it, as I have before told you,
you must hold it fast and firm, and not gently, so that your Adversary with the
least sudden beat or twist may force it out of your hand.


Sch. What is the hazard if I should hold it loosly in my hand?


Ma. The hazard of holding it loosly is this, The Reasons why a Man should not
hold his Sword too loosly in his hand.
that when once you get a habit of holding your sword so, if you should have
occasion to play with sharps, you will be in hazard of having it struck out of
your hand, which may put your life in hazard. This I think a sufficient reason
to cause you hold your Sword firm in your hand, but not so as to weary it.


Sch. Indeed it is so, and now when I consider it; Although a Man had not such
a Strong reason as that you have given me to cause him hold his Sword fast, yet
Peoples very laughing at men when they are playing with blunts, because they
see at every other Thrust their Flurett beat out of their Hand, should be a
sufficient argument to them to cause them hold it fast, and I my self when I
have seen them quite with their Flurett so easily, although I understood
nothing of this Art my self, yet I thought it very un-handsome, and laughed at
them as being as Ignorant of this Art as my self.


Ma. You had good reason to do so, and yet I have seen some who understood
little or nothing of this Art, beat the Flurett out of their Adversaries hand,
although he was very far above their play.


Sch. What should be the Reason of that?


Ma. The Reason why that sometimes falls out, is because he that is playing
with such an Ignorant, knows himself to be far above his play and therefore
trusting too much to his Adversaries, That an Ignorant may sometimes beat the
Fluret out of an Artists hand, and yet that it is no reflection upon this Art.
Ignorance neglects that which he should, and certainly would most if he were
playing with one he thought understood as well as himself, take notice of, so
that by the least sudden twist o^ Beat, that his Adversary gives his flurett^
(although more perhaps by chance the^ Art) he and it is separate, and it is
sometimes for such reasons as this, that bystanders who understand not this
Art. Cry it down and undervalue it as not worth the understanding, when they
see one that gets the Name of a Sword man, bafled by an Ignorant, never
considering that it is the others inadvertancie. Therefore, to prevent all such
inconveniences, let a man always hold his sword as firm in his hand as
possibly he can, without wearieing himself, and then he will be but in little
hazard as to that: for I can assure him he will but find few unless it be such
as are very expert in this Art, that will be able to Beat his sword with such a
spring, as to cause it go out of his hand, but let us go to the next thing I am
to teach you, which is.


CHAP. II Of keeping a Guard.
Sch How am I to keep a Guard?


Ma. Before I show you how to keep a ^ard, you must know how many there (...).


Sch. How many are there?


Ma. There are generally but two Guards, (...). the Quart-Guard, and the Terce.
Generally but two Guards.
^ut these two Guards, are again sub-divided to other Guards.


Sch. How?


Ma. The Quart-Guard is sub-divided in(...) two, viz. the Quart with a Straight
point, ^d the Quart with a Sloping point near to the ^ound: Particularly five
Guards.
The Terce is likewise sub-di^ded into two, viz. The Terce with the ^nt higher
then the Hilt, and the Terce ^th the point lower then the Hilt, There is ^ewise
another kind of Guard (but I have ^t a proper Name to it,) in which you (...)
to hold your Sword with both your ^ands. Now I shall teach you, how all ^ose
several Guards must be keept when I come to the Chapter that treats of the^
But because the Quart Guard with a Streig^ point, How to keep the Quart Guard,
with a straight point. See Plate 2. Fig. 1.
is most commonly made use of, (...) shall in this place show you how it is
kept.

And first you must keep a thin Body which is done by only showing your right
side to your Adversary, let your Feet be i^ a Straight line from him, so that
when h^ looks to your Right Leg, it may hinder him to see the left, but let
them not be too far asunder, for that will make your Elonge the shorter, nor
yet too closs, for then you cannot stand Firm, but keep them at a competent
distance, and let the point of your right Foot be turned a little outward from
the Straight Line, but the broadside of your Left must look toward your
Adversary, As in the first figure of the second Plate.


Sch. What good does the turning of my right Toe a Little outward do?


Ma. The turning of your Toe a little outward from the Straight Line, Makes
you both Stand Firmer, and handsomelyer, you are also to sink with both your
Thighs, but your left Knee must be a little more Bent then your Right, which is
done by leaning a little Back upon your left thigh: when you present your
Sword, you must hold the Plat 2
For page i6
Fig: i
The French way of Keeping the Quart Guard with a striaght Point, see page: i6

Fig 2
The best way in my opinion of keeping the quart guard with a striaght point,
see page: i7

Nails of your Sword Hand in Quart: (and ^t is from that, that this Guard has
its Name) the Hilt of your Sword as high as your right Papp, your Arm must be a
little ^ent, For the better pursuing, or for giving in a Thrust the quicker,
and the point of your Sword must look toward your Adversaries Right Side, and
about two or three Inches lower then your Hilt, your left Hand must be held as
high as your left Ear, and some more then half a Foot from it with the palm of
it looking Straight toward your Adversary, and the points of your Fingers must
not look upwards, but pointing toward your Adversary. All which Directions are
represented to you, by the first Figure of the Second Plate. The best way in my
opinion of keeping the Quartguard with a straight point; see plate 2. figure 2.



Sch. Sir your Directions are so plain, that I understand them very well, but
is their no other way of keeping this Quart Guard?


Ma. Yes, that there is, for the way I have been showing you is that which is
ordinarily used by the French, but I shall show you a way which is somewhat
different from it, and which in my opinion is by far the best, and safest, and
it is as follows: you know in the foregoing Guard, you are to set your left
foot with the broad side of it toward your Adversary but in this, you must
turn your left toe as far out as conveniently you can. As in the Second Figure
of the Second Plat.


Sch. What Good does that?


Ma. The good it does is, that of necessity it causes you turn out your left
Thigh, and therefore makes your Body so much the thinner, for when the Broad
side of your Foot is toward your Adversary, you can by no means turn out your
left Thigh, and so consequently it will be seen, or open to your Adversary to
thrust at, and therefore in hazard of being wounded, which your would have
prevented had you turned out your left Toe; you must remember also when you
stand to your Guard this way to Sink as closs to the Ground with your breech as
possible, without Thrusting of it out. As in the Second figure of the Second
Plate.


Sch. I am convinced of the Advantage I have in turning out of my left Toe, but
I do not understand any advantage I have by Sinking so closs to the Ground
with my Breech as you desire me.


Ma. The Advantage you have by Sinking is also considerable, for when you Sink
as I desire you, that part of your Body which is betwixt the Hilt of your Sword
and your right thigh is quite covered, which, when you keep your Guard after
the French way is quite discovered and open: You must also remember when you
Stand to your Guard this way, to bow both your Knees alike, and rest equally
with your Body upon both your Thighs, as in the Second Figure of the second
Plate; you are to keep the rest your Body, according to the Directions I gave
you for the French way: At first this Guard is a little uneasy, but a little
custom will make it become as easy to the Body, as the foregoing Posture.


Sch. I am now convinced by the Reasons you give me, of the advantage this
Latter way has of the former.


Ma. Sir I am glad that you both understand my meaning so well, and are
convinced by reason, of what is wrong, and what right, for that will encourage
me to take the more pains to Instruct you: but you must now to the next thing I
promised to teach you.


Sch. What was that?


Ma. You see I have taught you how to hold your Sword, and keep a Guard, the
next thing I promised to teach you was the Lessons, which accordingly I will
do, now I think the first thing a Man should learn, after that he can hold his
Sword, and keep a Guard is to defend himself, for certainly it is a great deal
more necessary, and honorable, for a Man to defend himself and save his Enemy
if possible, then for him either to kill his Enemy and have himself likewise
killed, or, eve^ kill his Enemy, and save himself, for the design of teaching
this Art, is not so much for to teach a man to offend, as to defend himself
handsomely, and with ease, when it may be his Fortune to be attached, for this
Art is called Fencing, or the A^ of Defense. Therefore I think it fittest to
begin with the Lessons Defensive, which are commonly called the Parade.


CHAP. III. Of the Lessons Defensive.
Sch. How am I then to defend my self?


Ma. Before I show you how to defend your self, you must know how many Parades,
Generally but 2 Parades.
or ways of defending there are.


Sch. How many Parades then are there?


Ma: There are generally but two Parades the Parade in Quart and the Parade in
Terce. but they are again subdivided into other Parades, to wit, the Parade in
Quart is subdivided into two, viz. Parti-Pcularly five Parades.
The Parade in Quart with the point a little higher then the Hilt, and the
Parade in Quart, with the point Sloping toward our Adversaries right Thigh,
and a thought without (...). The Parade in Terce is likewise subdivided into
two, viz. The Parade in Terce with the point (...) little higher then the Hilt,
and the Parade in ^erce with the point Sloping toward the Left side ^f your
Adversaries Thigh.


Sch. You have no other Parades, then those you have named to me, have you?


Ma. Yes, I have yet another which although ^t end always in one of the four
former Parades, yet there is a great difference betwixt the doing of them, and
the doing of it, and I can give no other name to this Parade but the
Conter-Caveating Parade, because, let your Adversary make use of what lesson he
pleases, or thrust upon what side He lists, if you make use of this Parade
as you should, you will infallibly meet with his Sword, and so cross all his
designs the easilier, which making use of any of the four former, you might
find somewhat more difficult to do.


Sch. I would have you show me why those Parades are called the Quart, and
Terce Parades, because I know not for what Reason they are so called.


Ma. I shall, Why the Parades are called the Quart and Terce Parades.
the First Parade then is either called the Quart Parade, or the Parade within
the Sword, because when you put by the thrust, you put it by upon the inside of
your Sword, or upon that side the Nails of your Hand look to, and that Side is
called Quart, or within the Sword: see the first Figure of the third Plate who
is pareing the Thrust of the second Figure with the first Parade in Quart, and
remember always when I desire you to hold your hand, or Nails in Quart, that I
mean you should hold your Nails quit upwards, as in the second figure of the
first plate marked F. The second Parade, is called the Terce Parade, or the
Parade without the Sword, because you put by the thrust upon that side which is
without your Sword, and as the other is called Quart, because it is within your
Sword, or upon that side your Nails look too, so this is called Terce, because
it is without your Sword, or upon that side the back of your hand looks too.
See the second Figure of the 4th. Plate who is Pareing the thrust of the first
figure with the first Parade in Terce. And remember also that when I desire you
to hold your hand, or Nails in Terce, that I mean you should hold your Nails
quite downwards as in the Third Figure of the first Plate marked G.


Sch. Sir I now by this Explanation understand you very well.


Ma. Sir, any doubt you have, or any thing that I show you which seems
difficult to you, mind me of it, and according to my power I shall explain it
to you.


Sch. I shall not faill to do it, but I pray you show me how I must Parie after
those five several ways.


Ma. I shall show you orderly one by one how you are to do them, How the first
Parade in Quart is to be done; see plate 3. figure ^
you must do the first Parade in Quart, with the point a little higher then the
Hilt after this manner, when you are Standing to your Guard, and your Adversary
offers to give you a Thrust home upon that side his Sword lies, which I
suppose to be within your Sword, for this Thrust is done without Disengaging
(which I shall explain to you hereafter) and is the plainest, and simplest
Thrust which can be given with the small Sword, and yet a Man will sometimes be
surprised with it; How a man is to perceive the coming in of a thrust,
I say when you perceive Him offer to give Home the Thrust, which is known by
looking Steadfastly to the Hilt of his Sword, and not as Ignorants do who look
to their Adversaries eye, for I pray you how can a Man Judge, either upon what
side of the Sword, or when the Thrust will be given, if he look to the Eve,
when he is playing with one that Squints, certainly it is very uncertain; and
therefore as a most certain Rule, and which will never fail you, Look always
to the Hilt of your Adversaries Sword, when you expect that he is going to
Thrust. And when you see it moving toward you, (which will be in the Twinkling
of an Eye, if he that gives in the Thrust have a swift hand.) You must
Immediately turn your wrest, with a little motion of the Arm, but so little
that it may scarcely be perceived, to your Lest side, and so put his Sword by,
(always with the Fort of yours.) Upon your Leftside, Still keeping the point
of your Sword after your Parade toward his right Shoulder, which is
represented by the first Figure of the Third Plate who is Pareing his
Adversaries Thrust given within his Sword, The best way in my opinion of doing
the first Parade in Quart.
with the first Parade in Quart. But I would have you, when you put by your
Adversaries Sword, to do it with a little Beat, or Spring toward the Ground,
which in my opinion is absolutely the best way of doing this Parade. When I say
a Spring, I mean a little Beat, and immediately bring your Sword to it is Plat 3
For page 24
Fig: i
One Pareing his Adversarys thrust given within his sword (...) first parrad in
quart see page: 23

Fig: 2
One giveing in A thrust within The sword see page: 39

^ght Posture again: when you Parie after this way, you must not at all turn
your wrest, but keep your hand when you Parie in the same posture, as when you
presented your Sword, which most ordinarily will be neither altogether Quart,
nor altogether Teree, but betwixt the two, because it is painful for a Man to
hold his hand long in Quart, yet the nearer you hold your hand to Quart, the
better is it; for there never was yet a Master who could in common practice
observe all the exact directions to an Ace, which I give you, therefore there
must be always some alowance given, but as I told you, the nearer you observe
them, the better will it be for you, because the Directions I give you are most
exact.


Sch. Why think you this last way of doing this Parade, better then the former?


Ma Because it is done with a Spring, and the former is not, so that using this
last way as you should, you may often in the Pareing, Beat your Adversaries
Sword out of his hand, which is no small Advantage; also this last way secureth
your Adversaries Sword better then the Former does, if you had a mind to give
him a Thrust upon the Respost, or back of your Parade, but as I told you
before, you must by any means remember to bring up your Sword to its right
posture again, otherwise your Body would ly too open without your Sword for
your Adversary to Thrust at. And therefore I say again, by any means forget not
the bringing up of your Sword, instantly after your Beat, and then I doubt not
in the least, but you will rather approve of this last way of pareing then of
the former.


Sch. Its very like I may, but in both their Parades what advantage have I by
keeping my Swords point toward my Adversaries right shoulder and not farther
aside.


Ma. The Advantage you have by it is this, The advantage a man has in not
letting his Swords. point go too far aside when he parieth.
that when you keep your Swords point toward your Adversaries right shoulder,
after you have Paried him, you are readier to go to the Parade again if he
should offer to Disengage, and Thrust upon the other Side, whereas if you keept
your Swords point farther aside, you would have a greater way to make with it,
if he should Immediately after his Thrust Disengage, and Thrust upon the other
side, or without your Sword, and therefore you would be in Hazard of receiving
the Thrust before you could meet with his Sword to put it by, also the keeping
of your point, as Straight as possible upon your Adversary when you Parie in
some manner aweth him, and hinders him to thrust so Furiously (for fear of
his receiving a Contre-temps) as otherwise he might do.


Sch. But why am I to make such a little Motion with my Arm when I Parie. For
one would think that the greater Motion one makes with their Arm the farther
they would put by their Adversaries Sword.


Ma. You are right, The disadvantage a Man has in making too great a motion
with his Arm when he parieth.
in that you would put by your Adversaries Sword the farther, as you make the
motion of your Arm the greater, but you perceive not the great disadvantage you
have in so doing; For do you not see? That if you should make so great a Motion
with your Arm, when you are Pareing, you would be infar greater hazard of being
hit, if your Adversary should make a Feint within your Sword, because then your
Body would be quite discovered upon that side, upon which he is to give in his
Thrust, which would have been in a manner secured, had you made as little a
motion with your Arm as I before desired you, besides that the making of so
great a Motion with your Arm, disordereth your Body, which should be keept in
as good a posture for defense as possible.


Sch. I am now convinced by the Reasons you give, of the Advantage a Man has
by making a little motion with the Arm when he is Par^ing, as also by keeping
of his Swords point, as Straight to his adversary as he can, after that he has
Paried him.


Ma. How the 2d. Parade in Quart is to be done.
I am glad of it, but now Secondly, you must do the second Parade in Quart.
with the point sloping toward your Adversaries right Thigh, and a thought
without it, as follows; when you perceive that he is Thrusting within your
Sword, turn the Nails of your hand in Quart, with a Stretched Arm, and your
hand as high as your Face, see Plate 5. Figure first. And at the very same time
you do this, Slop your point as low as your Adversaries Thigh, and so put by
his Thrust with the Fort of your Sword upon the weak of his. As I told you
before in Page twenty four; for if a Man Parie right, he must always do it,
with the Fort of his Sword, The danger that a Man is in, in not pareing with
the Fort of his Sword.
and not with the Feible.


Sch. Why, may not a Man sometimes Parie with the Feible of his Sword?


Ma. Yes, but then he runs the risk of having the Thrust forced in upon him,
which if his Adversaries Arm, or wrest, be stronger then his, may easily be
done, and which is almost impossible to be done, if he has the Parade right,
and Parie with the Fort of his Sword, as he should.


Sch. I see now indeed that there can no Man be sure of the Parade, if he offer
to Parie with the Feible of his Sword.


Ma. It is very true, and you must likewise when you make use of this Parade,
Quart. your Head well, and look as it were by the outside of your Sword.


Sch. What Advantage have I by Quarting of my Head? The advantage o^quarting
the head well.



Ma. The Advantage you have by Quarting of your Head, is, that it will hinder
your Adversary to hitt you so easily in the Face by way of Contre-temps, as
otherwise he might do.


Sch. I see so indeed, but how am I to do the first Parade in Terce, or without
the Sword, with the point a little higher then the Hilt.


Ma. You are to do the first Parade in Terce, or without the Sword, How the
first Parade in Terce is to be done.
with the point a little higher then the Hilt, after this Manner, when you
perceive your Adversary giving in the Thrust without your Sword, immediately
turn your wrest: (With a little motion also of the Arm, as in the first Parade
in Quart,) to that side until your Nails be in Terce, and so Parie his Thrust,
see Plate 4th. figure second, you must remember in this Parade, to keep the
point of your Sword, after you have Paried him toward his left Shoulder, The
best way in my opinion of doing the first Parade in Terce.
as in the first Parade in Quart you keep it toward his right, and that for
the Reasons shown you in page. 26. I would also have you to do this Parade
with a kind of a Spring, as I told you in the first Parade in Quart, and that
same very way, as you have it set down to you there, which as I told you before
is in my opinion the best way of doing this Parade, therefore I pray you to
mind it.


Sch. I shall endeavor to do so, seeing you recommend it so earnestly to me,
but how am I to d^ the second Parade in Terce, with a sloping point?


Ma. The second Parade in Terce, or without the Sword, with the point sloping
toward your Adversaries Thigh, How the 2. Parade in Terce is to be done.
and a thought within it, is done as follows; when you perceive your
Adversary giving in his thrust without and below your Sword, as it were at
your arm pit, see plate fifth, figure 2. Immediately let the point of your sword
fall as low as his thigh, and turn your Nails quite round to your right side
until they look from you, and keep your hand as high as your head, and put his
thrust by upon your right side, and in the time of your Parade let your head
lie close almost under your arm. see plate 6. figure 1.


Sch. What advantage have I by holding my head so?


Ma. As in the second Parade in Quart, the Quarting of your head preserves you
from being hirt in the face, so the holding of your head close under your arm,
when you make use of this second Parade in Terce preserves your face from your
Adversaries Scattering, or Contre temps thrusts: How a Man is to parie with the
2d. parade in Terce when his Adversary thrusts, without and above his Sword.
you may also make use of this Parade in Terce with a sloping point, if your
Adversary should offer to thrust without and above your Sword, by putting by
his thrust upon your left side, but then your point most not slop toward your
Adversaries thigh, but by his right side; also in Pareing this way, you must
Quart your Head well, whereas in the foregoing way, you are to hold it closs
almost under your Arm. This is all, I have to say of the Quart and Terce
Parades, either with the point a little higher then the Hilt, or with a sloping
point, but I must tell you, that this last way of Pareing with the second
Parade in Terce, with a sloping point, is seldom made use of except your
Adversary has so gained the Feeble of your sword, that you could not Parie
him with the first Parade in Terce.


Sch. I understand their four ways of Pareing which you have been showing me
very well, bu^ their is yet another, which you call the Contr^ caveating
Parade, the way of doing it, you have not as yet shown me.


Ma. How the Contre caveating Parade is to be done.
I am just going to show you it, it i^ the last Parade I named to you in page
(...) and is absolutely the best, and safest a man can make use of, the way of
doing it is thu^ when you perceive your Adversaries thru^ coming home within
your Sword, then Instantly slop the point of your sword an^ bring it up again
on the other side of you^ Adversaries, which will be without hi^ sword, and
parie his thrust without you^ sword, that was to be given within your Sword and
in parieing neither turn your Nails i^ Quart nor Terce, but keep them in the
samposture as when you presented your Sword this parade must also be done with
a spring In like manner if you think that he is to giv^ in his thrust without
your sword, you must In stantly slop your point and bring it up again, upon the
inside of his Sword, and so paric his thrust that was to be given without your
sword, within your Sword, this Sloping of your point, and bringing of it up
again upon the other side of your Adversary Sword, must be done in the
twinkling of a^ Eye, otherwise your Adversaries Thru^ will be home upon you,
and so your Parade will signify nothing: Therefore to prevent the coming in of
any Thrust, make use of this Parade, or of any other Parade you intend to use,
with as quick a Motion as possibly you can, which if you do, and judge exactly
of the coming in of your Adversaries Thrust, you will be but very seldom hitt.


Sch. I see I must so indeed, but I pray you let me know what advantage this
Parade has of the other four. The advantage the Contre-caveating Parade has
of any other.



Ma. The advantage a man has in making use of this Contre-caveating Parade is
very great, by what it is when he makes use of any of the four former, because
when a man makes use of any of the other four Parades, he may be hitt with a
Feint by Reason of his judging that the Thrust will be given without the Sword,
when it is designed to be given within the sword, or within the sword, when it
is to be given without the sword; and so although he has a quick enough
Parade, and a good Eye, yet you see he may be hit by reason of his wrong
Judging of the coming in of the Thrust, which would have been prevented had he
made use of this Contre-caveating Parade, for ^his Parade crosses and
confounds all Feints, yea not only Feints, but in a manner all Lessons that
can be played with the Small Sword, so that certainly it is by far the best
and safest Parade, and therefore I would advise you, that when once you can
make use of it, never, (unless it be very seldom) to make use of another, and
you will find it to be as I told you, the absolutely safest Parade, and the
Parade which should be most exactly understood, and frequently practiced, by
those who intend to be Masters of this Art.


Sch. Sir you have convinced me of the advantage a Man has in making use of
this Contre-caveating Parade, and therefore I shall endeavor never to make use
of any other, seeing it is so general a Parade.


Ma. Your resolution Sir is good, and I am confident if you keep it, you will
confess that all that I have said, in commendation of this Parade, is but
little in respect of what it deserves.


Sch. I shall to the outmost of my power endeavor to ^^^p it, but have you no
more to say of the Parades?


Ma. No, and what I have said concerning the T^fensive part, or Parade, I am
sure is so plain, and easy to be understood that the meanest capacity may be
able to put it in practice, if the Directions which have given be seriously
considered, and observed: we will now proceed to the Offensive part, in which I
shall endeavor to be as distinct, and easy in my Directions to you, as I have
been in the Defensive.


The End of the Defensive part, or Parades.

CHAP. 4. Of the Lessons Offensive.
Sch. Which is your first Lesson in the Offensive part?


Lesson 1. Of Approaching or Advancing.
Ma. My first Lesson is of Approaching, or Advancing.


Sch. How many ways are there of Approaching?


Ma. Two.


Sch. Show me how I am to approach these two ways?


Ma. The first way then is with a single stepp and is done thus, How a Man is
to approach with the single stepp.
when you are standing to your Guard, and your Adversary without your measure,
so that your Thrust cannot reach him, without Approaching, then lift your right
foot forewards about a foot, and immediately let your left foot follow clos^ by
the Ground, and keeping your left knee bowed, observing always at the end of
every stepp, that your feet be at the same distance they were at when you first
presented your Sword, or rather nearer.


Sch. Why nearer?


Ma. You must understand that in your appreaching with the single step the
nearer you bring your feet together, (yea even so closs that your heels almost
touch one another) your advantage is the greater, because your Elonge will come
as much nearer to your Adversary, as you brought your left foot, nearer to your
right.


Sch. I see so indeed?


Ma: And you must remember always to Redouble this stepp, or any other you
intend to make use of, until you come so near to your Adversary that you think
he is within your Measure, or that your Elonge will reach him.


Sch. Can a man make use of this single stepp in ragged Ground.


Ma. Not easily, for this single stepp is only to be made use of in plain
Ground, The use of the single and do^ble stepps.
where there is nothing that may occasion a Man's falling, but the double
stepp, which I am going to show you is most proper to be made use of, in stony
or ragged Ground, where a man cannot make use of the single stepp, without
being in hazard of falling; for with the double stepp, you may step over a
little furrow, or a rickle of stones, which is almost impossible for you to
do, with the single stepp, without being in hazard of falling, which is as
much as your life is worth.


Sch. Let me see how the double stepp is done?


Ma. The double stepp is done as follows, How a Man is to appreach with the
double stepp.
you must first throw your left foot, before your right (By raising of your
Body a little on your right foot to do it with the better grace,) about a
foot, then bring forewards your right foot again, as far before the left, as
it was when you presented your Sword, their two Motions must be done immediately
after other, otherwise the doing of this stepp, will appear very unhandsome.
Remember when you make use of this double stepp, to keep as thin a Body as
possible, because the throwing of your left foot before your right, casts your
Body open, and therefore you must guard against it. You must also as I told you
before redouble this stepp, according to the distance you are from your
Adverlary.


Sch. Since I now know how this double stepp is done, I perceive that it is
indeed, properest to use it in uneven Ground, and the single in a plain field.
But which is your second Lesson?


Lesson 2. Of Retireing.
Ma. My second Lesson is of Retireing.


Sch. How many ways can a man Retire?


Ma. Three ways.


Sch. Show me them?


Ma. The first is with a single stepp and is done the same way, How a Man is to
retire with the single stepp.
as you approach with the single stepp, only whereas in Approaching with the
single stepp, you lift your right foot first, in Retireing with the single
stepp you must lift your left foot first, you must observe the rest of the
Directions given you in Approaching with the single stepp.

The second way is with a double stepp; How a Man is to retire with the double
stepp.
and is also done the same way as the Advancing with the double stepp, only
whereas in Approaching with the double stepp you throw your lest Foot before
your Right in Retiring with the Double stepp, you throw your right foot
backwards, behind your le^t, the rest is to be done, as in Advancing with the
double stepp.


Sch. The Retiring with the Single and Double Stepps, is made use of, upon the
same Occasions and in the same Grounds, that the Advancing with the Single and
Double Stepp is, is it not?


Ma. Yes, that it is, but the Third way of Retireing is done by jumping
backwards upon the straight Line: The Reason why I call it the straight Line
is, because you Jump straight back from your Adversary, How a Man is to retire
by jumping.
as it were in a Straight Line, for there is play which must be played off the
Straight Line, called Quarting, and Volting, which shall be taught you in its
proper place, I say it is done by Jumping backwards upon the straight Line,
with both your feet in the Air at once, but you must lift your Right Foot
first, and after your Jump is done, stand to your Guard again, unless you
intend to Redouble your Jump, that you may go farther out of your Adversaries
Measure.


Sch. Which is your Third Lesson?


Lesson 3. Of giving in a Thrust.
Ma. My Third Lesson is of giving in a Thrust, or making of an Elonge.


Sch. How am I to give in a Thrust?


Ma. You are to do it thus, when you are standing to your Guard, How a Man is
to give in a Thrust.
and your Adversary within your Measure, your Sword being presented either
within or without your Adversaries Sword as you please, but I suppose it be
within, then stretch forth your Right Arm, and step foreward with your Right
Foot, as far as you can, keeping the point of it straight forewards, and let
the Motion of your Arm begin a thought before you move your Foot. see Plate 3.
figure 2. For a thrust that is right given, may be compared to the shot of a
Gun or Pistol, for as he that is wounded with the shot of a Pistol receives
his wound, before he hear the report of the Pistol, so he that is wounded with
a Sword receives his wound before he hear his Adversaries Right Foot touch the
ground when he is giving in his Thrust, and the Reason of it is, because the
Motion of his hand is begun, before that he move his right Foot, but the
difference is so little, that it can scarcely be perceived, but by a very quick
Eye, or Ear: when you are at your full stretch, keep your left hough stretched,
and by any means keep a closs and couched left Foot, which is done by keeping
your left heel and broad side of your foot closs to the Ground, without the
least drawing it after you, the keeping of a closs left foot, is one of the
Chiefest things to be most exactly observed in all the Art of Fencing, when you
give in your Thrust, throw your left hand behind your back as in Plate 3 figure
2. Plat. 4
For page 40
Fig: i
One giving in a Thrust without and above The sword see page:4i

Fig: 2
One Parieing his Adversaries thrust given without his sword with the first
Parade in ^orce see page: 2^

^r stretch it out upon your left Side, so that your two Arms, Body and Sword,
make one straight Line from your Adversary, as in Plate 4. Figure 1. you must
do this with your left Hand; when you intend not to make use of it for a
Parade, but if you in^end to make use of it for a Parade, then you must in the
very time of giving your ^hrust, throw your left Arm forwards, as ^ar as you
can, without disordering the rest ^f your Body, turning the Palm of it from
^ou, by turning down your Thumb, and ^p your little Finger, as in Plate 6.
Figure (...), and so Parrie his Thru^t, if you judged ^e was to thrust upon the
same time you ^rust; and you must remember always ^hen you give in a Thrust
within the Sword, (...) give it with your Nails in Quart, and Quart your Head
and Shoulders well; but when ^ou Thrust without the Sword, then give it ^ith
your Nails in Terce, and keep your ^ilt a good deal lower then your Point, and
^our head from your Adversaries Sword, ^d remember as a General Rule, that
(...) all Lessons in which you do not first ^ure, or bind your Adversaries
Sword, ^n are to Thrust closs by the Weak of his word, with the Fort of yours,
but the ^atter is far different in Lessons where you first secure your
Adversaries Sword, so^ after your securing, or binding, you quite his Sword,
and gives the Thrust straight home, without so much as touching it, after you
have bound it, which shall be taught in it is proper place.


Sch. But what advantage have I by observing all those Rules, in giving in a
Thrust, as when I thrust without the Sword, the holding of my Hilt lower then
my Point, and the holding of my Head from my Adversaries Sword; as also the
thrusting closs by the Feible of my Adversaries Sword; I pray you let me see,
what Advantage I have by observing all those Directions.


Ma. As the Quarting of your head when you Thrust within the Sword, The
advantage a Man has in giving in a Thrust according to Art.
preserves you from your Adversaries Contre-temps Thrusts in the face. So also
does your Thrusting closs by the Fieble of his Sword, and the holding of your
Hilt lower then the Point, when you Thrust without the sword, as also the
holding of your head always to the contrary side your Adversaries Sword is on,
preserve you from Contre-temps. And observe this as a General Rule always to
keep your head to the contrary side your Adversaries Sword is on, upon whatever
side you Thrust, for this will oftentimes preserve your face from being hitt,
when otherwise it would, for a Man that in giving a Thrust receives another at
the same time, cannot be accounted (...) Master of this Art, for this Art is
called the Art of Defense, and therefore the great use of it is to Defend ones
self, and save their Adversary, (which a Man that is Master of ^t, may easily
do.) and not to hurt their Adversary, and have themselves likewise wounded,
for any Man that never had a Sword in his Hand can do that: After that you
have let in your Thrust, recover your Body instantly to the posture it was in
when you stood to your Guard, and in the recovering, whither or not you think
your Adversary intends to Thrust upon the Respost, go to his Sword or to the
Parade, accordingly as you judge he will give in his Thrust, if you think
within the Sword, then Parie in Quart, if without the Sword, then Parie in
Terce, or you may make use of the Contre-Caveating Parade which if you make use
of it right will never fail you, let your Adversary Thrust as he pleases; this
recovering of the Body is one of the chiefest things in the Small Sword, for
many a Man for not recovering of his Body quickly enough, after the giving in
of a Thrust, has received one, which had he recovered his Body quickly he
would have shuned; Therefore I pray you by any means, mind to recover you^ Body
as quickly as possible after every thr^ and when you do recover, go to his
Swor^ and either Beat it or Bind it, as shall be taught you in it is propper
place.


Sch. I shall, and I also was convinced of t^ Excellency of this Contre
eaveating Parade before, but cannot a Man give in a Thrust unless he observe
exactly all the Directions which you have here given?


Ma. Yes that he may, and not observe one of them, but then his Thrust will not
be given according to the Rules of this Art, and so it cannot be expected, but
his Body will be exposed to a great deal of more hazard, then if he had
exactlie observed the foregoing directions.


Sch. Sir you are very far in the right, but go on to your next Lesson?


Lesson 4. Of Caveating or Dis-engaging.
How a Man is to disengage with his Adversaries Sword.
Ma. My fourth Lesson is of C^veating or Disengaging, with your Adversaries
Sword.


Sch. How am I to do it?


Ma. You must do it thus, when your Sword is presented within your Adversaries
Sword, and you would have it without his Sword, you must (keeping your Nails in
Quart,) sloap your Swords point so low, that you may bring it up upon the
outside, of your Adversaries, this sloaping must be done only with the wrest,
and not with any motion at all of the Arm.


Sch. Why so?


Ma. Because, if you should move your Arm, when you Dis-engade, as some
Ignorants do, you would discover so much of your Body, in the time of your
Dis-engaging, that your Adversary would have a very good time to give in a
Thrust, which he would want, had you only moved your wrest, this sloaping of
your Point with the wrest, and bringing of it up again on the other side,
resembles somewhat the Motion of the Contre-caveating Parade, and it must be
done very quickly.


Sch. It does so indeed, but is this all I must do, when I intend to
Dis-engage?


Ma. Yes, for if once you can Dis-engage, and go from the inside of your
Adversaries Sword, to the outside, and then back again to the inside, you will
know how to dis-engage, and slip your Adversaries Sword, as often as you please.


Sch. Which is your fifth Lessen?


Lesson. 5. Of Feinting or Falsifying.
Ma. My fifth Lesson is of Feinting, or Fa^sifying.


Sch How am I to make a Feint?


Ma. Before I show you how to make Feint, you must know that there are se^ rall
kinds of Feints.


Sch. I pray you show me them? How many kinds of Feints there are.



Ma. There is then the Ordinary single, Fein^ and the Ordinary double Feint;
the single Fei^ at the Head; and the double Feint at the be^ the low Feint,
single, and double; the single and double Feint upon Battery; Volt-coupe, sing
and double; all which Feints I shall show y^ orderly, as I have here set them
down how they must be played.


Sch. I pray you do so, and let your Expla^^tion of them be as distinct, How a
man is to play the ordinary single Feint, being within distance.
and easy, as possible that so I may the better understand your meaning.


Ma. I shall, you are to make your Ordinary single Feint then, after this
manner (I suppose that you are always standing (...) a Guard, before you offer
to play any Lesson when you are within your Adversaries Swor^ dis^engage and
make your Feint without, which is done by giving a beat with your right for
upon the ground, just as you disengage and your Sword upon the outside of your
Adversaries, and instantly after you have dis-engaged, if you perceive him
answer your Feint, by offering to Parie, dis-engage again, and give him the
Thrust within the Sword, some use to make their Feint without any beat with
their Right Foot, but I am wholly against it, unless you were playing against
those who are expert in this Art.


Sch. What is your Reason for that?


Ma. My Reason is this, Reasons showing that a Man should always give a beat
with his Foot when he is making a Feint, except when he is playing against
great Artists.
that if you should give a beat with your Foot, when you are playing against
such as understand this Art well, they would immediately know it to be a Feint,
and therefore would not answer it. Now to make your Feint, without any Motion
of your Foot to them, is most reasonable, because the making of it, as quick as
you can, without any beat of your Foot will cause them believe that it is
really a Thrust, coming in upon that side on which you make your Feint, and so
cause them answer it, and then you have your design. But the matter is far
different, when you are playing with Ignorants, or with such who are in a
manner but just grounded in this Art, for if you should make a Feint to them
without giving a beat with your Foot, upon the ground, they would not answer
it, not because they should not, (for observe this as a General Rule, never to
answer a Feint, unless you do it upon some design,) but because they have not
as yet come the length of discerning such quick play. For your Feint without a
beat of your Foot with it, would appear to them as no Feint at all, because of
the quickness of the Motion, whereas upon the contrary, if you gave a beat with
your Feint, you would surprise them, and in a manner make them start, when you
made your Feint, and so make them go to the Parade, which was your design.
Sometimes also a beat with ones Foot, without any Motion at all of the Sword,
will make some Ignorants brangle, which is no small advantage to their
Adversary.


Sch: I am now fully convinced of the necessity of Beating with the Foot,
except when I am playing as you say, with such as are in a manner Masters of
this Art.


Ma. I am glad you are convinced that what I say is true, for that will
encourage me to take the more pains to instruct you in the rest of this Art,
but let us now speak of the double Feint.


Sch. Show me first how I am to play the single Feint, being without distance.


Ma. You must approach with your Feint. How the ordinary single Feint is to be
played, being without distance.



Sch. And with what stepp am I to approach whither with the single or double?


Ma. With the single, for if you approached with the double, you would discover
your Body too much in the time of your approaching, and so be in hazard of
being hitt by your Adversary, besides that the double stepp is ordinarily never
made use of, neither in approaching, nor Retiring, But upon the occasions I
before told you in page 37. where I treated of them.


Sch. I indeed thought otherwise, but show me now how I must play the ordinary
double Feint.


Lesson 6. Of the Double-Feint.
Ma. Before I show you how to play it, you must know what difference there is
betwixt all Single Feints and Double Feints.


Sch. I am very well satisfied that you show me it.


Ma. You are then in all single Feints to make two Motions, The di^ference
betwixt all single and double Feints.
with the first Motion you make your Feint, and with the next you give in the
Thrust, and the Thrust in all Single Feints, (except when you make your Feint
upon that Side your Sword lies, which is done without Dis-engaging, and i^ the
simplest of all Feints) is given in upon the side your Sword lay before you
made your Feint, whereas in all Double Feints, you make 3. Motions, and the
Thrust (Except when you make your first Motion on that side your sword was
presented) is given in upon the other side, and not in that side your Sword lay
immediately before you began to make your Feint. This is the difference betwixt
Single and Double Feints.


Sch. Seeing you have shown me the difference betwixt them, pray show me how I
must play the ordinary Double Feint? How a Man is to play the ordinary double
Feint being within distance.



Ma. There are then two ways of playing your ordinary Double Feint, for when
your Adversary is within your Measure, you play it one way, and when he is
without your measure you are to play it another; when you are within distance,
your Sword being presented within your Adversarys Sword, you must Dis-engage,
and make your first Motion without his Sword, and stand a thought upon it to
see if he answers you, by offering to go to the Parade, if he do not answer
you, your Lesson will have no effect, and therefore in such a case, you must
try another: But if he answer your first Motion, then instantly make your
second Motion within his Sword, and your Third without the Sword again, by
giving the Thrust, their two last Motions must be as quick as possible, and
remember at every Motion to give a beat with your Foot, and Dis engage always
with your Nails in Quart.


Sch. How am I to play it being without distance?


Ma. When you are without distance, How the double feint it is to be played
being without distance.
you must first make a Motion to try if he will answer your Feint, and if you
perceive him answer you, then begin again, and make your first Motion just as
you did when you was within distance (but you must approach with it) and you
must make your second Motion, and Third also as you did before.


Sch. Which is your contrary to the ordinary Single and Double Feints?


Ma. My Contrary to them is this, The Parade, and contraries against the
ordinary single and double Feints.
when I perceive my Adversary make use of them against me, I then either make
use of the Contre caveating Parade, or otherwise, I keep my Swords point
immovable toward his face, with my Arm as stretched as Possible, and when I do
that, I recover my Body, by drawing my right Foot closs to my left, and
standing as it were upon my tipp-toes; and if for all his seeing me do that, he
give home the Thrust, then I Contre-temps him in the Face, and Parie his Thrust
with my left Hand, or otherwise when I see him make variety of Feints, then in
the very time of his making them, I make a half Thrust at him, that is I Thrust
but I go not home with it. This will make him go to the Parade, and so if I
please, I may take the Pursuit, or when he makes such variety of Feints, I
give home a plain thrust as smartly as possible, and in the time I give it, I
endeavor to defend my Body from a Contre-temps with my left Hand, as in Plate
5. fig. 1. or Plate 6. fig. 2. That the best contrary against Feints is the
Contre-caveating. Parade, also that the making use of the Left Hand is very
necessary.



Sch. But which of these Contraries is the best, and safest?


Ma. In my Opinion the Contre-caveating Parade, for if you make right use of it
you may defy his Feints, but making use of any of the other two Contraries you
may be hitt, because you trust all to your left Hand. Not that I am against the
making use of it, for upon the contrary, I think a Man can never give home a
Thrust without being in hazard of receiving a Contretemps (if his Adversary
design it,) unless he make use of his Left Hand, and therefore I advise you
never to give in a Thrust but when you make use of your Left Hand, and if you
make right use of it, you will find it save you from a great many Contretemps,
which otherwise you would have received; But let not this cause you trust all
to your Left Hand, and nothing to your Sword, for if you do that, it had been
better for you that I had not given you the foregoing Advice: Which,
nevertheless I can assure you is very good, if you only make use of it as a
help to your Parade with the Sword, and not alone, for alone it is dangerous,
but together with your Sword most safe and excellent.


Sch. Truly, Sir, I am much of your mind, and I shall endeavor first to come
to a Parade with my Sword alone, and when I am Master of the Parade that way,
then I think I may venture to make use of my Left Hand, without spoiling of my
self?


Ma. That is the very Method you should take, for once being Master of the
Parade with the Sword alone, you will then find the making use of your Left
Hand very useful to you, and you will I am confident, confess that it is of as
great use to you, as I before told you it would.


Sch. Its like I may; But which is your seventh Lesson?


Lesson 7. Of the Single Feint at the Head.
Ma. My seventh Lesson is the Single Feint, a la Test, or single Feint at the
Head.


Sch. How am I to play it?


Ma. When you are within distance play it after this manner, How a man is to
Play the single Feint at the Head.
you may either present your Sword within or without your Adversaries Sword, if
your Sword be presented without, make a Motion or Feint, at your Adversaries
Face, by stretching out of your right Arm a little, and turning your nails
upwards toward your Adversary, when you make the Motion give a beat with your
Right Foot, and if you perceive him answer your Feint, then instantly give in
your Thrust at your Adversaries Arm-pitt with your Head under your Right Arm,
as I show you in the second Parade in Terce, Page 30, and for the same reasons
there given, the Motion at the Face, stretching of your Arm, turning of your
Nails, and beat with your Right Foot, must be all done together, your Thrust
must be given with your Nails in Terce, and you must hold your left Hand before
you, with the palm of it, looking toward your Right Plat 5
For page: 54
Fig i
One Pareing his Adversaries thrust give^^ without and below his sword with the
second para in quart see page: 28

Fig 2
One giving in a thrust without and below the sword after his making a feint at
the head see page: 54

side, and that part of your Arm from your elbow to the points of your Fingers,
must stand in a manner straight upwards, this you are always to do when you
give in this thrust, to preserve you from a Contre-temps. see Plate 5 fig. 2.


Sch. Why must I stretch out my Arm, and make my Nails look upwards from my
self toward my Adversary.


Ma. Because the doing of it defends you from your Adversaries thrust, if he
should Thrust without and above your sword, at the same time you are making the
Motion at his Face.


Sch. Would I not also if I keept my Nails in Quart, when I make that Motion,
Parie his Thrust, if he should Thrust at the same time I am making it?


Ma. Not at all, for do you not see, that if you made your Feint with your
nails in Quart, your Body would be quite open without and above your sword,
which making your Feint with your Nails in Terce, is quite Guarded.


Sch. I see so indeed, but how must I play this Lesson, if at the first I had
presented my Sword, within my Adversaries?


Ma. Just as I have been showing you, but you must Disengage with the first
Motion.


Sch. And how am I to play it being without distance?


Ma. Also just as I have been showing you, only you must approach with your
Feint.


Sch. Which is your Contrary to this single Feint at the Head?


Ma. When I perceive my Adversary make use of this Lesson against me, The
Parade and contraryes to the single Feint at the Head.
then I either give him the Thrust upon time, which is just as he is making his
Feint at my Face, then I give him the Thrust at that same very time, and that
same way he should have given it me, or otherwise I Parie him with the second
Parade in Terce, or with the Contre-caveating Parade, by making half a Circle
with it, from my Right to my left side, which at last, will end in the second
Parade in Quart. see Plate 5. fig. 1.


Sch. I understand you very well, but is their no contraries whereby a Man may
win at his Adversary although he make use of these Parades, when this Lesson is
played upon him?


Ma. Yes, for each of these Parades, have a contrary, which you may make use
of, when you perceive your Adversary, make use of any of those two foregoing
Parades against this Lesson.


Sch. I pray you show me them?


Lesson 8. Of the Double Feint at the Head.
Ma. My Contrary to the first Parade, How the double feint at the head is to be
played, which is the contrary to the first parade of the single feint at the
head.
is called the Double Feint, at the Head, and is done thus, when you are within
distance, make your first Motion or Feint at the face as in the foregoing
Lesson, then make your second Motion low toward your Adversaries Belly without
his Sword, and with the Third Motion give in the Thrust without and above your
Adversaries Sword with the Nails of your Hand in Quart, and let your Head,
Hand, and Foot, mark every Motion: also when you make your second Motion
toward your Adversaries Belly, you must hold your Left Hand as I told you when
you was shown to play the single Feint at the Head see Plate 5. figure 2. when
you give in your Thrust above the Sword, you must Quart your Head well, because
you are to give it in with your Nails in Quart.


Sch. Why am I in this Lesson to give in my Thrust without, and above my
Adversaries Sword with my Nails in Quart, whereas in all other Thrusts without
and above the Sword, I am to give in my Thrust, with my Nails in Terce?


Ma. The reason is this, that after you have made your second Motion, toward
your Adversaries Belly, it lies more naturally to your Hand, to give in the
Thrust with your Nails in Quart, then in Terce, and besides, you can give in
your Thrust quicker this way then if you should Aim at the turning of your
Nails in Terce, which if you did, your Body would be open to your Adversary
within your Sword, if he should offer to Disengage and give you a Contre-temps,
but when you give in your thrust with your Nails in Quart, your Body within
your Sword is keept secure, especially if you Quart your Head well, and make
use of your Left Hand as in Plate 5. Figure 2.


Sch. I perceive so indeed, but must I not when I am without distance, or my
Sword presented within my Adversaries, and intends to play this Lesson, observe
your Directions given me in playing the single Feint, at the Head, without
distance?


Ma. Yes, and approach with your first Motion. The Parade of the double Feint
at the Head.



Sch. How is this Contrary to be Paried?


Ma. Either with the Contre caveating Parade, or by answering every Motion, and
so you will fall to Parie him with the first Parade, in Terce, see Plate 4
figure 2.


Sch. Which is your Contrary to the second Parade of the Single Feint at the
Head?


Lesson 9. Of the Feint at the Head, upon the true Parade.
Ma. My Contrary to the second Parade is called the Feint at the Head, How the
Feint at the head, upon the true Parade is to be played, which is the contrary
to the second Parade, of the single Feint at the Head.
upon the true Parade, and is to be done as follows first you make your
Motion at your Adversaries Fa^e, and then if you think that he intends to Parie
you with the second or Contre-caveating parade, go quit round his Sword, by
making as it were a circle with your Sword, and so give him in the Thrust at
his Arm-Pit, as in the Single Feint at the Head, and preserve your self with
your Left Hand, from a Contre temps as you do in it, see Plate 5. Figure 2. And
if you be without distance, approach with your first Motion.


Sch. I understand not what good that going round my Adversaries Sword does


Ma. Do you not see that by so doing you Caveat his sword and shun his parade.


Sch. I now see so indeed?


Ma. You may if you please make one, two or three circles as your Adversary
follows your sword, until you have the opportunity of letting in your Thrust.


Sch. And how is this Contrary paried?


Ma You may either parie it as you do the single Feint at the Head, The Parade
of the Feint at the head, upon the true parade.
or you may make one or two Circles with the Contre-caveating parade, until
you meet with his sword, but if your Adversary still Caveat you, by going
about, then make your Circle the Contrary way, and then certainly you will meet
with his sword, and so prevent the giving in of the Thrust.


Sch. Which is your next Lesson?


Lesson 10. Of the Low Feint.
Ma. My next Lesson is, How the single low Feint, is to be played
the Low Feint, and when you intend to play it, you must remember to have your
sword without your Adversaries, and when it is so, make exactly the second
Motion of the Double Feint, at the Head, and give in the Thrust above as you
did in it, and when you are without distance, approach with the Feint, or first
Motion, and give the Thrust with the second.


Sch. May not a Man make a Double Feint upon this Lesson?


Ma. Yes very well, How the double low Feint is to be played.
by only making the Motion with which you was to give in your Thrust above the
Sword, a Feint, and give in your Thrust as in the single Feint at the Head, at
your Adversaries Arm-Pitt, and when you are without distance, approach with
your first Feint or Motion.


Sch. Which is the Parade of this Lesson?


Ma. You may Parie it either by answering every Motion, The Parade of the Low
Feint.
or otherwise make use of the Contre-caveating Parade.


Sch. Have you a Contrary to this Lesson?


Ma. Yes, you may whon your Adversary is making his Low Feint, take time, The
contraries to the Low Feint.
and give him the Thrust above his Sword, with your Nails in Quart, or you may
Quart, or Volt, which I shall show you hereafter.


Sch. Which is your next Lesson?


Lesson 11. Of Battery.
Ma My next Lesson is called Battery.


Sch. Why has it that name?


Ma. I know no other reason for its having that name, but because it is done
with a kind of Beat. But before I proceed further, I will tell you that there
are many Names of Lessons in this Art, the meaning of which cannot be easily
explain^d in English, to make the name, and the Lesson answer other, and
therefore you need not trouble your self to ask a reason for their having such
Names.


Sch. I shall not; But pray tell me why you ha^ not English Names to them?


Ma. I can give you no other reason then this, that it is like those who
brought this A^ first to this Kingdom, out of other Countries, have still given
the Lessons the proper names, which they had in their own country, and now
those Lessons are so well known by the same names they give them at their first
coming to this Kingdom, that they need no other.


Sch. I think indeed that must he the reason of it, but how must I play this
Battery?


Ma. When you make use of this Lesson (for it is a kind of Beat) you may
present your sword either without, How the single Battery is to be played.
or within your Adversaries, if you present within his sword, and he within
your-measure, you must lie with your sword about half a Foot from his, and when
you intend to play the Lesson, give a little stroke with the Edge, and Feible
of your sword, upon the Edge and Feible of your Adversaries, and in the very
time you give the stroke give a beat with your Foot to surprise him: if he
does not in the least answer your stroke by offering to parie, give him the
Thrust straight home to his Right Pap, as you give in a plain Thrust within the
Sword, remember when you give the stroke, to make the Motion only with the
wrest, for by so doing you keep your Body closs, and does not disorder your
self.


Sch. I understand you, but if he offer to answer my stroke, what must I do in
that ease?


Ma. If you perceive him offer to go to the parade, then slip him, and give him
the thrust without, and above the sword.


Sch. May not a man make a Double Feint upon this Lesson?


Ma. Yes very well.


Sch. How I pray you?


Ma. Thus, How the double Battry is to be played.
when you perceive him going to the Parade, immediately slip, and make your
Feint in the other side, and give in the Thrust upon that side on which you
gave the Beat.


Sch. Must I give a Beat with my Foot, at every Motion?


Ma. You may either give a beat at every Motion you make, or otherwise, only at
the first, just as you please, and when you are without distance, approach with
the first Motion, and give the Beat with the Feible of your Sword, upon the
Feible of your Adversaries.


Sch. And how am I to play this Lesson, my Sword being presented without my
Adversaries?


Ma. You must observe exactly the same rules, your Sword being presented
without your Adversaries, as you do your Sword being presented within it, for
you may play this Lesson upon any side, without disengaging, after you have
presented your Sword.


Sch. Which is your Contrary to this Battery?


Ma. My Contrary is this, you may either Park it with the Contre-caveating
parade, The Parade and contrary to Battery.
or otherwise, you may meet his stroke, and make a half Thrust at him, which
will make him go to the parade, and so you become the Pursuer.


Sch. Which is your next Lesson?


Lesson 12. Of Volt Coupe.
Ma. My next Lesson is Volt Coupe.


Sch. How is it to be played?


Ma. You are to play it thus, when your Sword is presented within your
Adversaries, How the single volt-coupe is to be played.
and he within your measure, make a Feint at his Face, with your Nails in
Quart, and when you do it, give a Beat with your Foot, and Quart your Head
well, and if he answer your Feint by offering to parie, and parieth high, then
give him the Thrust in the Belly with your Nails in Terce, as in the single
Feint at the Head, and hold your Left hand that same way, to defend your self
from a contre-temps as you do in it. see Plate 5. fig. 2.


Sch. But what if be parie Low? How the double volt-coupe is to be played.



Ma. If he parie you with the first parade in Quart and very low, then make use
of the Double Volt-coupe, which is done thus, after you have made your Feint,
instead of giving him the Thrust in the Belly, you Slip his parade, and give
him the Thrust without and above the Sword which resembles something the
Double Battery, and when you are without distance, approach with the first
Motion, or Feint.


Sch. How must I play this Lesson when my sword is presented without my
Adversaries?


Ma. You must first Dis-engage.


Sch. Which is your contrary to this Lesson?


Ma. It is this, you may either Parie it with the second Parade in Quart, or
you may take time, The Parade and contrary to volt-Coupe.
and give him the Thrust, that same very way he was to give it you, just when
he is making the Motion at your face or you may pass with your Thrust, which
shall be shown you when I come to speak of passing.


Sch. You have now described to me very plainly the Feints, which you told me a
little before of: as also their Contraries, I pray you now go on to your other
Lessons, and be as plain in the discribing of them.


Lesson 13. Of Binding.
Ma. I shall, my next Lesson then is the Binding, or securing of your
Adversaties Sword, which certainly is the chiefest Lesson, belonging to this
Art. For a Man that can play it exactly, needs almost no other.


Sch. Because you commend this Lesson so much, I shall hear you discribe it with
the more attentiveness, that I may the better understand it.


Ma. You will do well to do so, for it is the only secure play, belonging to
the small Sword.


Sch. I shall, therefore I pray you, let me hear how it is done?


Ma. Take notice to me then, How a man is to hind, or secure his Adversaries
sword.
when you keep the Quart Guard, the first thing that ever you should do,
should be to secure or Bind your Adversaries sword, which if it be well done,
you will be but in little hazard of being hurt by him, and it is done after
this manner, after your sword is presented either within, or without your
Adversaries, immediately overlapp Six, or seven Inches of your Adversaries
Sword, with 8: or 10: of yours, the doing of with secureth his Sword: this
Binding must always be done with the edge of your Sword, whither it be
presented within or without your Adversaries, and immediately after you have
Bound his Sword, give him the Thrust straight home, keeping a closs Left Foot,
and remember always when you bind, to give a beat with your Foot, and Bind
with a spring, that is to say, press his Sword almost to the Ground, but stay
not with it, but instantly bring up your Sword again, and give in the Thrust.


Sch. I begin to think that when a Man makes use of this Lesson, he indeed
secureth his Adversaries Sword better, and is in less hazard of being bitt by a
Contre-temps, then when be makes use of any of the preceding Lessons.


Ma. That is most certain, otherwise I could not have had the confidence, to
recommend it so earnestly to you.


Sch. Sir I am oblidged to you, for the pain^ you take to inform me; but which
is your parade against this Lesson? The parade against binding.



Ma. The best Parade absolutely against this Lesson, is the Contre-caveating
Parade.


Sch. Which is your contrary to binding?


Ma. My Contrary is Caveating, or Slipping, The contrary to binding.
and you must do it before your Adversary feel your Sword, for your must
understand, that this binding is done by feeling, and not by seeing, as the
Lessons before shown you are.


Sch. I pray you let me understand this way of playing by feeling.


Ma. It is known thus, when you overlap your Adversaries Sword, if he slipp you
before you touch his Sword, (which is the feeling of it.) then your offering to
bind is in vain, because he has prevented it by Caveating your sword, but if
you feel his sword before he Caveat you, then you may safely give home the
thrust, because you did first secure it. Which you knew by your feeling, or
touching of his sword, and which you, nor no man else, could have so well
discerned by your sight.


Sch. But what must I do to prevent my Adversaries slipping of my Sword when I
am going to seeure his?


Ma. You must (if you intend to Bind his Sword within, The contrary to the
caveating or slipping of the Sword.
and he slipp you) rebind his Sword again, either without, by making use of the
first Parade in Terce, or within by making use of the Contre-caveating Parade,
and after you have rebound him, give him home the Thrust, or if you intend to
bind his sword without, and he slipp you, then either rebind him again within
his sword, by making use of the first Parade in Quart, or without his sword, by
making use of the Contre-caveating Parade, and remember that Binding or the
Contre caveating parade, are only the contraries to slipping, and that slipping
is absolutely the best Contrary, either against the Contre caveating-Parade, or
binding.


Sch. I understand you very well, but may I not play a Feint with Binding?


Ma. That you may, for you may make the ordinary single, and double Feint upon
it, which resembles very near the single, and double Feint upon battery, or
you may bind his sword without, and give in your Thrust as you do when you play
the single Feint at the Head.


Sch. When I am without distance and intends to bind my Adversaries sword, must
I not approach with the binding?


Ma. Yes, that you must.


Sch. I find this to be a very useful Lesson, and therefore I will endeavor to
practice it as much as lies in my power, that so I may become master of it.


Ma. If you do that, I am confident you will confess to me, that what I have
said in commendation of it, is far less then it deserves.


Sch. It may be so, but which is your Next Lesson?


Lesson 14. Of Flancanade.
Ma. My next Lesson is called Flancanade.


Sch. How am I to play this Lesson?


Ma. How Flantanade is to be played.
You must play it thus, (for it is a kind of binding) when you have presented
within your Adversaries sword, then over-lapp his sword within with about a
foot of yours upon 8. Inches of his, and give him the Thrust in his right
Flanck, upon the outside of his sword, and beneath it, with your Plat 6
For page: 70
Fig i
One Parieing his Adversaries thrust with the 2d parade in ^orce see page: 30

Fig 2
One giving in: Flanconade see page: ^^

Nails sidewise, and when you give in the Thrust, throw foreward your
Left Hand, turning the palm of it from you, and the points of your Fingers
toward the Ground, and with it keep off your Adversaries Sword from giving you
a Contre-temps in the Belly, see plat: 6: Fig: 2. You must also when you give
in the Thrust, keep your Hilt a good deal lower then your Point, the doing of
which likewise secureth your Adversaries sword; you must also remember when you
overlapp, to do it with the broad side of your blade, and not with the Edge, as
you do when you bind.


Sch. What Contrary have you to this Lesson?


Ma. There are only two Contraries to this Lesson, the first is by Parieing,
The contraries of Flancanade.
and the other by slipping, and the Parade is with the second Parade in Terce,
when your Adversary is giving in the Thrust.


Sch. Which is your contrary to the Parade?


Ma. If I perceive him offer to Parie, The contraries to the Parade and
slipping of Flancanade.
then I give him the thrust without, and above the sword, as in the double
Feint at the Head, and if he slipp my overlapping, then I either make use of
Binding, or the Contrecaveating Parade.


Sch. When I am without distance must I not approach, with the overlapping or
Binding?


Ma. Yes, that you must, and if your Sword be at first presented without your
Adversaries, then before you can play this Lesson, you must first dis-engage.


Sch. Which is your next Lesson?


Lesson 15. Of Vnder-Counter.
Ma. My next Lesson is Vnder-Counter.


Sch. How do you play it?


Ma. It is almost played like Flancanade, How undercounter is to be played.
only whereas in it, after you have overlapped your Adversaries Sword, you give
him the Thrust in his Flank, in this you must go quite under his Sword, turning
your hand in Terce, and bring up his Sword, and give him the Thrust, as you
give it when you play the single Feint at the Head, and hold your left hand
that same very way also, as you do in it.


Sch. Which is your Contrary to this Lesson. The contraries to undercounter.



Ma. There are also only two Contraries against this Lesson, the first is by
Parieing, and is done by making use of the second Parade in Quart, when he has
overlapped your Sword, and is giving in the Thrust, the second is by slipping,
when he is overlapping your Sword, and giving the Thrust without and above his
sword, by De-querting or Quarting off the straight Line, which shall be shown
you in its proper place, and is represented by the second figure of the ninth
plate.


Sch. Which is your contrary to this parade?


Ma. My contrary to this Parade, The contraries to the parade, and slipping of
undercounter.
is the Feint at the Head upon the true parade, and my contrary to his
slipping, is either binding, or the Contre caveating Parade, when you are
without distance, you must also approach with your overlapping, and if at first
your sword be presented without your Adversaries, you must before you offer to
play this Lesson disengage, because this Lesson is surer to be played when your
Sword is presented within your Adversaries, then when it is presented without,
for when you have presented within, you have the Advantage of overlapping your
Adversaries Sword, which in some Manner secureth it, Which you cannot at all
do, when you have presented without, unless you first dis-engage.


Sch. Is this all you have to say of this Lesson?


Ma. Yes.


Sch. Which is your Next then?


Lesson. 16. of Beating.
Ma. My next Lesson is, of the beating of your Adversaries Sword, with one or
both hands.


Sch. I pray you show me how that is done?


Ma. A Man should never offer to make use of this Lesson, until he be almost
Master of this Art, because the doing of it disordereth his Body, besides that
a Man is in hazard of being hitt, if he should miss his Beat, but because you
are curious to know how it is done, I shall satisfy you.


Sch. I pray you do so?


Ma. You must do it after this manner, How a man is to beat his Adversaries
sword, with one, or both hands.
when you intend to make use of this Lesson, you must let your Adversaries
Sword be within yours, and then either only with your right hand, or otherwise,
with your Left, joined to your sword about 8. or 10. Inches from the hilt, as
in Plate 11. Fig. 2. (To do it with the greater Force,) Dis engage, and beat
your Adversaries Sword strongly, and smartly, upon the outside, with the strong
of yours, upon the Feible of his, and do it with a spring, that is when you
beat, let not the point of your sword follow your Adversaries, but keep your
point as near straight toward your Adversary as possible, the doing of which
will less disorder your Body, then if ^e followed your Adversaries sword, for
then your Body would be discovered within your sword, and so you would give
your Adversary, an opportunity to thrust at you, if you happened to miss his
sword.


Sch. I take you up very well, But what signifies this beating?


Ma. It is very useful, for if you beat your Adversaries sword smartly, The
usefullness of beating.
and with a spring, as I before told you, you will hardly ever fail, either to
beat it, (unless he be all the better skilled in this Art, and take the more
notice to himself;) out of his hand, or if he keep his sword very firm, you
may infallibly give him the Thrust, but remember if you intend to give the
Thrust, to give it upon the straight Line, by keeping a Closs Left Foot, unless
you intend to Pass with your beat, as I shall teach your hereafter.


Sch. Well, but can I never make use of this Lesson, but when my Adversary
has presented his sword within mine?


Ma. Yes, that you may very well.


Sch. Show me then upon what occasions, The occasions upon which a Man may make
use of beating.
I should make use of it?


Ma. You may do it upon their occasions, First, if your Adversary offer to
give in a plain Thrust, either within, or, without your sword, then before his
Thrust come home to you, recovering your Body a little, Disengage, and beat his
sword, if he Thrust within your sword, Disengage, and beat his sword, upon the
outside, and if he Thrust without, Disengage, and beat within, and instantly
after the beat, give him home the Thrust. Secondly, if he should offer to make
a Feint, within your sword, then immediately in the time of his making the
Feint, Disengage, and beat his sword, and give him home the Thrust. Thirdly, if
you should offer to make a Feint within his sword, and he should take time, and
Thrust just as you are making your Feint, then instantly Disengage and before
his Thrust be home at you, beat his sword, and give him the Thrust, always
with a closs Left Foot; this I think as good a time for Beating of your
Adversaries sword this way, as can be, but you must be sure not to miss his
sword, for if you do, he is but an ignorant, if he miss you, And therefore, I
think a man should be very Expert in the Parade, and judging of his Adversaries
Measure, before he should offer to make use of this Lesson.


Sch. I am much of your opinion, considering what difficulty there is in
playing of it well.


Ma. I can assure you, the more you practice this Lesson, the more you will
find out the hazard a man is in, if he happen to miss his Adversaries Sword.


Sch. I believe it indeed, but can a Man never play this Lesson without
Disengaging?


Ma. Yes you may Beat your Adversaries Sword, after this same manner, without
Disengaging, when he offers to give in a plain Thrust, without your Sword,
but then your Beat has not such a spring with it, to cause him part with his
Sword, as when he offers to Thrust, either without or within your Sword, and
you Disengage, and Beat upon that time, which certainly is the best.


Sch. You are in the right now when I consider it. But is their no other way,
to Beat the sword, Two other ways of beating the sword out of a Man's hand.
to cause it go out of my Adversaries Hand?


Ma. Yes, there are yet two ways which I have not as yet shown you?


Sch. I pray you show me them?


Ma. The first way then is done thus, when your Adversary has his sword
presented within yours, The 1. way of beating your Adversaries sword out of his
hand.
then on a sudden give a smart Beat, with the strong and edge of your sword,
upon the Feible, and outter edge of his, and let your Beat be very strong, and
quick.


Sch Which is your second way?


Ma. The second way is done by a twist, and is just done as you play
under-counter, only you must do it with a spring, The 2. way.
by throwing of your point smartly up toward your Adversaries left side?


Sch. What contraries have you to this Beating of the sword?


Ma. A man must of necessity either slipp the Beat, The contraries to beating.
or otherwise hold his Sword so fast, that his Adversary Beat it not out of his
Hand. I have no other contraries against it, but the slipping is absolutely the
best, you must also remember that you can never make use of Beating, but when
you are within distance.


Sch. I shall, but is this all you have to say of the Beating of the sword?


Ma. Yes.


Sch. Which is your next Lesson then?


Lesson 17. Of Passing.
Ma. My next Lesson is of Passing, or making of a pass.


Sch. Show me how I am to do that?


Ma. Before I show you the way of doing it, What is properly called a Pass.
you must know that there are two kinds of Passes, the first kind, (and that
which most properly deserves the name of a Pass) is that with which a man
goes quite by, and behind his Adversary, the second kind which is called a
Pass, (but improperly,) is that with which a Man goes only closs to his
Adversary, and when he is closs at him commands his Sword, and this most
properly is called an enclosing or commanding of your Adversaries Sword, and
shall be the next Lesson I shall show you.


Sch. Show me then the way of making a true Pass?


Ma. The true Pass is done by running quite by your Adversaries right side
until you be behind him, How a Man is to pass.
and when you are running by, give him the Thrust at his right pap, if you give
him the Thrust above the Sword but if you give it him below at his Arm Pit,
then you must in the time of you passing keep your head that same very way as
you do when you play the single Feint (...) the Head, and that to preserve your
Fa^ from a blow, or join your left hand (...) your Sword, about half a Foot
from the point, and give him the thrust the very sam^ way as it is represented
by the 2d: figure o^ the seventh plate. And when you think yo^ are far enough
past your Adversary (which is that if he should turn about to you, yo^ would be
out of his measure,) You mu^ then turn about, and stand to your ow^ defense
again, and remember always when you intend to pass, to go quite through wit^
it. And not (if you should chance not (...) take the time exactly,) to stop in
the middle and offer to recover your Body. For the^ is far less hazard in going
foreward, a^ though you have not taken the occasion altogether so exactly as
you should, the^ to offer to recover your self.


Sch. Sir I think there is a great deal of reason for what you say, for when a
man offers to pas^ it surpriseth his Adversary, if he go quite through with
it, although he should miss the giving (...) the Thrust, but when a man
offers to pass, an^ does it not freely, it both disordereth himself Plat 7
For page: 80
Fig i
One receiving a thrust after his adversary has beat his sword see page: 80.

Fig 2
One passing below the sword after a beat given with both his hands see page: 80.

and encourages his Adversary to pursue him the brisklyer upon the bak of it,
but I pray you, Sir, upon what occasions am I to make use of this passing?


Ma. You may Pass upon the very same occasions that you can beat your
Adversaries sword. The occasions upon which a Man may pass.
(I mean not the two last ways of beating of it.) But then you must first
beat, and immediately after your beat, Pass, or you may pass without beating,
with the single Feint at the Head, Volt-coupe, and Vnder-counter, those are the
best times which I know for Passing, but you will by frequent practice know all
the occasions, upon which you may either Beat, or Pass, according to your
pleasure.


Sch. Which is your contrary to passing?


Ma. If your Adversary make use of Passing after his beat, The contraries to
passing
then prevent his Passing by using the contrary to beating, for by preventing
his beating, you prevent his passing after his beat, but if he offer to pass
upon any other occasion, then the best contraries I know, are either to parie
him, or otherwise to break his Measure, or go off the straight Line, as shall
be taught you here. after.


Sch. Which is your next Lesson?


Lesson 18. of Commanding the Sword.
Ma. I told you before that my next Lesson should be of Enclosing, or
commanding your Adversaries Sword.


Sch. Which way do you that.


Ma. There are two kinds of Enclosing, the first kind is done, by running close
to your Adversary, How the first kind of enclosing as it were, with half a
pass is to be done.
as it were with half a Pass. Which I before said was improperly called a Pass,
the second kind is done without running, Now I shall begin with the Enclosing,
with half a Pass as it were, and show you First how that is done, afterward I
shall go to the second kind, and also show you the occasions you are to take to
do it: as for the first kind then it is done thus, when you intend to Command
your Adversaries sword, or enclose with him, you must run close to his right
side, and take hold of the Hilt of his Sword, and not of his Arm, (as Ignorants
do,) so that their Adversary to be in a manner in equal terms with them again,
has nothing to do but to change his Sword, from his right hand to his Left,
and then I pray you for what serves the securing of the hand, seeing the Sword
is not secured.


Sch. Certainly a man should always endeavor to secure the Sword rather as
the Arm, but I think this a very dangerous kind of Lesson, for if I should run
so upon my Adversary as you tell me, be has no more to do, but to catch me
upon the point of his Sword.


Ma. There will be no fear of that, if you but observe the directions which I
shall give you.


Sch. Sir to the outmost of my power I shall, pray let me hear them?


Ma. They are these then which follow, The ways a man is to take for to
enclose with half a pass.
first when you intend to Command or Enclose this way, you must try if your
Adversary answers Feints, if he do not answer them, then it will be hard to
enclose with him this way, but if he do Answer and offers to go to the
Parade, then immediately Enclose with a plain thrust within his sword, at his
belly, Way first.
by turning the point of your sword, toward the right side of his Belly, for
the better resisting of his Parade if he should meet with your sword, before
that you hitt him, and when you are running to give your Thrust, let your Nails
be turned in Terce. Secondly, you may Enclose with an ordinary single, Way 2.
or double Feint: Thirdly you may enclose the same way, Way 3
with Volt-Coupe. Fourthly you may also Enclose with half a Pass, Way 4.
when you have secured your Adversaries sword without, and when you Pass,
carry the point of your sword, toward your Adversaries Left pap, as when you
give in the Thrust within the sword, you was to carry it toward the right side
of his belly, and that also for the better resisting of his Parade, and when
you Enclose with this thrust without the sword, carry your hilt low, to prevent
his slipping of your sword, and giving you the Thrust, when you are running to
Enclose.


Sch. I understand you, but yet I see that a man in making use of this kind of
enclosing, may be in a great deal of bazard, if he be not all the Experter in
this Art.


Ma. Sir I tell you again that a Man should never offer to play any of their
Difficult Lessons, when he is assaulting, until by practice upon a Masters
breast, he has become Master of them.


Sch. I see so indeed, but are there no ways to prevent this kind of
enclosing?


Ma. Yes that there are.


Sch. I would very gladly know them?


Ma. You may then prevent your Adversaries Commanding of your sword after this
kind, as follows, first then, The contrary to the First, Second, and Third
ways of enclosing with half a pass as it were.
if your Adversary makes use of the First, Second, or Third ways, you may
shun his Commanding, by throwing back your right Foot, and when you do it,
Parie his Pass with the second parade in Terce.

But secondly, if he make use of the Fourth way, then you may prevent his
Commanding Three ways, First you may when he is Passing, if he has not
secured your sword all the better, throw back your right Leg, The contraries
to the Fourth way of enclosing, with half a pass as it were.
and Parie his Pass with the First Parade in Terce, and in the mean time you
may with your left hand secure his sword, Secondly, if he has win the Feible
of your sword, so that you cannot Parie him with the First Parade in Terce,
then without moving your right Foot, Parie him with the second Parade in Terce,
which I show you in the Parade in page 31 if your Adversary should Thrust
without, and above the sword. Thirdly, you may prevent him by (just as he is
going to run) giving him the thrust, by de-quarting, or quarting off the
straight Line, which shall be shown you in its proper place, and so I go on to
the second kind of enclosing, which I told you of.


Sch. How am I to enclose after this second kind?


Ma. There are several occasions in which a man may make use of this Second
kind of enclosing, The several occasions in which a man may use the second kind
of commanding. Occasion 1.
which is done without running, as first if your Adversary keep a high point
and your sword be presented without his, and he within your measure; then with
the Fort of your sword, and your Naills turned upwards from you, put up the
point of his sword, and keeping your right soot close, throw forward your left
almost close to your Adversaries right Foot, and then secure his sword, as I
have before told you. Secondly, if your Adversary keep a low point, Occasion 2.
then you may overcross his sword, with your strong upon his weak, and so
pressing down the point of his sword, near the ground, throw forward your left
hand, and take hold of his sword with it, just at the hilt, and so wrest it out
of his hand, when you make use of this occasion, you must keep a close left
Foot. Occasion 3.
Thirdly, when your Adversary gives in a Thrust, within your sword, parie him
with the first parade in Quart, and take hold of his sword that same very way
you was to do it before. Occasion 4.
Fourthly, when your Adversary gives in a Thrust at you, without your sword,
immediately Parie him with the first Parade in Terce, and in the very time of
your Parade, throw your left Foot Plat. 8
For page 86
Fig i
One commanding his Adversaries sword by taking the fifth occasion see page: 87

Fig 2
One commanded by the fifth occasion

forward near to his right, and then secure his sword, when you do this, you
must keep a close Right Foot, and remember always, after you have taken hold
of your Adversaries sword, to draw back your right Leg, and Arm, and hold your
swords point to his Breast, as in Plat. 8. Fig. 1. So that if he do not
immediately yield you his sword, Occasion 5
you may either give him the Thrust, or spare him, as you please. Fifthly, you
may Command your Adversaries sword after this fashion, which is a very good
time for Commanding, and that is immediately after you have given in a Thrust
without the sword, and that your Adversary has paried it, you must then
immediately, leap half about to the right, changing your Feet, by putting the
Left where the Right was, and the right where the Left was, and in the very
time you are changing your Feet, bring your sword which was under your
Adversaries, quite over your head, and in the mean time you do this, throw your
left arm over your Adversaries sword and so secure it, under your Left arm as
in Plat. 8. Fig. 1. The changing of your Feet, bringing your sword over your
head, and securing of your Adversaries sword under your Arm must be all done
together, otherwise, the offering to take this occasion of Commanding, will
signify nothing. I now go to show you, how you are to prevent a man's taking
of these occasions to Enclose with you?


Sch. Pray do so, for I was just going to desire it of you.


Ma. You may then prevent your Adverlaries Commanding of your sword, How to
prevent the first occasion for enclosing.
as follows; first if your Adversary should make use of the first occasion,
you may shun his Commanding, by throwing back your right Foot, and in the time
you throw it back, give him a blow upon the Left hand; this must be done, just
as he is throwing in his Left Foot to command or you may, when you perceive him
offer to Command, leap quite out of his measure. How to prevent the second
occasion for enclosing.
Secondly, if your Adversary make use of the second occasion of Commanding,
you may shun him thus, immediately when he has overcrossed your Sword, and you
perceive him bringing foreward his left Hand to secure yours, either with a
leap half about to the right, change your Feet, by putting the left, where the
right was, and the right where the left was, and instantly take hold of his
Sword, and so long as you keep it in your hand, hold the point of yours to his
Breast, you may perceive the advanta^e, of making use of this contrary,
providing you take the right time, for if you do it right, you not only shun
his Commanding of you, but you at one time both prevent his enclosing with you,
and you become the pursuer, by Commanding of his Sword, whereas he should have
Commanded yours, but as I said before, you must be sure, to take the right
time, otherwise you will be disappointed.


Sch. But what is to be done, if he should catch hold of my Sword, before that
I command his?


Ma. Truly, if that happen you must either yield him your sword, or if you
will not do that, but rather run the hazard of receiving a Thrust, you must
instantly when you find that your sword is secured, turn your Hand in Terce,
and strive to secure his sword likewise, before that he can get his sword free
of you to harm you, but if you take this method, you must do it very quickly.


Sch. But although I turn my hand in Terce, may not my Adversary force my sword
from me, before that I can take hold of his?


Ma. Yes that he may, by only (when you have turned your hand,) drawing your
sword sidewise out of it, by raising of your Point, and pressing down your Hilt.


Sch. I understand all you say very well, but only that of taking the right
time I understand not.


Ma. I shall explain it to you then, The taking of right time explained.
there are two times, viz. A right and a wrong, for the wrong I have nothing to
do with it in this place, because most commonly all people take it, but to take
the right time, is that which at this time I am to explain to you, and show you
upon what occasions a man is said to take it, there are then two occasions in
which a man is said to take the right time, Occasion 1. of taking right time.
first, when a man has an opportunity of playing of a Lesson, commanding, or
giving in a Thrust, and neglects not that occasion, then he is said to take
the right time. Occasion 2. of taking right time.
The second is when a man preventeth his Adversary, by playing the same or the
like Lesson upon his Adversary, which his Adversary designed to play upon him,
and to make use of this second occasion right, a man must be sure to be before
his Adversary, that is to say, whatever Lesson he designs to prevent his
Adversaries Lesson with, he must have it played before his Adversary has
played his, otherwise it will be a Contre-temps, as for example, if your
Adversary should offer to give you in a Plain Thrust, and you in the very time
of his giving of it in, should give him a plain Thrust, before that his be home
at you, by Quarting your head, and shoulders upon the straight Line; then I say
you are Before him, because although he pursued first, yet you prevented him*
and was Before him, in so far as your Thrust, was sooner home at him, then his
at you, which had it not been so, it would have been a Contre-temps, because
you would have been hitt, had you not Quarted all the better upon the straight
Line; In like manner if a man should offer to command your sword, by taking the
second occasion, and you should offer to prevent him, by the contrary to it,
which I just before show you, I say, you must then have your Contrary played,
and his sword Commanded, before that he has yours Commanded, otherwise you
have neither taken the right time nor been Before him, and therefore your
endeavoring to prevent him signified nothing. I think I have now sufficiently
Explained to you, what the taking of the right time is.


Sch. You have so Sir and I understand you very well, but I pray you go on in
what you was saying, Concerning the shuning of my Adversaries commanding my
sword.


Ma. I shall, Thirdly then, if your Adversary should take the Third occasion
you may prevent him thus, How to prevent the third occasion for enclosing.
either by recovering of your Body, before that he catch hold of your sword, or
if he do catch hold of it before that you can recover your Body, you must then
Instantly turn your hand in Terce, and before that he can have the time either
to disarme you, or to get his sword free of you to command you, throw in your
left foot and command his sword likewise, and then he that is strongest must
carry it.

Fourthly, if your Adversary take the fourth occasion for Commanding, How to
prevent the fourth occasion for enclosing.
you may either prevent him, by making use of the 5th occasion as in Plat 8.
fig. 1. and so you command his sword, whereas he should have commanded yours,
or you may when he is throwing in his left foot, and going to take hold of your
sword, immediately throw your Left Foot behind you, toward your Adversary,
and upon it, as a Center make a whole turn to the Left, and in the time you are
turning, clapp the Feible of your sword, under your Left Arm Pit, and so you
both shun his Commanding of your sword, and you give him the Thrust, with your
sword being placed as I told you, in his Left shoulder as you are turning, if
you do this contrary right, the turn that you make upon your left Foot, will
put you quite behind your Adversary, and as I said in the very turning, you
give him the Thrust, and after you have given it him, you must jump out of his
Measure, and then stand to your Guard again, By this contrary you may see how
ridiculous some people are, in thinking that a Man cannot be fairly wouned in
the back, I am sure, there is no rational Man that will deny the faireness of
this Thrust, and yet you see it is given at your Adversaries back.


Sch. I see so indeed, and till now, I thought so my self, but now I see the
contrary both of this, and other things, which before I could not, because of
my Ignorance, but I think this turning? pretty kind of contrary.


Ma. It is so, but you would take heed that you play it not to your knowledge,
upon any who know the contrary to it, for if you do, it is ten to one, but you
meet with a reward, for your folly.


Sch. Why so, is their any hazard, in this turning?


Ma. Yes that there is, The contrary to the preven^ng of The 4. occasion for
enclosing by turning.
for if your Adversary should but thrust you off him with his Left Hand upon
your left shoulder when you are turning, he may either certainly give you the
thrust in the Back, or cause you fall if he thrust you off him with a little
force, and in the mean time trip you with his left Foot.


Sch. I see now indeed that there is more hazard in the making use of this
turning, then at first I thought there was.


Ma. Sir if you were not convinced with the reasons I give you, How to preven
the 5. occasion for enclosing.
that what I say is right, I would think my labor lost: But to the purpose, if
your Adversary should offer to command your sword, by taking the Fifth occasion
for Enclosing, you may then make use of the contrary to the First occasion, but
you must do it very quickly, otherwise you will not be Before him, and so he
will have you commanded, before that you could prevent him with your contrary.


Sch. These are all the contraries to the several occasions a man can have to
enclose, or command, are they not?


Ma. Yes, they are all which I think Necessary to show you, and therefore I
will proceed to my next Lesson.


Sch. Concerning what is it?


Lesson 19. Of Breaking of Measure.
Ma. It is of Breaking of Measure, which is a thing as Necessary to be
understood, as any Lesson I have as yet shown you, and it shows a Man's art
very much, if he do it neatly.


Sch. I pray you show me then how it is done?


Ma. It is done thus, How a man is to judge his Adversaries distance, or
Measure.
when you perceive your Adversary thrusting at you, and you are not very
certain of the Parade, then Break his measure, or make his thrust short of you,
by either stepping a Foot, or half a foot back, with the single stepp, for if
you Judge your Adversaries distance or measure well, half a foot will Break his
measure as well as ten Else: You are to Judge the distance your Adversary is
from you by First considering the Distance his right Foot is from you, Secondly
the Distance that there is betwixt his Feet. Now you must observe their two
Directions for although his right Foot be at a reasonable distance from you,
yet if his Feet be near to other, then he will reach you as far of, as if his
right Foot had been nearer to you, and his Feet at a greater Distance, because
the nearer that his Feet are together, the farther will his ^orge reach: this
needs no demonstration if you will but seriously consider it. So now in Judging
of Distance, there are two things to be observed, first the Distance his right
Foot is from you, Secondly, the distance betwixt his Feet, if you observe their
two Directions you cannot but judge your Adversaries distance exactly, which is
a chief point, in the Art of the small Sword, but as I said, How a manis to
break his Adversaries measure.
after you have Judged it, then to break it, you must when he is thrusting
break it according to the Distance you think he is from you, by either throwing
your Body backwards, and drawing your right foot a little to your left, which
you must keep fast, this way of breaking of measure, is sore for ones back, and
is not used, but when your Adversaries Thrust would not go far by you; or you
may, as I told you before, go back half a foot, a foot, o^ as you Judge your
Adversaries Distance, with the single stepp. This is the most ordinary, and, in
my opinion, the best way of breaking of measure; or you may break your
Adversaries measure, by Jumping backwards from him upon the straight line, but
this way of breaking of measure is not much made use of, except just after you
have given in a thrust your self, because it hinders extremely your
Adversaries pursuit upon the respost, and therefore is a great deal more proper
to be used upon that occasion, then upon any other, for in the ordinary
breaking of Measure, if people should jump always so far out of their
Adversaries reach, people would have really ground to cry out against the
breaking of Measure, for it would indeed look too like yielding of ground,
which I am very far against, it looking some what like cowardliness, but upon
the contrary, I am altogether for Judging of distance, and breaking of
Measure. For I never account a Man a complete Sword Man, until he both know
how to Judge distance, and break Measure, and also puts them in practice,
but I am altogether against yielding ground, unless it be done out of a good
design which no Coward can do.


Sch. Sir this is an extraordinary fine Lesson you have been explaining to me,
and I am very much convinced of the usefulness of it.


Ma. Sir, people may talk what they please of breaking of Measure, but I assure
you, it shows a Man's art, as much as any thing in all this art I have been
explaining to you.


Sch. Really it does so, and upon that aocount, I will endeavor to become
Master of it, but which is your next Lesson?


Lesson 20. Of Redoubling of Thrusts.
Ma. It is of Redoubling of Thrusts, and Gathering up of your left Foot, which
is to be done thus, after you have let in your Thrust, and that your Adversary
has broken your Measure, How a man is to Redouble his Thrust, which is the
contrary to the breaking of Measure.
and you at your Elonge, keeping your right Foot closs, draw your left so near
to it, that you can either approach, or make another Elonge, just as you
please, and when you Redouble or give in another Thrust, First Bind, for it is
the securest way, and then give in your Thrust, it you can play this Lesson
well, you may pursue your Adversary, by this Redoubling, (although he should
break your Measure) half a pair or more according to your strength, and when
you Redouble, remember as a general rule, always either to Beat, or Bind your
Adversaries sword, before you offer to give the Thrust, for it will preserve
you from a great many Contretemps.


Sch. I think this a very useful Lesson, for I perceive it is just the contrary
to retireing, or breaking of measure, which is a great preventer of all
thrusts.


Ma. It is so, and if you learn not to do this Redoubling exactly, your
Adversary may many a time shun your thrust, which (had you known how to
Redouble) he might certainly have gotten.


Sch. I perceive so indeed, but show me your next Lesson?


Lesson 21. Of raising or gathering up of the sword.
Ma. How a man is to raise, or gather up, his Adversaries sword, when the point
of it is sloping toward the ground.
My next Lesson is of Raising or Gathering up of your Adversaries sword, and I
do it thus, when my Adversary either presents his sword, with a very low
point, so that I cannot easily bind it, or that he makes use of the Quart
Guard, with a sloping point near to the Ground, then I present my sword within
his, and brings his up with the edge of my sword, not far from his point, and
when I have raised it as high as my middle then I bind him in the outside, and
so I give him the thrust, either straight home without his sword, or I make a
Feint without, and give the thrust within, you must know that this raising and
binding of my Adversaries sword, is done with two Motions, with the first I
bring up his sword, and with the second I Bind, when you are without distance,
you must approach with the raising or gathering up of the sword,


Sch. The contrary to the gather, ing up of the sword.
Is this all you have to say of this Lesson?


Ma. Yes, only that the contrary to it, is slipping.


Sch. Which is your next Lesson?


Lesson 22. Of Quarting and Volting.
Ma. My next and last Lesson is called Quarting and Volting, and is to be
played off the straight line.


Sch. I entreat you show me how this lesson is to be played?


Ma. You must play it after this manner, How a man is either to Quart or volt,
or to Quart and Volt immediately after other, as also the times in which a man
may make use of them.
you may either only Quart, or Volt, or Quart and Volt immediately after other,
if you only Quart, you must when your Adversary offers to bind your sword
without, immediately before he touch your sword, give him the thrust, by
slipping him, and in the very time you slipp him, throw your left foot behind
you off the straight line backwards toward your adversary, and give him the
thrust at his breast, by keeping your right leg close and stretched, this is
called Dequarting or Quarting off the straight line; see plat: 9. fig: 2. and
if you intend to Volt, you may either take the same very time, or when he is
going to Bind you within, but this time is not so safe as the former, or you
may Volt after you have Bound his sword, this is a very good time, but
whatsoever time you take, you must Volt, or leap with both your feet in the Air
at once, quite by your Adversaries left shoulder, and in the time you Volt,
Quart your head well, to prevent a Contre-temps, and give him the thrust at his
left pap, and Volt quite out of his Measure, and then stand to your Guard
again, and remember when you either Quart or Volt, always to make use of your
left hand for fear of a Contre-temps. But if you intend to Quart, and Volt
immediately after other; then you must first quart as I have shown you, but give
not your thrust with your quarting, and afterward volt, I say you must first
quart, and secure his sword within, by binding in the very time you quart, and
immediately after give him the thrust at his left Pap, by volting as I told you,
now the properest time, of Quarting, and volting, immediately after other, is
when your Adversary gives in a thrust within your Sword, or when he goes to
bind your Sword without, then immediately you Quart, and with the Quarting
secureth and Parieth his thrust as it were, although the Quarting of it self
shuneth it sufficiently, yet it is far surer first to secure his Sword, in the
time you Quart, and then with your volt you give the thrust, as I before show
you.


Sch I see this is a difficult Lesson, and should not be played, but when one
has a very fair opportunity for in playing of it, a man throws his body
wholly open to his Adversary.


Ma Sir your observation is good, and I am glad to see you reflect upon the
security, and hazard a man may be in when he makes use of such, and such a
lesson, for it is a great sign that you will reap advantage, from what I have
at present been teaching you.


Sch. I pray you if you have a Contrary to this Quarting and Volting, show me
it?


Ma. There is no other contrary to this Lesson, The contrary to quarting and
volting.
but when you perceive that your Adversary is either going to quart, or Volt,
to Rebind him without his sword, by making use of the contre caveating Parade,
and give him the Thrust straight home, or you may take time and Volt upon him.


Sch. And are you now Sir at an end with your Lessons?


Ma. Yes.


Sch. But have you no more to say, before you go on to the pursuing and
defending of the several Guards?


Ma. No, for although there might be a great deal more said, yet I think what I
have taught you, sufficient to make you a Master of this Art, providing you
practice it exactly, for the Lessons which I have shown you, are those upon
which this Art depends, so that a Man that can once play them exactlie, in my
opinion needs no other, besides that a Man when once he knows the common
grounds, may according to his own fancy, invent very good Lessons, together
with their contraries, for his own practice, for all Lessons that can be
invented, depend upon their that I have been showing you.


Sch. Sir I think there is a great deal of reason for what you say, but now let
us go to the several Guards, and see how they must be pursued and defended


CHAP. V. How the several Guards, are to be keept, pursued, and defended, and
First, Of the Quart Guard with a straight point.
Ma. I shall begin then with the quart guard with a straight point, for a man
that can pursue, or defend well upon that Guard, will easily pursue, or defend,
upon any of the rest: Now because I have shown you already in the beginning of
our discourse, in Page 16. and 17. How this Guard was to be keept, I shall not
in this place trouble you with the repetition of it, but shall refer you to the
Page and Plate wherein it is described. viz. Page 16. and Plat. 2. Fig. 1. or
2. but for my own part I prefer the second figure of the same Plate far
before the first but you may take your choice of either.


Sch. You say well Sir, but how am I to pursue this Quart Guard with a straight
point? How the Quart Guard, with a straight point, is to be Pursued.



Ma. Before I show you how to pursue it particularly, you must know that all
Guards as well as this, are Generally pursued by ^^ther, Falsefying, Binding,
Bearing, or a Plain Thrust, now if you intend to pursue your Adversary, he
keeping this Quart Guard, with a straight point, you may first try him with
Feints, and if you perceive that he answer your Feints, then you need make use
of no other Lesson against him, but if he do not answer your ordinary single,
and Double Feints, ^hen try him with your other Feints, viz, the ^ingle, and
Double Feint at the head, Battery ^ngle, and Double, or volt-coupe, and if you
^e that none of those Lessons will have ^flect; the second pursuit you must
make ^se of, must be by Binding of his sword, for (...) you can do that well,
you will force Thrusts upon him, whereas by the for^er, you strive first to
deceive him, and ^en to give him the Thrust, Thirdly you ^ay pursue him by
striking of his sword, ^ith one, or both your Hands, and either ^ive him the
Thrust with a closs left Foot, (...) if you see a fit oppurtunity Pass
immedi^ly after your stroke, and either give him the ^hrust, or Command him:
Fourthly, if he ^pp you when you are either going to Bind, or Beat his sword,
then immediately Rebind him by making use of the Contre-caveating-Parade,
Fifthly, you may try him with all sorts of Lessons, and what Lesso^s you find
have most effect, those use most frequently against him, if he Break your
Measure, then Redouble your Thrust again, and wha^ ever Lesson you design to
play upon him, by any means remember to have a care that he take not time upon
it, you would mind this Rule well, for it is of great importance to a sword
Man, I might fill a Volume with the description of Lessons with their
contraries together with their contraries, as also with the contraries of those
contraries, all which would in a manner signify nothing to you^ but to
Embarasse your Judgment. Therefore I think what I have said to you, concerning
the Pursuit of this Guard sufficient seeing you understand all the Lessons, and
may make use of any of them as you think fit.


Sch. I think Sir you are in the right, f^^ if a Man once know the grounds, he
may easi^^ of himself invent Lessons, to win at, and cros^ his Adversary.


Ma. It Is very true he may so, and it (...) upon that account, I have cut my
discourse so short, thinking any more concerning the Pursuit of this Guard
altogether unnecessary.


Sch. But how am I to defend my self, if my Adversary should pursue me, I
keeping this Guard?


Ma. You must Defend your self two ways, either by parieing, How a man is to
Defend himself upon the Quart Gurad with a straight point.
or by using contraries to the Lessons your Adversary plays upon you, if you
intend to Defend your self by parieing, which certainly is the best way, when
once a Man is Master of it, then use any of the five Parades I show you in the
Defensive part according to your discretion, and Judgment, but if you intend to
use Contraries, then make use of the Contraries which belongs to the Lessons
you Judge your Adversary is to play upon you, the which Contraries you know,
all along, I have set down, immediately after the Lessons they belong to,
and therefore, I think a repetition of them in this place, altogether
unnecessarie, seeing it is but your pains to look back to the pages, where they
are set down, and that you may make use of them according to your Judgment,
and pleasure.


Sch. It is so, but which is your next Guard?


Secondly Of the Quart Guard, with the point sloping near to the ground.
Ma. My second Guard, How the Quart Guard, with a sloping point, is to be keept.
is the Quart Guard, with a sloping point, and is to be keept thus, you must
stand a great deal streighter then you did in the Quart Guard, with a straight
point, and you must slop the point of your sword within half a Foot of the
ground, or nearer if you please, your Hilt as low as your fore pocket, with a
bent Arm, and your Nails betwixt Quart, and Terce, you are in this Guard to
make use of your left Hand, and therefore to make use of it with the more case,
it will be fit to advance your left shoulder, almost as far forward as your
right, and keep in your belly well, and out your breast, and hold your left
Hand, as high as your Head, just as one does that puteth up his Hand, to save
the Sun from his Face, but whereas he holds his closs to his brow, yours must
be held somewhat more then half a Foot from it, this is a very Open Guard, but
yet very surprising to those who know not how to Pursue it. See Plat. 11. Fig.
1.


Sch. How is it to be pursued?


Ma. There are only Four ways of pursuing this Guard, the First is by
Raising, How the Quart Guard, with a Low point, is to be Pursued and defended.
or Gathering up of your Adversaries sword, as is shown you in Lesson the 21.
the Second is by striking at his sword, and making half Thrusts at his Body,
and so make him doubtful when you will give in the Thrust, and when you think
you have an opportunity, then give it home, and always when you Pursue this
Guard, have your left hand in readiness to Parie your Adversaries thrust, if he
should thrust just as you at thrusting; for that is only his design, to thrust
when you are thrusting, and to Parie your thrust with his left hand; or
sometimes with his sword, just as he pleases, Which is all the defense upon
this Guard: Thirdly you may also after you Beat at his sword, give a Stroke at
his left hand, and see if you can force him by so doing to take himself to
another Guard, or Fourthly, you may Volt, and give him the thrust in the time
of your Volting, which if neatly done, will easily surprise him; this is all
the Pursuit, and Defense, can be used upon this Guard.


Sch Which is your next Guard?


Thirdly, Of the Terce Guard, with the Point higher then the Hilt.
Ma. My Third Guard, is the Terce Guard with the point higher then the Hilt,
How the Terce Guard, with the point, higher then the Hilt, is to be kept.
and is to be keept thus: you must hold your Nails in Terce, and your hand some
lower then in the Quart Guard, with a straight point, the point of your Sword
must be presented toward your Adversaries left shoulder (...) he be a tall
man, but if little, then to his left eye, you must keep your arm a little
bent, as in the Quart Guard, for the better pursuing: you are also to lean a
little forward with your body, as in the foregoing Guard and to make use of
your left hand for a Parade, but it must be held lower then you hold it in the
foregoing Guard, the rest o^ your body must be keept after the same manner,
as in the Quart Guard, with (...) straight point. See Plat. 10: fig: 1.


Sch How is this Guard to be pursued? How the Terce Guard, with the point
higher then the Hilt is to be Pursued and Defended.



Ma It is to be pursued either with striking Binding, Volting, or Passing, for
your feint upon this Guard will signify nothing, i^ your Adversary understand
it, for, as i^ Plat i0
For page ii0
Fig i
One keeping the terce guard with the point a little higher then the hilt see
page: ii0

Fig 2
One keeping the Terce guard with a sloping point see page: ii0

^one of the Guards a man is to answer feints, so far less in this; for the
right Defense of this Guard is to secure your self without your ^word, which
you do by presenting your ^oint to your Adversaries left shoulder, or ^ye, so
that your body is quite covered ^itheut your sword, and seeing you are by ^o
means to Answer his Feints, but to keep your self secured upon that side, you
are ^hen certain, that if he Thrust he must of necessity Thrust within your
sword, and ^hen you are to Parie him with your left Hand, and give him the
Thrust upon the Respost; or, you may, if you please, Parie with your Sword, or
take time, for seeing you are not to answer his Feints, you may the easilier
judge of the coming ^n of his Thrusts; and therefore may either make use of
Sword, or hand, as you think fit. Now seeing Feints, against this Guard,
signify nothing, therefore it must be pursued, according to your fancy, by
Binding, or Beating, you may also if you please, try your Adversary with
Feints, and if he answer them, they may do well enough, but then it is a
certain sign, that he understands not the Defense of this Guard, as he
should, but if your Adversary should pursue you upon this Guard, the most
proper way to defend your sel^ upon it, is to make use of your left hand
although it be left to your choice, either to make use of it, of your sword, or
any other Contrary you think fit, this is all (...) think needful to say of
this Guard.


Sch. Which is your fourth Guard?


Fourthly, Of the Terce Guard, with the point Lower then the Hilt.
Ma. My Fourth Guard is the Terce Guard, with the point lower then the Hilt,
How the Terce Guard with the point Lower then the Hilt, is to be kept, Pursued,
and Defended.
and is just Kept with your body in that posture, as when you give in the
Thrust, when you play the single Feint at the Head, but only your Feet must be
at their just distance, and not as when you are at your full Elonge, and your
left hand must be also just held after that same manner, as it is held when you
play that Lesson, but your swords point must be presented toward your
Adversaries left side, and make use of your left hand, for a Parade: it is to
be pursued and defended, just as the preceding Terce Guard, only when you
defend it, you need not make so much use of your left Hand, as in the
foregoing, but more of your sword, you may make use of either, according to
your Fancy. See Plat. 10. Fig. 2.


Sch. Which is your Fifth Guard?


Fifthly, Of a Guard, in which a Man is to hold his sword, with both hands.
Ma. To my Fifth and last Guard I have no proper Name, How the 5. kind of
Guard, is to be keept, pursued, and defended.
but as I told you in the beginning of this Treatise, Page-15-you are to hold
your sword with both your hands, and you are to do it thus, keep your body
Exactlie in the posture of the Quart Guard, with a straight point, but for your
sword, you are to join your left hand to it, about 8. or 10. Inches from the
Hilt, and hold the Blade betwixt your formest finger and thumb, just as you do,
when you are going to beat your Adversaries sword with both hands, as in page
7, and Plat. 11. Fig. 2. and secure your self within your sword immediately when
you present it, that is, present your swords point toward your Adversaries
right thigh, and a thought without it, with your point sloping, a little
toward the ground For to Pursue this Guard, you must First strive to take away
your Adversaries left hand, by striking at it, and immediately after the stroke,
offer to Thrust at his body, and so make him doubtful when you will give your
Thrust: the Pursuit of this Guard, is somewhat like the Pursuit of the Quart
Guard, with a sloping point; you may try him with Feints, but if he understand
the Defense of this Guard as he should, they will signify nothing, because he
will not answer them: any other way of Pursuing their Five Guards, then what I
have set you down, is left wholly to your own discretion, which you may easily,
with a little consideration find out, but these which I have given you are the
safest, and most proper Persuites, belonging to each Guard: if you take your
self to this Guard, and your Adversary Pursue you upon it, you know you are
secured upon one side, so that if he give you a Thrust, it must certainly be
upon that side in which you are discovered, unless it be your own Fault, by
answering of his falsisies, I say if he Pursue you upon it, your Defense is
only to wait his Thrust, and when he is giving it, Beat his sword, and give him
home the Thrust, and prevent as much as you can his Hitting you upon the left
hand, which you must do, by sometimes making half Thrusts at him, and other
times, drawing back your sword near your Body, by doing of which you slipp his
stroke; the judging of your Adversaries measure in this Guard, as well as in
all the rest, is most requisite, therefore, I entreat you to remember it. I have
now explained to you the Five several Guards, with their defenses and Pursuits,
which you may make use of; according to your own fancy, the next and last
thing I will show you, will be some Rules to be observed, (As I told you in
page eleventh) when you are playing with either Blunts, or Sharps, against
those who understand this Art, or against those who are altogether Ignorant of
it.


Sch. Sir before you do that, I would gladly have you show me, which of their
five Guards, is the best, and safest to be made use of, if a man were going to
venture his life. Which of the Guards a man should make choice of as the best
and safest.



Ma. This is a very pertinent Question, and I shall quickly according to my
own opinion resolve it to you; I think then either for Pursuing or Defending,
the Quart Guard, with a straight point, absolutely without comparison the
best. For if you intend to be the pursuer, then without debate this Guard is
the best, because when you keep it, you are in a readier posture for offending,
then when you keep any of the other four; and if you intend to be the defender,
then also is it the best, both because you are in as ready a posture to defend,
as when you keep any of the other, and also because in it as well as in any of
the other, you may make use of your Left Hand, so it has this advantage of the
rest, that when you keep it, your Body is more at liberty, and not so
constrained to observe one posture, and one Parade, as you must do for the most
part, when you keep any of the rest, for they are more proper for the Defensive
part, then for the pursuit; yet next the Quart Guard with a straight point, I
esteem the Terce Guard, with the point higher then the Hilt, next to it is the
Terce Guard with the point lower then the Hilt, to be chosen, next to it is the
Quart Guard, with the point sloping toward the Ground, and last of all, is the
Fifth Guard, which is only for the Defensive part, especially when a Man's
sword-hand is wearied, this is my opinion as to the choice of a guard for
safety, yet there may be some of another opinion, but every Man chooses the
guard he has most liking to: and so I leave it to you, to make your choose
also; according to your Fancy; although I think in reason you should choose
that which I have recommended to you as the best.


Sch. Sir, I think there is all the reason imaginable that I should, for seeing
I am not so able to judge of the goodness, and badness of them as you are, why
should I not then approve of your choice? But Sir, I will yet put you to the
trouble, of answering me one Question, before you proceed to those rules, you
were just now speaking of; and that is, if two men of equal Art, and courage,
were engaged against other, the one with a Broad Sword, and the other with a
Small, which of them, That the Small sword has the advantage of the Broad.
in your opinion would have the advantage?


Ma. Sir there is very little difficulty in answering of this Question, for
there is no rational man that understands both the Art of the Small Sword,
and the Broad, but will confess that the Small has a very great advantage of
the other, if these who are to make use of those different kinds of swords be
engaged for their lives, and the reason is this, that a man with a Small Sword,
may Contre-Temps with him that has the Broad, so that each of them receives a
wound, but he that had the Broad Sword shall be killed, because there can be
but few wounds given with the small Sword, in a man's Body, but what prove
mortal, whereas a man may receive many cutts in the Body, yea, even in the
Head, with a Broad Sword, which will not be mortal, yea even hardly so
disabling, as that a Man with a small sword may not (betwixt the time of his
receiving his wound, and being disabled) kill his Adversary, but I assure you,
if a Man be run through with a small-Sword, it either immediately kills him or
disableth him so, that he can hardly keep his feet, let alone to resist any
longer.


Sch. Truly Sir your argument is very strong, and in my opinion, there can
little be said against it, yet I have heard those in their Schools, who taught
the Broad-Sword, say that they would hitt a Man oftener with the Broad Sword, or
Cudgel, then a Man could hitt them with a small sword or Flourret?


Ma. I shall likewise easily answer you as to that, First every Man
endeavors to maintain the excellency of the Art he professes above other
Arts of that nature, as much as possible, that so he may be the better
employed, and really a Man can hardly be condemned for so doing, Secondly in
playing with Blunts, I think the Cudgel has as far the advantage of the
Flourret, as in sharps the small-sword, has of the broad, and my reason is,
because one good smart blow, of a bazle stick is worth a dozen of Thrusts given
with a Flourret, and so is a Thrust with a small-sword, which is right planted,
worth half a dozen, yea I may say a dozen of such wounds as ordinarily people
who understand the broad sword receive when they are playing with sharps: But
Thirdly, as for a Man's hitting oftener with the cudgel then another who
understands the Art of the small-sword, will with a Flourret, I altogether
deny it, unless a Man can hitt oftener with the Broad-sword, or cudgel without
being hitt by his Adversary, then his Adversary with a small-sword, or Flourret
can hitt him without being hitt himself, I say unless he hitt without being
hitt himself with a Contre-temps, or upon the respost, he cannot be said to
hitt oftener. Now if he be playing with one that is Master of the smallsword. I
positivelydeny, that ever he will hitt him without receiving a Thrust, either
by way of Contre-temps or upon the respost, if he with the small-sword have a
mind for it; which if he do, he cannot be said to hit oftener, and so
consequently, his Art is not better: I know that the grounds of the Art of the
Broad Sword are almost the same, with the grounds of this Art, but still when a
man comes to practice with sharps, the small sword has the advantage, both
because of the reasons I just now gave you, and also because it is Motions are a
great deal more Subtle, and quicker, then those of the Broad Sword, and I
appeal to any rational indifferent person, if what I say be not grounded upon
Reason, but for all this, I am so far from undervaluing the Art of the Broad
Sword, that upon the contrary I think it both very profitable, and pleasant,
and has it is own use as well as the Small, for as upon Foot the Small is most
commonly used (although it be also very useful upon Horseback,) so upon
Horseback is the Broad most ordinarily to be made use of, and I really think
that all Gentlemen should understand, how to Defend themselves with both, for a
Man can never be called a complete Sword-Man, until he can Defend himself with
all kinds of Swords, against all sorts his Adversary can choose against him.


Sch. Indeed Sir I agree with you in that, now this question, I have heard many
times debated, and till now could never be resolved of it, so that by the
reasons you have given me in favors of the small-sword against the broad, I am
fully of your opinion, and I think they are of such force, that no rational
Man will deny them; but seeing you mention the usefulness of the sword upon
horseback, I earnestly beg that before you proceed farther, you would do me
the favor to show me how to make use of it that way, which will be to me a
singular obligation.


Ma. Sir at your earnest desire I shall not much care, to put a little stop to
our present discourse* that so I may inform you in what you desire to know
concerning the fighting with the sword upon horseback.


Sch. In doing that Sir, I shall be so much beholden to you, that I am afraid
I shall never be able to recompense it.


Ma. Sir I earnestly beg of you to leave your complements, for seeing at present
I am in the station of a Master to you, it is but rational, that I should
answer according to my ability any question you can put to me, either
concerning the small or broadsword, upon Foot or Horseback: To begin then,
although the directions which I am to give you be mostly (according to your
desire) designed for the sword upon horseback, yet I think I cannot well shun
saying something of the Pistol, because now a days people seldom fight upon
horseback with the sword alone, but ordinarily with sword and Pistol, I should
rather say Pistol and sword, because before they come to make use of their
swords they first discharge their Pistols, so that in my opinion it is
properest to put the Pistol before the sword, and therefore following that
method, I shall in the first place (before I say any thing of the sword) teach
you how to discharge your Pistols against your Adversary with the greatest
advantage, which you may learn by the following directions if you seriously
consider them.


Sch. Sir you need not in the least fear my not taking notice to them, for
there is nothing that I would so gladly know.


First, Directions for fighting upon horseback with Pistols.
Ma. You must then in the first place provide your self if possible with a well
mouthed horse, How a man is to make use of his Pistols upon Horseback
that is to say with a Horse that will answer your Bridle-Hand, and spurs, as
you shall please to make use of them, so that with the least touch of them he
will go whither you direct him, he would also be bold and foreward, and not
affrighted at the report or fire of the Pistol, now after you have provided
your self with a Horse having those qualities, and that you know how to govern
him, for that is a chief point, because a good Horse without a good Rider
signifies not much; I say then if you have a Horse with the forenam'd
qualities, and your self also Master of him, you may (if you be not a Coward
your self) very confidently venture to engage against any Man. When you are
come to the field then, and have all in order viz. Your Pistols charged, Tutch
holes cleared and Primed, and good flints, by any means neglect not that, for
upon the goodness, orbadness of them may your life almost depend, therefore be
sure to be well provided as to them; you would also have your stirrups shorter
then ordinary, in case you should be forced after the discharging of your
Pistols to make use of your sword, that so you may pitch your self upon them,
to make your Blows or Thrusts reach the farther: being thus provided of all,
and after that you have passed your last complement upon your Adversary, so
that you are both of you to do the best you can to Master other, then step,
Trot or put your Horse into a gentle Hand-gallop until you be without Pistol
shot of him, and in the mean time you are going from him draw your sword being
tied about the plumet with a strong riband, and hang it upon your right wrest,
this you must always ways do to have it in readiness after your Pistols are
discharged, for it is always supposed that a Man may have to do with his
sword after that his Pistols are discharged, and therefore it is fit to have it
in readiness, after you have done that, then draw your right Pistol and Bending
her put her into your bridle-hand, holding her near the work betwixt your
formest finger and thumb, then immediately draw your left, and bend her
likewise holding her in your right hand with her muzel upwards, this you are
all to do in the going from your Adversary, therefore it must be all done in a
minute, and when you are at the distance I before spoke of, which I suppose to
be about fifty or sixty paces, then gently turn your Horse and come at a
Handgallop until you be within a pair, or less of your Adversary, keeping
still up the muzell of your Pistol till then, when you are about a pair from
him, make a brusch closs by him so that you may almost touch his leg with yours
in the passing, and after the time that you begin your brusch, let the muzel of
your Pistol fall so by degrees, that it may at your coming at him, or passing
him be level with the middle of his Body, so that in passing you may almost
touch him with it, and then fire upon him, this they call (in French, Tirer a
Brule pourpoint, or) to fire so near that you may almost with the fire of your
Pistol, singe your Adversaries Doublet or Coat, for you must know that one shot
given this near may be reckoned worth two or three shot at a greater distance,
and so consequently not so dangerous being shot in a manner at random, whereas
a shot given this near, if your Pistol be in order as she should, will hardly
ever fail to do execution, immediately when you are past him, drop the Pistol
you fired, and take the Pistol which is already Cocked in your Left Hand, into
your right, and in the mean time you are taking your Pistol into your
right hand, change your Horse to the right, and so Gallop on at a hand-gallop
until you be within a pair again of your adversary (if you have gone so far by
him) and then behave just as you did with the first Pistol remembering always
after you have passed your Adversary instantly to turn your Horse to the right,
that so you may shun his Gaining of your Crouper (which is called in French,
Gainer la croup) if after both your Pistols are fired, you have done no
Execution upon neither side, which will seldom fall out if you fire so near as
I desire you, especially if you have accustomed your self to Shoot at a mark
with your Pistolls, and that you know how they shoot, this is an Exercise which
all Gentlemen should practice; and therefore I earnestly recommend it to you:
But I say if it should happen that there be no execution done upon neither
side, then you will both of you be necessitat to decide the quarrel with your
Swords, the which that you may with the more Art and Advantage against your
Adversary do, their few following Directions will not be unnecessarie.


Sch Sir, I am extremely well pleased with what ye have been saying, therefore
pray go on.


Secondly, Directions for the sheering Sword upon Horseback.
Ma. Both your Pistols being Discharged, How a man is to make use of the
Sheering sword, upon Horseback.
and no execution upon neither side done, drop your last fired Pistol also, and
then (your stirrups being as I said before, somewhat shorter then ordinary)
take hold of your sword, which I suppose all this time to have been hanging at
your wrest, and pitch your self exactly to the Terce Guard with a sloping
point, see page 112 and plat: 10 fig. 2. It cannot be expected that you can
make use of your left hand with this Guard upon horseback, as you do upon Foot,
because you are to hold your bridle with it, but excepting that, keep exactly
the posture of the forementioned Figure and lean with your body a little
forewards that so you may the better Defend your Horses head, as for your
Defense upon this Guard, if you lean well forewards by standing upon your
stirrups to Defend your horses head, your Adversary will but have little
variety of play to make use of against you, for he can but strick at you two
ways, and that is either without and above the sword, by stricking at your
Head, and then you are to Defend your self with the second parade in Terce, as
is shown you in page 31, or he must strick at you without and below the sword
at your wrest, and then you are also to parie him with the second parade in
Terce, but not as you was to do it before, but as it is shown you in the
preceding page viz. page: 30: There is no other persuit upon horseback that is
any thing worth except this, and the gaining of your Crouper, or left band,
which is almost all your Adversary can do against you, you must indeed take
good notice that your Adversary gain not your Crouper, for if he gain that, he
will have the greatest advantage imaginable, but you may easily prevent it by
keeping your right side always toward him, and as he turns to go behind
you, turn you also your horse always that way, and then it will not be
possible for him to gain it, the gaining of the crouper, is one of the greatest
advantages that can be gotten upon horse back, and therefore you must by any
means prevent it, whither you be either making use of pistol, or sword, for if
once your crouper be gained, and your Adversary behind you upon your left hand,
he is absolutely master of you, if by great chance it happens not otherwise; you
must also endeavor as much as possible to defend your horses face, and his
bridle reins, because when once a horse gets a smart blow in the face, it
makes him afterward instead of advaneing, to retire, which will be a great
disadvantage to you, also if your bridle reins should be cut, you would be but
in a bad condition, but if you pitch your self to a right Guard as I desired
you, you may easily defend both, and that you may the better do it, as you
advance upon your Adversary, keep your horses head always from your Adversary,
by making your horse go side wise toward him, and always keep your Adversary
upon your sword hand, that so he gain not your crouper. Any other persuit upon
horseback, as enclosing, dismounting, or the like, I altogether disapprove,
because it is not possible to do them without both disordering your self, and
also very often giving your Adversary as good an opportunity, of either
Dismounting, or wounding your self as you thought to have got of him, and
therefore the only Pursuit upon Horseback is a plain stroke either at your
Adversary or his horse, then parie his stroke and do you Redouble upon the
back of your parade, for Feints upon horseback are worth nothing, especially
if you pitch your self to the Guard I before desired you, this is all I think
necessary to say of Fighting upon horseback, either with Pistol or sword, and
had it not been upon your earnest entreaty, I had not in the least at this time
spoken of it, seeing it did not at all concern our present discourse.


Sch. Sir I shall only trouble you with one other question, and then we shall
go on where we left.


Ma. Let me hear it then, and if I can, I shall answer it.


Sch. It this is, you know you ordered me to provide a well mouthed horse, but
I pray you what shall a Man do that in such a case is not master of such a
horse, neither can perhaps for money have one?


Ma. Really Sir if that happen, I would advise you to provide yourself with one
that can but stand still, and turn about in one place as you would have him,
without offering to Run away, for let your Horse be never so stiff, if he be
not a Runn-away-jade, you may always turn as soon in the ground your horse is
standing upon, as your Adversary can make a tour about you, so that what ever
part of the Gircumference your Adversaries Horse makes, let him be never so
nimble, you may at the same time with your Horse (being as it were the Center)
in a great deal less time make the same, and by consequence keep always your
Horses head toward your Adversary, which will hinder him to Gain your Crouper,
and you are to defend your self that same very way as if your horse were well
managed; you must also know that when you come to make use of your sword, A
Carrier, or Brushing, are altogether unnecessary, for they are properest to be
made use of when you are to discharge your Pistols, but when you come to make
use of your Sword, then there is nothing necessary but a gentle Hand-gallop,
except it fall out that you have a horse which will not answer you, and then
you are as I told you before, to stand still in one place with him, always
keeping his head toward your Adversary, that by so doing you may hinder him to
gain your Crouper.


Sch. Sir all which you have been saying I think extreme good, but you seem to
me at the beginning of this discourse to give an unnecessary advice, which is
the providing of a well mouthed Horse, whereas afterward you say that a Man
may des^nd himself as well, if his Horse will but stand still in one place with
him, which in my opinion is as much as to say, that there is no difference in a
single combat upon Horseback, betwixt a well managed, and nimble Horse, and a
Horse that can but stand still in one place, which is contrary almost to the
opinion of all the World, there fore I would gladly hear what your opinion is
as to that?


Ma. I shall likewise Sir seeing you desire it, That a managed Horse is but of
little advantage in a single combat upon Horse-Pack with Swords only.
give you my Opinion as to that, First then in a Single Combat only with Swords
upon Horseback, and also where there is but one Man engaged against another, I
realy think that there is but little, or no advantage at all in having a
Managed Horse, for suppose I were upon a well Managed Horse and you upon
another, who will hardlle stir out of his place, where I pray lies my
advantage in having mine Managed? for you know it is supposed that we are only
to make use of our Swords, now that being supposed; where lies my advantage?
For before I can strick at you to do you any harm, I must first come within
reach of you, and if I be within reach of you, you will also be within reach of
me; for it is not to be expected, that a man can Judge his Adversaries Measure
as exactly upon Horseback, as he can do upon Foot, to cause himself be
within reach of his Adversary, and yet his Adversary without reach of him,
which if he be an Artist he may do upon Foot but not upon Horse back;
therefore if I must before I can touch you, be within reach of you, and when I
am within reach of you, you are also within reach of me; then certainly who
ever is the best Sword Man should carry it, so that my Mastering of you
depends not so much upon the goodness of my Horse as upon the swiftness of my
Parade and Stroke, then suppose after I have given a stroke at you, I should go
off you again, I may if I please make my Horse go from hand to hand twenty
times, but what signifies it, seeing before that I can do you any harm I must
have you within my reach, and when you are so, I am within yours, so as I said
before, our Mastering of each other depends upon our own Art, and not upon
our Horses being Well or ill Managed, I conclude then that in a single fight
upon horseback only with the sword, and that also only between two persons, a
Managed horse is but little if any advantage at all; Wherein the advantage of
having a Managed Horse consists
But I will now let you see wherein the advantage of having a Managed Horse
consists; A Managed Horse then is absolutely necessary either in time of
war, for it may then happen that you may be surrounded with two or three
persons against your self alone, and in such a case a well mouthed Horse, and
one that answers the Spurrs is very useful, for if your Horse in such a case
will not answer you, you are certainly undone, whereas if he did answer your
Hand and Spurrs, you might perhaps find a way to get your self ridd of them,
which if your Horse stand still with you is impossible: Or he is also very
useful in a single Combat with pistols, because if both your Pistols be
Discharged, and your Adversary should have yet one of his to Discharge against
you, you may if you have a good Horse, make such motions and turnings with him
as may readily make your Adversary miss you, whereas if your Horse cannot stir
with you, you are in a manner in the same condition as if you were tied to a
Post, because your Adversary can come closs, and Discharge his Pistol upon you,
and you can make no kind of motion, which may occasion his missing of you,
which had you had a Managed Horse you could have done; so now the great use of
a Managed Horse, is either in a Battle, or where you are to make use of your
Pistols, for if you are to make use of your Sword only, then there will be no
great miss of him, and that for the reasons I before told you; Now the reason
why I desired you at first to provide a well mouthed Horse, was because as I
told you in the beginning of this discourse, people now adays seldom or never
make only use of their swords upon Horseback, but first of their Pistols, and
then of their swords, therefore that being the custom, I think a Managed Horse
absolutely necessary, but were it not upon that account, I think the want of
one might be dispensed with, I have now I suppose satisfied you as to that
doubt.


Sch. You have so Sir, but you have not as yet shown me how I am to behave upon
Horseback with the Smal-sword. How a man is to make use of the smalsword upon
Horseback.



Ma. I indeed forgot that, but now seeing you have put me in mind of it, I shall
give you some directions for it also, you are then if you have a Smal-sword
your self, to observe what fashion of sword your adversary has, if he have a
Broad sword and you a Small, then when you Pursue him, instead of stricking at
him, Thrust, and that must only be a plain Thrust beneath the sword, as you
give in the Single Feint at the head, upon Foot; see page 54, and Plat: 5. Fig.
2. If he Pursue you with his Broad sword, defend his Blows as you was taught
with your Sheiring sword, for you must pitch your self to the same Guard with
your Small sword, as you do with your Broad, and also defend your self the same
very way as you do with it, and be sure to Parie with the Fort of your sword,
because if you do it not, he may easily wound your Sword-hand, for when you
have a Small-sword, you have neither a Basket-hilt, nor a Back Wand to Defend
your hand, which ordinarily Sheering swords have, and therefore you must supply
the want of them with your Parade, by Pareing his strokes alwise with the Fort
of your sword cross your head: but if both your adversary and you have
Small-swords, then you are in your pursuit only to make use of Binding, as it
is shown you in page 67. And in your Defense only of the Contre caveating-Parade
as is shown you in page 32 This is all that is needful to be said of the
Defense, or pursuit of the Smal-sword, either against the Broad, or Smal-sword
upon Horseback, and therefore let us fall on to our old discourse where we left.


Sch. Withal my heart Sir, for I bringing in this discourse but be the by, it
will not now be amiss (having said all you think necessary anent it) to fall on
and show me those rules, which cerqinly cannot but be very necessary, and
useful.


CHAP. VI. General Rules to be observed, when a Man is playing either with
Blunts or Sharps, against those who understand this Art, or against those who
are altogether Ignorant of it.
Ma. I shall, and I must advertise you, that all that I have shown you will
signify but just nothing, if you do not exactlie both remember, and put in
practice the Rules which I am going to show you, for as I told you in the
Epistle to the Reader, that what I was to show you in this Treatise was the
Quintessence of this art, so I assure you that what I am now going to show you
is in effect the Quintessence not only of this Treatise, but Plat ii
For page i36
Fig i
One keeping the quart guard with a sloping point see page: i08

Fig 2
One keeping the fifth kind of guard which has no proper name see page: iii

of what can be practiced by the Small-sword, therefore you would do well to
take good notice, and resolve never either to present Flurret, or Sword,
without having all their Rules in your memory at once, and if you do it, you
will both reap the advantage your self, and deserve the name of an
understanding sword Man, of whom (to my great regrate) there are but few in
this Kingdom, but I hope as we improve in other things, so we will improve in
this Noble Art.


Sch. Sir I shall to the outmost of my power endeavor to observe them all,
seeing you say they are of so great importance.


Ma. I earnestly entreat you for your own good that you would do so, they are
those which follow.

In the First place then, Rules to be observed in playing with Blunts, against
those who understand this Art.
whither you be to play with Blunts, or Sharps, endeavor as much as you can to
play Calmly, and without pasion, or anger, for besides that it appears to
bystanders very unhandsome, it also disordereth your self, and for my part I
would scarcely desire a greater advantage of a man, then when I am playing with
him that he should be passionat, for it puts him quit from using any kind of
Art; but you must not mistake Vigorous and Brisk playing for Passionate
playing, I assure you there is a vast difference betwixt them for a Passionate
man can hardly ever be a good Sword-Man, and upon the contrary, a Man can
hardly ever be a good Sword-Man, without playing Vigorously, and Briskly, this
is a great property in a Sword-Man, the other a great imperfection, and
therefore I shall end this Rule with that saying of Seneca when he speaks of
anger, and it is a very true one, I shall therefore here give you it verbatim,
The Hunts man is not angry with the wild Boar, when he either pursues, or
receives him; a good sword Man watches his opportunity, and keeps himself upon
his Guard, whereas Passion lays a Man open: nay, (says he) it is one of the
prime Lessons in a Fencing School to learn not to be angry. And certainly
without any manner of doubt, it is one of the disadvantagiousest faults that a
Sword-Man can be guilty of: Therefore you would do well to guard against it,
as much as possible.

Secondly, 2ly.
Remember always to keep your sword fast and firm in your hand, after you have
presented it, but not so as to weary it. Thirdly, What ever Guard you stand to,
keep as thin a body as possible, 3ly.
and the nearer you can (without constraining your self) sink to the ground, so
much the better.

Fourthly, 4ly.
Always when you give in a thrust within the sword, give it with your nails in
Quart, and when without the sword, then with your nails in Terce, except when
you play the Double Feint at the Head, and Flancanade, for in the first you
must give your thrust without the sword, with your nails in Quart, and in the
other you must give it with your nails looking side-wayes, see Plate 6, Fig. 2:
the Quarting of your Head, and holding your hand in Quart, when you thrust
within the sword, and the holding your hand in Terce, and your head from your
Adversaries sword, when you thrust without the sword, preserves you from your
Adversaries Contre-temps thrusts.

Fifthly, 5ly.
When you give in a thrust either without the sword, or within, thrust always
closs by the Feible of your Adversaries sword, this is most proper when you
give in a plain thrust, or make an Ordinar single or double Feint; and when you
thrust by any means keep a closs left Foot, and a stretched hough, which will
hinder you to fall amongst your Adversaries feet, and also help you to recover
your self the quicklyer; which you must not neglect to do instantly after every
thrust, by first drawing back of your right foot a little when you are at your
full Elonge, and going to your Adversaries sword both at one time, and either
Beat, or Bind it, which will preserve you from his thrust upon the Respost or
back of his Parade; For not observing of this fifth Rule many a Man gets a
thrust, which otherwise he would have shuned, therefore mind it well.

Sixthly, 6ly.
The first thing you are ordinarily to do after you have presented your Sword,
is to Secure your Adversaries by Binding of it, which if it be neatly done as
it should, will infallibly cross all his designs, and hinder the violentness
of his pursuit.

Seventhly, 7ly.
Never let your Adversary secure your sword, if you can by any means hinder
him, which is done by always Slipping of him, and Dis-engaging with his sword.

Eighthly, 8ly.
Never answer a Feint unless you do it upon some design.

Ninthly, 9ly.
Play with Hand and Foot together, when you are either Falsifying, Binding, or
Stricking your Adversaries Sword, especially when you are playing with
Ignorants, for the Motion you make with your Foot in a manner surpriseth them,
and makes them answer your Feints the better, which nevertheless they should
by no means do, for when a Man answers Feints, it is a great token of his
ignorance.

Tenthly, 10ly.
Parie most frequently with the Contre-caveating Parade, for by so doing you
will cross all your Adversaries designs.

Eleventhly, 11ly.
when you are playing, look always to your Adversaries Hilt, and never to his
Eye, for by looking to his Hilt you may perceive where he intends to give his
thrust, which you cannot so easily do, when you look to his Eye.

Twelfthly, 12ly.
Before you play home any Lesson on your Adversary, endeavor first to sift and
find him out, by trying him with Feints, or any other Lesson you think fit, but
offer not to play them home upon him, until by sifting of him, you find out
whither or not they will have effect; and have a special care that when you are
trying him with these Lessons he take not time upon you.

Thirteenthly, When you are playing, 13ly.
you ^re to judge both your own, and your Adversaries measure exactly, this is
a chief Rule to be observed by any Sword Man, for the breaking of Measure
Parieth more thrusts then the Parade does, and shows more of Art.

Fourtheenthly, 14ly.
When you intend to make any kind of Pass, go quite by, or closs to your
Adversary, according as your design is, and do not as some who stopp in the
very middle of their Pass, because they did not take exactlie the Right time
upon their Adversary, for by so doing, they put themselves in a great deal of
more hazard, then if they went quite forward with it.

Fifthteenthly, 15ly.
Never offer to give home a Thrust unless you find a fit opportunity for I
assure you, the plainest Thrust you ca^ give, in some manner disordereth you^
body, and therefore you should not thru^ in vain, but wait until your
Adversari^ give you that opportunity.

Sixthteenthly. 16ly.
If your Adversary Break you Measure, then Redouble upon him, this R^doubling
is most to be practiced with Blunts although you may sometimes of necessity be
forced to make use of it with Sharps, Rules to be observed in playing with
Sharps, against those who understand this art.
bu^ I am for as little making use of it then a possible, because a man
disordereth himself in doing of it too often.

When you have occasion t^ make use of Sharps, observe all the for^ going
Rules, in so far as they are no contradictorie to these I am going to she^ you,
but where you find them not agree thou observe those which follow, I say you
are to make use of Sharps.

First, First,
When you play with Sharps make not your Elonge too long, for fear of your feet
slipping, which may put your life in hazard:

Secondly, 2ly.
In playing with Sharps play not too difficult Lessons, for they disorder your
body, and serve most to show (...) Man's art when he is playing with Blunts, but
they are not proper to be made use of when Men are playing with Sharps;
Therefore make most ordinary use of a single Thrust, and Binding, together with
the Con^re-caveating-Parade, or if you have the Pa^ade exactlie, you may take
your self to the Defensive part, and Pursue upon the Respost, which is also a
most secure kind of playing, if a Man be exactlie master of the Parade, but not
otherwise; Now this play, and no other kind of play but this, can be called the
secure play of the Small sword, therefore mark it well.

Thirdly, In playing with sharps, 3ly.
keep as straight a point toward your Adversary as possible, with a stretched
arm, but be sure to keep your point dis-engaged and always moving, that so you
may hinder his securing of it; if you observe this Rule well, you will find a
great advantage by it.

Fourthly, 4ly.
In playing with Sharps, have always your left hand in readinesss to put by
your Adversaries scattering, or Contre-temps Thrusts; if you make use of your
left hand with Judgment, you will also find a great advantage in it, but trust
not all to it, for it is only to be used as a help to your sword.

Fifthly, 5ly.
When you are playing with sharpes, be not too desirous of giving many Thrusts
upon the back one of another, without recovering of your body, and Jumping out
of your Adversaries Measure, but rather be satisfied with the giving of one
wound, although it should be never so slight, and immediately jump out of your
Adversaries Measure, which will preserve you mightily from his Thrusts upon the
Respost.

Sixthly, 6ly.
In playing with Sharps, if your Adversary chance to Command your sword, delay
not the delivering of it, unless you think you may graple with him without
being in hazard of your life, but rather yield it to him and come in his Mercy,
for you can expect no good but rather evil by the delaying of it, as many one
to their sad experience have found, for there is no stoutness, but rather
rashneis and folly, in struggling for your sword, when you know your Adversary
is master of it, and so consequently of you. Therefore I advice you as a
Friend, to follow my advice, seeing it is no disparagement to any man, to
deliver his sword, after his Adversary has commanded it. For there is no man
invincible, and although we must, and do use the means, yet it is Providence
that rules all. Now the reason why I give you this Advice, is because there is
almost no Sword-Man, that will after he has Commanded your Sword, stand and
debate the matter with you anent the delivering of it, but he will instantly
after the Commanding of it, if you quite not with it, give you a Thrust, and
the reason of it is, because by his delaying, he may loose his advantage, and
you may, if you be very quick, and nimble, graple and come in equal terms with
him, therefore people ordinarily, for fear of running that hazard, after they
have got the advantage immediately after their securing of the sword if it be
not instantly delivered to them, they give the Thrust, and therefore, that you
may not run this risk if it should happen that your sword should be Commanded,
I have given you this foregoing Advice, which seems to me not altogether
impertinent although to others it may.

But if you are to play against Ignorants, then you must know, that there are
only Two Humors of them, the First is a foreward Humor, Two humors of
Ignorants described.
and that you will easily find out, at your very first engaging with him, for
he will immediately run full upon you, always Thrusting irregularly, and not
caring whither you hitt him or not, providing that he can but give you thrust
for thrust Contre-temps ways, this first Humor in Ignorants is most crossing;
The second is of an Humor not so foreward, and therefore not so troublesome,
for his design will be to let you pursue him, and when you give in a thrust, he
will receive it, when he can do no better, and endeavor in the mean time to
give you a Contre-temps. You see both their Humors have one and the same
design, but to put their designs in execution, they use two different Methods,
for the first humor to effectuate his design becomes the pursuer, although he
knows not in the least how to defend himself upon his pursuit, the second
again to have his design, he takes himself to the Defensive part, although he
knows as little, yea perhaps less to defend himself then the former, and it
is a very great token when an Ignorant takes himself to the Defensive part
against ^an Artist, that he understands not in the least what is any ways
for his advantage, An advice to Ignorants.
for I must in this place (although it belongs not to our discourse, and is
as it were a Rule for Ignorants against Artists) give such Ignorants an advice,
and that is, that for an Ignorant to offer to take himself to the Defensive
part against an Artist is most ridicoulous, therefore all that they can do,
must be to pursue as violently as possible, to see if they can any ways put
the Artist in a confusion, so that he knows not what Contrary to use against
them, and so force him to take his hazard of receiving one Thrust, and giving
another, but if he be a complete Artist that such an Ignorant has to deal
with, this will not do the business, although it be all that an Ignorant can
possibly do to win at one who understands this Art, yet I say that will not
do against a Complete Sword-Man; therefore, I would wish that such Ignorants
would rather apply themselves a little to the understanding of what I have been
teaching you, that so they might by Art both endeavor to Defend themselves,
and master their Adversarys, that if it should be their fate to do it, they may
be said to overcome by Art, and not by Ignorance: this only coming in be the by
I shall leave it, and fall on to show you what I promised; the First of these
Two humors which I told you of, it being by far the most troublesome and
worst to cross, I will therefore show you first how to behave against it.

Seventhly, 7ly.
when you see your Adversary Pursuing violently, and without any kind of Art,
First, either enclose upon him with Half a pass, if you think you are strong
enough to struggle with him, or if you think you are too weak for him, Rules to
be observed in playing with either Blunts or Sharps against the First, or
Foreward Humor of Ignorants.
then Secondly keep a straight point toward his face with a stretched arm,
and make use of your Left hand with it for a Parade, by drawing back of your
right foot to your left, and standing as it were upon your Tip-toes as in page
51. Where I spoke of the Contraries to Feints. Or Thirdly, you may play Off the
straight line upon him, which is excellent against Ignorants of the First
humor; But if all that take not away the violentness of his Pursuit; Then
Fourthly, you must Break his Measure until you see an opportunity of
Thrusting or Enclosing: If you make use of their Contraries as you should, I
doubt not in the least but you will Master him; But some I know will think this
Last Advice I give you of Breaking his Measure (or giving ground as they call
it) looks too like a Coward; If they be rational Men who have that opiniof
Breaking of Measure, which shows a Man's Art as much as any thing that is
practiced with the Small Sword, I think I may easily convince them of their
error, but if they be such as will not be convinced by reason, but will be
obstinate in their opinion, in GOD'S Name let them enjoy it, which it is like
they may repent, if they ever happen to receive a thrust, which they would have
shuned, had they broken their Adversaries measure. But to the purpose, I say
when a Man is engaged for his life, Reasons demonstrating the usefulness of
breaking of Measure.
he should use all the Art imaginable to preserve it, now if he do that, he
must of necessity allow the Breaking of Measure, because it is of as great use
as the Parade, for why does a Man make use of the Parade, is it not to save
himself from being Killed? I say if that be his design, which I believe no Man
will deny, then say I, they must allow the Breaking of Measure, for that
Defends them yet better: but say they, when a Man retireth it looks as if
he were afraid that his Adversary should Kill him if he did it not, I deny not
in the least that, and I pray for what end does a Man endeavor to Parie his
Adversaries thrust, is it not also for fear he should hitt him? I am sure no
Man will deny that; therefore if they allow the Parade, they must of necessity
allow the Breaking of measure, otherwise they must allow a Man no Defenee at
all; because according to their Argument, it looks as if a Man were afraid
of being hitt, which is altogether ridiculous. But besides this there would
also two inconveniences follow upon the not allowing the Breaking of measure to
Artists. The first is, that all Art with the Sword hand alone would almost
signify nothing against a foreward Ignorant, for here I also suppose that a
Man is not to make use of his left hand for a Parade, because allowing the left
hand to be made use of by an Artist, then certainly the Ignorant let him take
himself to what Pursuit he pleases would have the disadvantage, because of his
not understanding how to make use of his left hand as well as the Artist, but I
say allowing the Artist only the use of the sword-hand against a Forward
Ignorant, his Art then will signify to him but little, the Breaking of Measure
not being allowed him, this is the First Inconveniency, and the Second is, that
all Weak Men let them have never so much Art, would almost always have the
worst, if they were to engage against stronger then themselves, if the use of
the left hand, and Breaking of Measure, be not allowed to them, which two
Inconveniences I prove as follows, First that all Art with the Sword-Hand
alone would signify but little, is most evident thus, let the ablest Fencing
Master in Christendom be engaged against a Foreward Ignorant, and the Fencing
Master neither allowed to Parie the Ignorants thrusts with his Left hand, nor
to Break his Measure, then in an instant they either Contre-temps upon other,
or Enclose, and if they do either, then the Ignorant may be said to have as
much the Advantage as the other, for if they Contre-tempts, there is no reason
why the Ignorants thrust should not be as mortal as the Fencing Masters: And if
they Enclose then still the strongest must carry it, which proves the Second
Inconveniency, in not allowing the use of the left hand, and the Breaking of
Measure to Weak men against Strong, for they have nothing to Defend themselves
with, against those who are Stronger then them but their Art, which can
signify almost nothing to them if the Breaking of Measure, and the use of
their left hand be not allowed, and so it is ten to one, but the Strongest Man
carry it, unless by chance the Weak Man Contre-Temps the Strong in a more
dangerous part of the Body then he does the Weak, for if they enclose,
undoubtedly the Strongest must carry it, and if they Contre-temps, then whose
soever thrust is severest he must carry it, which cannot be said to be by Art,
but mere Fortune; I know some will object that an expert Fencing-Master will
not suffer an Ignorant to Contre-temps upon him, because he will first Parie
the Ignorants thrust, and then give him a Thrust upon the Respost. I answer,
that if the Breaking of Measure, and the use of the left hand be not allowed,
no Fencing Master can hinder an Ignorant either to Contre-temps, or Enclose,
for if he be a Foreward Ignorant, (as I supposed) then if the Fencing-Master
should offer to Parie his thrust with his Sword, before ever that he could well
get him Paried, the Ignorant would run in and Enclose with him, because that he
would just run to Enclose in the very time that he thrusts, so that the
Fencing-Master must of necessity, either hazard a Contre-temps, or an
Enclosing, any of which makes the Ignorant in equal terms with him, which,
had the Fencing-Master been allowed the Breaking of Measure, or the use of his
left hand, he could have easily prevented, but to the best of my knowledge
hardly any other way. But here I am afraid some persons may be so far
mistaken, as to think that what I have here said reflecteth somewhat upon the
usefulness of this Art, because that I am in a manner letting them see, that a
Man having no Art may be almost as safe when he is attacqued, either by an
Ignorant or Artist, as one who understands this Art exactly can be when he is
attacqued by either, and that by reason of the Ignorants Contre-temping, or
Enclosing; but let not such persons be deceived, for if they but reflect a
little upon what I have been saying, they will find that to make the Ignorant
in equal terms with the Artist, I have supposed two of the chiefest Defenses
in the Art of the Smal-Sword, not to be allowed the Artist, which almost no
rational Man will but allow him, and those are the Breaking of Measure, and
the use of the left hand for a Parade, now although I know that many will yet
stickle at the allowing the breaking of measure, notwithstanding of all that I
have said, both to show the reasonableness of allowing it, and the
ridiculousnes of crying out against it, yet there is no Man I am sure so
unreasonable, as not to allow the other, which is the Parieing with the
lefthand, for if he allow not that, he may as well allow no defense at all, and
if he allow it, then Art will still be serviceable to any Man, against
Ignorants of what ever Humor they be, because those who have Art will by it
know how to make use of their left hand, which the others being Ignorant
cannot, and so consequently let an Artist be engaged against an Ignorant in
never so little bounds, where perhaps he cannot Break measure although he
would, yet still by his art he has an advantage of the Ignorant, because by it
he knows both to Defend himself with his Sword, and left hand, a great deal
better then the Ignorant can be supposed to do, never having been taught it. I
thought fit to set down their few lines, to hinder such persons from thinking
that by what I was saying before, in favors of the Ignorant against the
Artist, I intended to prove the uselessness of this Art, you see both my
opinion, and design are far Contrary to it, and therefore I again desire both
you and them, not to mistake me. But that I may return to my former discourse,
although there can no Man be a greater friend to the Breaking of Measure then I
am, both because I know the advantages Artists have in making right use of it,
and the disadvantages which would of necessity (as I have been demonstrating to
you) happen to Artists in not allowing it; yet notwithstanding of all I have
been saying in commendation of it, and for as much as I approve of it, I allow
not a man's still going back, and loosing of his ground, no, not at all, because
there is a great difference betwixt yielding of much ground, and the breaking
of measure. For a Man may break Measure very handsomely without loosing much
ground, as I before told you in page 96, where I taught you how to break
measure; besides when a Man's Adversary pursues hotly, if he get not
immediately his Design, he grows soon out of Breath, and then the other may
do with him what he pleases: Therefore I maintain that a Man when he is
engaged for his Life against one who is of a Forward, Hasty, or Passionate
Humor, should yield a little Ground to him, for a^ People ordinarily say, he
will find the first Brunt of the Battle to be the worst, and when that is once
over, he will have time enough to consider what to do with him next. This which
I have been saying puteth me in mind of a very good Story I heard of a Famous
Fencing Master, and a Gentleman of this Country, whose name at present I
forbear to mention; it is as follows, and in my opinion comes in very fitly
in this place; It seems the Gentleman came to the Fencing Masters School,
upon whom the Feneing Master passed the ordinar Complement of all Fencing
Schools, viz. That he would play a Thrust, the Gentleman at the first refused,
because said he, I know nothing of your Art; the Fencing Master then desired
that he would take the Flurret and play his Natural Play, as he would do if he
were to play with Sharps, which at last the Gentleman condescended to do, so
when they fell a playing the Gentleman pursued furiously and ignorantly, and by
all probability as he would have done had he been making use of Sharps, in the
mean time the Fencing Master took himself to the Parade, and broke the
Gentleman's measure; so after they had played a while, the Gentleman's Arm
wearied with his too violent pursuing, which the Fencing Master perceiving,
said to him, Now Sir have at you, the Gentleman cried out, O you now take me at
a disadvantage, because you see I am out of Breath; Says the Fencing Master to
him, now Sir is my only time of pursuing you when you are so, and then its like
he gave him a Thrust or two. I think you may easily apply this Story to what I
was before saying, That a Man may break his Adversaries Measure, and that as
often as he thinks it conv^nient for his own safety, without being any ways
accounted a Coward. I know very well that those who understand this Art will be
of my opinion, because they know that the Judging of Distance exactly is one of
the hardest things to be acquired in all the Art of the smal-Sword; and when
once it is acquired it is one of the usefulest things, and shows a Man's Art
as much as any Lesson in it; but I am for no Man's Retiring too much, unless
upon a very good Design, and that hardly any Ignorant of this Art can have,
because what he does (as the common Proverb is) he does by rule of Thumb, and
not by Art.

Eighthly, 2ly.
But if it be your Fortune to have to do with an Ignorant of the second humor
I before told you of, which is not so forward, for he will let you be the
Pursuer, How a man is to behave against the second Humor of Ignoranit.
you may then assure your self, that the only prejudice he can do you, is to
endeavor to give you a Contre-temps, for he will never offer to Parie a
Thrust, and good reason why, because he cannot; Now to win at this Ignorant,
you must be sure always to make use of Binding, and your left hand to preserve
you from his Contretemps thrusts, and Thrust some times at his Face, if any
thing make him endeavor to Parie as he can, that will: This is all I have to
say, of this Humor of Ignorants, so that I think I have now omitted no Rule,
which may be any ways necessary to you in playing either with Blunts, or
Sharps, against either Ignorants, or those who understand this Art, except this
one which follows, it is true it is against the Broadsword, but however, that
you may be ignorant of nothing which belongs to ^ Master of the small-sword;
I therefore think fit that you should know it, and if I be not deceived you
will think it very well worth your pains to understand it; It is this.

Of a Man's Defending himself with a small-sword, against a Broad.

Ninthly, 9ly.
If you are engaged with a Smallsword against a Man with a Broad, How a man is
to defend himself with a smalsword against a Broad.
or Shearing-Sword, you would be as Circumspect as possible, for you would
first consider the fashion of his Sword, as whether it be a Broad-Sword only
for Striking, or a Shearing Sword, so that he may either Strike, or Thrust as
he pleases, for according to the Fashion of your Adversaries Sword, so are you
to take your Measure, First then if your Adversary has a Shearing-Sword, then
you would be altogether as warry as if he had a Small, because you are not sure
but ^he may Thrust at you, as well as Strike, and therefore the Judging of
Distance in such a case is most necessary, especially if your Adversary
understand any thing of the Smal-sword, for that will yet make it the harder
for you, but there is nothing for him as I told you, but to expect the worst,
and be as careful as you can that he Contretemps not upon you: But secondly, if
it be a Broad sword that your Adversary has against you, so that you fear not
so much ^his Thrusts as his Blows, then I would advise you if you intend to
take the Defensive part, to stand to this posture, viz. Stand not to an
Ordinary Guard, The posture which a man is to stand too, with a smalsword
against a Broad.
for then he would Disable your sword Arm, therefore I would have you hold your
sword quite Cross before your body, and your hand in Terce, see Plat: 12. Fig.
2. So that if he offer to strike at your Feet; you must first slipp his stroke,
and immediately Pass with a Thrust upon him before he can recover a second
Stroke; and if he should offer to strike at your Head or Hand, then you Plat i2
For page i58
Fig i
(...)

Fig 2
The posture which a Man is to stand to with the small sword against a Broad see
page: i59

may either only Parie his Stroke, which yo^ may easily do holding your Sword
in the Posture I just now desired you; or otherwi^ first Parie, and then Pass
immediately afte^ but never offer to Thrust, for if you should he may easily
Disable your Sword Ha^ when you are at your Elonge; therefore m^ best Advice to
you is this, that when you a^ to play against a Broad sword you would
immediately after you have presented, Pursu^ and Pass with an Enclosing upon
him; so tha^ although he should hit you when you a^ Enclosing, yet you are sure
to give him a thrus^ which as I have before told you will certainly be much
severer to him then his Stroa^ can be to you, because you will be closs upon
him before you receive the stroke and consequently the Force of his Stroke will
be spen^ And as I told you, you must never offer t^ give home a thrust for fear
of his disabling your Sword-Hand, which is not easily defended because you have
not a Basket-hi^ upon it as he has upon his, but you may sometimes thrust at
his Sword Hand to disabl^ it if you can, or make half thrusts at him to cause
him strike, that so you may slip his stroke, and Enclose before he can fetch
another; so I will end with this Direction once over again to you, which is,
That if your Adversary has a Sheering sword against you, that then you would
be extraordinary careful of your self, as if he had a Small; And if he have a
Broad against you, that then at your first presenting you should enclose upon
him, but never give in a Thrust but half Thrusts to bring him to a Stroke, and
then be sure to break his Measure, or slip his Stroke, and immediately Pass upon
him. But in my Opinion it is absolutely the best to become the Pursuer, and
instantly Enclose when ever you have Presented, for by so doing, you will
surprise him extraordinarly. Their Directions which I have here given you, I
think altogether sufficient for the Smal-Sword against the Broad; therefore I
shall not trouble you with any more, leaving that wholly to your own Discretion.

Now Sir, There is one thing which I would never have you want, and that is a
well mounted sword by your side, that is to say, How to know when a Sword is
well mounted.
which is light before the Hand, you may easily try if it be so, by only laying
it cross your foremost Finger about three inches from the Shell, and then if
the Hilt contrepoise the Blade, it is well mounted, otherwise not; and also let
it be of an indifferent good length which is about three quarters of an eln
long in the Blade, this is a middle betwixt the two extremes, for it is neither
too long, which would be unhandsome; nor too short, which is very inconvenient:
For I can assure you that if a Man's Arm be longer then his Adversaries, he has
by it some Advantage, although their Swords be of equal length, so seeing there
is Advantage in a long Arm, certainly there is more in a long Sword against a
short. I will now give you my last Advice which I know many People will treat
en ridicule; But I assure you, let People think or talk what they please, it is
of greater importance then they imagine, and were it not out of Kindness to
you, perhaps I would not so expose my self to their Censure; But seeing I know
it will be for your Advantage, I will proceed in giving it you, and undervalue
what People may talk of me for it, An advice not altogether so unnecessary as
some people may imagine.
especially seeing you nor no Man is forced to observe more of what I have been
saying to you, then what you think is for your Advantage. Now my Advice is
this, That you would never go to the Field in drink; but rather if you can by
any means (without putting a tash upon your Honor) delay it until you be sober;
For to Drunk and Passionate Men this Art signifies but little or nothing,
because neither of them have their Judgment about them to know how they should
make use of it; And so I end.


Sch. Sir It is a very good one, and I thank you most heartily for it; But have
you no more to show me of this Art, but what you have already explained to me?


Ma. No Sir, and I am sure if what I have explained to you be exactly
understood, and put in practice, whoever is able to do it, I say without
vanity, that he will deserve the name of Master.


Sch. There is no doubt of that; But now Sir seeing we are at a close with our
discourse, I think it my duty to give you hearty thanks for the great Pains
and Trouble you have taken t^ instruct me; And that you may not think your
labor lost, I promise to you that I shall endeavor to put in Practice
according to my power, what you have taught me; neither shall I ever be wanting
to do you all the Service lies in my Power, either in recommending of Scholars
to you, or making your Ability in this Art more public; So Sir, wishing You
all Health and Happiness, I bid You farewell.


Ma. Farewell, Dear Sir, and may you never have Occasion (but with Blunts) to
Practice what I have taught you.


THE END.
POSTSCRIPT
I Have now kind Reader, (for I cannot well other ways call you, who have done
me the favor to peruse this small Piece) if I be not deceived, made good the
Tittle Page, and if you seriously consider it, somewhat more; therefore if you
reap not Advantage by what you have read, blame not me, for I have given you
the Directions, which is all lies in my Power to make you a Sword-Man, and if
you put them not in practice the fault is your own; for you must not expect
that the simple reading of what I have here given you, will ever make you a
Sword-Man; No no, it is practice that must do that; its true your reading of
this little Piece may make you talk, and discourse learnedly enough of Fencing;
But what will that avail a Man, when he is either to make use of Blunts or
Sharps? Certainly in such a case Theorie without Practice will serve but for
little: It is therefore Practice joined with it which in such a case must do
the business; Reading therefore will as I said give you the Theorie, which is
also absolutely necessary for a Sword-Man, but it is Practice which must make
you Act those things I have here given you, so that without it your Reading
will signify but very little: Therefore I again give you the Advice which I
once gave you before, and that is, That you would get exactly by heart any
Lesson you intend to Practice, and when you have it so, then fall to the
practicing of it, either upon a Fencing Masters Breast, which certainly is the
best way if you can have one, or otherwise upon a Comerads. This is the only
way to reap Advantage by the Scots-Fencing-Master, you may therefore observe it
if you please; And if observing it exactly it answer not your expectation, I
shall then willingly acknowledge my putting you to unnecessary trouble: But upon
the other hand I earnestly beg that you would not condemn me before you have
made a trial, and even then if all should not answer your expectation as you
imagined, yet in such a case I desire a favorable censure, seeing I have
imparted to you the small knowledge I have my self of this Art, and that it is
not to be expected that a Man can give more then he has to himself. I
therefore expect of those who are not competent Judges of what I have here
written, that they will keep their Judgment to themselves, until they be able
first to find a Fault if there be any, and then to amend it, for I know many
will endeavor to find Faults, which they are not able to prove such, and far
less capable to amend them if they were really so, and upon that account I
expect of such persens the foregoing Favor; But for those again who really
understand this Art, if they shall happen to find any thing amiss in it, I
shall indeed be so far from either expecting, or desiring them to be silent,
that upon the contrary I earnestly beg they would make their knowledge in it
more public, that by so doing they may both advance the Practice of this so
Gentile, and useful an Art, and also make me sensible, either of the Errors I
have committed, or of things Essential I have omitted, and if they think not
that worth their pains, then give me Leave to say with the Poet,

Carpere vel nolinostra, etc.

But till then I hope none will undervalue this small Piece of mine, but upon
the contrary, look favorably upon it, especially seeing my design is free
from any mean by-end, and meerlie for the good, and improvement, of the Youth
of this Kingdom whom I wish all to be good Sword Men, otherwise I had never
been at the pains to give them this Piece, which I am confident if rightly
used, will be a great help to the improving of them, for there is nothing in
it, but what by a little consideration, may be easily taken up, and understood,
for I have all along endeavored as much as lay in my power to be plain, and
distinct in my directions; and that I may likewise end so, I have here given an
Index of the most Material things treated of in this book, which will
certainly be a great help for finding the Pages, where such things are
deseribed.

ADIEU.
THE CONTENTS Of the SCOTS FENCING MASTER, OR COMPLETE SMAL-SWORD-MAN.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, Objection first against the Subject of the Book:
The Answer, Page 9 Second Objection Page 10 The Answer. That it is an advantage
for a Man to understand Fencing, Page 11 Reason first, why Ignorants sometimes
overcome Artists, Page 12 Reason second, Page 13 Reason third, Page 14 The
first, second and third Objection against my self; Together with the Answer to
the first Objection; Page 15 The design of putting out this Treatise, Page 15
and 16 Answer to the second Objection, Page 19 Answer to the third Objection,
Page 21 Advertisement to both Right and Left Handed Men, Page 22, 23, and 24
THE INTRODUCTION
THe Division of the Sword, Page 2, 3 All the Terms of Art belonging to the
Small -- Sword, explained, Page 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10.
CHAP. I. Of Holding the Sword.
HOw a Man is to hold his Sword, Page 11, 12 The Reasons why a Man should not
hold his Sword too loosly in his hand, Page 13 That an Ignorants beating of the
Fluret out of an Artists hand, is no reflection upon this Art. Page 14
CHAP. II. Of keeping a Guard.
HOw many Guards there are. Page 15 How to keep the Quart Guard with a straight
point. page 16 The best way in my opinion of keeping the Quart Guard with a
straight Point, as also the Reasons why I think it the best. page 17, 18, and
19.
CHAP. III. Of the Lessons Defensive, or Parades.
HOw many Parades there are. page 20, and 21. Why the Parades, are called the
Quart, and Terce Parades. page 22 How the First Parade in Quart is to be done,
page 23 How a Man is to perceive the coming in of a Thrust, page 23, and 24.
The best way in my opinion of doing the First Parade in Quart, as also the
Reasons why I think it so. page 24, and 25. The Advantage that a man has in
not leting his swords-point go too far aside when he Parieth. page 26 The
disadvantage that a Man has in making too great a Motion with his Arm when be
Parieth. page 27 How the second Parade in Quart with a sloping point is to be
done page 28 The danger that a Man is in, in not Parieing with the Fort of his
Sword page 28 The advantage of Quarting the Head well. page 29 How the First
Parade in Terce is to be done. page 29 The best way in my opinion of doing the
First Parade in Terce page 30 How the Second Parade in Terce with a sloping
point is to be done, page 30 How a man is to Parie with the Second Parade in
Terce, when his Adversary Thrusts without and above his Sword, page 31 How
the Contre-Caveating-Parade, is to be done. page 32 The Advantage the
Contre-Caveating-Parade has of any other. page 33, and 34.
CHAP IV. Of the Lessons Offensive. Lesson I. Of Approaching or Advancing.
HOw many ways there are of Approaching, page 35 How a Man is to approach with
the single stepp Page 35, and 36. The use of the single and Double Stepps. Page
36, and 37. How a man is to Approach with the Double step. Page 37
Lesson 2 Of Retiring.
How many ways there are of Retiring. Page 38 How a man is to Retire with the
Single-Stepp. Page 38 How a man is to Retire with the Double-Stepp. Page 38 How
a man is to Retire by Jumping, Page 39
Lesson 3. Of Giving in a Thrust.
HOw a man is to Give in a Thrust Page 39, 40, and 41, The Advantage that a man
has in Giving in a Thrust according to Art. Page 42, and 43.
Lesson 4. Of Caveating, or Dis-ingageing.
HOw a man is to Dis-ingage, or slipp his Adversaries sword. page 44, and 45.
Lesson 5. Of Feinting, or Falsifying.
HOw many kinds of Feints there are. page 46 How a man is to play the ordinary
single Feint being within distance, page 46, and 47 That a man should always
give a Beat with his Foot at every Feint he makes, except when he is playing
against Great Artists, page 47, and 48. How the Ordinary single Feint is to be
played being without Distance, page 49.
Lesson 6. Of the ordinary Double Feint.
THe difference betwixt all Single and Double Feints explained, page 49, and
50. How a man is to play the Ordinary double Feint being within Distance, page
50, and 51. How it is to be played being without Distance. page 51 The Parade
and Contraries against the Ordinary Single and Double Feints page 51, and 52.
That the making use of the Left Hand for a Parade is very necessary. page 52,
and 53.
Lesson 7. Of the Single Feint at the Head.
HOw a man is to play the Single Feint at the Head. page 54, and 55. The Parade
and Contraries to the Single Feint at the Head. page 56
Lesson 8. Of the Double Feint at the Head.
HOw the Double Feint at the Head is to be played. page 57, and 58. The Parade
of the Double Feint at the Head, page 58
Lesson 9. Of the Feint at the Head upon the true Parade.
HOw the Feint at the Head upon the true Parade is to be played, page 59 The
Parade of the Feint at the Head upon the true Parade. page 60
Lesson 10. Of the Low Feint.
HOw the Single Low Feint is to be played. page 60 How the Double Low Feint is
to be played. page 61 The Parade of the Low Feint. page 61 The Contraries to
the Low Feint. page 61
Lesson 11. Of Batery.
THe Reason why we have not English Names to all the Lessons, page 61, and 62.
How the Single Batery is to be played page 62, and 63. How the Double Batery is
to be played. Page 63, and 64. The Parade and Contrary to Batery. Page 64
Lesson 12. Of Volt-coupe.
How the Single Volt-coupe is to he played, page 65 How the Double Volt-coupe
is to be played. page 65 The Parade and Contraty to Voltcoupe. page 66
Lesson 13. Of Binding.
How a man is to Bind or Secure his Adversaries sword; Page 67 The Parade
against Binding, Page 68 The Contrary to Binding: Page 68 The playing by
Feeling explained. Page 68 The Contrary to the Caveating, or Slipping, of the
Sword. Page 69
Lesson 14. Of Flancanade.
HOw Flancanade is to be played page 70, and 71. The Parade and Contrary to
Flancanade. page 71 The Contraries to the Parade, and slipping, of Flancanade.
page 71
Lesson 15. Of Under-Counter.
HOw Under. Counter is to be played, page 72 The Contraries to Under-Counter.
page 72 The Contraries to the Parade, and slipping, of Under-Counter. page 73
Lesson 16. Of Beating.
HOw a man is to Beat his Adversaries sword with one or both-Hands page 74, and
75 The usefulness of Beating, page 75 The Occasions upon which a man may make
use of Beating; page 76, and 77. Two other ways of Beating the sword out of a
man's hand. page 77, and 78. The Contraries to Beating. page 78
Lesson 17. Of Passing.
WHat is Properly called a Pass, page 79 How a man is to Pass; page 79 The
Occasions upon which a man may Pass. page 81 The Contraries to Passing. page 81
Lesson. 18. Of Enclosing, or Commanding
TWo ways of enclosing explained, page 82 How the First kind of enclosing, as
it were with Half a Pass, is to be done. page 82 The several ways that a man
is to take for to Enclose with Half a Pass; page 83, and 84. The Contraries, to
the First, Second and Third ways of enclosing with Half a pass. page 85 The
Contraries to the Fourth way of enclosing with Half a pass. page 85 The several
Occasions in which a man may use the Second kind of Commanding. page 86, and
87. How to Prevent the First occasion for enclosing. page 88 How to Prevent the
Second occasion for Enclosing. page 88, and 89. The Taking of right time
explained. page 90 The Occasions in which a man is said to Take the right time.
page 90, and 91 How to Prevent the Third occasion for Enclosing, page 92 How to
Prevent the Fourth occasion for Enclosing. page 92, and, 93 The Contrary to
the Preventing of the Fourth occasion by Turning, page 93, and 94 How to
Prevent the Fifth occasion for Enclosing: page 94
Lesson 19. Of Breaking of Measure.
HOw a man is to Judge his Adversaries Distance or Measure, page 95, and 96.
How a man is to Break his Adversaries Measure. page 96, and 97.
Lesson 20. Of Redoubling of Thrusts.
HOw a man is to Redouble his Thrust, which is the Contrary to the Breaking of
Measure. page 98, and 99.
Lesson 21. Of Raising or Gathering up of the Sword.
HOw a man is to Raise, or Gather up his Adversaries Sword, when the point of
it is sloping toward the Ground. page 99, and 100. The Contrary to the
Gathering up of the Sword. page 100.
Lesson 22. Of Quarting and Volting.
HOw a man is either to Quart, Volt, or Quart and Volt, immediately after other,
as also the Times in which a man may use them. page 101, and 102. he Contrary
to Quarting and Volting. page 103.
CHAP. V. Now the several Guards are to be kept, pursued, and Defended.
First, HOw the Quart Guard with a straight point is to be Pursued. page 105,
and 106. How a man is to Defend himself upon the Quart Guard with a straight
point. page 107 Secondly, How the Quart Guard with a sloping point is to he
Kept. page 108. How the Quart Guard with a sloping point is to be Pursued and
Defended. page 109. Thirdly, How the Terce Guard with the point higher then the
Hilt, is to be Kept. page 110. How the Terce Guard with the point higher then
the Hilt, is to be Pursued and Defended. page 110, 111, and 112. Fourthly, How
the Terce Guard with the point lower then the Hilt is to be Kept, Pursued, and
Defended. page 112, and 113. Fifthly, How the Fifth kind of Guard is (...)
Kept, Pursued, and Defended, page 113, 114, and 115. Which of the Guards a man
should make choice of as the Best and Safest page 115, 116, and 117. That the
Small-Sword has the Advantage of the Broad, and the reasons for it page 117,
118, 119, and 120.
Directions for fighting upon Horseback, with Pistols.
How a man is to make use of his Pistols upon Horseback. page 122, 123, 124,
155, and 126.
Directions for the Sheering sword, upon Horseback:
How a man is to make use of the Sheering-Sword, upon Horseback. from Page
126, to 130 That a Managed-Horse, is but of little advantage in a single Combat
upon Horseback with Swords only, Page 131, and 132. Wherein the advantage of
having a Managed-Horse consists. Page 133, and 134. How a man is to make use
of the Smal-Sword, upon Horseback. Page 134, and 135.
CHAP. VI. General Rules to be observed when a Man is playing either with
Blunts, or Sharps, against those who understand this Art, or against those
who are altogether Ignorant of it.
RUles to be observed in playing with Blunts, against those who understand this
Art. page from 137, to 142. R^les to be observed in playing with Sharps,
against those who understand this art. from page 142, to 145. T^o Humors of
Ignorants described, page 146. A^ advice to Ignorants. page 147 R^les to be
observed (...) playing with either Blunts, or Sharps, against the First or
Foreward Humor of Ignorants. page 148 Reasons demonstrating the usefulness of
Breaking of Measure. from page 149, to 157. How a man is to behave against the
Second Humor of Ignorants. page 157, and 158. How a man is to Defend himself
with a Smal-Sword, against a Broad. page 158, and 159, The Posture which a man
is to stand to with a Smal-Sword against a Broad. page 159 How to know when a
Sword is well Mounted. page 161 An Advice not altogether so unnecessary as some
People may imagine page 162 The Postscript to the Reader from Page 164, to the
end.
FINIS.

