A TRACT CONCERNING SCHISM AND SCHISMATIQVES. WHEREIN, Is briefly discovered
the original causes of all Schism.

Written by a Learned and Judicious Divine.

TOGETHER, With certain Animadversions upon some Passages thereof.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD for Edward Forest. 1642.

A TRACT CONCERNING SCHISM.
Heresy and Schism as they are commonly used, are two Theological scar
crows, with which they, who uphold a party in Religion, use to fright away
such, as making enquiry into it, are ready to relinquish and oppose it, if it
appear either erroneous or suspicious; for as Plutarch reports of a Painter,
who having unskilfully painted a Cock, chased away all Cocks and Hens, that so
the imperfection of his Art might not appear by comparison with Nature; so
men, willing for ends to admit of no fancy but their own, endeavor to hinder
all enquiry into it, by way of comparison of somewhat with it, peradventure
truer, that so the deformity of their own, might not appear: but howsoever in
the common manage, Heresy and Schism are but ridiculous terms, yet the
things in themselves are of very considerable moment, the one offending against
Truth, the other against Charity, and therefore both deadly, when they are not
by imputation, but in deed.

It is then a matter of no small importance, truly to descry the nature of
them, that so they may fear who are guilty of them, and they on the contrary
strengthen themselves, who, through the iniquity of men and times, are
injuriously charged with them.

Schism (for of Heresy we shall not now treat, except it be by accident, and
that by occasion of a general mistake, spread through all the writings of the
Ancients, in which their names are familiarly confounded) Schism, I say, upon
the very sound of the word imports division, Division is not but where
Communion is or ought to be: now Communion is the strength and ground of all
Society, whether Sacred or Civil; whosoever therefore they be, that offend
against this Common society and friendlinesse of men, if it be in civil
occasions, are guilty of Sedition or Rebellion; if it be by reason of
Ecclesiastical difference, they are guilty of Schism: So that Schism is an
Ecclesiastical sedition, as Sedition is a lay Schism, yet the great benefit
of Communion notwithstanding, in regard of diverse distempers men are subject
to, Dissension and Disunion are often necessary; For when either false or
uncertain Conclusions are obtruded for truth, and Acts either unlawful, or
ministering just scruple are required of us to be performed, in these cases,
consent were conspiracy, and open contestation is not faction or Schism, but
due Christian animosity.

For the opening therefore of the nature of Schism, something must be added by
way of difference, to distinguish it from necessary separation, and that is,
that the cause upon which division is attempted, proceed not from Passion, or
from Distemper, or from Ambition, or Avatice, or such other ends, as humane
folly is apt to pursue, but from well weighed and necessary reasons, and that
when all other means having been tried, nothing will serve to save us from
guilt of Conscience, but open separation; so that Schism, if we would define
it, is nothing else but an unnecessary separation of Christians from that part
of the visible Church, of which they were once members; now as in mutinies and
civil dissentions, there are two attendants in ordinary belonging unto them:
one, the Choice of an Elector or Guide, in place of the General or Ordinary
Governor, to rule and guide, the other the appointing of some public place,
or Randevous, where public meetings must be celebrated. So in Church
dissentions and quarrels, two appurtenances there are, which serve to make
Schism complete.

First, in the choice of a Bishop, in opposition to the former, (a thing very
frequent amongst the Ancients, and which many times was the cause and effect of
Schism.)

Secondly, the erecting of a new Church and Oratory, for the dividing parts to
meet in publicly. For till this be done, the Schism is but yet in the womb.

In that late famous Controversy in Holland, De Pradestinatione and auxiliis,
as long as the disagreeing parties went no farther then Disputes and
Pen-Combats, the Schism was all that while unhatched; but as soon as one party
swept an old Cloister, and by a pretty Art suddenly made it a Church, by
putting a new Pulpit in it, for the separating party there to meet; now what
before was a Controversy, became a formal Schism. To know no more then this,
if you take it to be true, had been enough to direct how you are to judge, and
what to think of Schism and Schismatiques, yet because of the Ancients, (by
whom many are more affrighted then hurt) much is said and many fearful doomes
are pronounced in this case, we will descend a little to consider of Schism,
as it were by way of story, and that partly farther to open that, which we have
said in general by instancing in particulars, and partly to disabuse those,
who reverencing Antiquity more then needs, have suffered themselves to be
scared with imputation of Schism above due measure, for what the Ancients
speak by way of censure of Schism in general is most true, for they saw (and
it is no great matter to see so much) that unadvised and open fancy to break
the knot of union, betwixt man and man (especially amongst Christians, upon
whom above all other kind of men, the tie of love and communion does most
especially rest) was a crime hardly pardonable, and that nothing absolves men
from the guilt of it, but true and unpretended Conscience, yet when they came
to pronounce of Schism in particular, (whether it was because of their own
interest, or that they saw not the truth, or for what other cause God only does
know) their judgments many times (to speak most gently) are justly to be
suspected, which that you may see, we will range all Schism into two ranks.

First, there is a Schism, in which only one party is the Schismatique: for
where cause of Schism is necessary, there not he that separates, but he that
is the cause of separation is the Schismatique.

Secondly, there is a Schism in which both parties are the Schismatiques, for
where the occasion of separation is unnecessary, neither side can be excused
from guilt of Schism.

But you will ask, who shall be judge, what is necessary? Indeed it is a
question which has been often made, but I think scarcely ever truly answered,
not because it is a point of great depth or difficulty truly to assoyle it, but
because the true solution of it, carries fire in the tail of it (for it
brings with it a piece of doctrine, which is seldom pleasing to Superiors)
To you for the present, this shall suffice,

If so be you be animo defaecato, if you have cleared your self from froath
and grownes, if neither sloth nor fear, nor ambition, nor any tempting spirit
of that nature abuse you (for these and such as these are the true impediments,
why both that and other questions of the like danger are not truly answered) if
all this be, and yet you know not how to frame your resolution, and settle your
self for that doubt; I will say no more of you, then was said of Papias S.
John's own scholar, your abilities are not so good as I presumed.

ANIMADVERSION.
THIS tract, I must confess, is handsomely and acutely penned, and many things
in it well worthy our observation. Yet because I greatly honor antiquity, and
highly reverence the holy Fathers of the Church, I must crave pardon, if I
deal plainly, and roundly with the Author thereof, who in some passages (as I
conceive) does two much neglect antiquity, and indeed all authority.

For first, in that he says, the Fathers generally mistake in confounding
these names of Heresies and Schism, they do not mistake them, but commonly
distinguish them, or it is no great matter if they do, they are so nearly
linked together, that they are seldom separated, you shall hardly find any one
guilty of Schism, but he does easily and very often fall into Heresy.

Schism, say you, is an unnecessary separation of Christians from that part of
the visible Church, of which they were once members. But as you will put the
question afterward, who shall be judge what is necessary? and you are loath to
assoile this question because the solution thereof carries fire in the tail
of it, for it brings with it a piece of doctrine, seldom pleasing to
superiors.

Is this doctrine, let me ask you, good or bad? If good, then it should, then
I hope it will be pleasing to superiors; If bad, then should it displease
superiors and inferiors too. But the truth is, the doctrine is most
pernicious to government, and therefore to all sorts of people, to wit, in
plain terms, it is this, that every one must judge for himself with this
proviso, so he be animo defaecato, And I pray who shall judge of this? Even
your self also. So that if you be persuaded that you are animo defaecato, and
if you think you have cleared your self from the froath and grownes of fear,
sloth, and ambition, then it must needs be so, whereas the heart of man being
deceitful above all things, there is nothing more usual then for a man to
deceive himself, and think he is thus and thus, when he is nothing so. And
seeing the best of us all have faces enough in us, why may not superiors have
as few of these dreggs in them as inferiors, and so as well able, at the least,
to judge a right, as they. And you may talk what you will of being clear from
the froath of ambition, I know not what greater pride and ambition there can be
then thus to pull down all authority and jurisdiction, and erect a tribunal
in every man's breast; And yet he that goes about it, will think him self to be
animo defaecato: And you may well say it carries fire in the tail of it. For
thus to trample under foot all power and authority, by making every one his own
judge, must needs raise a great combustion and a strange confusion in the world.

Secondly, you cannot endure that they should be truly Heretics and
Schismatics which were anciently so esteemed. For say you, men are more
affrighted then hurt by the Ancients, and that many reverence antiquity more
then need, and after tell us in plain terms, that when they came to pronounce
of Schisms in particular, whether it were because of their own interests, or
that they saw not the truth, or for what other cause God only does know, their
judgments many times to (speak most gently) are justly to be suspected.

Where I will not go about to defend all the particular tenants of every
Father, for questionless, being men, they had their passions and perturbations
as well as we, so that take them singly, we shall find in many of them such
private conceits of their own, which cannot be so well excused: Yet for all
this, when all, or most of them agree together in any point, we are not to
question or doubt of the truth of it, according to that ancient and hitherto
well approved rule of Vincentius Lirinensis, Lib. ad Her. cap. 39.
Whatsoever all of them, or most of them, in one and the same sense shall
plainly frequently and constantly deliver and confirm, let that be esteemed as
a ratified, certain, and undoubted truth.

So then, though one or two of them may be mistaken, yet that all or the
greatest part should agree together in a falsehood, I cannot easily believe.
And therefore I cannot think that the current of the Fathers should thus be
mistaken, and that they should generally account them for Heretics and
Schismatics, which were not so indeed; I shall not so much suspect their
judgments, as his that thinks so. But all this I perceive is, that there might
be some opinions favored now, which were commonly condemned by them, as we
shall see afterward.

TRACT.
But to go on with what I intended, and from that that diverted me, that you
may the better judge of the nature of Schisms by their occasions, you shall
find that all Schisms have crept into the Church by one of these three ways,
either upon matter of fact, or upon matter of opinion, or point of ambition:
for the first, I call that matter of fact, when something is required to be
done by us, which either we know, or strongly suspect to be unlawful; so the
first notable Schism, of which we read in the Church, contained in it matter
of fact, for it being upon error taken for necessary, that an Easter must be
kept, and upon worse then error (if I may so speak) for it was no less then a
point of Iudaisme forced upon the Church, upon worse then error, I say, thought
further necessary that the ground of the time, for keeping of that Feast must
be the rule left by Moses to the Jews, there arose a stout Question, whether
we were to celebrate with the Jews on the fourteenth Moon, or the Sunday
following? This matter though most unnecessary, most vain, yet caused as great
a combustion as ever was in the Church, the West separating and refusing
Communion with the East, for many years together: In this fantastical hurry I
cannot see but all the world were Schismatiques, neither can any thing excuse
them from that imputation, excepting only this, that we charitably suppose that
all parties did what they did out of Conseience, a thing which befell them
through the ignorance of their guides, (for I will not say through their
malice) and that through the just judgment of God. because through sloth and
blind obedience men examined not the things which they were taught, but like
beasts of burden, patiently couched down, and indifferently underwent
whatsoever their Superiors laid upon them: by the way, by this we may plainly
see the danger of our appeal to Antiquity, for resolution in controverted
points of Faith, and how small relief we are to expect from thence; for if the
discretion of the chiefest Guides, and Directors of the Church, did in a point
so trivial, so inconsiderable, so mainely fail them, as not to see the truth
in a subject, wherein it is the greatest marvel, how they could avoid the
sight of it, can we without the imputation of great grossness and folly,
think so poor spirited persons, competent Judges of the questions now on foot
betwixt the Churches; pardon me, I know not what Temptation drew that note from
me.

ANIMADVERSION.
Thirdly, about keeping of Easter, say you, anciently all the world were
Schismatics.

A strange assertion, to lay such an heavy imputation upon all those ancient
worthies. Had they been thus guilty, it had been the part of a dutiful son
to have made some apology for them, and to have covered his Fathers nakedness.
But a far greater crime it is, thus to accuse them without a cause. The best
of it is, I shall not have occasion here to excuse their error, but to defend
their innocence. For first, their difference is not about a point that
concerns Faith or Good manners, but only the outward discipline and
government of the Church: about the keeping of a solemn feast. And that not,
whether we should keep it or no, (for all agreed well enough that it ought to
be kept) but about the time of keeping it, whether at this or that time, which
is a matter of far less moment.

The occasion of this difference briefly was thus, St Peter and his successors
at Rome kept Easter the Sunday after the foureteenth Moon. But S. James and
many of his successors at Jerusalem, being all of them Ministers of the
circumcision, the sooner to win their brethren the Jews, condescended to keep
their Easter, as the Jews did, 14o Lunae. Which diversity of observation
continued for the space of 200. years, neither Church censuring or condemning
one another for it. Till at the length Victor Pope of Rome would needs take
upon him to bring all those Eastern Churches to his custom, and excommunicate
them for not yielding, whereupon grew the Schism. So that although at the
first they kept Easter diversely for a long time together, yet so long as there
was no breach of charity between them, there was no Schism, by your own
confession, who tell us, that Schism offends against charity, as Heresy
against truth.

So then, whiles they were charitable one to another, all the world were so
far from being Schismatics, that no part of it could be justly thus branded.
The Schism indeed began, when the Pope would needs rashly and unadvisedly
excommunicate those Eastern Churches, with whom he had nothing to do. But
then was not the whole world, but only Victor and his partisans the
Schismatics according to you, who unjustly divided themselves from the other
side, the East Churches continuing their old custom without any Schism at
all, yet some of them not forbearing to tell Victor of his unadvised and
unjustifiable action.

For shall we not allow to several Churches (especially when they have no
dependency one upon another) their several rites and observations, but they
must be all Schismatic for it? You may as well call both these Churches
Schismatics for this also, because the one Church fasts on Saturday, the other
fasts not; the one administers the Eucharist in unleavened, the other in
leavened bread. These and such like points concern not the body of the Church,
but her garments: now although her body must be but one, yet her garments are
of diverse colors. Nay, as one says very well, diversitas rituum commendat
unitatem fidei. The unity of faith does more gloriously appear amidst the
diversity of ceremonies and rituall observations.

I wonder if one of our refined spirits now a days, who is animo defaecato,
had lived in those times, what could he have done to avoid this Schism? how
could he have chosen but be a Schismatic on one side or another? I conceive
how he should have escaped by you, to wit, to join with neither side by
keeping no Easter at all: for with you it is an error to think that an Easter
must be kept: which position being put in practice will prove the greatest
Schime of all, thus to divide ones self from all the Christian world. For
although these holy Fathers differed for a while amongst themselves about the
time, yet they all agreed against you about the thing it self, and not only
the Orthodoxe but the very Heretics of those times kept an Easter. Not so much
as the Novatians (who called themselves Cathari the Puritans of the Primitive
Church) but an Easter they had, though they were very indifferent about the
time of keeping it. And the whole Christian world ever since has duly
observed the keeping of Easter. But you take no notice of this, only your ear
is to excuse those Fathers the best you can. And you can find but this one way
to do it, That we charitably suppose that all parties did what they did out of
conscience, a thing which befell them through the ignorance of their guides,
for I will not say through their malice, and that through the just judgment of
God, because through sloth and blind obedience, men examined not the things
which they were taught, but like beasts of burden patiently couched down, and
indifferently underwent whatsoever their superiors laid upon them.

Do you call this an excusation, and not rather an heavy censure and
accusation both of Priest and People in those purer times: For what a dishonor
is this to the Pastors and Prelates then, that they who lived so near the
Apostles should be such ignorant guides? Nay what a disparagement is it to the
very Apostles themselves, that they should choose such ignorant guides, that
could instruct the people no better. For some of these you speak of, certainly
were the immediate successors of the Apostles themselves. They have been
accounted hitherto men, not only of conscience but of learning, knowing and
understanding, pious and devout men, in many of them the gift of doing miracles
still remained. I cannot with patience speak against this imputation.

But you are as bold with the people, by accusing them of sloth and blind
obedience, and to be beasts of burden, because they did not examine what they
were taught.

Whereas this good people had well learned, that they should not, they could
not be wiser then their teachers; and they had been newly taught from St Paul's
own mouth, that they were to obey those that had the rule over them, and submit
themselves. Which was not a blind but a wise discreet holy and dutiful
obedience.

But you it seems will teach the people another lesson, to wit, to guide their
guides. And they are now apt enough to learn it. For they begin to practice it
apace.

But you infer upon these weak premises. By this you may plainly see the
danger of our appeal to antiquity for resolution in coutroversed points of
faith, and how small relief we are to expect from thence; For if the
discretion of the chiefest guides of the Church, did in a point so trivial, so
inconsiderable, so mainely fail them as not to see the truth, etc.

But you build too large a structure upon such a sandy foundation. For here the
discretion of the chiefest guides of the Church did not fail them, as you
imagine: but they constantly kept their own several customs in love and
charity, and therefore without Schism, till Victor would needs take too much
upon him, whereas the whole business was afterward settled in that famous
Council of Nice.

So that here is no oversight of any truth, as I conceive, unless, as you
intimate before, the truth is, they should have kept no Easter at all: and then
as you say, it was most unnecessary and most vain to strive about the time of
keeping it. But such a truth as this, the Christian world has not yet
embraced, neither do I know when it will. So that for ought yet appears,
(unless you bring better reason against them) we may take good directions from
antiquity in the resolution of our modern controversies: and we may for all
this examine the question on foot, by the doctrine of those purer times, and
Heroic spirits, although you are pleased to term them poor spirited persons.
Which to me seems a very strange appellation, was S. Ambrose a poor
spirited person, who durst excommunicate that great Emperor Theodosius, and
forbid him to enter into the Church? Was S. Chrysostom a poor spirited person,
who did preach against Eudoxia the Empress, and valiantly suffered banishment
for it? Was S. Athanasius either, a poor spirited person who durst stand out
even against all the World, as it is storied of him, Athanasius against the
world, and the world against Athanasius? Or were any of those Fathers poor
spirited persons, who did courageously suffer martyrdom for the testimony of
Christ? Can you name any one author ancient or modern, that has so called or
esteemed of them? If not, then it is but thus with you. The Fathers are poor
spirited persons, because I say so, who am animo defaecato.

Neither are you yet constant to your self in this assertion, for although
here you call them poor spirited persons, yet afterward you do in effect
unsay it, where you so much approve of what Socrates observes of them, that
they were the great disturbers of the Christian world. Do poor spirited
persons use to make such hurly burlies? Pardon me, say you, I know not what
temptation drew this note from me.

And if you would pardon me, I could give a great guess at the temptation. I
fear it is a temptation of pride and singularity, thus to trample upon those
ancient worthies, the better to make way for some kind of novelty. And I would
it were no worse then this, of not keeping Easter.

TRACT.
The next Schism which had in it matter of fact, is that of the Donatist, who
was persuaded (at least pretended so) that it was unlawful to converse or
communicate in holy duties with men stained with any notorious sin, for
howsoever, that Austen do specify only the Thurificati and Traditores and
Libellatici, etc. as if he separated only from those, whom he found to be such,
yet by necessary proportion, he must refer to all notorious sinners, upon
this he taught that in all places, where good and bad were mixed together, there
could be no Church by reason of Pollution, evaporating as it were from sinners,
which blasted righteous persons, who conversed with them, and made all unclean
on this ground, separating himself from all that he list to suspect, he gave
out, that the Church was no where to be found but in him, and his Associates,
as being the only men among whom wicked persons found no shelter, and by
consequence the only clear and unpolluted company, and therefore the only
Church. Against this Saint Augustine laid down this Conclusion, Vnitatem
Ecclesiae per totum Mundum dispersae propter nonnullorum peccata non esse
deserendam, which is indeed the whole sum of that Fathers disputation against
the Donatists. Now in one part of this Controversy, one thing is very
remarkable. The truth was there, where it was, by mere chance, and might have
been on either side, the reason brought by either party notwithstanding, for
though it were Defacto false, that pars Donati shut up in Afric was the only
Othodox party, yet it might be true, notwithstanding any thing Saint Augustine
brings to confute it; and on the contrary, though it were de facto true, that
the part of Christians dispersed over the whole Earth were Orthodox, yet it
might have been false, notwithstanding any thing Saint Augustine brings to
confirm it. For where, or amongst whom, or how many the Church shall be, or
is, is a thing indifferent, it may be in any number more or less, it may be in
any Place, Country or Nation, it may be in all, and for ought I know, it may be
in none, without any prejudice to the definition of a Church, or the truth of
the Gospel, North or South, many or few, dispersed in many places, or confined
to one: None of these do either prove or disprove a Church.

Now this Schism, and likewise that former, to a wise man that well
understands the matter in Controversy, may afford perchance matter of pity,
to see men so strangely distracted upon fancy, but of doubt or trouble what to
do, it can yield none; for though in this Schism the Donatist be the
Schismatic, and in the former, both parties be equally engaged in the Schism;
yet you may safely upon your occasions communicate with either, if so be you
slatter neither in their Schism: For why might not it be lawful to go to
Church with the Donatist, or to celebrate Easter with the Quartodeciman, if
occasion so require? since neither Nature, nor Religion, nor Reason does
suggest any thing of moment to the contrary? For in all public meetings
pretending holiness, so there be nothing done, but what true Devotion and
piety brook; why may not I be present in them, and use communication with
them; Nay, what if those to whom the execution of the public service is
committed, do something either unseemly or suspicious, or peradventure
unlawful? what if the garments they wear be censured, nay indeed be
superstitious? what if the gesture of adoration be used to the Altars, as now
we have learned to speak? what if the Homilist have preached, or delivered any
doctrine of the truth, of the which we are not well persuaded? a thing which
very often falls out: yet for all this we may not separate, except we be
constrained personally to bear a part in them our selves; The Priests under
Ely had so ill demeaned themselves about the daily sacrifice, that the
Scripture tells us, they made them to stink, yet the People refused not to come
to the Tabernacle, nor to bring their Sacrifice to the Priest, for in those
Schisms which concern fact, nothing can be a just cause of refusing of
Communion, but only to require the execution of some unlawful or suspected
act; for not only in reason, but in religion too, that maxim admits of no
release, cautissimicuiusque Praeceptum quod dubitas ne feceris; long it was ere
the Church fell upon Schism, upon this occasion, though of late it has had
very many, for until the second Council of Nice, in which concileable,
Superstition and Ignorance did conspire, I say, until the Rout did set up
Image Worship, there was not any remarkable Schism upon just occasion of fact,
all the rest of Schisms of that kind were but wantons, this was truly
serious; in this the Schismatic party was the Synod it self, and such as
conspired with it; for concerning the use of Images in sacris,

First, it is acknowledged by all that it is a thing unnecessary.

Secondly, it is by most suspected.

Thirdly, it is by many held utterly unlawful, can then the enjoining of such
a thing be ought else but abuse? or can the refusal of Communion here be
thought any other thing then duty? Here or upon the like occasion to separate,
may peradventure bring personal trouble or danger, (against which it concerns
any honest man, to have pectus been Praeparatum) further harm it cannot do,
so that in these cases you cannot be to seek what to think, or what you have to
do.

ANIMADVERSION.
Fourthly, you fall foul upon S. Austin in particular, who, I may boldly say,
has deserved as well of the Christian world as any one man since the Apostles
times. And if this were my opinion alone, I should suspect it, but I appeal
herein to the general applause the learned have of him.

The truth was, say you, on S. Austins side against the Donatist, but by mere
chance. For the Donatist might have been the only Orthodoxe party, for any
thing S. Austin brings to confute it, and the other party might not have been
Orthodoxe, for any thing S. Austin brings to confirm it.

Then which, what could have been spoken more derogatory to so famous, learned
and renowned a Father? As if his arguments were so slight and silly, both to
defend himself and offend his adversary, that they are not worth the reading
or regarding, but are as much, as if he had said nothing at all. Whereas it is
well known and confessed, that although this good father was renowned for many
things, yet his master piece does appear in his Polemicks, who, to the
admiration of the World hitherto, is accounted to have acutely subtly, and
soundly confuted all those Heretics and Schismatics he wrote against; and
therefore deservedly styled Malleus haereticorum, the mauler of the heretics.

Now he must be esteemed a silly man, and to have said nothing against them.
You should do well, now you have thus accused him, to set down and make it
appear unto the world, that his arguments both offensive and defensive against
the Donatist, are so slight and weak as you would make us believe. There be
some that will defend him, and maintain that this Father has proved against
the Donatist by irrefragable arguments drawn out of Scripture, that the Church
of Christ neither then was, nor ever shall be, drawn into such a narrow
compass, as you and they imagine.

I would ask you this question. If S. Austin has given you so little
satisfaction against the Donatist, how do you know, but that the Donatist may
be defacto in the right, and S. Austin in the wrong; for it seems by you, it
was but hap hazard, which way it would go. I would therefore willingly learn
the way you take to discern which of these two ways is the right, for it
seems you have learnt nothing by S. Austin.

But me thinks you go a strange way to work to say the Church may be in none,
without any prejudice to the definition of the Church or the truth of the
Gospel.

I would willingly know how you define a Church, which shall consist of none,
and whether this be not most derogatory to the truth of the Gospel, that
Christ should have a Church which is in none, that is, as I conceive it, should
have no Church at all. For although it pleases God to remove his Candlestick
from one Country to another, and that his Church should be like the Moon,
sometimes in the full, and sometimes in the waine; yet that it should be
utterly eclipsed, and quite vanish away, directly crosses the prophesies of
the old Testament, and the promises of the new.

But you will pity S. Austin and those Fathers before him, that were thus
distracted upon fancy.

And me thinks the greatest pity of all is, that some of our wise men that so
well now understand the matters in controversy, had not lived in their times,
to have rectified them, and put these fancies out of their heads. But I know
not, whether it be not the greatest fancy of all, to think our selves so wise,
and them so fantastical.

But you easily resolve the doubt, and think it lawful to go to Church with
the Donatist, or to celebrate Easter with the Quartodeciman, so you flatter
neither in their Schism, and there be nothing done but what true devotion and
piety will brooks.

But how can this be? for your joining with them in their custom and
communion, must needs, if not flatter, yet much harten and encourage them in
their Schism. Besides you give a great scandal and offense to the Orthodox
party, and make them justly so suspect, that because you thus join with them
in their public communion, that you favor, at the least dislike not, their
private opinion. Thus then to scandalize your brethren, can never stand with
true piety and devotion.

TRACT.
Come we then to consider a little of the second sort of Schism, arising upon
occasion of variety of opinion: It has been the common disease of Christians
from the beginning, not to content themselves, with that measure of Faith,
which God and Scriptures have expressly afforded us, but out of a vain desire
to know more then is revealed, they have attempted to devise things, of which
we have no light, neither from Reason nor Revelation, neither have they rested
here, but upon pretense of Church authority (which is none) or Tradition (which
for the most part is but fained) they have peremptorily concluded, and
confidently imposed upon other a necessity of entertayning conclusions of taht
nature, and to strengthen themselves have broken out into divisions and
factions, opposing man to man, Synod to Synod, till the peace of the Church
vanished, without all possibiity of recall: hence arose those ancient, and many
seperations amongst Christians, occasioned by Arianisme, Eutychianisme,
Nestorianisme, Photinianisme, Sabellianisme, and many more both ancients, and
in our owue time, all which indeed are but names of Schism; howsoever in the
common language of the Fathers, they were called Heresies, for Heresy is an
act of the will, not of thereason, and is indeed a lie and not a mistake, else
how could that of Austen go for true, Errare possum, Hareticus esse nolo:
indeed Manichanisme, Valentinianisme, Macedonianisme, Mahometisme, are truly
and properly Herises: For we know that the Authors of them received them not,
but invented them themselves, and so knew what they taught to be a lie: but can
any man avouch that Arius and Nestorius, and others that taught erroniously
concerning the Trinity, and the person of our SAVIOR, did maliciously invent
what they taught, and not rather fall upon it by error and mistake? till that
be done, and upon good evidence, we will think no worse of all parties than
needs we must, and take these Rents in the Church to be at the worst but
Schisms, upon matter of opinion, in which case what we are to do, is not a
point of any great depth of understanding to discover, if so be distemper and
partiality do not intervene: I do not see that opinionum varictas and
opinantium unitas, are (...), or that men of different opinions in Christian
Religion, may not hold communion in Sacris, and both go to one Church, why may
I not go* If occasion require, to an Arian Church, so there be no Arianisme
expressed in their Liturgy, and were Liturgies and public forms of Service so
framed, as that they admitted not of particular and private fancies, but
contained only such things, as in which all Christians do agree; Schisms on
opinion were utterly vanished: for consider of all the Liturgies that are and
ever have been, and remove from them whatsoever is scandalous to any party,
and leave nothing but what all agree on, and the event shall be, that the
public Service and Honor of God shall no ways suffer. Whereas to load our
public forms, with the private fancies upon which we differ, is the most
sovereign way to perpetuate Schism unto the worlds end; Prayer, Confession,
Thanksgiving, Reading of Scriptures, Administration of Sacriments, in the
plainest and the simplest manner, were matter enough to furnish out a
sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either of private opinion, or of Church
Pomp, of Garments, or prescribed Gestures, of Imagery, of music, of matter
concerning the Dead, of many superfluities which creep into the Church, under
the name of Order, and Decency, did interpose it self.

To charge Churches and Liturgies, with things unnecessary was first the
beginning of all superstition, and when scruple of Conscience began to be made
or pretended, there Schism began to break in; if the special Guides and
Fathers of the Church would be a little sparing of incumbring Churches with
superfluities, or not over-rigid either in reviving obsolete Customs, or
imposing new, there would be far less cause of Schism or Superstition, and
all the inconveniance likely to ensue, would be but this, they should in so
doing yield a little to the imbecility of their Inferiors, a thing which S.
Paul would never have refused to do; mean while wheresoever false or suspected
opinions are made a piece of Church Liturgy, he that seperates is not the
Schismatique, for it is alike unlawful to make profession of known or
suspected falsehood, as to put in practice unlawful or suspected actions.

ANIMADVERSION.
Fifthly, having trampled upon the Ancients, you come now to the Church, and
level that also with the ground. It has been, say you, the common disease of
Christians from the beginning, not to content themselves with that measure of
faith which God and Scriptures have expressly afforded us, but out of a vain
desire to know more then is revealed, they have attempted to devise things of
which we have no light from reason nor revelation. Neither have they rested
here, but upon pretense of Church authority (which is none) or Tradition (which
for the most part is but fained. etc.

I, has the Church no authority? did not our Savior give power to the Church
to punish and excommunicate a notorious offender? when he says, go tell the
Church, and if he hear not the Church, let him be to thee a heathen or a
Publican. And did not his S. Paul give great power to the Church when he
calls it the Pillar and fortress of truth. It were easy here to enlarge my
self, and prove out of the Ancient Fathers did you not reject them, that they
attributed great power and authority to the Church. But the Church of England
(whose son suppose you are, and therefore cannot so well neglect her
authority) will tell you, Artic. 20.
that the Church has power to decree rites or ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith. But here you would cry up the authority of the
Scriptures, that thereby you might decry the authority of the Church, whereas
these two are not opposite, but subordinate one to another; I mean the Church
to the Scripture; If therefore you will commend unto us the authority of
Scripture, you must also uphold the authority of the Church, which is founded
in Scripture, but if you nullify the authority of the Church, you must also
neglect the authority of the Scripture, which gives the Church such power. And
let no man think the Roman Church will here break in upon me, for by Church, I
mean the truly ancient Catholic and Apostolic Church, from which the Roman
Church is far enough.

And as by Church, so I mean by Tradition, for where Tradition is fained, none
are to esteem of it, but when it does appear unto us to be truly ancient
Catholic and Apostolic, it is not a little to be regarded. Hereupon
Vincentius would have us duplici modo munire fidem, to fortify our faith two
manner of ways, Cap. 1. and 2.
primo, divinae legis authoritate, deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae traditione,
first, by the authority of divine law, then by the tradition of the Catholic
Church. Then he puts that objection, which you here, and many others are
used to make; seeing that the canon of Scripture is perfect enough and more
then enough sufficient in it self to all things, what need is there that we
should join unto it the authority of Ecclesiastical exposition. Unto which me
thinks he gives a very satisfying answer, Because all do not understand the
holy Scriptures, by reason of the height thereof, in one and the same sense:
but one interprets it one way, and another a several way. So that there be as
many minds and meanings about it, almost as there be men. For Novatus expounds
it one way, Donatus another, Arius another, Pelagius another, etc. Therefore it
is very needful, by reason of so great and diverse errors, that the line of
Prophetical and Apostolical interpretation, be directed according to the rule
of Ecclesiastical and Catholic meaning.

So that true and Catholic Tradition, is like unto a strong wall about the
garden of holy Scripture, which keeps it from the incursion of Heretics, or if
they chance to get in, it is a sovereign antidote to preserve us from the
poison they suck out of these sweet flowers.

So that take the Church and Tradition in a right sense, there is much to be
attributed to them, but I entend brevity. Only I cannot omit, how you would
make us believe, that this authority of the Church has caused those
seperations which Arius, Nestorius, and other Heretics have raised, when you
say, hence arose those ancient and many separations amongst Christians. etc.

Whereas indeed it was the authority of the Church and Catholic Fathers which
has quelled, confuted, and silenced all those Heresies, and Heretics which it
seems you have a mind to revive, for you will not have them called Heresies,
but Schisms, for indeed, say you, they are but names of Schism, howsoever in
the common language of the Fathers they were called Heresies.

But you must pardon those who think it safer and sounder to follow the common
language of the Fathers, then your own private assertion.

But you have a reason for it. For Heresy, say you, is an act of the will not
of reason, whereas indeed it is both. For does not the heretic first fasten
upon a false opinion, which is an act of the understanding and corrupted
reason, and this is the material part of heresy. And then does wilfully and
stubbornely* being convinced of it, maintain the same, which is an act of the
will and formalizeth heresy. And in this sense, not in yours, is that known
speech of St. Austine true, errare possum, haereticus esse nolo, that is, I may
err and so fall into the material part of heresy, by apprehending and
judging that to be a good doctrine which is false and erroneous, but haereticus
esse nolo, I will not be an heretic, that is, I will not persist in this
opinion, being lawfully convicted and condemned for it by the Church and
governors thereof. For then I should be formally and properly an heretic.
For howsoever you slight and nullify the authority of the Church, yet in the
primitive times when the Church was at unity, when there was not altar contra
altar, it was then esteemed to be of great power and authority, which
authority of that Church has justly declared not only the Manichees,
Valentinians and Marcionites, but also the Arians, Nestorians, and Pelagians to
be heretics. Howsoever you are willing to distinguish them, and make these
latter scarce Schismatics, for you will take these rents in the Church to be
at the worst but Schisms. Then at the best it seems they are not so much as
Schisms.

Yet I cannot be persuaded so ill of the former; as to think they knew what
they taught, was a lie, and so went directly against their own consciences:
nor yet so well of the latter to excuse them with you, from heresy, for I am
yet to learn, that heresy is nothing else, but to know that a lie is taught,
such kind of wickedness I shall rather term open blasphemy then heresy,
when men go against the light of their own consciences.

Sixthly, you chalk us out a way, wherein we may safely walk, not only with
the Donatists, But with the Arian and all other heretics. And that is to have
Liturgies and public forms of service so framed, as that they admitted not
of particular and private fancyes, but contained only such things, as in which
all Christians do agree; and then, Schisms on opinion were utterly vanished,
and thus, say you, I may go to an Arian Church.

A pretty fancy indeed. But first I think you could not prevail with the
Arian party to frame their Creed so, as might not give offense to the
orthodoxe side, for in all Liturgies they use to have a confession of their
faith.

And secondly, if you could prevail with them, how could you persuade all our
Churches, to put that clause out of our Creed. [ I believe in Christ the only
begotten son of God, begotten of his father before all worlds, God of God,
light of light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one
substance with the father by whom all things were made.] which was a good
illustration of our Creed joined to it, and made a part of it by the fathers of
the Nicene Council against the Arians then, and will serve as a sufficient
bulwark against our Sosinians now: which Creed has had the general applause
of the Christian Churches since, and has the honor to be one of the Creeds of
the Catholic Church.

You must prevail with them likewise to blot out of Athanasius Creed (which
though it were made but by one man, yet by general approbation is now also
become the Creed of all our Churches,) I say you must put out of it, these
clauses. [ there is one person of the Father, another of the son, another of
the Holy Ghost, but the Godhead of the Father and of the son and of the Holy
Ghost is all one, the glory equal, the majesty coeternall, the Father
eternal, the son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal: the Father is God,
the son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God.] All which do directly overthrow
these heresies. And do not call these clauses, particular and private fancies,
for they are part of the universal and public faith of the Church, which all
the East and West, all Popish and Reformed Churches do unanimously profess
and believe. It is not a time now to add, much less to detract, from our
public Confessions of faith.

TRACT.
The third thing I named for matter of Schism was Ambition, I mean Episcopal
Ambition, showing it self especially in two heads, one concerning Pluralities
of Bishops in the same Sea. Another concerning the superiority of Bishops in
diverse Seas. Aristotle tells us that necessity causes but small faults, but
Avarice and Ambition were the mother of great Crimes; Episcopal Ambition has
made this true, for no occasion has produced more frequent, more continuous,
more sanguineous Schisms, than this has done; the Seas of Alexandria, of
Constantinople, of Antioch, and above all of Rome, do abundantly show thus
much, and all Ecclesiastical stories witness no less, of which the greatest
part consists of factionating and tumultuating of great and potent Bishops.

Socrates Apologizing for himself, that professing to write an Ecclesiastical
story, he did oft-times interlace the actions of secular Princes and other
Civil business, tells us that he did this to refresh his reader, who otherwise
were in danger to be cloyd by reading so much of the Acts of unquiet and unruly
Bishops, (...), in which as a man may say, they made butter and cheese one of
another, for (...), that I may show you a cast of my old office and open you a
mystery in Grammar, properly signifies to make butter and cheese, and because
these are not made without much agitation of the milk, hence (...), by a
borrowed and translated signification, signifies to do things with much
agitation and tumult.

But that I may a little consider of the two heads, I but now specified, the
first I mentioned was the plurality of Bishops in one Sea. For the general
practice of the Church, since the beginning, at least since the original of
Episcopacy, as now it is, was never to admit at once more than one Bishop in
one Sea, and so far in this point have they been careful to preserve unity,
that they would not have a Bishop in his Sea to have two Cathedral Churches,
which thing lately brought us a book out of France De monogamia Episcoporum,
written by occasion of the Bishop of La^gres: who, I know not upon what fancy,
could not be content with one Cathedral Church in his Diocese but would needs
have two, which to the Author of that Work seem, to be a kind of Spiritual
Polygamy; it fell out amongst the Ancients very often, sometimes upon occasion
of difference in opinions, sometimes because of those who were interessed in
the choice of Bishops; that two and sometimes more were set up, and all parties
striving to maintain their own Bishop, made themselves several Churches,
several Congregations, each refusing to participate with others, and many
times proceeding to mutual excommunications; that is that which Cyprian calls
Erigere Altar contra Altar, to this does he impute the original of all
Church disorders, and if you read him, you world think he thought no other
Church tumult to be Schism but this. This perchance may plead some excuse, for
though in regard of Religion it self, it matters not whether there be one or
more Bishops in one Diocese, and sometimes two are known to have set at once;
for Epiphanius reckoning up the Bishops of Rome, makes Peter and Paul the
first: and Saint Augustine acknowledges for a time he sat fellow Bishop with
his predecessor, though he excused it, that he did so by being ignorant that
the contrary had been decreed by the Council of Nice, yet it being a thing
very convenient for the peace of the Church to have it so, neither does it any
whit savor of vice or misdemeanor, their punishments sleeps not who
unnecessarily and wantonly go about to infring it.

ANIMADVERSION.
Seventhly, you come to Episcopal Ambition, then which you say none has
caused more frequent, more continuous, more sanguineous Schisms.

It is very true indeed, we shall read of many uproares and much bloodshed
about the election of some Bishops, for which you cannot so much accuse the
Bishops as the factious, furious, and unruly multitude, who eagerly pursue
their several humors, and are violently carried into extremes. And therefore
for the cure of this mischief, the order and power of Bishops was not taken
away, but the choice of them, you know, was taken from the giddy multitude and
translated unto the nomination and election of temporal Princes.

As for your story out of Socrates, you should have done well to have put down
the place, that your reader might have seen, you have urged it to your own
advantage. I shall set it down plainly as I find it in his proeme to his fifth
book: where Socrates intending to write an ecclesiastical history, and yet
withal is willing to mingle amongst it temporal affairs, makes three
apologies for it. First, says he, that these warlike affairs might not be
forgotten, but come unto posterity, for it seems there were few or no
historians in his time. The second excuse is (which you allege) for variety
sake, least the reader should be cloyed with perusing only Church affairs,
which is no more then if a man writing a story of a commonwealth, should for
variety and delight, intermixe here and there businesses of the Church. Not
that the commonwealth was then more quiet then the Church, but there were full
as many troubles and tumults in that as in this. Nay which may serve somewhat
to excuse the unquietness of the Clergy, it was caused through the disturbance
of the commonwealth. For that is Socrates his third and chiefest reason,
because by setting down the affairs of the temporal estate, we may know
from whence these tumults amongst Bishops arose. For when, says he, the
commonwealth was thus tossed up and down with troubles and seditions with
factions and divisions: the estate of the Church and chiefest Churchmen (...),
as it were by a certain kind of Sympathy, could not choose but be infected
with the same disease.

Besides, suppose some Bishops then were factious and ambitious, you should
consider that this concerns the persons of Bishops, not their calling, though
I think you might have spared both. Now what a vulgar and illogicall way is
this, through the sides of any man's person to wound his very calling. And had
our great writer of Bishops lives been as careful to lay together all that
makes for them, as he has been industrious to rake together all that makes
against them, he might have made his volumes swell twice as bigg.

TRACT.
But that other head of Episcopal Ambition, concerning Supremacy of Bishops in
diverse Seas, one clayming Supremacy over another, as it has been from time to
time, a great trespass against the Churches Peace, so it is now the final
ruin of it. The East and West through the fury of the two prime Bishops being
irremediably separated without all hope of Reconcilement. And besides all this
mischief, it is founded on a vice contrary to all Christian humility, without
which no man shall see his SAVIOR; for they do but abuse themselves and
others, that would persuade us, that Bishops by CHRIST'S Institution have any
superiority over other men further then of Reverence, or that any Bishop is
Superior to another further than Positive order agreed upon amongst Christians
has prescribed: for we have believed him that has told us that in JESUS
CHRIST there is neither high nor low, and that in giving honor, every man
should be ready to prefer another before himself, which saying cuts of all
claim certainly of superiority, by title of Christianity, except men think
that these things were spoken only to poor and private men. Nature and
Religion agree in this, that neither of them has an hand in this heraldry of
Secundum sub and supra, all this comes from Composition and agreement of men
amongst themselves, wherefore this abuse of Christianity to make it Lacquey to
Ambition, is a vice for which I have no extraordinary name of Ignominy, and an
ordinary I will not give it, least you should take so transcendent a vice to be
but trivial.

Now concerning Schism arising upon these heads, you cannot be for behavior
much to seek, for you may safely communicate with all parties as occasion shall
call you, and the Schismatiques here are all those who are heads of the
faction, together with all those who foment it: for private and indifferent
persons, they may be spectators of these contentions as securely in regard of
any peril of Conscience, (for of danger in purse or person, I keep no
account) as at a Cock fight where serpents fight, who cares who has the
better? the best wish is that both may perish in the fight.

And for conventicles, of the nature of which you desire to be informed, thus
much in general evidently appears, that all meetings upon an unnecessary
separation are to be so styled, so that in sense a Conventicle is nothing else
but a Congregation of Schismatiques, yet Time has taken leave sometimes to fix
this name upon good and honest meetings, and that perchance not altogether
without good reason, for with public religious meetings thus it fares. First,
it has been at all times confessed necessary, that God requires not only
inward and private devotion, when men either in their hearts and Closets or
within their privaet walls, pray, praise, confess and acknowledge; but he
further requires all those things to be done in public, by troops and
shoales of men, and from hence have proceeded public Temples, Altars, forms
of Service, appointed times, and the like, which are required for open
Assemblies, yet whilst men are truly pious, all meetings of men for mutual
help of piety and devotion wheresoever and by whomsoever celebrated, were
permitted without exception.

But when it was espied that ill affected persons abused private meetings,
whether Religious or Civil to evil ends; Religiousnesse to cross Impiety, as
appears in the Ethnic Elusinia, and Bacchanalia, and Christian meetings under
the Pagan Princes, when for fear they durst not come together in open view,
were charged with foul imputations, as by the report of Christians themselves
plainly appears, and Civil meetings many times, under pretense of friendly
and neighbourly visites, sheltred treasonable attempts against Princes and
Commonweals,

Hence both Church and State joined, and jointly gave order for Forms, Times,
Places of Public meetings, whether for Religious or Civil ends, and all
other meetings whatsoever, besides those of which both time and Place, are
limited, they censured for Routs and Riots, and unlawful Assemblies in the
State, and in the Church, for Conventicles.

So that it is not lawful, no not for prayer, ^earing, for Conference, for any
other Religious office whatsoever, for people to Assemble otherwise, then by
public order is allowed, neither may we complain of this in times of
incorruption, for why should men desire to do that suspitiously in private
which warrantably may be performed in public.

But in times of manifest Corruptions and persecutions, wherein Religious
Assembling is dangerous, private meetings howsoever, besides public order,
are not only lawful, but they are of necessity and duty, else how shall we
excuse Meetings of Christians for public Service, in time of danger and
persecutions, and of our selves in Queen Mary's days? and how will those of
the Roman Church amongst us, put off the imputation of Conventicling, who are
known amongst us privately to assemble for Religious exercise against all
established order, both in State and Church? For indeed all pious Assemblies in
times of persecution and corruption howsoever practiced, are indeed or rather
alone the lawful Congregations, and Public Assemblies though according to
form of Law, are indeed nothing else but Riots and Conventicles, if they be
stained with corruption and superstition.

ANIMADVERSION.
Eighthly and lastly, you take away all superiority from Bishop's when you say,
they do but abuse themselves and others, that would persuade us, that Bishops
by Christ's institution have any superiority over other men, further then of
reverence.

Where (although you intended only to speak against the superiority of one
Bishop over another) yet you seem to take away, not only all power of one
Bishop over another, but of a Bishop over a Presbyter, yea of a Bishop over any
other private man. I cannot here (intending brevity) enter upon the dispute
about the power of one Bishop over another, or of the power of a Bishop over a
Presbyter. The former of which is no doubt confirmed by a long continued
Ecclesiastical power, the latter by an Apostolical. But that a Bishop should
not have any superiority over an ordinary layman, seems strange to me.
Certainly our Savior intended some power and authority unto Peter and the
rest of the Apostles, when he gave them the keys and wished them to open and
shut, to bind and loose, whose successors Bishops are, and though some make
question whether they succeed them as Bishops, yet none doubt but they
succeed them as Pastors of the Church, and thus have they power over laymen.
S. Paul wills Timothy to command and teach, 1. Tim. 4. 11. and in another place
wills others to obey those who had the oversight of them, Heb. 13. 17.

Now where there is commanding on the one side and obeying on the other, there
must needs be superiority.

But I could not have imagined this had been your meaning, but for your proofs
which follow. For we have believed him that has told us, that in Christ Jesus
there is neither high nor low, and that in giving honor every man should be
ready to prefer another before himself, which saying cuts of all claim
certainly of superiority, by title of Christianity, except men think that
these things were spoken only to poor and private men.

Where, you consider not, that you run into an Anabaptisticall humor, and take
away all superiority in the commonwealth, as well as in the Church, and
entrench upon the Scepter of the King as well as upon the Miter of the Bishop.
But your proofs are easily satisfied. For the first, though we find not those
very words in Scripture, yet I suppose you aim at that place wherein it is
said, We are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28. where the true meaning of
the place is, that as we are Christians we are all one, that is, we have all
equally, and alike been partakers of Christ by baptism, as he says, verse.
27. as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. So
that as members of Christ we are all one, and all make but one body of Christ.
Yet as amongst the natural members of our bodies, so amongst the mystical
members of Christ, though they be all one as members, being compared with the
head: yet being compared one with another, S. Paul tells us, there are more
honorable and less honorable members, 1. Cor. 12. 23.

Your other place, that we should in giving honor prefer one another,
teaches humility, but takes not away superiority.

But you go on and tell us, that nature and religion agree in this, that
neither of them has an hand in this heraldry of Secundum sub and supra:
whereas in it they both join hand in hand. Nature acknowledges this heraldry,
that she may avoid ataxie and confusion: And religion also, for did not our
Lord and Master acknowledge a Caesar, and commanded us to give unto him that
which belonged unto him, to wit, obedience and subjection. And does not his
Apostle S. Paul command that every soul should be subject to the higher power.
Romans 13. 1. where you see this heraldry of sub and supra, is put down in
express terms: and pray let us observe the Apostles reason why we should
thus be subject to the higher powers, for, says he, there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be are ordained of God. How hear I then, that all
this comes from composition and agreement of men amongst themselves.

But I spare to prosecute this doctrine any further, least I should discover in
it a very transcendent crime.

FINIS.

