THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH, In expectation of the Resurrection from the DEAD.
Opened in a Sermon at the Funeral of the Right Worshipful Mr Thomas Slany
late Mayor of the famous Town and Corporation of Kings-Lynn in the County of
Norsolk, who deceased in the year of his Maioralty, Jan. 10. 1649.

PREACHED THERE By JOHN HORN an unworthy Servant of God, in the Gospel of his
Son Jesus Christ, whereof he is a Preacher to the Congregation at Lynn
Allhallows.

HEBREWS 6.12. Be not slothful, but follow the steps of those who through
faith and patience have inherited the promises.

HOSEA 13.14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem
them from death, O death, I will be thy plague, O grave, I will be thy
destruction, repentance is hid from mine eyes.

Fiducia Christianorum Resurrectio mortuorum, Contemplatio est spei in hoc
spatio, non praesentatio, expectatio, non possessio. Tertul. de Res Carnis.
Haec fidei vis est, quod mediat inter vitam and mortem, and mortem transmutat
in vitam, Luther. LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller dwelling in Black friars.
1649.

To his beloved Friend Mrs. MARY SLANY Relict of the late Worshipful Mr Thomas
Slany, with his and their Children, Grace, Mercy and Peace, from God our
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Beloved,
AT your motion and by your request these papers are become more public then
was intended: not for any rare worth in them, but to satisfle your desire and
esteem of them, which though at first I was more inclinable to, considering
that they bear some testimony, though not much, against some spreading evils of
these times, yet upon second thoughts I began to recoil, and should have
contented my self with your private enj^ment of them, considering the plenty of
books, and the slenderness of what these contain, and what the temper of the
world is, that they would be ready to laugh at and deride my doings, and accuse
me of arrogance and soolishnesse: of arregancy as if I sought to be known and
taken notice of, of footishnesse in endeavoring it by (or in filling the world
with) such dead discourses, and this had stifled it in its birth, and made it
never for me to have seen the Sun in this way, had not my respect to you and
your desire, made me to disregard these reasonings which yet it did with some
reluctance, while I further considered, that as my weakresse would provoke some
to slight the witness born against their evils, so my plainness might
perhaps offend others, and engage them against me into some contentions, not
which but their bettering and profit is my desire: but Gods will be done in it,
he is a fr^^ agent and can do all things, and oftentimes works by most
unlikely means, and does most good where least is expected. One talent put to
the improvement may bring forth a second with is blessing on it, and though
some may heart themselves, yet others more sober minded may happily pick
something from it that may serve to their profit, yea, some perhaps may find
leisure to look on such a Paper who either want it for, or money to procure
larger volumes: for your sakes then and for theirs I have adventured it to
public censure.

And seeing you were so much his whose furerall this solemnized, To you it is
meetest in the first place with these portions of himself he has left
surviving him, that I commend it, not to provoke you to renewed gries in
thought of your less of him, but to stir you up to imitate his virtues in
mi^ding his gains by them May you his and yours be so minded hereby of his or
those for^er worthies says and walkings, as thereby to be stirred up to
receive embrace and where you have enbraced to hold fast the word and premises,
and so to follow their virtuous footsteps in contempt of the world, and carnest
pursuit of the promise ^rest as to live by says and die in says (...) I shall
thank ^y labor b^rciy well bestowed, whose hearty prater is your prosperities,
subscribing my self with my endeavors,

Yours, to serve you in the Gospel of Christ, J. H.

To the Right Worshipful Mr THOMAS REVET Mayor of the Town and Corporation of
Lynn in Norfolk, with his worshipful Brethren and Assistants, Grace and Mercy
in Christ Jesus.
Right Worshipful,
I Am bold to present you with these Papers, because you were not only auditors
of, but also much interessed in what they contain, they present you with a me
nortall of a late head of yours, though untimely (as to your wished benefit by
him) cut off by the hand o^ death, providence so ordering that the lesser body
should therein be the praeludium and forerunning reprelentation of a greater,
of whom you bear the image and superscription: what was wanting to his honor
here by the shortness of his Maioralty, I have endeavored herein to supply,
by adding to his memory, which though he need not for himself, yet in some
things may be useful for us, something it may afford us for instruction,
something for imitation. He was a man of parts, that is known I think to all of
us, and yet I have heard intelligent men say they were known to few; what they
were would best have appeared in their improvement: but before you and he came
to that point (as to Magistracy) he and they too were almost gone: there is
something in that worthy of our instruction; when God gives you men of parts,
make use of them (as to office) while ye may enjoy them, chiefly such as are
also exemplary for piety, and worthy imitation: and such as have parts, be ye
willing to improve them while ye have opportunity Post est occasia calvae.

When God presents us with a mercy, it is wisdom to meet i^ in the face, and
not let it slide by us, till it be past recovery. He was a man of integrity,
mercy, piety, one that affected honesty more then his honor, in these things
he was worthy imitation. It Is wisdom (so far a^ we may) to imitate in our
selves whatsoever we are convinced of is good in others But have these Papers
nothing else but a mention of him? perhaps your wisedoms may pick out something
else, though through my little ability but weakly handled, yet that may afford
some spiritual profit. If it be but to put you in mind of death: that is worth
the thinking of, that well considered may make you the better while you live,
but ^ndeed there are some other things that inclined me to the publishing it,
chiefly the witness herein born against a threefold spreading and overcommon
malady, one that deem, the extent of the Gospel-dectine of the death of Christ,
and good will of God to sinners, something akinne to the old Pharisaison, that
would tie it up to the elect, the lews and people proselvted into themselves,
whom they therefore also judged of the same election with themselves: denying
it to Publicans and sinners not so regulated, and to uncircumcised gentile (the
body and generality of them) not so proselyted. The second is the common
pro^hannesse of superficial Christians and turners of the grace and Gospel ^f
Christ into wantonness, that rest in a name and notion of Christianity, but
deny the power of it, of which sort there are every where too many, The third
is the sect of the Sadduces, that deny the resurrection, the visible coming of
Christ personally again, and the glorious performance of the promises at that
his appearing, a too too spreading generation. May God make it useful to you
to lead you besides all these tocks, in the true ancient Scripture-doctrine
and faith formerly also attested to in the Church in England, so to embrace and
love the promised salvation, and so to follow the steps of this good man, and
of other Worthies that have gone before him, in the belief of and hearty love
to, closing with an entertainment of the Word of God, that it may produce like
fruits in you as in them, unto death and in death, that you with them also may
partake of the glorious resurrection unto life and happiness, I shall have
cause of much rejoicing: The fountain of mercy and wisdom flow down upon you,
sill you with truth, with peace and righteousness, direct and bless you, and
make you blessings in your places and generations, So prays,

Your Worships Servant to his ability, J. H.

Upon the subject of this Book, An INSTRUCTION and HYMN.
REader, see here how great a mystery
Lies cropped up in Christianity.
Strange Paradoxes! h^r^'s a bush o^ flame
Burning yet no^ consumed by the same,
By Coll^quintida death in the set,
And yet so healed that it his teth not,
Drink from a rock, in gravel w^^^some feed,
In darkness light, in midst of eval good,
In sickness health, the sweetest case in pain,
In weakness strength, in loss the greatest gain,
Yea life in death, and in absurdities
The depth of wisdom, bassling all the wise.
The tell how men by falling rise, and how
By lesing what they have they richer grow*
How by dishonor m^n may mount on high,
By being overcome have victory.
Here have thou meat out of the eater, here
Sweet from he strong, holdnesse in greatest fear,
A dying man sild full of life and breath,
Conquered and yet triumphing over death,
But whence all thu? or how can these things be?
Shall Paradoxes be Divinity?
Behold, here is God with man, Emmanuel,
That only word (...) does unspell.
In God is good, light (...) strength case and gain
In man all, darkness, sickn^sse, weakness, pain,
Yea sorrow, less, and misery, and death,
God fountain is of bless, jor, life and breath.
In Christ these (...), Behold the mystery,
Manhead united with the Deity.
Yea, all those properties and consequents
Of each, found place in him: a battle thence
In him was fought, while sin on righteousness,
Death on eternal life, and curse on bless,
Made their assault, for these on him did seize,
Cause God to bruise his precious soul did please.
Death with us train could find but small alode,
Though the humanity did yield thereto,
The Deity soon resoued is therefro,
And since our evils in that death did meet.
The eater yielded meat, and the strong sweet.
God shen'd himself in man, in weakness strength,
In darkness glortom light, in shortness length,
Even length of days and immortality,
Death being swallowed up in victory,
Of which man's nature being dispessest,
Is now become in him Gods endless rest,
Yea, men is there the seat of blessings all
As^e^ded, and captivity made thrall,
Which treastored are in him for us, from thence
Blessing of every kind God does ^^spense.
Christy his ho^y Word and Spirit, by which
He peace and pardon in (...) Name does preach^*
By these he works says, and that the (...)
'Twixt us and Christ bringing to unity
With him, from which does such communion slow
That he and we no longer are as two;
^oyn'd in one spirit as he took our flesh,
So he gives us his Spirit, which does refresh
And fill our hearts with joy: Gods power he is
Conquering death and its accomplices
In us, as once in Christ, with whom joined thus,
He writes his Name upon us, God with us,
He is our life in death, hope in despair,
Our strength in weak^sse, and he does repair
Our breaches all, while he does make us see
That we shall r^st and reign as well as he.
Oh glorious death by which our life appears!
Oh glorious Spirit that our hearts no bears!
Oh gloricus Word that does this tidings bring!
Oh glorious Cha^ where our heavenly King
Comes riding to (...), precious Faith
That such a spring and such an issue has.
Oh precious Lord that bar^st to us such love!
Try self so to abase, ^ll to remove
From (...) whom it lay, and would have wrought
Our and esse ruin, Thou to is have brought
Life, yea, immortal life. Thou art the day
That lightnest our night. Thou art the way
By which God comes to (...) in he great night,
By which he give to (...) his holy Spirit,
By which we come to him and find his power
Infusing life into us in deaths hour.
The ^s art the Word, on thee the Spirit is put
To open eyes that blind are, and unshut
The stepped ears, from bondage to set free,
And to get over d^^th full victory.
Oh show thy self to us, be thou our life,
Fill us with piece and joy, end all our strife,
Be thou our All, open our hearts to see,
And fill us with^ly glory, so shall we
Triumph in midst of death, and sing thy praise,
Full well assured that thou then^e wilt raise
Us up again, and set us on thy Throne,
For evermore with God to be at one.
THE LIFE OF FAITH IN DEATH.
The Text.
HEBREWS 11.13, 14. All these died ((...)) in (or according to) faith, not
having received the promises, but seeing them afar off, they were persuaded,
and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and sojourners in the
earth.
For they that say such things manifest that they seek a Country.

THe custom of a solemn interring of the dead bodies of deceased friends, and
of making lamentations over them is very ancient and laudable, the mention of
it is as old as Abraham's time, we find it was then a custom usual in the
Eastern countries, as we read in the book of Genesis of the Patriarchs and
Egyptians, and surely in its original it was tessera and fidei and amoris, a
pledge and testimony both of their faith and love, fidei a witness of their
faith that they believed and looked for the resurrection of the body, and
therefore would decently bestow cost upon, and interre the body: amoris, of
their love to the deceased, whose relics therefore they so sarre honored,
and whose loss (or absence rather) they lamented, as in their presence
formerly they had been delighted: thus I might show you Abraham himself the
father of the faithful, Genesis 23.2. burying the Corpse of his deceased Sarah,
and weeping for her, and yet it is observable that the Jews write the letter
(...) in the word (...) that signifies to weep very small (...) to intimate the
practice of Abraham to have been suitable to what the Apostle Paul expressly
wishes that believers in the like cases should be, 1 These. 4 13. a moderate
mourning for their dead in the Lord, as those that believing the doctrine of
the resurrection, are not without hope for them, I might point you likewise to
Jacobs burial of his wife Rachel, and his and Esaus burial of their father
Isaac, Genesis 35.19, 20, 29. and to Joseph and his brethren, with many of the
Egyptians, making a very great lamentation for old Israel when they buried him,
insomuch that the place where they stayed lamenting him, got from thence a new
denomination, being afterward called Abel Mizraim, Genesis 50.10, 11.
or, the Egyptians mourning, because of the excessive mourning of the
Egyptians, by which it seems that the Egyptians though least akinne to him, yet
made the greatest lamentation, surely not because they loved him better then
his children, but because they were not so well instructed, and therefore had
neither so much knowledge, nor so much hope of the resurrection which should
have put more bounds unto their mourning, except we shall say that the whole
company coming out of Egypt had the common name of Egyptians put upon them,
because so adjudged to be by the people thereabout inhabiting. I might tell you
too of the interring of Aaron, Miriam, and the lamentations made for them, as
also for Moses, Joshua, Samuel, and many others: but then as the Apostle sales
in this Heb. 11. in another case, the time would fail me, or my strength would
fail me by exceeding the time: I shall therefore content my self with what is
said to that, and turn from this discourse to my text, and see what it will
afford for our observation and usefullnesse, before we make further application
of our discourse to the present occasion.

All these died in (or according to) faith
The Apostle in this Epistle had most sweetly opened the doctrine of Christ to
the Hebrews that were partakers of the heavenly call, and thereby brought to
believe, and thence called holy brethren ( chapter 3.1.) and from his natures,
offices, sufferings, and from the dignity of them all, he had abundantly
evinced and cleared it, that they had good ground to hold fast the faith and
profession of him firm without wavering, and not be moved therefrom by any
cause or reason: In the 10th Chapter he had laid down many other arguments also
to press them thereunto, as from the danger of willing backsliding, If we sin
wilfully, after the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sin, etc. verse. 25, 26. and from the consideration of the excellency
apprehended by them in Christ in their illumination, and the effects of that
apprehension in them, etc. verse, 33, 34. Remember the days in which after ye
were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of affliction, etc. from the
greatness of the reward promised, and to be certainly enjoied by them in its
season, if they hold fast their faith and confidence, and were not turned aside
therefrom. verse. 35. Cast not away your confidence which has great recompense
of reward, to which he adds an instruction about their need of patience, ver.
36. and usefullnesse and excellency of faith, as that which most suiteth with
the condition in which God uses to lead his, and in which they should meet
with preservation unto the enjoyment of the reward promised them, verse. 38. Now
the just shall live by faith, or, the just by faith shall live: without that
the profession will be worthless, the considence will vanish, and patience
will have no place: but there will either be an open revolting or a secret
withdrawing in a barren, empty, dead adhering to an outside profession. Now in
this Chapter he confirms what he had there said, that faith is that in which
God exercises his people, and gives them life, that God does not use to keep
them by sense, in giving in an enjoyment of things promised, so much as by
faith in his word without sensible feelings and experiments: but first of all,
he lays down a definition of this faith, v. 1. Its the subsistence of things
hoped for, and the evidence or argument of things not seen, that puts an end to
vain empty disputations, How do you know that God made the world, or that the
Scriptures are the word of God, or are true etc.? Faith makes it evident to me.
God has said thus, and in his saying I am convinced and persuaded to believe,
though I see not the things of which he speaks to me, and in believing I am
stayed and satisfied about it, and its become to me as firm a principle as if I
had seen. Its an argument leaning upon Gods authority, speaking and manifesting
it self unto the conscience, that gives a su^sistence to things hoped for, as
to my mind: so that though we see not the things we hope for, nor are they as
yet in being, yet they being believed, have a kind of subsistence in the
heart: and the soul acts upon that subsistence toward them as really as if
it saw them with the bodily sense, as if they were already existent and had a
being, which also they shall have in their season. From that the Apostle
proceeds to give diverse instances of the excellency, usefullnesse and ^fficacy
of this faith in the prime and choice Saints of God in all ages, how they have
lived by it, and in the exercise of it, without the enjoyment of the things set
before them and believed: and he begins at Abel, v. 4. and so passes on to
Enoch, ver. 5. Noah, ver. 7 a^ thence to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, ver. 8, 9.
and Sarah, ver. 11. or whom he h^re says in the text, All these diea in faith,
not having received the promises, etc.

The words (these all) seem to refer to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Sarah, both
because of Enoch, of whom its said verse. 5. that he was translated that he
should not see death, who therefore cannot be here included (except we take his
change in his translation to be equivalent to death) and also because that he
tells us verse. 15, of these forsaking their Country, which we find no where
affirmed of those others mentioned before these. But let us come to the words,
and note something from them, that present themselves unto us, for I shall not
spend time about a curious supersluous cutting them in pieces: Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob were worthy persons highly favored of God, chosen by him to peculiar
dignity and privileges, Princes and Prophets, and very famous in their proper
seasons, yet behold what the Apostle in the first words of the text affirms
of them all, These all died, Whence let us note (and I shall but briesly note
things, and not bound up my discourse unto the unfolding of some one only
proposition)

That no dignity or privilege though very great will exempt us from dying.
Note 1.


Death is a due debt to nature, Omne quod generatur corrumpitur, whatsoever
has a natural generation is also subject to corruption, death is in the
present principles of every earthly living being, and that as by man's sin
meritoriously, so by Gods just sentence upon man's sinning judicially, Heb. 9.27.
Statutum est, etc. Its enacted, resolved upon and ordained for man once to
die, and that once, though for time uncertain to us, yet that it shall find a
time, nothing more sure, yea, many a time it seems very near us, and we are in
a tendency to it from our birth to our last gasp. By many ways, diseases,
infirmities or providentiall accidents we may, and by some or other of them we
are sure to arrive at death: we read of none exempted save Enoch and Elias,
the first changed, the other assumed (for as for the Virgin Mary we have not
such authentic authority or warrant to believe it) those two did God exempt
from the common way of flesh, to show in them his power over all flesh, over
nature and natural principles and inclinations, and that we might the more
readily be induced to believe the benefit of Christ in the resurrection of the
dead, when we hear that he preserved some from death and made them as pledges
to us of the certainty of that glory and immortality that is the promised
portion of all that believe in him through his death. And yet surely even they
underwent a change equivalent to death, though they slept not in death, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.51. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, though we lie not in death, yet we must pass through it, we must put
off this mortality, these innate principles of death: we shall not be as now we
are, when we come to inherit what now we believe for. But for us and the rest
of mankind death in a more proper way is to be expected by us, and will come
upon us (except the coming of Christ should suddenly prevent us, and then such
a change might be allotted us) It Is not the being great or gracious that
exempts from that event, These all died, many have lived many years, yet (as
the longest day has its night) so this has been the constant Catastrophe and
winding up of them all in their genealogies, They all died: Jared lived nine
hundred and sixty two years, and then he died: Methuselah lived nine hundred
sixty and nine years, but then it follows too, he also died: so Noah and
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, all gracious and holy men, and found righteous in
the^ generations, and yet these all died. It Is that that David propounds to
all, Psa 49.1, 2. high and low, rich and poor, one and other, because its the
lot of all, that death will overtake them all, none can shift from it, None can
give a ransom to God for his brother, that he should live always and never
di^, the price is too great and it cease for ever. We see wise men die as
well as fools, righteous men as well as sinners, Magistrates as well as
Subjects, rich as well as poor, one as well as another, there is no escape of
any in this battle, nay men as well as the bruit beasts, for as to this common
condition of flesh, there is one event to them both, though not as to the
spirits of both, nor as to the supernatural work of the resurrection of the
body, but as to death, one thing happens to both, both are of the dust, and
both go to the dust: 2 Sa^^. 14.14.
Not only they but we also must needs all die, and our strength is as Water
spilt upon the ground, neither is there any respect of persons with God. Serius
aut^citius, etc. sooner or later we must all stoop to death in the flesh, These
all died.

A truth known to all, and to be experimented by us all, and yet a truth as
little though of as almost any, and as little made use of, well might David cry
out as he did, when he was about to speak thereof Audite hoe omnes populi, etc.
Psa. 19.1. Hear this all ye people, for though we all see it, and shall feel
it, yet we mind it not, few incline their ears to hear what God says to us in
it, but hear this all ye people, rich and poor, high and low, one and other,
All must die: Ye that are rich and wealthy, and have seraped much together, and
laid it up for posterity, ye must die, and leave all this that ye have gotten,
and ye know not who shall possess it after you. Hear this all ye gallants of
the world that are fine and fashionable, and delight to deck up your selves in
costly apparel, Quid ita colitis escam vermibus? you must die and leave these
bodies which you so dress up, for the worms to feed upon. Hear this ye that
addict your selves to pleasures, and rejoice in a thing of naught, and make
your selves merry with mere vanities, ye must all die, and death will put an
end to your mirth and jollity, to your pleasure and voluptuousness, chambering
and wantonness, and nothing but the guilt of these things shall descend with
you. Hear this ye that are poor and pincht with want, and bitten with sorrow,
that fill your selves with cares, and pine away with grief, ye must die too,
and then your poverty and afflictions here shall have an end, ye shall then
have no more need of what now ye murmr, or grieve, or turmoil your selves for
want of: It Is but a momentany condition that you are here afflicted with, ye
must die, and death will put an end to it, yea, death will put an end to all
these things, weal and woe, sorrow and mirth, riches and pleasures, and
whatever here we have, as to us. Surely man in his best estate here is
altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.6.
like a bubble full of wind and emptiness, easily broken and blown away with a
blast, and then that that was sweld up into a great appearing magnitude, proves
as nothing, makes no further show or appearance that we should look after it;
Oh! why then do ye pursue after vain things? why sport ye your selves so
eagerly in voluptuousness? or spend so much cost on dust and ashes, and pride
your selves of that ye have no hold on? or care so much for that that strangers
or victors may devour up when you are gone? why labor ye for that that
perishes, and delight in that that will not endure? Sure the very thought of
death might instruct us all to sobriety in all conditions: Sobriety in earthly
delights, for we must leave them, Sobriety in honors and preferments, for we
must leave them, Sobriety in apparel, for we must leave it, Sobriety in caring
for and getting in the things of this world, 1 Timothy 6.7.
for we must leave them: As we brought nothing into this World With us, so we
are sure We can carry nothing out With us, Sobriety in all things for we must
die to them, Sobriety in fears of growing enemies, Psa. 49.17, 18.
Be not thou afraid When one is made rich, and the glory of his house is
increased, yea, though he be one that b^tes thee, and so has more power
visibly to harm thee, for his day will come, he also is but mortal, and death
will overtake him, and bring down his excellency, and when he dies, he shall
not take any thing with him, nor shall his glory and pomp descend after him;
Isa. 57.12.
who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the
Son of man that shall be made as grass? though here enemies be strong and
potent, and use their power wickedly to persecute the innocent and oppress
them, yet this their state is but for a moment, they also shall die and go
down to the dust, and then where is their fury? in the grave we shall be quiet,
and they have no power to harm us: Job. 3.17, 18, 19.
There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest, there
the prisoners rest together, and they hear not the voice of the oppressor, the
small and great are there, and the servant is free from his master, yea, the
thought of death might further us in taking of our Saviors counsel, Joh.
6.29. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that that will endure to
life eternal. Set not we our hearts on these things, whereof death will surely
deprive us, and we know not how near that is unto us: but look we after those
things that will abide with us after death, and carry us through death, which
it has no power over, nor can take from us, the favor of God, the light of
his countenance, faith and a good conference, assurance of eternal happiness,
when thou have these things thou must rejoice indeed: and thy joy. nor men, nor
death can take away from thee. These all died.

But wherefore died they? There might be many reasons given, but I will not
insist upon them, they died that they might be removed from the evil of the
world, and not always therewith burdened, Isa. 57 1. The righteous is taken
away from the evil to come, and they died that they might rest from their
labor, Rev. 14.13. that having done their work and served their generation (as
is said of David, Act. 13.36.) they might go to bed and sleep, (...).
they shall enter into rest or peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one
walking in his uprightness, Isa. 57.2. thence death is usually in Scripture
called a sleep, such a one fell asleep, and such a one slept with his fathers:
thence the heathen Poets have also called sleep Placidissima mortis imago, and
(...), the pleasant image, resemblance, and as it were the premeditation of
death. But I pass from these things, and go forward with the text, for this
is not the business that the Apostle here mainly propounds, though very
useful for us to consider, and at this time also very seasonable and suitable
with our present occasion, that we also might be stirred up with earnestness
to pray as that good man of God, Psa. 90.12. So teach us O Lord to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: but the Apostle adds,

These all died ((...)) in (or according to) faith, Secundum fidem, after the
faith. What? Did they die in faith? Did their faith die? Verily no, they did
not cast away their faith when they died, but exercised it: their act of dying
too was done in faith, and according to their faith, they died in an exercise
of faith, that it might be further manifest (according to the first proposition
and prime intent of the Apostle here) that they did live by faith, as they did
believe in God while they lived, so when they came to die, they yielded up
themselves to God in that belief, and were not shaken from it, no not by death:
they feared not in the valley of the shadow of death, Psa 23.3. nor fainted in
the hour of death, Genesis 49.18. even then also they waited for Gods salvation,
though death ceised on their bodies, yet they retained, and let not go their
confidence: though the day of their lives here was expired, yet died not their
hopes and hearts within them, but were supported by faith, with the expectation
of another day, in which the promises should be enjoyed, and here we may
further note the excellency of faith.

They that live by faith die in faith, the just by says fi^de life through
their faith, even in the midst of death.

These all died in faith, In this these righteous ones diff^r f^m others, All
die, but die not (...), as becomes faith, or with an experiment of the power
of faith, all die passively, they s^ffer the pains of death, and have their
lives fe^^hed from them, but all are not active in death, willingly and
believingly to resign up their spirits to God, and cast themselves into his
arms with confidence that he will keep and restore them, and notwithstanding
death intervene their receipt of his word and the performance of his promise,
yet he will not fail of his word, but perform every jot and tittle of it to
them. This is the carriage and privilege of those that have the word of God
abiding in and united by faith with them, These all died in faith, these die in
the Lord, 1 Th. 4.16. Rev. 14.3. Through faith they close with and are enclosed
in the power, strength and virtue of the Lord Jesus Christ, by which their
souls are acted and carried with lively hope and expectation of good from God
through him, and as they live in him so they die in him too, as they walk in
his virtue and power while alive in the body, so in the same virtue and power
putting forth it self in (yea encompassing) their souls, through faith they
depart out of the body unto God, and depo^e themselves with God, till the time
in which he shall restore them. These hold fast their faith to the death and in
death, that they mighthe examples and encouragem ^s to us also to hold ^sast^
that we may have the like use and bene^^^ of it in our deaths* But may some
object.

But how do these things stand together, Object.
Faith and Death? When Christ has said, that if a man keep his saying he shall
never see death? Joh. 8.51. What is it to keep his saying but to believe his
sayings, and hold fast that belief? and did not Abraham keep his sayings, and
the Prophets keep his sayings, might not we be offended at Christ as the Jews
were, and say with them, All these had faith, and kept it to the death, and yet
as the Apostle here witnesses, they all notwithstanding that, died, how is it
then that Christ says, If any man keep my sayings he shall never see death?

Oh how mysterious is the word of God, Answ.
and what a riddle to fleshly wisdom and humane ^nse! It Is to be believed and
held for true by faith, not to be judged of as true or false by the verdict of
our sense: certainly both Christ and his Apostles said the truth, he that keeps
his sayings shall not see death, and yet these that kept his sayings (for
before A^^ah^m was Christ was, and his sayings they were that he received) did
all die, yea, the Apostle here hints a solution to that doubt of the appearing
contradiction in them, when he says these all d^d in faith, for in this very
thing that they died in faith, they were so preseryed that they did not see
death, for this very fa^h in which they died, carried them above sense, and
took their eye off from death, and set it upon life, so that they saw, sound
felt, experimented life in death, even when they d^ed according to the fl^^h,
yet the then lived in their spirits; their bodies did but sleep in death, while
their sp^its lived above death, being made partakers of Jesus Christ (as he
word of God to be made flesh, who is the resurrection and the life) and the
very death of death, putting it to death, they passed through the shadow of it,
but they saw not, felt not, found (...) of it, they saw God in their death, and
the sight of him ^o ^ook up and filled their eye that they could not see death
Or 2. they saw not that death that is (...), for ever, for indeed that is death
and worthy the name of death, the second death, the other, the first death, Rom
3.12,
the condemnation that came by the first man upon all men, that spent it sell
upon Christ, being by the wise and merciful God ^a* slated upon him, 2 Timothy
1.10
and he has abolished it so in and by himself, that nothing but the carcass
and shadow of it abides for us to see or grapple with, so that he that sees
but it, sees not death properly but only the shadow and shell of it: Its life,
power, and proper vigor is by the death of Christ swallowed up, abolished and
gone* he then that never sees the second death, sees not death, for there is no
other death by way of punishment of man for his sin, that is prope^y death,
but it, remaming, and that has no power upon Christ or any in him: the just
shall live by faith in the midst of the shadow of the other death, and he shall
live out of the way and danger of this second death, he shall never be hurt of
it either by the bearing it or fearing it, his faith shall keep him from the
first, and being exercised carry him through and above the second, and he shall
never be overcome or over-powred by it, thence blessed and holy is he that has
part in the first resurrection, Rev. 20.6.
that has part in Christ the first begotten from the dead, the resurrection
and the life, that in their spirits are raised with him, and shall have their
bodies raised with the just at his glorious appearing.

Seeing then that we must all needs die, Appli^.
and that is our portion in the flesh, and there is a way by which we may so die
as not to see death, viz. to die in faith, what wisdom is it to take that
course that we may so die, that we may see no death when we die, feel no sting
in death, find it but a shadow that has no deadly substance in it, nay rather
find it lighted with the glory of eternal life, seen and tasted through it?
that we may see life in death, a life beyond, above and without death. Oh how
terrible is death to men when they see death in it! when they experiment and
feel a sting in it, the sting of a self-condemning conscience, and the pricks
of the second death in the first death. When they see death and nothing but
death, when life is hid from their eyes, and so their hearts and thoughts die
within them together with or before their bodies: when they die full of
despair, strangers from and hopeless of ever finding the life of God: that
will be a black griesly day to a soul that sees not life in it, what need then
to cry to God here, so to teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts to Wisdom? the wisdom of God in its sayings, reproofs, counsels, calls,
that it pouring out its spirit upon us, and opening its precious words to us,
we may be filled with faith and courage, and be in such a state as in which to
see no death, that we may so believe and live in and by faith in the power and
exercise of it, that in all our dying conditions, yea, when we come to breath
out our souls we may die in faith, die according to faith and not according to
sense; Even some believers not living and dying in an exercise of faith, are
many times filled with sorrow, fears, faintings, especially in their dying
cases, because they judge not, and so die not according to faith, they judge
according to sense, they feeling pain and feeling temptations, and seeing
griesly things represented to them by Satan, they are affrighted and rerrified
at them, though they be false illusions, whereas exercising faith, and so
judging according to it, they are carried above, and get the victory over sense
and temptation. Let us therefore so follow on after wisdom, that her words may
dwell richly in us, that her spirit may be a spirit of faith in us, that we may
live in faith, and have a living exercise of faith in all conditions, so shall
we also dying have our hearts born up by faith, and shall be enabled to lay
down our tabernacle with peace and joy, as that will lead us, and not with
trouble, as sense would carry us, and unbelief affright us, while we judge of
God and Christ, life and death, sin and righteousness according to faith,
and not according to carnal sense and philosophical speculations, we shall be
from seeing death when we die, yea, shall find and feel life in the shadow of
death, according to that Joh. 5.24. He that hears my Word, and believes on
him that sent me has eternal life, and shall not come into judgment, but is
passed from death to life, and that Joh. 11.25, 26. I am the resurrection and
the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, and
he that lives and believes, shall never die.

Those all died in faith.
Faith? Ay, but what is faith, and how may a man come by it? Object.


The Apostle in this Chapter Heb. 11.1. tells us what it is: Answ.
It Is (...)(or as the paraphrase has it (...)) (...) the argument and
demonstration of things not seen, of invisible things that are not the objects
of sense, but that are declared in the word of God: such is the virtue and
power of faith, that it gives as great a certainty of those unseen things to
the soul or mind, as can be made over by any scientificall demonstration, for
so (...)signifies, a demonstration to the mind, not a presentation to the
bodily essence, as the Greek Scholiast upon it, (...)etc. Faith presents
invisible things as visible: how? to the mind and hope: which hope also
springs from it, and is upheld by it, as it there follows, it is (...) too,
the basis or subsistence of things hoped for, It so presents divine things to
the mind, that it also draws in the soul to trust in God, and hope for good
from him, and the good things it hopes for, faith gives bottom to, and enables
the soul to act toward them, as if they had a real existence as was before
noted. Romans 10.17.
And for the way to come by this faith, the Apostle tells us Fides ex auditu
etc. Faith is by hearing, by that means God ^fi^ct^th it, whence that in Isa.
55.3. Hear, and your souls shall live, (...), but it is not every hearing that
produces this faith, but that which i^ by the word of God, the hearing of the
Gospel or word of faith, that is both mother and nurse of it, from that it
springs, and by that it is nourished: in listening to that God puts forth his
mighty arm, and enables the soul to believe, as sometimes he did to the
Israelites by the brazen Serpent, and to Naaman in the waters of Jordan to heal
them, He that hears my Words and believes on him that sent me, etc. Joh. 5.24.
Hearing the Word is the way to believe in God.

First, God declares the truth, which is truth when declared by him, not made
truth by our believing: this truth heard persuades the soul by the divine power
and spirit, which is therewith ministered, to close with what it hears, and
closing with what it hears, the same power and spirit does therethrough further
(while therein are opened excellent things, as the hatred and justice of God
against sin, and yet his love, mercy and good will in Christ toward the sinful
soul^ etc.) p^swade the soul to embrace and close with Christ himself, of whom
the truth witnesses, and unto whom as its proper body and fountain (as God is
in him and he is God) it leads, and so the soul is by the Word heard, and
through the divine power of God therein, brought unto Christ, and in and
through Christ unto God, by the beam to the body of the Sun, and in that to all
that fountain, fulness of glorious light that sils that body, and makes it so
glorious.

But indeed the nature of this says in which these holy men of God died, and
which is of so glorious use in life and death, is in the text it self by ^cts
and operations notably laid forth and described. I shall briesly and but
briesly touch upon them: These all died in faith not having received the
promises, faith stands not in men's having in possession o^ actual fruition the
things promised, for then faith and sense should be confounded, but 1. they see
them (the promises) afar off,

That Is the first act of this faith, though alone of it self it is not faith,
for it is said of some they have seen and hated Joh. 15.24. yet this is I say,
the first act of this faith, or the first act tending to this faith, through
which the following acts are also generated where this is rightly seated, and
the abiding in this and of this, is that in and through which the other acts
are carried on too and perpetuated: this act being the first product of the
Word heard, and that which most immediately springs from it: for while God
speaks, he presents in his speakings truth to the soul, and the soul hearing
and receiving in the word spoken, finds therein and therewith a divine power
illuminating and giving light to it, and power of discerning that light, as if
the light of the Sun coming to a blind man in a dungeon, should both present
light to him, and in the same moment give him a faculty and power of seeing:
thus in Psa. 119.130. the entrance of thy word gives light, and gives
understanding to the simple; the soul receiving or looking upon divine word
sees things set before it, that it never so saw before, as his own vileness
and filthiness, and Gods goodness and compassions, and the great and glorious
things in his way (his Son) to be met with and enjoied. But these are said to
have seen them afar of, (...). Isa. 46.10.
God shows the end from the beginning: things to be done never so long time
hence, yet being revealed in the word and there presented, are by faith seen;
indeed men not harkening to the word, miss of much light and knowledge therein
held forth, and see not many things which in wist viewing or diligent attention
they might come to see, things afar off, the things promised, which were not of
a long time to be performed, whence neither had they so full and clear a sight
of them as those that see them in nearer times, as things seen afar off at a
great distance are not so fully and clearly seen, as when they are seen nearer
hand. Now they are brought near to us, these being the last times, yea, some of
these promises that they saw through the word at a distance are already in part
performed, and are become Gospel declarations to us, as the coming and
resurrection of Christ, of the former whereof Mary could in her time say (much
more may we now) He has helped his servant Israel in remembrance of his mercy
as he spoke to our forefathers, to Abraham and to his seed for ever, Luke 1.25.
And the Apostle Paul declares the latter as another step of the performance of
these promises, saying, we declare unto you good tidings, how that the promise
that was made unto the fathers God has fullfilled the same unto us their
children, in that he has raised up Jesus from the dead. We believing see them
by faith as things already done, and they are the grounds of our believing in
him for those further things contained in those promises, which are yet
unfullfilled, and which we are to expect the performance of in his season, but
then there must be with this seeing a further act, even that that follows in
the next place of them, viz.

2. They were persuaded.

That Is the second act in this divine faith, it is not a bare speculation of
truths in the proposition without a persuasion, that they are truths, and
worthy to be heeded and embraced by them, the discerning of divine truths as
propounded is a means to persuasion, and so to believing ( Joh. 6.40. Every one
that sees the Son, and believes on him, etc,) and is it self augmented, and
flows in more upon the soul through believing, but is not it self faith without
persuasion, nor can it be so called: these worthies in their faith saw and were
persuaded they were not (...) or (...) Children of unperswasibleness,
disobedient to the heavenly vision, like men that see things at a distance
presented to them, but yet cannot be persuaded they are indeed the things they
seem to be, because they know not how or which way such things should come
there, and they must have their reason satisfied in that, or else they will
think it is an illusion and strong misapprehension in their senses. No it is not
so with faith, though they saw but afar off, yet they were persuaded of the
truth and certainty of what was showed them, and of what in that showing they
did see: In which they differed from many that now though they have the Gospel
more nearly, clearly and plainly presenting the things of God to them, yet they
are not persuaded of them, they see such things affirmed, but cannot think they
are so as they seem to be affirmed of; they exalt their reason, and cannot deny
themselves, and be willing to become fools to follow the word of God, and to
come to its sayings, they have many questions nauseously lie upon their
stomachs through the exercise of their fleshly wisdom, of which they are sick,
and in which they must be fore-satisfied, or else they cannot be persuaded:
like Nicodemus, How can this and that be? Can a man enter into his mothers womb
again, and be born a second time? or like old Zachary, how can persons so
stricken in years have the pr^mise of a child made good unto them? or those in
the wilderness, Can God prepare a table? etc. But so it is not with faith, it
says not, Romans 10.6, 7.
Who shall ascend up into heaven to fetch down Christ? or Who shall descend
into the deep to bring him up? it raises not up questions, it stumbles not
through its reasonings, but is persuaded through the consideration of Gods
authority, They were persuaded, and yet it rests not there neither, but as it
follows of these holy ones

3. They embraced them.

(...) and saluting or kissing them: ay this is the completive, intr^nsecall
act of faith, the faith which the just do live by. It Is not a bare sight and
persuasion, but such as in which the heart likes, and closes with the things
presented, and whereof they are persuaded. It Is possible a man may see and be
persuaded of truth, and yet not like but hate it, not salute and embrace it,
but turn his back upon it and reject it: Mat. 21.38.
some were persuaded that Christ was the heir, yet were so far from embracing
him, that they added, Come, let us kill him: even so many a man when he sees a
truth which reproves his way, and is not for his turn, his lust, purpose or
design, though he see and be persuaded it is true, yet his heart loves it not,
but boggles against it, he cannot like to entertain it, the young man that came
to Christ Mat. 19.22, could not nor did object against Christ's doctrine, nay,
it seems he was in some measure persuaded it was true, why else should it have
troubled him, and made him sad? had he given no credit to it, it would never
have come so near his heart, he would lightlier have got rid of it, but yet he
could not embrace or welcome it, though there was a precious promise set before
him, yet he could not like it upon those terms on which it was propounded: it
was not his case alone, many could like to have the happiness promised in the
Gospel, and are persuaded that upon such and such terms they might and should
have it, who yet not liking those terms do not embrace it, like Boaz his
kinsman, Ruth 4 4, 6.
he could like to have redeemed Naomies lands, till he came to see the terms,
that it would spoil his own inheritance, and upon these terms he would none of
it: many would own and embrace truth, were it not that it would spoil them of
their self-interests, if it lead them not to such self-denial. But this
divine faith here spoken of carries the heart above those stumbles, and makes
it with chearfullnesse and joy to welcome the glorious grace and promised
portion that truth presents it upon its own terms: It so acts the will and
affections too, that they like what the soul sees in truth, and is persuaded
of, and take it home, and give it the best entertainment they possibly can, it
unites the soul unto the promise, and the promise finds a subsistence in the
soul: It Is as a march that God has propounded, and the soul accepts it upon
Gods terms, owns, loves, sides with and rejoices in it: upon which follows,

4. They confessed themselves strangers and pilgrims in the earth, thereby
declaring plainly that they seek a country.

Here we have faith completed inwardly in its own essence, further perfecting
it self in its fruit and operation, as the tree may be said to be perfected in
its bearing fruit: Here Is an inward hope and expectation of the thing promised,
and in that a seeking after it, a country, another and a better state, a new
heaven and a new earth, Act. 3.21.
that is the ultimate thing promised, the state of restoration of all things,
and therein the full enjoyment of God: now through faith (that is through the
word of promise, seen, 1 Pet. 1.3.
persuaded of and embraced) they are begot to a living hope, and that puts the
soul upon pressing after the glory promised, and purges the soul from the
earthly affections, that fill the hearts of those that have not so believed:
all they had before were now nothing to what they see and were persuaded of and
embraced. These promises or things promised are so welcome to their souls
though yet they possess them not, but only have the faith of them, that earth
and world and all things here are not to be compared with them, they reckon
themselves not at home till they enjoy them, their minds are after them, and
off from these things that they lived upon, before these better things were
revealed to them: Here Is mortification on effected both in mind and
conversation, the affections removed from the things below, and set upon these
things that are above, taken off from present enjoyment and advantages for
enjoying the world, and set upon the promised future happiness, the heart is
taken and gone after another city and country, and that heart-belief and
inward affection, produces mouth and practice-confession to salvation, they
confessed themselves strangers and pilgrims in this earth, they find not
herein a resting place, they have a better home, and that they seek after, I
know others may utter such like words upon other principles, as men seeing the
brevity and uncertainty of man's life, may think they have here no staying
continuance, as Cicero the heathen Philosopher speaks somewhat to that purpose,
I go (says he) out of this life, Ex hac vita ita discedo tanquam ex hospitio,
non tanquam ex domo, commorandi enim diversorium nature nohis, non habi. tandi
dedit.
as if I went out of an I^^e, not out of my dwelling house, for nature has
given us here a place to bait in only, not to dwell in. Thus a moral man may
be led to say by the sense and knowledge he has of this life's uncertainty and
passing swiftness, but their confession proceeded from their faith in an
earnest seeking after Gods heavenly promises: the belief of Gods word, and the
complacency they had therein in the expectation of the things set before them,
made them so to reckon themselves as strangers and pilgrims in the earth, and
therefore not to love or covet after the enjoiments of the earth, not to mind
to return back into their own country, whence by faith they had departed to
follow after God: all see they cannot here always continue, but all know not
that they have a better country: and therefore all that so see are not
mortified in their minds to the things whose vanity they see: all reckon not
(nor so walk as if they reckoned) themselves strangers and pilgrims in the
earth seeking another country.

Two things we may principally note from what has been said he to about the
nature of faith and efficacy thereof.

1. Note 3.
That that divine faith that will indeed do us good in death stands in the word
of God, the word of the promise or Gospel, closes with and springs from that,
sees, is persuaded of and embraces the testimony of God held forth in that.

2. Note 4.
That that divine faith is exceeding operative and working inwardly and
outwardly, embracing the heavenly things propounded, it leads to look for,
expect and seek them, and to despise these earthly things, in comparison of
them. Tit. 2 11, 12.
It leads to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope, the
promised inheritance at the appearance of Christ Jesus. It Is neither a
groundless humane conception and presumption, nor an empty, barren and idle
speculation. It Is such an heart-closing with the word as in which the word is
vigorous in the heart, and brings forth fruit unto eternal life: this in both
parts we have seen already, in the opening of the text, they saw them afar off
and were persuaded, and embracing them confessed that they were but strangers
and pilgrims in the earth.

Would we have faith, or would we that have any measure of it grow, Applic.
therein? let us take heed to the word, the word of faith, the doctrine of the
Gospel, and let us be swift to hear, slow to speak, or make confessions or
protestations of our faith further then that heard effects them in us: be
more ready to hear what God says to us, then to boast our selves of what is in
us, or to offer the sacrifice of fools, Eccl. 5.1^.
such as the power of the truths we hear spring not up in us: much more be we
slow to speak against the Gospel of God, because we comprehend it not with our
reason, or to be wroth and offended thereat because it comes to lay us low, and
pull down our proud swelling conceptions. Hearken diligently, and your souls
shall live. Isa. 55 3.


And so, would we be means to bring others to faith? preach we and hold we
forth the word to them, not our dictates and placitas, but Gods word, the
Gospel as attested in the Scripture, that men may believe as the Scripture has
said, for to such faith is the promise made, Joh. 9.38. He that believes on
me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall slow rivers of living
water, and for such believers Christ has prayed, Joh. 17.20. for them that
shall believe through their word, Joh. 17.10. Gal. 4.28.
the word given by Christ to his Apostles whom he sent out into the world:
preach the word of promise, for of that it is that the heirs are born that
shall enjoy the inheritance, the word of the death and of the resurrection of
Jesus Christ for men, which is part of the promise made to Abraham, as was
showed before, that is the foundation doctrine: upon this foundation build them,
and then exhort them to walk worthy thereof in all well-pleasing. There Is many
a man's faith detected to be vain by these two things; by its want of a right
bottom, and by its want of right fruits and operations. 1. Thou say thou
believe and trustest in God, but according to what do thou believe? it is
with many a man because of and according to their works, diligence, endeavors,
sense, feelings, not according as it is said in the word to us (as it is said of
Abraham, he believed according to what was spoken to him, So shall thy seed be,
To. 4.17.) Now as that is not right faith that carries not on the soul after
God, and causes it not to seek the country promised, so neither is that right
faith that springs from man's own strifts and endeavors after the love of God,
as that is not a good faith that is without works, so neither is that good that is
bottomed upon thy works. It Is the character of true believers in Act. 18.27.
that they believed through grace, not through works, I believe says one, that
Christ died for me, and is a Mediator for me. Well but how came thou by that
faith? whereupon is it grounded? why they will say perhaps from the word: Well,
let us see how the word evidenced it to thee? why, I found such and such
effects wrought in me, I was convinced of my evil way, and humbled, and
mourned, and reformed, and was thus and thus changed, therefore I perceived
that I was one of the elect of God, and Christ died for me. Oh but now
believe thou not according to the word but deceivest thy self, grounding thy
faith of Christ's mediation upon thy works, or the effects of law and conscience
in thee, etc. I fear when thou come to the trial, thy works will be found
light and vain. What do thou tell me of fruits and effects of faith,
evidencing thine election before, and as the ground of thy believing Christ a
Mediator for thee? No changes or fruits will evidence election, but such
spring from faith in Christ in whom the election is, nor is there any faith
rightly in Christ as now come, but in his blood and mediation, Romans 3.25. by
his blood We have access to God, to believe in him, and approach to him, and
see his love to us: and can thou have faith in his blood before thou know
whether he shed any for thee, that thereby thou might know he shed it for
thee? faith in the blood of Christ is this, through the knowledge and belief of
his blood shed, to be imboldned to approach to and rely on God, and expect good
from him as from one that thereby has testified his good will toward thee, and
opened a way of access to himself and to his Kingdom for thee, that thou
might come to him, and hope in him for it. It Is strange that Christ's blood
should give thee boldness to rely on God, when thou know not whether ever
it was shed for thee, or that thou had any thing to do with it: thou say it
was shed for all that believe, and thou believe, etc. That it was shed for
all that believe, is not questioned, but that very believing is to be in that
blood: Now the doubt is of thy believing in it, before thou feast Gods word
hold it forth as shed for thee, that so thou might know it is shed for thee:
I say that believing of thine was not a right believing in it, that preceded
thy belief of it by divine testimony to be shed for thee: It was shed for
enemies and ungodly, that being preached to them they might believe in it, as
well as for them as believing in it, that they might be sanctified and saved by
it. If thou believe in it or think to have salvation by it, because of thy
former self-actings to sorrow and to reformation, then is not this faith right,
because not springing from the word, yea, thou inverttest the order of the
Apostle, Tit. 2.11, 12. and 3.4, 5.
he tells us they were saved from their filthiness and disobedience, and led to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts by the grace, the love and pity of God to
man appearing, and thou first art led to reform and alter and deny thy lusts,
and to believe as thou think before thou apprehendest his grace, and then
drawest an inference of his grace from those thy works and denials, thou
endeavourest and conceitest thy self to work well, and thereupon buildest an
opinion that God loved thee, and Christ came and died for thee, this faith
springs from thy works and not from the word, the testimony of God is not
believed by thee. Oh but thou will say, Even all those frames were begotten by
the grace of God in thee, else thou could not have had them, and it was in
hearing his word that thou wast led to them. Ay, but what meanest thou by
grace? the good will of God in Christ fore-manifested to thee in the word of
the Gospel? No, for that thou saw not, but fetchest in by consequence upon
thy changes: what then? a certain secret insensible working of power in thy
heart to persuade thee to confess thy sins, and mend thy actions, and do
better then formerly? Now thou speak in the dialect of that Pharisee, Luk
18.10, 11. He had such a like considerce that he was a righteous, justified
person, and was in state of grace: but how came he by it? he trusted in
himself, he says not to be made righteous, but that he was now a righteous
one, one that should have benefit by the Messiah in his coming, and should
partake of the promises, he fetched the arguments of his confidence from
himself, and yet what he speaks of as in him he attributes to Gods grace as if
he had wrought it in him, God I thank thee that I am not thus and thus, he does
not ascribe it to himself but to God, and it is not likely but he thought God
had persuaded him so and so to walk by what he had heard of his will in the
Scriptures, in the law of God, he thought of a secret working of power in the
word, but he never apprehended or believed the grace, that is, the good will of
God, as it was preached to Abraham in the Gospel and promise, he was ignorant
of Gods righteousness, 1 Cor. 10.13. Gal. 4.23, 24.
he was born of the Bondwoman, his changes and righteousness sprang not from
love and grace fore-apprehended, but from the Law enjoining and adding promises
to man's observation, and therefore this plea would no serve him, his confidence
was not current, nor did God accept him. Such is thy profession, thou find
it said, If thou believe thou shall be saved which (in it self only
considered) is but like a legal promise, and nothing differs from it, for that
says, if thou do thus and thus, thou shall live or be saved; but herein the
Gospel differs from it, that it lays down a foundation of love demonstrated
from God to a sinner, in the first place to move him, empower and enable him to
the thing required of him: so does not the law, but only holds forth a
conditional promise upon obedience, and while a man sees or closes with no
more of the Gospel, the Gospel is but a legal doctrine to him, it is not the
Gospel, he sees not the love declared, the glad tidings of Gods good will to
him a sinner and ungodly in the gift of Jesus: in the belief of which he should
be principled to the thing required: but I say thou meeting with such a
conditional promise, thou endeavourest after faith, and humility, and fruits,
and from thy self-endeavours, changes and self differings, which thou think
are notable fruits of faith, thou concludest and trustest in thy self, that
thou art righteous, a believer, a justified one, and so that Christ is thy
Mediator, and died for thee, and attributest this to God as if thou were no
enemy to grace, but a Preacher of it in opposition to free will, and thus many
men do whenas they never yet saw or discerned what grace is, nor had any other
principle in what they did, but the law, its threats and promises, and their
own will; whence though they have as strong confidence of their being righteous
as the Pharisee had, yet it is but a strong fancy and groundless conception of
faith, the bottom of it is a legal covenant, and their own work and endeavor,
not the word of the Gospel, the declaration of grace, they receive not the word
that should beget it. I know they say they believe all the Scriptures, from the
beginning of Genesis to the latter end of the Revelations, but come to the
point, let us examine thee in the testimony of God, whereof the Apostle Paul
was made a Preacher, a Crier, or Herald for the obedience of faith, we find
it 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6, 7. Do thou believe this? God wills all men to be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the truth: and that Christ gave himself a ransom
for all, etc. by and by they cry our, A damnable heresy, I see it there
written, but I am not persuaded it is meant as it was spoken, I cannot embrace
it: Well, how then? God has good will to none but an elect number in the
world, Christ gave himself a ransom for no other. Where read thou that? not
such a word in all the Bible: well, but how know thou then for thy self?
thou will say, God forbid that I should not think that Christ died for me: Why
so, if not for all? yes, I hope so (will the very drunkards say, though they
deny it for all) Every one will flatter himself in a good conceit of himself,
and make his own good conceit the ground of his faith, and so the faith proves
thereafter, but the most general plea is, I am thus humbled, changed, etc. as
if he should say, God I thank thee I am not as other men are: Now though they
say, they believe for themselves that that is in it self true, yet, this being
not the effect of the word of the Gospel in them, but a conclusion drawn by
themselves from their own changes or self-flattery, it has not the nature of
divine faith in it, but of opinion: and what good works they do or seem to do,
they are not fruits of the word of God working through faith in them, and so
not the lively evidences of faith, but things endeavored after by the power of
law and conscience in them, to annex and pin them to their faith, or rather
to maintain and uphold their own opinion of their having faith. Too many
Preachers there are that are in the fault, for building up men in this manner,
not preaching the word of Gods grace to them, according to the tenor of the
Apostolical commission, some of whom while they plead for unity, in the mean
time depart from the unity of the faith, and will not strive together with us,
for that tenor of it once delivered to the Saints, Phil. 1.27. Romans 16.17.
but have made a division besides and contrary to that wholesome doctrine,
whereas all unity should stand in verity, and then it will be lasting unity: oh
that they would believe the word of God, that it may appear that the power and
force thereof operates in them, and that their faith and works spring
therefrom, and we are ready to embrace unity with them: yea, in the mean time
we will love them and be at unity with them in what they had according to the
word, though we must reprove them, when they disclaim, dissent, and draw people
from the credit of the word, as if our reproving their strayings from that,
Maledi^ a fit illa charitas propter qua^ periclitatur vel amittitur veritas.
Luth.
or holding forth the word as we find and believe it faithfully to the people,
make or occasion division, we cannot help that, we must not lay down the truth
of God to gain peace with men. Let men lay aside opposition then to the
Gospel-declaration, and if they hold it not forth, yet deny it not, disclaim
not against it, oppose not evident Scripture-sayings, and we shall readily
endeavor to be at one with them. Many deal with men as Pharaohs officers with
the poor Israelites, they took away the straw, and yet required the tale of
brick, so men now press men upon faith and repentance, and yet in the mean
while withhold from them the doctrine of Gods love and goodness: to what
purpose is it to tell men of the privileges of bele^vers, and withhold from
them, or render doubtful to them those motives of Gods good will toward them
and Christ's death for them. which God in the Gospel holds forth to them to
bring them to believe? to what purpose talk ye to men out of Christ, and
uncalled, of a secret election that is only in Christ, and no where else to be
met with nor enjoied, suppressing the doctrine of the death of Christ for them,
that should draw them unto Christ, and tell them stories of an eternal
reprobation, without respect to their rejecting Gods grace: yea, with an
affirmation that there was no such grace for the greater part of mankind to be
received or rejected by them, as is affirmed in the Gospel for them: so
obstructing the way of their apprehending that grace that should lead them to
repentance, or to put them upon a form of repentance, that has no power in it,
that they might presume themselves elect (for better it cannot be) while the
doctrine of Gods grace and goodness is not held forth and magnified toward
them, which leads to a true and living repentance and faith of Gods elect.

2. Again, how many talk of faith, and yet show no fruits of faith? Qui Curios
simulant and Bacchanalia vivuxt, call themselves Christians but neither have
the anointing, nor do the works of Christianity, that profess the Gospel, yet
rest in the letter or shell of it, and look not into it to behold the glorious
grace discovered in the Gospel, nor embrace the reproofs of self and flesh,
fleshly wisdom, strength, righteousness and affections that come along to
them in and with the Gospel, that talk of grace, but receive it in vain, and
yield not up the inmost of their hearts to grace, welcome it not in its
teachings to deny ungodliness and worldly lust, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world, receive not the love of the truth
to be saved by it from Satan's temptations, and their own corruptions, thou
say thou believe and hopest to have heaven and happiness, but yet thou art
a drunkard, a whoremaster, a blasphemer, covetous, thy works proclaim thee to
be a liar, such faith as consists in opinion, and saying thou believe, and
yet has no power in thee to break thee off from vanities, will never save thee
from destruction. It Is true, Saints have had their failings, but they have been
but failings, and they have been saved out of them, they have not lain and
wallowed in their sin, and yet said, tush, these are but failings, their
failings and fallings through temptation can be no plea for thee, that never
yet arose from sin, and that live and sportest thy self in thy sin. O deceive
not thy self with a vain conception, to think the outward profession of a
Christian will save thee, when nothing of his divine power and spirit dwells
within thee, turn not the grace of God into lasciviousness, backslide not from
the escapes you have had from pollutions through the knowledge of Christ to be
entangled again with your corruptions, and yet flatter up your selves with the
Saints failings, and say, ye may be true believers and real Saints for all
this: thou say thou seek a country too, an heavenly city, and yet thy
care is altogether for, and thy love eager to this country, how to live
bravely, and fare deliciously, uphold thy name and reputation, with men, though
by vanity and iniquity, miss no advantages of grasping in the world to thy
self, of satisfying thy affections, and enjoying thy vain pleasures, etc. sure
these are not the works of faith, thou walk not as the good old Patriarchs
who counted themselves strangers and pilgrims in the earth, and regarded not to
return to their own country, which they came out of at Gods commandment; as
the former sort of men deny the word of faith, and discover their defect of
faith by opposition to the word, so these by their works declare the vanity of
their words: neither of these faiths, faith upon works and not grounded on and
springing from the word, nor faith (or rather a saying a man has faith)
without works (inward operations and outward testimonies through the power of
the word feeding it) will suffice to make a man just, or cause him to live, nor
will either of them be sufficient for dying to keep a man that he see not
death. But there is one thing more yet, they received not the promises, though
they believed and saw them afar off: they died in faith, but yet enjoyed them
not: how may we understand that, and what shall we note from it? The promises
metonymically for the things promised, which are either for this life or the
life that is to come; for this life, such as these to be a shield to them, to
protect them, provide for them, give them children, etc. for the life to come,
such as the country or city that has foundations, the full enjoyment of
himself and his glory: and as the way to that, the Messiah to be born of their
seed, to die and rise, etc. as also to bless all nations in him.

Again, the word [promise] sometimes in Scripture signifies the word of
promise, or the promise it self made in words to us, and by these distinctions
and considerations we may resolve a doubt, for whereas it is said here, these
all died in faith, not having received the promises, it is said, as we read it
in ver. 17. that Abraham had received the promise, He that had received the
promises offered up his only begotten Son, and so chap. 6.15. after he had
patiently endured he obtained the promise. The solution, that the word of a
promise he had received from God, God made his promise with and to him, and
that promise as a thing made in word, he had received it, he heard it and
believed it, but he had not received the things spoken of in that promise, or
in those promises, as the word promises in the text signifies the things
promised.

2. He did before he died obtain and receive the promise in some things but not
in all, the promises for this life of having God a shield to him to protect him
and be his God, and own him and give him a Son, these he had obtained and
received before the died, yea, before he offered up his son Isaac, but not all
the promises, nor the main things promised, as neither the land of Canaan, nor
the multiplying his seed as the stars of heaven, nor the Messiah coming and
blessing all nations, nor (which is the main, the full thing aimed at) the
heavenly country or kingdom, the enjoyment of God and Christ in glory with
his seed, and yet these they were heirs of, these fell to them by lot from God,
Heb. 6.12. yea, these they received in semine, in Isaac, and Isaac in Jacob,
etc. they had them in pignore, but not in plenitudine, in the first fruits or
pledge, but not in the full enjoyment, They all died in faith not having
received the promises, the greatest part, the glory and the inheritance
promised they received not, and yet though they had them not till their death,
yet they left not off believing and hoping for them, nay, in their very death
they held fast that faith and hope of them, and that upheld them in death, they
knew themselves heirs of them, and judged God faithful not to deprive them.
But how could that be, seeing now they died without them? Sure then they looked
for another day and time in which they should enjoy them, and in which we also
that now believe should enjoy them with them, as is said, ver. 39, 40. These
all being Wi^nessed of by faith, or having received a good report or testimony
by says, received not the promises, God having provided some better thing for
us, that they without us should not be made perfect. God has provided another
time and day, in which they and we together shall receive and enjoy them: M^nde
we here then a little: these dying believed still the receipt of the promises,
though even at the time of their death they had not received them: how did they
then believe, wrong or right? was the thing they believed true or false? Surely
their faith was good, for the holy Ghost here commends it, and God therefore
vouchsafed to be called their God, having prepared a city for them, verse. 16.
and if so, then surely they must yet have the promises performed to them though
now dead. What shall we say then? Verily we must needs hence further note,

That there shall be a resurrection from the dead, Note 5.
death shall not frustrate the promises of God, and make void their faith.

There shall be a time when they shall be brought out of the power of death and
grave, and then shall receive the promises that they died short of: then shall
the word of God be performed to them: and indeed here was the triumph of their
faith: that though God kill them and take their lives from them, and they never
see the fulfilling of the prime things promised, yet they believed that they
should receive them: death it self, wherein according to sense, there was an
end put to them, and all further hope and expectation, could not make their
faith to fail them, for they believe in God that raised the dead, and calls
things that are not as if they were, Romans 4 17. and so above hope believed in
hope, according (not to sense, but) to what was spoken of God, so shall thy
seed be. O the power and virtue of divine faith, supported by the power of God
in the belief of the resurrection from the dead! Surely if they believed not in
vain, as without doubt they did not, then it undeniably follows that they shall
have (and so that there is) a day of Resurrection, when the promised country
and glory shall be made good unto them. Verily if this doctrine were not true,
our faith were vain, and the Gospel preaching with its promises vain, we could
have no ground for faith in death, but faith and hope and all must die with us:
but now they died all in faith though they had not yet received the promises:
verily there shall be a reward for the righteous, for all their faith and
patience: verily there shall then be a resurrection of them that they may be
rewarded: the time of the resurrection of the just is the time of their
remuneration, as in Luke 14.14. Thou shall be rewarded in the resurrection of
the just: deny the resurrection of the just, and thou take away the hope of
their reward, and thou make them of all men most miserable, because here they
have a time of deeper sufferings and sorrowings then others, and thou tellest
them that they must never rise more to receive a reward for them, here they
die, and have not received the promises, and if death swallow them up, and they
never rise, they must never receive them: Look to this, you that deny the
resurrection, I know your evasion, you say they have it already, they are in
Christ, and risen with him, and he is the resurrection and the life, and so
they have their reward: but hearken thou vain man, though they be risen with
Christ in their spirits, risen from earth to heaven, yet this is not all their
resurrection, nor have they herein their reward, their full reward: for thus
Abraham was raised in his spirit to look after the heavenly country, even
before he died (as they that are raised with Christ in their spirits are
exhorted to seek the things above, Col. 3.1, 2.) but yet even after that he
died in says, and had not received the promises, he neither was raised above
faith to live without any further exercise of faith (as some vainly prate) nor
had he or any of them received all the reward of faith, but they all died in
faith not having received the promises, and therefore must have yet another
resurrection, or a completing of that resurrection in the redemption of their
bodies, that they may receive those promises, according to that Romans 8.23. We
that have received the first fruits of the spirit, yet wait for the adoption,
the redemption of our bodies: for indeed the promises are to the man, the whole
man: now a man is not a man without his body too, Hominem proprte carnem diet,
qu^a vocabulum bominis occupavit.
the soul is but part of the man (nay as Tertullian has well noted, the body
is rather called the man, because it first had the denomination of man: God
formed man of the dust of the earth, and breathed into him the breath of life,
he was called man before the breath of life was breathed into him, Genesis 2.7.)
therefore the resurrection is of that also, that must be raised and united to
the soul, that so the man may inherit the promise made to him: yea, what is
resurrection, but a raising to life that that died? but the spirits of just men
die not with their bodies, they were raised up and enlivened before, and live
by faith even when the body dies, therefore its the body must be raised, He
shall change our vile body, and make it like his own glorious body, Phil. 3.21.
yea, not the righteous only but the wicked too must rise, Act, 24.15. There
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust. Hark
you Allegoriarum nimium amantes, nimium amentes, you that dote on All gories,
where will you find ground of Allegory for this? will ye say the unjust and
wicked too have Christ, and are risen with Christ? perhaps you will say, they
shall rise from sin to righteousness, and so into and with Christ, but
(beside that this crosses the Scripture, all shall not so rise) you make that
the resurrection of the just, and if that shall be the unjusts resurrection,
then I pray, what is that that is further spoken of, of the just seeing that
they have already, and yet speaking in the future tense, he says, they shall
arise? but what need we many words, when our Savior is so express in Joh. 5,
29. All that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and
come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they
that have done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation: not from sin to
righteousness in this life, but to condemnation for their unrighteousness
acted in this life. But we need not go so far from the text, to prove that
there shall be a resurrection of the body. Seeing by that that here follows
that God is not ashamed to be called their God. ver. 16. our Savior has to
our hands confuted that opinion of the Sadduces, and proved that there shall be
a resurrection even of them that are dead in the body: for that was the thing
that the Sadduces oppugned, and not the quickening up of men's spirits to God, as
we may see by their way of arguing, Mar. 12.18, 27. Then it is at that glorious
resurrection that all things shall be made new, when the bodies that are dead
shall by the power of God be raised, new heavens and new earth prepared, and
given unto the Saints, in which dwells righteousness, that is, then shall they
have and enjoy remainingly the righteousness of God in the full accomplishment
of all his former promises, in the faith of which they died, but had not
received.

Dear friends, hold fast this doctrine of the resurrection, Applic.
for as Tertullian well begins his book upon this subject, Fiducia
Christianorum, resurrectio mortuorum, the resurrection of the dead is the hope
and expectation of Christians, there is no doctrine more properly Christian
then it, none more comfortable, none now in greater danger to be let slip,
these being those shaking times of the most fundamental doctrines of Christian
truth, which the Apostle Peter long since warned us of, 2 Pet. 3.2, 3, 13.
There shall (says he) come mockers, Walking after their own ungodly lusts,
that shall mock at the performance of Gods promises, in the coming of Christ,
and restitution of all things, saying, where is the promise of his coming? for
since the fathers f^ll asleep, all things continue in their state. As if they
should say, they are like to receive no more then they had before they died:
but let not this doctrine be shaken from you, for what then will follow but a
rotall falling off from the faith, a denying of the resurrection of Christ, 1
Cor. 11.17, 18.
and of the kingdom of Christ? yea, then faith and preaching and all is vain,
yea, then the reins are given to all licentiousness, Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall die, and when we are dead, there is a sinall end with us,
and that is indeed the issue of that wickedness, they that say, Where is the
promise of his coming? Will not fear to walk after their own ungodly lusts:
It Is true, one principle upon which they lean in denying it, and way to
insinuate the slieghting of it unto others (as Tertullian has long since
observed, and as experience of their words yet teaches us) is a disrespect
they seem to bear to the flesh, so our spirits enjoy God (say they) and go up
to God, what is matter for this flesh? it is but dust, and to dust let it go, and
no matter whether ever it rise or not, but as he also well observes, Sunt tamen
^arnis amicessimi, nemo enim tam carnaliter vivit, quam qui resurrectionem
mortuorum negat, though they seem to slieght the flesh, none love better to
please the flesh, none live more after the flesh: prayers and ordinance and
discipline then is nothing with them, to trim up themselves, and wear, and eat,
and drink the best, to play and game (and perhaps do worse things) these they
will not deny the flesh, they will please it what they can here, because they
think it shall have no pleasure, or good hereafter. But oh! take heed to the
Scriptures, both Pharisees and Sadduces err in not knowing and believing them:
Mat. 27.29.
ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God: they pretend to
know them better then others, while they can pervert them more then others: and
while they pretend a more spiritual understanding of them, they contradict the
spirit of understanding speaking in them, and through fraud and subtlety seduce
the simple, seeming at first to speak as they, till they wind them into their
snares, as Tertullian observed of them in his times, De Res. Car.
they would say to the simple-hearted, Vae qui in hae carne non resurrexerint,
Woe to them that rise not in this flesh, which the simple hearted hearing
oftentimes were led to judge they meant honestly and according to the Scripture
only, whenas they meant (says he) Dum in hac carne sunt, that rise not while
they are in this flesh, and so by one part of truth seemingly confessed the
rising of our spirits here by faith with Christ, they would by little and
little undermine the faith of the simple-hearted, and doctrinate them not to
matter, and then to deny the resurrection of the body, running themselves and
them that listened to them into the error of Hymenaeus and Philetus, 2 Timothy
2.17. that say, the resurrection is already past, in whose very footsteps many
also now walk, not knowing the Scriptures, yea, departing from the Scriptures,
and not acknowledging the power of God: thence say they, how should the bodies
that are long since dead, and diverse ways dispersed, and that have endured so
many transmutations be possibly raised? and how can the world it self contain
them? as if they did not believe God Almighty, and that all things are possible
to him beyond our thought, to whom I might say with the Apostle Act. 26 8. Why
should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the
dead? But I say again, mind we the word of God, and so mind and keep it that
we may be kept by it in the faith from this dangerous error of the wicked,
dream not with them of all our resurrection here: no coming of Christ but what
they meet with here, no performance of promises but what they have here, all
enjoyments and fulness and perfection here: sure if that was true Paul was
very low and ignorant to them, when he says he had finished his course, 2 Timothy
4 8.
and kept the faith, and yet adds, henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which God the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: he had
done his work, and yet he had not received his reward: it was but laid up for
him, and laid up to be given him, not in this but in that day, in another day,
the day of Christ's appearance, sure then the Apostle was out here too, when he
said, these all died in faith, and yet had not received the promises. Nay, the
Apostle ' Paul instructs us, that we shall not one prevent another in the
receipt of them, 1 These. 4.15. They that live at the coming of Christ shall not
prevent them that are asleep: They that now live shall not have them till
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob have them, nor they before we have them, Heb. 11.40.
the dead in Christ shall be first raised at his coming, and the living changed,
and both be caught into the air up together to meet him, certainly they say
false then that say Christ is come to them in his glory, and they are raised
and have the promises, all they look for, or all that any shall have, and yet
many of their brethren died without them, and are not yet raised, and if we
will believe them never shall be, and many yet are uncalled to them. But
beloved, regard we not their sayings, but know them to be false and vain, and
look we to Christ that died for us and rose again, and know that as he rose, so
shall we also, and together with Abraham and the Patriarchs and Prophets, and
all the Saints shall be caught up at his appearance to meet him, 1 These 4.18.
as the Apostle exhorts us, comfort we one another for our deceased brethren
with these sayings. And indeed what comfort could we have for one another in
respect of them, if we believed that all their portion they are to have, they
have had it already, and when they and we die, our spirits go to God, and our
bodies to the dust, and there is an end of the matter, we shall never enjoy them
again, there shall be no resurrection; away with such unchristian and unsavours
conceptions, and let ns where we have believed hold fast the faith, and not
upon any pretense or by any Philosophy or vain deceit of man, depart therefrom,
let us live in it, that we may die in it, or according to it.

And thus I have given you a view of the text, I suppose you expect I should
now return to our present occasion, and say something about our deceased
brother: Truly the text is such a comment on him, as that we might go over it
again and apply it to him, or you might understand that spoken of these
Worthies here, as if said of him, he believed the Gospel, and had insight in
it, and oftentimes rejoiced much in it, was persuaded of it, embraced it, loved
it, counted himself a stranger and pilgrim in the earth, walked with that
contempt and carelessenesse of it (how it thought of him and esteemed him) as
if he judged it not his habitation, but had his eye (as indeed he had) upon a
better country, an enduring city that has foundations, he lived in this world
as if he had his heart in another world, not regarding, nor scarce suffering
the honors of this world or of this place to be thrust upon him; his name was
nothing to him for the Gospels sake, that he would approve whoever disproved
him, he would stop his ears against, and not endure to hear of their sayings,
who deny Christ's mediation, and impugn the doctrine of the resurrection, and
professing his joy and comfort to be therein, and in the hope he had
therethrough of an enduring happy condition: for justice, uprightness and
honesty, it was his aim and endeavor, and therein has not left many to exceed
(I doubt I may say to equallize) him, we may say of him, the righteous man is
taken away, and the merciful man from amongst us: In both which respects I
fear many will miss him, as the loins of the poor blessed him alive, so I
doubt they will find cause of mourning for his death: as he affected not
honor with men, so did he not long enjoy it, God not judging us worthy the
improvement of his abilities for the good of the Town, perhaps because no
better respected (when more able) by them: he was more like the self-denying
Olive, then the aspiring bramble: he looked upon earths honor as a burden,
having his chief desire upon that which is from heaven, therefore God has
taken him from his burden to give him his desire: in a word he was upright in
his life, faithful to the truth to his death, patient under affliction (though
long in great pain) and very desirous of his dissolution, that he might be with
Christ. Let it be ourcare to imitate him in these good steps, that with him and
all those who through faith and patience have looked after the promises of God,
we may in due time be raised up, and brought to inherit them. I shall only add
an Epitaph upon him, and I shall leave both you and him.

*

FINIS.
AN EPITAPH.
QVi cum vixit erat Major, major moriendo est
(Morte repurgatus) quam fuit ipse prius.
Majestatis erat brevita cadaveris umbra,
Vix ea majestas, illius umbra brevis:
Spe laetus, multumque gemens mala publica, corpus
Mandat humo, plenam numine caelo animam.
In English thus.
This man alive was May'r, now dead is more
Advanced (death bettring him) then heretofore.
Short shade o'th corpse of Royalty he was,
That Royalty scarce shadowed what he was.
Who joy'd in hope, did public woes condole,
Left earth his corpse, to heaven his graceful soul.
FINIS.

