AN ANSWER To a Scandalous lying Pamphlet, INTITVLED PRINCE RVPERT His
DECLARATION.

Published in the vindication of the honor of the High Court of Parliament and
their Army, from the untrue and malicious aspersions cast on them in the said
Pamphlet.

And dedicated to the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons now assembled in
that sacred Senate.

By their humblest Honourer the Author G. H.

Invidia Siculi non invenere Tyranni Majus tormentum --

LONDON, Printed for John Matthewes.

An Answer to a scandalous flying Pamphlet, entitled Prince RVPERT his
Declaration.
IT may appear a strange and presumptuous insolence in a private person of
almost no name nor knowledge, to engage himself as it were the champion of the
public Fame, wounded and delacerated by this Declaration (if his it be) of
Prince Ruperts* But since no man of more eminence has undertaken the quarrel,
though my modesty deterred me, as that of the Prince of Poets Virgil, when he
was to write his AEneiads:

Cum canerem Reges and praelia, Cinthius aurem
Vellit and admonuit, etc.
Yet my reason assured me it was a dire and dreadful injustice that such a
malicious aspersion should be intruded on the best ornament of the High Court
of Parliament, (it is innocence) and so resolved, as the Poet speaks of one;

-- ausus concurrere Comminus hosti
Retorqueo jaculum. --
I am entered the Lists against that mighty Mars of the Malignants, Prince
Rupert, and doubt not having Minerva's shield, the buckler of truth, to protect
me, not only to come safe off (but in the eyes of all indifferent Judges)
victorious from this combat.

Briefly then to his preamble, I shall only note in it the turbulent acrimony
and unjust malice of his spirit, that dares so manifestly and falsely charge the
time with odious and impossible untruths against His sacred Majesty, when
surely no time has ever been more careful to preserve His Majesty's honor, no
persons more diligent in searching out the Authors of scandalous Pamphlets
against His Majesty, nor punishing them when found, then the High Court of
Parliament. Witness their exemplary justice on Walker the Ironmonger, and
their serious endeavors to have found out the writer as well as the Printer of
that calumnious Pamphlet, entitled King James His Judgment; because there
were some clauses in it that might be interpreted reflective on the honor of
His Majesty, which Prince Rupert surely more afflicts in striving to fix those
supposed aspersions on His credit, then ever His people here have done, who
have been always ready to defend it: Nor could he have ever had occasion, to
say the King is only guilty of being too good to be our King. Surely His
Subjects duty had according to it is quality answered His Royal goodness, had
not such perverse, though more crafty Malignants then Prince Rupert is, by
their sinister Councels infascinated as it were the Royal and gracious
disposition of His Majesty, and alienated him from harkening to the advice of
that supreme Council, which has always been the glory and safety of his
royal Progenitors, the Honorable the high Court of Parliament.

Next, for his particular challenging the right Honorable the Lord Wharton, of
deluding the City with an untruth, concerning the battle at Edgehill, and
casting aspersions of inhumanity and desire of plunder on the Prince Rupert and
his Troopers; for the last, Ex factis tuis iudicabo te, O princeps: Could there
be a greater or more Iuculent expression of desire to plunder, then was at that
battle demonstrated in the said Prince and his Troopers; when forgetful of
their own and their companions safety, in the heat and fury of the fight they
fell to pillaging the Wagons, where surely some boys and women, left there,
not to guard the Carriages, but to be secured by their guards, were barbarously
murdered. For the other clause of the victory, it was not only testified by my
Lord Wharton, but justified by the General and the whole Army: Nay Prince
Rupert himself convinces himself of untruth in that business, when he
says ironically, ( For that they slew as many of ours as we did of theirs, is
as true as that they beat us at Sherburn Castle, etc.) That we beat them at
Sherburne Castle is apparent, why else did the Marquess quit it, but that he
was vanquished? It must needs be granted then by his own confession, that we
were victorious over them at Keinton also. And surely though the Prince in
threatening language seems to upbraid my Lord Wharton of faint-heartednesse,
that Nobleman (bating the reverence he bears the Princes blood, as he is the
Kings Nephew) dares let him understand, even in the way of personal encounter,
that a real English Baron as much detests to utter untruths, as any titular
German Prince whatsoever.

For his extenuating the guilt of himself and Soldiers, concerning inhumanity
to women and children, though we may in a charitable modesty believe more has
been imputed to the Prince himself then he has committed, yet we can no way
acquit his Soldiers, whose rapacity and barbarism no Tartars have ever
equalled: and if when any conquest is won, or victory in a battle, the glory
of it is only devolved on the General, as it is; the Soldiers valor being
no theme for Fame to discourse on: it is in my opinion a kind of justice, that
the soldiers infamy as well as honor should be cast on the General. So that
our Pamphlets may be excused, for saying Prince Rupert perpetrated such and
such villainies, they by that intended his Soldiers did them. Which
questionless was no falsehood, as their diverse rapines in Leichestershire may
sufficiently testify. And I much admire the Prince should so much forget the
Nobility of his extract, as to strive to acquit his men of plundring; an
untruth so manifest, that impudence it self would blush to patronize it;
witness their demeanor at Alisbury, Abington, Ockingham: nay, Oxford it
self, which with all hospitality entertained them, has not escaped their
avaritious cruelty, as that good Alderman Nickson can sufficiently testify;
whom they rifled of at least six hundred pounds. And for our Soldiers rifling
the Countess Ri^ers and Lady Lucas house, Soldiers they were not, nor any of
them at that time listed in his Excellencies army, but rude Country people,
that knowing those houses to be receptacles of Delinquents, thought it was just
to rifle them: Not that they were abetted by the Parliament to do so, but led
on by their own fury; the Parliament daily setting out Proclamations to
restrain the insolence of their Soldiers, and which I am certain was nevet
yet done nor thought on by Prince Rupert; promising and taking order for
restitution of such moneys and goods as have by their Soldiers been ravished
from the righteous owners.

But were there no grosser errors (I am loath even implicitly to give the
Prince the Lie in the most modest phrase) included in that Declaration, these
were pardonable: Hominesque Deosque invadet, (like the Giants that waged war
with Heaven) nothing escapes its malice; It taxes our party for imprisoning
those for Delinquents, who stand loyal to their Prince. Who shall be judge of
their loyalty, Prince Rupert, or the Parliament? Surely that which is the
original of our Laws, the fountain of our municipall constitutions (the
Parliament) is better acquainted with those Laws and Constitutions then any
stranger, though it were Lycurgus himself; and therefore, can fullier censure
and define when those Laws and Constitutions are violated.

For the Earls, Judges, Lords, Bishops, Knights, and the like, that he says
stuff the prisons in London, are they not open Delinquents or principal
Abettors of this Kingdoms miserable distractions? Wild Beasts, that it were
very fit should be chained up, lest they should destroy us, and yet suffer they
no more or stricter imprisonment here, then those whom they have as prisoners
do there; witness Captain Wingates inthralment and others.

For the (...)ling the mouths of the most grave and learned Divines, or else
imprisoning them whom the Prince has named, I will in charity impute it to
misinformation; the world knows there is no such matter. It Is true; Doctor
Heywood and some other of the Arminian faction, that preached and printed
diverse things against the peace of the Commonwealth, are worthily therefore in
durance; but for our only countenancing of ignorant and sedious teachers, none
but those who are the sourses of sedition themselves will cast that unworthy
appellation on those reverent and learned Divines.

For the looseness and incivility which the Prince would excuse in himself
and soldiers, with the generality and community of such vices in all great
armies, it is the only thing in his Declaration that may seem to challenge
the privilege of being admitted for a truth; were it not immediately attainted
by the succeeding falsehood, viz. His wish that there were no more Papists in
the Parliaments Army then in theirs. I shall now have occosion to overcome the
Prince at his own weapons, and dare him to name one Papist of quality or
trust, nay, one soldier of that sect in all the Parliament Army. In theirs,
Sergeant Major Ashton is conspicuous, besides my Lord Herbert, who (not in the
Army is a member of it) is a notorious Papist, so are diverse of his Commanders.
With my Lord of Newcastle, birds of that feather flock together in numbers:
and I would feign know of Prince Rupert, of what Religion he takes the Earl
Rivers to be, surely a Church-papist at least in all the worlds opinion. For
his gracious Majesty, none ever durst be so disloyally impious, to deny him to
be the true and best defender of the Protestant Faith, and therefore Prince
Ruperts testimony of it to us, who already believe it, is unnecessary and
useless: And for the trophies the Prince boasts of his own sufferings for the
Protestant Cause in Germany, what honors he refused, and what close
imprisonment he was threatened if he would not change his Religion, in Gods
name let him enjoy the glory of that constancy, none will be so malicious to
deprive him of the least scruple of his merit; yet is this no sufficient proof
that he fights now for the same Cause as he seems to intimate.

For the exercise of his valor against the Irish Rebels, I believe every man
may join with him in his wishes; but whereas he maliciously says, he fights
to defend the King, Religion and Laws of a Kingdom, against Subjects who are
up in arms against their Lord and Sovereign; paralelling the Cause of this
Kingdom with that of Ireland; there he showed all those former aspersions to
be but Molehils to this Mountain of calumny.

First, the Irish are Papists, and have been ever on all occasions rebellious,
took up arms, as the sequel has witnessed, to re-invest their own nation
with the Sovcraignty of that Kingdom; we are Protestants, his Majesty's most
faithful Subjects, the Parliament here, not taking up arms for any other end,
then to secure their own lives, and the Subjects Liberties, the known Laws
of the Kingdom, nay, to preserve the King himself, and rescue him from those
seditious and malignant Counselors, who have inthrall'd, as it were, both his
body and mind. And so much in answer to Prince Ruperts Declaration, wherein, if
I have not sufficiently vindicated the credit of the Cause from his calumny, I
submit to censure, and hope to meet an indulgent remission for my error.

FINIS.

