Balaams Wish; OR, The Reward of Righteousness in, and after Death.

Considered and explicated by occasion of the Late Decease of Mrs. BARBARA
WHITEFOOT, Late of HAPTON in the County of NORFOLK; Who Deceased April 9. and
was Interred April 11, 1667.

By JOHN HORN, Preacher of the Gospel in former times in the Parish of
Lin-Allhallows, in the same County.

Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea
says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Psalm. 31.19. Oh how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for those
that fear thee! which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the
sons of men!

Prove. 12.26. The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor: but the way of
the wicked seduceth them.

Quid prodest cum magnis difficultatibus cultum Dei tenere, quae est summa
virtus, nisi eum Divinum Praemium Beatitudinis subsequatur?

Lactan. Divin. Institut. lib. 7. De Divino Praemio. cap. 1. LONDON, Printed in
the Year 1667.

To Mr. Daniel Whitefoote, and Mrs. Barbara Waller, the only Son and Daughter
of the Deceased Mrs. Barbara Whitefoote, late of Hapton: Mercy, Grace and Peace
from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, be extended and multiplied.
Dear Friends,
I Have you may see (though with some reluctance as being conscious to my self
of my own weakness, in speaking to the great things of God and Christ)
accomplished your desires, for publishing what was upon my thoughts; and (as to
some Heads thereof) was spoken to, and in the Family of your Deceased Mother,
by occasion of her Death and Burial. I pray God add his blessing with it, that
it may provoke some at least, yea all that read it, if it may be, to consider
their ways, whether they be good and righteous, and what the end toward which
they tend: so that they that believe and live amiss, may be there-through
awakened to repentance, and to seek after righteousness; even the righteousness
which is of God by Faith: not resting with Balaam in good Wishes and Desires,
or rather in Wishes and Desires of Good, so as to miss as he did, of the good
they wish; but that awakening from sin to righteousness and following after
it, in seeking the Lord, they may both desire and attain what is truly good:
and that they that are in the way of righteousness, may through the
consideration of its good and glorious end and reward, hold on their way to the
end: So should my labor herein be well bestowed. And oh that both I and you
may our selves do what we desire and have herein, in some measure, endeavored
for others! that while we seek their good, we also minding the good way, may
share with all that are good, or get good hereby, in the reward. This briefly
in General. Besides which I would add a word to either of you, Severally. And

First to you Mr. Daniel, let me say, Remember the good and grave counsel and
advice of your Dear deceased Mother; especially her dying farewell, and
endeavor so to seek after the Lord, read and mind his good word, believe his
love and grace toward mankind in his Son, and yield up your self to obey and
follow his heavenly Counsels, preferring the Gospel (as your good Mother
advised you) not only above the pleasures of sin for a season, and what vain
Companions, sports and pastimes can afford, or vain persons entice you to, but
also above your worldly estate; and so adhere to the good advice of such as be
sober, staid, and godly friends, that she may at least reap the fruit of all
her serious wishes, desires prayers and tears for your good, and of all her
tender affectionate love to you, in her receiving you in the resurrection of
the just, at the coming of the Lord, in the lot and state of the righteous and
holy Saints and servants of God. You are young, and need help and direction. I
would have you think so and be sober minded: not thinking your self so wise as
that you may choose for your self your ways, and need none to guide and counsel
you; mind Solomon's saying, Prove. 27.10. And thine own friend and thy Mothers
friend forsake thou not. Not taking any for your friends that would flatter you
into vain courses, to follow your will and pleasures to your ruin; in all
things mind Gods word, and call upon him for his grace and blessing in and
through Christ Jesus, and he will bless you and do you good. Seriously peruse
also this Treatise, and let its contents be ever with you. And the Lord bless
it to you, That Is all I shall say to you at present.

As for thee, Dear Sister, thou have cause to bless God for the good he has
done to you, and the mercy and grace he has showed you, both in your self and
in your Dear deceased Mother. Oh let not his goodness ever be forgotten by you,
or slip out of your heart: follow yet on after righteousness, and seek the
Lord: the prize is before you, and ascertained in Christ to you in following
after it: only watch and take heed of what may divert or subvert you from it,
especially of knowing your self in what you know, and in the gifts God has
bestowed on you, and so of being puffed up with any spiritual pride. Though not
of that only, but also of every way of the world, or sinful temptation by which
the adversary will not be wanting to endeavor your harm, and whereof this
Treatise also affords some notice and warning; but that is one main temptation
he uses against such as are going on the right way, to make them reflect so
upon their own beauty, put upon them by Christ as there-through to adulterate
from Christ, as in Ezekiel. 16.14, 15, 16, 17, etc. It was probably the way he
fell himself, the looking upon and falling in love with his own created
excellencies: and thence lifting up himself to desire that that was proper to
the Creator, and its the way he sets upon many persons (knowing persons
especially) to corrupt them from the simplicity of Christ, and an humble
faithful dependence on him and walking in the f^^^ of God through him, in whom
all their fullness and safety is. But I hope, he that has called you by, and
into his grace will keep you through his grace from that and every other evil
thing; and so cleanse, sanctify, and make you perfect in every good thing, as
that you shall without fail attain to the glory and glorious kingdom that he
has prepared for, and promised to them that love him. And in that hope and
persuasion for you, I commit you to him and to his blessing. And so taking my
leave of you both, and desiring that this treatise may further both your
happinesses,

I rest, Your truly Loving Friend. JOHN HORN.
From my House in Lin Regis. Jan. 6. 1667.
ERRATA
Courteous Reader, thou art desired with thy Pen to correct these ensuing
escapes of the Press.
PAge 16. line 1. for dying men, rea^ men's dying. p. 17. l. 18. r. taken, p.
21. l. 36. put a stop at us. p 22. l. 25. put out the first ^in p. 25. l. 26.
1. ^apt. p. 30. in the Margin. 1. penitentiam. p. 33. l. 18. 1. in there. p. 34.
l. 2. for etc. 1. and. p. 35. l. 33. 1. exers, ^. 40. l. 31. 1. that appear to
come, p. 41. l. 15. put out and p. 147. l. 21. put ^ut it. l. 40. r. the cross
of Christ. p. 48. In the Margin. for come, 1. lio^. p. 60. l. 11. r. Rev. 22.
p. 65. l. 38. for this 1. his* p. 70. in the Margin, ^. ad^ciant. l. 40. r.
dainty. p. 72. l. 22, there is a whole line left out, it should be, De^^^ from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil, etc. p. 73. l. 12.
for 10. r. with. p. 74, Marg. for die, r. have p. 78 l. 29. r. Deuteronomy. 3^. p. ^0.
Marg. r. recusandus p 87. l. 17. for of r. in. p. 80. in the six last lines,
the first letters are placed too low. p. 89. l. 13. r. 31. l 20. r. to. p. 91.
l. 11. r. wish. p. 92. l. 35. for 68. r. 86. p. 94. l. 31. r. 1 Cor. 1.13. p.
97 l. 22. for there r. their. p. 102. l. 14. a whole line is omitted, it should
be, Christ only to be be^ righteousness, having her hope in him, and therefore
doing righteousness in her generation etc. l. 37. put a stop at indulgence.

In the Verses.
The last Anagram should be thus printed and pointed, 6 What if a robber? eat.
p. 105. l. 11. and 22. and 34. Whitescote, sh^'d have been in two words
Whitescote. in the Epitaph. v. 2. for beat, r. beat, also the Ablative
Faeminine, terra, tumba, aetheria, should have had a circumflex accent. and v.
7. for intens ^tens

BALAAM'S WISH: OR, The Happiness of the Righteous in, and after Death,
NUMBERS 23.14. Let me (my soul) die the Death of the Righteous, (or upright
ones) and let my latter end be like to his.


WHatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our instruction,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have hope, Romans
15.4. Now, not only the words, sayings, and doings of God, and good men, be
there recorded; but also many of evil Angels, and evil men: in which, though we
cannot say of them properly, Hear the words of the Lord; but rather, as our
Savior says in the Parable of the unjust Judge, Luke 18.6. Hear what the
unjust Judge says: hear what this, or that evil man, or evil spirit says: yet
in as much as they are recorded of God, and by his Spirit, it is certain that
they may not be only lawful to be considered by us, but also useful too, for
therefore has the holy Ghost there recorded them, that we might receive
instruction by them. For as there is no weed so stinking, but the Be may
gather honey therefrom, as they use proverbially to say, so neither is there
any saying, or doing of evil men, or devils so bad, but a good and wise heart,
by the guidance of that Spirit, that lead his servants to record them, may get
instruction and profit by them; as our Savior observes from the Parables of the
unjust Judge, and unjust Steward, Luke 16. and 18. And Solomon from the
vineyard of the slothful man, and from the field of him that was void of
understanding, Prove. 24 30, 31, 32. Even as no saying or doing of God is so
good, but an evil mind may abuse it to its own ruin, turning his grace into
wantonness; and that that is for a welfare into a snare, In the Hebrew it is
(...)
and what he gives as a Table, into a trap, as Jud. 4 Psalm. 69.22. destroying
it self, because there is help in God, Hos. 13.9.

Though then what I have proposed to be considered, be the words of Balaam, and
he was a bad man, a false prophet, Diviner, or Sooth-sayer, as appears in 2
Pet. 2.15, 16. Jude 11. Rev. 2.14. Numb. 24.1. Deuteronomy. 23.4, 5. Numb. 31.16. and
diverse other places, yet for as much as To the pure all things are pure, and
the holy Ghost has recorded them by Moses for our usefulness, we may consider
them, and see what instruction is afforded in them.

The occasion of them was this: Israel traveling toward the Land of Canaan,
to take possession thereof, by Gods guidance and conduct of them, they pass by
the borders of Moah; thereupon Balak King of Moah is troubled, and that he
might be confident to fight them (though giving him no cause) he sends for
Balaam (famous in the East Countries, it seems, for Divinations) to come and
curse them; persuading himself that whom he cursed, should be accursed, and he
might then prevail against them, Number. 22.6. Balaam at first refuses to go, God
forbidding him. Balak sends to him again more Messengers, and more honorable,
with greater proffers. Balaam, though he had a mind to the wages of
unrighteousness, durst not go with them without leave from God. God, knowing
how to answer him according to his idol, and yet glorify himself, and magnify
his people in overruling his attempts against them, lets him go: yet sets his
Angel in the way to resist him, and opens the dumb Asses mouth he rode on, upon
its sight of the Angel, to reprove his folly; and charges him by his Angel to
say nothing to Balak, but what he bid him, and so lets him go on. Being come to
Balak, they prepare Altars and offer Sacrifices, as proving if God might be
moved by them, to put a curse into his mouth against them, and goes to meet
with God, who puts these words into his mouth that follow: Balak King of Moab
has brought me from Aram, from the mountains of the East, saying, Come curse
me Jacob: and come, defy Israel. How shall I curse, whom God has not cursed?
And how shall I defy, whom the Lord has not defied? For from the top of the
Rocks I see him; from the bills I behold him. Lo, the people shall dwell alone,
and shall not be reckoned among the nations. Who can count the dust of Jacob?
and the number of the fourth part of Israel? To which he adds, as admiring and
implying their happiness, especially as to his Death, and after state, Let me
die the death of the righteous, and let my latter end be like his. Where we may
note,

That these were the words that God put into his mouth, ver. 5. and so divine
words, and full of truth and rightness in themselves; and the truth of diverse
passages herein are evident to be true: as, that they are a people dwelling
alone, and not accounted (or, (...)
as the Hebrew and the Latin has it, Scipsum non annume^at.
numbers not himself,) among the Nations, which the truth of all Histories to
this day witnesses: For though they are dispersed among all nations for their
sins, yet they ever dwell, as it were, by themselves, as a distinct people or
nation, from all those among whom they dwell, not reckoning themselves with
them; and their dispersions all over, notwithstanding the Bishop Usher reckons
up in his Annals, as slain of them in sundry places, in the wars under Titus
and Vespasian, 254490, besides in the siege of Jerusalem 1100000 in all 1354490
and N^cephorus tells of millions of them destroyed in Adrians time, yea 53
wyriads in one dey, besides what were slain in the tumults in Tra^ans time.
numerous multitudes of them that have at sundry times been in diverse places
slaughtered, testify their number to be exceeding great, and such as Balaam
might well say of them here, Who can count their dust?

In the words of the Text, we may consider

1. Who he was that spoke the words: Not Israel, but Balaam. Its he that is
meant of in the word [ me, or my soul.]

2. The matter spoken. And that is considerable, 1. In general. A good Wish, or
Desire. 2. In particular. That he might die the death of the righteous, etc.


1. From the first of these: The person wishing, Balaam, a bad man; we may
briefly note

Note 1. That good words may sometimes be in bad men's mou^hs. As the Greek
Proverb is, Oftimes (...).
a fool may speak seasonable sayings. God is the Lord of Hosts. All creatures
are his. And as in the former Chapter he put a man's voice into an Asses mouth;
as if she had had a man's understanding in her brutish heart, and a man's wit in
her dull head. So in this, and the following Chapter, he put divine words,
words of truth, into the mouth of a wicked man. As Satan can transform himself
into an Angel of light, so his ministers may be sometimes transformed into
ministers of righteousness; not only through evil design of their own, but
also sometime by Gods overruling power and providence. So the Spirit of God
came upon Saul, and he prophesied, even when he was in his persecutions of
David, 1 Samuel 19.20, 23. and Caiaphas spoke by the instinct of the Holy Ghost,
in saving, It behoved one man to die for the Nation, etc. John 11.50, 51. Yea
as sometime Satan may insinuate his words into good men's mouths, as when Peter
bid Christ favor himself. So also God sometimes puts good words into evil men's
mouths: And that

(...). Origin in Gels. lib. 7. This is, God bieng a lover of mankind, has
made known the truth, and what is to be known of him, not e^l^y to those that
are addicted to him, but also to such (...) are without his sincere worship, or
godlin^ss toward him, though some doing things n^w ^hy of that knowledge live
ungodlily.
1. Because God is good to all, and Christ the true Light that lights every
one coming into the world, and his Spirit judging, or striving in man, that
they might be turned in to God, and be saved. As it is said, God would have all
men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth; for there is one God, and
one Mediator of God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom
for all, a testimony in due time, 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. Whence it is said, Does not
wisdom cry? and understanding lift up her voice? As if he would say, Can that
be denied or doubted of? Prove. 8.1, 2, 4, 5, etc. Thence it is said, That the
heathen withheld the truth in unrighteousness; for what was to be known of God
was manifest in them, for God showed it them. Though when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, nor were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, letting in something of Gods light, though rejecting the life and
power of it, and obeyed it nor. Thence we find good speeches in the Heathen,
though they liked not to be made good by Gods light and goodness discovered. We
may instance one in Juvenal to this purpose.

Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris:
Nam pro j^cundis aptissima quaeque dubunt Dii,
Charior est illis homo quam sibi, etc.
Leave't to the Powers above to judge what is meet,
They Will give what is good, in stead of what seems sweet.
They love man better than man himself loves.
But this was still more evident in the Jews, as is to be seen in Romans 2.17,
18, 19, 20, 21, etc. They knew, and could speak of many excellent things,
though they that so spoke, abode still wicked: and so the Gospel is as a
Draw-net that being cast into the sea, catches fishes good and bad. Whence many
receiving its light may speak well, though not receiving its life and power
they live ill, Math. 13.47, 48. and fail of the grace that God afforded them,
receiving it in vain, Heb. 12.15, 2 Cor. 6.1.

2. For a testimony to others, that they might have means of understanding and
help in the way of God. And so as Balaams Ass spoke with a man's voice, for his
Masters sake; so might Balaam have those divine Raptures, and speak the
language of Gods true Prophets, for Moabs sake* That they knowing who was the
true God, and seeing his great goodness to, and the good condition of his
people, and who they were, might have opportunity of joining themselves to
them, and enjoying their happiness with them. And it is thought by many, Vident
Chaldaei in Coelis qued Balaam reliquit in Scripturis, orietur Stella ex Jacob
etc. Bern. in Concep. B. Mariae. Ipsa veritas cogente naturaetiam ab invilis
pecteribus eramp^t La^ lib. 2. cap. 1.
that the Prophecies of this man out of the mountains of the East, preserved
amongst the children of those Eastern Countries, gave that understanding to the
Wisemen out of the East, that are said upon the Birth of Christ to have seen
his star, and to come and worship him, Mat. 2.1, 2.

3. For the greater testimony to God and his truth, while they have such force
and evidence, as to gain a confession from those that love them not, but are
their enemies. As its an evidence of the strength of a man's Cause, when the
adversary cannot but acknowledge it. An evidence of the righteousness of Gods
Cause, when he appeals to men's Consciences to be Judges in it, Isa. 5.3, 4
Their Rock is not as our Rock (says Moses of the Nations) our Adversaries
themselves being Judges, Deuteronomy. 32.31.

4. In extraordinary Cases, such as this was, it is for the good and advantage
of Gods choice people. And so it is affirmed in Deuteronomy. 23.4, 5. The Lord would
not hearken unto Balaam, but turned the Curse into a Blessing, Because the Lord
their God loved his people. And in Josh. 24.10. I would not hearken unto
Balaam, but he altogether blessed you, and I delivered you out of his hand.
Whence also the Prophet Micah bids Israel remember what Balaam the son of Beor
answered unto Balak, That they might know the righteousness of the Lord. That
is, his faithfulness to his people, Mich. 6.5. So Saul's prophesying was that
David might escape him. could not abuse his goodness were he not so good to
them, and would not abuse it, and rest short of his gracious good end in
extending it, if they were not so bad.

2. It instructs us as not to receive every word that good men may say; for sin
and corruption in them, and Satan getting advantage thereby, may sometime
mis-lead them to speak amiss, as Peter to our Lord in Math. 16.23. (...)
Whence the Apostle next to his direction, Not to despise prophesying, adds,
Try all things, and hold fast that that is good. And thence also good men
sometime, un-say what they have foresaid, and vary from it; as Austin had his
Book of Retractations. So also not to reject all that may be said by evil men,
because evil men; at least not to reject Gods savings and good counsels from
them: though no body would wisely go to seek the Lord, or enquire after his
mind by them, when better means are afforded. The Scribes and Pharisees (says
our Savior) sit in Moses Chair, all therefore whatsoever they bid you do,
(namely, as holding forth, and setting forward Moses Law) that observe and do,
Math. 23.2, 3. And its observable, that after our Savior had testified against
Judas, John 13.19. he immediately adds, Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
receives whomsoever I send, receives me; and he that receives me, receives
him that sent me. As implying, that what Judas had preached by his Mission of
him, was never the less to be regarded by others, though he himself miscarryed.
Gods words are Gods words, and in themselves have the same truth and holiness,
though in a wicked man's mouth; nor does he disown his Statutes, though an evil
man declare them, but only the evil man that declares them, Psalm. 50.16, 17.
Even as Christ says not, he never knew his Name when evil men prophesied in
it, and thereby cast out devils; but he knew not the men though doing such
things therein, that wrought iniquity, and abode in evil, Math. 7.22.23. St.
Paul cites sometimes the sayings of Heathen Poets, and has made them Canonical
Scripture by his citing them; and it cost a good man his life that he neglected
to hear counsel from God by a heathen. 2 Chronicles. 35.22. Josu^h was slain in
battle, not hearing or harkening to the words of Necho King of Egypt, from the
mouth of God.

Bern. de 206 Dis^. 3. Audivit Balaam sermones Dei, and vis^^^s omnipotentis
intui^^ est, sed cadeb^t opertis coeulis, sic multos videtis had estudentes
Se^s ^at^, etc
Again, let no man lift up himself in having knowlegde and ability to preach,
and speak Gods word, and give good language to, or of Gods people, seeing
that is a gift a bad man may have, and be never the better, but the worse for
it: Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall inherit the Kingdom, but he
that does the will of God, that hears the word of God and keeps it. Better to
be but a hearer and a doer, than a Preacher and no doer of the word of God. As
many might help to build Noah's Ark, that not entering it, perished in the Flood:
So it is here, Mat. 7.21, 22.

2. As to the matter of the words in general: They are a wish, a good wish or
desire, such a wish as a good man may wish.

Thence note, 1. Gods dispensations to men may beget good things in them, that
yet are not made good by them. So here, what God said and showed to Balaam,
produced in him an enlightened understanding, an apprehension and persuasion
that Israel was a righteous and a good people; and that continuing so, they
should have a good Death, and a desirable End, and therefore he also commends
and blesses them. as a happy people; and had good desires that his soul might
dye their death, and his latter end be like to his. Yea, this note is further
confirmed, if we view other expressions of what was begot in him, as a
resolution to obey God, and an actual obedience too in many things, when God
said, Thou shall not go with them (the Messengers of Balak) thou shall not
curse the people, for they are blessed; though it made him not good, yet he was
so far obedient that he did not go with them, nor do the evil God forbad him,
Numb. 22.12, 13. and when Balak sent more, and more honorable Messengers with
proffers of greater honors and rewards, he had such an awe of God upon his
spirit, that he tells them, Though Balak would give him his house full of
Silver and Gold, he could not go beyond the word of the Lord his God; both
calling God, his God, and protesting his ad^aering to his word: And when he see
the Angel standing in the way against him, because his way was perverse before
God, yet he so far submits himself as to say, if it displeased him, he would go
back again; and God permitting him to go on, he told Balak, the word that God
put in his mouth, that should he speak, verse. 38. and Chap. 23.12. Must I not
take heed to speak that which the Lord has put into my mouth? and justifying
himself against Balak, angry with, and faulting him for not curring, but
blessing Israel, he says, Told I not thee that all that the Lord speaks that
I must do? all that, and nothing but that. What obedience and constancy in his
obedience is here? and Chap. 24.12, 13. Spoke I not to thy Messengers which
thou sent est to me, saying, if Balak would give me his house full of Silver
and Gold, I cannot go beyond the Commandment of the Lord, to do good or evil
of mine own mind? but what the Lord says, that I will speak; as resolving and
holding fast his resolution to obey God whatever honor and preferment he
thereby lost, though a house full, yea, Balak's house full of Silver and Gold;
and Balak being a King, his house sure was a great house, a Palace. I fear a
few handfuls of such metal would tempt many now adays to revile the fearers of
God, and to turn Men-pleasers therein: especially if such men as Balak was. Yet
Balaam stood so to his tackling, that he will not be tempted by a house full of
Gold and Silver. Yea, he makes Balak stamp and clap his hands at him, and bad
him flee to his place: he thought to have promoted him to great honor, but now
the Lord had kept him back from honor, Chap. 24, 10, 11. How far may a man go,
and yet be a bad man, a false Prophet for all that! Balaam seemed here to
outstrip St. Peter at some time. Balaam through fear of God, displeases and
angers Balak, because he will not disobey God, and curse his people. And Peter
at the voice of a so^r^ Damsel, denies his Master Christ, yea, with swearing
and cursing himself, disowns him; yet both being overborn by fear, neither of
their actings are reckoned to them. Not Balaam^ for good, because it was not
out of love to God and his people that he blessed them; but out of fear and
constraint: he durst do no otherwise. Nor Peter's for evil; for it was not out
of hatred or ill will to his Master, but merely as one overborn by fear; and
therefore also they both repented them, as it appears; for he that acts but out
of fear, when that fear is over will recoyle, and not endure to the end. Balaam
it seems looking back to that honor he deprived himself of, though he durst
not curse Israel, yet gave bad counsel against them, and therein spoke, and did
beyond what God bade him, as is evident in Numb. 31.16. Rev. 2.14. having an
eye therein to the reward or wages of unrighteousness, as is said 2 Pet. 2.15,
16. Jud. 11. and Peter when Christ looked back upon him, looking back upon the
disservice done his Master, went out and wept bitterly, and afterward boldly
confessed him, Act. 4.10, 11, 12. Luc. 22.62 so that its not good to be hasty
to judge good or evil of men by some present actings, but the end is to be
attended. But besides those effects in and upon Balaam before mentioned, what
excellent rapture had he? and what excellent things speaks he of Israel?
whereas many an honest heart can speak little of, or for God and Christ, or the
privileges of his people: and may never meet with a trance or rapture all
their days; but go mourning and are afflicted from their youth up, as Heman
says of himself, Psalm. 88.15. How various herein are Gods dealings with men?
how unsearchable his judgments, and his ways are past finding out! But why
this surely?

1. To instruct us, not to rest in desires, wishes, fear of offending God, and
incurring his displeasure, resolutions and such like operations, as sure
evidences of our good estates or conditions with God; or as things that so
accompany salvation, as that we persuade our selves we cannot therefore miss of
it, because such things be found in us; for these are insufficient to justify
us or declare us to be righteous. Men may have these, and not be in Christ, out
of whom we have not life, whatever we may have by and through him, either
dispensed to us, or wrought in us. Balaam had these and yet was a wicked man,
and perished in his wickedness. Had he indeed followed on through this desire
to seek to know the God of Israel, and to be made one with Israel, and so to
have been brought in to Christ, that he might have had his hope and rejoicing
in him, and been renewed by him, he might have done well, and become a good
man. He had advantage given him for that, and something effected of tendency to
that, but not heartily yiedling up to it, but looking back to the wages of
unrighteousness that were in his eye, all his fruit was blasted, and withered
like grass upon the house top; his desires languished and brought not forth an
hearty effectual endeavor after what was desired, and his resolutions were
lost, while his subtlety undermined what his fear had led him to, namely his
blessing of Israel. And all his raptures and visions were but like to flashes
of lightning in a dark Night; which though at present they make all things in
the Room visible, yet are presently gone again, and leave the Room as dark or
darker than they found it, not like the morning light, that abides and
increases more and more unto the perfect day; as the way of the the upright is,
Prove. 4.18. Its the being in Christ, and so of the Circumcision, and Israel of
God, the worshipping God in spirit and truth, rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and
having no confidence or glorying in the flesh, which renders us of the blessed
people, and in a happy condition, Philip. 3.3. not the being enlightened into
and having abilities to discourse of them and their excellencies, nor our
having bare desires and some languid wishes and endeavors to dye like them,
and have share with them.

2. To instruct us not to take up in raptures, revelations, Aliqui done Spi^tu,
Sancti ^er merit^m sed pe^f^us forti^tur sicut sunt propheti^ cu^t ^es, etc.
^nc est quod Balaam p^pulo Dei bene^, etc. Be^n. in ^oen. Dom.
excellency of knowledge, expressions, etc. seeing these may be, where the
heart is not right, not subdued to be of the Israel of God. It is not every one
that has such visions, raptures, trances; much less none but they that shall
inherit the Kingdom, and enjoy the blessing; but every one that hears the Word
of God and does it, though he never meet with any such things all his days.
Men may have such things and be hurt by them, thence the Apostle tells us it
was doubtless not expedient for him to glory in such things; yea, that God was
pleased to give him a Thorn in the flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet him,
to prevent the hurt he was in danger to fall into by them, 2 Cor. 12.7.8. Lest
I should (says he) be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations, there was given me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to
buffet me, left I should be exalted above measure. He goes twice over with it,
to signify the certainty and greatness of the danger of it, and the great care
and faithfulness of Christ to prevent it, these therefore are not the things to
be so much gloryed in, much less rested and relied upon; but rather and only
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, even the knowledge of Christ, and of him
Crucified. Gal. 6.14. 1 Cor. 22. But I pass on, and come

2. To consider the matter of the Text in particular, the thing desired. Let me
(or my soul) dye the death of the Righteous (or upright ones) and let my latter
end be like his. Wherein

These truths are contained, seen and confessed by Balaam.

That me dye the death of the Righteous, and let my latter end be like His.

That death and latter end like theirs.

These are both of them truths, and never the less truths for coming out of
Balaams mouth; but rather the more evident and observeable truths because
confessed by Balaam also, even by such as are not the Children and lovers of
the truth. Let us veiw them briefly and in order.

Point 1.
Death is common to the righteous and the wicked, and both of them have their
latter end. There be two branches of this proposition, Death common to good and
bad
and both branches are employed fairly. Balaam being an unrighteous man, a
Diviner and Enchanter, sees and acknowledges he must dye, and have a latter end
or an after part: else no ground for his wishing so to die, as, or that his
latter end might be like that of the righteous: and it is clearly employed and
taken for granted by him, that the righteous has his death, and his latter
end, or after part. Both have them therefore, though it is employed that they
are not the same to both: nor indeed the one like to the other; for if they
were, there was no ground for wishing or desiring a likeness of them. This is
common to both, they shall dye and they shall come to an end or after part;
that is the substance of the first point or proposition: the inequality and
unlikeness between them belongs to the second.

Consider we first the former in both Branches: and so first,

That they must both dye. Death is common to all men; Bran. 1. Good and bad
must dye.
yea it is the way of all flesh, and the Grave the house appointed for all
living, Josh. 23.14. Job. 30.25. The way of all the earth we see, says the
Psalmist, wise men dye, likewise the fool, and the brutish man perish, Psalm.
49.10. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead, and so be the Apostles, and
all generally that have been before us, and now are not, except Enoch and
Elias, one of which was translated, and the other taken alive into heaven, but
all else generally have dyed; and all that come after us shall dye in like
manner, except those believers that shall survive to the coming of the Lord
Jesus, who shall not dye as others; so as to sleep or rest in death, as the
Apostle witnesses, saying, Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at
the last Trump; for the Trump shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed; so also 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17. though in
the change shall be something exceeding suddenly answering to Death and
Resurrection in a moment; but for all others they do, and must look to dye,
that is, to have their breath and spirit taken from them, their Souls and
Bodies separated each from other, and that necessarily, as in 1 Samuel 14.14.
Reasons why D^^th i^ common Re^
we must needs all dye, and we are as water spilt upon the ground that cannot
be gathered up again; neither does God respect any persons, etc. For righteous
and wicked be both men, partakers of the same humane nature, one as other; and
this Death we now speak of, the bodily Death which the proposition is intended
of, is, that that pertains to men as they are partakers of the nature of man;
and that neither the righteous put off by being righteous, though they partake
also of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 2.4. Nor the wicked by his being wicked,
though he therein become also of the wicked one, 1 John 3.12. Righteousness and
wickedness make a difference of the state of men toward God, and of the frame
of heart, and the way of conversation and life, but makes not an alteration of
the common nature or humanity so as to cause it to cease in either party. It is
appointed to men once to dye. Heb. 9.27. to men, namely, in the capacity and
consideration of men, not to the righteous only, nor to the wicked only as
such, but to men; and that also because

for by one man sin entered into the world, and Death by sin, and so death
passed over all men, because all sinned. Romans 5.12. and that was the Original
cause of Death, the wages o^ sin is death, Romans 6.23. now not only they that
^^w are wicked and ungodly sinned in Adam, but all men, eve^ ^ich also as are
now made and become righteous in and by Jesus Christ, for all have sinned and
come short of the glory of God, Heb. 2.^^
Romans 3.23. where all is expressed, none is excluded from it. The Prophet
putting in himself with all his Brethren, says, We all like sheep have gone
astray, we have turned every man to his own way. Isa. 53.6. And the Apostle, If
we say we have not sinned, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.10. And because of this sin

Adam in the day he sinned, passed upon him not only as a single particular
person, but also as the root of all Mankind, and their inclusive Father, in
whose loins seminally all were, and so when it was said to him, Dust thou art,
and to dust thou shall return, death in and by virtue of that Sentence was
denounced and passed upon all men, Genesis 2.17. with 3.18. Romans 5.12, 16. (only
by special favor and prerogative through Christ, God exempted one or two as
instances of immortallity, and of such a change as in which he will exempt
those that are alive at Christ's appearing in the faith of him, as we said
before.) This is included in what the Apostle speaks of, when he says, The
judgment was of one offense to condemnation, and through the offense of one,
judgment came upon all to condemnation. Romans 5.16.18. in which it was appointed
of God to men once to dye; whereupon

Psalm. 49.12. Man in honor abides not; he is like the Beasts that perish; in
respect of the frailty and diseasedness of his body and outward man, and
lyableness to be penetrated, pierced, wounded, killed, dye of hunger, thirst,
cold, or the like: whence that of Solomon, Eccles. 3.18.19.20. I said in my
heart concerning the state of the sons of men, that God might manifest them,
(or that they might clear God) and see that they themselves are beasts. For
that which befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts, even one thing
befalls them. As the one dies, so dies the other, yea they have all one
breath, (their breath in all of them is in their nostrils now) so that a man
has no pre-eminence (that is in respect of the temper of his body, and its
mortality and lyableness to death) above a beast, for all is vanity. Both man
and beast of a vanishing, momentany continuance in this life, all go unto one
place, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again; For all flesh is grass,
(as well that of men, as that of beasts, or birds or fishes) and all the
goodliness of man is as the flower of the field: The grass withers, the
flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord bleweth upon it, (that is his
anger whence the Sentence of Death proceeded) surely the people is grass, Isa.
40.6, 7. Now then, in as much as the righteous as men, are flesh as well as the
wicked, they are also both subject and liable to death.

True it is, that Christ has died for all, Moses, and consequently no other
way, and so that we might by him be brought back again to God, and be made
partakers of eternal life. And that he having power as Lord and Judge over all
men, even over those also that obey not his Calls, or believe not in him, might
raise and judge them according to his good pleasure. Of which further by and by.

Now these being the ends of Christ's dying for men, his death is no hinderance
to dying men; For God pronounced the sentence of Death upon men after the
interposure of the Mediator, as appears Genesis 3.15.18. He first provided, and
promised that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the head of the Serpent; and
then afterward, notwithstanding that, sentenced both the man and the woman, and
in them all of us to die, and return to dust, out of which we were taken. Now
that sentence that was pronounced after the promise of Christ's coming and dying
for us, is not let and prevented by his dying, only as the promise of
Christ to die* laid a foundation of our hoping in him to have this Death
abolished, so as that we might not be hurt of it, or kept out from obtaining
and receiving the blessing of God by it; so accordingly his actual dying was
the bringing forth that foundation and ground of hope in him into act, that we
might die in hope also of that better life that he has promised us in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Romans 8.10. The justification received in believing on Christ, being but as to
his state toward God, to the freeing him from his wrath, and from lyableness to
the eternal Death, in the second Judgment that shall be in the end of the
world, the wrath to come; and to the admitting him into fellowship with him,
and with the Saints and Holy Ones in his Spirit and inward man, as to his being
accepted and accounted as righteous with God in Christ, and an Heir of the
Promises of God here and hereafter: but it exempts not from the bearing the
sentence of the bodily Death, through which he also must pass as well as
Christ, Reasons of Gods ordering Death to the Righteous.
that he may enter into glory with, and through him. Yea, there be diverse
reasons why God orders that his people shall lie under the Sentence of Death,
though righteous, and pass in their due times through it. As to say,

1. To show that he is the Lord, and disposes of his creature as he pleases:
And seeing he has in his great and infinite wisdom, and by his righteous will
pleased so to order it, that both the righteous and sinners shall submit to
that Sentence, we being the clay and he as the Potter over us, its meet that we
be all silent before him, and subject to him, practicing obedience even in so
suffering.

2. That we might have the thought and remembrance of it, as a spur to stir us
up, and provoke us to many excellent and profitable duties and exercises: As
for instance,

1. To seek him more earnestly, and apply our hearts to wisdom in the knowledge
of him in Christ Jesus, seeing our times for that are not always. Whence that
Prayer Psalm 90.11. Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts to wisdom.

2. To quicken us to serve him in our generations in doing good, knowing that
our time is but short; to be plying our business for glorifying him here, and
laying up for our selves a good foundation against the time to come. That we
might do what our hand finds to do with all diligence, because in the Grave
whither we go there is no work, no praising God, etc. Eccles. 9.10. Psalm
115.17.

3. To make us always more watchful and fearful to offend God, seeing our time
is limited here, and is in his hand, and if we take liberty to wander from him,
we may in the mean while be taked hence, and so it may go ill with us. To this
purpose are those sayings of our Savior, Watch, for you know not what hour your
Lord comes, Math. 24.42, 44. Luke 21.34.36.

4. To exercise Faith in the truth, power, and faithfulness of God in Christ,
for the bringing us to glory, notwithstanding Death and Grave, John 11.25, 26,
40. 2 Cor. 4.13, 14, 15, 16. 1 These. 4.14, 15. 1 Cor. 15.2, 3, 4, 12.58.

5. To comfort us, and persuade us to patience under our sufferings here, and
make us the willinger to choose to under go them, rather than to sin agaiast
him, and turn from him. Seeing Death will come and put an end to them, and give
us as it were a discharge from them all, we may the better hold out to the end,
because it will not be long to it; this life being but a vapor that appears a
little while, and then vanishes, Jam. 4 13, 14. The Apostl^s thus comforted
themselves in their sufferings, partly in the consideration of the
momentaniness of them, they being but the sufferings of this present time,
which Death will finish, 2 Cor. 4.4.17, 18. Romans 8.18.

6. To moderate their affections to, and endeavors after these earthy, worldly
things, that so they may be the more given up to seek and serve the Lord,
seeing the time is but short and uncertain that we shall, or can be here to
enjoy them, or want them, 1 Cor. 79.2, 30. 1 John 2.16, 17. The world passes
away, and the lust of it.

3. He orders it to give us more abundant sense and perception of the
odiousness of sin to him; and so to admonish us not to sin against him, but to
stand in awe of him, while we see and find that notwithstanding all that Christ
has done for our Reconciliation and Restoration into his favor, yet he will
have such things pass upon us still in our persons, and be sustained by us; for
Death is the wages of Sin, Romans 6.23. and if for our sinning once in Adam, God
will have such a punishment lie upon us all in all generations, though Christ
also has interposed between God and us, what may we not fear will befall us if
we dare still in our persons to sin again and again against him!

4. He orders it to occasion in us a deeper sense of the love of God and Christ
to us; of God in abasing Christ, and of Christ in abasing himself for us, so
low as to dye for us, while we have the experiments of it, and of the things
that tend to it in our selves, though without the curse and sting in it, which
our Lord by suffering them, took away, we are aptly minded to consider what it
was to him that endured it as the curse of the Law, and so with its sting and
venom in it; and so how great love that was that led him so to do for us.

5. He orders it to be an end, or put an end to our sorrows, labors,
temptations and exercises here, that we may rest from them all, and be at quiet
from molestations, from men and Devils; for there the wicked cease to trouble,
and there the weary be at rest; they hear not the voice of the Oppressors, Job.
3.17.18. they enter into peace, and rest in their beds, etc. Isa. 57.1, 2.

6. To conform us to his blessed Son in sufferings and death, and so in
exercising such faith in God and submission to him in resigning our selves to
his merciful dispose, as he also exercised in resigning up his spirit to him,
depending upon him to dispose of it, and in due time to raise him, Romans 8.29,
30. Luc. 23.46. with Psalm. 31.5.

7. To give them advantage of their more abundantly testifying their love and
obedience to God and Christ, in laying down their lives for him, as he may call
any of them thereto; and so to magnify him in their deaths, as Philip. 1.20.
It is the desire of Lovers to have some advantages or occasions given them to
show the greatness and reallity of their love to them they love; whence that,
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits? Psalm. 116.112. and its
some satisfaction and rejoicing when such advantages are given them. Now herein
Christ gives us a possibility of such advantage of that desirable satisfaction
of love to him, that we may sometimes show it in dying or exposing our lives to
dangers of it for him, Rev. 12.11.

8. To show forth more abundantly the excellency of his power and glory in the
Resurrection, in raising them up again from the dead. For his power is made
manifest in weakness, and is perfected in infirmities; how much more when we
are so altogether under the power of death and the grave, that it may seem
impossible to be revived or brought up again. If the greatness of the power of
God was seen in raising up Christ from the dead, sure the greatness of the
power and glory of Christ will be seen in raising up his people again, and
making them therein conformable to himself, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Philip. 3.20, 21.
this will be such an evidence of his power, as shall make them indeed to know
how infinitely great he is, and how true and faithful in his promises. Thence
its said, I will open your graves, oh my people, and cause you to come out of
your graves, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your
graves, O my people, and brought you out of your graves, and put my spirit into
you, and ye shall live, then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken it, and
have performed it, etc. Ezekiel. 37.12, 13, 14. To such purposes, and for such
like good, holy, and gracious, and glorious ends does God order death upon the
righteous also, and indeed in all this chiefly to magnify the greatness and
glory of the Lord Jesus, and his own in him, and for the benefit and profit of
us. Whence its said that death also is ours, the believers, not they its, but
it theirs; their advantage mercy and privilege, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. and according
to these several considerations might we apply it. And especially

To provoke us to consider our mortallity, that we must die, and in Christ
prepared for us, to be the more earnest and diligent in seeking after them, in
seeking his face and favor, and serving, him in our generation, being so much
the more earnest therein, as we know our times here are short and uncertain;
and not giving way to our hearts to wander after vanity and iniquity, lest he
putting an end suddenly to our lives, we be found wandered from him out of the
way of understanding, and so miss of his salvation.

2 And seeing we must die, and death will put an end to our present sufferings,
temptations and afflictions, stablish we our hearts in the way of God, to hold
fast the profession of our faith, and the practice of godliness firm without
wavering to the end, as knowing that our sufferings here, will not, nor can be
everlasting. Yet a little while and Christ will put us to bed in the grave,
where we shall rest from all our labors and sorrows, and be out of the reach
either of Satan to tempt us, or of the world to persecute or oppress us. The
worst that men can do against us, is but to kill our Bodies, and our Bodies
must die, though we do not yield them up to the Lord to glorify him in the
life and death of them. And if men do oppress and afflict us till we die, yet
then have they no more that they can do against us in which they may afflict or
trouble us, Math. 10.28. Jam. 5.8.

Reasons of Death in respect of the wicked.
As for the wickeds dying, they living in their sins and wickedness, and not
repenting thereof, they must needs die, as being

1. Not justified from their sins, the wages whereof is death, Romans 6.23.

2. Yea, they besides the sin of Adam, upon the account whereof the first Death
was pronounced and passes upon all, by their personal sins and wickednesses
oftentimes provoke God to cut them off signally insuch times and ways as else
they might not have died in. For though Pharaoh, Saul, Haman, Judas, etc. as
men and as sinners must have dyed; yet they needed not, nor might haved dyed at
such times, and in such ways as they did, had they not been guilty of such
heinous personal wickednesses as they were: otherwise such their deaths should
not have been punishments to them for such their sins, as it is certain they
were. See Psalm. 55 23.
Yea sometimes Gods people also by some sinful ways or acts pull upon
themselves untimely and exemplary deaths. God chastening them and making them
examples and admonitions to others in such ways, in which he also may prevent
the perishing of their souls, as is evident in 1 Cor. 11.29, 30. For this cause
many are sick and weak, and some are fallen asleep: But

3. Besides, God in mercy to men even such as are wicked, has ordered Death to
them, that the consideration of it might awake them to repentance, while a day
of grace is vouchsafed to them, that ceasing to be wicked, they might not die
for ever. Isa. 55.7. Ezekiel. 33.12.

4. And for the sake of the righteous and in mercy to them, that (they
persisting in their wickedness, and not turning therefrom) the world might not
be always pestered with them, nor they be always a vexation and mischief to
them that walk with God and fear him. But that the yoke may be broken sometimes
off their necks, and Gods anger against his people cease in their destruction,
as I^a. 10.25. and as we have instances in the Deaths of Pharaoh, Haman,
Ahitophel, Saul, and diverse others, from whose wrath, malice and mischeivous
madness, God gave his servants deliverance by cutting them off by Death in his
due time. Yea,

5. For the benefit of the world too, and such as yet are ignorant of, and
opposite to God and his truth. Partly, that they might be delivered from such
teachers of, and provokers to wickedness, by their evil examples, counsels,
compulsions, and withholding from them the ways and means of life. And partly,
that they might by Gods exemplary judgments upon them in their deaths and
destructions, be awakened and made to see the evil of wickedness, and the truth
of Gods words, and goodness of the ways of righteousness: as Psalm. 58.11. Psalm
9 16.
Seeing the wicked also shall die, it may instruct us

1. Not to be afraid of the fury of the oppressor, so as to turn David said of
Saul in his persecuting him, 1 Samuel 26.10.) and then he shall cease from all
power of troubling and molesting us in the day that the wickeds breath goes
out of his nostrils; all his thoughts, purposes or intentions for evil against
us shall perish. With this the Lord Jesus comforts his followers and people,
the Nation that knows his righteousness, and have his Law in their hearts, in
Isa. 51.7, 8.12, 13. Fear ye not, says he, the reproach of the people, neither
be ye afraid of their revilings, for the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment,
and the Worm shall eat them like wool: But my righteousness shall be for ever,
and my salvation to all generations. And again, Who art thou that thou should
be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man that shall be made as
grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker, and have feared all the day ^ing,
because of the fury of the oppressor? And where is the fury of the oppressor?
when God does but take away his breath and life from him (as he will at some
time or other, and may at any time when he will) what becomes then of all his
rage and wrath? his Cruel Threatenings? Bloody Laws and Decrees? Unjust
Oppressions? or the like. Surely they shall all vanish with him.

2. It may instruct us also not to envy their prosperity, and reprove such as
so do. To that purpose is that in Prove. 23.17, 18. Let not thine heart envy
sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. Upon this
account, for there shall be an end, namely, to thy suffering from them, and of
their lives and power to put thee to suffering, as also of their enjoying those
their enjoyments for which thou art apt to envy them. As it is more evident in
that parallel Counsel, Psalm. 37.1, 2. Envy thou not because of evil doers, for
they shall soon, be cut off as the Grass, and wither as the green Herb, etc.

3. It may also admonish the wicked to cease from his wickedness, and from his
priding in himself in, or pursuing after those things for and by which he is
made wicked, and hardened in his wickedness: Seeing he must die, and then all
his glory and what he prefers before God and his ways must be at an end with
him; yea, he also must give an account and be judged after that for all his
wickedness too. But that leads us to consider

Bran. 2. Both have a latter end.
The second Branch of this point, viz. That both righteous and wicked have, or
shall have their end. We have this asserted of both in Psalm. 37.37, 38. Mark
the perfect man and consider the upright, for the End of that man is Peace. But
transgressors shall be destroyed together; the End of the wicked shall be be
cut off. There is the End both of the upright, and of the wicked.

But 1. Joh. 2.17. That he that does the will of God, shall abide for ever. How
is it then that he has an end? how shall we understand it? Again it is said of
both righteous and wicked, That these, the wicked shall go into everlasting
punishment, and the righteous into everlasting life, Math. 25.46. How then can
either of them be said to have an end, seeing the one is everlastingly
punished, and the other lives everlastingly? Yea, it would be an happiness to
the wicked to have an End, for then he should not be everlastingly punished.
And a loss and exceeding damage to the righteous to have an End, for then
should not he be in a state of Eternal life, or Endless happiness.

Those sayings have reference to the state of the good and bad, Because I live,
says he, ye shall live also, Joh. 14.20. That is, ye shall abide and enjoy the
favor of God, and therein live for-ever. But those that are disobedient to God
and Christ, evil and wicked, and so persist, they are under the wrath of God,
and that abides upon them in life and death. And though they also by virtue of
Christ's having died for them as men, being risen again, and his being Lord and
Judge of them, What meant by their latter end.
and all men, shall be also raised again from death and grave, yet it shall be
to an eternal state of wrath and misery. But now the End here spoken of

1. May be meant of their latter end as to this life, and their being here in
this world. And so both the good and the bad have an end here: neither of them
shall be here in this world, and mortal state always; but as to that shall
have an end, an Exitus or going away hence, so as to be no more here seen.
Psalm. 39.13. Their place shall know them no more; neither shall they, either
the one or the other of them, return to it again, Job 7.10, and 10.21. and
16.22. Neither shall the wicked live here always to sin and do mischief,
oppress and grieve the righteous, etc. Neither shall the righteous live here
always to do good, or to suffer evil among an untoward, crooked, and wicked
generation. And so death, and the day of it, is the latter end to them both,
and the words are (...), a double expression of the same thing. Or else the
word rendered latter end

2. May signify otherwise. In the Hebrew it has its derivation from a word
that signifies, (...)
after, and so may be rightly rendered after-part, or after-state. And indeed
because the end is after the beginning and middle of a thing, therefore the
word is sometime translated the latter end. As also because our posterity
succeed and be after us, and are sometimes called them that come after,
therefore speaking of them it is sometime rendered posterity. And because the
reward is after the work, and usually at the end of it, therefore it is
sometime understood to signify, and so is rendered, the reward; and in any of
these three senses it may be here translated: either Let my end, or latter end,
in the sense above given, the end of my life, or days here, be like his. Or
else, Let my posterity be like his; for the seed of the righteous are in the
blessing, Psa. 37.26. They are the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring
with them, Isa. 65.23. Psalm. 115.14, 5. and exceeding great happiness is
promised to the posterity of Israel in the latter days, when God will save
them, and they shall bud and blossom, and fill the earth with increase, Isa.
27.5, 6, 7. Or else, and that I rather pitch upon, and think to be the sense,
Let my reward (my after-part, namely, that that follows the thing last before
mentioned, that is my death, let that that follows that, or is after it) be
like his. And so it signifies that both the wicked and the righteous have a
state, or part after death; a state in which shall be their rewards and
recompense for what they have done here in this life. And that agrees well
enough with the Scriptures above objected, and is an evident truth. Not
therefore to be judged a truth upon Balaams authority, because he says it; but
because they were the words of God in his mouth, and that which thence issued
forth; and because the sayings of Gods testimony every where do attest, or
assert it. And so we may say, it was a truth manifest also to Balaam though he
was wicked. For the Scriptures frequently tell us, that

1. As there is a state of Grave after Death to the body in which that returns
to the earth whence it was taken, so the Spirit also has its state in which it
shall go to God, Eccles. 12.7. which the Wiseman speaks of man indefinitely,
not of either the righteous only, nor the wicked only, but of man whose dust
goes to the earth, his spirit shall go up to God to receive its doom and
disposal by, and from him. As the like is also employed, Eccles. 3. 21. where
Solomon having said, that man dies as the beast dies, all are of the dust, and
all go to the dust again, in respect of the body, and the mortality come upon
all by sin, both are alike; immediately adds as an exception as to the spirit,
or inward part of the man or beast, that there is great difference. Who knows
(that is, or may be, considers, minds, or takes notice of) the spirit of the
sons of men that it geeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that it descends,
or goes down to the earth? The spirit or breath of the beast goes out with the
body, and goes to the earth as the body does in a sort, it survives not the
body: But it is not so with the spirit of the sons of Adam, or man, That goes
upward, or ascends to God that gave it, (as the other Proof says) that so it
might be judged or disposed of by him, as Heb. 9.27. The Judgment is appointed
unto men indefinitely after death, so as the soul or spirit is placed either in
Paradise, or in a state of Rest, as our Lord said to the Malefactor that
confessed him, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise; which could not be
said of the body, for that went to the grave, but of the spirit, which Paul
proved (either out of the body, or in the body he knew not whether) to be wrapped
up into the third Heavens, or into Paradise, while he was not yet taken away by
death, but survived many years after, 2 Cor. 12.6, 7. otherwise called Abraham's
Bosom, Luke 16.22. Or to be with Christ Phil. 1.23. Or else to be disposed of
to prison, or a state of hell and doleful misery, 1 Pet. 3.20. Luke 16.23. Yea,
and beside this, men after bodily death differ from the beasts also, in that

2. There shall be a state of Resurrection unto them, when the dead and
deceased shall both in body and spirit reunited, be brought to a living state
in union together, as the Scriptures abundantly testify, a Resurrection both
of the just and unjust, Act. 24.15. For all that are in the grave, whether good
or bad, righteous or wicked, shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and shall
come forth, says our Lord Jesus himself, John 5.28. Yea, the Sea shall give up
her dead, and Death and Hell shall give up the dead in them, Rev. 20.13. And
this in order to their being all brought before him, as the Great and Sovereign
Lord and Judge of all bath quick and dead. For

3. There shall be a state of Judgment, wherein all men being raised from the
dead, shall be brought to appear before the Tribunal or Judgment Seat of
Christ, to give account of themselves to him, and receive of him rewards
according to the things done in the body by them, whether good or evil; and
then shall properly be the reward, full recompense, and end of every man good
or bad, according to his works, 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 2.11.16. and 14.9, 10. in
which both they that have done good, and they that have done evil, shall be
everlastingly disposed of by Jesus Christ, in a way of infinite equity and
righteousness; therefore also it is called both, The righteous Judgment of
God, Romans 2.5, 6. because of his righteousness in judging and disposing rewards
and recompenses, and the eternal Judgment, Heb. 6.2. because of the
lastingness of that Judgment, as to the rewards and recompenses therein
ordered, and the state of man according to it, that shall succeed and follow
upon it. And all these three may be included here in the latter end.

The grounds of this latter end.
Now that there shall be such a latter, or after-part, or end for men good and
bad, stands as upon the will and pleasure of God: so upon that as manifested in
Christ Jesus, and his undertakings and performances. I cannot say, that if he
had not come in the flesh and dyed for us, there should have been nothing to
man after death, but an annihilation, being made both in soul and body like the
beasts that perish. What manner of death or dying, man must have sustained,
with the curse in it I cannot say; but doubtless it would have been very
miserable: and what the state of the soul would have been after, it is not
expressed. Something of it may be conjectured, if not certainly known, from the
agonies in Death, and the Hell into which Christ descended at, or upon his
Death; in which his soul was not left in hell, yet that it came into it, is
there employed, in that it is said it was not left in it, as ours must have been
had not his come into it, or had it been left in it. And what is writ in Psalm
18.4, 5. and 116.3, 4. is applicable to Christ: The sorrows of death compassed
me about, and the pains or pangs of hell took hold upon me. I found woe and
sorrow. But sure it is, that the after-state of man should not have been the
same as now it will. For as by Man came death, so by Man also the resurrection
of the dead: for as in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be made alive, 1
Cor. 15.21, 22. It is by virtue of Christ's having been made flesh for us, and
suffering in the flesh for us, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God, therein giving himself a ransom or price of redemption for all; and by
Death destroying Death, and him that had the power of Death, the Devil, and so
buying us all into his own Lordship and dispose, and being filled with the
fullness of the Spirit and Power of God, and so made a quickening Spirit, able by
his Word and Spirit both to quicken dead souls that listen to him and hear his
voice, and to quicken and raise up dead bodies too, that he is become the
Resurrection and the Life; and so having abolished death, will raise up and
revive all men from under the Sentence and Judgment of it, and present them
before himself to be judged by him as their proper Lord and Savior to whom they
owe their life, and ought to have lived, and by whom they should have sought
for salvation, looking to him for it, as in whom alone there is righteousness,
strength and salvation for them, 1 Pet. 3.18. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9, 14. 2 Timothy
1.10. 1 Cor. 15.45. John 5.21, 22, 26, 28. and 11. 25, 26. 2 Cor. 5.10.14, 15.
Isa. 45.22, 23, 24. Acts 4.11, 12. Yea the dispose of men by him both in the
state of death, and separation of soul from body, and in the state of
resurrection, depend upon and springs from his being Lord and Judge both of
quick and dead, through his having died, risen and revived, Acts 10.40.42, 43.
Romans 14.9, 10, 12. that he may be honored and glorified in all, and so the
Father in him; and to that purpose that his power, wisdom, mercy, justice,
holiness, love, and other glorious Attributes might be most brightly displayed
and glorified, and he be admired in all his Saints, etc. Philip. 1.10, 11. Isa.
49.4, 5. 2 These. 1.8, 9, 10. for the greatness of his power will be gloriously
displayed in his raising all, and bringing them before him, and executing
Judgment on them. His wisdom, justice, mercy, goodness, love, and holiness,
etc. in the final sentencing and disposing of them; and in all the vertuousness
and preciousness of his cross, blood, and sacrifice with God for men. As Lord
and Judge of the Dead it appertains to him, and he will dispose of the dead,
and take care of them that none of them be lost as to their bodies, but that
they be forth coming, and raised up by him at the last day, John 6.38, 39. and
of their spirits, that they be disposed of to Paradise or prison; to Heaven
with Christ, or to hell torments till the last day, as is noted before. And as
Lord and Judge of the living it appertains to him to, and he does order and
dispose of all here in this life as he sees good. And when he pleases puts an
end to the lives both of good and bad: and being raised again give them their
rewards according to their works, in equity and righteousness. For which that
there be an aftertime is requisite and necessary, and that it shall be so, is
most certain. For

1. The righteousness and stedfastness of his Law and Doctrine, his love of
righteousness, and hatred of iniquity, and his righteousness in rewarding
virtue, and punishing sin and wickedness must be declared, 2 These. 1.4, 5, 6.
Heb. 6.10, 11. He is the righteous Lord that loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.7.
And He is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, (...) S. p^, Ajax. Flag.
but hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. And therefore has in
his Law and Doctrine promised and proposed great rewards and blessings to the
righteous, and threatened great wrath and punishment to the wicked, Levit. 26.
Deuteronomy. 28. But,

2. This Time is not the time in which these things are sufficiently manifested
and fulfilled. This is but the time of workings, not of recompencing and
rewarding. All the time of this life is a time of work and labor; and therefore
there must be another time of reward. For here neither are the righteous
evidently rewarded with, or enjoy the promised blessings, Heb. 11.13. nor the
wicked punished according to their wickedness, so as may either sufficiently
evidence Gods love and faithfulness to the one, or his wrath and hatred against
the other, and the truth of his threatenings.

True it is, that God does give some rewards, or rather encouragements to
goodness here in inward peace and comfort, and oft-times in outward and signal
preservations and deliverances from dangers, and benefits conferred; Especially
to Societies and Companies of men, as Cities and Nations doing righteously and
cleaving to it. For otherwise there would be no encouragements here to serve
God and walk in his ways that might induce the world thereto, or such as are
chiefly yet sensual: But his service must needs be a sad and uncomfortable
exercise, and especially in communities or common bodies, as Kingdoms, Cities,
and Commonwealths as such, which (as one well observes) shall never be
restored into their public capacities again, to be as such rewarded. Nor would
it be known by experience or rationally thought that the giving such benefits
here appertained to God, or that he takes notice of men's righteous or evil
doings, if God should give such mercies to none that ask or desire them, or
that fear and serve him. And again on the other hand, true it is, that some
wicked men (and especially Nations and Commonwealths for the reason above
noted) are punished here with severe and smart judgments for their wickedness,
as Egypt, De civ. Dei, lib. 1 cap. 8. Si nulium peccatum nunc punires aperte
divini^as nulla esse divina providentia crederetur.
Babylon, Jerusalem, Pharaoh, Saul, Haman, etc. otherwise (as St. Augustine
also notes) men would believe no Divine providence nor have sufficient evidence
of Gods anger against wickedness, to move them to beware of it, and fear the
judgments further threatened. But yet neither are the encouragements here given
to the righteous persons, especially in their personal considerations, such as
either answer or evidence the greatness of Gods love to them, or come up to
such promises as, The meek shall inherit the earth, and delight themselves in
the abundance of Peace, Psalm. 37.11. that they are blessed of the Lord, and
shall endure before him for ever. And many the like, nor are they common or
general to all of them, as to such at least as are outwardly and visibly
testified. Many of them in the eye of the world, and to their own sense (as
some of themselves oftimes complain) being plagued all the day long, and
afflicted every morning. Mala corporis, bona sunt anim. Lact lib. 5. cap, 7.
So as they are ready to say, and others to think, that they in vain cleanse
their hearts, and wash their hands in innocence, Psalm. 73.13, 14. being as the
Scripture says else where, oftimes killed all the day long, and made as Sheep
for the slaughter, Romans 8.36. Yea, seem to the world to die miserably, and
receive no reward here for their love to righteousness, and to God, and Christ
testified in their death. As on the other hand the wicked oftimes prosper all
their lives, become old, and grow great in power, have none, or no remarkable
wrath testified against them, either in their life (their houses being safe
from fear, and they prospering in the world) or in their Death, having no bonds
therein, as Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5-12. Job. 21.6, 7, 8, etc. Yea, and they of them
that are punished here, are not punished beyond what some one of their
innumerable sins may deserve, nay little more than what lays upon all good and
bad, commonly befalls them. For what had Pharaoh more than Josiah in being
Drowned; or Saul in being killed in the Battle; or Haman in being hanged, more
than ordinarily is felt in men dying? except the suddainness, the
frightfulness, publickness and shame therein, or some such concomitant making
their falls exemplary, and testimonies of vengeance. Many a man that dies on
his bed of the Colic, or Stone, or Strangury, endures more torment: yea, and
many righteous persons endure as sudden, violent and shameful Deaths, even for
righteousness, as many Martyrs, and those mentioned Heb. 11.35, 36, 37. St.
Lawrence on the Gridiron endured as much for Christ, as Ahab and Keliah for
Idolatry and Adultery, whom the King of Babylon roasted in the Fire. Jer.
29.22, 23. as to what was visible. Here all things happen to the outward eye
promiscuously, and to all alike, as to the evil, so to the good; as to him that
fears the Lord, so to him that fears him not. God now causing his Sun to
shine on good and bad, and his rain to fall on the just, and on the unjust.
Matthew. 5.45. he desiring the Death of none, no not of the wicked, invites them
by his goodness, long-suffering and forbearance to repentance. And some of them
doubtless are led to repent thereby, though others harden their hearts
there-against, and in their impenitency treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelations of the righteous judgment of God, Matthew. 11.21.23. and
12.41. Romans 2.4, 5. and on the other side God often corrects both good and bad,
that he might exercise the faith of the one, and more purify and prepare them
for his glory, making them therethrough partakers of his holiness: and that he
might admonish and awaken the other to repentance that his soul might be kept
from going down to the pit, etc. Job. 33.29. and some are awakened thereby to
repentance, though some when Gods hand is lifted up will not see, Deus non
exclusit mala ut ratio virtutis constare posset. Lact.
Isa. 26, 9, 10. though indeed the righteous have the greatest share of
troubles and evils here, for the greater evidencing and adding worth and luster
to their faith and obedience. And also for the preparing them for, and
magnifying or inhancing their after-rewards. Their light and momentany
sufferings here, working for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. As also because they have all their punishment here, none
hereafter. As the contrary may be some reason of the wickeds more prospering
here, Luc. 16.26. and so as Austin well observes, Tam patientia Dei ad
poenitentia invitat males; sicut flagellum Dei od patientiam erudit bones
Item^, misericordia Dei fovendos amplectitur bones: sicut severitas Dei
pnniendos corripit malos, etc. Ang. de ci vit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 8.
the patience of God invites the wicked to repentance, and the Rod of God
nurtures the good to patience. Sometime again the mercy of God embraces the
good that are to be cherished; and the severity of God chastens the wicked that
are to be punished. Again, God would have these temporal matters common to
both. That good men might neither greedily covet what good things they see, to
be but the portion of the wicked here, nor shamefully avoid such troubles as
they see for the most part befall the good. Here then, evident it is, is
neither the time nor place of the full manifestation of Gods righteous judgment
on either: And therefore

3. It remains that seeing God has said he will punish all the workers of
iniquity, and reward all that are righteous and patiently persevere in well
doing; that there must be another, an aftertime and state in which his word,
that must not pass or fall to the ground, shall be accomplished, and his
righteousness both to the one and the other, and his love to righteousness and
hatred of iniquity, be fully manifested, Romans 2.5. which must therefore be
after Death. But then again

4. Seeing in the state of Death and separation of the Body and Soul (though
indeed there is a different dispose of their Souls, as aforesaid, and as will
after appear and be more cleared; yet) what is done then to the Soul or Spirit
by way of reward or punishment, is neither of the whole guilty or praiseworthy
subject. The Body having sinned also, and been active in the wickedness of the
wicked, and on the other hand has wrought what is good, and suffered injuries
and wrongs for Christ and righteousness sake in the righteous; and its but
right and reasonable that the whole that shared in the work, should share too
in the wages, (though the soul in both being the principal agent and mover of
the body, its not unreasonable that both in the one and the other it have the
precedence, and so have what is allotted in the separated state while the body
lies dead and senseless:) as also seeing what happens to the soul or spirit, is
not openly evident to the world, (if evident to those spirits that partake of
like state) and its meet that Gods righteousness be as openly and evidently
seen in the world, to men and angels, as men's works have been, and as his Law
and Doctrine have, which they therein kept or broke, as also the Promises and
Threatenings therein. As also many things in the spirits (and bodily actings
too) of men have been here hid, as also much of the reason of Gods dealings
here; and he has promised open-rewards, therefore it follows that it is
necessary that there be a resurrection and reviving both of good and bad from
the dead, and the bringing them to a public, visible, open and manifest
Judgment; so as God and Christ may be openly and manifestly glorified. And the
good and bad receive open and manifest recompenses for their works. So as both
the good may be openly honored and rewarded in the veiw of those that have
derided, and reproached them, and from and amongst whom they have suffered for
and practiced righteousness. And the wicked be openly judged amongst and by,
and punished in the veiw of those over whom they have here gloryed and
triumphed, and whom they here falsely judged and condemned. Such the grounds and
reasons for this after-state.

The as a shadow, Job. 8, 9. and 14.2. a vapor. (...) the shadow of smoke. And
(...) the dream of a shadow in S^pa and Pindar.
Jam. 4.14. a post, swifter than a post. Job. 9.25, or a Weavers shuttle. Job.
7.6. and the like (as some of the heathen have compared them to a shadow, or
smoke, or a dream, or the dream of a shadow, and man himself to an image or
shadow) and so we know not how soon we may be at that after-part; therefore to
be more serious, passing the time of our present so journing in the fear of
God, 1 Pet. 1.17. Remembering our Creator in the days of our youth, or choice,
while yet Life and Death are before us, and either of them may be chosen by us.
Not to live like (because as to our Bodies, we are mortal and must die, as) the
Beasts, or like the Epicures that say, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
die; as if there was nothing for us after death either to enjoy or suffer, and
as if the old Verse of the Epicures were true, viz. Ede, bibas, ludas, post
mortem nulia voluptas.
Let us eat, drink and play, for in the Grave
Or after Death, no pleasure men shall have.


So making the consideration of our Death an argument to provoke us to mind and
follow after the fading pleasures and enjoyments only of this fading life:
banishing the remembrances of God out of our hearts, as those wicked ones in
Job. 21.13, 14. and 22.16, 17. that say to God, Depart from us, we desire not
not the knowledge of thy ways. What can the Almighty do for us? But seeing
there is something after Death good or bad to be reaped by us according to our
lives here; it should stir us up to live as men endued with principles of
understanding and reason, and so capable of knowing and improving those truths
concerning us, minding and thinking on him who in creating and making us and
all other creatures, preferred us before and above them, and prepared another
and a further life for us, beyond what he gave or gives them; that in calling
to mind what he has done for and to us, both in the first Adam, and in our own
persons, as in and from him, in making us men endued with his image and
likeness, and capable of higher happiness than the Beasts of the earth, over
which he also gave us dominion: and also, and especially in the second Adam,
our Lord Jesus, in whom he has ransomed us from the Death we fell into in the
first Adam, and bought us into his own merciful and righteous Lordship and
dispose, and given us eternal life; a far better portion and happiness than
either what we may have in this life and world, or might have had in and from
Adam; considering also that he has appointed a Day of Death for us, and after
that a Judgment by him that died for us, and rose again, whereof also he has
given assurance (...).
or faith, to all men that he has raised him from the dead, Act. 17.31. we may
set our selves to seek him, the knowledge of him and of his will, which we may
find in his revelations of them to us by Jesus Christ, that so knowing and
yiedling up our selves to him to the obeying and doing his will (wherein we
shall be reputed righteous) we may be well, mercifully, and comfortably
disposed of by him in the after-state, avoiding and abandoning all those things
that might withdraw us from him, and from the obedience of his will, and
following after, or yiedling up our selves to what may further us therein. But
the further opening and improvement of this Use will better fall in after and
upon our consideration of the second point; viz. Point 2. The excellency of the
Death and end of the righteous.


That there is a very desirable excellency in the Death of the Righteous, and
in his latter end above that of other men, especially of such as are wicked. So
as even the wicked that care not to live their life, and to have their
beginning and progress, yet understanding it, desire to be like them therein.
Tartus est pietatis ^ructus. tanta justitiae merces ut ne ab ipsis ^ quid ^nin
des^rari qu^at impiis and injustis.
It is in a manner St. Bernaca's observation upon the words; For, says he,
such or so great is the fruit of piety, and such the reward of righteousness,
that it cannot but he desired of the wicked and unrighteous. Bern. in Ps. 91.
Ser. 7.

This does suppose and imply the second Branch of what we noted in our entrance
to discourse of the former Proposition, viz. That the Death and end of the
righteous, H^^e the Scriptures m^^n (...) the wo^d wicked.
are very different from those of the wicked, etc. of any that are not
righteous, which I only distinguish from the wicked, as the Scriptures usually
by the wicked understand men, not only ignorant of and out of Christ,
unjustified persons, but also evilly affected toward and opposite to Christ,
and the truth of God and his grace in the discoveries and teachings of it, so
as to act contrary, and in opposition to it against light and knowledge, and
that with stubbornness and wilfulness, and often to the endeavoring the
mischief of the righteous, and suppression of the truth of God. Now that the
righteous man's Death and after-end or part, differs from that of the
unrighteous and wicked, so as to be far better, we shall make evident through
Gods help and assistance in what we shall speak thereof.

1. Positively, as considered in themselves, and then also a little.

2. Comparatively, as comparing them with the sinners and wickeds.

1. In speaking positively of them we shall consider.

1. Who are the Righteous, whose Death and latter end are so commendably
excellent, and how they come to be so; or wherein their righteousness stands?

2. What is the Death of the Righteous, that is so desirable? And

3. Wherein, or upon what accounts it is desirable.

4. What the after-part or latter end of the Righteous, and the desirableness
thereof.

VVh^ ^e the Righteou^.
1. Who be these righteous ones, and upon what account, or wherein any is so? To
which let us mind

1. That the righteous are denominated from righteousness, so as they are
righteous in whom righteousness is found, or they in it, and by whom it is
practiced. Now righteousness is in it self an exact and perfect straightness or
rightness, so as to be without blame, fault or crookedness in every thing or
respect, and so its absolutely in God in the first place, and he both Father,
Word, and Holy Spirit, is called, the Just God, or the righteous Lord, Psalm.
119.137. Jer. 12.1. Job. 17.27. Zeph. 3.5. Deuteronomy. 32.4. yea, the most just or
upright, Job. 34.17. Isa. 26.7. because righteousness is essential to him, and
he and his will the most perfect rule of righteousness; but he lives and dies
not: nor of him can we understand the words, who is eternal, and without
beginning, end, or reward.

2. That we have to speak of righteous men, and righteousness, as found in or
upon man, and so we may say generally that Righteousness is a conformity in man
to the wiil and mind of God, and they are righteous that are so; and so are
right and straight according to Gods mind. (...)
And such is the signification of the word here translated, Righteous, Upright,
or Right. And so

1. God made man Jashir, upright, suitable to his mind, not crooked or
perverse, bending from him, or faulty before him, Eccles. 7.29. And that was
man's primitive, original, created state called also His likeness, or
similitude; but according to this righteousness or uprightness, there is no man
found while here living upright in himself, man having found out many
inventions, Eccles. 7.29. For all have sinned and swerved from that first
creered uprightness and integrity, and have failed of the glory of God, Romans 3
23. But God still abides just and righteous, though man be fallen from him; and
that rightness and uprightness that he gave or made us in, his acts, doings,
ways, words and works are all righteous, and there is no iniquity in him. And

2. He gave a righteous, just and holy Law, as a perfect Rule of righteousness:
according to which he that should do should live, and enjoy his favor and
blessing; but he that swerves therefrom, and continues not in all things
contained therein, is crooked and unjust; unrighteous and condemned by it to
die, yea accursed and blasted of God in his most holy and righteous Sentence.
But this coming in upon fallen man, and being proposed to him as a Rule, to
measure himself by, and square his heart and actions after, finds him so
desperately crooked and distorred by his fall, that it altogether pronounces
against man and condemns him. And while man would set himself to conform
himself to it in heart and way, he is thereby convinced that he is wrong and
unrighteous: For by the Law is the knowledge of sin; yea, sin taking occasion
by it, it is more awakened and stirred up to exert and act forth it self, when
it finds the Law its enemy to forbid, restrain and curb it, and strives to
bear it down before it, or else secretly to elude it. And so man in stead of
being made just and righteous by it, is discovered to be more vile and sinful;
yea, occasionally is made so, as the Apostle says, Romans 5.20. the Law entered
that sin might abound. And in Chap. 7.5 8, 9. The motions or passions of sin
that were be the Law, wrought in our members to bring forth fruit unto Death:
And sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me (says he) all manner
of concupiscence, or all lusting or coveting. So that according to that Rule we
are all pronounced unrighteous: There is none righteous, no not one, Romans 3.10.
None that does good, no not one, ver. 12. All gave out of the way, all together
become unprofitable, every mouth stopped, and all the world guilty before God,
verse. 13.19. What ever conceits men may have of themselves, or one of another,
yet by the deeds of the Law no flesh living is, or shall be justified in the
sight of God, ver. 20. As many as are of the work^ of the Law, and claim life
and righteousness, the promises and blessing to themselves that way, are all
deceived, and are under the Curse: the Law saying, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law, to do
them, Gal. 3.18. And there is not a man found living here upon earth that does
so continue in all things to do them. Not a just man upon earth that does good,
and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. The whole first Adam, our natural Root, with all
of us, even all the natural branches naturally springing out of him, being all
rotten and corrupt, crooked and perverse, bowed down from God to the creature,
and from loving one another, to love our selves with a perverse love: but
neither God nor our selves, nor one another as we ought, and in a way, manner,
and measure conformable to his will. And all our blossoms or what proceeds from
us, goes up as dust: all our thoughts, words and works corrupt and abominable,
filthy and stinking, Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3. Romans 3.10, 11, to 19. Such the
unrighteousness and unrightness of mankind, and notwithstanding all the Law
can do to rectify and mend us, the Law could not make us just, the flesh in us
prevailing against it; and multiplying sin by occasion of it, Romans 8.3. with
7.8. What then be these righteous or upright ones, whose death Balaam would
die, and whose latter end he would have like his? What, shall we take them to
be Angels! No sure. They die not, those especially that be righteous, holy and
good; and for the damned ones, they are far from being righteous or upright.
No, we must find them in the nature of men, and amongst men: To which purpose

3. God still being righteous, holy and good, and his Eternal Word and Almighty
Spirit, by whom he made and gave being to all things, abiding still just and
upright, and eternally so, (pitying fallen miserable man, being under the
Sentence of a most dreadful Death, by none to be desired, for his unrightness;
and devising how to deliver him therefrom) created a new thing in the earth,
such as was not found in all his first Creation; a new Root of Righteousness
and Plant of Renown, a Righteous Seed out of the sinning woman, by a wonderful
and most glorious way, even by ordaining and in due time sending forth his own
Eternal Word, his only begotten Son made of a woman: and so taking the seed of
the woman, the nature of a man, into a perfect, entire, and personal union with
himself, did so sanctify that Branch of man's nature in the conception of it,
and uniting it with himself, that therein (and so in him as become man,
Immanuel, God with us) there was no stain or pollution of sin. He knew no sin.
2 Cor. 5.21. nor did he any sin, nor was any guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet.
2.22. Him he made to be his Lamb for taking away the sin of the world; a
spotless Lamb and without blemish before him in heart and life, doing ever and
in all things what pleased his Father, to his utmost content and satisfaction,
Job. 8.29. 1 Pet. 1.19. Math. 3.17. Isa. 42.1. He only of all men, or persons
partaking of the humane nature, was and is the holy and just One, Act. 3.14.
and 7.52. Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 Job. 2.1. and he was just and righteous
according to the Law which he was made under, and was subject to ( Gal. 4.4.)
for our sakes, never breaking it, or doing any thing short of what was required
of man in it. So as that God testifies of him once, and again, that he was well
pleased in, or with him, Math. 17.5. for he delighted to do his will, his Law
was in his heart, his ear he opened, and he was not rebellions nor turned back,
Psalm. 40.7, 8, 9. Isa. 50.5, 6. Heb. 10.7. and indeed in respect of his perfect
obedience to God, and conformity to his Law, he was justified thereby, and
ought to have lived and to be blessed; but yet though he had done so, and those
things were due to him, God his Father willing him to lay down all that life
and blessing, and take upon himself (as our nature and Law, so now) also our
sin and curse, and notwithstanding life and blessing was his due, to die for us
and be made a curse; he willingly for our sake did so, and so he suffered, the
just for the unjust, and died for the ungodly, that he might bring us unto God,
Romans 5.6. and 1 Pet. 3.18. it happened to him, the righteous One, according to
the work and desert of us wicked and ungodly ones, that it might happen to us
ungodly ones according to the work of him the just and righteous One; for he
that knew no sin was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him, and he has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us, that so the blessing of Abraham for (or concerning or unto) the
Gentiles might be in Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the
Spirit through faith, that is, that he might be made the righteousness of God
to us, and we might be made righteous by and in him, and inherit the life and
blessing promised by the law to the righteous; and so the righteousness of the
law be fulfilled in us, walking not after the flesh, but after the Spirit given
us in and through him, Gal. 31 13.14. 2 Cor. 5.21. and 1 Cor. 1.30. Romans 8.4.
So that this righteous One having dyed for all, and therein given himself a
ransom for all from under that sin and sentence of death upon all, there is
now in and by him wrought for us a complete righteousness even the
righteousness of God through the faith of him (he says not the faith in him,
(...).
but of him, the Gospel) unto (or for) all (even for all men, for the free gift
is for or unto all men, for the justification of life) and upon all that
believe, Romans 3.22. and 5.18.

So then here we have found a righteous man, a perfectly righteous and upright
One, in whom no crookedness or guile in the least; and that not only in
himself, and for himself, but for us too; as a root and fountain of them, and
of all life and blessing for all other men, for his name is called The Lord our
Righteousness. Jer. 23.6. 1 Cor. 1.30. But no man I think would wish to die
such a death as he dyed, so as to be a curse in dying: no it cannot be
understood of him as to that clause, the word Righteous or Upright being of the
plural number also, and including more: though as to the latter end or reward
rendered in the singular number, like his, it may be meant of him, as to the
infinite portion of life and happiness he has received in the nature of man
for us upon the account of his Death and sufferings; or it may signify like
the latter end, or after-part of him, that is, Israel, or any one of them
righteous or right ones, whom we must find also plurally. That we may make our
Doctrine come up to the language of the Text, and so find that there are other
persons, diverse, or many persons righteous, and so there are, but all in him
the righteous and just One, the righteousness of God for us, and root of
righteousness to us; And so we find, that by the obedience of one, many shall
be made righteous, Romans 5.19. And I say unto you, Many righteous men and
Prophets have desired to see the things ye see, etc. Math. 13.17. To show how
this comes about, and wherein they are righteous, observe

4. That God having provided such a righteousness as his Son, and that in his
Son for us, even for the justification and salvation of us sinful men in
general; now it is his will that we close with, come to, and believe in the
name of this his Son, the righteous One, seeking in him, and in the faith of
him (as evidenced and made known to us) remission of all our sins,
justification and acceptance of our persons, the holy Spirit of God, and his
heavenly gifts, and blessings, wisdom, righteousness, holiness, redemption,
and in a word all things pertaining to life and goddness. To which purpose he
declares and proclaims him to men in the Gospel; teaches the knowledge of him,
and therein draws to him, so as every one that hears and learns of him (the
Father) comes to him, and believes in him, 1. Joh. 3.23. Joh. 6.29. This is the
work of God that ye believe on him whom he has sent. And this is his
commandment that ye believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one
another. Therefore also he calls, Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine Elect
in whom my soul delights, I have put my holy Spirit upon him, and he shall
bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, Isa. 42.1. And this is my well-beloved
Son, hear ye him, Math. 3.17. and 17.5. And Christ also calls us to himself:
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest:
and if any man thirst let him come unto me and drink: He that believes on me,
as the Scriptures have said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
waters, Math. 11.28. Joh. 7.37, 38. and many the like. In which he inclusively
promises the gift of righteousness, that he will make such righteous with God,
there being no rest or satisfaction to any without that. Now then all they that
by the gracious call of God and Christ are overcome or prevailed with to come
to him, (...). Our Saviore being righteousness it self, is pertook of by the
righteous O^ig. in C^ls. lib. 6
look to and believe in him (upon the account of what he has done and suffered
for them in himself, and of the fullness of that provision made ready in him,
and his readiness and faithfulness, as he has also promised, to communicate it
to them, and in a word, through the grace discovered in the call to them,) to
them Christ is made righteousness, and they are justified and acquitted of
their sins in him, and accepted as righteous persons, and Christ also is
faithful to wash, sanctify and frame them to his mind, leading them from all
their Idols, former evils and abominations, unto God in himself, to behold his
glory and glorious grace, love him, depend on him, yield up to him, to worship,
serve and obey him, and to love one another, and to seek the good of all to
their capacities, and so to write his law in them: these I say, as looked upon
in Christ, (in whom and for whose sake they are accepted, even in his spotless
and perfect righteousness,) are righteous in the sight of God; and doers of
righteousness, in as much as they are led by and follow the Spirit of God, who
makes it his business to glorify Christ to them, and lead them into him and
after him; and so to confirm them in him, and conform them to him. In a word,
they are righteous that are in Christ Jesus, and walk not after the flesh but
after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. that are the Israel of God, the Circumcision, cut
off from all hope and confidence in themselves, their fleshly birth, breeding,
wisdom, righteousness or conceits of holiness, as seeing an emptiness and
insufficiency in them all, and as seeing an excellency in the knowledge of
Christ, and of the grace of God in and through him, and so they come off from
all carnal, Mosaical, or much more, devised worships (and much more as to
seeking life or putting righteousness, life, or holiness in them) to worship
God in the Spirit, rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh; in which their being made in Christ, and brought to have their
dependence upon and rejoicing in him, they are of the seed of Abraham and
heirs according to promise, such as Isaac was, and not as Ishmael who was born
after the flesh; as those be that trust they are Christ's because of their
fleshly birth, or endeavors or privileges: that from such things conjecture
and hope they are of those that Christ dyed for, and are the children of God.
And yet as Isaac also had two sons Jacob and Esau, the one a simple-hearted
man, the other a cunning hunter that sold his birthright for a mess of pottage:
so of those that come to God by Jesus Christ, and rejoice in his goodness and
graciousness to sinners, there are some that abuse this grace and turn it into
wantonness, saying, Let us do evil that good may come thereof; sin that grace
may abound; or because we are not under law but under grace; and so in some
eager pursuit of some worldly lust, honor, riches, or fleshly lust after wine,
women, etc. sell their birthright in the Gospel. These as Esau are rejected too
(as well as those that are of works like Ishmael) and are not righteous, though
they may be sons of the Church, and, in a sort, of God, as to repute. But those
that being brought into Christ, baptized into his name; and made the Sons of
God by faith in him, do also mind the grace of God, and so effectually receive
it as to be made simple and upright hearted unto him thereby, obeying their
Father and Mother, God and his Grace, or the Jerusalem above, the Mother of us
all, Gal. 4.26. and so walk after the teachings of his grace (which is the same
with walking after the Spirit, it being the holy Spirit that breaths therein
and teaches us) that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live
soberly, righteously and godlily in this present world, (not with the Edomites
embracing this present world, but with Jacob) looking after (the blessing, the
inheritance promised in Christ Jesus, and so) the blessed hope, even the
appearance of the glory of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us, etc. Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. (...) these are Israelites indeed,
the upright and the blessed Seed, being righteous (as by all hereabout said may
be seen) in a double respect.

1. In regard of Christ as their righteousness put on by them and made of God
righteousness to them, In what respect the godly are said to be righteous.
Gal. 3.26, 27. 2 Cor. 1.30. accepted in him the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. and abiding
in him are presented without rebuke and blame, as in him in the sight of God,
Col. 1.21, 22, 23.

2. In regard of their being in a measure by and through Christ conformed to
him, and made righteous in their way and demeanor, doing those things that are
right and good in the sight of God and our Savior, the imperfections and
defects wherein are taken away and covered in and by him believed on, and that
that is of his Spirit and spiritual operation in them, made acceptable through
him, 1 Job. 2.29. and 3.21, 22. 1 Pet. 2.5. And in this latter consideration,
they are right or upright, as the word in the Text signifies, in and through
Christ.

1. In that they disclaim and renounce themselves and all things of themselves,
their own works, worthiness and righteousness, and only believe in, close with,
and have their life and rejoicing in Christ Jesus; living not by or upon their
own works, but by faith; even by the Faith or Doctrine of the Son of God
believed and minded, and the grace therein testified, in that he loved them,
and gave himself for them, Gal. 2.20. which who so slight, and are lifted up
above, as thinking it too simple and mean a ground for their hope, their hearts
are not upright in him, Heb. 2.4. they that are seeking something else besides
and above the vision of him that shall come, and will come, and will not tarry
(that is, of Christ Jesus and the grace in him) their Souls are not upright in
Christ; For the upright love him, (Cant. 1.4.) and so content themselves there,
and keep them only and singly for all things to him; as believing that in him
they are complete, and have all things freely given them in and with him, both
pertaining to life and godliness, and so wisdom, righteousness, holiness and
redemption (as was said before) yea eternal life; yea, the promises both of
this life, and of that to come, so as that in the knowledge, believing, and
understanding of him and the grace in him, they shall have all things
administered to them, Col. 2.9, 10. 1 Timothy 4.8. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. Romans 8.32. and so
they abide in him, in the belief of his grace and obedience to his Counsels and
Instructions, looking to and depending upon him and God, in and through him for
all things. And herein

2. They deny all ungodliness, all evil, unbeseeming and hard thoughts of God,
Atheism, Idolatry, or Idolatrous conceptions directing them to seek for life,
righteousness, safety and satisfaction in something out of him: or of some
other power than of God in him; as judging some insufficiency or want of
graciousness in him, with all profane neglects of him, his way, worship, and
service, so as that though evil thoughts, temptations and motions may be
suggested to them by Satan, or spring up in them through their corruption, as
if there were no God, or as if he loved them not, or cared not for them,
because he afflicts and tryes them. Or as if he minded not men's ways or
walkings, because he prospers the wicked and afflicts the righteous: or as if
his testimonies were not true, or it were in vain to worship and call upon him,
etc. yet through the grace of God, and his testimony (the faith of Jesus) kept
to, they reject these and deny them, and do not yield up themselves to them to
be carried away by them, Psalm. 73.1, 2, 3.13, 14, 15, 16.

3. Knowing him to be Lord, and to have the dispose of all things in heaven and
earth, and that the promises of this life that is, and of that to come, are in
him all Yea and Amen, affirmed and confirmed for, and with those that cleave to
him, and that he is wise in heart, and holy in way, loving, faithful, and
merciful to all (as is evident to them in what they believe he has already
ready done in his Death and Sufferings for all) especially to them that wait
upon him: being the Savior of all men, and especially of them that believe;
they in the light direction and strength of this grace, do also deny worldly
lusts, lusts of covetousness after more and greater honors, preferments,
riches, pleasures and delights to the flesh, or whatever else the world has in
it, and proposes to us to allure and draw us from him. Knowing also and
believing that in fearing God and cleaving to Christ in the conduct of his Word
and Spirit, they shall want nothing that is good for them. Psalm. 23. and 34.9,
10. and 84.11. Mat. 6.33. but shall have all their needs supplied, and a better
portion here (though in less) having his love and favor with it, than those
that have far more without them, Psalm. 37.16. Prove. 15.16. and 16.8. So that
though discontentedness with their lot and portion here, sometimes arises in
them, and lustings and covetings after more assail them, yet they war against
them, and in minding and taking heed to the vision or testimony of Christ, deny
them, Psalm. 73.22, 23, 24.

4. And knowing and beleiving that all their approach to and acceptance with
God is only in and upon the account of Christ Jesus; and that they in
themselves are every where imperfect, yea of themselves as of themselves to
have no sufficiency to any good thing, nor any thing truly good, pleasing and
acceptable to God dwelling in them; they are sober in the thoughts of
themselves, not thinking of themselves above what is meet, as if for their own
betterness or goodness, they were more favored of God, or were able of
themselves as of themselves to do or perform any thing pleasing to God, or
profitable to themselves or others, or able to find out the things of God and
Christ otherwise, and further than by his holy Spirit in his testimony he gives
them understanding and discerning of them; or were worthy to have them revealed
to them, rather than others: and so exercise not themselves in things too high
for them, Romans 12.3, 4. 2 Cor. 3.5. Romans 7.14. Psalm. 131.1, 2. and so are
sober. And though proud, aspiring, high conceited thoughts of themselves, and
their parts, gifts, seize, abilities, doings and worthiness may be darted
into them by Satan, or spring up in them from their own corruption; yet through
their cleaving to this grace of God in Christ they are helped to repel them, or
humble themselves before God for them, on discovery of them. Mat. 18.1, 2, 3. 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 26. Coll. 3.12. Ephesians. 4.2.

5. Yea, and in considering the same things of their unworthiness, and their
being all that they are by the grace of God, etc. they are also moderated and
made sober in their desires of, pursuits after, and use and enjoyment of the
things of this life, not judging themselves worthy of great things by way of
riches, honors, apparels, buildings, etc. yea in the belief of the only
fullness in Christ, seeing the vanity of this world, and their portion being in
Christ, and laid up with him in heaven; and that their life is in him, and in
what they have there, they are not transported with their enjoyments of any
great or good things of this life; nor give up themselves to pride or vaunt
themselves of and in them, or fill themselves to excess with them: but are
sober in all things; so as repelling by the grace of God the contrary motions
and risings of corruptions: or repenting and humbling themselves for them, if
at any time overtaken with them, Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 16.

6. In the view of the same grace in Christ, and the righteousness of God
toward us in and through Christ, and his love of righteousness testified in
all he has done in Christ for us, and his hatred of unrighteousness there also
manifested, they are led and framed to a righteous demeanor toward others; so
as beholding all things ordered of God in Christ, whose wisdom, goodness, and
holiness is so brightly displayed in the Gospel; they are led to submit to his
orders, and so to those he sets over them for his sake, as Kings, Magistrates,
Rulers, Governors, Fathers, Mothers, Masters, etc. or in any place of
superiority, not withholding from them that honor, subjection, duty, love, and
obedience he requires of them toward them; whether they be good or froward;
knowing and minding that they be well and wisely, and holily ordered of God
over them, and for good by way of protection, maintenance, encouragement; or
trial or exercise of their faith and obedience to God. As also, beholding those
that are their inferiors, and any way committed to their care, or to be walked
before, as such as are to be helped in the way to life, to take such care of
them, and to act forth and exercise such righteousness toward them as becomes
our places and stations, and so to wrong or injury none in word or deed, as to
their honor, life, chastity and purity, estate, name, or otherwise; loving to
all, especially their Brethren in Christ; content with their own portion,
knowing that their portion in Christ and God is exceeding good, and that in
walking with and depending on him, he will in all things do what is best for
them, by the help of Gods grace, repelling all contrary motions and temptations.

7. Yea, the view of his love and grace toward them and all men, principles
and instructs them to be loving and charitable to all men: and so righteous in
giving forth or ministering to them of those things, spiritual or temporal, that
are deposited or betrusted with them, for them and their good, according to
their needs and wants, and their own furnitures and capacities for extending
relief and help to them, by instruction, counsels, comfort, outward supplies,
in giving to relieve their poverty, exercising their skill for healing and
helpfulness in sicknesses, sores, etc. and some observe that the word
righteousness is put sometimes for alms or charity, as in Psalm. 112.9. with 2
Cor. 9.9. So the righteous man is sometime described to be a merciful man, and
the merciful man joined with the mention of the righteous or upright, as Psalm.
37.26. The righteous is ever merciful and lends, his seed is in the blessing,
and in Isa. 57.1. The righteous perishes and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men (or men of kindness) are taken away, none considering that they
are taken from the evil. And indeed, it is but right and just, that as we have
all our life and hope of happiness in and from the mercy of the Lord to us, so
we again should put on the bowels of mercies and kindness, and be full thereof
to others; and that as God does in and by Christ give us talents of outward or
inward blessings for the good of others; so that we should not withhold good
from the owners thereof, or those for whose good we are betrusted with it,
Prove. 3.28, 29. Luc. 6.36. and 16.9.11, 12. Col. 3.12. Ephesians. 5.1, 2.

8. In a word, this grace of God in Christ believed and lived upon leads and
instructs the soul; and the righteous and upright are answerably, in their
being led by it, framed and helped to acknowledge God in and through Jesus
Christ in all things, so as in all their straights, needs, and afflictions to
have to do with him, hoping in his mercy, and believing his promises, to make
their requests and addresses to him in Christ Jesus for such supplies of grace
and mercy, for help in the things of this life, or for help against the enemies
of their souls, as to things pertaining to the life to come, or for supplying
with what is requisite to promote their faith in Christ or service of God, as
also in such straits and trials, eying them as ordered of God in wisdom,
faithfulness and righteousness, to submit to him therein; and justify or
glorify him in them: in all services and sufferings to lean upon him and trust
in him and his strength and righteousness: and in all benefits and mercies
received, whether for this life or that to come, to give thanks to him by Jesus
Christ, yiedling up themselves more readily, cheerfully and perfectly to be
his, and to serve and glorify him in word and conversation, so in all things
exercising themselves to Godliness, in the hope of eternal life, which God who
cannot lie, promised from before the ancient times, and the promise whereof he
has confirmed both by his Oath and by the blood of his only begotten Son,
through whom, and whose mediation he may, and is led to, look for it and
confidently expect it at his blessed appearing, Tit. 2.12, 13. 1 Pet. 1.13, 17.
Ephesians. 5.20. Coll. 3.17. Philip. 4.5, 6, 7. Heb. 13. 15. Prove. 3.4, 5, 6. Tit.
1.2. Heb. 6.13, 17, 18. and 9, 15. Phil. 3.20.21.

9. And lastly upon sight of shortness in these things, or any of them, or any
other matter that the grace of God instructs and leads to, to groan under it,
and seek to God through Christ for his further increase of grace in it, and
conformity to God and his will thereby, and in sight of aberrations and
swarvings from the ways of God and his grace, to seek diligently for pardon and
healing in the blood of Jesus: and that the heart and soul may be turned in to
Gods testimonies; waiting upon God in his word and ordinances; and so cleansing
the heart and washing the hands in innocence, not approving themselves in any
wickedness and way of iniquity, Prove. 28.13. 1. Joh. 1.7, 8, 9. and 2, 1, 2.
Psalm. 119.59, 60. and 73.13. 2 Cor. 7.1. And they that so believe in Christ and
walk after the Spirit of God, are indeed upright men and righteous ones, and
such as Balaam wished he might be like in his Death and latter end.

2. What is meant by the Death of the Righteous here.

A proper Death of the righteous.
1. There is a Death of the righteous, that is so properly their Death, as it is
not common to any else with them, and its a Death properly of their soul too,
and possibly Balaam might mean here of that: though if he did, he took nor the
course to obtain it; but only rested in the desire, and wish of it, and that is
a Death unto sin, and self, and world, through the knowledge of God and our
Lord Jesus Christ, of which the Apostle speaks in 1. Pet. 2. 24. Mentioning it
as

1. A Death unto sin, as we translate or read it, Christ himself bare our sins
in his own body on the tree: that we being dead to sin may live to
righteousness. Wicked men are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2 1, 5.
and the righteous die to sin. Thence in Romans 6.2. How shall we that are dead
to sin live any longer therein? And, reckon your selves dead indeed unto sin
but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord, ver. 11. And this is effected
by the discoveries of the grace of God in Christ toward the soul, and the
abundance of the grace brought unto it in him, causing the soul so to love God
and like the enjoyment of his love and favor (and so the ways leading to it
and in which it is to be perfected and maintained) as therefore to abandon and
hate every false way, every way of iniquity and sin, either as to judgment or
conversation, as in Psalm. 119.104. and 97. 10, 11. so as to be as dead to the
allurements and inticements thereof, and lively, apt and ready to the Lord and
his service, and so to every good way and work for his sake.

2. A Death to self, as ceasing, through the same grace discerned, to have, or
look to have, its rejoicing from its self; its hope, confidence, or spiritual
life in and from its own fleshly excellencies or privileges, that i^sometime
in the state of ignorance of Christ it has, finding the life of its own hand,
as is said Isa. 57.10 This is that the Apostle says, Gal. 2.29.20. I through
the Law am dead to the Law that I might live to God, I am crucified with
Christ, yet I live, yet not I but Christ that lives in me, etc. And Philip.
3.3. We rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. When for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, the soul parts with, and
yields up that confidence and rejoicing it had in its own works, frames,
righteousness after the Law, or in any thing of the flesh, as seeing an
emptiness and insufficiency therein, and lives upon Christ and the fullness in
him. And herein is a Death to the Law also.

3. A Death to the world, when through the perception of the same grace and
hope of glory, and reception of the same; it is taken off from having its
glorying or rejoicing in the Worlds enjoyments, love, favor, fellowship,
friendship, riches, honors, approbation, principles and rudiments; as also
from all endeavors with purpose of heart thereafter, contenting it self with
the approbation, love, and fellowship of God in Christ, and with his care,
provision and protection, being as a crucified thing or person to the world
through the cross, Gal. 6.14. 1 Cor. 15. 31. And this Death in each of these
branches is a desirable Death, though not to the flesh and carnal mind, yet
to the illuminated understanding, as Balaams was, or might be at this time when
he saw the visions of the Almighty and had his eyes open; (...) ^um est illud
Eu^^^ides (...) To (...) is to d^ and t^ die is to live in these things.
for this Death leads to a Divine and heavenly life to and in God and Christ,
and in the faith of his grace and love; whence also the stable peace, safety
and satisfaction of the soul springs up, it is kept in perfect peace, stayed
upon the Lord, delighted in and satisfied with him, for the great disturbances
and dangers of the soul are from its love of and living to sin; its love of and
living in, or desiring to have its life and peace and comfort in its self, and
in the enjoyments of the world, for all these things being either full of
mutability and vanity in themselves, as the life of a man's own hands, or his
fleshly self-righteousness and the things of the world: or else being directly
opposed by the law of God and the discoveries of wrath and curse there against
as in all ways of sin, the soul can there have no setledness or peace. But now
being dead in its affections to and dependences on such things, and having the
heart set upon and confiding in Christ, and God in Christ, it is established
and fixed so as not to be moved, and lives because Christ lives, Joh. 14.20.
Who cannot cease to live, and who lives to obtain life for and maintain life
in the soul, Psalm. 112. 6, 7, 8. And this living in and to the Lord, here leads
assuredly to the enjoyment of eternal life for ever, a most blessed and
desirable state, but yet

The Death of the righteous as to the natural Death, better then that of the
unrighteous.
2. Though this would stand well enough with the words, and possibly might be in
Balaams sense, yet its most usually otherwise understood, and there is more
certainty, or probability at least, that he rather desired to die as the
righteous in respect of his departing hence by bodily Death, and so we carried
it all along in the former pro position, and cannot exclude, but must include
it here, as being that which, without peradventure, Balaam and many a wicked
man has desired and yet do: nor may the Hebrew word that signifies my soul
(let my soul die the Death of the righteous,) enforce us to understand it in
the former sense, at least not in that only, for both the word (Soul) is
diversely used in the Scripture, and oftentimes is put for the person endued
with a soul, as when its said Genesis 2.7. man became a living soul, its all one
as a living man or person. And so its evidently meant, when its said: So many
souls came out of the loins of Jacob, as in Genesis 46. 15, 18, 22. and 12.5.
Exodus 1.5. and 12, 4. and many other places, yea sometimes its used to signify
the body, as a dead soul, according to the Hebrew reading is used to signify a
dead body, in Levit. 19.28. Numb. 5.2. and so its rightly enough read here. Let
me die, etc. But then

3. Wherein is the death of the righteous in this sense Desirable that any
wicked man should desire to die it? Wherein its better, neg^lively answered.
Surely

1. Not as to the outside, the sensible part of it, as to the way of the
separation of soul and body, and what is sustained by them therein, for the
Scriptures imply that the Death of the wicked is more desirable in that respect
then the Death of the righteous. And therefore we find a good man envious at
the wicked upon that account, because they have no bands in their Death, nor
are in plagues as other men, Psalm, 73.3, 4. And at the best all things happen
alike to all, Eccles. 9.12. so that it befalls to them that fear God, as to
them that fear him not, sometimes God gives them that fear him a quiet,
peaceable and easy death, as he did to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses,
and many others. And so it often befalls evil men too, and sometimes the one and
the other die with much pain and bitterness, but more often the Death of the
righteous is in this respect less desirable and chusable then other men,
because God judging them here for their sins, that they may not perish
hereafter with the world. Either

1. Lays his hand often more heavily upon them here, filling them with pains,
aches, yea the multitude of their bones with strong pains, Job. 33.16, 17, 18.
as Lazarus, Luke 16.21, 22. Yea sometimes with pestilence, famine, and the
like, as many of those that fell in the wilderness, or rather those in the
seige of Jerusalem, in which there were some righteous judged with the wicked,
as is employed, Ezekiel. 21.3, 4. Yea some Interpreters think those mentioned as
fallen asleep in 1 Cor. 11.29, 30. dyed of the pestilence.

2. But more especially he often gives them into the hand of sinners to whip,
and scourge them by bodily and bloody persecutions, so as they die grievous
deaths in the sight of men, being put to sorrow, shame, reproach and manifold
abuses: as may be seen in the Lord himself, who was taken with the wicked hands
of the Jews, crucified and slain, after many scorns and scourges, and abusive
carriages toward him, so as with reproach to break his heart, Psalm. 69.20.
besides the hiding of Gods face from him, and many bitter agonies in his soul
for our sins sake, in which God sometimes for trial and exercise of his
servants faith and patience, and for correction for their sins, may conform
some of his servants to him; as also is seen in what befell diverse of the
Saints of God put to cruel sufferings by blood-thirsty men, as both the
Histories of the Scriptures and of the primitive times of the Churches after
the Apostles testify: To this purpose is what we read, Heb. 11.35, 36, 37.
Others were tortured not accepting deliverance; others had trials of cruel
mockings and scourgings, yea of bonds and imprisonments; (in which also we find
by reading that many Martyrs have dyed) they were slain with the sword, they
wandered about in sheepskins and goats-skins, being destitute, tormented, and
afflicted. Many such persons, good and upright men both in the primitive and
later persecutions suffered such things, they were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, they were tempted; (or as some read it, were burnt with hot irons)
some dyed in the waters, some in the fire, some roasted on grid-irons, some
pulled in pieces, devoured by wild-beasts, and sustained any cruelty the wit or
malice of men and Devils could devise. Daniel prophesied also, that many such
should fall (that is die or be slain) by the sword, and by flame, and by
captivity, and by spoil, Dan. 11.33. And surely these are in themselves no
desirable ways of dying, nor the thing Baalam wished for or desired. Men
generally both good and bad, desire rather, if God see, it good, to die easier
Deaths, and indeed the wicked do ordinarily die as the righteous, or better in
this respect, some of them too die by the sword, some by famine, some by flame,
some by pestilence, some by the halter or gibbet, etc. and multitudes of them
of a natural and quiet Death; even as also many of the righteous do so that
this could not be the meaning of Balaam, nor does the preciousness of the Death
of the righteous stand therein. But

affirmatively.
2. In that which is less visible, that that appears in the sight of God, as is
said Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his
Saints, Psalm. 72.14. And so as to the soul in his dying or departing this life,
its leaving the body, and ceasing therein to reside and live, and give life to
it, and that is it that Balaam respected. Not that his body simply might die as
the righteous men's bodies, but that his soul might die or depart this life or
body, so as the righteous or upright ones. And that is desirable both in
respect of

1. The state of the soul, and so of the person in dying or in Death.

2. The advantages accrewing to them by their Death.

1. The death of the righteous, or the dying of their soul, as it signifies
its departing this life or body, is very excellent and precious in regard of
their state in their death or dying. For

1. They die in the Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ who is Lord of all, Rev. 14.13.
Act. 10.36. and so they are said to die, because

1. In the faith of him, as it is said of the Patriaks, all these dyed in the
faith, Heb. 11.13. and also because

2. Enclosed in and compassed about, as it were, with the virtues of his death,
sacrifice, and mediation, which gives infinite safety and security against what
might harm, and powerful title to what he has thereby purchased, and obtained.

3 In his favor also, beloved of him as he was of his Father, as he says
himself in Job. 15.9. And

4. In him as united with, standing and abiding in him, as a Root in the soil,
Col. 2.6, 7. or as a Branch in the vine Joh. 15.1, 14. or as a Member in the
body, 2 Cor. 12.27. and so interested in the fatness of the soil or stock, the
good things that are Christ's; and so in all the safety, honor and welfare of
the Head. And by virtue hereof

2. They die in a state of choice and peculiar favor with God, (Christ in whom
they are, being his beloved one, owned, accepted and justified) however
otherwise accused and condemned here of men; and this is signified by the white
robes to be given them, Rev. 6.11. whether they die a natural death, and
quietly in their beds, or a violent, sharp or shameful death, all is one, dying
in Christ they die in Gods love and favor even as he did. Thence it was the
great desire of the Apostle Paul to win Christ and be found in him, Philip. 3
8, 9. knowing that otherwise it could not be well with him, but in him he
should be found of God in peace, and without blame before him, 2 Cor. 5.9. 2
Pet. 3.14, 15. Coll. 1.22, 23.

3. They die in Covenant with God, for Christ is given for a Covenant to the
people, an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, Isa. 42.6, 7.
and 49.8. and 55.3. 2 Samuel 23.5. and so he is still their God even in death,
Psalm. 48.14. God having engaged himself to Christ, and to all in him, to be
their God, and to own them for his peculiar ones, and to do good to all in
Christ according to the greatness of his love and mercy for Christ's sake. They
that are Christ's are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise, or to the
Covenant made with Abraham, the sum whereof was, that he would be his God,
and the God of his seed after him, Gal. 3.29. Genesis 17.7. (Covenant and promise
signifying one and the same thing with the Apostle, Gal. 3.15.16.29.) and the
being Christ's, is a consequent of being in the faith of Christ, and of having
thereby put on Christ, Ver. 26, 27, 28, 29. So as that dying in Christ or in
the faith of him, they must needs be in the Covenant of God.

4. They die in hope, or have hope in their death, Prove. 14.32. the righteous
has hope in his death by virtue of Christ Jesus, who is our hope, the heir of
all the promises and blessings of God, and the Covenant of them to us, dying in
him heirs of God and his promises; there must needs be great hope for them,
even of the enjoyment of all the good that is promised, and by Christ's death
and mediation assured and secured, which respect the state after death, and in
the life or world to come; for also in Christ

5. They are holy to God, he being made holiness to them, 1 Cor. 1.30. they are
Gods portion as well in death as in life: his Saints, Psalm. 116.15. and God is
not ashamed to be called their God, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in
their dying, as well as in their living: and therefore from, and in all these

6. They are blessed in their Death. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord,
Rev. 14.13. that is, they are happy, they are delivered from their sins, for
blessed the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin, Psalm. 32.1, 2. they have
nothing to be charged further upon them, nay all blessing is theirs, a happy
and most desirable state.

2. Exceeding great too are their advantages thereby, as to say

1. Their fight is fought, their labor and work finished, and their race run,
they have now no more to do that may be looked upon, as any condition to be
performed by them, upon which the promises of God, and their enjoyment of
happiness is in any wise suspended; while we live here there is yet an If upon
us, some thing to be done by us, upon which our happiness is in a sort
suspended, so as in failing therein we may pull judgment upon our selves, as in
Coll. 1.22, 23. Christ will present you blameless, if you continue in the faith
rooted and grounded, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, Heb.
3.6. whose house we are, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of
the hope firm to the end, 1 Cor. 9.24. So run that ye may obtain. If we die
with him, we shall live with him; if we suffer with him, we shall reign with
him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. But now when death comes and passes upon the righteous,
they may say with Christ, it is finished, or as Joh. 17.4. I have finished the
work which thou gave me to do; or as the Apostle Paul, I have fought the good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth no more
work to do, but only to go to God, and the Crown is reserved, and laid up for
them, to be given them at the day of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8. their labor is at an
end, their warfare accomplished, and they go to rest. And so

2. Their sufferings and sorrows are at an end too, here they have labored and
suffered reproach, and many afflictions are while they are here endured by
them, through much affliction and tribulation we must enter the Kingdom, Act.
14.22. Ye shall weep and lament, says our Savior to his Disciples, and ye
shall have tribulation, Joh. 16.20, 21, 22, 33. This is their seed-time when
they go forth weeping, bearing forth their precious seed, Psalm. 126.6. now they
are in heaviness through manifold temptations if need be, 1 Pet. 1.7. grapling
sometimes with their own corruptions, Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this Death, the Law in their members warring against the
Law of their mind, Romans 7.23, 24. they have lusts warring against their souls,
that they must abstain from and strive against, 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 12. 3, 4,
sometimes with Satan winnowing, tempting, buffetting, and every way playing
their adversary, 1 Pet. 5 8. Ephesians. 6.12, 13, 14. Luc. 22.31. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
Sometimes with the world, frowning, threatening, opposing, persecuting them in
sundry and diverse sorts, Joh. 15.16.19. 1 John 3.2. 2 Timothy 3.12, 13. Sometimes
under the righteous and merciful hand of God afflicting and rebuking, and
sometimes more sharply scourging and filling with bitterness, Heb. 12.6, 7.
Pro. 3.11, 12. Job. 19.21. Many are the afflictions of the righteous here,
Psalm. 34.19. But now in their death all these are at an end, they then are
delivered from the evil, so as no more to be under the grief or vexation
thereof, Isa. 57.1. neither evil men nor evil spirits shall any more afflict or
exercise them, nor will Gods hand go any further upon them to afflict them:
They rest from their labors in both senses, even from their laboring under
pains taking and sorrows too, and hear the voice of the Oppressor no more, Job.
3.17, 18.

3. Their dangers are now all past, they are past the danger of sinning,
offending, and provoking God to displeasure which they are in, so long as they
live, there is need of watching and praying always till that day be come, Luc.
21.36. but in their yiedling up their spirits to God, they are past those
snares that before they were among; then the Devil has no more power to tempt
them, nor are they any more in danger to be tempted by him or overcome of him,
or of any of the flatteries or threats of the world, the persons or things
therein; their race is run, their goal is obtained, no further danger now of
fainting, failing or starting aside, the Devil or world can no more now come at
them to touch them, for their spirits go to God, and are in his hand and
dispose, and their state from henceforth fixed, so as they are in no danger of
going to hell now, being therefrom exempted and otherwise disposed of for ever,
Luc. 16.27. And surely this is a most desirable condition to be out of all
labor, sorrows and danger which this world is full of perpetually. Yea,

4. Now they go home to be with Christ, in his presence and sure protection, as
at home with him, and in the enjoyment of him in their spirits, where it is
better to be than any where here, Philip. 1.23 2 Cor. 5.8. But that leads us to
the next particular, viz.

The latter end of the righteous
4. The after-state or latter end of the righteous, what that is, and what its
excellency. The very discovery of it will show its excellency abundantly; and
its considerable in three Branches.

Bran. 1. In the separate or dead state* 1. As to body.
In the state of separation of soul and body after Death: and that

1. In respect of their body: indeed as to its visible appearing condition it
differs nothing from the state of the body of the wicked; for they both are of
the dust, and both go to the dust; even Christ himself made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death, Isa. 53.9. yea, many times in that
respect the wicked have the advantage; they get honorable Burials when the
bodies of the Saints sometimes get none at all, or very mean ones. We read that
the wicked rich man whose soul went to hell, yet as to his body, it after death
had a burial, Luc. 16.22. which in many wicked rich men is very honorable; but
as for poor Lazarus though after his death carried into Abraham's bosom, yet we
read of no burial afforded him. Nay, we read of many of the Saints, that their
dead bodies have been given for meat to the sowls of heaven, and their flesh to
the beasts of the earth. Psalm. 79. 2, 3 But yet for all this, the bodies of the
righteous are in a better state after death, than the bodies of the wicked; let
the wicked do what they can or will to and with them, for not an hair of their
heads shall perish, Luc. 21.18. Yea, their bodies be happy because they be
their bodies who are in Covenant with God, and in his favor in their death,
and their death puts not an end to their being so; whence God is called the God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, after they were dead and
buried, and long before the time of their resurrection, Exodus 3. and that
pertains not to their spirits only, but to their bodies also; for by that our
Savior proves the resurrection of the dead which is properly of the body, as
the Apostle shows clearly in 1 Cor. 15.57. This corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality, and he shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned to the likeness of his glorious body,
Philip. 3.21. I say our Savior proves by that his being the God of Abraham,
etc. that the dead shall rise, as implying that he is God of their bodies also,
Mat. 22. 32, 33. So that the bodies of the righteous, even when in the grave,
are Gods to take care of and in Covenant with him, to bring in his due time, as
the members of Christ to the enjoyment of his blessing; even as the body of our
Lord Jesus Christ when dead, had the denomination of the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.16, 17
because his body that was and is the Lord, and in union with the Deity, though
then dead, Mat. 28.6. Come see the place where the Lord lay; So also the bodies
of the Saints have the denomination of the Saints whose bodies they were and
are, and so have interest in the Covenant and Christ, in which and in whom they
are, though dead. So David's body, and Abraham's, and Isaacs, and Jacobs, are
called by their names in the Scriptures. These were the days of the years of
the life of Abraham -- and he dyed -- and his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried
him, that is his body, Genesis 25.8. the like is said of Sarah, Abraham buried
Sarah his wife, Genesis 23.19. and so its said of Isaac, Genesis 35.28. and of Jacob,
Genesis 50, 1.13. and this relation of their bodies, as being their bodies,
intitles them in and through Christ, to all the future happiness of them. But

2. In repect of the spirit departed, 2. As to Spirit.
their state is exceeding good and desirable; for

1. It is and abides in its separated state in Christ, and in and through him
in a state of bless; for so it is said, Blessed are the Dead that die in the
Lord, not only blessed in their death, but when dead also, all those things
said before of their state in death, being and continuing to be their portion
even to the Resurrection also, Rev. 14.13. being clearly and for ever
delivered, and at rest from all their labors, griefs, fears, dangers, and in a
state of quiet repose and safe rest: whence it is said, They rest from their
labors, and their works follow them, and that they must rest for a little
season, Rev. 6.11. and they shall enter into peace (into a quiet, settled,
perfect state, so as they may be capable of it in their state of separation)
they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness, Isa. 57.2.
being clearly and fully discharged of all their sins, and arrayed in the
perfect righteousness of Christ as in white robes in the presence of God all
that time of their rest, Rev. 6. 11, 12.

2. In an impossibility of failing of the reward promised to, and prepared for
them; there being no passing now from them and their state, to a state of
misery, as was noted before; nay, their works do follow them, not only shall,
they are in possession of some, and that no inconsiderable fruit and recompense
of their good works in this state, being so at rest, and at home, as no more
any trouble to pass upon them, no other Purgatory, no not so much as for the
Malefactor that died with Christ on a Cross for his offenses, he was that day
to be in a better place: For

3. The spirit of the righteous goes forthwith upward to God, and is disposed
by him in a state of welfare expressed by Abraham's bosom, as being under the
enjoyment of the Covenant, and the promises made with him, as it is capable in
that separated state, Luc. 16.21. and is said to be (as the Malefactor
abovementioned) in Paradise, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luc.
23. 43. which signifies a state or place of exceeding delight or pleasure, its
Notion in the Greek being that of a delightful Garden, such as God at first
planted, and put Adam and Evah into, Genesis 2. and so it signifies, that it is in
a state of exceeding pleasure and delight; yea, it is mentioned (I think) as
equivolent to the third heavens, 2 Cor. 12.2.4. and why not, seeing it is
expressly said to be with Christ, Luc. 23.43. Philip. 1.23. which is said to be
far better than to be here in the flesh, though in Christ, and under the favor
of God here also. Again its said to be, when absent from the body, at home with
the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8 so as a child at home with his Father, or a Wife with her
Husband; now as the condition of the child is more safe, comfortable, and
desirable when at home with a loving, tender, vigilant, rich and careful
Father, than when its absent and abroad from him, though provided for by him,
and supplied in its wants: and much more the state a wife with her husband,
loving, tender and every way able to maintain her; to be at home with him and
in his bosom is more sweet and contentful then to be, though the same man's
wife, at distance from him, in a travel or pilgrimage; yea though therein cared
for too, and provided for by him: so also is the state of the soul or Spirit
returned to God and at home with Christ: A blessed state, and so its said, They
are comforted, Luc. 16.25. such the happy state of the soul then. Yea its
happiness herein is more then we can in mortal bodies comprehend, for when this
earthy house of this Tabernacle is dissolved, it has then, and is in
possession of a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, so the
Apostle implies when he says, not we shall have, but we have an house not made
with hands, etc. 2 Cor. 5.1. And yet this is not all the after-state desirable,
its yet incomplete while thus: and in a state of desire, and patient waiting
still, in respect of its having the fellowship of its body in its happiness,
and full victory over, and revenge of all enemies, and fruition of the Kingdom
promised, as is employed in that cry under the Altar, and the answer to it, Rev.
6.10, 11. There is therefore besides all this a further state.

2. The after-state in respect of the Reunion of soul and body, 2. Branch. In
the Resurrection.
or Resurrection from the dead, for they shall be raised again, and so shall
the unjust and wicked as we see before, Christ having dyed and given himself a
ransom for all, and thereby abolished the death, that upon our first Fathers
transgression came upon all, so as to have obtained the keys of hell and death
into his hand, for the raising up all (from death and grave; and out of the
hell in which they are detained till the time of the Resurrection, and their
appearing before him) to be finally judged by him: but yet the righteous shall
differ from others in the Resurrection as well as in the glory that shall
follow, for they, the righteous shall be more excellent than their neighbor
then more apparently, Prove. 12.26. For

1. They, the righteous, the dead in Christ shall be first raised, 1 Thessalonians.
4.16. they shall have the praeheminence therein as to the order and time of
their being raised; for Christ who is risen already before his members and
people, and is become the first fruits of them that sleep is the first therein,
then afterward they that are Christ's at his coming, that is, they that are his
in a peculiar sense, (...) dein ceps postea.
his people, flock, members, his in union with him, they shall rise first, at
his coming; and then afterward shall the end come, when he shall have
delivered up the Kingdom to God even his Father, 1 Cor. 15.23, 24. for he shall
reign (namely at his coming, 2 Timothy 4.1.) till he have put down all authority
and power, even the last enemy too, which is Death: but the righteous shall be
raised up to the enjoyment of the Kingdom and reigning with him in his manhood
and Mediatorian capacity before he deliver it up; for they live and reign with
Christ a thousand years, says Rev. 20.4.6. and that before the rest of the
dead be raised, Ver. 5. which (namely the raising of the rest) will be at the
end, when the thousand years are ended, when (or somewhat before) he shall
deliver up the Kingdom, for he must reign till he have put down all authority
and power, the last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death, which he shall
destroy in the raising up all the dead; even those not raised till the thousand
years be ended; and in his casting death and hell into the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone in the great and last Judgment, as in Rev. 20.11, 14.
for good and bad, first and last shall be raised and judged by him, Joh. 5.28,
29. but the good, the dead in Christ, shall be raised first, and then in the
same moment in the twinkling of an eye the living surviving believers shall be
suddenly changed, and all of them, both the raised, and the changed, shall be
caught up to meet the Lord in the air, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.

2. They, the righteous in the Resurrection, also shall have a glorious and
joyful manner of rising, Ingenti Angelorum jubilo and acclamatione, Aret.
both as it shall be accompanied with a mighty shout: probably (and as some
think) of the Angels greatly rejoicing: or also of the Spirits of the just
coming with Christ as triumphing that that time is come, or of Christ by the
voice of the Archangel and trump of God, Vox Domini hortantis ut experrecti
properent E^as in 1 These. 4.15.
exhorting the dead Saints, awaking to make haste to meet him; and by that
voice inabling and exciting them thereto: as when raising Lazarus he said,
Lazarus come forth, Job. 11.43. and as coming down in their spirit with Christ
(those that sleep in Jesus shall Christ bring with him. 1 These. 4.14. And, the
Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee, Zech. 14.5.) and so on a
sudden enlivening their bodies, when in a wonderful, joyful, and glorious state
being caught up to meet the Lord, they shall come down to the earth together,
and be ever with him, as noted before, 1 These. 4.16.

3. They, the righteous shall be raised up as in Christ, as members of Christ
in union with him, and so by the Spirit of God and Christ, as the Spirit that
now dwells in them, as Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies by the Spirit which dwells in you. And therefore
also

4. To a more excellent state, even fellowship with Christ their Head, Lord and
Husband, briefly called the Resurrection of life, Joh. 5.29. which leads us to
the third

Their after-state when raised, 3. Branch. The raised state
and that shall be exceeding excellent, and most desirable both in respect of
the body, and of the soul or spirit, and so of the whole person, yea their
whole company, society, or fellowship.

1. In respect of their body raised: In respect of the body
It shall be in a very happy and glorious state, fashioned (says the Apostle,
Philip. 3.21.) to the likeness of Christ glorious body, whose body was so
glorious in its appearing to Paul (for he was last of all seen of him in his
raised state after he was ascended and glorified, 1 Cor. 9.1. and 15.8.) that
he tells us the light that shone about him from him was brighter than the Sun
in brightness, above the Sun though at midday, Act. 26.13. freed from all its
former bondage to corruption, either of sin or mortallity, yea from all its
former infirmity in the living state of it in the flesh, and much more from all
the putrefaction and rottenness that it lay under in its dead state in the
grave or dust. All those things shall he totally shaken off from it, and the
contrary most heavenly and glorious properties and endowments shall then cloth
it, it shall not be flesh and blood as now it is, for flesh and blood, a
natural body shall not, nor can inherit the Kingdom of God, though it be the
same body that is now flesh and blood, as to its essence or substance, yet it
shall not be then flesh and blood as now, a body so nourished and kept up by
the continual supply or maintenance of its blood, in which is now its life:
Neither shall corruption, that now is inseparable from its natural state,
inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.50. but though sown in corruption, it shall be
raised in incorruption; though sown in dishonor, it shall be raised in glory;
though sown in weakness, it shall be raised in power; though sown a natural
body, it shall be raised a spiritual body; such as in which we shall bear the
image of the heavenly; even as now while natural we bear in it the image of the
earthy Adam, 1 Cor, 15.42, 43, 44, 45. an exceeding happy state of the body
possessed of incorruption and immortallity, so as to be incapable of
corrupting, putrefying, or decaying any more, or of dying or turning again to
dust, or of any thing tending thereto, Ver. 53, 54. Yea on the contrary,
clothed with unchangeable and most excellent beauty and glory.

In respect of their Spirit.
2. The Spirit or soul also then shall be possessed of this glorious body, and
have it a companion in all its glory, and an instrument or organ of all its
spiritual and heavenly service of God and the Lamb in the Kingdom: ( for his
servants shall serve him, Rev. 23.3.) as here it was a companion in its
sufferings and labors in this mortal state of corruption; and it shall also be
perfect in its spiritual capacities, its knowledge, and perception of things,
and its enjoyment and love of God and Christ, and one another therein, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.10, 12. when that which is perfect is come, that which
is in part shall be done away: now we see darkly as through a glass, but then
face to face: now know I in part, but then shall I know even as also I am
known; and then that shall be perfectly fulfilled, that they shall no more need
to prophecy and to say one to another, as teaching one another, know the Lord,
for they shall all know (that is discern, acknowledge, like, worship) me from
the least of them to the greatest of them, Heb. 8.11. And so

In respect of the whole man.
3. In their whole person, they shall be made complete and perfect, perfectly
conformed to the Lord Jesus: it does not yet appear what we shall be (that
exceeds all that we can know and understand now fully and distinctly; yea the
Apostles in mortal bodies, though exceedingly gifted and filled with the
Spirit, knew it not (which is an intimate commendation and magnifying the glory
and happiness of that state) but we know that when he appears, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is: he says not only, we shall be like
the Angels of God, though that our Savior tells us we shall be equal unto them
(the children of God, and children of the Resurrection) so as neither to need
marrying nor giving in marriage; nor in a capacity to die or to have soul and
body separated any more, as now they are by death, and so in a state as far
above the necessities and refreshments of this life, as the Angels of God, Luc.
20.35, 36. but that's not all, but we shall be like him, even like to Christ,
and so both in the resurrection put into an immediate capacity of the heavenly
and eternal glory: and being raised, be actually put into and possessed of it,
1 John 3.2.

4. As to the whole Body and Society of the Church of God and members of
Christ, in that raised and changed state, In respect of the who^e Church.
they shall be

1. Perfectly united, being freed from all sin, ignorance and enmity in every
individual; and so of all that might tend to disunite, and divide the hearts
and affections of one from another any more; as now we are too apt to be
disunited, no more envyings and swellings; no more grudgings and prejudices one
against another then, no more judgings and despisings of one another: The envy
of Ephraim shall cease, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim
shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not oppress Ephraim any more, Isa. 11.13.

2. They shall be ever with Christ their Head, 1 These. 4.16. being al I caught
up into the air to meet the Lord we shall be ever with the Lord, and so in and
with him as a city compacted and at unity in it self, the holy city, the new
Jerusalem, and so represented in Rev. 21.2, 10. with Psalm. 122.3. no rent or
breach therein, no cord to be loosed, or stake to be pulled up or taken down
for ever, Isa. 33.20. and the portion of them all together in and from Christ's
presence with them, exceeding happy; for there he the glorious Lord will be to
them a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein shall go no Gally with
oars, nor shall gallant ship pass thereby, for the Lord is their Judge, the
Lord shall be their Lawgiver, the Lord is their King and he will save them,
Isa. 33.22. Thence also

3. They shall be for ever quiet and free from all external molestation from
men or devils, or from any hand or stroke of God upon or against them; for all
their enemies shall be cut off and consumed, all that watch for iniquity, etc.
Isa. 29.20. and they shall dwell safely then; when Gods everlasting arms shall
have raised them up from under all adversities or sufferings, and thrust out
the enemy, and shall say, Destroy, Deuteronomy. 33.27, 28. then there shall none hurt
or destroy in all Gods holy Mountain, or glorious triumphant Church, for the
devil and his instruments shall have no more any power, or be in any capacity
for ever to molest them, he and they being shut up in the prison and in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Isa. 11.9.
Rev. 19.20, 21. and 20.2, 14. there shall be no more any Canaanite to vex,
oppress, or occasion disturbance to them in the least: none to be as a pricking
bryer or grieving thorn unto them, none of them that despised them, Zech.
14.21. Nah. 1.15. Ezekiel. 28.24. For they shall be above the reach of the malice
of either men or devils, and there shall be no more curse there, no blast or
withering word or work from God any more upon any of them; but salvation shall
be their everlasting walls and bulwarks; and the days of their mourning shall
be for ever ended, Rev. 22.3. Isa. 26.1. and 60.20. Rev. 21.3, 4, 5.

4. They shall be in the presence of God, and in the full enjoyment of his love
and favor for ever; so as he shall be with them, his Tabernacle among them,
they shall be his people, and God himself with them their God, and they shall
see his face, and behold always and uninterruptedly the light of his
countenance, without any eclipse or withdrawing of it from them, for there
shall be no night there, nor going down of their sun for ever, Rev. 21.3, 4.
and 22.3, 4. Isa. 60.20.

5. Thence they shall have fullness of joy and satisfaction in the presence of
God and of the Lamb, which is compared to a pure river of water of life, clear
as crystal, proceeding from the Throne of God and of the Lamb, which shall be
then gloriously among them; In which fullness of joy shall be no mixture or
abatement at any time, but they all shall have everlasting joy on their head
(everlasting joy in respect of Christ, their Head, among them; as also through
the perfect knowledge of God filling their minds and understandings) they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away, Rev. 21.4. and
22.1. Psalm. 16.11. Isa. 51.11. they shall enter into, and be filled with their
Masters joy, Math. 25.21, 23. And that because also

6. The glory of the Lord shall be upon them, making them unspeakably glorious,
in each and all of them, which they shall appear in and possess with him, even
the glory of the Lord Jesus, which who can understand, comprehend, or express!
Isa. 60.1. Rev. 21.11. Coll. 3.3, 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Yea

7. They shall reign with him in his glory, as Kings and Priests also to God
and Christ, having his name openly in their forehead, even his authority, power
and unspeakable excellencies gloriously instampt upon them, and all things and
persons beside shall be under and in subjection to them: for they shall judge
the world; yea the Angels too, sitting upon thrones with Christ, yea upon the
throne of Christ, as he is set down with his Father in his throne, having
overcome, Rev. 2.26, 27. and 3.21. with, 22.5. Luc. 12.32. and 22.28, 29. Rev.
20.6. and 5.10. and 1.6. 1 Cor. 6.3, 4. Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Yea and

8. All this in the new Heavens and new Earth, in which dwells righteousness;
which he will create and make for them when these shall be past away at his
coming, and be destroyed (at least then as to the present state and frame of
them, and of Church and State in, and under them,) Dan. 7.27. Rev. 21.1, 2. 2
Pet. 3. 10, 11, 13, 14. which new heavens and new earth shall abide before him
for ever, and they therein enjoying the righteousness of God in the full
accomplishment of all his glorious and gracious promises for ever, Isa. 66.22.
Yea and

9. When he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God his Father, as Man or
Mediator, then God shall be all in all after an inconceivable manner, 1 Cor.
15.28. then shall we know as we are known, and see him as he is, Aug de civit.
Dei l. 22. c. 29. ita nobis erit Deus notus and conspicuus etc.

Ejusdem cap. 30. Videbitur sine fine, amabitur sine fastidio, laudibitur sine
fatigatione. Vacabimus and videbimus, videbimus and amabimus, amabimus and
laudebimus. Hoc est quod erit in Fine sine F^ne, n^m quis al^us r^s^r est
finis, nisi p^^venite a^g^um ejus nullus est Finis.


1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2. and have that blessed vision of God which shall be
most fully and perfectly satisfying; for then (as St. Austin also writes) God
shall be so known and manifest as to be seen in spirit of every one in every
one of us: seen of one in another, seen in himself; seen in the new heavens,
and in the new earth, and in every creature that then shall be: Seen in every
body, even by or through the bodies whither soever the eyes of the spiritual
body shall direct their sight, yea the thoughts of one shall be open and
manifest to another, etc. and God shall be the God of his people fully and most
immediately, even all their satisfaction: all things that may holily be
desired, their life, health, food, riches, glory, peace, honor, and all good
things. He shall be the end of their desires, who shall be endlesly seen, loved
without any thing of loathing, and praised without their being weary with
praising him. When they rest in him as fully known and enjoyed, rest in him and
behold him, behold and love him, love him and laud him: this shall be in the
End without End: for what else is their End then to come and attain to the
glorious Kingdom whereof there is NO END. Oh the unfathomable height and depth
of peace, happiness, joy, glory, and all fullness of bless, honor, dignity and
felicity that shall be their portion in that day?

Such, but far beyond what I have expressed, or can express, shall be the
after-part of the righteous in that life or world to come. In a word, the
Apostle comprehends it in this term EVERLASTING or ETERNAL LIFE: So in Romans
6.22. Being made free from sin, and become the servants of God, ye have the
fruit unto holiness, and the END EVERLASTING LIFE. And in 1 John 2.24, 25. Let
that which ye have heard from the beginning abide in you: if that which ye have
heard from the beginning abide in you, ye shall continue in the Father and in
the Son, and this is the promise which he has promised us, even ETERNAL LIFE.
Sometimes it is called the EVERLASTING KINGDOM of our Lord and Savior JESUS
CHRIST, 2 Pet. 1.11. or HIS HEAVENLY KINGDOM, as 2 Timothy 4.18. or GODS ETERNAL
GLORY, as 1 Pet. 5.10. A latter End, or reward infinitely desirable in it self
as comprehending in it all good; and all good perfectly, and all good
perpetually, and all good endlesly and eternally to be fully enjoyed, because
it is God himself, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, and he is
all good, and perfectly, perpetually, endlesly and eternally Good: and he is
their Portion and their Exceeding Great reward, Whence this happy state.
Psalm. 16.5, 6. and 73.26. Genesis 17.1. The strength of their hearts here, and
their PORTION FOR EVER.

But

Ans. Negatively.
1. Not from themselves, nor from the desert of their righteousness, they being
in themselves earthly, frail, and sinful creatures, could not possibly do or
act any such goodness or righteousness (much less of our selves) as should
deserve or render them worthy of such an end and recompense; nor could a finite
obedience of a finite creature be commensurate with an infinite reward in its
worth and virtue: and therefore neither shall they make themselves the burden
of their endless rejoycings, and everlasting songs, but rather shall say Not
unto us, Not unto us give we glory. It is true, that righteousness is better in
it self than wickedness, and God is just to difference them in his
retributions; but neither is their righteousness that he rewards, of
themselves, or their own righteousness, but their righteousness is of the
Lord, Isa. 54.17. Nor is that righteousness so perfectly embraced and walked in
by them, but that in many things they offend and sin, so as should God enter
into jugdment with them, and be strict to observe what they do amiss, they
could not stand or be justified in his sight, as themselves have acknowledged,
Psalm. 130.3, 4. and 143.2. they could have no salvation or deliverance from
wrath and the portion of the ungodly, (much less reward, and much less, yet
such a reward for their works) but through the forgiveness of their sins, Luc.
1.77. and therefore also when God promises his people what he will do for them
in the last days in their restoration (the great substance of which is the
glory to be enjoyed in the Kingdom of Christ,) he puts in such a Caution
against ascribing it to themselves. Not for your sakes do I do these things:
Not for your sakes, be it known to you: oh house of Israel, be ashamed and
confounded, says the Lord; Ezekiel. 36.22, 32. even as Moses did before upon
their first entering the Land of Canaan, the type and figure of this promised
inheritance; Speak not in thime heart, after that the Lord thy God has cast
out these nations, saying; for my righteousness, the Lord has brought me in to
possess this land: not for thy righteousness, nor for the uprightness of thine
heart do thou go to possess this Land, etc. Deuteronomy. 9.5, 6. and yet it is the
reward of righteousness that God will give, and that wherein he will testify
his great love to righteousness, and to the righteous. As it is said, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom; for I was hungry, and ye fed me;
naked, and ye clothed me, etc. Math. 25.35, 36. rendering that as the reason of
their receiving that reward. As also the Apostle says, God is not unrighteous
to forget your work and labor of love, etc. Heb. 6.10, 11. It is true
therefore that God does and will reward the righteous, and with respect to
their righteousness, and not the unrighteous; otherwise it would be no motive
or encouragement to righteousness. But true it is also, that neither is that
righteousness of themselves, nor deserves it those rewards as it is in and from
them. But positively

2. It is from God himself. He is as the End, Ans. Affirmatively.
so also the beginning of their welfare, as the Last end of their desires and
enjoyment: so the First cause, spring, and original whence it all had its rise
and issue. He is the Alpha as well as the Omega of all their felicity, Isa.
41.4. and 44.6. and 48.12. and to him they must acknowledge it and will sing
Hallelujahs, or praise ye the Lord, To thy Name be the glory, Rev. 19.1, 4, 6.
Psalm. 155.1. For

1. It springs from his good pleasure, this love and good will to man, whom as
he created in his own image and likeness at first by and for his only begotten
Son, the express character of his own Majesty: so he so loved him as both to
prepare an infinite reward for him being righteous; or for such, or so many of
them as should be found righteous before him; for the manifestation of the
riches of his grace, and glorious bounty and goodness to him; and also when he
fell from his primitive and created righteousness in which he made him, he made
his Son, (the increated image of his person and of his essential righteousness)
to be in the image and likeness of the fallen man, in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and under sin, and curse, and condemnation (only without sin in him)
that he being clothed as it were with man's unrighteousness as imputed to him,
and swallowing up the sin and curse, might himself become his perfect
righteousness, and conforming him to himself in holiness and righteousness,
might make him also the subject in, and with himself of that infinite reward
prepared for the righteous, even that infinite glory and inconceivable
happiness which he had before the world prepared for them: as it is said, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from before the
foundations of the world, Math. 25.35. and Fear not little Flock it is my
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luc. 12.32. Thence the
Praedestination to the adoption of children, and to the obtaining of the
inheritance, is said to be according to the good pleasure of his will, and
according to his good purpose, Ephesians. 1.5, 11.

2. It springs from his love to righteousness, even to the righteousness of
faith; or to his only blessed Son made in the virtues of his abasement,
obedience, and sufferings, righteousness to them: as his love and pity to man
led him to give his Son to ransom him from his unrighteousness, and to be his
righteousness; so his love to righteousness, even to his Son, made man's
righteousness, leads him so to love man as found therein, as to think nothing
too good or great for him, even himself, and all his fullness of grace and glory
to be his portion in life and death, but most fully and manifestly in the life
to come. Thence the care of the Apostle to be found in Christ, in order to his
apprehending that for which he was apprehended of Christ, and to his obtaining
the price of Gods high calling in him, Philip. 3.8, 9, 12, 14. God loving them
that love Christ, because they love Christ, with this manner of loving of them,
whence he so rewards them, Joh, 16.27, 28. whence also their election, though
before the foundation of the world, is said to be in Christ, and their
praedestination to the adoption of children to be by Christ. So as with respect
to him namely, Ephesians 2.4, 5. And so

3. It springs from the infinite excellency of the person, and the precious
vertuousness of the abasement and obedience of the Lord Jesus to the death, the
death of the Cross, and the force and prevalency of his mediation of the new
Testament with God his Father in the virtues thereof, that the called might
receive the promise of the eternel inheritance, Heb. 9.15. 2 These. 4.14. 1 Pet.
5. 10. For though, if man had abode in his innocence, he I believe should have
been very happy, out of the love that God bears to righteousness, and to man
as his creature abiding righteous: yet as it is no where said, so neither find
I sufficient ground to believe, that he should have had the same happiness that
now he shall have in, and upon the account of Christ Jesus: he not only
delivering him from his sin, but being made also such a righteousness to man as
made in him, as becomes a new and more glorious foundation of his future
happiness, then his own personal righteousness as a pure creature could have
been; Therefore also it is said, that Gods eternal purpose about the
Gospel-contents were purposed in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1.11. and that Christ at
his coming shall be admired in all his Saints: it being the glory of Christ
that shall then be manifested in and upon them; even that that he has by the
virtues of his abasement, sufferings and death, acquired into the nature of man
for us, and to be communicated by and with him to us, 2 These. 1.10. and 2.14.
Its the great commendation and Manifestation of the strength and excellency of
this foundation, that it is counted worthy of, and meet for such a glorious
superstructure to be built upon it, and that its able to support and uphold
such a weight, an exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Sure if
our sufferings in, and for him work for us such a weight of glory, as some
particular rewards of them in that Kingdom, what did his sufferings for us work
(whence all our sufferings for him have their foundation, motive and value) but
even the whole Kingdom it self, and all its glory! Such was his unspeakable
love and grace in abasing himself so low at the will and appointment of his
Father, and suffering so great things for man, that as he is accounted worthy
to receive of God his Father highest dignity, honor, and glory in the manhood,
and for men, even power and riches, wisdom and strength, honor and glory and
blessing, Rev. 5.12. so also such is the infinite prevalency of his mediation
with his Father through the same, that he obtains of him what he desires: and
such is his infinite love and grace to his that love and obey him, that as his
Father loves him, so he loves them, Joh. 15.9. and therefore aimed at, asks
and obtaines of his Father for them, the highest and most inconceivable
happiness and glory that may be enjoyed by them: whence also we may say, that

4 It springs from Christ's unspeakeable love to them, as his Members, Spouse,
Inheritance; which is such as that he thinks nothing too good or great for
them, that he has in his power, or may by his power and prevalency obtain of
God for them. Thence he tells them, that he appoints to them a Kingdom as his
Father appointed him, that they may sit, and eat, and drink with him at his
table in his Kingdom, and sit on thrones, etc. Luc. 22.28, 29. Rev. 2.26, 27.
and 3.21. and to give to them to sit with him on his throne: and he gave
himself for his Church, that he may sanctify it with the washing of water in
the word; to present it to himself a Glorious Church, etc. Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
improving all the infinite virtues of his Cross and Sufferings, and all the
authority and power he has with his Father, and over all things, for the
advancing them to the height of happiness. How great must that happiness needs
be? how great that glory that shall be to the height of Christ's power and
interest! by which also they are prepared for that glory and brought to it too.
Whence the Spouse glories also, my beloved is mine. He, and all that he is and
has, and I am his, to love, delight in, and make me happy; as well as also to
obey and serve him. Yea

5. It springs from the love both of the Father and Son to them, which leads
them so to accept of any their breathings after them, love and services to
them, as to reward them not after their worthiness in themselves, but according
to the graciousness of their own acceptance of them in their love to them, and
according to the infinite munificence and magnificence of so great and glorious
persons: so as they may show forth the glory of their grace and love therein to
them, and upon them.

6 It springs from the truth and faithfulness of God and Christ: for whereas
love and goodness led or moved God and Christ to promise so great and glorious
recompenses to them that overcome their corruptions, and lusts, and wills, and
enemies, in the power of his grace given them in Christ; and that do not
through sloth, cowardliness, or contempt of the riches of his goodness,
unbelief, or the like, yield themselves to them: his faithfulness, truth, and
power are engaged to perform and make good these engagements to them. To which
he has bound himself both by promise and oath, that by two immutable things in
which it is impossible for God to lie, they may have strong consolation that
flee for refuge to the hope set before them, Heb. 6.13.17, 18. Now God is
faithful and able to perform that that he has promised, and will not fail:
his righteousness shall be seen and glorified therefore in the performance to
the heirs of promise, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6.

7. Lastly it springs also from the great wisdom of God, that such and so great
a reward and End was prepared for, and is promised by him, that he may induce
and encourage the hearts of poor mortal creatures to obedience to the faith of
Jesus, and to the way and practice of righteousness. For such is the power of
corruption, error, and ignorance in us naturally; such the powerful influences
of this world, and its allurements upon us, such the force also of its threats,
frowns and hardships to be met with in the way of God: and such the force and
violence of Satan in thrusting against us in, and with all aforementioned, and
endeavoring to ruin us; that did not God bid so high for us and our service,
he would have few that would deny themselves of the baits, and encounter with,
and stand against the difficulties and discouragements they meet with. But the
veiw of such a price, or prize kept in the eye may, and does, and will allure,
and draw, and keep up the heart in, and through Christ Jesus to all the
services, and carry through all the sufferings he calls to. Thence those
frequent expressions of respect to the reward had and exercised by the Saints,
as the Patriarchs, Heb. 11.9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16. Moses Verse. 25.26, 27. the
Apostles, 2 Cor. 4.12. 14, 16, 17, 18. and 5.1. Philip. 3.12, 14. Yea Christ
himself as man, Heb. 12.2. and the frequent mention and proposal of it to
others to animate and hearten them on, as in 1 Cor. 15.58. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
with 7.1. Heb. 6.10, 11, 12, 13. and 10.35, 36, 37. Rev. 2. and 3. and God is
just to perform his bargain; having given also an earnest of it to his
servants, Ephesians. 1 13, 14. Such the grounds and reasons of this so happy a Death,
and after-state, which yet we have hitherto considered only absolutely: it will
be yet more manifest (contraries being set off and illustrated the more by
their contraries) to be desirable, if we veiw the contrary condition of the
Death and after-part of the unrighteous and wicked, The after-part or latter
end of the wicked.
and so veiw it Comparatively. Comparing it with the portion of the wicked, and
see how it excels that. But who can express either of them to the life, either
the excellency of the End of the righteous, or the misery of the End of the
ungodly and wicked? the Psalmist tells us: The End of the transgressors shall
be cut off, Psalm. 37.38. Eli tells his Sons, it will be bitterness in the End,
1 Samuel 2.26. Yea the Apostle Peter implies it to be inexpressible bitterness,
bitterer than wormwood (as is said of the End of the whorish woman, Prove. 5.3,
4.) when he says; what shall the End be of those that obey not the Gospel? as
wanting words to express the bitterness and badness of it, 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. We
might show it to be in all things contrary to the End of the righteous or
upright, both as to their state in dying, and as to their after-state both in
the time of their being dead, and in and after their Resurrection. But I shall
but hint at it, because I would not be too tedious. And so

In Death.
1. Whereas Death to the righteous is an End to all their miseries, sorrows, and
troubles; on the contrary, Death to the wicked is an End to all their good.
Thou in the life time (says Abraham to the rich man) received'st thy good
things, Quis s^it an adj^nt hodic^nae crastina sum^ae Tempora Dii superi^ Hor.
Luc. 16.25. All in this life time, nothing after: and alas, this life time is
very short and uncertain, very momentany and hidden at all times, as to the
length and duration of it; in continual dangers and jeopardies of being cut
off. Its so in Gods hand, that he can cut it off as a weaver his thread when he
will, and that's very easily; So that their good is, (as Job says) not in their
hand, Isa. 38.12. Job. 21. 16. and that very consideration takes off
exceedingly from the sweetness of their present portion, that they know not how
soon or suddenly they shall loose it all: but loose it all, it is certain, and
they cannot but know it, they must; for the living know that they must die; and
they see wise men, even those that are wisest for this world die also; and the
brutish and foolish persons perish and leave their wealth, their houses, and
lands, and so all the comforts they have here, to others, Psalm. 49.10. Yea, and
besides the knowledge of the uncertainty of the good things they have here,
there is a deal of mixture of vanity and vexation of spirit with them very
frequently: but what ever good or sweet they have with that mixture, Death when
it comes sweeps it all away; their silver, gold, houses, lands, wives,
children, pleasures, honors, gay cloths, dain^y fare, etc. Yea, though Crowns
and Kingdoms, all goes at Death, and then they must have no more good for ever.
Were there nothing else to be said of their portion or after-part but that in
their death they loose and part with all comfort for ever, and have no more any
good thing befall them, it were enough to render their part and lot very
inconsiderable and despicable: Yea, though it might be had in the amplest,
surest manner here, and for many years continuance, in comparison of that of
the righteous. But alas, this is but the least piece of its worthlesness and
wretchedness. For

2. Death is the inlet to them to infinite and endless miseries: for they die
out of Christ, and have no share in him, or in the blessings in him, and so
they are accursed both in soul and body. Its true, the body (as we said before)
may be more honorably interred than the righteous man's; but yet its the body of
a wicked man that has no part in Christ, and therefore dies in his sins, which
are all chargeable upon him both soul and body, and the punnishment hangs over
him, and begins now to seize upon him. Being not in Christ, he is not in Gods
favor and acceptance nor under any promise of any good, mercy, or blessing: but
under all the threatenings of curse and misery; his hope is perished, what ever
he had in the world, its gone with the world; and if he had any hope in God
upon account of his birth, parentage, profession, works, goodness in his own
eyes, its blown all away with his breath which he breathed our when he gave up
the ghost. If he plead it in the resurrection, it will not stand, Math. 7.22,
23. there is no hope for him of any good for ever, his body is reserved in the
grave against the day of evil and vengeance, and shall then be brought forth
from it; there being no darkness or shadow of death where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves from punishment, Job. 34.22. So that their bodies
are in far worse case than the bodies of the beasts, and his spirit is disposed
of by God to a restless, unquiet, miserable case, like that of the damned
spirits or evil Angels, that are as it were prisoners in chains of perpetual
darkness reserved to the Judgment of the great Day, 1. Pet. 3.19, 20. and 2
Pet. 2.4. And then

3. Their resurrection and raised state is still worse than their death and
dead-state; for as that is not in the first resurrection, In and after the
Resurrection.
the resurrection of the just (on the raised, wherein the second Death shall
have no power,) Luc. 14.14. Rev. 20.5, 6. so when it comes, its not as of
Christ's members, and by his spirit in dwelling in them, but by his terrible and
powerful voice, forcing them, will they, nill they, out of their graves and
several receptacles, to appear before him as their dreadful angry and impartial
Judge, in bodies indeed immortal and incapable of dying any more as to a
dissolution of them, and separation of them from their souls as before (which
will be their exceeding misery; for now they cannot be made senseless of pain
and misery as they were while in their graves) but everlastingly united with
their spirits, that both bodies and spirits that sinned together, may be cast
into destruction together, and suffer together an everlasting punishment, Math.
25.46. both body and soul being cast into hell fire, Math. 10.28. To which
purpose, Christ (whom they have sinned perpetually against, despising his
counsels, slighting his instructions, hating him and his reproofs, and ways,
and truths, and people: and whose love and blood, and all the grace thereby
procured for, and held forth to them, they set at naught) he shall come in
flaming fire to render vengeance on them, and gathering them before him, the
heavens shall reveal their iniquities, and the earth shall rise up against
them, Job. 20. 27. and all their sins and wickednesses shall be ripped up in the
sight and veiw of God, and Angels, and men, with all their ugliness,
aggravations, circumstances; and then they shall by him be adjudged to, and
undergo that terrible sentence, Depart devil and his Angels, Math. 25.41.
whereby they shall be for ever thrust out from God and Christ, and from all his
holy Ones with infinite shame, reproach, and ignominy, never to taste of their
happiness or felicity, being everlastingly accursed of God, and thrust away
with most dreadful, miserable, and damned spirits, whose company and counsel
they here liked and followed after, into a state of darkness or
uncomfortableness, distress and anguish in the sense and feeling of the most
severe wrath and vengeance of God poured out like fire, and burning for ever
upon them, without end, Quanta satius est pro perpetuis bones maela brevia
pensare, quam pro brevibus ac caducis bonis mala perpetua sustinere? Loct. lib.
6.
ease, or intermission: their worm never dying, nor their fire ever quenched;
there shall be weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth. Lo such is the portion
of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed of God for him, Job 20.29.
Oh dreadful, heavy, and infinitely wretched portion? infinitely worse than the
worst condition that any man is or can be here in; and therefore how much more
than that of the righteous, in which are all things infinitely happy and
glorious? But I shall say no more to it, this brief hint may suffice

Why the unrighteous and wicked have so sad a death and latter end, The reason
of the sad end of the wicked.
diverse reasons might be given reduceable to two heads: I shall mention but a
hint to either: that is to say,

1. It is of themselves only as to desert, for though Satan tempt, and the
world allure, and corruption move to disobedience and rebellion against God;
yet, through the grace of God afforded, they might resist; and complying with
the light, truth and grace afforded, might be helped; but putting the fear of
God from them, they choose to walk after sin and Satan, stubbornly persisting
therein, and refusing to turn at wisedoms reproves, or having begun to turn,
returned back again with the Dog to his vomit, and to the Sow that is washed to
wallow in the mire, till death seized on them: and therefore their sin being
theirs, their punnishment and destruction too is of themselves, Prove. 1.20.24,
25, 26, etc. Hos. 13.9. Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21. etc. and their punnishment and
misery is so great, horrible, and inexpressible.

1. Because their sins are innumerable, and every one of them exceeding great,
as there is therein a slighting or contempt of God and his authority, power and
goodness, which is infinite; a slighting also or contempt of Christ, and all
done and suffered by him for them, and all his love therein testified, and all
the good there-through done and extended to them; a grieving also and rejecting
of the love and loving calls, reproofs, and strivings of the holy Spirit with
them, and withal making no account either of Gods favor to seek it, or of his
wrath to endeavor to avoid it; an abuse of all his mercies and good things
here bestowed, and slighting all corrections used for their amendment; and a
careless despising all the glory and happiness by him tendered; which things
being against an infinite Deity, and his infinite Attributes, put an
infiniteness into the demerits of their sins, and so pull upon them an infinite
punishment. And then

2. Because they dying in their sins dye out of Christ, and shall rise again
our of him, they have no forgiveness of their sins through him, and so must
answer for them, and bear the punishment of them themselves: which being not
otherwise, to be infinitely endured, but in the infiniteness of their time of
sufferings, will occasion their endlesness to them.

2. It is of God as to the decreeing, sentencing and inflicting it as a most
just and righteous Judge; and the most unspeakably injured and provoked
Majesty; who will herein show forth his righteous judgment, Romans 2.6.11. and
therein

1. Testify his infinite holiness and purity in his perfect hatred of sin and
iniquity, Isa 6.3. Apoc. 11.3.

Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 29.
2. Avenge his own despised authority, power, love and goodness, laws, counsels,
etc. slighted and contemned by them.

3. Avenge the injuries done to Christ in their slighting all his love, Psalm.
2.3, 4.
sorrows, sufferings for them, and Grace therein declared and tendered to them:
and therein also*

1 Pet. 2 7, 8
4. Magnify and glorify his Son and the infinite preciousness of his blood and
sacrifice despised by them; in taking such an unspeakable vengeance of their
injuries to him, upon them.

Zech. 7.11, 12.
5. Avenge the abuses and slightings of all the addresses of the holy Spirit to
them, and gracious patient waiting upon them.

6. Avenge the abuses of, and unthankfulness for the Ministry and service of
his holy Angels about them, and of all other mercies in all his creatures
afforded to them, Romans 2.4, 5, 6, 11.

7. And in a word, all their abuses of themselves and one another, but chiefly
of his Sion; his people and servants sent to, or living amongst them, and
deserving better use from them: this last is particularly mentioned, Math.
25.41, 42, 43, 44.

No marvail now if a wicked man enlightened to see any thing of these matters,
wished to die the death of the righteous, and to have his latter end like to
his! The latter part of the point considered in answer to two questions.
about which (having spoken to the first and main business of the point about
the excellency of the Death and latter end of the righteous or upright ones) it
remains that we speak a little as in the latter part of the Point we added,
that they be such as that even the wicked that care not to live their life, or
to have their beginning and progress, yet understanding them, desire to have
their Deaths and latter ends like theirs. Concerning which, I shall only
propound and speak to a Question or two, and so come to the Application. And so

1. Whereas Balaam in wishing or desiring thus, implies that he thought it
possible (though not certain that it would be so) that he might dye the death
of the righteous, Whether a wicked man may die a righteous man's
and that his latter end might be like his; being in a manner a prayer: and men
use to pray for what they think possible, Thence it may be queried.

Whether is it possible, that a wicked man as Balaam was, may obtain to dye the
death of the righteous, and to have his latter end like his, To which I shall
answer by distinction.

That a wicked man abiding a wicked man, Ans. 1. Not abiding wicked.
can by no means have such a death, and after-part as the righteous and upright
ones. Except your righteousness (says our Savior) exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharasees, ye can in no wise enter the Kingdom of God, Math.
5.20. that is, except men be truly righteous they cannot enjoy Gods Kingdom
which is the end and portion of the righteous; Reasons of it.
and the reason is because

1. It is against the purity and holiness of God to admit wickedness, and so
wicked men abiding and continuing such, into such nighness with himself, and so
into his favor and affection as the righteous be; for the righteous Lord
loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.8. and the righteous, Psalm. 146.8. but he is not
a God that has pleasure in wickedness, evil may not dwell with him: fools may
not stand in his sight, he hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5. He
is of purer eyes than to behold evil and iniquity, Hab. 1.13. and therefore
cannot admit wicked men, as, and while such, to come into his Kingdom, and have
part with the righteous.

2. That would make void all the ends and intents of the Death of Christ, and
all the whole work and business of his undertakeing; for if men might be saved
and enjoy God in their sins, then they might have been saved without Christ's
coming and suffering for them: for why should Christ come to take away sins,
and wash and make us clean from them, if God can endure them in his sight and
presence unwashed away from men? yea and why then was God angry with men for
sinning? yea and Christ should then fail of his undertaking, if undertaking to
bring men to God clean and pure from their sins, he should bring them in their
uncleanness to him; in vain is a costly Bath prepared for washing and healing
men, if they may be well without it. Christ's coming therefore on purpose to
take away our sins in order to our enjoyment of happiness, is an evident
demonstration that we may not be happy in them. Thence our Savior says to St.
Peter, Except I wash thee, thou have no part with me, Joh. 13.8. Yea

3. That stands cross to all the purposes, declarations and threatenings of God
in the Scripture which cannot be broken, God cannot lie, but he has purposed,
said, decreed, and declared that no unclean or unrighteous thing shall inherit
his Kingdom, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. either then we must cease to be
wicked, or else no part with the righteous, for the ungodly shall not stand in
the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the just, Psalm. 1.4, 5. Yea

4. They being an abomination each to other; the sinners to the righteous, much
more to the most holy and righteous God, how shall they endure to live
together, and enjoy the same end, reward and portion? Prove. 29.27. Yea and
lastly,

5. God should not be just, should he reward wickedness as he does
righteousness: and God forbid that the Judge of all the earth should do
unjustly, Romans 3.5, 6. Genesis 18.25. But

Answ. 2. They may if they become righteous, as they may.
It is very possible that wicked men may by the grace of God cease to be wicked,
and be converted to righteousness, and so they maybe brought to enjoy the same
end with the righteous. And of the truth of this, Manasses, Mary Magdalen,
Paul, the malefactor on the Cross, that but there beginning to confess Christ,
found mercy, and was that day with him in Paradise, Luke 33.40.43. and many
more are evident proofs and instances. Yea, this is clearly signified and held
forth throughout the Scriptures, that wicked men may be converted from their
wickedness, and being converted, they become one in way and end with the
righteous. For,

Reasons of that answer.
1. This was the end of Christ's coming into the World, and dying for all men,
even the ungodly and sinners: suffering the just for the unjust or unrighteous,
that there-through he might both remove the curse from off the nature of man,
and obtain power and spirit into himself as man, so as he might both by his
power and spirit call and quicken men (being ransomed from under the curse)
unto the knowledge of God and faith in himself; and also when so, to forgive
and justify them, washing them in his own blood and renewing them also by his
own Spirit, into his own image and likeness from glory to glory: To which end

2. God in and by him, and he in the power of God, has ordered repentance and
forgiveness of sins to be preached in his Name amongst all Nations for the
obedience of faith, Luke 24, 47. in and by which he is calling, commanding, and
encouraging all men, the wickedest as well as others, every where to repent;
because he has appointed a day to judge the World, etc. Act. 17.30, 31. Yea he
is calling sinners to repentance, and causing his servants whom he has saved
from their sins, and reconciled to God, to teach sinners the way, that
transgressors might be turned unto him, while it is a day of Grace, an accepted
time, Math. 9.13. Psalm. 51.14, 15. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. with 5.19, 20. In which time
also

3. He is by his spirit accompanying his calls, bringing his word nigh to men,
even to their hearts and mouths that they might receive it, believe, and be
saved. So as the Kingdom of God is therein, and there-through made nigh to men,
which kingdom is righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans
10.8, 9. Luke 9.9, 10. Rome 14.17. the holy Spirit in the means vouchesafed,
striving with, or judging in men; reproving and convincing them of sin,
righteousness and judgment; opening the eyes that they might see, and their
ears that they might hear, so that they might understand with their hearts,
and be converted and Christ might heal them, Genesis 6.3. Joh. 16.9, 10, 11. Math.
13.15. Yea so nigh does God bring his word to men, that Satan is said to take
it out of the hearts of those that are in their hearing, and receiving it,
compared but to the way-side, Math. 13.19. Luke 8.12.

4. They that do in hearing, hear; and in seeing, see; that is, when God by his
Spirit is bringing light and salvation to them, showing them his truth and
teaching them his way; they that then wink not with the eye, stop not the ear,
nor harden their heart against his discoveries, calls and operations; but
listen and look to him in the power and grace preventing them, and so turn at
his reproofs and be converted, they come to Christ and to God in and by him,
and are translated from a state of sin to a state of righteousness, and from
the power of Satan unto God, to receive remission of sins, and inheritance
among the sanctified by faith in him, Isa. 42.18, 19 and 45.22, 23. Math.
13.16, 16. Prove. 1.23. Joh. 6.44, 45. Acts 3.19. and 26.18. Joh. 5.28, 29. and
these are all justified from all things from which they could not be justified
otherwise, and abiding in that grace into which they are called, they shall
have their portion among the Saints and righteous ones, Act. 13.38, 39. 1 Cor.
6.9.11. 1 John 2.24, 25.

5. And for as much as this grace in Christ is prepared for all men, and is in
the Gospel declared and tendered to all, he being the propitiation for the sins
of the whole world; and all invited and called to attend and listen to him that
they might in the receipt of this grace be saved; there is a Door opened, and
during the day of grace held open unto all, so as by the grace afforded through
Christ, any man yiedling up to the calls of God and seeking and following on to
know him, may be brought into Christ and be justified and saved, Isa. 25.6.
Romans 3.22, 23, 24. and 5.18. 1 John 2.1, 2. Isa. 45.22. and 55. 1, 2, 6, 7.
Rev. 22.17. In a word

6. There is in Christ through his precious Death and Sacrifice, such
plenteousness of redemption, even forgiveness of sins, and he so lives for
ever, and makes such powerful intercession for transgressors, and is so loving
to man and patient toward sinners; and God so loath any should perish, having
no delight in the Death of the wicked, that as he calls such also, and extend,
by and through Christ his holy Spirit to enable them to obey his calls, so any
wicked man obeying his call, is by the blood of Christ washed from his sins,
and by his powerful intercession with God for him, in coming to God by him (who
will in no wise cast out him that comes to him) is accepted of God and saved,
Psalm. 130.4, 7. Col. 1.14. Heb. 7.25. Isa. 53.12. Ezekiel. 33.11. 2 Pet. 3.9, 15.
Joh. 6.37. 1 Cor. 6.11. These things considered, it is not a vain thing for
men, even wicked men to wish, desire, seek, and endeavor (so as they submit to
seek in the right way, and in good earnest, striving to enter the strait gate
while it is yet open, and not shut against them, Luc. 13.24, 25.) to attain
this end, Deuteronomy. 3^.46, 47. But for men to wish and would, desire and crave, and
yet be slothful and refuse to strive, or to strive and labor in a wrong way,
rejecting the grace of God and his truth, in the evidences and operations
thereof; or to wish to have the portion, end, and reward of the righteous, and
yet continue and keep on in the ways of error and sin, this is foolish,
absurd, and bootless. Such as Balaams wishing was, who therefore
notwithstanding this wish, was slain by Israel, and dyed the Death of, and
among the wicked, Numb. 31.8. The fluggard wishes and desires, but has not,
because his hands refuse to labor, Prove. 13.4. and 21.25. and many in such
ways as are wrong, or when too late, seek to enter, and shall not be able, Luc.
13.24, 25. Romans 9, 30, 31, 32. But

Seeing the wicked sometimes seeing the goodness of the death and latter end of
the righteous, in some measure desire them, Que. Why do any wicked not
endeavor it.
whence is it they become not righteous, or walk not in the way to them?

To this many things might Ans. Reasons of it.
be said: I shall but touch upon some of them. As to say,

1. They see something of their end but not so fully and prevailingly as to
make them love and like the way they walk in thereto, because they wink with
the eye, and follow not on to know: light comes upon them sometimes more than
they desire; but they desire not to mind much the light that comes upon them,
that they might get a further light into what it shows them. They see and hate,
Joh. 15.24. and that because

2. They are sensual, and love to please and satisfy their senses in present
enjoyments: indeed because they apprehend sweetness and pleasure in the latter
end of the righteous, they desire them: but because they feel and find
sweetness in the world and present ways of sin, they love them and retain
them; and being more affected with present sweets then futures (the ways to
which also would deprive them of much of what is present) they hold fast what
they have (or endeavor so to do) though with hazzarding the loss of the other.
Nay, because the light that discovers the end of the righteous reproves their
ways, and would deprive them of the pleasures of sin, they therefore hate the
light, and put it from them, or turn from it, and so come not so to see as to
be converted by it, Joh. 3.19, 20. Job 24.13, 14, 17. Math. 13.15.

3. Winking with the eye, and not abiding in, or following the light, Satan
gets more power upon them to blind and harden them, as 2 Cor. 4.4. stealing out
the light or seed of life from their hearts, Luke 8.12. and so moving them to
doubt of or disbelieve again what they have seen, Genesis 3.1, 3, 4. or also
filling them with strong delusions to believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11, 12. as
persuading them

1. That they may have their present pleasures of sin, and the future good
things prepared for the just and righteous ones too, Deuteronomy. 29.19.

2. That they may repent soon enough hereafter, Pro. 6.10.

3. That God is gracious, and will forgive their sins, though they live in them
upon the account of some outwardly religious enjoyments, or services, or
privileges, Jer. 7.4, 5. Isa. 28.14, 15. and 66.1, 3. Math. 3.7, 8, 9. Joh.
8.33, 34. Math. 7.21, 22.

4. Sometimes, that there is no hope for them, and that therefore they had as
good sit still as strive to enter to no purpose, Jer. 18.11, 12. Or

5. That they are in the way already to that good end, when they are not but
quite out of it, Pro. 30.12. Romans 9.31, 32. Rev. 3.14, 15. and many such like
deceits, which God justly leaves them to for their having pleasure in
unrighteousness, and not receiving the love of the truth that they might be
saved; 2 These. 2.10, 12.

4. Their pride oftimes hinders them from seeking after God, or accepting of
his salvation, and submitting to the simplicity of his ways, as Hos. 5.5. and
7.10. Psalm. 10.4. Joh. 9.25, 26, 40. they love the praise of men more than the
praise of God, Job. 5.44. and 12.43. and so the retaining other lusts, as
covetousness, slothfulness, etc.

Applic.
The consideration of all hitherto said upon this second point, together with
these Questions and Answers, is diversely useful; As

Exhortation to all
First to exhort and provoke all men to seek in the first place for the Kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, as in Math. 6.33. as that that is infinitely
worthy our seeking and endeavoring after, not only to wish and desire with
Balaam to die the Death of the righteous, and to have our latter end, or
after-part like his, but to seek it, and seek it in the first place above all
other things, as counting all other things below it, Nobis nullus labor est
recu sante^quoad acquira^tur quod nullo modo possit amitti. Lact. lib. 6. cap.
4.
and inferior to it: things momentany and vain in comparison of Gods Kingdom,
and the glorious performance of his precious promises, and so the enjoyment of
his righteousness therein, and what may give us right and title to it, while we
are made therein of the righteous seed or people of God. Seek we these things
as earnestly as Balaam and Balak did to get the people of Israel cursed; as I
once knew a good man that was much moved and stirred up to seek diligently
after God, partly upon this consideration; Were Balak and Balaam (would he
often say) so earnest to seek to have the people of God cursed, and should not
I be as earnest to seek to be blessed of God? a very good improvement of so bad
a matter. Now the way to obtain this blessing, and so to die the death of the
righteous, and have their end and reward, is to be indeed righteous, and do and
practice righteousness by the grace of God. The way to which is

1. To mind and diligently attend to the word of righteousness, as it is
called, Heb. 5.13. the Doctrine of the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus, in
which the power and arm of God is put forth for pulling us out of our
unrighteousness, and turning us unto righteousness, Dan. 12.3. Act. 26.17, 18.
that's the power of God to salvation to every one that believes, yea and the
word of faith by which heard and minded, faith is begotten; even the believing
with the heart unto righteousness, Romans 10.9, 10, 17. and 1.16. this is the arm
and engine wherewith God and Christ, by the holy Spirit (accompanying it and
breathing therein, and dispensed thereby) works and accomplisheth his whole
work in the heart that receives it. Whence men are so much in the Scripture,
in order to their being made righteous, called upon to come to Christ, listen
to him and his voice, receive his sayings, and the like, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. and
18.3. and 42.18, 19. Pro. 4.1, 10, 20, 21, 22. and 5.1, 2. and 8.1, 4, 5, 6,
31, 32, 33. Jam. 1.18, 19, 21. And in this listening to the Gospel and seeking
after it

2. Wink not with the eye, but be willing to see and learn what it discovers to
us, whether of, and concerning God and his grace and mercy to mankind, and so
to us all in Christ Jesus: or what it discovers of us, and our sinfulness, the
vanity and emptiness of all our wisdom, works and endeavors for righteousness
of our own, or in our strength or ways; as also of all fleshly privileges, and
worldly enjoyments, for justifying us, or making us happy; and hate not, but
suffer such discoveries, convincements or reproofs, as are therein brought unto
us, Math. 13.15. Isa. 42.18. and 45.22. and 65.1. and 40.10, 15. and 41.27.29.
and 42.1, 2, etc. Yea

3. In taking notice of what is in the light of Gods testimonies discovered to
us; turn we at Christ's reproofs, as knowing that they are the way to life,
rejecting and casting away whatsoever therein is discovered to be an Idol; a
vain and false object or matter of trust, stay, and confidence to our souls,
or what we seek for delight, shelter and safety in that will not profit us: and
so generally putting away from us what ever evil in heart or hand, way or work,
is discovered to us to be in, and with us; denying all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, so as to confess them to be such and no better than that divine light
discovers them to be, and looking to God to cleanse and deliver us from them:
and as he is helping and strengthening us, laying them aside and renouncing
them, Prove. 1.23. and 6.23. Tit. 2.11. Jam. 1.21. 1 John 1.9. Prove. 28.13. And

4. In taking notice what that heavenly word and testimony, and the holy Spirit
therein, and there-through discovers of Christ and the fullness, richness and
freeness of the grace in him, and in God, in and by him; as that discovered
affects and works upon our hearts, and draws us unto Christ, and raises us up
to hope and trust in him, approach to, and seek more knowledge of, and
acquaintance with him; and leads, frames, moves, and strengthens us to look up
to God in and by him; seek him, admire him, hope and trust in him, rejoice in,
and obey him: So yield we up to follow the holy Spirit therein, and to be
framed thereby: not turning away therefrom, or looking off from it to any other
thing to work in us or frame us; but only to such arguments and motives as that
Doctrine presents us with in every case; not greiving the holy Spirit, or
rebelling against it, but in and by the light, power and operation of it. Be ye
saved, Isa. 45.22. Be ye reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. Be ye converted and turned in
to God, Act. 3.19. Be ye separated unto God. Be ye enlarged, 2 Cor. 6.14, 17.
Be ye wise, and of an understanding heart, etc. Prove. 8.5. and the like.

5 And as the same grace coming in, making free, leads, and moves, and
strengthens; so in obedience to its teachings yield up our bodies, powers and
members, weapons and instruments of righteousness, to live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world: doing and walking in the Commandments of the
Lord, given to us by Jesus Christ, looking to, and depending on God for
strength, help, and direction always therein, Joh. 8. 32, 33. Romans 6.12, 13.
Tit, 2.12, 13. 1. These. 4.1, 2, 4.

6. And in all this be not slothful, nor give way to discouragements from
within or from without, but minding the grace of God and his truth set before
us; follow we on to know him and to seek him, and provoke we one another, and
be we willing to be provoked one by another thereunto; casting away the weights
that press down, and the sin that easily besets, run we with patience the race
set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of the faith;
accepting all such helps therein and thereunto as God pleases to afford us,
Heb. 6.12. and 3.1, 8, 12, 13. and 12.1, 2, 15. as in walking with wise men,
hearing their reproofs and counsels, endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace: building up our selves in the most holy faith,
praying in the holy ghost, keeping our selves in the love of God, and waiting
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, avoiding and keeping
far from the contrary thereunto, Prove. 6.7, and 13.18, 20. and 15.31, 32. and
29.15. Ephesians. 4.3, 4. Jude 20.21, Rom 12.2. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. and 7.1. considering

1. That these are the great concernments of our souls, Motives.
the matters of eternity; in which if we obtain we are happy for ever, and
miserable for ever if we miss, as all abovesaid in opening and explicating the
end of the righteous and of the wicked evinces. And as it is said, Deuteronomy. 32.46,
47. it is not a vain thing for thee, for it is thy life, etc. Now the greatest
things and of greatest concernment to us, are chiefly to be regarded by us:
were they other men's concernments and not our own, yet in some cases being
weighty and of great concernment to them, they ought not to be negleded or
carelessly looked after by us: it would be unfaithfulness and uncharitableness
in us, especially if put upon us: but how much more should we take care of
these things, seeing it is our selves that are here concerned, and not others
only. Indeed it might be for the great furtherance of others also, that we be
thereby made good examples to them, fitted for their helpfulness, and filled
with charity to help them: but its not so much others as our selves, and sure
we are nearest to our selves, and especially in things not of light moment, but
of greatest weight: were they matters of our estate, we would be industrious in
them, if they lay at the stake, or were under question, but how much more may
the concernments of our persons immediately challenge our care and industry?
Vivitur exiguo meliu^ Horat.
the things of this world lie without us, and men with a little may live
comfortably, and many do so, yea more comfortably than others with abundance,
and therefore losses in the world might not so pinch us, if reason (and much
less if grace) rule us, but our persons cannot be ill, but the pains and evils
will touch and grate upon us, yet were they but matters of body, as our health,
ease, liberty, etc. we are careful there, and would count it folly and madness
to be neglectful of them: though yet men may be comfortable in those things too
in their spirits: the spirit of a man will sustain its infirmities, but a
wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. Yet if all these should press us
here, they may do so, and be but for a season, and be over and at an end when
Death comes. But these are the great matters of our souls, and for ever, which
if we miscarry in, render all other things to no profit or advantage, and our
selves miserable for ever: the loss and misery of our soul^ ^eing insuperable,
neither to be born with patience, no^ (...) ways bought off or to have end or
mittigation. What will it profit us (as our Savior says, Math. 16. 26.) to
win the whole world, and loose our own souls? or what shall be given for
exchange or recompense! what will the rich man's full bags or full barns do him
good? what his beautiful wife, or pretty children, what the multitude of
friends and lovers, that may wail the loss of him, or joy in their inheriting
what he leaves behind him? yea what is any thing, what are all things to him
when his soul in the depth of hell and misery, is stripped of all things, and can
now receive no ease or comfort from any of them? As on the contrary, what harm
is it to the poor man that he endures or has endured pinching poverty, and
grinding griefs, the scorns of the proud, and the contempt of the covetous,
that he leaves no estate to others, but only his children perhaps, to God and
his providence (who also accounts the seed of the righteous as included in his
blessing) what if his name be cast out on earth, and no man here miss or desire
him; if his soul while here be accepted of God, and when taken hence, be in the
bosom of Abraham, and in the embraces of Christ, never to grapple with sorrows
or sufferings any more for ever! what hurt is all that to him! our own
interests here then if any where, should excite our earnestness, and quicken
our affections to diligence in these things.

Mot. 2.
Again, how earnest, zealous, and industrious has God and Christ, and the holy
Spirit been, and yet are, for us to bring us to this happiness, and prevent our
miseries! when God made us at first, how much did he, how great works wrought
he that we might be well provided for, and feel no misery! The frame and
fabric of heaven and earth, and all variety of creatures therein, and his not
resting from his works till he had provided us of all things that might give us
rest, do abundantly testify. But when we had by our sin forfeited all these
benefits, see how our miseries rather added to his diligence, and increast the
workings of his love and pity toward us, then any whit abated them, we had
made him more work, and he disdained it not. He looked out for a ransom for
us, and found it, when neither men or Angels could have invented one. He rested
not in the ministry of Angels to us, nor institutions of Laws and Ordinances
pointing us out a way of righteousness that the man that does them might live
therein; but finding a defect in all those sacrifices and appointments, and
that our misery was such as no Law could provide against it, no work of ours
remedy us in it; he spared not his own Son, but sent him forth for us, made him
flesh, and sin, and a curse, delivered him up for us to Death, and therein laid
upon him the iniquities of us all; raised him up for our justification, exalted
and glorified him, filled him with all his fullness for us, made him the great
High Priest to plead for us, and make reconciliation for our sins: Our Prophet
to instruct and guide us in the way to life: our King to command, govern and
rule us; to save, protect and honor us: the Lord of all to control all enemies
and evils, and order all creatures as may be best for us; our Physician to heal
us, etc. He declares him, calls to him, draws us by his love and its cords, his
bounty, goodness, forbearance, inviting us to repentance, his corrections tend
to drive us from our Idols, and force us to seek after him, that we may live,
Christ also he has been, and is as zealous of our good, and spared no pains
or cost to do us good and help us. He accepted his Fathers will, came down from
heaven to do it, did it with cheerfulness, delighted to do it, was incarnate,
acted, and did good; suffered, sorrowed, dyed, and therein bare our sins and
carried our sorrows; rested not till having made a purgation for our sins by
his blood, slain the enmity, broken down the wall of partition, destroyed him
that had the power of death, that is, the devil; abolished death, taken out of
the midway what might hinder us from coming back to God and to happiness; made
peace for us, perfected righteousness, obtained an eternal redemption: offering
up himself a perfect sacrifice to his Father, he received of him what ever
power, glory and fullness might furnish and fit him to be the Author of eternal
salvation to all that obey him, and then he sat down and rested at the right
hand of God. And yet as the Father works hitherto for our good, so he works
also; and is faithfully mediating with him for us, and digging about and
dressing us, sending forth his servants, and with them his Word and Spirit,
calling, counselling, etc. The holy Spirit also as he was one in devising help
and preparing it, in preparing and sanctifying the body of Christ, and
strengthening him in all his services and sufferings for us (for in the eternal
Spirit be offered up himself without spot to God, Heb. 9, 14.) so he in the
name of Christ and of God in him, strives in and with men, inlightning,
calling, reproving, convincing, moving, promising, threatening, withdrawing, and
returning again and using all means to woo and turn us to Christ, and
confirm us in him that we might live and not die. Now shall God, and Christ,
and his Spirit, be so concerned in us and our welfare, and shall we be
sloathful and neglective for our selves? how then can, or shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation that the whole blessed Trinity are so diligent to
promote!

Mot. 3. (...) is propenso Co^lo and accurate introspicere, omni studio in
aliquid incumbere, heedfully to p^y into, to look wistly at a thing. Mot. 4.
The holy Angels are taken with what God has done for us to do us good, peeping
down as it were diligently prying into it, 1 Pet. 1.12. and they rejoice in our
welfare, Luke 15.10. and shall not we be much more inquisitive into them, and
diligent in endeavoring after what they rejoice in, and we should much more:
they joy for us when well, and surely we should much more joy for our selves;
and if we neglect it, we our selves must bear it, Prove. 9.12.

The evil Angels or Devils are busy and earnest to seek our ruin, and make
themselves and us everlastingly miserable; and their rage is great as their
time is shorter, Rev. 12.12. and shall not we much more be industrious in
seeking after our own good and welfare? that we may avoid their snares, and
attain what they have lost, and envy that we should find it, even eternal
happiness? shall our enemies be diligent and vigilant to harm and kill us, and
shall we sleep and be slothful, and not stand upon our Wa^ch and Guard,
watching and praying against them? and using all means to prevent our misery
and their designs upon us? Satan compasses the earth and walks to and fro
therein, and seeks whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. Job 1.7. and shall we sit
still and not go to and fro to seek for knowledge and get understanding, to be
delivered from him and his snares, and obtain everlasting happiness?

Mot. 5.
The wicked are busy and eager, and earnest to serve the devil and work out
their own misery, and poison themselves and us, and one another with their evil
principles or examples; or to oppress and crush us with their wicked and
malicious designs, making themselves and one another, and all of us miserable
so far as they can: and shall not we be as careful, solicitous and diligent to
do our selves, and one another, and all men good, and to serve God, and make
sure of heaven? etc.

Mot. 6. Per mare per terras, etc. Trahit sua quemq, voluptas.
The children of this world are ^ger for the world: for riches, honors,
pleasures; plotting, a^ ^ning, riding, ventureing soul and body, and all for
(...): rising up early and fitting up late and eating the (...) ^lness: the
covetous man for riches, the ambitious m^ (...) the voluptuous man for his
pleasures and jollity, watching and taking their opportunities for hawking,
hounding, whoring, sporting, etc. every one for that his heart carries him out
after; and shall not we be as industrious for Heaven, and God, and Christ: as
the Apostle says, they that strive for Masteries are temperate in all things,
and they indeed for a corruptible crown, and should not we do more for an
incorruptible? 1 Cor. 9.25. Mot. 7. Parva nam (...) exemplo est, magni f^rin^
laboris, Ho^.


Yea every creature is busy in what its office and work is, the Beasts to feed
themselves, which is the best happiness they are capable of, the Birds to feed
themselves, and sit and sing, etc. the Be follows its making of honey, the
Spider to make its web, the Ant prepares her meat in the summer, and gathers
her food in the harvest, etc. the Rivers run from their springs into the Seas,
and the Seas ebb and flow: all things are full of motion, and labor; and shall
we only be idle and sit still or do nothing, or act but lazily for that which
was the end of our coming into, and continuance of the world? that is to say,
the everlasting welfare of our souls, Eccles. 1.4, 5, 6. let not all these rise
up in Judgment against us and condemn us.

The Queen of the South came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of
Solomon; Mot. 8. (...) Chris. H^m^. 6. in Genesis Mot. ^.
and we have the wisdom of one greater than Solomon brought to us in the Gospel
and preserved among us, and shall we not prize it, and improve it to our own
and one another happiness? Math. 12.40.41. It were profitable to do as St.
Chrysostom exhorts his hearers, take the holy Bible in our hands, call
together our neighbors, and by those divine Oracles water thence our own minds
and theirs that are with us, that so we may escape the devices of the wicked
one, and reap many good benefits to our selves. To say nothing of many diligent
to travail far and near, and hazard their lives and souls to see fashions, and
shall not we be more industrious to see and enjoy the heavenly country?

9. And to say no more: The time past may suffice us to have wrought evil and
sought after our ruin: its time now to awake to righteousness and give
diligence that we fail not of the grace of God, lest our time be put to an end,
before we think of it, and we be lost for ever for want of wisdom and diligence
to improve our times and opportunities while we had them, 1 Pet. 4.3* 4. Romans
13.12, 13. These and the like things should be considered by us.

Exhortation to believers.
It may also further exhort and provoke all that are in the way of
righteousness, and following after it, to hold on their way, and be not turned
aside by any means from it, seeing it has such an end and reward at last in
death and after death. Cast not away your confidence which has a great
recompense of reward; but we have need of patience that after we have done the
will of God, we may receive the promises; for yet a while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry. Now the just shall live by faith, but if
any man (yea if he) draw back, my soul (says God) shall have no pleasure in
him, Heb. 10.35, 36, 37, 38. as good not at all, as not to the end: better
never to know the way of righteousness, than having known it, to turn from the
holy commandment, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. and therefore

Rule 1.
Abide in Christ, in the minding and eyeing him and the grace given us in him,
and so in the likement of him, and well pleasedness with him, by that grace
affected in us, take heed of a decay of our first love, or a leaving it; but be
diligent and daily in the consideration of him, and the grace given us in him,
1 John 2.28. Joh. 15.4, 5. Rev. 2.3, 4, 5. Heb. 3.1, 2.7. and 12.2.15. and

Rule 2.
Let Christ's word abide in us: forget not, nor let slip that which we have heard
and received concerning him and from him, they will admonish, instruct, and
direct us every where; yea they will strengthen and frame us to abide in the
faith, and likement of him, and dependence on him; for the Gospel of Christ is
the power of God to Salvation (for the preservation and keeping from falling)
of every one that believes, Joh. 15.4. 1 John 2.24, 25. Heb. 2.1.3. Col. 3.16.
Romans 1.16. and 16.25, 26.

Rule 3.
Hold fast the ordinances, traditions, or observances delivered to us by the
Apostles, for our edifying our selves and one another in the faith of Jesus;
such as be our Christian communion and fellowship in the Gospel; not forsaking
the assembling of our selves together; But exhorting one another while it is
yet called to day; and therein provoking one another to love and good works,
praying in the holy Ghost both by our selves and together with, and for one
another, and for all Saints, breaking bread or observing the Lords Supper and
whatever ordinances of the Gospel, the Apostles having received them of the
Lord delivered to us, for our helpfulness, growth and preservation in grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15. 1 Cor. 11.2.23. Col. 2.5. Heb. 3, 12, 13. and 10.24, 25. and
13.1. Jud. 20, 21. Ephesians. 6.11.18, 19.

Beware of, Rule 4.
watch and pray against all that may harm us and occasion our turning aside,
plucking out the right eye and cutting off the right hand or foot to that
purpose, where they offend us, lest by retaining them they prejudice us,
mis-lead, and undo us, Mark 9.43.48. Math. 26.41. and so

1. Beware of false Prophets that under fair and specious pretenses commend
something as right, or as righteousness to us, Cant. 1.
which is not so, to deprive us of our reward in Christ, by corrupting us from
the simplicity in him; the belief of his doctrine and of the sufficiency
thereof, and of the grace in him for us in all things; directing us to some
other law, doctrine or observation as necessary for us beside him, and what he
proposes to us, or as rendering something in and of him doubtful, needless or
vain for us, Math. 7.15, 16. and 24.4, 5.23, 24, 25. 1 John 2.18, 19. and 4.1,
2.6. 2 John 7.8, 9. Gal. 1 8.9. Cease to hear the instructions that cause to
err from the words of knowledge, Prove. 19.27. and go from the presence of a
foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lip of knowledge, Prove. 14.7.
Cant. 2.


Beware of eyeing and looking upon our own seize, abilities, or seeming
excellencies and fullness, and so of being there-through puffed up with pride,
and becoming high-minded; pluck out that right eye and cast it away, for its
exceeding dangerous; for pride goes before destruction, and an haughty mind
before a fall; Be not high minded therefore, but fear as knowing thou stand
not upon thine own goodness, but by faith in Christ, Prove. 6.13. and 16 18, 19.
and 18.12. Romans 11.20, 21. Cant. 3.


Beware of eyeing and looking upon the pomp and splendor of the world, and
their present portion, power, policy, multitude, and strength for oppressing
the truth: or on the contrary, on the low estate, persecutions, troubles and
afflictions that the seekers and followers of the Lord are here exposed to, or
that thou thy self meetest with: or art threatened with, and in danger of, or
likelihood to fall into, for thereby some have been turned aside, and have
fallen from the way of righteousness. Thus Asaph had like to have stumbled, and
to have turned aside; therefore pluck out thy right eye here too, and cast it
from thee, minding the Te^^imony of God which declares the sad end of the
wicked, not^ithstanding all their enjoyments, and the good end of the Lord
^^ward the righteous in ordering their trials and afflictions; and (...) good
end he will make with them in the conclusion, Psalm. 73.^* ^3, 12, 13, 14, etc.

Cant. 4.
Beware of the love of this world, and the things of this world; as its favor,
friendship, flatteries and the like, lest thy heart be snared with them; either
so as through lust after them, if not had; or through content taking in them,
or cares about them if enjoyed; or griefs about them if mist or lost, to have
thy heart choked, and the love of God eaten out of thee: or to have thy heart
surfeited and drunken with them, or carried away with foolish and noisome lusts
after, and unsober use of any of them to thy destruction. Love not the world
nor the things of the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him, Joh. 2. 15, 16, 17. and he that will be a friend of this world,
is an enemy of God, Jam. 4.4 See also Math. 13.22. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10, 11. Luke
31.34, 35, 36. if riches increase, set not your hearts thereon, Psalm. 62. 9, 10.

Cant. 5.
Beware of poreing too much upon thine own barrenness, deadness, sinfulness,
unworthiness, or the little profiting by the means of grace, or by Gods dealing
with us; or the afflictions, crosses, temptations, desertions thou meetest with
from God in the hidings of his face, or the like: or what of that nature may,
and as they tend too, discourage in thy attending to and following after him,
but cast away those weights that press down, and consider what Christ sets
before thee in Isa. 51.1, 2, 3. etc. Hearken unto me, says he, ye that follow
after righhteousness, that seek the Lord. Look to the Rock out of which ye were
hewn, the hole of the pit out of which ye were dug. Look to Abraham your
Father, and Sarah that bare you, for I called him alone, and blessed and
increased him, Where by the Rock out of which ye were hewed, may either be
meant Christ; and by the hole of the pit out of which we were dug, the low
estate of his abasement and sufferings out of which we were begotten of God, to
seek him and follow after righteousness, or else the low estate out of which he
dug or pulled us. And then its the same with that in Heb. 12.2. Look to
Jesus the Author and finisher of the faith, and that in Ephesians. 2 11, 12, 13.
Remember what you were before saved by grace, and yet how by his grace and
sufferings ye were saved. Or else the next words explain the former; namely,
Consider Abraham the father of us all, as believers, and Sarah our Mother, the
Type of the heavenly Jerusalem, the Mother of us all, Romans 4.16. Gal. 4.26. how
dry his body, how barren her womb, how alone they were, and how likely so to
have remained, in respect to fruitfulness, when God called them, and yet his
call and blessing upon them made them increase. And so God will comfort Sion,
and will comfort all her waste places, and make her wilderness like Eden, and
her desert (those of her that are most desolate forsaken and forlorn, in
following after righteousness and seeking the Lord) like the Garden of God. Joy
and gladness shall be found therein, the voice of thanksgiving and melody, And
verse 4. His righteousness, even the accomplishment of his promises is near,
his salvation (or deliverance for saving) is gone forth (is on the way to you
and draws nigh,) so that hold but on a little longer, and you shall obtain them.

Beware of too wi^^eying and looking upon the faults and offenses, pride,
slightings, weaknesses and miscarriages of brethren; Cant. 6*
or of such as make profession and worship with us, they may sometime occasion
stumbling and turning aside. If thy right eye offend thee there, pluck it out
and cast it from thee, putting on charity which covers a multitude of offenses,
1 Pet. 4.7.8.

Beware of evil company and fellowship with vain, Cant. 7.
empty and sinful persons. Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers; either as
to marriage with such, or as to holding great correspondency and intimacy, or
making leagues with them. The Canaanites drew away Israel by such means from
God. A companion of fools is in danger to be destroyed, Prove. 13.20. Blessed is
the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the
way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of scorners. Be not therefore amongst
wine-bibbers, among riotous eaters of flesh, a companion of Harlots, or vain
persons, or bound up in friendship with angry furious persons, lest they prove
a snare to thee, and undo thee, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Psalm. 1.1. Prove. 1.10,
11.15. and 22.24, 25. and 23.21, 22. and 24.1, 2.

Lastly, beware of the receiving the Grace of God in vain, Cant. 8.
or overly; for that is a great or main ground of, and way to the failing in all
the other particulars, and in time of temptation and sufferings for the Gospel
causes or occasions a falling off; therefore give we diligence that we fail not
of the Grace of God, lest any root of bitterness spring up, etc. Math. 13.5,
6.20, 21. 2 Cor. 6.1. Heb. 12.15, 16. But I shall forbear any further
particulars, only add some considerations over and besides what is said in the
fifth Caveat for further helpfulness.

Consider the wonderful encouragement thou have in God and Christ, Help ^.
and the engagement thou have thence to continue in the faith and obedience of
him. It may be seen in diverse particulars; as

1. Consider what he has already done for thee to manifest his love and
goodness to thee, and sufficiency to help and save thee. Did he not devise and
find out a way to help and save thee, when thou wast wholly lost, and his own
Word, Truth and Law stood against thee? and it was above the reach of men and
Angels, much more of thine own power and wisdom, either to help thee or to find
out a way whereby God might help thee. He was both infinite in wisdom and
understanding to find out the way, and in power to be able to bring it about,
and has actually devised and made the way for thy welfare, in his giving his
only Son for, and to thee, as before has been noted: and Christ has come
forth, suffered and dyed for thee to ransom thee from curse, by being made a
curse for thee, and to obtain blessing for thee, and give it to thee. Now he
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all while sinners and
ungodly, how shall not be also freely give us all things with him that may
further conduce to our welfare and salvation? 1 Romans 8.32. if he has
reconciled us to himself being enemies, by the Death of his Son, how much more
being reconciled shall we be saved by his life? Romans 5.10. and Christ having
laid down his life, and shed his blood for thy redemption and justification,
what may thou not hope in him that he will do for thee? and what art thou not
obliged to do for his service and glory? where is there any that so loves us,
and has so done for us that we should turn from him to them? had any paid a
great debt for thee and freed thee from prison, and taken thee home to him to
maintain thee, when else likely to have perished, would thou not be very
confident of his after-freindship to thee, and think thy self greatly engaged
to love him, and be ready to do him service.

2. Consider again what fullness and sufficiency is in him for us, to help and
succor us all along, and in all trials and temptations, to save us from all
enemies, and bring us to the inheritance. Among the Gods there is none like
unto thee, O Lord, nor are there any works like thy works, says David, Psalm.
^^.8. In Christ God has provided all things for us pertaining to life and
godliness, all things are there ready, Math. 2^ 4. in him it has pleased the
Father that all fullness should dwell; yea, all the fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him as in our Head and Savior, and in him we are complete. Coll.
1.19. and 2.9, 10. Against the guilt of our sins, there is in him through his
blood plenteousness of redemption, even forgiveness of sins that the conscience
of them might not drive us by despair from him, but that confessing them and
repenting, we might seek and obtain mercy in and by him, Psalm. 130.4, 7. 1 John
2.9. and 2.1, 2. Ephesians. 1.7. through that plenteousness of redemption in him thou
may oppose to the greatness of thy sins, the greatness of his mercy and
grace, Psalm. 145.8. Ephesians. 2.4, 5. against the multitude of thy sins the
multitude of his mercies, Psalm. 5.7. and 51.1. to all such as seriously turn to
him for it, he will multiply pardon, Isa. 55.7. Isa. 45.23.24.
Against the consideration of thy weakness there is infinite strength in him to
support and enable thee under what trials, and unto what services he does call
thee: Against the consideration of thy folly and bruitishness, there is in him
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and upon him the Spirit of wisdom
and revelation to inlighten and instruct thee, and to make thee wiser than
thine enemies, even wise to salvation, and therein to be wisdom to thee, Isa.
42.1. 1 Cor. 1.30. Against the corruption of thy nature and natural
disposition, there is in him Spirit and Grace to renew, wash and sanctify
thee, so as to present thee white and pure, without spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing; he being made thy sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 5.26. Satan is
strong to tempt and trouble thee, but there is in him greater power to uphold
and succor thee, 1 John 4.45. Against the power, policy and malice of the
world, he has overcome the world, and has greater wisdom, power, and love to
strengthen, help and succor thee, Joh. 16.33. In a word, there are all things
in him, and that in all fullness that are needful and fit for thee to save and
satisfy thee. Riches and honor are with him, yea durable riches and
righteousness: his ways also are full of pleasantness, and all his paths peace,
Prove. 3.17. and 8.18. Now who would a poor man be willing to retain to and
remain with, but such a person as can every way supply his needs?

3. Consider, God in Christ has made a Covenant, and ratifyed it in his
precious blood and confirmed it with his oath, in which are all precious
promises for administering all supplies of grace out of that infinite fullness in
Christ for thee, according to thy needs in thy attending to, and abiding in
him: a Covenant ordered in all things and sure which Christ also has
undertaken as the Mediator of it in the virtues of his precious blood, and by
his powerful intercession to see made good to thee, Heb. 9.15. A Covenant in
which is provided and promised the writing his Law in thy heart, putting his
fear in thy inward parts, teaching thee the knowledge of God, and the
everlasting blotting out thy sins, so as to remember them no more, Heb. 8.10,
11, 12. Yea, in a word, all grace necessary and good for this life, and for
that that is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

4. Consider that God is faithful that has promised and cannot lie, nor will
fail or forsake them that seek and wait upon him, Heb. 10.23, 24. and 13.6, 7,
and Christ is faithful to him in all things that he has appointed him to: both
as the Apostle of our profession to teach us in that Covenant, and as the great
High Priest to mediate the dispensation thereof for us, and give down its
promised contents to us; and he will not fail, nor be discouraged till he have
set Judgment in the earth, Heb. 3.1, 2. Isa. 42.3, 4. And of the faithfulness
of God and Christ to uphold, save and satisfy the hearts of those that wait
upon him, there is a cloud of witnesses, even all his Saints in all ages; who
have ever lived and been preserved through the faith of him to salvation, Heb.
11. tot. and 12.1. Yea art not thou thy self a witness hereof? has he been a
barren wilderness or land of darkness to thee? what iniquity have thou found in
him that thou should forsake and leave him? well said the holy martyr
Polycarp, Above fourscore years have I served him, Epist. S^i^. Eusebius. lib 4.
chap. 15.
and he never harmed me, and therefore I will not now deny or forsake him, when
he was about to be burnt for his name sake, Jer. 2.5, 31.

Help. 2.
Consider the exceeding emptiness of all other things or persons, states or
enjoyments out of him; whither will thou go from him to help or mend thy self?
he only has the words of eternal life; no salvation but in him, and in the way
of his commandments, Act. 4.11, 12. Joh. 6.68. none else was crucified for
thee, nor wast thou baptized into any other name, 1. Cor. 8.13. if then thou
turnest from him, thou must needs go after vain things, and things that cannot
profit thee: there is no sacrifice but his available with God for thee, Job 5.1.
1 Samuel 12.19, 20. Heb. 10.26. to which of the Saints then will thou turn, if
thou neglect him? if thou go to the wise virgins having foolisly neglected him,
thinking they will supply thee, thou art deceived: they will tell thee their
oil they have is too little for themselves and thee too, and bid thee go and
buy somewhere else, Math. 2^.9. If thou go from Christ to Antichrist, the
Pope and his Ministers, they will tell thee indeed they can redeem thy soul
from purgatory, which is nothing; but from hell, they cannot redeem thee; they
may tell thee they can give thee pardon and prevent thy misery: but their
indulgences are so void of a bottom, that if thou rely on them thou will drop
through into destruction: if thou go to men, See D. Tailor disswasive from
popery, c^. 2.. 4.
men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a^ly, to be laid in
the balance they are altogether lighter than vanity. If thou flee to riches,
they make themselves wings and will flee away from thee. Yea all things will
fail thee; and against the wrath of God from whom thou with-drawest, no power
can defend thee, nor policy shift thee, or secret hiding place secure thee: if
thou betakest thy self to thine own righteousness and works, they shall not
profit thee, Isa. 57.12. for if they could have saved thee, Christ came and
dyed in vain, which could not be.

Consider the brevity of all things here: the afflictions, Help. 3.
trials and sufferings here that thou have to grapple with, are but short, the
minding that will be a means to persuade thee to hold out a little longer and
endure them: they are but momentany, 2 Cor. 4.17. and that consideration in
part helped the Apostles as there is employed. The pleasures or enjoyments of
the world for which sin and satan would persuade thee to exchange eternal life,
are short too, the pleasures of sin are but for a season, and that might be in
Moses eye too. Heb. 11.25. and so riches are not for ever, nor does the crown
endure to every generation, Prove. 27.24. after a little while both the good and
the bad of this world will be gone: the world passes away, and the lust of it;
yea, and the enmity and troubles of it too: Yet a little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. And then

Consider (what we have been in this Treatise all along considering) the happy
end and reward of the righteous at Christ's coming, Help. 4.
and their exceeding joy that have waited for him, and shall then say with
shouting; Lo, this is our God we have waited for him, and he will save. This is
the Lord, whom we have tarryed for, we will rejoice and be glad in his
salvation, Isa. 25.9. And on the contrary the sad end of those that have not
waited for him, but hasted from him, and turned aside to crooked paths, they
shall have sorrows multiplied upon them then, being led forth with the workers
of iniquity, Psalm. 16.4. and 125.5.6. whose doleful end we have before
mentioned. Let these things be considered, and they may be useful through Gods
blessing to persuade us to cleave to Christ, and persevere to the end with him.

Disswades from envying the wicked.
A third use is, to discover the causlesness that the righteous have to envy and
fret at the prosperity and portion of the wicked: surely they have no cause so
to do, if they consider either the happiness of their own estate, as to the end
or after-part thereof especially: or the misery and wretchedness of the state
and condition of the wicked, especially as to their end that hastes apace. See
to that purpose, Psalms 33. and 73. throughout, as also Prove. 3.31. and 23.17,
18. Let not thine heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all
the day long: for there is an end. Consider that both thine own and the
goodness of it, the end that death will put to thine afflictions and
sufferings, and the reward and recompense that will be after, which is thine
expectation that shall not be cut off, as also the sad and calamitous end of
the wicked thine enemies. See also Prove. 24.1, 2, 19, 20.

Reproof to our fears of death.
It may also reprove and check any fearfulness of Death, or loathness to die
found, and given way to in and by believers. Why should we fear death, seeing
Christ has abolished Death for us, and made it (to all in him without doubt)
better than the day in which they were born, Eccles. 7.1. 2 Timothy 1.10. the
outlet to sorrows and miseries, and inlet to all happiness; a passage to rest,
and peace, and freedom from all evils, and to the nearer and fuller enjoyment
of Christ, and of the happiness given us in him! The Apostle was not afraid,
but desirous to be dissolved and to be with Christ, and sure if we knew and
loved Christ as well as he, and loved the world as little, we should be so too:
and though David had some risings of fear in the veiw of it, yet see how he
checks them in, Psalm. 49.5. Why should I fear in the days of adversity, when
the iniquities of my heels do compass me about, seeing none can escape it, and
the Lord will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, (or of hell) and will
receive me, says he Verse. 15. The consideration of the end or reward of the
righteous, which we have in some measure been veiwing; as it should provoke us
to diligence in seeking to be found in Christ as our righteousness; so being so
to encourage us to lay down our lives when he calls for them from us, and
especially in a way of suffering for him, with as much readiness as a child to
leave some poor cottage where he did sojourn, to go to his Fathers full and
stately house: or a wife to leave some place of pilgrimage and hardship, to go
to live with her loving, rich, and tender husband. But how much do we generally
both live and die more by, or according to sense, than by or according to
faith? and yet as it is a mercy to live out our days, to be serviceable in them
to God and men, that fulfilling our work we may receive the fuller reward; or
having through wandering weakened our selves, to live to recover strength, and
not be taken away in the midst of our days in wrath and Judgment: so the Saints
have been, and we may be loath to die, and submissively desire to be spared of
God, so as we may come to our graves as a Rick of Corn fully ripe, Psalm. 39.13
and 102.24. Job 5.26. Phil. 1.24. Isa. 38.3, 4.

It may also incite and provoke wicked men to consider with themselves the sad
and doleful state and way they are in, Exciting wicked man to rep^^.
and to awaken betimes while yet they may, and there is yet a day of grace and
mercy afforded them to repentance; that so they may not know what the death of
the wicked is, and the after-part that will follow: but that that sad and
endess misery may be prevented from them, it speaks aloud to all such in the
language of the holy Ghost in Isa. 55.7. not only to wish, and desire, and pray
as Balaam here did, Oh let me die the Death of the righteous, and let my latter
end be like his; but to forsake their ways, and let go their vain and evil
thoughts, and turn to the Lord, who is gracious; and to our God, who will
multiply to pardon: and who has said and sworn as he lives he has no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but rather that he turn and live, and therefore
calls, Turn ye: turn ye, why will ye die? Ezekiel. 33.11. There is all the reason
in the world that a wicked man should turn from his wickedness, and not go on
in it; for if he go on, there is a gulf before him into which he will fall, and
wherein he will certainly perish for ever; all the word of God stands against
him; yea, all the love and mercy of God and the sufferings, blood and purchase
of Christ thereby, will come in and plead against him, and ly upon him, and
aggravate his misery if he turn not in time: his peace, prosperity and comforts
will all flee away and vanish ere long, as smoke in the wind: and his miseries
and sorrows will come thick and threefold upon him, and crush him in pieces for
ever. And on the other side, if he repent and turn, the word, and promise, and
oath of God: the sufferings, blood, sacrifice and mediation of Christ, and the
holy Spirit in and with all are for him, and assure him of a gracious
intertainment with God; of washing, cleansing, forgiveness and healing by
Christ, and of an everlasting happy portion; his death than will be good, and
his resurrection better, and his after-state best of all. He shall have what
Balaam here wished to have, his soul shall die the death of the righteous, and
his latter end shall be like his.

Reproof to the wicked not turning and to such as backslide.
It proclaims the desperate folly and madness of wicked men, that will yet
persist in their wickedness, notwithstanding such a discovery of the end of
those that so do: but much more the desperate madness of such as having been
through the grace of God brought into the way of righteousness, do for any
occasion, or upon any account either of discontent with their own way and
portion, or coveting after the way and portion, or enjoyments of any other,
turn from the way of righteousness: these do as those who being brought safely
out of the dangers of the seas, and of perishing there by some storm, and being
set safely on a rock on the shore, should because the wind blows cold upon
them, or because they see some little fishes play, or rather some perishing men
float on the waves, throw themselves headlong thereinto to their destruction,
but indeed far worse. If I say to a righteous man, says God, thou shall surely
live; if that righteous man trusting in his righteousness, commit iniquity, he
shall surely die, Ezekiel. 33.13. If we turn from God, we must needs go after vain
things, and things that profit not, 1 Samuel 12.21. but that's but an easy and
soft expression in comparison of what the holy Ghost has elsewhere, as when he
says, Thou will destroy all those that go a whoring from thee, Psalm. 73.27.
And they shall be destroyed with an everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, that obey not the Gospel, 2 These.
1.7, 8. and they are said not to obey the truth that abide not in it, Gal. 3.1.

Instruction to moderation in mourning for deceased believers.
But lastly, it may instruct us to moderation in our mourning for the death of
such as are righteous and die in the Lord; that we should not mourn for them as
those that are without hope, either of or for them, or of our enjoyment again
of them; there is no cause of so mourning for them; nay, but as our Savior
said to his Non est lugendus qui ante, cedit sed plane desiderandus, profectio
est quam putas mortem. Ter. de patien. (...) apud G^aec est mori.
Disciples mourning at their hearing of his leaving them, If ye had loved me ye
would have rejoiced, because I said I go to my Father, for my Father is greater
then I, Joh. 14.28. So in respect of such persons when taken away by death, we
have rather cause of joy and gladness than of lamentation and sadness, for they
are gone to a better place and state, as to their spirits, which is the main of
them: and their bodies too are more at ease than they were before; they dying
in the Lord (as we have seen) are blessed at the present, and they shall come
again in their personal and bodily capacities after a while with Christ to the
enjoyment of his Kingdom: yea, so as the living Saints shall not prevent them;
as is said, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, which words we have to comfort one
another with in this case, left on record for our instruction; indeed some
cause of mourning, and in some regard of great lamentation we may have
sometime; as Abraham is said to have sorrowed for Sarah, Jacobs sons for him,
and the people of Israel for Moses, and diverse others; but the Jews write the
middle letter of the word used of Abraham's weeping very small, to signify,
they say, (...)
his moderation in respect of his belief of the resurrection, but its said Act.
8.2. That devout men carried Stephen to his burial, and to have made great
lamentation for him. When persons are very useful among people, and a great
blow, breach, or loss comes to the Survivers by their removal; then there is
ground for great lamentation in respect thereof, and especially upon those that
it falls so heavy upon; as for the loss of our society with them, and their
useful company, or the loss others have of them: but in regard of themselves
there is cause of rejoicing, singing and making merry, for that their race is
run, their dangers past, their cares and labors are at an end; their goal
obtained, and their reward ascertained. And it seems the Jews did apprehend the
same truth as Balaam here, that the death of the righteous was a desirable
thing, and matter of gladness; for when they (who accounted themselves the
righteous nation) died, they had music and melody upon their departing, as
appears by that passage of our Saviors finding Minstrils at the house of
Jairus when his daughter was dead, Math. 9.23. and sure by how much the more
the grace of God is unfolded by the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus,
and his Spirit opening the grounds, ends and virtues of it, in and by the
Gospel to us: so much the more gladness when righteous persons die in their
righteousness; It Is that that good men have desired before they attained it, as
the Apostle Paul, Phil. 1.23 I desire to be dissolved and be with Christ, which
is ^etter. And it is that that bad men have wished they might have the happiness
of obtaining, as appears in the Text; Let me die the death of the righteous,
and let my latter end, etc. Now when any attain that which is desirable on all
hands (and especially when they have lived to a good old age, and have filled
up the number of their days, and served their generation by the will of God)
should we mourn for them without rejoicing? or should we mourn so in respect of
our own losses, as not to qualify and take up our selves with the
consideration of their gain. If a heathen man could comfort himself over the
death of his deceased daughter, Non a nissa sed praemiss^, Cic.
with the consideration that she was not lost, but only gone or sent away
before; how much more may we Christians when we may say it with this addition,
that they are gone before to heavenly and happy mansions, to the bosom of
Abraham; nay to the presence and enjoyment of the Lord Jesus in their spirits;
and that they shall come again with him: and though their bodies now lie
covered up in earth and ashes, or dust; yet they also shall be raised up again
in honor when Christ appears, and then both body and soul shall appear in
glory with him, and enjoy so happy a portion as exceeds all expression*

And now I have finished what I had to say to my Text, but yet not my discourse
without a word of Application of it upon this last account to that which
occasioned my thoughts of it, which was the death and interment of a good and
virtuous Gentlewoman, Mrs. Barbara Whitefoote of Hapton in the County of
Norfolk; A woman well known in the Country, not so much for her outward
greatness as to estate in the world (though God gave her a good sufficiency
there too) as for the good she did in the world; and especially to the places
and people near her: Her profession and practice proclaimed her a Christian
more then in name only: a follower after righteousness, and a seeker of the
Lord; one that we judge to have sought first Gods Kingdom and his
righteousness, and therefore we question not but she has now obtained. A woman
of a good report many years, and of noted zeal and fervency in what she
apprehended to be the truth and right way of God, walking for diverse years
with, and of good note, among some people called Independants: amongst whom her
love and liberality, zeal and diligence in seeking after God, according to
their principles, were conspicuous, and her yet remaining works for them and
their entertainment speak yet for her. But it pleased God in process of time to
open her understanding in the Scriptures of truth and righter way of the Lord,
in giving her to perceive his Grace in Christ to all mankind, according to the
received doctrine of the Church of England, and freeness to impart it to all,
and interest any of all there-through in his everlasting Covenant in coming to
him, and to bring her into acquaintance with a people believing and walking
therein. Chiefly I think, by means of her son in law, Mr Jeremy Coleman,
Minister of Hethersest in Norfolk, a man of a sweet and excellent spirit, and
usefully precious in his generation; who some years before her, though young,
was taken away as a chastisement to many yet surviving. How readily she
received the Testimony of the Grace of God in its extent, and how well she
relisht it, and retained it, and how blamelesly and uprightly she walked in it
for diverse years before her decease, and until her decease, I suppose many can
Testify. And so that she was so far as men may judge, a truly righteous
person; because seeking and accepting of the Lord Jesus Christ only to be her
righteousness in her generation to her capacities, which were none of the
meanest. Her constancy in the faith of Christ, her love to it, her charity and
liberality, her blamelesness, etc. yet live in the memories of diverse, though
she be dead now some time since, and long may they there live. A woman she was
that had a close therefore better than his that died unlamented, and indeed
worthy to be lamented in respect of others, though to be rejoiced in, in
behalf of her self. The loss many have and will have of her, is to be bewailed
by us; for as she was good and useful to many while she lived, so now being
dead that usefulness cannot but be missed. Chiefly her only son has a loss of
her, whom she had a most motherly and affectionate care of, being as yet in his
minority, and a little too much indulgence for his sake, and to have seen him
well disposed of, and much more, truly well disposed, she could have been glad,
if God had pleased, to have lived here yet a little longer: otherwise for her
self content to be dissolved and to be with Christ. How gravely and graciously
(as I was informed, I being then not there) she did instruct and admonish him,
when her sickness began to seize on her, and she thought death approached, some
yet can well remember^ and I pray God he himself may not forget it, but may
follow her good admonitions, advise and practices as long a^ he lives. A lo^^
the town and neighborhood had of her, who may w^ (...) lament that one so
useful to, and among them (...) The good relief the poor had, and the good
(...) and matters of health; the sick and (...) the good opportunities such as
would, had, and more also might have had, for receiving instructions in the
Gospel and truth of God for their souls by her means, as a countenancer and
promoter thereof, speak for lamentations upon her death, her friends and
relations have the want and loss of her company and acquaintance: Chiefly her
ou^ Daughter (...) of Ya^mo^h.
but she we trust is above the reach of loss and wants as to her self. In many
respects therefore her Death is greatly to be lamented, but in respect of her
death it self, and in respect of her self in and by death, cause of gladness
and much rejoicing. That she did well while she lived, and lived so long as she
did, (considering her weak body, much craziness and often infirmities) to do so
much good as she did, and that she dyed in the faith of Christ, and hope of his
glory to be revealed upon her, and enjoyed by her at the appearing again of the
Lord Jesus; these are matters to be rejoiced in and for. Her righteous doing
here is at and end, but her righteousness in which she was righteous, and which
in that righteousness she did, endures for ever: for she was righteous in that
sense of righteousness too as it is taken for mercy and almsdeeds: so that it
might be said of her, she dispersed and gave to the poor, her righteou^ness
endures for ever, and therefore her h^rn shall be exalted with honor, Psalm.
112.7 The consideration of the goodness of her life, but much more of the
happiness of her death, and of her state as dead, put me in mind of what
Balaam wished, and put me upon explicating it in order to the consideration of
the desirableness of what he wished and desired. Well, she is gone, and gone to
the best place, we trust that she could go to, even to the presence of the Lord
Jesus, in whom and through whose grace, she and what she did, had allowance and
acceptance: and with whom she is above our wishing and praying for any thing
more for her, except that Gods Kingdom may come, and therein the accomplishment
of hers and all our happiness. Being a woman that feared God, and wrought
righteousness, as she was accepted of God, so she may be praised of men: for
favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord she
shall be praised: and though I cannot say of her in all things as was said of
that unparalleled woman, Prove. 31. yet we may say in her commendations, she was
doubtless among the daughters that did virtuously; though I will not say that
she e^^elled all the rest, Prove. 31 30, 31. Let us also imitate whatsoever was
truly praiseworthy in her, giving diligence that we may die the death of the
righteous by living their life, that our latter end may be like hers.

ADieu, adieu dear Friend; that state possess
Wherein the upright Souls have endless bless.
What others but desired, thou have gained:
What we yet pray for, thou have now obtained.
Freed from all earthly dross and worldly cares,
Thou have that peace now which nothing impairs.
Thy righteousness which here thou followdst after,
Like Sarahs womb, has brought forth only laughter.
For naught but joy and happiness attends
The Soul that on the Lord alone depends.
Who trusting in him does what is good, how well
He speeds at last, no mortals tongue can tell.
But thou in part injoyst what we below
Can see but glimmerings of, not fully know.
Thy Race is run, thy Goal's obtained, and thou
Art far above the reach of danger now.
Oh happy Soul! But blessed for ever be
That precious Lamb of God that made thee free.
Free him to close with, and believe on here:
Free now from sin, temptation, sorrow, fear.
He was thy Righteousness, He is thy Rest,
For ever may his holy Name be blessed.
An Acrostick.
Bless Soul adieu, enjoy that rest
And peace whereof thou art possessed.
Rejoice in thy behalf we may,
Because thou went to heaven the way.
And there, we trust, with Christ thou art;
Receiving that most joyful part
Among the Saints, which cannot decay.
Who can that happiness conceive,
Heaven gives to those that here believe
In Jesus Christ! who in his grace
Trust to the end, they see his face
Eternally; whence issues forth
Fullness of joys of boundless worth.
Oh happy state! who can but wish it!
Oh folly to neglect and miss it!
Thanks to rich grace which does us grant
Endless enjoyments, without want.
Barbara Whitefoote.
ANAGRAM.
Bar, Bar, a Whitefoote!
OR,
O what if a robber eat!
or, O what if a robber eat.
We need not here the Letters to displace,
To find an Anagram; the voice of grace
With gentle pausings we may orderly,
In The letters and in the Syllables espy.
Bar, Bar; out every plea of evil spirits,
Who because she had sin, would its demerits
Against her plead, as if she therefore must
Out of the Catalogue of Saints be thrust,
From the upright ones, whose death and after-state
Is happy boundlesly beyond times date.
For she a Whitefoote was, and had, her ways,
Affection, trust, meant by the Foot, were praise-
Worthy through grace, washed White in his pure blood
Who as a Sacrifice in her place stood,
And answered for her blacks: bathing therein
Her Foot, was made White, cleansed from dust of sin.
And dirt of worldly filth, that might defile her,
Bar, Bar out therefore all that would beguile her
Of what the supreme Judge has made the right
Of all that walk here with a Foot that is White.
Or Thus,
Who with a Whitefoote, a pure walk, do come
To seek admittance into Christ's Kingdom,
All evil Angels he from them will fray;
And will command, Bar, Bar those foes away.
He Will count them meet to walk with him in White
Whose ways are cleansed, and whose heart's made right.
But O what if a robber eat? He must
Out of this heavenly Company be thrust.
Into Christ's sheeps-fold who will come and over
The wall would climb, not entering by the door:
Who of Saints privileges would partake,
And yet Christ of his claims the ground don't make
Or walks not with a Whitefoote, would he eat,
Bar, Bar him. He Is a robber, must be beat,
But O what if a robber eat: his bite
I fear will rob me of my heavenly right;
For in me many faults he may espy
To fasten on, fear not, thou shall not die.
Fear not thou Whitefoote, he but gnaws a bone
That fastens on a Foot, Or thy sins all cover^, etc.
where flesh there is none.
Being in Christ; His perfect righteousness
Thy sinful flesh removes, procures thee bless:
Echo the last word then of thy sad moan
In Latin Eat, and t's let him be gone.
Bar, bar the robber out, he boldly cries,
That lives a Whitefoote and a Whitefoote dies.
EPITAPHIVM.
MOrtua quae jacet hic terra tumbaque sepulta
Cum Christo aetherea part bear mane^.
Barbara nomine erat; non Barbara moribus autem:
Nomine Pes Albus, moribus atque fuit.
Quae quia dum vixit pede gressa est cautior albo
Mortua nunc albo est digna reperta loco;
Coelesti vestita ^^tens jam luce, quod albis
Nil commune nigris, candida convenient.
Pes iter and finis, pars ultima; prosperus albus
Et purus, Foelix finis iterque piis.
In English thus.
WHo lies here dead in earth and tomb interred
Her heavenly part's to Christ in bless perfer'd.
Barbara her name; Her ways not Barbarous were
Her name and manners both Whitefoote did bear,
Who since sh'alive wisely with White steps went
Unto a place that's White, being dead she is sent
Where now she shines clothed with heavenly light;
For White with black agrees not but with White
Foot way and end, White happy and clean portend.
The clean in way, are happy way and End.
Sic lusit in amicam vita in fide defunctam juvenilius ingenium hominis jam
senescentis. Johannis Horn.

FINIS.

