THE VANITY OF THE WORLD.

BY EZEKIEL HOPKINS.

LONDON: Printed for Nathaniel Ranew and Jonathan Robinson at the Angel in
Jewen-street, 1668.

TO THE Right Worshipful, SIR ROBERT VYNER Knight and Baronet.
Sir,
WEre You one of that sort of men, who value themselves by the Bag, or the
Acre; it might possibly be thought rather an Affront, than a Dedication, to
prefix your Name to this Treatise. For since it is purposely intended to beat
down the price of the World, and to expose its admired Vanities to public
contempt, those sordid Spirits, who have no other worth to commend them, but
what is summed up in their yearly Revenues, would interpret such an Address,
not so much a tender of respect and service, as a design to undo and beggar
them. But Sir to you, whom God has doubly blessed with a large Estate, and a
larger heart, I doubt not but this Piece will be very acceptable; if upon no
other account, yet at least as the perusal of it may be helpful to you to strip
off, and as it were to sequester all your worldly advantages, that you may the
better take an Estimate of your self according to your Native and Genuine
worth, both as a man, and as a Christian.

I am not so much a Cynick, as to plead for affected Poverty, and a disdainful
rejecting the gifts of Divine Providence. Such a morose and sour pride I judge
worthy to be chastis'd not only with the censure of Vanity, but Impiety. We
need not shelter our selves under any Monastic vow; nor fly to Deserts, and
Solitudes to hide us from the Allurements of the World: This is to run away
from that Enemy, whom we ought to conquer. Certainly Religion allows us the
possession of earthly Comforts; only it regulates the Use, and forbids the
inordinate Love of them. We may prize them as Comforts, but not as Treasures:
And while we employ a due part of our abundance, in the works of a generous
Charity, and true Piety, we may well look upon what is left, as a Salary that
God gives us for being faithful Stewards of the rest. Thus to use the World for
the Interests of Heaven, to make its enjoyments tributary to Gods Glory, it is
to convert and proselite it; and turn that into an Offering, which others make
an Idol. By this we give Earth a Translation; and in a nobler sense than the
new Systeme of Astronomy teaches, advance it to be a Star, and a Celestial
body. And by this Method, we change those helps that Vice had to make it self
prodigious and infamous, into the most serviceable Instruments that Virtue can
have to make it self conspicuous and exemplary. For Wealth and Honor in a
virtuous person, are like the well setting of a Jem, which, though it makes it
not more precious, makes it more sparkling.

But Sir, I forget my self, and instead of writing a Letter, am writing a
Tract. I shall make no other Apology for it, but that the Book being designed
against Vanity, I would not have the Dedication of it guilty of that common and
notorious one, to be filled only with Complements. And I hope you will not
think it any thing of that strain, when I shall assure you that my prayers to
God for you are, that you may still enjoy all advantages of doing good here on
Earth, and hereafter receive the reward of it in Heaven.

Exon. Feb. 1. 1668. Your most Humble, and most obliged Servant, Ezekiel. Hopkins.

The Reader is desired to pardon faults of less moment and to correct these
which follow.
PAge 6. line 18. for since read sense. p. 22. margin, for curalia r. curatio.
p. 24. for ridiculous r. ridiculously. p. 25. marg. for (...) r. (...). p. 27.
marg. for (...) r. (...). p. 28. for softer r. softest. p. 31. l. 8. for
imagined r. imagine. p. 41. marg. for (...) r. (...) ibid. for (...) r. (...).
p. 46. marg for luxuriae r. luxuria. p. 47. marg. for (...) r. (...).

THE VANITY. OF THE WORLD.
Ecclesiastes 1.2. Vanity of Vanities, says the Preacher, Vanity of Vanities,
all is Vanity.


THe Preacher here mentioned, is no less a Person than Solomon: and this whole
Book is no other than his recantation Sermon. The Text he preached on is the
same that I have chosen: and it contains the true and severe judgment he past
upon all things under the Sun. Certainly, he who had Riches as plentiful as the
1 Kings 8.27.
Stones of the Street, and Wisdom as large as the sand of the 1 Kings 4.29.
Sea, could want no advantages either to try experiments, or draw conclusions
from them. And yet, when he had Eccles. 1.16, 17.
employed both, in the critical search of true happiness, and contentment, and
had dissected and ransacked the whole world to find it, He returns disappointed
of his hopes, and tired with his pursuit, and begins the sad Narrative of his
long wanderings and errors, with Vanity of Vanities all is Vanity.

Vanity of Vanities. Which shows a mind so full of matter, that it could not
attend the circumstance of a Prologue to usher it in.

Vanity it self.

Vanity of Vanities. Now this reflection of the same word upon it self, is always
used to signify the height and greatness of the thing expressed, as King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords denotes the highest King, and the most absolute Lord.
So here Vanity of Vanities intimates to us the most exceeding superlative
Vanity imaginable.

Pharaohs dream was Genesis 41.32.
doubled: and partly the more to imprint it upon our consideration. Vanity of
Vanities, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.

But though this be expressed in most general and comprehensive terms, yet it
must not be taken in the utmost latitude, as if there were nothing at all of
solid, and real good extant. It is enough if we understand the words in a sense
restrained to the subject matter whereof he here treats. For the Wiseman
himself Ecl. 12.13.
exempts the Fear and service of God, from that Vanity under which he had
concluded all other things. God and Religion have in them a solid and
substantial good; the one as our utmost end and happiness, the other as the
best proportioned means to attain it.

When therefore he pronounces all to be Vanity, it must be meant of all
worldly and earthly things: for he speaks only of these. And if we enquire
what these wordly things are, that have this censure of Vanity so vehemently
past upon them, Saint John has drawn up a full and true Inventory of all the
goods that are to be found in this great House of the Universe, 1 John 2.16.
All that is in the world is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of Life. The Lusts of the flesh are the pleasures of the world; which are
all of them suited to gratify the sensual and fleshly part of man. The Lusts
of the eye, are riches; so called, because their greatest serviceableness is
only to make a glittering, and dazzling show. Which since Solomon approves,
Eccles. 5.11. What good is there to the owners thereof, save the beholding them
with their eyes. The Pride of life is honor and dignity, that flatulent, and
aerie notion, that puffes up men's pride and vainglory, and makes them look
upon their inferiors, as though they were not their fellow Creatures. This is
all that the world can show, Pleasures, Riches, Honors, and this is that All
concerning which the Wiseman pronounces that it is Vanity.

For these things, though they make a fair and gaudy show, yet it is all but
show and appearance. As bubbles blown into the air, will represent great
variety of Orient and glittering colors, not (as some suppose) that there are
any such really there, but only they appear so to us, thorough a false
reflection of light cast upon them: so truly this world, this earth on which we
live, is nothing else but a great bubble blown up by the breath of God in the
midst of the air, where it now hangs. It sparkles with ten thousand glories;
not that they are so in themselves, but only they seem so to us thorough the
false light, by which we look upon them. If we come to grasp it, like a thin
filme it breaks, and leaves nothing but wind and disappointment in our hands:
as histories report of the fruits that grow near the dead sea, Tacit. hist.
lib. 5. Fumum exhilant and fa iscuat in vagum pulverem Solin. Joseph. Antiquit.
l. 5. c. 5.
where once Sodom and Gomorah stood, they appear very fair and beautiful to
the eye, but if they be crushed, in cinerem vanescunt, turn straight to smoke
and ashes.

The Subject, which I have propounded to discourse of, is this Vanity of the
world, and of all things here below; that being hereof convinced, we may desist
our vain pursuit of vain objects, and may set our affections on those things
which are above, which are the alone valuable, because the only permanent and
stable good. Whence is it that we are become so degenerate, that we, who have
immortal and heaven-born Souls, should stake them down to these perishing
enjoyments? Whence is it, that we, who should soar aloft unto God, and were to
that end fitted with the fleet wings of Meditation and affections, to cut
through the Heavens in an instant, and to appear there before the Throne of the
great God, that we should lie here grovelling in the thick clay and muck of this
world, as if the Serpents curse were become ours, to creep upon our bellies,
Genesis 3.14
and to lick up the dust of the earth? Do we not shamefully degrade our selves,
when we stoop to admire, what is so vastely below us, and barter away our
precious Souls, Souls more worth than ten thousand worlds, only to gain some
small part of one? Certainly the God of this world has blinded men's eyes, and
cast a strange mist before them, that they cannot discern, what is most evident
and obvious, even the instability and vanity, of all sublunary enjoyments. That
I may therefore contribute somewhat to scatter this mist, I shall endeavor to
represent to you the native and genuine Vanity that is in all earthly things,
free from that deceitful varnish, which the Devil usually puts upon them; and
so to deform, and wound that great Sorcerer, that his charms may have no more
power to prevail over you.

Now, that we may rightly proceed in this, I shall premise these two or three
things.

First, There is nothing in the world vain in respect of its natural being.
Whatsoever God has made is, in its kind good. And so the great Creator
pronounced of them, when he took a survey of all the works of his hands. Genesis
1.31. God saw every thing, that he had made, and behold it was very good. There
is a most harmonious order, and beauty in all the Creation, and every part of
it. And therefore Solomon must not be here so interpreted, as if he disparaged
the works of God in pronouncing them all Vanity. Certainly he does not libell
his Creator, nor upraid him as though he had filled the world only with vain
toys and trifles. If we regard the wonderful artifice and wisdom, that shines
forth in the frame of nature, we cannot have so unworthy a thought either of
the world it self, or of God, who made it.

Veiw the Sun (next unto Jam. 1 17.
God) the great Father of lights. Veiw the numerous assembly of the Stars:
observe their Influences, their Courses, and Measures. Is it a vain or
impertinent thing, to spread forth the Heavens, and to beat out a Path for
every one of these to walk in! The Air, that thin and subtle Vail that God has
spread over the face of Nature; the Earth that God has poised in the midst of
the Air, and the whole Universe in the midst of a vast and boundless Nothing:
The great Sea, whose proud waves God binds in with a girdle of sand; and checks
its rage by a body almost as unsettled and roling as it self: The various kinds
of Creatures that God governs by a wonderful Aeconomy; the great family of
brute Beasts, which God brings up and educates without disorder; but especially
Man, the Lord and Chief of the World, that knot that God has tied between
Heaven and Earth, that sacred band of Time with Eternity: If we consider the
frame and composure of all these things in themselves, or their usefulness and
subserviency unto us, we shall be so far from branding them with Vanity, that
unless our contemplations lead us from natural things to the great God who
formed them, we might rather fear lest their beauty and excellency should
inviegle us, as it did the Heathen, to look no farther for a Deity, but Worship
them as Gods.

Secondly, There is nothing vain in respect of God the Creator. He makes his
ends out of all: for they all glorify him according to their several ranks and
orders; and to rational and considerate men, are most evident Demonstrations,
of his infinite Being, Wisdom, (...). Plut. de placitis philos. c. 6.
and Power. In which sense the Apostle tells us, Romans 1.20. The invisible
things of God are clearly seen, being understood by the things which are made,
even his Eternal Power and Godhead. God has composed two Books, by the
diligent study of which we may attain to the knowledge of Himself; the Book of
the Creatures, and the Book of the Scriptures. The Book of the Creatures is
written in those great letters of Heaven and Earth, the Air and Sea, and by
these we may spell out somewhat of God. He made them for our instruction, as
well as for our service; the least and vilest of them read us lectures of his
glorious Attributes; nor is it any absurdity, to say, that as they are all the
Works of his Mouth, so they are all the Words of his Hand. Indeed this knowledge
that the creatures give us of the Creator, cannot suffice to make us happy,
though it may be sufficient to make us Romans 1.20, 21.
inexcusable. We could never have collected from them those mysterious
discoveries of God, which the Scriptures exhibit, and which are so necessary to
our eternal bliss. For what signature is there stamp't upon any of the
Creatures of a Trinity in Unity; of the eternal Generation, or temporal
Incarnation of the Son of God? What Creature could have informed us of our
first fall, and guilt contracted by it? Or where can we find the Copy of the
Covenant of Works, or of Grace printed upon any of the Creatures? All the great
sages of the world, though they were Natures Secretaries, and ransackt its
abstrusest secrets, yet all their learning and knowledge could never discover
that sacred mystery of a crucified Savior. These are truths which Nature and
Reason are so far from finding out that they can scare 1 Cor. 1.14.
receive them when discovered. And therefore God has manifested them to us by
the Light and Revelation of the Holy Scriptures. But yet so much of God as
belongs to those two great Titles of Creator and Governor of the World, our
reason may collect from created and visible things, running up their
consequences, till they are all resolved into the first cause, and Origin of
all.

Thirdly, Therefore, All the Vanity that is in worldly things is only in
respect of the sin and folly of man. For those things are said to be Vain,
which neither do, nor can, perform what we expect from them. Our great
expectation is Happiness, and our great folly is that we think to obtain it by
the enjoyments of this world. This makes men pursue pleasures, hoard up riches,
court honors and preferments, because they look with an overweening conceit on
these things, as such as can make them truly happy. Whereas to seek for
happiness among these worldly things, is but to seek the living among the dead;
yea, it is but to search for happiness among those things which are the very
root and occasion of all our misery. (...) Epic. apud Laert. in vita Epicuri.
They are all of them leaky and broken Cisterns and cannot hold this living
water. This is it which makes them charged with Vanity, because in our
perverted fancy, we look upon them as stable, permanent, and satisfactory, fix
them as our journeys end, which ought only to be used by us in our passage,
and expect much more from them than they can yield: And so indeed the Vanity is
not so much theirs as ours.

There are some things (as Aug. doct. Christ. l. 1. c. 3
S. Austin and the Lomb. l. 1. d. 1 Aquia. 1 12. q 11. 16 Du^and. l. 1 d 1 q 4
^rim. d. 1. 4 3. ^rt 2. Altiss. l 3 tract. 10
Schools from him do well distinguish) which must be only enjoyed, other
things what must be only used. To Frui est amore alicui rei inhaetere propter
scipsam. Aug. doct. Christ. l. 1. c. 4.
enjoy, is to cleave to an object by love for its own sake: And this belongs
only to God. What we Uti autem, quod in usum venerit ad id quod ^m^s,
obti^eadum refer. Id. ibid.
use, we refer to the obtaining of what we desire to enjoy: And this belongs to
the Creatures. So that we ought to Utendum est hoc mu^do, non fru^adum, ut
invisibilia Dei per ea quae sact^ sunt, intellg^n^ue, hoc est ut de temporal
h^^ae (...) capi^^tur, A^g, b l.
use the creatures, that we may arrive at the Creator: We may serve our selves
of them, but we must alone enjoy him.

Now that which makes the whole world become Vanity, is when we break this
order of use and fruition; when we set up any particular created good as our
end and happiness, which ought only to be used as a means to attain it. All
things in the world are in themselves good, but when we propound them as the
greatest and highest good that we expect satisfaction from, this turns them all
into Vanity, and so every thing besides God, becomes nothing.

And thus we have a brief account whence proceeds this Vanity of the World, not
from the nature of things, but from those vain hopes and expectations we build
upon them for that happiness which they cannot afford.

It remains therefore to display before you this Vanity of the World, in some
more remarkable particulars: Whereof I have collected these following.

First, The Vanity of the World appears in this, that all its glory and
splendour depends merely upon opinion and fancy. It is not so much what things
are, as what we account them, that makes them good or evil: And what can be
vainer than that which borrows its worth from so vain and fickle a thing as our
estimation? And therefore we find the things of the world rated diversely,
Quantum apud nos indicis marg^ritis pretium est, tantum apud Indos in curalia.
Namque ista persuasione gentium constant. Plia. lib. 32. de Genesis Benzoai del
mundo nuovo, lib. 1.
according to the esteem that men have of them. What were Gold and Silver, had
not men's fancy stamped upon them an excellency far beyond their natural
usefulness? This great Idol of the world, was of no value among those barbarous
Nations, where abundance made it vile. They preferred Glass and Beads before
it, and made that their treasure, which we make our scorn. They despise our
riches, and we theirs; and true reason will tell us that both the one and the
other are in themselves alike despicable, and it is only fancy that puts such
an immodest and extravagant price upon them, far above their natural worth.
Should the whole world conspire together to depose Gold and Silver from that
sovereignty they have usurped over us, they might for ever lie hid in the
bowels of the Earth, ere their true usefulness would entice any to the pains
and hazard of digging them out into the light. Indeed the whole use of what we
so much dote upon is merely fantastical, and to make our selves needy, we have
invented an artificial kind of riches, which are no more necessary to the
service of sober Nature, than Jewels and Bracelets were to that Plane-tree,
which Aelian. l. 2. c. 14.
Xerxes so ridiculous adorned. And although we eagerly pursue these things, and
count our selves poor and indigent without them; yet possibly right reason will
dictate, that they are no more needful to us, than to bruit or senseless
Creatures; and that it would be altogether as ridiculous for a man to be decked
with them, as for a Beast or Plant, were it but as uncommon. These precious
trifles when they are hung about us, make no more either to the warmth or
defense of the Body, than if they were hung upon a tree they could make its
leaves more verdant, or its shade more refreshing. (...) L^cian. Cynicus.
Does any man lie the softer, because his bed posts are gilt? Does his Meat and
Drink relish the better, because served up in Gold? Is his House more
convenient, because better carved or painted? Or are his Clothes more fit,
because more fashionable than another? And if they are not necessary to these
natural uses, all that is left them is but fancy and opinion. Indeed mankind
cozen themselves by compact, and by setting a value upon things that are rare,
have made many think themselves poor, whereas God and Nature made all equally
wealthy, had they not artificially impoverisht themselves. It is nothing but
conceit that makes the difference between the richest and the meanest, if both
enjoy necessaries. For what are all their superfluous riches, but a load that
men's covetousness lays upon them? They are but like -- Ut si Reticul^m panis,
vertales inter, e^usto Forte vehas humero, nihilo plus accipias quam. Qui nil
po^tari^. Hor. sat. 1.
Roman slaves that were wont to carry heavy burdens of bread upon their backs,
whereof others eat as large a share as they. Whatsoever is more than barely to
satisfy the cravings of Nature, is of no other use but only to Eccles. 5.11.
look upon. Thy Lands, thy Houses, and fair Estate are but Pictures of things.
The poorest that sees them enjoys as much of them as thy self: Yea, and if men
could be contented with reason, all that they behold with their eyes, is as
much theirs as it is the owners.

And indeed if we strip all these admired nothings to their naked principles,
we shall find them as base and sordid as the meanest of those things which we
spurn and despise; only Art or Nature put new shapes upon them, and fancy a
price upon those shapes. (...) M. Anto. de s^iosa l. 6. S. 10. Edit. Cas.
(...). Id. l. 9. S. 30. 6.
What are Gold and Silver, but divercyfied Earth, hard and shining Clay? The
very place where they are bred, the entrails of the Earth, upbraids us for
accounting them precious. The best and richest perfumes, what are they but the
clammy sweat of Trees, or the mucous froth of Beasts? The softer Silks are but
the Excrement of a vile Worm. The most racy and generous Wines, are nothing
else but puddle water strained through a Vine. Our choicest delicates are but
dirt, cookt and served up to us in various forms. The very same things which we
contemn under one shape, we admire in another; and with this, Fancy and
Custom have conspired together to cheat us.

Think, O worldling! when thou castest thy greedy eyes upon thy riches, think,
here are bags that only fancy has filled with treasure, which else were filled
with dirt. Here are trifles, that only fancy has called Jewels, which else
were no better than common peebles. And shall I lay the foundation of my
content and happiness upon a fancy, a thing more light and wavering than the
very Air?

Nay, consider, That a distempered fancy can easily alter a man's condition,
and put what shape it pleases upon it. If a black and sullen Melancholy
ceiseth the spirits, it will make him complain of poverty in the midst of his
abundance of pain and sickness, in the midst of his health and strength. It Is
true, these are but the effects of a distorted fancy; but though his sickness
and poverty be not real, yet the torment of them is. It is all one, as to our
disquiet whether we be indeed unhappy, or only (...). Epictet. Enchir. c. 10.
and dissert. l. 3. c. 19.
imagine our selves so.

Again, If the fancy be more merrily perverted, straight they are nothing less
than Kings, or Emperors, in their own conceit. A straw is as majestic as a
Scepter, they will speak of their Rags as magnificently, as if they were Robes:
And look upon all that come near them as their subjects or servants. They make
every stone a Jem, every cottage a Palace; all they see is their own, and all
their own is most excellent. Now what think you, are these things vain, or no?
I doubt not but you will conclude them most extremly vain; and yet they serve
their turns as well, and bring them in as much solace and contentment, as if
they were really what they imagined them. Thus Aelian. l. 4. c. 25
Thrasyllus noted down all the Ships that arrived at the Port of Athens,
thinking them and their Merchandise to be all his own. And when cured of that
pleasant madness, (...). Ia. ibid.
confessed, that he never in his whole life enjoyed so much content, as in that
conceited wealth those Ships brought him. And indeed for my part, I know not
whether these things are more vain in the fancy, or in the reality. Such is
the exceeding Vanity of all things in the World, that were it not for the
Eternal concernments of the Soul, which cannot be so well regarded under a
suspention or distraction of Reason, I should make no difficulty to account and
prove them the happiest men on Earth.

If then there be so great a power in fancy, how vain must all those things be
which you pursue with eagerness and impatience, since a vain fancy without
them, can give you as much satisfaction,; as if you enjoyed them all: And a
vain fancy can, on the other hand, in the greatest abundance of them, make
your lives as wearisome and vexatious, as if you enjoyed nothing. That is the
first Demonstration.

Secondly, The Vanity of the World appears in its deceitfulness and treachery.
It is not only Vanity, but a lying Vanity, and betrays both our hopes, and our
souls.

Requiem to our selves, and are ready to say, Our Mountain is so strong, Psalm.
30.6, 7.
that it shall never be moved: But within a while God has shaken it like that
of Sinai, and wrapped it about with clouds and thick darkness.

in strong, though secret and insensible snares, and insinuates into the heart
that love of it self, which is inconsistent with the love of God. The world is
the Devils factor, and drives on the designs of Hell. The Apostle has told us,
1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. And
because of the subserviency of worldly enjoyments to men's lusts, it is almost
as impossible a thing to moderate our affections toward them, or to bound our
appetites and desires, as it is to assuage the thirst of a Dropsy by drinking,
or to keep that sire from increasing into which we are still casting new fuel.
And therefore our Savior has pronounced it as Luke 18.25.
Hard for a rich man to enter into Heaven, as for a Camel to go through the eye
of a needle.

As Judas gave a sign to the Officers that came with him to apprehend Jesus,
Mat 26.48.
Whomsoever I shall kiss, the same is he, hold him fast: The same sign does the
World give the Devil. Whomsoever I shall caress and favor, whomsoever I shall
heap honor and riches on, whomsoever I shall embrace and kiss, the same is he,
hold him fast. Such a darling of the World, is usually fast bound in the silken
bands of Voluptuousness, and consigned over to be fast bound in chains of massy
darkness.

As all things in the world are lying Vanities, so are they all vexatious. They
are infamous to a Proverb, Uncertain comforts, but most certain crosses. And
therefore the wise man concludes them all to be not only Vanity, but Vexation
of spirit.

There is a fourfold Vexatiousness in all worldly things.

Adams brows has streamed down along upon ours, and the curse together with
it, Genesis 3.19.
that in sorrow we should eat of that which Toil and Labor has provided for
us. Men rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the Bread of carefulness, and
such is either their curse, or their folly, that they make their lives
uncomfortable, only to get the comforts of life.

Ex bis tristitia sequitur, si aut non successit, aut successus pudet Sen^c. de
tranquil. c. 11.
If they cannot compass their designs, then they are tormented, because they
fall short of what they labored for; if they do compass them, yet still they
are tormented, because what they labored for, falls short of what they
expected from it. The truth is, the World is much better in show than
substance: And those very things we admire before we enjoy them, yet afterward,
we find much less in them than we expected. As he that sees a falling Star
shoot through the Air, and draw after it a long train of light, runs to the
place, and thinking to get some bright and glittering thing, catches up nothing
but a filthy jelly; such is the disappointment we find in our pursuit after the
enjoyments of this world: They make a glorious show at a distance, but when we
come near them, we find our hopes deluded, and nothing upon the place but a
vile slime.

of enjoying it is wholly swallowed up. (...). Plut. de Tranquil.
For strong affections begeting strong fears, do always lessen the delight of
present enjoyments. This is the unhappiness of all things in the world, that if
we set any price and value upon them, we lose much of the sweetness of them, by
fearing to lose them.

Fourthly, They are all vexatious, as in their enjoyment, so especially in
their loss. Whatever we set our hearts upon, we may assure our selves, and
experience will teach it us, that the pleasure of possessing it, will not near
countervail the bitterness of losing it. And as if God had on purpose so
ordained it, to take off our hearts from the world, the better we esteem any
thing, the more Vanity and Vexation shall we find in it; for the more will our
care and perplexity in keeping it, and the more our grief and torment in losing
it be increased. That Is a third Demonstration.

Fourthly, The Vanity of the world appears in this, that a little cross will
embitter great comforts. One dead Fly is enough to corrupt a whole Box of the
worlds most fragrant Ointment. How much will only the aching of a tooth, a fit
of the Stone or Gout deaden and dishearten us, to all the joys and pleasures of
Life? Certainly, the world must needs be vain, that cannot bear out the brunt
of a little pain or sickness. The least cross accident is enough to discompose
all our delights. And indeed there are so many ingredients required to make up
worldly Felicity, (...), E. l. 1 c. 8. and l ^0. c. ^.
Riches, Health, Friends, Honor, good Name, and the like, that if any of these
be wanting, the whole composition is spoiled; and we shall take advantage
against our selves to conclude we are miserable. For such is the peevishness of
our nature, that if we have not all we would, we take no content in any thing
we have. And besides, we are apt (...) P^^ ^rch. de tr^^^.
to slide off from the smoother part of our lives, as Flies from glass, and to
stick only on the rougher passages: For neither is Sense capable to be so much
or so long affected with the impressions of pleasure, as of pain (since never
could there yet be any delights invented as piercing, as there are many
torments) nor yet is our busy remembrance so officious in calling back the
pleasant passages of our days to our review, as those that have been more
gloomy and dolorous. And though it be our sin to lock more upon the Crosses we
find, than the Comforts we enjoy, yet here we may likewise see how vain a thing
it is for us to expect happiness and contentment from the world, whose Crosses
as they are more, so are they more considerable than its Comforts.

pleasures, to recruit nature, and sharpen their sensual desires, without which
they would but cloy and surfeit, and instead of pleasures, prove only a wast
and oppression to the spirits. Certos ha^^b^^ates ipse magister voluptatis
Epicurus, quibus malign f^mem extingueret. Sen. Ep. 18 Ep. ad Menoeceum apud
Diog. Lacit in vita (...). (...).
Epicurus himself, the great Master and Servant of pleasure, who made it the
highest good and chiefest happiness of man, set himself certain days of
abstinence in course, wherein he would but niggardly satisfy his stomach; well
knowing that the pleasure of gluttony, could never be so much chanced as by an
intervall of hunger.

For what is a furnished Table to him whose constant meals overtake one another,
but only the heaping of food upon crudities and indigestion? What are titles
of Honor to a person born noble? They signify no more to him, than it does to
another man, when he hears himself called by his ordinary name. What is respect
and honor to a man long accustomed to it? It brings him no great content when
he has it, but torments him when he fails of it. Give these things to those
that are unacquainted with them, if you would have them valued. Bring a poor
man to a table of Delicates; invest an ignoble person with Honors and
Dignities; give respect to a despised person, and for the present you bless
them. But time and custom will wear off this content: And the -- Sunt
talisiqunque ^aelia vitae Magna. Voluptates comm^ndat rarior usus. Juv. Sa^. 11.
tediousness even of such a life as this will make them willing at least for
their divertisement and recreation, to Non existim^s me ducere te ad modices
canas and paup^ram cell^s, and quicquid aliud est per quod laxuriae, divitiarum
taedio ludi^. S^n. Ep. 1^.
retire to their homely Cells and Station. For as it is with those that are
accustomed to strong perfumes, they themselves cannot scent those odours, which
to others that use them not, are most sweet and fragrant: So it fares with us
in the long continuance of worldly enjoyments; our senses are so stufft and
even suffocated with them, that we cannot perceive them; and unless we purchase
pleasures by alternate sorrow, they are but lost upon us. Now how vain must the
world needs be, whose comforts are not valuable while we have them, but while
we have them not? And how vain are those joys, for which we must pay down as
much grief, as the joys themselves are worth? So that upon ballancing the
account there remains nothing to us: And it had been altogether as good to have
enjoyed nothing.

(...) A^^^ ^ l 2. S. 12.
round of Actions, and what can be duller than still to be doing the same
things over and over again? Ask the most frollick Gallant, whose only study it
is how he may pass his time merrily, and live happily: What account can he give
of his pleasures, but that from his Bed, he rises to his Table, from his Table
to his Sports, from them he tumbles into his Bed again? This is the most
gentile and fashionable life. And are these the great joys that a world so
prized and so admired can afford? One half of his pleasant life he spends in
sleep, a dull state, which we may rather reckon to death, than life. The other
half he spends in clogging his appetite, and tiring his body, and then to sleep
again. What generous and noble designs are these! Fit for high spirits and
high births, while the contemptible Peasants are left to do the drudgery of the
world, and to be the only serviceable men in it. Nay rather what a pitiful
Circle is this, still to be doing the same things, and things which we have
before searched and often found all that is in them. So that even a Heathen
Cogita quamdiu eadem facias. Cibus, somaus, libido. Mori velle, non tantum
prudens and sortis aut miser, sed etiam fastidiosus potest. Sen. Ep. 77.
could say, that not only a valiant, or a miserable man might desire to die,
but a nice and delicate man, as disdaining the irksome repetition of the same
things.

Seventhly, The Vanity of the World appears in this, that it can stand us in no
stead, then when we have the greatest need of support and comfort. There be two
seasons especially, in which the soul wants relief and comfort, and they are in
trouble of Conscience, and at the hour of death. Now in each of these the world
shows it self to be exceeding vain and useless.

stands in need of, those who have felt the sting and terrors of it, can best
tell. The torments they then feel, next to those of the damned, are the most
intolerable, and the most unutterable. God sets them up as his mark, and shoots
his Arrows dipped in flaming poison into the very midst of their souls. He
kindles a secret fire in them, that consumes their bones, dries up their
marrow, and scorches their entrals, and such is the spreading rage of it, that
oftentimes it smoaks out at their mouths in despairing outcrys.

The spirit of a man, (says Solomon, Prove. 18.14.) will bear his infirmity; i.
e. The natural cheerfulness and vivacity of a man's spirit, will enable him to
bear up under bodily pains; but a wounded spirit who can bear? When our Prop it
self is broken we must needs sink, and fall under the most gloomy apprehensions
that Guilt and Hell can create in a soul already singed with those Eternal
flames into which with unspeakable horror it daily expects to be plunged. Oh!
think what exact torture thou must needs endure, when God shall make deep
wounds in thy spirit, and let fall great drops of his burning wrath, on that
part of thy soul that is infinitely more tender and sensible than the apple of
thine eye. Imagine what sharp and intolerable pains those Martyrs sustained,
who (as the Apostle tells us Heb. 11.37. were sawn asunder. Or suppose that
thou thy self were now under the tagged teeth of a Saw, drawn to and fro upon
the tendrest parts of thy body, tearing thy flesh, thy nerves, and sinews;
grating and jarring upon thy very bones: Yet all the extremity of this, is
nothing to what torments the Conscience feels, when God causes his Sword to
enter into it, to rive it up; when he makes deep and bloody wounds in it, and
instead of pouring in healing balm, with an heavy hand chafes them with fire
and brimstone.

Now in such a time of anguish and distress as this, what is there that can
relieve the afflicted soul? The worldling that heaps up his ill-gotten
treasures, and wallows in thick clay, when God comes to ransack his conscience,
and to set before him the guilt of his sins, will then know with terror and
amazement, that there is a Justice which Gold and Silver cannot bribe. The
voluptuous person will no longer relish any savouriness in his carnal delights,
when once God Job. 13.26.
writes bitter things against him. What is mirth and music to him that can now
hear nothing but the screiches of his own conscience? What is a full cup to
him, that can now taste nothing but the cup of fury and trembling? Little
content will the Noble take in his honorable Titles, if all this while his
Conscience call him Reprobate. A Title of Honor will no more abate the
torments of Conscience, than it does mitigate Belzebubs torments to be styled
Prince of the Devils. All the worlds honey, will not serve to allay the
invenomed stingings of Conscience. That Is a fiery Serpent, a deaf Adder, that
will not be charmed by all the alluring pleasures of the world. These are vain
and impertinent to one whose thoughts are wholly possessed with the fear of Wrath
and Hell, from which these cannot deliver him. When God makes a wound in the
spirit, the whole world cannot make a Plaster broad enough to cover it.

of us may never conflict with the terrors of Conscience, nor have that
conviction of the worlds Vanity: But yet we must all conflict with death, that
King of terrors. Suppose therefore (what must certainly once be) that we were
now gasping our last, our tongues faltering, our eyestrings breaking, our limbs
quivering, a dead cold and stiffness invading us; were our souls tossed to and
fro upon our expiring breath, and like wrecks at Sea, sometimes cast up, and by
and by sucked back again, what could stand us in stead, and make our passage
happy at such a time as this? Now the soul requires the strongest, the richest
Cordials. Prepare it one mingled of the best Ingredients the whole world can
afford. Cast into the Cup Riches, Honor, Pleasure, the Quintessence of all
that is here desirable, yet alas! What is all this world to a dying man who is
just leaving it?

Thy wicked companions, with whom thou have laughed and fined away thy freshest
years, will in this thy last extremity forsake thee; or if they do attend so
sad a spectacle, alas, What miserable comforters will they be? They will then
prove another bad conscience to thee, and bring to thy remembrance with horror
the sins which thou have committed by their enticement, or they by thine. Thy
mirth and jollity, will then be turned into groans and howlings: All things
will stare ruthfully upon thee, and when thou call upon them for help, Non
domus and fundus, non ae^is acervus and turi, Aegroto domini deduxit corpore
febris, Non animo curas. Hocat. Ep. 2.
confess their impotency to rescue thee from the gripe of death, and from the
doom of Justice.

Sickness is usually a busy time with conscience, and when it is packing up
for a remove into the other world, it will be sure to gather together all the
sins of a man's life, and bind them as an heavy and insupportable burden upon
his soul. Can thy sensual pleasures divert thee now? As they have served thee
to pass away the tediousness of time, can they serve to pass away the infinite
tediousness of Eternity? Nay, how can it otherwise be, but that a mind long
soak't and softened by these, should be made the more capable of receiving deep
impressions of grief, anguish, and despair?

Indeed, while we eagerly pursue any of these worldly enjoyments, we are but
running after a shadow: And as shadows vanish, and are swallowed up in the
greater shade of night, so when the night of Death shall cast its thick shade
about us, and wrap us up in deep and substantial darkness, all these vain
shadows will then disappear, and vanish quite out of sight.

Now could we have the same opinion of the world in the time of our health and
prosperity, as we shall certainly have when we lie languishing and drawing on
to Eternity, we should be able then with a generous scorn to live above it, and
despise it. Shall we prize those comforts, which will be none to us, when we
have the greatest need of comfort? Shall we glue our affections to that which
either is so faithless that it will not, or so weak that it cannot help us? So
vain a thing is it, that it cannot resist the disgrace that sleep, or only
winking does it. Shut but your eyes, and what becomes of all the pomp and
luster, the beauty and splendor that we so much admire in the world? It all
vanishes into darkness and nothing. Sleep snatcheth us from it; and for the
time, we have no more enjoyment of it, than if we were dead. Every night we die
in our beds, and yet every day are so immerst in the pleasures, and businesses
of the world, as if we were never to die indeed. Since therefore we have higher
and nobler objects to fix our affections on, let us not lavish them out upon
these worldly Vanities, which can at no time prove real comforts unto us, and
then least of all, when we have most need of comfort. That Is a seventh
Demonstration.

are supplied. Have we not all of us precious and immortal souls, capable and
desirous of happiness? Do not these crave to be satisfied? Do they not deserve
to be heard? Shall our vile bodies which are but dust and worms-meat, engross
all our care how to please and pamper them, and shall the necessities of our
never dying souls be neglected? What have you laid up in store for these? Alas!
That which most men busy themselves about, is to heap up temporal riches, To
join house to house, Isa. 5.8.
and land to land, that they might dwell alone upon the Earth. But know, thou
do but give thy soul husks and swinesmeat, when thou fettest the whole world
before it.

And therefore our Savior justly brands the rich man in the Gospel for a fool,
that when he had stuffed up his barns with Corn, said to his soul, Luke 12.19.
Soul thou have much Goods laid up for many years. A fool indeed to measure the
souls goods by the Barn, or by the Bushel. The very same is the folly of most
men, who think they are in all respects well provided for, if they can but
scrape together a great estate, whereas the soul can no more live upon these
things, than the body can upon a thought or notion.

There is a threefold unsuitableness, between worldly things and the soul.

Of all things belonging to a man his breath is the most subtle, invisible,
and spiritual. But now the soul is called the Genesis 2.7.
Breath of God, and therefore must needs be spiritual in a high degree. And
what then has a spiritual soul to do with clods of Earth, or acres of Land;
with Barns full of Corn, or Bags full of Gold? These are too thick and gross to
correspond with its refined nature. But rather, bring spiritual things to
Spiritual. God who is the Heb. 12.9.
Father of Spirits, his love and favor, an interest in him, and communion with
him, the consolations of the Holy Ghost, the actings of Grace, and the hopes of
Glory; these spiritual and clarified Essences, which a carnal eye cannot see,
nor a carnal judgment value, these are most suitable to the soul, that is a
Spirit, and ought not to be unequaly yoak't to the dregs and dross of earthly
enjoyments:

Requiem, to say, Soul, take thy ease, thou have Goods laid up for many years.
Thou fool! What is an estate for many years, to a soul whose duration is not
measured by years, but by Eternity? What when those years of plenty are
expired? How destitute will thy soul be when it shall have out lived all its
good things? It may outlive them, even in this world. God may nip and blast
all that thou set thy heart on, and make all thy comforts fall off from
thee, like so many withered leaves. However, if thou have no other than what
this miserable world can afford, thou shall certainly outlive them in the
world to come: And what will thou do, not in those years, but in that Eternity
of Famine?

As it is with those that are invited to feast in some noble Family, the
Furniture is rich, the Entertainment splendid and magnificent; but when they
depart, they cannot of all that pomp and bravery carry any thing away with
them: So is it here; the world is Gods great House, richly furnished, and we
well entertained in it; we have all things liberally afforded us for our use;
but nothing of all is ours. And therefore God has set that grim Porter, Death,
at his Gate to see that as we brought nothing into it, so we carry nothing out
of it. What a sad parting hour will it be to the soul, when it must go into
another world, and leave all that it admired, and loved, behind in this? How
will it protract, and linger? How loath will it be to enter upon so great a
journey, and carry nothing to defray the charges of it? Certainly, dying must
needs be a terrible thing to those who have gotten nothing but what they can no
longer keep, when their souls must be set on shore in a vast and black Eternity
all naked and destitute, having nothing to relieve or support them.

mercy of God. It wants Sanctification and Holiness, Comfort, and Assurance,
nothing can effect these but the Holy Ghost. Here all worldly things fall
short. The Exigencies of the outward man they may supply; but the greatest
abundance of them can never quiet a troubled Conscience, nor appease an angry
God, nor remove the condemning guilt of the least sin: No, Psalm. 49.8.
The redemption of the soul is precious (more precious than to be purchased by
these poor things) and it cease for ever.

Possibly now in the time of your peace and prosperity, you regard not these
spiritual wants; but when the days of sorrow and darkness shall come upon you,
when God shall drop into your Consciences a little of his wrath and
displeasure, you may as well seek to cure a wound in your body by applying a
plaster to your garment, as seek to ease a wounded Spirit by all the
Treasures, Pleasures, and Enjoyments of this world. Prove. 11.4.
Riches (says the wise man) profit not in the day of wrath: For indeed they
cannot reach the soul to bring any true solace to it.

Thus you see how unsuitable the World is to the Soul. Unsuitable to the Nature
of it, for the Soul is spiritual, but all earthly enjoyments, are drossie and
material; the soul is immortal, but these are all perishing: Unsuitable also to
the necessities of the soul, which they can never reach nor supply.

wheels (to which they are compared Ezekiel. 1.) the same part is now uppermost,
and anon lowermost; now lifted up in the Air, and by and by grated through the
mire. This is the mutable condition of the world. And therefore we find it
compared to the Moon, Rev. 12.1. where the Church is described to be Clothed
with the Sun, and to have the Moon, that is, the World, under her sent. And
well may it bear the resemblance, for it is still waxing and waning, sometimes
full of brightness, at other times scarce a small streak of light to be
discerned. There are none of us but have had experience in some kind or other,
of the inconstancy of these sublunary enjoyments. When the Sun shines bright
and warm, all the flowers of the Field open and display their leaves, to
receive him into their bosoms; but when night comes, they fold together, and
shut up all their glories: And though they were like so many little Suns
shining here below, able, one would think, to force a day for themselves, yet
when the Sun withdraws his Beams, they droop, and hang the head, and stand
neglected, dull and obscure things. So has it fared with us: While God has
shone upon us with warm and cherishing influences, we opened and spread, and
flourisht into a great pomp and glory: But he only hides his Face, draws in
his Beams, and all our beautiful leaves shut up, or fall to the ground, and
leave us a bare stalk, poor and contemptible.

Or if there have been no such considerable mutations in what concerns us, yet
the revolutions that God has of late years brought upon others, so beyond
expectation or example, may well instruct us in the Vanity of the World, and
make us no less contemn it, than admire that infinite wisdom that governs it.

It is said of the Wheels, Ezekiel. 1.17. That they went upon their four sides.
For one Wheel intersecting and crossing another, the whole must needs consist
of four sides or Semi-circles: And moving upon these four sides, it must of
necessity move very ruggedly, by jolts and jerks. So truly the Providence of
God do sometimes move unevenly, as cross wheels would do moving upon their
sides. Great and sudden changes are often brought to pass without being
ripened by sensible degrees; but happen by the surprisal of some unexpected
Providence, and as it were, by the sudden jerk of the wheel, shaking off those
who sat on the top, and crushing them in its passage over.

It Is true these mutations which to us seem so confused and tumultuary, are all
orderly and harmonious in the Divine Council and foreknowledg. There is not a
Providence that breaks its rank, not a wheel that moves out of its tract, and
there is a destined end for them all, the glory of the Almighty Creator; to
which, while every Creature pursues its own inclinations, he sweetly, and yet
efficaciously sways them. They are all like Arrows shot at a mark by an
unerring hand: Some are shot point-blanck, and some by compass, but none so
carelessly as to miss it. Though changes may surprise us, yet they do not
surprise God: But as it is a great pleasure to us, to see our designs and
forecasts accomplished; so infinite Wisdom delights it self to look on, and see
how all things start up into their place and order, as soon as called forth by
his efficacious decree and foreknowledg. Among all the weighty and arduous
cares of governing the world, it is (if I may so express it) the recreation of
Providence, to amuse mankind, with some wonderful events; that when we cannot
find out the connection and dependence of second causes, we may humbly acquiesce
in adoring the absolute Sovereignty of the First: And by observing the
mutations of Affairs here below, may be taught to repose our selves in him who
only is immutable. Thus God administers the various accurrences of the world
according to the council of his own will; and makes the inconstancy of it,
serve both for his delight and our admonition.

It is in vain therefore to expect happiness from what is so uncertain. All the
comforts of it are but like fading flowers, that while we are looking on them,
and smelling to them, die, and wither in our hands. Is it pleasures we seek?
These must vary: For where there is not an intermission, it is not pleasure,
but a glut and surfeit. And hence it is that they who are used to hardships,
taste more sweetness in some ordinary pleasures, than those who are accustomed
to a voluptuous life, do in all their exquisite and invented delights. Do you
pursue Honor and Applause in the world? This hangs upon the wavering tongues
of the Multitude: To follow this is but to pursue a puff of wind, and of all
winds in nature the most fickle and changeable. The Peoples Hosanna, and
Crucify are often pronounced in the same breath. And besides that it is (...).
Ant. l. S. Sect. 44.
no great matter that those should think or speak well of thee, who have but
too much reason to think ill of themselves; besides this, consider how soon
public Fame grows out of breath. Possibly an Age or two may talk of thee, but
this bruit is but like successive Echo's, that render the voice still weaker
and weaker, till at length it vanishes into silence. Yea, could thou fill
whole Chronicles with thy story, yet time or moths will eat thee out: And the
(...). Id. l. 7. S. 23.
fresher remembrance of other men's actions will bury thine in Oblivion. Is it
riches you desire? These too are uncertain, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that they
trust not in uncertain riches. Uncertain they are in getting, and uncertain in
keeping when got. All our treasures are like quicksilver, which strangely
slips between our fingers when we think we hold it fastest. Riches, ( Prove.
23.5.
says the Wise man) make themselves Wings, and fly away as an Eagle toward
Heaven; and it were a most strange folly (...). Id. lib. 6. Sect. 11. The same
with that of Solomon, Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not, etc.
to fall passionately in love with a Bird upon his wing, who is free and
unconfined as the Air in which he flies, and will not stoop to thy call or
lure. Believe it Miser, all thy angels are winged, and if thou do not, yet
some or other of thy heirs will set them flying. How much better were it, since
they will fly, for thy self to direct their flight toward Heaven, by
relieving the necessitous servants and members of Jesus Christ. Then will their
flight be happy and glorious, when they carry on their wings the prayers and
blessings of the poor whose bowels thou have refreshed. This is to lay up
Treasure in Heaven, to remit thy Monys to the other World, where they shall be
truly paid thee, with abundant Interest. This is to lay up a stock for
hereafter, that thou may have whereon to live splendidly and gloriously to
all Eternity. And thus to lay out, is to lay up, to lay up uncertain riches in
a safe repository: Gods promises shall be thy security, and every Star in
Heaven, a Seal set upon the Treasury door which none can break or violate.

Thus you see how mutable and inconstant all worldly things are. So that we may
truly apply that which the Psalmist speaks of the Earth in another sense, That
Psalm. 24.2.
God has founded it upon the Sea, and established it upon the Floods. Such is
the waving, and fluctuation of all things here below, that they are no more
constant, than if they were merely built upon the ebbing and flowing of the
Tide.

Psalm. 73.30. As a dream when one awakes, so O Lord, thou shall despise their
image. The Images and Representations that a dream makes, seem very brisk and
lively; but when we reflect upon them with our waking thoughts, we find them
confused and impertinent. Such is all the prosperity of this world, it is but
as the image and fiction of a dream.

Isa. 29.8.
As an hungry man that dreams, he is at a furnished Table, and fills himself
with all varieties of Delicates, how joyful, and how pleased is he, how fully
satisfied, if he were not to wake again! But some one jogs or calls him; he
wakes, and finds himself hunger-starved, nothing fed but his fancy. So is it
with us in this world. While the Soul lies under the coverlet of this body, it
sleeps: And one thinks himself rich; another, great and noble; a third learned
and wise: But alas! All this is only a dream: When either Afflictions, or
Death, make a noise, and call upon him, the sleepy soul awakes, and finds it
self empty and hunger-starved, after all the imaginary store it enjoyed.

Now, the Unsatisfactoriness of the World, may be clearly evinced by these two
things.

stand the fairer mark for trouble. And yet we are like Children, that think
the Sky lies on yonder Hill; thither they run, hoping to touch it there: When
they come, they find it dislodged to another Hill; after it they run, and
pursue it from hill to hill, and after all their pains and sweat, find
themselves as far below it as at first: So it fares with us. We think
happiness, and true content lies in some condition above us. Thither we hasten,
hoping we shall reach it there. When we arrive thither, we find, the happiness
we sought for is dislodged, and seems to us to rest in a condition above that:
But when we attain this too, still we are as far below happiness and
satisfaction, as we were in our lowest estate.

When we change our outward condition, be it to never so great advantage, we do
not lose, but only change our cares. If we are freed from the cares and
crosses of a poor and private life; we fall into those of a pompous and envied
greatness, which are both more numerous, and more oppressive. Angustanda sunt
patrimonia, ut mi^us ad injurias fortunae simus expositi. Habiliora sunt
corpora in bello, quae in arm^ sua contrahi possunt, quam quae supe^funduntur,
and undique magnitudo sua vula^ribus objecit. Sen. de t^^^que c. 8. Cogendae
i^dictum res sunt, ut telum in vanum ^adant. Id. c. 9.
The man that lies most compacted, and in least compass in the world, is like
to escape best: Whereas the great ones, that take up much room, do only show in
how many places, and concernments, they are liable to be wounded. It is not
therefore any thing in this world that can give you satisfaction. All the
enjoyments of it are to the soul, as wind to the stomach, they may gripe it,
but they can never satisfy it. Indeed so vain are they, that they scarce have
any other proof of their reality, but the pain and torment they bring with them.

Secondly, The world appears to be unsatisfactory, in that be our condition
what it will, yet still we desire change. We can no more rest in an high
estate, than in a low; but still we desire something further, and something
better. (...); Plut. de ^runquil. A^^^.
As sick men toss to and fro, from side to side, thinking to find ease, by
changing their posture; whereas it is not their outward posture, but their
inward distemper, that is the cause of their restlesseness: So do we endeavor
to change and shift conditions in the world, and ly sometimes in one posture,
and sometimes in another, but yet are restless in all; for wheresoere we
tumble, we carry our disease with us, false opinions and foolish hopes, and
impotent desires, and fond designs, which make us complain of our present
state, and wish the amendment of that, when nothing wants cure but our selves.

(...). etc. Plut. Ib.
The Servant thinks he shall be a happy man when he is made free. Is the
freeman happy? No, but he shall be, when he has gotten such an estate. Is the
rich man happy? No; but he shall be when he is invested with such an honor and
dignity. Well, Is the honorable man happy? No; unless he be supreme. And those
who are supreme, cannot think themselves completely happy, unless they be
Universal Monarchs. And those who were so, we find they could not rest there,
but would needs be adored for Gods. Oh whither do the boundless desires of men
hurry them! Nothing in this world can put a stop to them.

Plut. in vi^a Pyr^^.
It was a pertinent discourse of Cineas, diswading Pyrrhus from undertaking a
war against the Romans: Sir, (says he) when you have conquered them what will
you do next? Then Sicily is near at hand, and easy to master. And what when
you have subdued Sicily? Then we'll pass over to Africa, and take Carthage,
which cannot long withstand us. When these are conquered, what will be your
next attempt? Then (says Pyrrhus) we'll fall in upon Greece, and Macedon, and
recover what we have lost there. Well, when all are subdued, what fruit do you
expect from all your Victories? Then (says he) we'll sit down and enjoy our
selves. Sir (replies Cineas) May we not do it now? Have you not already a
Kingdom of your own? And he that cannot enjoy himself with a Kingdom, cannot
with the whole World. Such are the designs of men, and so we may answer them.
Most are projecting how they may get such an estate; then how they may raise
themselves to honor, and think that their advancement in both, will bring them
satisfaction. Alas! This will not do. Their desires will still run before them:
And they may as well sit down content where they are, as where they hope to be.

And the reason of this unsatisfactoriness in worldly things, is because none
of them are so good as the soul is. The Soul, next to Angels, is the very top
and cream of the whole Creation, other things are but Dregs and Lees compared
to it. Now that which is our happiness must be better than our selves; for it
must perfect us. But these things being far worse, and inferior, the soul in
cleaving to them, is secretly conscious that it abaseth, and disparageth it
self; and therefore cannot find true satisfaction. Nothing can fill the soul,
but that which eminently contains in it all good. But now, as light is only
divided, and parcel'd out among the Stars, but is all united in the Sun: So
goodness is only parcel'd out among the Creatures; this Creature has one
share, and that, another; not any of them contains the whole sum of goodness.
This is proper to God only, who is the Author, and original of them all, in
whom all excellencies and perfections are concentred. And therefore in him
alone can be found that rest and satisfaction which the soul in vain seeks for,
in any thing besides himself.

These are the Demonstrations of the Worlds Vanity; which, though they be many,
and various, yet I doubt not but every man's particular experience, may furnish
him with diverse others. But whatever our Observations are, the Uses we may make
of them are these.

First, It should teach us to admire and adore the good Providence of God to
his Children, in so ordering it that the World should be thus vain, and deal so
ill with those who serve it. For if it were not so infamous and deceitful as it
is, if it did not frustrate and disappoint our hopes, and pay us with Vexation,
when it promises Fruition, and Content: What think thou O Christian, would
be the end of this? Would any one think of God or remember Heaven, and the life
to come? St. Augustine somewhere, speaks excellently, Turbat me Mundus, and Ego
eum diligo, quid si non turbaret? The World troubles and molests me, and yet I
love it; What if I did not trouble me? Certainly, we should fall into an utter
forgetfulness of God, if we could find any true satisfaction here. We should
never think of returning to the Fountain of living Waters, if we could find
enough in Cisterns to quench the thirst of our souls. And therefore God deals
with us, as some great person would do with a disobedient son, that forsakes
his House, and riots among his Tenants: His Father gives order they should
treat him ill, affront, and chase him from them, and all that he might reduce
him. The same does God. Man is his wild and debaucht son. He flies from the
commands of his Father, and cannot endure to live under his strict and severe
Government. Whither goes he? But to the pleasures of the World, and revels, and
riots among the Creatures. But God resolves to recover him, and therefore
commands every Creature to handle him roughly. Burn him Fire, toss him
Tempests, and Shipwreck his Estate; forsake him Friends, designs fail him;
Children be rebellious to him, as he is to me; let his supports and dependances
sink under him, his riches melt away, leave him poor, and dispis'd, and
destitute. These are all Gods servants, and must obey his will. And to what end
is all this, but that seeing himself forsaken of all, he may at length like the
beggared Prodigal return again to his Father.

Secondly, If the Vanity of the world be such, and so great, if it be only an
empty bubble, a swelling nothing, less solid than the dream of a shadow; if it
be thus unsuitable, uncertain, and unsatisfactory, as I have demonstrated to
you, what gross folly then are most men guilty of in setting so high a price
upon that which is of no worth nor substance? Though formerly we have been so
much deceived as to take the worlds paint and varnish for true beauty, and its
glittering for substantial treasure, yet now since the cheat is discovered,
since you have seen this false pack opened, and nothing but counterfeit wares
obtruded upon you, your folly will be inexcusable if after experiments and
admonitions, you should contribute any longer to your own cheat, and set a
price upon things which you know to be vile and worthless. The wise man (as you
have heard) sums up their whole value, only in a great Cipher, and a great
blot, Vanity, and Vexation. At what price would you rate Vanity, which is
nothing? Or Vexation which is worse than nothing?

And therefore our Savior, Mark 4.9. compares the things of this world to
Thorns; Some fell among thorns: which thorns he interprets to be the Cares of
this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, verse. 19. Now, he were a mad man
that to assuage his hunger, would attempt to swallow a bush of Thorns. No less
is the madness, and extreme folly of most men, who to satisfy the eager
appetite of an hungry and indigent soul, gape after the Thorns of this world,
and chew Thistles; which instead of yielding them either Grapes or Figs, will
only serve to pierce them through with innumerable sorrows.

A man's wisdom or folly is commonly judged by the bargains he makes. If he lay
out that which is very precious, to purchase what is of no worth, this we
justly account a foolish bargain. If on the other hand, he purchases that
which is of great price, with something little worth, we account it a wise and
thriving bargain. Now here we may see the gross folly of most men. Though they
are wise enough in bartering one part of the world for another; yet they show
themselves very fools in purchasing any part of the world, with that which is
no part of it. The Scripture has told us, That all that is in the world is
honor, pleasure or profit. While we only traffic with these for one another,
we do not amiss. The world is a proper price for it self. And doubtless we may
lawfully part with some worldly advantages to procure others. But then there
are other things which do not belong to the world under this acception. Our
Affections, our Consciences, our precious and immortal Souls. And these God
has given us to trade with for Heaven, and eternal glory. Now herein lies the
folly of most men, that they purchase the vile things of this World, with such
an inestimable price, and extravagantly outbid themselves to procure trifles
with that which might procure them eternal happiness. More particularly,

First, Is it not extreme folly to lavish out precious affections, upon vile
and vain objects. Affections are the wings of the the soul, without which, the
soul it self, were but a dull and unactive carcass. These God has given it,
that it might be able to take its flight to heaven, and lodge it self in his
bosom. Now, how unworthy a thing is it only to flutter to and fro upon the
surface of the earth, to clog and clotter these wings with mire and dirt, which
were at first made to take so high, and so noble a flight.

Colos. 3.2.
The Apostle has commanded us to set our affections on things above, and not
on things on the earth. And indeed there is great reason for it. For the two
choice affections of the soul are Love, and Joy. Now that is most worthy our
Love, that can return a Joy most worthy of us. But the Joy that the world
gives, is usually tumultuous, always check with some secret annoy, and it ends
with a dullness and damp upon the spirits. It is but like the empty Eccles. 7 6
Fl^mma stip^la exorta, claro crepitu, largo fulgore, cito incemento; sed enim
materia l^vi, caduco inc^ndio, nullis reliquiis Apol. Apol.
crackling of thorns under a pot, that for the present may make a great noise
and blaze, but suddenly vanishes all away into smoke. Whereas an heavenly
Christian feels sometimes a ponderous and weighty Joy, a Joy springing up in
his soul, almost intolerable, and altogether unutterable, a Joy that melts him
into ecstasy and rapture. How infinitely does he then disdain that any Soul
should be so wretchedly sottish, as to prefer the the world before, or
equallize it with God. He thinks the happiness he then enjoyes so great, that
although he believes it is, yet he cannot conceive how it should be more, or
greater in Heaven it self. Then the soul claps its wings; it would fain take
its flight, and be gone: it breaths, it pants, it reaches after God, and falls
into an agony of Joy and desire inconceivably mixed together. Can the world give
us any such over powering Joy as this? It may afford us Corn, and wine, the
weak recruits of a frail life: but when it has emptied all its store and
abundance into our bosoms, it is not worthy to be mentioned with the love, and
favor of God, which is Psalm. 63.3
better than life it self. And therefore the Psalmist makes it his prayer,
Psalm. 4.6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us: Thou have
put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that their corn or wine
increased.

The Joy of the world resembles a torrent: As upon a glut of Rain, you shall
have a torrent come rolling along with noise and violence, overflowing its
banks, and bearing all before it; yet it is but muddy and impure water, and
it is soon gone and dried up. Such is all the Joy this world can give; it makes
a great noise, it is commonly immoderate, and swells beyond its due bounds, yet
it is but a muddy and impure Joy, it soon rolls away, and leaves nothing behind
but a drowth in the soul. Now since the Worlds Joy is but such a poor empty
thing as this, it is most gross folly for us to lay out our best love upon that
which cannot repay us with the best Joy.

Secondly, If the World be thus vain, what folly is it to lay out our most
serious cares, and contrivances upon it! The cares of worldly men are most
absurd and irrational. Ask them why they care, they will tell you it is that
they may live without care: and yet the more they get, the more do their cares
swarm and increase about them. To what purpose do they thus disquiet
themselves? They were as good make Nets to catch the Wind, as lay plots either
to obtain, or secure a World, which is so slippery, and so full of
disappointments, that neither they who have it, are sure of keeping it; nor
they who have it not, of getting it. We may observe a kind of coyness in the
World: those who court it most, and pursue it closest, oftimes miss of their
designs, because they overact them. And it is commonly seen, that those (who
as we use to say) have many Irons in the Fire, get nothing thereby, but only
the burning of their own fingers.

It Is true, there is a prudential and providential care, that is so far from
being chargeable with folly, that it is necessary, and a great part of our
duty, not only as we are men, but as we are 1 Timothy 5.8.
Christians. And this prudential care is, when we do, what lawfully we may to
procure the comforts of life; and then with all quietness and indifferency,
submit the success to God. This is a care of Diligence. But that which is
justly branded with folly is a care of Diffidence, which is always accompanied
with torment, fears, and distractions about the success and issue, and most
unreasonably vexes us, for what is not in our power to determine. Such a care
as this usurps upon God. And certainly it is no less a fault to invade Gods
part, than to neglect our own; and a like folly. The right temper a Christian
should observe in procuring any worldly comfort, is to interest his judgment
in the choice of means, but to keep his affections disinterested and
unconcerned in the event. But when we are anxious, how our designs will
succeed, we make it a torment to us in getting, before we can make it a comfort
to us in enjoying.

To what purpose then do thou, O worldling, rack thy brains with
contrivances, how to fill thy baggs with treasure, how to empty them out with
advantage? When thou have added heap to heap; of all thy store thou enjoyest no
more, than what thou eatest, or drinkest, or wearest: and of this too thou
enjoyest no more, than will just suffice to satisfy thy hunger, to quench thy
thirst, and to fence off the injuries of the weather: all the rest turns either
to diseases, or burdens. True reason will teach us to choose our Estates, as we
would do our Fortuna, velut tuaica, magis concinna quam longa proba^da, quipp^
etiam ea si no^ gestetur, and trah^tur, nihilo m^^us quam l^cinia praependens
(...) dit and praecipitat. Etenim ^n omnibus ad vitae munia utendis, q^icquid
apiam moderatio^em s^perg^editur on ripotiu^ quam usui exuberat. Ap^l. Apol.
Garments, not those which are largest, but those which are fittest for us.
Vast and overflowing Estates are but like huge enormous Rudders, that rather
serve to sink the Ship, than steer it: their abundance is useless and their
excess dangerous. To what end therefore is all our care and carking, all our
perplexing and solicitous thoughts, those parching and consuming distractions,
which can hasten on nothing but our own natural decays; to what end are they,
unless it be to contradict our Savior, and show that we have a power to make
our Mat. 5.36.
black hairs white? When we lay subtle and intricate designs to obtain the
things of this World, we are but like Spiders, that with a great deal of art
and labor, weave a curious Cobweb, only to catch Flies; and possibly spend
more of their bowels in framing it than the prey they catch can again repair.
Yea, and it may be too, before the prey be caught, both they and their Web are
swept down together, and trod in the dust. So when we frame designs, to get
any worldly advantage, it is but taking a great deal of pains to catch a Fly.
And possibly before it be caught, the rude hand of death wraps us about in our
Cobweb, and sweeps us down into the Grave, Psalm. 146.4.
and in that very moment, we, and all our well laid projects perish together.

Thirdly, If the World be thus vain, what extreme and prodigious folly is it,
to take as much pains to secure the poor and perishing concernments of it, as
would suffice to secure Heaven and eternal glory, were they laid out that way!
We labor for the Bread that perishes, and we perish with it in our very
mouths. About this are our hearts, our hands, our strength, our time employed:
whereas the great things of Eternity, are so utterly neglected by us, as if
they were none of our concernments to look after. Were we but as laborious in
our Christian calling, as we commonly are in our Worldly callings, salvation
would not lie upon our hands unwrought, God and Christ, and all Heaven were
ours. Who would doubt, when they see men so busy about impertinencies, and the
trivial affairs of this World, but that they were much more anxious about their
souls? Who would not conclude, that certainly their great work is already done,
that shall see them so earnest and solicitous about petty matters? But alas! It
may astonish Men and Angels, that rational Creatures, who have immortal souls,
Souls whose endless duration, must abide either in inconceivable misery or
bliss, should trifle away that time and strength, which might secure their
everlasting happiness, about those vain nothings, that have neither happiness
in them, nor continuance. Certainly, the service of God is not more painful,
than the drudgery of the World: and sure I am, it is far more cleanly. Thou
shall not in his service set thine hand to any foul Office: whereas the world
employes thee basely to rake together thick clay, and load thy self with it;
and the Devil yet worse, to rake in the mire and filth of all manner of
defilements, which now pollute the soul, and will hereafter damn it. Both these
are most grievous taskmasters. Some draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin, as it were with a cart-rope. Isa. 5.18. They are so enslaved to the work
of the Devil, that he puts them into his Team, makes them draw and strain for
their iniquities, and does them a courtesy when their sins come easily. He
makes them toil and sweat in carrying Fagots to their own Fire, and blowing up
those flames, which must for ever burn them. Others (as the Prophet expresses
it Hab. 2.13.) labor in the fire, and weary themselves for very Vanity. They
take great pains in the World, and meet with great disappointments; for both
are signified by laboring in the fire, where what they produce, cannot be
enjoyed, but is consumed between their hands.

Since then you must take so much pains, either for sin, or Vanity, why will
you not be persuaded rather to lay it out upon that which is substantially good
and eternally so? God requires not more, but only other work from you: Luke
10.45.
and the many things that Martha was careful about, Religion and Holiness
reduces to the One thing necessary; which though it contains many particular
duties under it, yet by reason of its uniformity and subserviency to it self,
is less distracting and cumbersome. The Wheels of a Watch move and click as
fast, when it goes false, as when it goes true: and if it be but set right at
first, the same activity of the Spring will so continue it, which before made
its motion irregular. So is it here: The same activity and industry which you
irregularly use in pursuit of the World, would procure Heaven and Glory for
you, were it that way directed. Your cares, your contrivances, your endeavors,
need be no more than now they are; only what before you laid out upon the
World, reserve now for Heaven. And how infinitely reasonable is this! Certainly
they are most stupidly foolish, that will take up Vanity at as dear a rate as
Happiness, and give as much for Vexation, as for endless Joy.

Fourthly, If the things of this World be so vain, what inexcusable folly is it
to part with the peace, or the purity of our Consciences for them! And yet what
more common? If men can get any thing of the World at the price of a sin, they
think, they have made a gainful bargain. And therefore the Devil has recourse
to this, as his most prevailing temptation. When he set on our Savior in the
Wilderness, the last assault was, Mat. 4 9.
All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me; and
when this battery could not make a breach, he raises his siege, as despairing
of success. And this is the usual temptation by which he assaults others. Judas
comes with his Mat. 26.15.
Quid dabitis, what will you give me; and sets Christ, and his own Conscience
to sale, for the inconsiderable sum of thirty pieces. He demands no more than
the common market Exodus 21.32.
price of a slave (not amounting to above Accounting the value of the common
shekel to be 15 pence of our money.
eight and thirty shillings) for the Lord of Life and Glory: And thinks his
bargain so good, that he gives himself to the Devil for vantage. This is the
very root of all that injustice, and rapine, and oppresion, and violence that
is to be found among men. They all strive and tugg, who shall get most of this
earth from one another; and lose Heaven, and their own Consciences in the
scuffle. This is it that makes men so often shift their Sails, that they may run
before every wind that blows. If times grow rough and tempestuous, and they
must throw overboard either their gain, or their godliness, this persuades them
to make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, only that they may bear up
in this World, though they sink hereafter, Now, what deplorable folly is this!
When thy conscience is disquieted with the tormenting review of past crimes,
what will all thy ill-gotten wealth avail thee? Thou will then with extreme
horror cast thy eyes upon all thy treasures of wickedness, when conscience
shall tell thee, thou have not only treasured up them, but wrath too against
the day of wrath.

Fifthly, What desperate folly is it to purchase a vain World, with the loss of
our precious Souls! So our Savior Matthew. 16.26. What is a man profited if he
shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, or what shall a man give in
exchange for his Soul? O think what great losers they must needs be, who lose
their Souls, to gain the World, and must at last lose the World too, together
with their Souls! This is the only thing that damns men, that they prefer the
Pleasures, Honors, Profits, and pitiful nothings of this World, before their
precious and immortal Souls, which are more worth than ten thousand Worlds.
What is this but a stupidity as gross, as that of the old Heathens, to make a
vile Worm our God, and sacrifice an Ox to it; or a Monster our God, and
sacrifice a Man to it? Think how dreadful and grating will be the reflections of
worldlings in hell, to consider that there they must lie and burn to eternity,
for their inordinate love to that World, of which they have nothing left them,
besides the bitter remembrance. What will it then avail them that they have
lived here in ease and delights, when all their mirth shall be turned into
groans and howling? What will all their treasures and riches avail them, when
these shall be melted down about them, to increase their torment? Believe it,
it is sad to be left to the conviction of that day, when the Vanity of Earth,
shall appear in the torments of Hell. Be persuaded therefore, as you have
renounced it in all its pomps and and vanities, when you gave up your Names to
Christianity, so to renounce it likewise in your lives; habitually, at all
times, by setting loose from it, and living above it; and actually, whenever
God calls for any of your temporal enjoyments, that is, when you cannot keep
them without wounding your consciences, and hazarding your souls.

Thirdly, Another Use may be this, If the World be thus vain and empty, why
then should we pride our selves in, or prize our selves by any poor enjoyments
of it? How foolish is it to account thy self a better man than another, only
because thy dunghill is a little bigger than his! These things are not at all
to be reckoned into the value and worth of a man: they are all without thee,
and concern thee no more than fine clothes do the health or strength of the
body. It Is wealth indeed that makes all the noise and bustle in the World, and
challenges all the respect and honor to it self, and the ignorant Vulgar,
whose eyes are dazzled with pomp and bravery, pay it with a stupid and astonished
reverence. Yet know, that it is but thy Silks and Velvet, thy Lands, or thy
Retinue and Servants, they venerate not thee: and if thou think otherwise,
thou art as justly ridiculous, as that Ass in the Apologue, that grew very
gravely proud, and took state when the people fell prostrate before him,
adoring not him but the Idol he carried.

Those things which belong to the perfection of a man, are all within him;
Knowledge, and Wisdom, and Temperance, a serene Mind, and calm Affections, an
inflexible Virtue, and a Soul constant and true to it self in all Occurrences.
Give me such an one that can stand firm and unshaken upon his own basis, when
the whole World totters; that knows what is just and honest, and dares do it;
that is master of his own passions, and scorns to be a slave to another; such
an one in his Rags and Poverty, is a far better man than those gay things, who
owe all their parts, and wisdom, and virtue to their Rentals, and whose Tenants
and Stewards bring them in the yearly Revenue of their Reputation. But then
suppose this excellent person endowed with Divine Grace, and the true fear and
love of God, and this will exalt him above the highest and greatest of other
men, as far as they themselves are above the vilest of Beasts. Solomon tells
us, Prove. 10.20. That the heart of the wicked is little worth; it is of no
price nor value: And shall his estate be, when his heart is not? Indeed nothing
makes us rich as men, but Wisdom and virtue, nor as Christians, but Piety and
Holiness. And in these which are the only true and substantial riches, the
poorest Christian may vie stakes with all the world. Drop millions of Gold,
boundless Revenues, ample Territories, Crowns and Scepters, and a poor
contemptible Christian lays his one God against all these, and beggars them.

If the World and all the enjoyments of it be thus vain, (...). An^^^. l. 9. S
3. A^^a^s mors ^bducit, (...) a bo^is, verum si quae imus. Hoc quidum a
Circ^^ico H^gesia sis cop^os^ d^sputatur, ut is a reg^ Ptolaem^o prohib^tus
ess^ dicatur illa in scholis dicere, quod (...) ^uditis, mortem sibi ipsi
consciscerent. Cic. Tus. quast l. 1.
this should fortify us against the fear of Death, which can deprive us of
nothing but what is both vain and vexatious.

Life is nothing else but an huddle of business, a great swarm of employments,
that have more stings in them, than Honey. If we be great, we are but the larger
Hives for cares. If honorable, we are but raised above others to be the more
weather-beaten. An high degree in this World, does but shelter other men's cares
under our wings, and adopt other men's troubles, as a wretched supplement to our
own. If our estate be mean and low; as it exposes us to contempt and injuries,
so it engages us to rescue our selves from the pressures of Poverty by our own
sweat and industry. Those few things that are necessary to a comfortable
subsistence in the world, will yet cost us care and labor, an aching heart, and
a weary hand; and this turns our Bread into Stones, and our Fish into
Scorpions. If we have too much business in the world, our callings become a
burden or temptation to us: And if we have none, we become a burden to our
selves and to others. God has written Vanity and Vexation upon every
condition, and if his Providence create not troubles for us, yet our own folly
will. Thus has man made himself a slave and drudg to the world, over which God
had made him Lord.

Why then should Death be so terrible, which comes only to ease us of our
burden, to stroke the sweat from our brows, and to give us a profound rest from
all our labors in the bed of the Grave? There (as Job says) the weary be at
rest; Job. 3.17.
and all cares and troubles vanish, as soon as our heads touch that Pillow.
There is no work nor device in the grave whither we are going; but a deep
repose, a secure retirement where none of the vexations of this life shall ever
find us.

And as it frees us from all the cares, so from all the sorrows of this world.
What is our life but a bubble? Our sighs are the Air, and our tears the water
that make it. The first possession that we take of this world, is by crying:
And there is nothing in it that we hold by a surer tenure than our griefs.
Tears are the inheritance of our eyes, either our sins calls for them or our
sufferings, and nothing can dry them up but the dust of the Grave. Sometimes
we lose a Friend, or near Relation; the Tribute we owe their memory must be
paid down in tears. Sometimes their ungodly practices torment us, when by their
lewdness and debaucheries they are lost both to their own interests, and our
hopes. Sometimes compassion of other men's sufferings, affects us with a tender
sorrow; and as if we had not grief enough springing up out of our own bowels,
we call in foreign succours^ to augment the score. And many times tedious and
lingering sicknesses waste us, grinding pains rack and torture us; which were
far the more intolerable, but that they hasten on that Death, that puts an end
and period to all a Christians miseries. We are not concerned in the Grave, at
the loss of some Friends, nor the evil courses of others: What calamities
befall the World, or those whom we loved dearest in it. There it troubles us
not, though preferment go by the merit of flattery and baseness, while the
generous and gallant soul, starves through the mere rigor of his Virtue. It
concerns us nothing what stinking breath blasts our good Name; or what unworthy
foot treads upon our Grave. Here a little pain molests us; but their whole
limbs rot, and fall off, and crumble into dust, without at all disturbing that
quiet rest, that buries all the cares and sorrows of this life in silence and
oblivion. Where then is the dreadfulness of death, which only frees us from
the troubles and crosses of a wretched life? It is unreasonble to complain of
that change, which delivers us from a world of which we are still complaining:
And it is childish to quarrel at that hand which undresses us, and strips off
our uneasy garments, only to lay us to sleep.

(...). Clem. Alex Paed. l. 2. c. 1.

Quod satiare po^est dive^ natura ministrat Quod docet inf^aenis gloria sine
circi. Petr.


There is scarce any condition in the world so low, but may satisfy our wants:
And there is no condition so high, as can satisfy our desires. Charron de la
sagesse l. 3. c 25.
If we live according to the law of Nature and Reason, we shall never be poor;
but if we live according to fond opinion and fancy, we shall never be rich.
That which we have, be it never so little, is full as satisfactory, as that
which we hope for, be it never so great. For Vanity and Vexation of spirit is
past upon all that is in the world, whether it be more or less.

And therefore, O Christian, thou may well bear a narrow stint in the things
of this world. If God reduce thee to a morsel of bread, and a cup of water, it
is enough: This will suffice to bear thy charges to Heaven; or if this too
should fail, thy journey will only be the shorter. Possibly God keeps thee
short in Vanities, that he might bestow upon thee that which is solid and
substantial good. The Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 68.19. that God daily loads us
with his benefits. Though some may have more than others, yet every one has
his load, as much as he can carry. Every Vessel cannot bear up with a like
Sail, and therefore God to keep us from oversetting, puts on so much as will
safest bring us to Heaven, our desired Port.

Let us therefore Cast these cares and burdens upon him who has Ps. 55.22.
promised to sustain us; and turn the stream of our desires Heavenward, where
alone we can find permanent and satisfactory good. (...). Antonin. l. 4. S. 22.
Walk humbly with God, keep your selves always in an awful fear of his dread
Majesty, be constant in the exercise of Grace, and the performance of Duty:
These are the only things exempted from Vanity and Vexation; in these alone
can the Soul find true rest and contentment. And therefore Solomon, after he
had pierced and searched, through all the World, and pronounced Riches,
Strength, Beauty, Wisdom, Learning, and all to be Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit; he rests himself in the Close, and tells us, Chapter 12.13. Let us hear
the Conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for
this is the whole of man: It is his whole duty, and his only happiness in this
life.

FINIS.

