MILTON's Paradise Lost Imitated in Rhyme. In the Fourth Sixth and Ninth Books;
CONTAINING The Primitive LOVES. The BATTLE of the Angels. The FALL of MAN.


By Mr. John Hopkins,

In Magnis vel voluisse Sat est. LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible
under the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1699.

TO THE Truly Honorable LORD CUTTS.
THE real Lover, burning for the Fair,
Rather than offer up a Fawning Prayer,
Owns his Demerits, owns his Just despair.
Crowns her with parting Praises, all her due;
Blushing she Hears them, but Believes them true;
The Poet so should to his Patron move,
And sue to Honor as he sues to Love.
No constant Youth a Second charm can Boast,
They feel not Fierce desires, who Court the most,
Should I lose thee, then every Patron's lost.
No more to Greatness would the Poet sue,
Honor's indeed A Name, if such in You.
All but my constant humble Faith is gone,
Yet, my sole Claim, is, I pretend to none.
Beneath your Generous smiles assured I grow;
Who makes me Happy will confirm me so.
Well may he own his Fortunes once deprest,
Who finds his late past Ills can make him Blessed.
Let others Quarrel with exalted State,
It Is mine to Praise, who know thee more than great.
O what return can you, my Lord, receive?
Or what can Poets to their Patrons give,
What, what shall I who through your Favor live.
The Muses offerings to your Fame I owe,
That taught me Verse, and to Despise it too.
No gift, no recompense, can Fancy make,
You only give whence you can never take.
Others are pleased with Gain, you pleased, Bestow,
Generous, alone because you Will be so.
All I can be, to you, my Lord, is due,
Even my best Hopes have been Derived from you.
If e're to active Good I bend my Powers,
Mine is the Profit, but the Glory yours.
THE PREFACE.
IT has been the Misfortune of one of my Name to affront the Sacred Prose of
David, with Intolerable Rhyme, and It Is mine, I fear, to have abused almost
as Sacred Verse. I have only this Excuse, when I did it, I did not so well
Percieve the Majesty and Noble air of Mr. Milton's Style as now I do; and were
it not already done, I must confess, I never should attempt it; but if others
have the same Opinion of this great Author, as I have, he will not Suffer by
me, but rather be the more Admired. To say I had nothing else to do, when I
undertook this, will be no excuse, for Idleness can no more excuse a man for
doing Ill, than Trivial bussiness can for not doing Good. And to own I envied
Mr. Milton in his Paradise, would make me look like Satan in the Eyes of the
World, who thought it worse than Hell to see those Seats of Happiness which the
First pair enjoyd; yet, I am so Conscious of my Transgression now, I almost
doubt, I did; However, this Great Father of the Poetic race of Men, I am
assured, cannot fall by me, Though every Charming Fair should Play the Eve, and
Praise the Fruit. His work like the Tree of Knowledge is Forbidden to the
Ladies, to those I mean, who would Taste the Apples, but care not for Climbing
to the Bough, and I have heard some say Mr. Milton in Rhyme would be a Fine
thing; well, if they say so, that must Satisfy all my present Expectation, and
for ought I know, Hercules looked well enough in Petticoats; If it will Oblidge
them, I should be apt to throw off the Lyon's Skin, and put the soft Apparel
on the Whole; Yet, when it is done, I must needs own, I would rather Look on Mr.
Milton Plain, (if I may say so) than in the Gaudy dress my Effeminate Fancy
gave him.

The flaming Sword drove our first Parents out of Paradise, but Mr. Milton's
Pen has again restored it; strange restitution! He gives it, only telling how
we Lost it. Though I have but Played with him, it has Cost me Pains; he is too
Strong for Dallyance; and I, took weak to Close with him, have only Touched him
at a distance, but in the Wide conflict, the Serpent (he so well describes) has
slipped me, and I have been deceived in his Speech as well as Eve; he who could
Break the Fetters in Hell asign'd him, disdained the Chains of Rhyme; however
if I attempt any further on Mr. Milton, I shall sit Closer to him, but if I
meet censure for what I have already done, I have no Paradise of Fame to fall
from, and at worst, can but be said to Slip at that Precipice where all Mankind
has Fallen. Now I would beg the Reader's Pardon for a Digression, but I think
Nothing that is Necessary, can be such. I am Generally reported the Author of a
Book written in prejudice of Mr. Congreve; I shall say but little in my own
Vindication, and the odd reason I give for it is, because I am greatly Wronged;
Excuse is infinite as Knowledge; they who Favor me with their acquantance, and
know all I Write, and almost all I Think, give me Assurance they Believe I
would no more be Author of any thing Scandalous of Mr. Congreve, than those he
Favors with his, can Believe he would Deserve it. In short, I declare, I am
not, and if that be not Satisfaction to others, I must, Submitting to their
Censures, be as Satisfied as I can my Self.

Advertisements.
THE Triumphs of Peace, or Glories of Nassaw, a Pindarick Poem.

2 The Victory of Death, or the fall of Beauty a Visionary Pindarick Poem,
Occasioned by the Death of the Lady Cutts. both by Mr. John Hopkins.

3 Contemplations on the State of man in this Life, and in that which is to
come, by Bp. Jeremy Tailor.

All Sold by R. Smith, at the Bible under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill.

The Primitive LOVES. BEING AN IMITATION Of the 4 th. BOOK, of MILTONS Paradise
LOST.

The Primitive LOVES. Being an Imitation of the 4 th. Book, of MILTON'S
Paradise LOST.
DESIGNING Satan, now in Eden, Sees
Tall Spreading Groves, and Ranks of Lofty Trees.
Around the walls of Praradise they Grew,
And Seemed delightful at a distant view,
But all within, more Goodly plants appear,
Blossoms and Fruits at once their Branches bear,
And leafs with Blooming Colors, all the Year.
Over the high walls, with a Disdainful bound,
The Tempter leaps on the yet Happy ground.
Thence to the Tree of Life he boldly Flew,
Placed in the Midst, the Tallest there that grew.
Where Proudly Seated he surveys the Fields,
And all the Pleasures which the prospect Yields.
To him God's Garden no delight can give,
He thought it Hell in Paradise to Live.
With Scornful eyes He did from thence behold,
The branches Bending with their growing Gold.
Beneath him far he Viewed the fragrant Bowers,
Fair, odor'ous Plants, and various Smilling flowers.
He saw the banks Washed by the Crystal streams,
And silent Rivers Silvered over with Beams.
He saw the Meads, the Vales, and charming Groves,
Saw Eve and Adam, and Observed their Loves.
For now the Happy pair to Shades retreat,
Their Labors past, to Shun the Schorching Heat.
Hand Joined in Hand, their eyes dart amorous Flame
Naked they Stood, yet Stood secure from Shame,
From purest thoughts their ardent wishes move,
They knew no passion, but Excess of Love.
Thus past they on, in Close Embraces still,
Nor God, nor Angels shunned, for they conceived no ill.
His Curling Hair was over his Shoulders Spread,
He of a Strong, and Vigorous Structure made.
Her Golden Tresses his in Length Surpast,
In Easy waves they Flowed, behind her Cast,
And fell, like a Fair viel, adown Her Slender waste,
She, to Whatever, he Offered by Her side,
Yielded with coy Submission, and with Modest Pride.
And now arrived at Their Appointed Seat,
With grateful thanks their Supper Fruits they eat.
The Loaded branches with their Burdens bow,
The Fruits, by their unweildy weight complying now,
Bend over their Heads, and Court them as they Grow.
On Flowery banks in their Fair Bowers they sit,
Bowers for such Loves, and for such Lovers fit.
Around them far and near their Creatures Play,
In Mutual fondness Happy too as they.
All Beasts before them mild, and Gentle be,
And the proud Lion, Humbly Wooes his She.
And now fond Adam to his Beauteous Eve,
Mixed with his Speech, does some dear Kisses give.
Thus with endearing Words his silence Breaks,
And his fair Bride leans Melting while he Speaks,
Thy welfare Chiefly all my thougths Employs,
Sole cause, and Partner of my greatest Joys.
It Is thou, thou only Giv'st these Sweets I see;
My Pleasures and Delights are Centred all in thee,
I grow Transported when your charms you Show,
Your Love and Fondness, makes them allways new,
This place had not been Paradise, had I wanted you,
But now, Dear fair, above Expression Dear,
Think who created us, and placed us Here,
Obey his will, and mind his Fixed decree,
Nor dare to Taste of the Forbidden Tree.
The tree of Knowledge Still forbear to Know,
The Tree of Knowledge is the tree of Woe.
Taste not it is Fruits, nor pluck them with thy Hand,
This is the Lord's, and this is my command.
To us God daily does new Joys afford,
Then let us thank our God, then let us praise the Lord.
For all the Mercies he is Pleased to Show,
To prune these Plants is all he bids us do,
Which, were it Toylsome, yet were Sweet with you.
Thus Eve replied; Dear shall thy precepts be,
I Will pay Obedience both to God and thee,
Thou art my Guide, thou art my whole Delight.
My daily comfort, and my Joy by Night.
To Heaven indeed I all my Praises owe,
Heaven made me thine, and Heaven did thee bestow.
That day I often remember er'e I rose,
When I first waked, as if from Soft repose.
On a fair bed of Flowers, Beneath a shade,
I saw my self in a Sweet Grotto laid.
First my own form I did with wonder View,
All caused my Wonder then, for all was New.
With silent Admiration, as I lay,
I Viewed the Light, and saw the Shining day.
Gently I stirred Pleased with the Grateful show,
Gazed at these Locks, which round my Breasts did Flow,
And wondered what I was, whence Brought, and How.
Around I looked, looked all around to see
If ought else Lived, or had a form like me.
My wondering Eyes long did I cast around,
Still viewed my Self, and then the Flowery ground.
Thoughtfull I rose, and in the Fragrant Blow'rs,
With Childish fondness I admired the Flowers.
Just at the Entrance of the Pleasing Shade,
I saw mute Creatures which in Pairs were laid,
By them I passed, and on their forms I Gazed,
Near me, all Fawned, and all appeared Amazed.
A Murmuring sound I heard, not far from Thence,
Which stayed my Progress, and allured my Sense.
This grateful Noise, rough Issuing waters made,
Which poured from Caves, and down the Valleys spread.
There Gently passed, as Rivers to the main,
And Flowed themselves into a Liquid plain.
Thither I went, and on it is Banks I stood,
Then Leaned and Looked into the Silver Flood;
Soon as I cast my Eyes upon the Stream,
To my Fond view a Beauteous Image came;
Frighted, I Started back, it Started too,
But soon I turned to take a Second View.
Calmly I looked with an Alluring air,
And Saw it Smile, Pleased too, and Charming there.
Long on the Lake I held my constant Eye,
The Lake then Seemed another Painted Sky.
There had I pined, and died with vain desire,
(Such power the Waters had to raise a Fire)
But that a Voice in warning accents said,
It is thy self thou See there, Beauteous Maid.
With thee it Comes, and goes, but walk these ways,
And I will lead thee where no Shadow stays.
Where one with Fond, and Earnest wishes Waits,
To meet, and Bless thee in these Happy Seats.
Thoughts of thy Soft embraces fill his Soul,
Thou Shal't enjoy him and possess him. whole
What could I do but follow? Strangely led,
I wishing passed along the Flow'ery mead.
At last I saw thee Tall indeed and Fair,
Beneath a shade you Stood, and viewed me there.
Lovely you looked, and taking Charms you wore,
The watery Image Pleased me less before.
Though that more Soft, and amiably mild,
Winning and Fair, with Longing Glances Smiled.
Toward me Strait you moved, all Charmed I burned,
And wished, and Blushed, yet with restraint I turned.
You following cried alou'd, whom Fly'st thou Eve,
My fair, thy Lover, and his Loves receive.
Forward in have with Lovely awe you came,
And your Eyes Sparkled with a rising flame.
With low, Submissive bows my hands you pressed,
And clasp't me fondly to your Swelling Breast,
Thus far your Actions wooed, and your looks Spoke the rest.
With a kind Glance, such as must needs have Charms,
I prayed you quit me from your Folded Arms.
Then on the Ground I cast my Bashful Eyes,
Yours fixed on mine, Looked with a fond Surprise.
Still wanting power to Speak, you Clasp't me fast.
At Lenth, all fired, a kinder Glance I cast,
And pressed you Close to my own Breast at Last.
You all in Transport, did some Kisses give,
And cried my Fair, my best, my Dearest Eve.
With fond Embraces first I looked at you,
I saw you Sighing, and I strait Sighed too.
Then did thou wish our Blessings to improve,
And led me Thence to know the Rights of Love.
With an unwilling willingness I Went,
And some Dear sigh's as we Past on, I sent.
Now at the Bow'er arrived, Fond ar^ you used,
And would enjoy, but Bashful I refused.
Sweetly you Pleaded, urged by amorous Fires,
And showed your own, and Heightened my desires.
I still denied, much Pleased to hear you Sue,
Saw all your Longings, all your wishes knew;
And wished my Self with Passion more than you.
I marked your Loves which Raised your Fondness high,
Yet could not Grant, nor could I well deny.
The Joys you Sought, were sure by Heaven designed,
To be the greatest Blessing Man can find.
Yet if no Courtship, and no Pains it cost,
I'ts Sweets would soon be Palled and all i'ts Pleasures lost.
Fondly you Strove, and all your arts you tried,
You saw me Yield at last, yet Yielding I denied.
With grateful Force which you did well Employ,
You both took from me, and you Gave me Joy.
But a Short while the transient Blessings Stay,
While in each others arms imparadis'd we lay.
So spoke our General Mother; and with Eyes
Sparkling with Love, to Her Charmed Husband flys.
Half of her Swelling Breast he might behold,
Free from her Tresses Curls, which Loosely rolled
Naked, and Joining, his beneath the Flowing Gold.
Pleased with Her Beauty, and Submissive Charms,
He with Superior Love receives Her in his Arms.
Smiling he says, but first Her Lips he pressed,
The nighr, fair consort, Warns us now to Rest.
Sleep's timely dew falls Gently down, and Lies
With soft, and Slumb'rous weight upon our Eyes.
Come then, my Love, Soon as the Early Morn,
Shall all the Fruits, and Fragrant Flowers adorn;
We must arise, and to our work prepare,
The dropping Gums and Blossoms need our care.
Bestrown unseemly, and unsmooth they Lie,
Hindering our walks, and Easy passage by.
To whom thus Eve, in Smiles and Blushes dressed.
As you command me, I shall have to Rest,
I shall not ever beyond thy Pleasure stay,
Whatever thou bidst, unargu'd, I obey.
Obedience still through all my acts Shall Shine;
So God commands, God is thy Law, thou Mine.
To know no more, nor Towering thoughts to Raise,
Is Woman's Happiest knowledge, and Her praise.
With thee Conversing, I all time forget,
The Sun unmarkt by me, may Rise or set.
Sweet is the Breath of Morn, the Evening Sweet,
All seasons please me when with thee I meet.
The Shining day, and the still, Starry Night,
While I have thee, are Grateful to my Sight,
But all without thee could Yield no Delight.
Thus talking Hand in Hand, on new fallen Flow'ers,
They pass, well Pleased, toward their Peaceful Bow'ers.
Their inmost Grotts of Odo'rous Trees were made,
And lofty Plants around them cast their Shade.
In statley pride Lawrells, and Myrthes grow,
And grace the Entrance with a Double row.
Rose trees, and Gessamin at the Doors appear,
And high their fragrant, Flourished Heads they rear
Eve when espoused, here did in Close Recess,
Her nuptial Bed with Flow'ers and Garlands dress.
Thus at their Grotts arrived, they both Adored,
And thanked, and Praised their ever Bounteous Lord,
Then side by side they Lay, nor Turning move
But to perform the Sacred Rites of Love.
Let others, as they please, Debarr their Joy,
And talk austerely, but They did Enjoy.
Here Love his best, his Golden shafts Employed,
This Happy pair still Loved, but nere were Cloyed.
Whilst a soft Choir of Birds their Nuptials sings,
Love lights his constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings.
Secure they Lay, their Bow'er by Angels kept,
And, Lulled by Nightingales, embracing Slept.
The Flowery roof their Naked Limbs bestrows,
With showers of Violets, and the Fragrant Rose.
Thus this Blessed Pair's refreshed, and all the while,
Pleased do they Sleep, and in their Dreams they Smile.
THE BATTLE OF THE ANGELS, Being an Imitation of the 6th. Book of Milton's
Paradise Lost.

THE BATTLE OF THE ANGELS Being an Imitation of the 6th. book of Milton's
Paradise Lost.
NOW Heaven's dread Voice, which late Spoke loud, was still,
And clouds began to Darken all the Hill.
In dusky Wreaths, Smoke rolled reluctant Flame,
And peals of Thunder God's waked wrath proclaim.
With Godlike looks, Bright arming Angels fly,
And vast Etherial Trumpets sounded through the Sky.
In the Horizon, far toward the North,
The Prince of Darkness led his Spuadrons forth.
In Batt'lous aspect they were stretched out far,
Where with proud state They Stood to meet the War.
Their Flying Banners of bright Clouds were made,
Whereon were Boastfull Arguments portray'd.
From far appeared, through the Celestial fields,
Beam-pointed Spears, Helmets, and ponderous shields.
Forward the Cursed Apostate Legions ran,
For the Loud shout of Battle now Began.
High in the Midst, exalted as a God,
Proud Satan in his Sun-bright Chariot Rode.
Idol Himself of Majesty Divine,
His flaming Cherubim about him Shine.
Now Host with Host are met, this Chief alone,
Proudly descends from his Exalted Throne.
Before the Clowdy, van while Horses pranc'd,
Proud Satan now, with Vast, and Haughty strides advanced.
Whom Heaven's bright Glorious Hosts might well behold
Come Towering, armed with adamant and Gold.
Abbiel, who veiw'd him with a bold disdain,
Rushed forward now, and met him on the Plain.
When strait a Noble Stroke he Lifted high,
Satan received the Blow, not used to Fly,
The blow resounded through the upper Sky.
Of all his Force, by this assault, despoyl'd,
Ten paces huge the rebel back recoyl'd;
Down had he Fallen and Lay'n all prostrate there,
If not sustained upon his Massy Spear.
Stagg'ring some time, forced to forsake his Ground,
He strait, as if by Thunder struck, Turned Round.
So, from Beneath the Earth some gushing Flood,
Moves a Vast Mountain which had firmly Stood;
Born by the Rolling torrent half sunk Down,
And the Floods roar to find the Mountain drown.
Thus shouted Heaven's bright Hosts; their Chief Commands,
Michael, their Godlike Chief, his Foremost bands.
Arch-Angells Trumpets, as the Sign is given,
Sound dreadful Loud, through all the Vast of Heaven.
Hosanna now the Faithful armies Sung,
Whose Joyful Echoes through wide Regions Rung.
The Legions move, and now the Horrid shock
Made Thundering Skies, with their Engagements, Rock.
Fierce storming Fury in both Armies rose,
And each confusedly Charges on his Foes.
Dread shouts and Noises now fill all the Air,
And Clamours, such as Heaven never used to Hear.
Arms clash on Armor, and the Madding Wheels
Of brazen Chariots rage, while the Struck Driver Reels.
O'erhead the dismal hiss, where Squadrons drew,
Of fiery Darts in Flaming vollies flew.
No worsted Champions from the fight retire,
Though flying shafts Vaulted each Host with fire.
None here knew Fear, each on Himself relied,
As if his arm alone could the dread strife decide,
All there Fought boldly, none appeared to Run,
And deeds of Everlasting Fame were done.
Far wide was Spread the Various Toil of War,
And All encountered in the Danger far,
Now on Firm Ground a standing fight performed,
Then, through the Scorching Air on soaring Wings they Stormed.
Long time the Battle Hung in even Scale,
Nor either side Could over his foe Prevail.
Satan that day Prodigious Power had shown,
All who approached were by his arms Orethrown;
But saw his Host to Michaels Sword give way,
It drove whole Squadrons with it is Conquering sway.
In have, he Strait opposed him in the Field,
Under the vast Circumf'rence of his Shield.
Around him far it did from Danger Shade,
The rocky Orb of tenfold Adamant was Made.
At his approach the Great Archangel broke
Forth from the Toyls of War, and thus Inflamed, he spoke.
Cease proud, aspiring Fiend, desist from War,
Least Heaven pour Vengeance on thee from afar.
These are the Seats of Bliss, the Seats of Love,
They bear not Violence, nor it is Works approve;
Hence to thy place allotted, hence to Hell,
That is thy Doom, and thou Deserve it Well.
Have, and be gone, or my Avengefull Sword,
Shall act the will of thy Eternal Lord.
So spoke the Prince of Angels; Satan now
Swells vast, and Answers with Contracted brow.
With aerie Threats think not to make me Yield,
It Is time to Treat, when you have gained the Field,
What can thou Boast of, where is yet thy Praise,
What Trophies can you from your Valor raise.
Have even the Least of these Ignobly fled;
You shall not Terror through our armies Spread,
While I am Chief, and Marching at their Head.
Hence thou to Hell, thy self; no more thy Lord,
Shall by your Meniall Slavery be adored.
I Will Empty Heaven of you --
Here we our self triumphant, high shall Dwell,
Or turn this very Heaven into Hell.
Where is thy potent God? Let him appear,
Now, by my self, I know he Stays through fear.
What! do I poorly Boast, a Slave! I see
Even thy Allmighty is afraid of me,
Not he, but I shall the Allmighty be.
This said, both Chiefs with all their utmost might
And furious Prowess, now addressed for Fight.
Such was the onset, that no Angel's thought
Could reach their Godlike courage, for like God's they Fought.
Stood they, or moved, or Struck on either-side,
Fit they appeared Heaven's Empire to decide.
Now, now they waved their Flaming Blades in Air,
And made dread Streaming, fiery circles there.
His glowing Sword each Warrior strongly wields,
While two broad Suns Blazed opposite, their Shields.
With fiercer onsets each returned the Shock,
Their armor clash'd, and Struck like Rock on Rock.
Just so, should Nature's Frame to ruin run,
Among the Constellations War begun.
Two Shining Planets rushing from on high,
Would Strike, with Feirce encounter, in the Sky.
At the first Shock turning each other Round,
Their Combat Soon would Jarring Spheres confound.
Now both their Swords alost were Proudly reared,
And each to make the first Assault prepared.
At once they Struck, the Sword of Satan broke,
And in his Side deep he received the Stroke.
Loud shouts were raised, then Satan first knew Pain,
And writhed him, to and fro Convolv'd, in Vain.
Fatally sharp the Grinding Sword he found,
Through him it cut with Discontinuous wound.
Ethereal substance must by Nature close,
Soon it Grows whole, but from the Gash arose
A stream of Necta'rous humor which in Torrents Flows.
Such Blood, Caelestiall Spirits, when Wounded,
It stained his Armor with a paler Red.
His Friends, on shields, back to his Chariot bore Shed;
That conquered Chief, who Triumphed there before,
Groaning through Pain, and reeking in his Gore.
Not far from off the Files of War they came,
And laid him there, Lost to his Pride, and fame,
Gnashing for Anguish, and despite, and Shame.
And now their Mightiest quelled, the Foe retreat,
Michael, God's Chief, gave them a full Defeat.
The Warlike field with shivered arms was Strown,
Chariot and Charioteer lay overturned, and thrown.
Confused in Heaps, were shattered Armours laid,
And fiery, Foaming Steed's ran wildly on, and Neigh'd.
The Vanquished Foe now with the day took Flight,
And the Cursed Prince of Darkness was obliged by Night.
Under Her Cloudy covert he retires,
And in Her Foggs he rolls his sultry Fires.
Michael encamped where he Victorious grew,
On the same Field he Fought, he Triumphed too.
His Guards, and Watches placed, when now he Prayed,
Cherubick, waving Flames his Standards there displayed.
Satan in Council sits all Night to form,
Engines with which he hopes God's Throne to Storm.
Vast, Devilish Cannons he with Sulphur fills,
And Mounts them high on Mighty rolling Wheels.
With these he comforts his Despairing Friends,
And seems assured that he shall Gain his Ends.
These Dreadful Guns to all his Host he shows,
They shall, he says, a Fatal Birth disclose,
From far with Thundering noise among his flying Foes.
God's Saints, he adds, shall to his side Revolt,
And think it is he has got the Thund'rer's Bolt.
Proundly he Slights the great Eternal Name,
And Boasting loud, through Infamy seeks Fame.
And now the Morning dos its dawn Disclose,
When up in have the Victor Angels rose.
Not far they looked, out to the Northern Coast,
When they behold the lately Vanquished Host,
On toward them Slow, yet firm their Squadrons came,
Thick as a Cloud, but Lightened into Flame,
Satan at Head, appeared in Pompous Show,
He caused his Drums to beat, his Trumpets blow,
And then his dreadful Cannons thundered on his foe.
The victor Host, though firm as Rocks, and bold,
Fell thick, and Angel on Archangel rolled.
The Host Satanick, Boasts they snall Prevail,
With their chained Thunderbolts, and fiery Hail.
Their Guns begin the Cherubim to gore,
And they, through Joy, Loud as their Engines, roar.
God's Angels are, though now too late alarmed,
Naked of all Defense, by being Armed.
Impetuous Shots, upon their armor made,
Low on the Ground the doubtful Seraphs laid
Which they, as Spirits, might unarmed, evade.
This overthrow to Punish them was given,
Their armor should be confidence in Heaven.
Worsted, but not Dismayed, they ran, they flew,
And from them far Armor and Arms they threw.
From their Foundations loss'ning to and fro,
They plucked the Seated Hills, and Hurled them at the Foe.
Shadowing they came, Turned downwards with their Floods,
While Angels held them by their Branching Woods.
Water in Streams from their Dashed tops distills,
As through the air Vast Hills encountered Hills.
Thus, whilst this Wreck was made, and Scattered far,
They Fought in dismal shade even in the heat of War.
Now whilst the falling Mountains dash their Foes,
Confusion heapt upon Confusion rose.
Now Satan's Hosts fear they have lost the day,
Buried Beneath the Hills, their Confidence and they.
Legions oppressed by the vast Burdens fall,
Michael Involving in one ruin all.
Battered by Rocks, their Armor, bruised and crushed,
With grinding Pain into their Substance rushed.
And now their dreaded Guns are Useless grown,
By mighty Mountains Rudely overthown,
Whilst Satan, Bruised himself, hears his hurt Legions Groan.
Some, in Confusion, from the Battle fly,
And wish in vain the wanted Power to dye.
But now their Chief, Proud in his deep despair,
Rallies his choicest Bands who scorn to Fear,
Flies to a vast high Mount, and bids Defyance there.
Pieces of rocks from the dread Height they throw,
And Angels fly to Shun the Ponderous blow.
The conquering Hosts in Vain to reach them try,
Their Mountains cannot so far, though Winged with forests, Fly.
Now Michael's God hears the proud rebels boasts,
And now resolves to Prove the Lord of Hosts.
He bids his Son have to the Dreadful Fight,
And makes him Mightiest in his Father's Might.
Go, says the Voice, (while Blessed Messiah kneels,)
Ascend my Chariot, guide the rapid Wheels;
Get my Allmighty arms which Conquer far,
My Bow, my Sword and Thunder, all my War
Go thou, and pour thy Force upon the Foe,
Go, have, my Son, full of thy Father, go.
He said, and on him Strait with brightest rays,
The High, Allmighty's shining Glories blaze.
Commanded thus to Triumpth over his Foes,
Messiah, bowing over his Scepter, rose.
Now the third sacred Morn began to Shine,
With more than usual Luster and with Beams Divine
When God's dread Chariot rushed with Whirlwind sound,
Flashing thick Flames, and Thundering over the Ground.
There, drawn by four Cherubick shapes in State,
The great Messiah, as Triumphant, sat.
Swiftly these Cherubin ascend the Skys,
Each with four wondrous Faces onward Flys,
Their Bodies as with Stars, and Wings beset with Eyes.
This shining Chariot bears Heavens brightest Sun,
Whilst the strong Diamond wheels prodigious, feircely run.
He on a Saphir Throne was Seated high,
And Angels over his Head bore up a Crystal sky.
At his right Hand, which Thunderbolts did hold,
Winged Victory sat, with visage Nobly bold,
Whilst from his Chariot, Flames with Fierce effusion rolled.
Onward he came, far off his coming Shone;
He Is soon descried, and wellcom'd by his Own.
The Rebel Hosts now dreaded, all amazed,
When the great Ensign of Messiah Blazed,
They saw him coming, Armed with flashing Flame,
Abashed, and Thunderstruck, before his Thunder came.
With Thousand, Thousand Saints attended far,
And with his Father's Chariots, all for War,
On wings of Cherub, now Sublime he Rode,
Great, and Illustrious, like the Son of God.
To him dos Michael all his Legions bring,
Dispersed, and Circumfus'd on either Wing.
Before him power Divine prepared his way,
He bids the Hills retire, the Hills obey.
He'ven's face renewed, each Mountain rears his Pile,
And with fresh Flowers they and the Valleys smile.
Now great Messiah in his Chariot stands,
And gives to Michael charge of all his Bands.
Alone resolved to Thunder from afar
And with his own right Hand subdue the War.
Satan Enraged at this, before he fell,
And yet in Heaven, within him, felt his Hell.
Through all his troops in driving have he Flys,
Tells them all Hope in this last Battle lies,
And proudly now he shouts --
And Blasphemously bold the Son of God defys.
Drums beat on both sides, and the Trumpets sound,
Whose voice is soon by louder Thunder drowned.
And now Messiah into terror Grows,
His countenance Changes dreadful on his Foes.
At once the four their Starry Wings spread far,
With horrid shade Contiguous, dark'ning all the War.
As with the Sound of torrents, Rushing bold,
The thundering Orbs of his fierce Chariot rolled.
All but the Throne of God i'ts Motion feels,
The steadfast Empyrean shook beneath his Burning Wheels.
Onward he drove: and near his Foes he came,
And now his Chariot flashes Smoaky Flame.
In his right hand his Thunderbolts he bore,
Thousands he throws, and now Ten Thousand more,
Whilst dashed Satanick Hosts, loud as the Thunder, roar.
Down dropped their Idle weapons; over Sheilds
Over armor, Helms, and Arms he Triumphs through the Fields.
Over thrones and mighty Seraphim he rode,
And Scattered wild destruction far abroad.
Whilst routed Legions wish, but wish in vain,
The dreadful Mountains now might be again
Thrown on them in huge Heaps, to shelter them from Pain
On either side in a Tempestuous shower,
The fourfold-visag'd Four their Fiery arrows pou'r,
One Spirit in them ruled, and all their Eyes
Glar'd Lightning which in dreadful Flashes flies.
Now Satan thunderstruck, with all his Host,
Forsakes the Fight, and owns the Battle lost.
Vast Showers of Darts fly over them, as they run,
Raising thick Clouds, and Dark'ning all the Sun.
Sparkling with Fire, and hissing through the Air,
They make all Heaven dreadful as Hell appear.
Like a dispersing Herd, or timorous Flock,
Satanick Hosts fled from the horrid shock.
Messiah now has a full Conquest seen,
And in mid Vollie holds his Thunder in.
Fast he pursues them all with Terrors driven,
To the remotest parts, and utmost Bounds of Heaven.
Now from the Crystal wall they might behold
The wastfull deep; the wall far inward rolled.
Such Fiends as those Heaven now no longer bore,
Down tumbled Thousand Legions, Thousand more
Confounded Chaos Loud, did in dread Echoes roar.
THE Fall of Man. BEING AN IMITATION Of the Ninth BOOK of MILTON's Paradise
LOST.

THE Fall of Man. Being an Imitation of the 9th. Book of Milton's Paradise Lost.
IT WAS Morning now, and Eve the Happy bride,
Advised her Spouse their Labors to divide,
In words like these, while Walking by his Side;
Adam, do thou, as Pleases best, remove,
The pains we take, so may Successful prove;
But side by side while we together go,
The spreading Boughs, fast as we Lop them, Grow.
Placed near to thee, Perhaps, I work a while,
But soon I steal a look, and give a Smile.
Either our work, or our soft, Amorous Play,
Or somewhat else we Talk of all the day.
Pruning the Trees, as I before you go,
That you may Reach me soon, I work but slow.
Or if you foremost in the Walk I see,
Slightly I pass the Boughs, and Fly to thee.
Then with Embraces we the time delay,
And with dear Kisses one an other stay.
Thus spoke Fair Eve, thus spoke the Beauteous bride,
To her Loved Lord, who thus to her replied.
Well have thou Motion'd, fair one, hither come;
Thy charming Beauties like these Gardens Bloom.
Delightful Blossoms in thy Face I find,
And full grown Fruits are ripening in thy mind.
Dearest, most Prized, and above all things Loved,
Why would thou be from thy Delight removed?
Soft, intervening Glances fondness show,
And timely smiles from Love and reason Flow.
God has imposed no Task but what may Please,
And Labors but to recommend our Ease.
Sufficient time is given to Dress the Flowers,
To lop the growing Plants, and spreading Bowers;
All but the daily Task of a few Leisure Hours.
But if much Converse cloy thee, I could Yield,
To pass some time without thee in the Field.
To Pleasure you, though I shall Fondly burn,
For short Retirement urges Sweet return.
Distance will bring us Nearer, not remove,
And when we meet, we shall renew our Love.
When from afar I see thy Beauteous Charms,
I Will have, and Rush all Transport to thy arms.
Whilst thy Bright Eyes shooting out Shining fires,
In me shall Kindle fond, yet Fierce desires.
Gushed with delights, I Will fold thee Gently so,
Whilst both our Cheeks with rising Blushes glow,
I Will kiss, and vow I Will never, never let thee go.
But ah! Some sudden thought has Checked me, Eve,
We must not part, I ca'nt without thee Live.
We have a foe whom I extremely fear,
Stir not from Hence, but if you Love, Stay here.
Together still, we need not be afraid,
But may, if Tempted, Yield each other Aid,
Yet thou, or I alone, may be Betrayed.
Whatever comes, Leave not this faithful side,
That gave thee being, Stay with me, my Bride.
The wife, whenever Warned of Dangerous ways;
Safest, and Seemliest by her Husband stays.
Thus Adam Spoke, while Eve attentive Hears,
And thus replys; Dispell thy causeless Fears,
The truth of what you Warn me, well I know,
But do you doubt, because there is a Foe.
Sure I can firm against his hatred Prove,
Not all his arts my Constancy can move,
Angels themselves could not Estrange my Love.
Of Death or Pain incapable we Live,
Force cannot avail, unless I Please to give.
Whatever is offered, if it seem not Well,
Either I cannot receive, or can repel.
So, it is the fraud of the close Foe you dread,
And think my easy Faith may be Misled.
If we Unsafely from each other Go,
Eden exposed, can be no Eden so.
To whom thus Adam answered; Beauteous Eve,
Too Late, I fear, you may my words Believe,
Who deceived Angels, may thee too deceive.
Warned be me thus, scince you your Faith must try,
Remember me, and on your God rely.
Go then, for now my Hope on this depends,
You thus Prepared, the Foe may Miss his ends.
Whatever the Tempter, or Temptation be,
I charge thee, Touch not the Forbidden Tree.
With thy Permission then, says Eve, I Go,
Doubt not, my Love, I shall resist the Foe.
Then softly drawing from his Hand Her own,
She smiling Leaves him, so Secure she is Grown.
Quickly, he cries, ah! Quickly, Eve, return,
With great concern I shall thy absence Mourn.
Well pleased, She Promises to see Him Soon,
And in the Bower to wait him, ever it is noon.
With ardent Looks he views Her on Her way,
Delighted much, but Wishing more Her stay.
Still dos he Gaze while the Dear form he sees,
But soon No more perceives Her, hid by Trees.
Lost, and Unblest, he must Alas! no more
Behold a guiltless Bride all Charming as before.
Through fragrant shades of Roses does She go,
The Roses now in deeper Blushes Glow.
Superfluous leafs, which grew Deformed, She crops
And slender Stalks of drooping Flowers she Props.
But of her self, (fair Flower!) She takes no care,
Though storms are nigh, and She from Succor far.
At length the Serpent ranges through the Fields,
He comes, He tempts, and as He temps, She yields.
And now Persuaded by a long Dispute,
She boldly Tastes of the forbidden Fruit.
Rashly she Eats, then to Debate she fell,
Nor knows she yet has she done Ill or well.
Now she resolves, what ever the Danger be,
Adam shall Taste the Fruit, made Guilty too as she.
In words, like these, she dos her Fondness show,
Adam shall share with me in Bliss, or Woe,
To Life, or Death, we shall together Go.
Should he not Taste, and I by Doom not Live,
He would be wedded to another Eve.
Then would his Second Fair my Guilt approve,
It Is death to think he should a Second Love.
^o saying, strait to Adam she repairs,
Contriving reasons to Subdue his fears.
Impatient grown, He had a Garland made,
Of choicest Flowers to Crown her lovely Head
Whom lost he finds, and in Amazement stands,
To see a bough held Brandished in her Hands.
Eve with excuses tells what She has done,
Urges that he should Equal Hazard run,
And bids him not such Proffered Blessings shun.
With brisk, alluring Air her Spouse she Warms,
Alas! what Woman wants Prevailing Charms!
She guilds her Crime with Thousand reasons given,
And Damns him with large Promises of Heaven.
Flushing she Spoke, her Cheeks such Blushes wore,
As the fair Fruit which in her Hands she bore.
Adam awhile, Astonished, and amazed,
Stood speechless by, and on the apples Gazed.
From his slack Hand the falling Garland shed,
The faded Roses, which now lost their Red.
At length, all Trembling, silence thus he Breaks,
And to his Fatal, but Loved Eve, he speaks.
How late, vain fair one, Did thou idly Boast,
Yet art thou Lost, yes, on a Sudden Lost.
Defaced, deflowered, robbed of thy Blooming store,
Just like those Roses faded
Never! ah, never to be Beauteous more.
Doomed, and Condemned, Death must thy Sentence be,
Death be it then to both --
For thou have Cursed thy self, and with thee, Me.
Why should I now propose, or wish to Live,
No, not though God should form another Eve.
No second fair could such a Blessing prove,
For, after thee, what could be worth my Love.
This, and much more, Extremely moved, he said,
While lifeless Paleness through his Visage spread.
She, all the while, Jocund, in Game-some Mood,
Laughs at his Fears, and now holds back the Food.
Ten Thousand arts she uses, looks, and Smiles,
And now deludes him with her Specious wiles.
At last he Yields and rushes to her Arms,
Through soft Endearments, more her Beauty Warms;
What vigorous Man resists, when naked Woman charms
Smelling the Fruit, on Eve his Eyes he cast,
She Plucks, and Smiles, and he too Plucks at last.
And now together Wantonly they Eat,
All over Transported with the Charming meat.
With his Loved Eve the flowing Juice he Drinks,
The place not Paradise, but Heaven he thinks.
He looks, she Smiles, he Dallies with her Hair,
He Clasps her, She Clasps too, but cries Forbear.
So when she found him Stagg'ring into Sin,
By female Arts, and Wiles she led him in.
Before his veiw the tempting Bough she bore,
And only held it back, to urge Him on the more.
But now their Transports to excesses fly,
For soon Endearment works the Passion high.
Now more Inflamed, Closely his Bride he pressed,
And spread warm Kisses over her Panting Breast.
From her lewd Eyes such eager Glances came,
Love's fires they Killed, and kindled lustful Flame.
Now to their Bower, not distant far, they Have,
And some few Moments do their Pleasures last.
For now the transient Blessings quickly Cloy,
Their falling Spirits sink, and with them sinks their Joy.
Not, as before their Fall, do they possess,
When they Enjoyed to a Divine excess,
Nor by enjoying did the Sweets grow less.
Now spent, with Languid Eyes they look a while,
But no soft Glances cast, to raise a Smile.
A Gloomy Slumber dos their sense overtake,
And in their Dreams perplexed, with broken Starts they wake.
Like Sampson now his Dalilah he views,
Close by his Side, but no Endearment shows.
With looks estranged, he marks her as she lies,
Frowning his Brows, and Angry were his Eyes,
While all within Tempestuous Passions rise.
Now standing up, he veiws Her with disdain,
And cries, vain Creature! beyond Fancy, vain!
My strength by thy rash Weakness is Betrayed
And thou I find Were perfect Woman made.
Curse on thy Wiles, Heaven formed thee for Deceit,
All Imperfections make thy Sex complete.
What wild desire of Wandering led thee on,
To ruin me, and be thy Self undone?
Thou worse than Serpent, Base, deceitful Eve;
The Tempter best might in thy form Deceive.
Led though strange errors, Traytress, thou have been,
Though by the Devil, desirous to be seen.
Whilst I, fond I, such Lovers fancies are,
Thought naught could Injure thee, so Sweet, and Fair.
This said, on Eve he fixed his constant Eyes,
Who, now the Crime excusing, thus replys.
Look not so harsh on your fond, hapless Bride,
Must I have never Parted from thy Side.
I might as well a Lifeless Rib remain,
Ah! would to Heaven I were so now again.
Why did not you, you who my Failings know,
Command me Absolutely not to go,
It was thy Fault, not mine, I thought no Ill,
Woman is weak in all things, but her Will.
Besides, no Enmity between us known,
I meant the Foe no harm, so dreaded none.
Thus by her Speech her Innocence she Proved.
Whom Adam answered thus, Extremely moved,
And Calmer Grows because he knew she Loved.
Come, to the Figtrees let us strait repair,
And hide our Naked parts from one another there,
Around them tall, fast rooted Twiggs I see,
And Daughters grow about the Mother Tree.
Broad are their Leafs, with them Conceal thy Shame,
Thus Adam her, and She did Adam blame.
Hence it appears her Sex dos Nothing Ill,
Their crime is charged on their Accuser still,
And the Wife blames the Man who should restrain her Will,
THE END.
BELLONA AND ASTREA.
[ Ast.] BEllona, stay, forsake not Albion's Shore,
Though now thou Rav'st in horrid Arms no more.
The Conquest mine, mine should the Triumph be,
By thy own Victories I vanquished thee.
Throw not thy Helmet by, nor drop thy Shield,
Be thou Astraea's Champion in the Field,
For I am Ravished if Bellona Yield.

[ Bell.] Still must I range along the burdened Plains,
Must I still Fright Brittannia's harrass'd Swains?
Beneath my Tread no smiling Corn will Grow,
All will be Barren where my Sword shall Plow.
Detain me not, or keep me Bound your Slave;
You may in time Repent the Power you Gave.

[ Ast.] With fierce Embrace Bellona was pursued,
You Nassaw ravished, but Astrea wooed.
Though now his Bride, still I Am his Mistress too,
Only to Yield to me, he Vanquished you.
When thy large Veins are Swelled, all is Ravaged far;
And I too Triumph in the Spoils of War.
Sheath thy strong Sword, but Sheath it at thy Side,
Be thou the Guard of Albion, I the Guide.
Secure of reaping, laboring Hinds shall Sow,
Corn with no Burden, but its own, shall bow;
And it shall never fall Unripen'd now.
Safe in thy Fence, long shall it Laughing Stand,
And, gently bowing, Court the Reaper's hand.
Ceres shall pregnant Golden Crops afford,
The Rustic hook edged by the Soldier's Sword,

[ Bell.] Rather my Troops turn Shephards peaceful swains,
And where they Conquered, now Manure the Plains
At work, the Hinds of Foes shall hear them tell,
Thus, thus, they Struck, and thus the others Fell.
How did Rome's great Dictator Quinctius bow.
He stooped to Fight, but Triumphed to the Plow.
How did bold Cadmus Till the patient Earth,
And to a warlike Troop give sudden Birth.
So may my Forces make kind Tellus bear,
And, when Occasion serves, start up to War.

[ Ast.] Must then the famed Brittannia's glory sleep,
And Men who fought like Lions, look to Sheep.
O poor Reward for labors, labors lost,
Must Soldiers boast to Hinds, and only boast.
The mighty Rustick's fame too far you Spread,
Who chose to Plow rather than Fight for Bread.
Of Cadmus army sprung from Earth you tell;
Think, how that Earth-born Army quickly fell.
The groveling Heroes, not inured to Foes,
Served but to fat those Furrows, whence they rose.
Peasants unused to the Alarms of War,
Rather would Dye at home, than Conquer far.
Let every Artist have his Task assigned,
The fruitful Earth be harrow'd by the Kind,
Let Seamen steer, and watch the changing Wind.
In his own Element give each his right,
Let Tradesmen gain, and let the soldier Fight.

[ Bell.] But now the sound of Thundering Battel's over,
Soft Peace flows in, let Soldiers be no more.
Let me and mine be Banished from your Isle,
Dwell you in slumbers, freed from Warlike toil;
Smile on your flowery Lawns, and fragrant Meads,
All must be Happy where Astraea treads.

[ Ast.] The mighty Chief, who triumphed over the Ball,
Kept up those Armies who had Vanquished all.
Allways in Posture to resist a Foe,
So he Gained conquests, he Maintained them So.
They, whom no Quarrels, no disputes divide,
Bear still their faithful Guardian at their side.
They who give no Affront, fear no abuse,
Wear Swords for ornament, if not for use,
This all Brittannia's happy Sons confess,
And is her Safety or her Honor less.
Can there be one among Astrea's Friends,
Who slights his Country, yet himself Defends.
Stay then, Bellona, under my command,
Thou art more safe than in a Foreign Land.
Thy troops in others interests Joined, my Powers
Might sue too late, and Pray in vain for Yours.
Should you Insult Brittannia's Peaceful shore,
How should I Court what I had Scorned before!
O Albion, happy in your Power remain,
Prise high your Nassaw's his Astrea's reign.
Confide in him! That Is sure the Least you owe,
And he who Saved you, your Defense shall grow.
Reward his Soldiers for their Manly toil.
Crown them with Plenty on their Native soil.
Next to their Chief, load them, with Honors too,
What could not Brittons led by Nassaw, do.
Who, Mighty Prince! can Trace thy Actions over,
Heaven still contrives to make thy Blessings more,
Thou now Confirm'st what thou had given before.
The Gift increasing seems for ever new,
To You from Heaven Insur'd, to Us from you.
Maintain thy Force, to Earth and Seas give Law,
And keep not Gallia but the World in awe,
Thy powers in Arms; what Mortal Foe shall dare
Disturb their Peace, who can at will, make War.
Wise is thy rule, as Neptune's over the Seas,
You who Calmed storms would never Tempests raise.
No vengefull Thunder unprovoked will Fly,
Though still it is Tempered in the gloomy Sky.
When Earth's proud Sons Olympus did invade,
Heaven had been Sacked, had not Jove's bolts been Made.

FINIS.

