Imprimatur,

Roger L'Estrange.
September. 10. 1665.
CARMINA DESVNT

The Poems of Horace Translated into English By several Persons.



THE POEMS OF HORACE, Consisting of Odes, Satyrs, and Epistles, Rendered in
ENGLISH VERSE BY SEVERAL PERSONS.

HOR. SAT. 3. Lib. 1.

Qui, ne tuberibus propriis offendat amicum
Postulat; ignoscat verrucas illius --
He that desires his Wens should not offend
His Friend, must wink at the pimples of his Friend.
LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane, M.DC.LXVI.

To his honored Friend and Patron Sir William Backhouse BARONET,
SIR,
I Here present, or rather pay, what I have often promised you, and what you
have a right to; The Poems of HORACE in the English tongue: To the Translation
whereof my pleasant retirement and conveniences at your delightsome
Habitation, have liberally contributed.

And now according to the Custom of my Predecessors, having spoiled some paper
with writing a bad Book, I am to waste more in a worse Preface, least I suffer
under the imputation of being a heretic in Book-writing.

However, I will be so kind to you and my self, as to spare so much time and
paper as might be employed in celebrating your Greatness, Virtues, and generous
Inclinations toward me, being Themes for a higher Pen than dare pretend to,
and only tell you how you came to be disturbed with these undertakings.

'Twas not because I understand this Author better than others do, nor because
I thought I did. But the same temptation which induced our Grandame Eve to eat
fruit, prevaild with me to read Horace, merely because forbidden.

But the frequent Quotation of him by all sorts of ingenious men, and the
Hault-goust which the wit and truth of his excellent sayings gave, made me
languish till I had broken through all the difficulties which my imbecility
contended with, and thrown my self on this audacious adventure.

In the prosecution whereof I never blushd to ask the advice or take the
assistance of any person whom I thought able to contribute either. And among
the rest, of that indefatigable and eminently learned person with whom, by your
indulgence and his own condiscension I had the honor and happiness to grow
acquainted, whom I found so skilled in all the difficulties of this Poet, that
he was to me more then all the Voluminous Commentators.

Sir, For my speedier dispatch and your advantage, I made bold to take in all
such parts of HORACE, as have been Englished by the Lord Ambassador Fanshaw;
and what were omitted by him, I supplied with such as have been done by Sir
Thomas Hawkins, or Dr. Holiday, or both, for they are both the same; and
whether of the two is the Author, remains to me undiscovered: What were not
touched by these, I gathered out of Mr. Cowleys and other Printed Books; and
such as were not Translated by others, my self and several friends of mine at
my request have attempted: De Art Poetica being long since Englished by that
great Master thereof B. Johnson, I have borrowed to crown the rest.

So that you will easily find, that as this Book consists of several men
endeavors, so those several men went several ways; but all studied to shun a
nice Pedantical Translation, which Horace could not abide. By reading all which
you are certain of two Pleasures, Liberty of censuring, and variety of matter.

And I have this felicity, that if any dislike what is done, it will not be
safe for them to traduce it publicly, least they should reproach some of the
Undertakers to their faces; for we are considerable for number and quality,
consisting of many persons; and those either Right Honorable, Right
Worshipful, Reverend, or (which is as good) Well-beloved; and if I for my part
have herein played the Fool, it is in very good Company.

Such as it is I expose it to public perusal, with this becoming Confidence,
that the excellence of the Author will make amends for the imperfections of the
Translators; and having this in my prospect, that HORACE may chance to find as
good fortune as his dear friend VIRGIL had, who being plundered of all his
Ornaments by the old Traslatours, was restored to others with double luster by
those Standard-bearers of Wit and Judgment, Denham and Waller. To which end I
humbly commend this rude Essay, to those Persons whose Learning, Wit, and
Leisure shall enable to do him such right as he serves. And for a president, I
desire them to compare these lines of Phaer, This end had Priams destinies, all
this chance him Fortune sent,
When he the fire in Troy had seen, his Walls and Castles rent,
That sometimes over Peoples proud, and Lands had reigned with fame
Of Asia Emperor great, now short on shore he lies with shame,
His head besides his shoulders laid, his corpse no more of name.
with this done by Sir John Denham, Thus fell the King who yet survived the
State,
With such a signal and peculiar fate,
Under so vast a ruin, not a grave,
Nor in such flames a funeral fire to have:
He whom such Titles swelled, such power made proud,
To whom the Scepters of all Asia bowed;
On the cold earth lies this neglected King,
A headless Carcass, and a uameless thing.
By which they may perceive how highly Translations may be improved. And if any
Gentlemen will be so industrious and kind, as to amend, or but to find out the
faults in this Essay (which may easily be done) or furnish the Stationer with
any better against the next Impression, they will be so far from disobliging
me, that I invite them to it, conceiving it a work by which they may gratify
and oblige Posterity: And should rejoice to see these rude and imperfect
draughts, like the Athenian ship so often and thoroughly amended, that there
shall not an old plank remain therein: That so these Poems which were so
acceptable to Augustus in their native dress, might be so polish^d in our
language, that they may be looked on by a more indulgent and greater Prince
than he was.

Perhaps it may be expected that I should have embellished (as they call it)
this Address with Witty Passages, and Rhetorical flowers; but indeed Sir, they
are grown quite out of fashion, and I am heartily glad that thereby I am freed
from a task which I was so unfit for.

And now Sir, having tired you with this flat Narrative, to make you amends, I
will make no Address to the Gentle Reader; only I declare to him and all the
World, that I profess my self, and am what your Goodness has made me,

Honored Mecaenas, Your very much obliged Servant, Alex. Brom.

THE LIFE OF HORACE*
QUintus Horatius Flaccus was born at Venusium, formerly one of the best Cities
in Italy, now called Venoso; of mean Parentage; his Father was one whom the
Romans called Libertinus, viz. the Son of a Slave who had been made free; and
by Profession he was a Praeco, or a Coactor, whose Employment was to gather in
Debts for Usurers. Of his Mother we find no mention; only ^tis agreed by all
the Dutch Commentators, that he had one. He was born two years before Catalines
Conspiracy, viz. the 6th. of the Ides of December; Cotta and Torquatus being
Consuls. His Education was at Rome, where his Father finding him very pregnant,
kept him at School under Orbilius a whipping Schoolmasters; his Father also,
being a very prudent man, had a severe and watchful eye over him, and
instructed him in Virtue. Having attained to a good measure of Grammar learning
at Rome, he was sent to Athens (then the most famous University in the World)
and there studied Philosophy; in which, if he adhaered to any Sect, it was to
the Epicuraeans. At first he was no great Zealot in Religion, but rather jeared
than adored any of the Heathen Gods; of which nevertheless he afterward
repented and made an Ode professedly to testify his Recantation. In the Civil
War betwixt Augustus and Brutus and Cassius, he being the familiar Friend of
Brutus, took his part in the battle at Philippi; in which he was a Tribune,
which is equivalent to a Colonel here: but whether he fought or not, does not
appear; only by his being so great a Commander and so ingenious a person, it is
probable that the Muses might inspire him with Wit enough to keep himself out
of danger: Some have traduced him for running away, which if true, is
excusable; for Valor and Wit are two spirits which possess only some men, and
that but at some times: So that the same Commanders who have proved Cowards in
a just and honorable War, have afterward in a Tavern dared to challenge such
as called them so; and by the law a Soldier is no more bound to fight when he
is out of his humor, then an Orator to speak when he is out of his wits: Nor is
it prudent for a man of Wit and Learning to have his brains beaten out by one
that has none. Augustus having won the Battle, it appeared that Horace had
taken the wrong side, for which his great friend Mecaenas, a very rich noble
man of Rome, and in great esteem with Augustus, obtained a pardon: And
Augustus, like a good-natured Prince, not only pardoned, but rewarded him for
being against him, and (if it had then bin in fashion there) would have
Knighted him. Now being become a Courtier, and not old or bold enough to beg;
and Augustus, so newly after a War, not rich enough to give; he (like others
of his Order) wanted Money, and that put him upon making Verses, which he
performed to admiration, and was the first that introduced the Lyrick Poetry
among the Romans: By which, and his great ingenuity and sweetness of
Conversation, he grew so much in favor with Mecaenas, that he by his good
will, would never have him out of his Company; and to encourage him in his
Studies, and enable him to live without cares, bestowed on him a competent
Estate among the Sabines, where he had a Country House, to which he often
retired, from the noise and bustle of Rome, to write and contemplate, and in
which he took great delight and recreation. By Mecaenas he was preferred to a
familiar acquaintance with Augustus, who offered to make him his Secretary of
State: But Horace (like other great Wits) hated business. Augustus also
considering what immortality Poets conferr on Princes and other great men,
wrote a Letter himself, inviting him to come and live with him as his
companion. And having read some of the Satyrs, and found not himself
concerned, or his name mentioned therein, he complained of it, and asked him,
Whether he thought it would be a disparagement to him to have it recorded to
posterity, that Horace was a familiar friend to Augustus? As to his Stature, he
was short and very fat, blear-eyed, gray headed in his youth, and bald in the
forehead. And for his morals, he was a very good man, pious and grateful to his
Father, whom being grown old and poor, he releived and kept at his Country
house: much a Gentleman in his nature and demeanor; very merry and face^ious
in company, soon angry and as soon pleased: As to his Diet, he was that which
we by a grand mistake call an Epicure, for he loved and understood how to eat
and drink well; and though he was very temperate and frugal generally, yet at a
Treat, if he liked his Company, he would give nature a loose, and come up to
Ohe! He had that good natured Vice (if it be one) which constantly adheres to
great Wits, and is much indulged by high imagination; an inclination to women,
which he is the less to be condemned for, because he was a Bachelour, and in
his time and Country it was not esteemed a crime. He was well acquainted with,
and highly valued by, all the eminent wits, and persons of quality in his time.
By frequent Company-keeping, and strict observation, he informed himself of all
the vices and humors of Rome, which he reproved and chastised in a way of
raillery, whereby men were jear'd out of their ill manners and not offended: So
considerable was he for his parts, and so eminent for his writings, that he
deservedly won the applauses of diverse of the greatest Scholars in their
times, as Tibullus, Virgil, Ovid, Petronius, Persius, Quintilian Alex. Severus,
St. Augustine Scaliger, and Bishop Jewel, who have all written in his
Commendation, and are known to be neither Fools nor Flatterers. How long he
lived, is not agreed on; some say 50, some 55, some 59, others 70 years; but
when he finished his second Book of Epistles he was 44 years old. And he dyed
soon after Mecaenas, namely (as the best Authors report) 5 Kal. December.
Censorinus and Gallus being Consuls, which was five years before the birth of
Christ, having made Augustus his heir, to whom he left his Library, which was a
good one; and a years provision, which he always designed to keep before hand;
and being a great contemner of wealth, and a derider of covetous men, he never
aimed at more. Being dead he was buried next to Mecaenas himself, in the
Esquiliae; an honor which good Poets deserve, and which great Princes have in
all times taken care to conferr upon them.

ODES.
BOOK I.
ODE I. By Sir R. Fanshaw. To MECOENAS.
That several Men affect several Things: That himself is delighted with the
Study of Lyrick Verses.

MECOENAS, Thuscan Kings descent,
My Bulwark and sweet Ornament.
There are that love their Charets spoak
With raised Olympic dust should smoke:
And with hot Wheels the Goal close shaven,
And noble Palm, lifts Men to Heaven*
One, if the fickle Peoples blast
Redoubled Honors on him cast:
Another that delights to tear
With Plough the Fields his Fathers were:
If in his private Barns He store
Whatever fruitful Africa bore;
The wealth of Croesus cannot gain
With trembling Keele to plough the Main.
Frighted with rough Icarian Seas,
The Merchant praises Home and Ease:
But His bruised Vessel repairs straight,
Impatient of a mean Estate.
There is that neither scorns to taste
Old Massique, nor half-days to waste
Under a shady Poplar spread,
Or at a Bubling Fountains Head.
Some Drums and Trumpets love, and War;
Which Mothers do as much abhor.
The Huntsman in the cold does rome,
Forgetting his poor Wife at home,
Whether his Hounds a Stagg have rowz'd,
Or Marsian Boar his Nets have towz'd.
Me Ivy (Meed of learned Heads)
Ranks with the gods: Me chill Groves, Treads
Of Satyrs with loose Nymphs, have showed
A way out of the common Road;
Whilst kind Euterpe wets my Flute,
Whilst Polyhymnie strings my Lute;
Then write Me in the Lyrick Role,
My lofty Head shall knock the Pole.
A Paraphrase upon the first Ode by S. W. Esquire To MECOENAS.
MECOENAS, sprung from Royal blood,
My greatest Patron, just and and good!
There are, who in the Olympic Games
Raise the light dust, but more their names:
When the Fleet Race, and noble prize,
E're death, the Victor Deifies.
Some in applause, that empty air,
Place both their honor, and their care;
While others with a different mind
Would choose more solid wealth to find,
And rich in what the Earth dos yield,
To the whole Sea preferrs one field;
The Sea'l not tempt them, or its store,
No not the World, to leave the shore.
The Merchant when he sees the Skies
Covered with storms, and Tempests rise,
Thinks none so happy live or well,
As those that on the Main-land dwell;
He praises what he slights at home:
But when from a bad Voyage come,
Above the Earth he loves the Main,
And longs to be at Sea again.
The Fuddlecap, whose God's the Vine,
Lacks not the Sun if he have Wine;
By the Sun he only finds a way
To some cool Spring, to spend the day.
Shrill Flutes and Trumpets Soldiers love,
And scorn those fears that Women move.
The Huntsman, in the open Plains
Regardless of the Air remains;
A Dear makes him forget his Wife*
And a fierce Boar despise his life.
But me the learned Laurel give,
The Gods themselves by Poets live.
Give me a Grove, whose gloomy shade
For Nymphs and frisking Fawns was made,
Where from the Vu^gar hid, I Will be,
The Muses waiting all on me;
Here one my Harp and Lute shall string,
Another there shall stand and sing.
This one thing great Mecoenas do,
Inroll me in the Lyhick Count,
A Lyrick Poet, and I Will mount
Above the skies, almost as high as you.
ODE II. By Sir R. F. To AUGUSTUS CAESAR.
That all the Gods are angry with the Romans for the killing of Julius Caesar:
That the only hope of the Empire is placed in Augustus.

ENough of Hail and cruel Snow
Has Jove now showered on us below;
Enough with Thundering Steeples down
Frighted the Town.
Frighted the World, lest Pyrrha's Reign
Which of new monsters did complain,
Should come again, when Proteus Flocks
Did climb the Rocks:
And Fish in tops of Elm-Trees hung,
Where Birds once built their Nests, and sung,
And the all-covering Sea did bear
The trembling Dear.
We, Yellow Tyber did behold
Back from the Tyrrhene Ocean rolled,
Against the Fane of Vesta power,
And Numa's Tower;
Whilst the Uxorious River swears
He Will be revenged for Ilia's Tears;
And over both his Banks does rove
Unbid of Jove.
Our Children through our faults but few,
Shall hear that we their Fathers slew
Our Countrymen: Who might as well
The Persians quell.
What God shall we invoke to stay
The falling Empire? with what Lay
Shall holy Nuns tire Vesta's Pray'r-Resisting
Ear?
To whom will Jove the charge commend
Of Purging us? at length descend
Prophetic Phoebus, whose white Neck
A Cloud does deck.
Or Venus in whose smiling Rays
Youth with a thousand Cupids plays:
Or Mars, if thou at length can pity
Thy long plagued City.
Alas, we long have sported thee,
To whom it is sport bright Casks to see,
And grim Aspects of Moorish Foot
With Blood and Soot;
Or winged Hermes, if it is you
Whom in Augustus form we view,
With this revenging the other Flood
Of Julius Blood;
Return to Heaven late we pray,
And long with us the Romans stay:
Nor let disdain of that Offense
Snatch thee from hence.
Love here Victorious Triumphs rather;
Love here the Name of Prince and Father:
Nor let the Medes unpunisht ride,
Thou being our Guide.
A Paraphrase on the Second Ode by S. W. To AUGUSTUS.
Storms long enough at length have blown!
Jove hayl, fire, has darted down,
Has his own Temples overthrown,
And threatened all the Town.
Threatened the World, which now did fear
Another Deluge to be near;
When Proteus all his herds did drive
Upon the hills to live.
When highest trees with Fish were filled,
Those trees where birds were wont to build;
And staggs that could the wind out fly
Must take the Sea, or dye.
We Tiber saw, when seas withstood
His streams, and checked with Seas his flood,
More heady, and unruly grown,
Not wash, but bear all down;
And swelling at his Ilias wrong
No more his banks did glide along,
But chose new Channels and a Sea,
To be revenged would be.
How our own swords those wounds did make
Which might have made the Persian quake,
These Civil Wars, next age shall tell,
And fear what us befell.
When the Empire thus begins to fall,
On what God shall poor Romans call?
In vain we hope our god will hear
When Vesta stops her ear.
To whom will Jove Commission give
To purge us, or our Plagues reprieve?
Descend Apollo clothed with light,
Thy beams must make us bright.
Or else thou fairest Queen of Love,
More needed here then thou'art above,
About whose neck the Graces fly,
And languish in thine eye.
Or Mars, if he has any pity
For his despised and ruined City;
Though Mars has been so long at Rome
We need not wish he would come.
Or you bright Hermes, proud to be
Augustus, more than Mercury,
Since in that shape you choose to breath,
And expiate Caesar's death.
Let it be long ere you return
To heaven, in love your Romans burn
For their old crimes, desire your stay,
Never to go away.
Do you their Lives and Wars command,
The Prince and Father of your Land,
Nor let our Enemies 'ore us ride,
While Caesar is our Guide.
ODE III. By Sir R. F.
He prays a prosperous Voyage to Virgil, Embarked for Athens: and takes
occasion from thence to inveigh against the Boldness of Man.

SHip, that to us sweet Virgil ow'st
(With thee entrusted) safe
Convey him to the Attick Coast;
And save my better half:
So Helene's Brothers (Stellifi'd)
And Venus guide thy Sails:
And the Wind's Father, having tie'd
All up, but Vernal Gales.
Of Oak a Bosom had that man,
And trebble-sheath'd with Brass,
Who first the horrid Ocean
With brittle Bark did pass;
Nor feared the hollow Storms, that rore;
The Hyades, that weep;
Nor the South Wind, which Lords it ore
The Adriatic Deep.
What face of Death could him dismay,
That saw the Monsters fell;
And wracking Rocks, and swelling Sea,
With Eyes that did not swell?
In vain, the Providence of God
The Earth and Sea did part,
If yet the watery Paths are trod
By a forbidden Art.
But Men (that will have all, or none)
Still things forbid desire:
Iapetus bold Son stole down
The Elemental Fire:
Whence Leanness overspread the World,
And Fevers (a new Race)
Which creeping Death on Mortals hurled;
And bad him mend his pace.
Daedale the empty Air did cut
With wings not given to men;
And Hercules the Gates unshut
Of Pluto's dismal Den.
Nothing is hard to sinful Man:
At Heaven it self we fly;
Nor suffer Jove (do what he can)
To lay his Thunder by.
ODE IV. By Sir R. F. To L. SEXTIUS a Consular Man.
Proposes the arrival of the Spring; and the common condition of Death, as
Inducements to Pleasures.

SHarp winter's thawed with spring and western gales,
And Ships drawn up the Engine hales:
The Clown the Fire, the Beasts their Stalls forgo:
The Fields have cast their Coats of Snow.
Fair Venus now by Moonshine leads a Dance,
The Graces after comely prance.
With them the Nymphs the Earth alternate beat,
Whilst Vulcan at his Forge does sweat.
Now should we be with lasting Myrtle Crowned,
Or Flowers late Prisners in the Ground.
Now should we sacrifice a Lambkins Blood
To Faunus in a sacred Wood.
Death knocks as boldly at the Rich man's door
As at the Cottage of the Poor,
Rich Sextius: and the shortness of our days
Fits not with long and rugged ways.
Swift night will intercept thee, and the Sprights,
They chat so of in Winter Nights,
And Pluto's haunted Inn. Thou can not there
Call for the Music and good Cheer:
Nor in soft Chloris gaze away thy sight,
Her Sexes Envy, Our delight.
ODE V. By Sir R. F. To PYRRHA.
That those Men are miserable who are entangled in her Love: That he is escaped
out of it as from Shipwreck by Swimming.

WHat Stripling now thee discomposes,
In Woodbine Rooms, on Beds of Roses,
For whom thy Auburn hair
Is spread, unpainted fair?
How will he one day curse thy Oaths,
And Heaven that witnessed your Betroaths!
How will the poor Cuckold,
That deems thee perfect Gold,
Bearing no stamp but his, be mazed
To see a sudden Tempest raised!
He dreams not of the Winds,
And thinks all Gold that shines.
For me my Votive Table shows
That I have hung up my wet Clothes
Upon the Temple Wall
Of Seas great Admiral.
A Paraphrase on the fifth Ode, by Dr. C.
1.
TO whom now Pyrrha art thou kind?
To what Heart-ravisht Lover
Do thou thy golden locks unbind,
Thy hidden sweets discover,
And with large bounty open set
All the bright stores of thy rich Cabinet?
2.
Ah simple youth, how often will he
Of thy changed faith complain?
And his own fortunes find to be
So airy and so vain,
Of so Camelion-like an hew,
That still their color changes with it too.
3.
How often alas, will he admire
The blackness of the skies?
Trembling to hear the winds sound higher,
And see the billows rise,
Poor unexperienced he,
Who never before alas had been at Sea!
4.
He enjoyes thy calmy Sunshine now,
And no treath stirring hears;
In the clear heaven of thy brow,
No smallest cloud appears;
He sees thee gentle, fair, and gay,
And trusts the faithless April of thy May.
5.
Unhappy! thrice unhappy he,
TO whom thou untried do shine,
But there is no danger now for me,
Since over Lorettoes shrine,
In witness of the shipwreck past,
My consecrated vessel hangs at last.
ODE VI. By C. C. Esquire To AGRIPPA.
Argument.
Though Varius in Heroic style
Agrippa's Martial Acts compile;
Yet Horace his low-pitched Muse
More humble Subjects best pursues.
VArius in living Annals may
To the admiring Universe
Voice out in high Maeonian Verse
Thy courage and thy conquests won,
And what thy Troops by Land and Sea,
Have through thy noble conduct done,
Our Muse Agrippa that does fly
An humbler pitch, attempts not these,
T'express Pelides rage; nor fly
Ulysses tedious Voyages:
Nor dips her Plume in those red Tides
Flow from the bloody Parricides
Of Pelops cruel Family:
We nothing to such heights pretend,
Since Modesty,
And our weak Muse, who does aspire
No further than the jolly Lyre,
Forbids that we
Should in our vain attempts offend
And darken with our humble Lays
Thine, and great Caesar's God-like praise.
Who to his worth can Mars display
When clad in Arms, whose dreadful ray,
Puts out the day?
Or brave Meriones set forth,
When soyl'd in Trojan dust, or raise
Fit Trophies to Tydides worth
Who to the immortal gods was made
A rival by Minerva's aid?
We sing of Feasting, and Delights,
Stout drinking, and the harmless fights
Of hot young Men, and blushing Maids,
Who when the Foe invades
Make a faint show
To guard what they are content should go.
These are the subjects of our Song
In nights that else would seem too long,
Did we not wisely prove
ODE VII. By Sir T. H. To MUNATIUS PLANCUS.
Some praise one City, some another, but Horace prefers Tibur before all,
where Plancus was born, whom he exhorts to wash Care away with Wine.

SOme Rhodes, some Myt'l^ne, Ephesus does please,
Or walls of Corinth, with its twofold Seas:
Some Thebes, some Delian Delphos worth defend,
Other Thessalian Tempe's air commend.
There are, who make their sole, and fixed design,
To mention Pallas City in each line,
And rather strive her Olive branch to grace,
Than any pulled off from another place:
Yea some to honor Juno, loud proclaim
Horse-racing Argos, and Mycenas fame.
Me, not the patient Sparta's pompous sights,
Nor fat Larissa field so much delights,
As do Albunea's Eccho-giving Groves,
And Anien's headlong stream that by it roves;
Or than Tiburnus woods, and Orchard-grounds,
Moystned with gliding brook which it arrounds.
As the South wind, the Heavens from dark Clouds scowrs
And does not generate perpetual showers;
So ( Plancus) with good Wine, be it thy strife,
To wash down sadness, and the toyls of life:
Whether thou to thy glittering Tents art tied,
Or do in Tibur's shady Bowers abide.
When Teucer fled, Father, and Salamine,
He, (it is said) his Temples dew'd with wine,
And brows encircled with a Poplar wreath,
Did amongst his pensive friends these accents breath:
What way Fortune (more kind than Syres) shall show,
We, Friends, and dear Companions, will go.
Teucer, your Guide, Teucer Encourager,
Despair not any thing, admit no fear:
For we shall raise a second Salamine,
(Says wise Apollo) in another Clime:
Brave Spirits, who with me have suffered sorrow,
Drink cares away; we will set up fails to morrow.
ODE VIII. By Sir R. F. To LYDIA.
He notes obscurely a certain Young Man, whom he calls Sybaris, as undone with
Love, and melted with Pleasures.

LIdia, in Heavens Name
Why melts young Sybaris in thy Flame?
Why does he bedridden lie
That can endure the intemperate Sky?
Why rides he not and twits
The French great Horse with wringled bits?
Why shuns he Tybur's Flood,
And wrastlers Oil like Vipers Blood?
Nor has his Flesh made soft
With bruising Arms; having so often
Been praised for shooting far
And clean delivered of the Bar?
For shame, why lies he hid
As at Troy's siege Achilles did,
For fear lest Man's Array
Should him to Manly Deeds betray?
ODE IX. By Sir R. F. To THALIARCHUS.
That being Winter, it is time for Men to give themselves to Pleasure.

THou see the Hills candied with Snow
Which groaning Woods scarce undergo,
And a stiff Ice those Veins
Congeals which Branch the Plains.
Dissolve the Frost with Logs pil'd up
To the Mantle-Tree; let the great Cup
Out of a larger Sluice
Pour the reviving Juice.
Trust Jove with other things; when he
The fighting Winds takes up at Sea,
Nor speared Cypress shakes,
Nor aged Elm-Tree quakes.
Upon to Morrow reckon not,
Then if it comes it is clearly got:
Nor being young despise
Or Dancings, or Loves Joys.
Till testy Age gray Hairs shall snow
Upon thy Head, lose Mask, nor Show:
Soft whispers now delight
At a set hour by Night:
And Maids that gigle to discover
Where they are hidden to a Lover;
And Bracelets or some toy
Snatched from the willing Coy.
ODE X. To MERCURY.
Argument.
The Character of Mercury,
His Eloquence, and Progeny:
And various other Ornaments,
Our Poet in this Ode presents.
Mercuri facunde.
SWeet-tongu'd Cyllenius, son of May,
Who man's first rudeness did allay
With Eloquence, and graceful parts
Of wrestling Arts;
I Will sing of thee, Heavens Messenger
By whom crookt Lyres invented were:
Crafty to hide what ere's bereft
By sportsome theft.
While thee (O youth) his threats affray,
Except thou his stoll'n Beefs repay:
With no shaft-bearing Quiver fraught,
Apollo laughed.
Rich Priam too deserting Troy,
The proud Atreids escaped with thy Convoy,
Thessalian watches, and each tent
Against Trojans bent.
Thou in blessed Mansions Ghosts imbowers,
And thy Caducean Rod 'ore-powers
The exiler Tribe; whom Gods above,
And lower love.
ODE XI. By Sir T. H. To LEUCONOE.
He exhorts Leuconoe, that care omitted, she seek please her self, taking
argument from the shortness life, and speed of death.

STrive not ( Leuconoe) to know what end
The Gods above to thee or me will send:
Nor with Astrologers consult at all,
That thou may better know what can befall.
Whether, thou liv'st more winters, or thy last
Be this, which Tyrrhen waves against rocks do cast;
Be wise, drink free, and in so short a space,
Do not protracted hopes of life embrace.
Whilst we are talking, envious Time does slide:
This day's thine own, the next may be denied.
A Paraphrase on the same Ode, by S. W. To LEUCONOE.
NEre strive Leuconoe, never strive to know
What Fates decreed for thee and me, nor go
To an Astrologer; it is half the cure,
When Ill, to think it will not long endure:
Whether Jove will another Winter give,
Or whether it is your last that now you live;
Be wise, and since you have not long to stay,
Fool not with tedious hopes your life away.
Time, while we speak on it flies; now banish sorrow,
Live well to day, and never trust to morrow.
ODE XII. By Sir T. H. To AUGUSTUS.
The Gods, Demy-Gods, and some worthy men honored, he descends into the
divine praises of Augustus.

WHat man, or Hero (Clio) will thou praise
With shrillest Pipe, or Lyra's softer lays?
What God? whose name in sportive strain,
Echo will chaunt thee back again?
Either in shady Heliconian Bowers,
High Pindus, or cold craggy Hemus Towers,
Whence leavy Groves by heaps confused,
To wait on tuneful Orpheus used;
Orpheus well skilled from mothers artful lay,
Swift rivers glide, and speedy winds to stay,
And with his harps melodious song
Attentive Oaks to draw along.
What shall I sing before the constant praise
Of Father Jove, who Gods, and Mortals swayes?
Yea, Land, Sea, World extended wide
With various seasons does divide?
from whom there nothing springs, greater than he:
Like nothing lives, nor can a second be:
Yet shall next honors Pallas grace,
Though seated in a lower place.
Nor will I, warlike Bacchus, let thee go,
Nor Dian, savage beasts eternal foe:
Phoebus shall likewise have a part,
Dreadful with unavoided dart.
With Hercules I Leda's sons must name,
Horse-service this, Foot-fight gives the other Fame:
Whose brighter star, when first in sky,
The wakeful Saylor does descrie,
Down from the rocks impetuous waters flow;
The winds surcease, the clouds dispelled go:
And threatening waves (so the Twins will)
Upon the Oceans brow are still.
These mentioned first, shall Romulus obtain
The next record, or Numa's peaceful reign?
Shall I the power of Tarquins state,
Or Cato's manly death relate?
Stout Regulus, the Scauri, Paulus, free
Of his great soul in Canna's victory;
Or shall my grateful tongue rehearse
Fabricius, in resplendent verse?
Who with the valiant Curious, rough in guise
And hair uncomb'd, did with Camillus rise
To high advancement, homely bred
In their poor Grand-Sires lands, and Shed.
Marcellus Fame is like a spreading Tree,
Which grows still, although insensibly:
Each eye the Julian Star admires,
As Cynthia amongst the lesser fires*
Great Father, and Protector of Mankind
From Saturn sprung, to thee the Fates assigned
The care of mighty Caesar; Reign,
And Caesar second place obtain.
He whether in full triumph lead along
The vanquished Parthians, who near Latium throng.
Or Seres, and swart Indians tame,
That Eastward tremble at his name:
He less, but, Just, the spacious world shall guide;
Heav'n-shaking, thou in thundering Chariot ride,
And thy offended lightning cast
On Groves, which harbor the unchaste.
ODE XIII. By Sir R. F. To LYDIA.
He complains that Telephus is preferred before him.

THe Arms that Wax-like bend,
And every henge when you commend,
On which the Head does turn
Of Telephus, ah, how I burn!
Madness my mind does rap,
My Color goes; and the warm sap
Wheesing through either Eye,
Shows with what lingering Flames I fry.
I fry; when thy white hue
Is in a Tavern brawl died blew,
Or when the sharp-set Youth
Thy melting Kiss grinds with his Tooth.
Believe't, his love's not sound
That can such healing kisses wound;
Kisses which Venus has
Made supple in a Nectar bath.
O their felicity
Whom a firm cord of love does tie,
Unbroke with wicked strife,
And twisted with their threads of Life!
OED XIV. By Sir T. H. To the Commonwealth preparing afresh for Civil-war.
O Ship, what do? fresh storms again
Will drive thee back into the Main;
Bravely recover Port, and shore.
See not thou art destitute of Oar?
Swift South-west winds invade thy mast,
Thy sail-yard cracks with every blast?
And cables scarce thy keel assure,
Those surly billows to endure?
Thy sails are torn, and thou a thrall,
No gods haste to invoke at all.
Though Pontique Pine (woods noble race)
Thou boast thy barren name and place;
The fearful Sailer (dangers tried)
Does not to painted ships confide:
Take heed unless thou have a mind
To be a sport unto the wind.
(Oh my desire and greatest care,
Erst horror to my heart) Beware,
And fly in time chose shelfie Seas,
Which run betwixt bright Cyclades.
ODE XV. By Sir T. H. The Prophecy of Nereus concerning the destruction of Troy.
WHen in Idaean ships the treacherous swain,
With Hellen his Greek mistress crossed the main,
Nereus, that ^ll events he might presage,
Becalmed with lazy rest the swift winds rage.
Thou her take home with thee in an ill hour,
Whom Greece shall fetch again with armed power,
Conspiring to dissolve thy married state,
And Priam's ancient Kingdom ruinate.
Alas! what toil for horse, for men what pain,
What direful funerals of Trojans slain.
See, Pallas, helm and target does provide,
And will on her incensed Chariot ride.
In vain grown insolent with Venus grace,
Shall thou thine hair dishevel, sleeke thy face:
In vain shall thou, on harps effeminate string,
Soft tuned notes to attentive women sing:
In vain, thou in thy chamber shall decline
Sharp spears, and head of Cnossian javeline,
Loud noise, and Ajax, nimble to pursue,
Yet dust at last shall soil thy beauties hue.
Do thou not Nestor, nor Ulysses mind,
Who for thy countries ruin art designed?
On the undaunted Salaminius flies;
Thee Sthenelus provokes, who bears the prize
Of arms, or horse to manage with command
Against thee likewise shall Meriones stand:
Fell Diomedes stronger than his fire,
For thee, with desperate fury shall enquire:
Whom as an heart that does neglect his food,
Spying far off the wolf thirsty of blood,
Thou faintly shall, and almost breathless fly,
Breaking thy vow to Hellen cowardly.
Achilles wrathful Fleet the hour shall slack
Of Phrygi^n matrons fall, and Ilium's wrack;
But Grecian fire in time determinate,
Shall Trojan buildings burn, and dissipate.
ODE XVI. By Sir T. H. To a Friend.
He recants: For he asks pardon of a Maid, whom had wounded with Iambicks,
transferring the fault up anger, the un^rid ed force whereof he describes.

DAughter, than thy fair mother much more fair,
On my Iambicks fraught with spiteful air,
Do thou prescribe what doom thy self shall please,
Either of flames, or Adriatique seas.
Not Dindymenian, nor the Pythian Priest,
Are with such fury by their Gods possessed;
Not Bacchus, nor the Corybantes so,
When on shrill brass they iterate their blow,
As baneful anger, which not Norique arms,
Nor the ship^wracking stormy Ocean charms:
Not furious fire, nor Jove himself on high,
When be with dreadful thunder rends the sky.
It Is said, Pr^me^heus, resolved to make
M^n out of clay, did several parcels take
Dissected cunningly from every beast,
And put fierce lions wrath into our breast.
Anger Thyestes into ruin cast,
And unto cities ever was the last
Cause, why they fell, and that proud foes were seen
With hostile share to plough where walls had be.
Bridle thy self. Me likewise heat of blood
Enraged in youth, and with distempered mood
Into Iambicks hurried: Now I seek
To change my rougher language into meek;
So wrongs recanted, thou more friendly be,
And love reciprocal return to me.
ODE XVII. To TYNDARIS.
Argument.
The Lyric Tyndaris invites
Unto Lucretile. Recites
What profits and delights abound,
And in what Climate may be found.
Velox amaenum.
FRom mount Lyaeus, to sweet Lucretile,
Swift-footed Pan is flitting every while,
And is still my Goats defense
From storms, and Sols hot influence.
Dams from their noisome leaders strayed away,
Over all the woods securely forage may,
Seeking Thyme and VVildings there;
Nor do the Kids infolded fear
Green-speckled-snakes, nor wolfs to Mars assigned.
Where ever vales ( Tyndaris) and the steep inclined
Mount Ustica's fleek Rocks bound,
Again the Pipes harmonious sound.
Me, Gods protect, and in my piety,
And Lyric-Muse, they much delighted be:
Rural wealth here plenty grows,
And with a bounteous horn o'r-flows.
Here in Maeandrian-vale may thou decline
The Dog-stars heat; and chaunt in Teyan line Penelope, and Circe clear,
Who both for one man anxious were.
Here may thou prostrate in a shadie bower*
Bolls of unnauseous Lesbian-wine devour:
Nor shall Bacchus juice excite
Thee to outrageous brawls and fight.
Nor shall thou 'f jealous Cyrus fearful stand,
Lest he o'r-lay thee with lascivious hand,
Rending chaplets from thy crown,
And undeserv'dly tear thy gow^*
ODE XVIII. By Sir R. F. To QUINTILIUS VARUS.
That with moderate drinking of wine, the mind is exhilerated: with
immoderate, quarrels begotten.

OF all the trees, plant me the sacred Vine
In Tybur's mellow fields, and let it climb
Cathyllus walls: for Jove does cares propound
To sober heads, which in full cups are drowned.
Of want, or war, who cries out after wine?
Thee father Bacchus, thee fair Erycine,
Who does not sing? but through intemp'rate use,
Least Other names of Bacchus.
Liber's gifts you turn into abuse,
Think of the Centaures braul, fought in their Cans,
With Lapithes: and to Sithonians
Heavy Evous, when their heated blood
Makes little difference betwixt what is good,
And what is not. No, gentle Bassareu,
I will not force thee; nor betray to view
Thy vine-clad parts: suppress thy Thracian hollow,
And dismal dynn: which blind self-love does follow,
And Glory-puffing heads with empty worth,
And a Glass-bosome pouring secrets forth.
ODE. XIX. Of GLYCERA.
Argument.
How beauteous Glycera infires
His heart with amorous desires.
Matter saeva.
TYrannic Venus charge me,
And Bacchus the heir of Theban Semele,
And wanton leisure bids me too,
Extinguished flames of Cupid to renew.
Fair Glycer a inflames me sore,
Than any Parian Marble glittering more:
Her pleasing coyness, and her face
Is over-ru^nating for a gaze.
The Queen of love her Isle forsook,
Falling sore on me, nor will Scythians brook,
Nor stout back-darting Parthians
For my Pens theme, nor unconcerning strains.
Here (servants) green turf-altars rear,
Vervains, and sacred Frankincense place here.
A Boll of two-years wine, to these
A victime slain, she will her ire appease.
ODE XX. To MAECENAS.
Argument.
He prays Maecenas for a guest
Unto a plain and homely feast.
Vile potabis.
THou'st bouze cheap Sabine in small cup,
Which in Greek Butt my self daubed up:
When Theaters with Ovations high
Rang in the sky.
Thy fames (thou of Equestrian rank
Maecenas) that thy Tiber's bank,
And the echo tossed thy praise again
From the Vaticane:
Caecubian, and Calenian wines,
Shall be thy drink. No Falern vines,
Nor Grapes which crown the Formian knolls,
Flow in my bolls.
ODE XXI. By Sir T. H. Of Diana and Apollo.
He exhorts youths and virgins to sing forth their praises.

YOu tender virgins, sound Diana's name,
(Boys) be your song youthful Apollo's fame,
Latona likewise touch,
By Jove affected much.
(Maids) mention her, who loved rivers so,
And woods which on cold Algidus do grow,
On Erymant are spread;
Or Cragus verdant head.
(Boys) with your notes delightful Tempe grace,
And Delos chaunt, Apollo's native place;
His shoulders, quiver-dight,
And harp of heavenly might.
He, with our prayers moved, shall banish far,
Sharp hunger, pestilence, and direful war
From Prince and people, to
Persian, and British foe.
ODE XXII. By Sir T. H. To ARISTIUS.
Integrity of life is every where safe, which he proves his own example.

WHo lives upright, and pure of heart
(O Fuscus) neither needs the dart,
Nor bow, nor quiver, fraught with store
Of shafts envenomed by the Moor:
Whether over Libya's parched sands,
Or Caucasus that houseless stands,
He takes his journey; or those places
Through which the famed Hydaspes traces*
For (careless) through the Sabin grove,
Whilst chaunting Lalage, I rove,
Not well observing limits due,
A wolf (from me unarmed) flew.
A monster such as all exceeds,
Which in huge words fierce Daunia feeds:
Or those that Iuba's kingdom has,
The Desart-nurse of lions wrath.
Place me in coldest Champanies, where
No Summer warmth the trees do cheer:
Let me in that dull Climate rest,
Which clouds and sullen Jove infest:
Yea place me underneath the Carre
Of too near Phoebus: feared far
From dwellings: Lalage I Will love,
Whose smiles, whose words so sweetly move.
A Paraphrase on the same Ode, By S. W. To FUSCUS ARISTIUS.
THe just man needs nor Sword nor Bow,
Those arms his fear, not safety show,
Who better has for his defense
Strong guards of innocence.
For if along rough shoars he coast,
Tempests and Seas on him are lost.
Or if he Caucasus pass by,
Tigers their rage deny.
A wolf that croft me in my grove,
As I walked musing on my love
Beyond my bounds, and no arms had,
Was of my love afraid.
Away he fled, though Dauma yields
No greater monster in her fields:
Though Africa which Lions breeds,
None half so cruel feeds.
Put me where never Summer breeze
Kissed the dull earth, or lifeless trees,
In that skirt of the world, where showers
Do number out the hours,
Or place me in the Torrid Zone,
Where never house or man was known,
If there my Lalage but smile
And sing, I Will love the while.
ODE XXIII. To CHLOE.
Argument.
CHloe adult: no cause now why
She should from men's embracements fly.
Vitas hinnuloe.
Chloe, thou shunn'st me like a wanton Fawn
Of timorous Dam forsook in pathless lawn;
Dreading with mind aghast
Every bush, and every blast.
For as when Zephyrus trembling leaves does shake,
Or green-speckt Newts make bramble bushes quake,
So tremulous is she,
Dith'ring both in heart and knee:
But I not to devour thee now pursue,
As Afric Lions, and wild Tigers do.
O leave thy Mother pray,
Now grown ripe for Venus play.
ODE XXIV. By Sir T. H. To VIRGIL.
Who immoderately bewailed the death of Quintilius.

MElpomene, whom Jove our Father daignes
Shril voice applied to harps melodious strains,
Tell in sad notes how far the bounds extend
Of love, and shame unto so dear a friend;
Shall then in endless sleep Quintilius lie?
As equal unto whom, pure Modesty,
And Justice' sister, Faith sincere and plain*
Nor naked Verity shall ever gain?
Of many worthy men bemoaned he fell,
But ( Virgil) no man's grief can thine excel.
Thou (loving) do (alas) the gods in vain
Quintilius, not so lent thee, ask again.
WHat if more sweet, than Thracian Orpheus wire,
You trees persuade to hearken to your lyre?
Yet can you not, return of life command
To shadow vain, which once with dreadful wand,
God Mercury, unwilling Fate to unlock,
Has forced to dwell among the Stygian flock.
It Is hard, I grant; But patience makes that light,
Which to correct, or change, exceeds our might.
The same by Sir R. F. To VIRGIL.
Who lamented immoderately the death of Quintilian.

What shame, or stint in mourning ore
So dear a Head? Weep not but rore
Melpomene, to whom thy Sire
Gave a shrill voice, and twanging lyre.
B^t does Quintilian sleep his last?
Whose Fellow, Modesty, and fast
Faith, with her Sister Justice joined
And naked truth, when will they find?
Bewa^l'd by all good men, he is gone:
But then Thee Virgil, more by none.
Thou begst back (ah! pious in vain)
Thee, not so lent, Quintilian.
If sweeter then the Thracian Bard,
Thou could strike tunes by dull Trees heard,
The blood would never more be made
To flow into the empty shade,
Which Hermes with his horrid wand
(Inflexible to countermand
The unevitable doom of Death)
Once drove to the black Flock beneath.
It Is hard: But Patience makes that less,
Which all the World cannot redress.
ODE XXV. To LYDIA.
Argument.
He Lydia sc^ffs for Aged look,
And cause her Suitors her forsook.
Parcius junctas.
NOw froward youths rap not so sore
At thy shut casements as before,
To break thy sleep; thy gates love much
Their thresholds tou^h,
Which wont so 'ft on glib hinges run:
You Are less and less now called upon*
Ho Lydia! sleep'st all night while I
Thy lover die?
Thou, an aged Queen, again shall moan
Thy scornful Paramours, all alone,
In narrow lanes: while North-winds range
'Bout Phoebe's change:
When fragrant love, and lustful flames,
Such as infuriates Horses dams,
Thy ulcer'd breast with rage impales,
Not without wails:
Cause youth likes verdant Ivy more,
Than Myrtle almost sabled o'r:
And gives to Heber's Wintry tide
Boughs wither-dry'd.
ODE XXVI. By Sir T. H. To his Muse concerning Aelius Lamia.
It is not fit for the lovers of the Muses to be subject to ca^^ and sadness.
The Poet commends his Lamia to the Pimplean Muse.

I, Who the Muses love, sadness, and fear
Will to rought winds commit, that they may bear
Them to the Cretique sea, careless, who swayes,
And whom the far-North dweller most obeys:
Or what does great Tirridates affright.
O my Pimplean Muse (my hearts delight;)
O thou who near pure Fountains ^ittest down,
Wreath o'drous flowers for Lamia, wreath a crown.
Little without thee works my applause:
It Is now become thine, and thy Sister's cause
Him, with unused strains to celebrate,
And with thy Lesbian lyre to consecrate.
ODE XXVII. By Sir R. F. To his Companions.
To his Companions feasting together, that they should (...) quarrel in their
drink, and fight with the Cups them^selves, after the manner of the Barbarians.

WIth Goblets made for Mirth, to fight,
It Is barbarous: leave that Thracian rite,
Nor mix the bashful blushing God
Of Wine, with quarrels and with blood.
A Cand-stick, and Quart-pot, how far,
They differ from the Cymitar?
Your wicked noise Companions cease,
And on your Elbows lean in peace.
Would you have me to share the austere
Falernian liquor: Let me hear
Megella's brother, by what eyes,
Of what blessed wound and shaft he dies.
No! then will I not drink: whatever
Venus tames thee, she toasts thy Liver
With fires thou have no cause to cover,
Still sinning an ingenuous lover.
Come, thou may lay it whatsoere
It is, securely in my Ear.
Ah wretch! in what a Whirl-pool taken?
Boy worthy of a better flame,
What Witch with her Thessalian Rod
Can loose thee from those charms? What God?
Scarce Pegasus himself can thee
From this three-shap'd Chimera free.
A Paraphrase on the same Ode, by Dr. P*
What? Quarrel in your drink, my friends? ye'abuse
Glasses, and Wine, made for a better use.
It Is a Dutch trick; Fie, let your brawling cease,
And from your Wine and Olives learn both mirth and peace.
Your swords drawn in a Tavern, whilst the hand
That holds them shakes, and he that fights cannot stand,
Sheath 'um for shame, embrace, kiss, so away,
Sit down, and ply the business of the day.
But I Will not drink, unless T. S. declares
Who is his Mistress, and whose wounds he wears.
Whence comes the glance, from what sweet-killing-Eye,
That sinks his Hope so low, and mounts his Muse so high!
Will thou not tell? Drawer, what is to pay?
If you're reserved I Will neither drink nor stay:
Or let me go, or out w'it; she must be
Worth naming, sure; whose Fate it was to conquer thee:
Speak softly, -- She! forbid it Heaven above!
Unhappy youth! unhappy in thy love;
Oh how I pity thy Eternal pain!
Thou never can get loose, thou never can obtain;
Lets talk no more of love, my friends, lets drink again.
ODE XXVIII. By Sir T. H.
Architas, a Philosopher, and Geometrician, is presented, answering to a
certain Mariner, that all wen must die, and entreating him, that he would not
suffer his body to lie on the shore unburied.

THe poor gift of a little dust, confines,
And near unto the Matine shore enshrines
Thee, now ( Architas) who could measure well
The Sea, the Earth, and Sands, which none can tell.
Nor could it any help, or profit be,
Death being ready still to seize on thee;
Those airy mansions to have sought from hence,
And often surveyed the Heavens circumference.
The fire of Pelops, who with gods did feast,
And aged Tython, shrunk at Deaths arrest:
And Minos, to Jove's counsels called, was slain,
And Panthois di'de, sent down to Hell again;
Though by the shield pulled down, he proving well
That his First-birth in Trojane ages fell,
Affirmed, that Death naught killed, but nerves and skin:
(No man in Natures power was better seen:)
But we into one self-same night do fall,
And must the paths of Death tread once for all.
The Furies some to games of Mars apply,
The greedy sailer drenched in sails does lie.
In death both young and old, by heaps do join;
Nor any head escapes sad Proserpine.
Me, the South Wind, crooked Orion's Mate
O're-whelmed in Illyrian waves of late:
But (gentle Friend) be pleased now I am dead,
In loose sands to interre my bones, and head.
Which done (so thou be safe) may the Eastern-wind,
Which stirs Hesperian billows, be assigned
To bluster lowdly in Venusium woods:
And may on every side, thy traffiqu'd goods
In plenty flow to thee from Jove's just hand,
And Neptune, who Tarentum does command:
But if this fault of thine shall seem but slight,
(Which may upon thy harmless issue light)
I wish due punishment and proud neglect,
May on thy funeral Obsequies reflect:
Nor shall my prayers be poured forth in vain,
Nor vows have strength to set thee free again.
Yet if thou haste, no longer stay I crave,
But thrice to throw the dust upon my Grave.
ODE XXIX. by Sir T. H. To ICCIUS.
It is a strange thing, that Iccius the Philosopher intermitting his Studies,
should become a man at Arms, out of the love of money.

ICcius, thou now the Arabs do envy
Their golden treasure, and to wars do hie,
Against the Sabean Kings unvanquished,
And nets prepar'st to snare the horrid Mede.
What Captive Damsel her beloved slain
Shall serve thee now? What youth of noble strain
Shall now anointed, on thy Cup attend,
Prompt, from his fathers Bow swift-shafts to send?
Who can deny but falling Rivers may
Run up steep hills, and Tyber backward stray:
When thou Panetius books on all sides sought,
And house of Socrates, where arts were taught,
Do into Steely Spanish arms translate,
With promise to thy self of better state.
ODE XXX. To VENUS.
Argument.
He implores Venus to refrain
Her Cyprus, and her presence daign
At Glyc'ras consecrated Fane.
O Venus regina.
O Venus, Cnide's and Paphos Queen,
At Cyprus be less gracious seen:
To Glyc'ras beauteous Temple go,
Where odours flow.
Take with thee Cupid, ungirt graces,
The agile Nymphs with their swift paces,
Iuventas sullen without thee,
And Mercury.
ODE XXXI. By Sir R. F. To APOLLO.
He asks not riches of Apollo, but that he may have a sound mind in a sound
body.

WHat does the Poet Phoebus pray,
In his new Fane? what does he say,
Pouring sweet liquor from the cup?
Not give me fat Sardinia's crop.
Not hot Calabria's goodly Kye:
Not Gold, and Indian Ivory:
Not Fields which quiet Liris laves,
And eats into with silent waves.
Proyne, They that have them, Massick Vines:
In Golden Goblets carowse Wines,
The wealthy Merchant, which he bought
With Merchandise from Syria brought,
The Minion of the Gods: as he
That in one year the Altantick Sea
Three or four times, unpunished past.
Mine Olives, Endive my Repast,
And Mallows light. Latona's Son,
In Mind and Bodies health my own
TO enjoy; old Age from dotage free,
And solac'd with the Lute, give me.
The same by Sir T. H.
WHat does thy Poet ask ( Phoebus divine;)
What craves he, when he pours the bowls of wine?
Not the rich corn of fat Sardinia,
Nor fruitful Flocks of burnt Calabria,
Nor gold, nor Indian ivorie; nor the grounds,
Which silent Lyris with soft stream arrounds.
Let those whom Fortune so much store assigns,
Prune with Calenian hook their fertile vines:
Let the rich Merchant to the Gods so dear,
(For so I term him right, who every year,
Three, or four times, visits the Atlantique seas
From shipwreck free:) Let him his palate please;
And in guilt bowls drink wines of highest price,
Bought with the sale of Syrian Merchandice.
Loose Mallows, Succorie, and Olive-plant
Serve me for food. O (great Apollo) grant
To me in health, and free from life's annoy,
Things native, and soon gotten to enjoy;
And with a mind composed old Age attain,
Not loathsome, nor deprived of Lyrick strain.
ODE XXXII. To his Lyre.
Argument.
He bids his Lyre still ready be
To cheer him up with Melody.
Poscimus si quid.
WE beg, if we supinely lane,
In shrouds with thee played ere a strain
Worth Fame's Record, o Lyre display
In Latin Lay:
On which A^caeus first resounded,
Who (though with Mars fierce broyls surrounded,
Or that his shattered sail he tied
To the Ocean side.)
Of Liber, Muses, Venus sung,
And the youth that always to her clung,
And Lycus for black eyes and hair,
Of presence rare.
O Lyre, Apollo't ornament,
Yielding Jove's banquets blessed content,
My toils sweet solace, hail while I
Unto thee cry.
ODE XXXIII. To ALBIUS TIBULLUS.
Argument.
He Albius wills not lay't to heart,
Though undeservedly on his part,
Cursed Glycera respects more
His Rival, and Competitour.
Albi, ne doleas.
ALbius, not too excessively condole
Harsh Glycera's unkindness: neither howl
Out mournful Elegies, though thy junior be
Perfidiously preferred to thee.
Lycoris, famed for narrow forehead, burns
For Cyrus love; and Cyrus, lo he turns
Unto coy Pholoe: But ever Pholoe err
With that all-base Adulterer,
Goats with Apulian wolfs shall copulate:
So Venus, and dire Cupid please, who mate
Unequal forms, and different minds together
Within a Brazen yoke and Tether.
But when a fairer Mistress courted me,
Myrtle me held in sweet captivity,
A Libertine, more fierce than Adrian Seas,
Which crooktly 'bout Calabria preaze.
ODE XXXIV. By Sir R. F. To himself.
Repenting that having followed the Epicureans, he had been little studious i^
worshipping the Gods.

IN That have seldom worshipped Heaven,
As to a mad Sect too much given,
My former ways am forced to balk,
And after the old light to walk.
For Cloud-dividing, lightning- Jove,
Through a clear Firmament late drove
His thrundring Horses, and swift wheels:
With which supporting Atlas reels:
With which Earth, Seas, the Stygian Lake,
And Hell, with all her Furies quake.
It shook me too. God pulls the Proud
From his high Seat, and from their Cloud
Draws the obscure: Levels the hills,
And with their Earth the valleys fills:
It Is all he does, he does it all:
Yet this, blind Mortals Fortune call.
ODE XXXV. By Sir. T. H. To Fortune.
He beseeches her, that she would preserve Caesar going into Britany.

O Goddess, which beloved Antium swayes,
Still ready with thy powerful Arm to raise
Men, from the low degree of wretched thrals,
Or turn proud Triumphs into Funerals;
The poor and rustic Clown with humble plea
Solicites thee: The Lady of the Sea
He loudly invocates, who ere does sweep
In Asian vessel the Carpathian Deep.
The Dacian rough, the wandering Scythian,
Kingdoms and Cities; the fierce Latian:
Thee Mothers of Barbarian Kings do fear,
And Tyrants, which bright Purple garments wear.
Let not a standing Pillar be overthrown
By thy offended foot: Nor be it known,
That troops of Warlike people now at rest;
Take Arms again, and Empire's peace infest.
Still, sharp Necessity before thee goes,
Holden in Brazen hand, (as pledge of woes)
Tormenting beams, and wracks: and more to daunt,
Sharphooks, and molten lead do never want.
Thee, Hope, and simple Faith in white attire,
Much honor, and thy company desire;
How e're thou do another habit take,
And made a Foe to Great Men, them forsake.
But the false Multitude, and perjured Whore
Retireth back: yea friends, when vessel's store
Is to the dregs drunk up, away do fly,
Shunning the yoke of mutual poverty;
Preserve thou Caesar safe, we thee implore,
Bound to the worlds remotest Brittan shore,
And those new Troops of youth, whose dreadful sight,
The East and ruddie Ocean does affright.
Fie on our broils, vile Acts, and Brothers fall.
Bad Age! what mischief do we shun at all?
What youth, his hand for fear of Gods contains?
Or who from sacred Altar's spoil refrains?
Ah! rather let us dull swords new forge, and whet
Against the Arabian and the Massaget.
ODE XXXVI. To POMPONIUS NUMIDA.
Argument.
Our Lyrick joy'd, exults amain
For Numida's return from Spain.
Et thure, and fidibus.
With Frankincense and Lyric Lay,
And bullocks justly slaughtered, let us allay
Great Numid's tutelary gods:
Who safe arrived from Spains remot'st abodes,
Gave's dear friends many a-kiss-salute,
But to sweet Lamia most did distribute:
Remembering how both served all
Their youthful days under one General.
And both their gowns together quit,
This beauteous day sign with a Chalky smit:
Let vast Wine-rundlets freely spout,
And Salian like incessant skip about,
Nor more let soaking Dam'lis bouze,
Than Bassus in a Thracian carrouze.
Let Roses, Parsley ever green,
And fading Lillies much at feasts be seen.
All shall their eyes with Lust infested
On Dam'lis cast, nor Dam'lis be wrested
From her new Paramour, who combine
Closer than any amorous Ivies twine.
ODE XXXVII. By Sir T. H. To his Companions.
Whom he exhorts to be merry upon the News of the Actiaque victory.

NOw let us drink, now dance (Companions) now,
Let Us Salian banquets to the Gods allow.
It might before this time be thought a sin,
To broach old Caecube wines, whilst the mad Queen
Prepared the ruin, and disastrous fall,
Both of the Empire and the Capitol,
With her ^cabb'd Troop of men effeminate,
Proud with vast hopes, and drunk with prosperous state:
But the scarce safety of one ship from fire
Less'ned ^er fury, whilst great Caesar's ire
To real fears enforced her to resign
Her mind enraged with Mareotique wine,
He pressed with swift vessels to enchain
This monster, flying Italy amain:
As Hawk the fearful Dove, or Hunter swift
Pursues the Hare the row Aemon's snowie drift:
Whilst she, that she might die the nobler way,
Did neither as a woman fear the ray
Of brandished sword, nor labored to fly,
With speedy flight in secret nooks to lie:
But with an eye serene, and courage bold,
Durst her dejected Palaces behold,
Handle the hissi^g Adder and the Snake,
And in her body their black poison take;
Made the more fierce by death determined,
She (Noble Spirit) scorned to be led
In hostile vessels, as a private thrall,
To fill proud triumphs with her wretched fall,
ODE XXXVIII. To his Servant,
Argument.
He wills his Servant, rooms be dre^^
With Myrtle only at his Feast,
Persicos odi.
SErvant, all Persian pomp disdain,
From Teyl-rinde pleated Crowns refrain*
Cease further scrutiny where grows
The ^ardy Rose,
For nothing but plain Myrtles care,
They most beseeming Servants are:
And for my self too, tippling laid
In Vine-tree shade.
The end of the First Book.
ODES. BOOK II.
ODE 1. By Sir R. F. To C. ASINIUS POLLIO.
He exhorts him to intermit a while his writing of Tragedies, until he have
finished his History of the Civil War of Rome; Then extolls that Work.

THE Civil War from the first seeds,
The Causes of it, Vices, Tides
Of various Chance, and our prime Lords
Fatal Alliance, and the Swords
Sheathed, but not yet hung up, and oiled,
The Quarrels fully reconciled:
Thou writ'st a work of hazard great,
And walk'st on Embers in deceit^
Full Ashes raked. Let thy severe
Tragical Muse a while for bear
The Stage: This public Task then done,
Thy Buskins high again put on,
Afflicted Clients grand support
And light to the consulting Court:
Whom thy Dalmatick triumph crowned
With deathless Bays. Hark how the sound
Of thy braced Drums, awakes old fears,
Thy Trumpets tingle in our ears:
How clattering arms make the Horse shog,
And from the Horse-man's face the blood.
Now, now amidst the Common Heard
See the great Generals fight, besmeared
With glorious dust: and quel'd the whole
World, but unconquered Cato's Soul!
Juno, and whatsoever Gods,
To Afric Friends, yielded to th'odds
Of Rome; the Victors Grandsons made
A Sacrifice to Iugurth's shade.
What Field, manured with Daunian blood
Shows not in Graves, our impious Feud,
And the loud crack of Latiums fall,
Heard to the Babylonian wall?
What lake, what river's ignorant
Of the sad war? what Sea with paint
Of Latin slaughter, is not red?
What land's not peopled with our dead?
But wanton Muse, least leaving Toys,
Thou should turn Odes to Elegies,
Let us in Dioneian Cell
Seek matter for a lighter Quill.
ODE II. By Sir R. F. To C. SALUSTIUS CRISPUS.
First, he praises P. for his liberality to his brothers: Then shows, that he
who can repress his appetite, and despise money, is only a King, only happy.

SAlust, thou enemy of gold,
Mettles, which the earth has hoarded, Mould,
Until with moderate exercise
Their color rise.
No Age the name of Pontius smothers,
For being a Father to his Brothers:
Surviving Fame on towering wings
His bounty sings.
He that restrains his covetous soul,
Rules more, then if he should control
Both Land and Sea; and add a West Indies to the East.
The cruel Dropsy grows, self-nurst,
The thirst not quenched, till the cause first
Be purged the veins, and the faint humor
Which made the tumor.
Virtue, that reves what Fortune gave,
Calls crowned Phraates his Wealth's slave,
And to the Common People teaches
More proper speeches.
Giving a Scepter, and sure Throne,
And unshar'd Palms to him alone,
That (unconcerned) could behold
Mountains of Gold.
ODE III. By Sir R. F. To DELLIUS.
That the mind should not be cast down with adversity, (...) puffed up with
prosperity: But that we should live merrily, since the condition of dying is
equal to all.

KEep still an equal mind, not sunk
With storms of adverse chance, not drunk
With sweet Prosperity,
O Dellius that must die,
Whether thou live still melancholy,
Or stretched in a retired valley;
Make all thy hours merry
With bowls of choicest Sherrie.
Where the white Poplar and tall Pine,
Their hospitable shadow join,
And a soft purling brook,
With wrigling stream does crook;
Bid hither Wines and Ointments bring,
And the too short sweets of the Spring,
Whilst wealth and youth combine,
And the Fates give thee Line.
Thou must forgo thy purchased seats,
Even that which golden Tyber wets,
Thou must; and a glad Heir
Shall revel with thy care.
If thou be rich, born of the Race
Of ancient Inachus, or base
Lieft in the street; all is one,
Impartial death spares none.
All go one way: shak'd is the pot,
And first or last comes forth thy lot,
The Pass, by which you are sent
TO Eternal banishment.
ODE IV. By Sir R. F. To XANTHIA PHOCEUS.
That he need not be ashamed of being in love with a Serving-maid: for that the
same had befaln many a Great Man.

TO love a Serving-Maid's no shame;
The white Briseis did inflame
Her Lord Achilles, and yet none
Was prouder known*
Stout Telamonian Ajax proved
His Captives Slave; A^rides loved
In midst of all his Victories,
A Girl his prize:
When the Barbarian side went down,
And Hect^^s death rendered the Town
Of Troy, more easy to be carried
By Grecians wearied.
Know thou from whom fair Phillis springs?
Thou may be son in law to Kings;
She mourns, as one deposed by Fate
From regal state.
Believe 't she was not poorly born:
Phoceus, such Faith, so brave a scorn
Of tempting riches, could not come
From a base womb.
Her face, round arms, and every lim
I praise unsmit. Suspect not him,
On whose loves wildfire Age does throw
Its cooling Snow.
ODE V. Upon Lalage.
Argument.
Since beauteous Lalage's unfit
For Hymen's rites, or Venus yet;
He will with Continency's reign,
All wild Concupisence restrain.
Nondum Subacta.
AS yet with neck subdued she cannot 'bide
The yoke, nor answer the office of a bride;
Nor sustain the eagerful,
Fierce rushes of a pondrous bull.
Thy heifer 'bout the Verdant medows roves;
Sometimes in brooks to allay her thirst she loves;
And sometimes she is much rejoiced
To sport with Calves amongst Sallows moist.
Restrain all longing for Grapes immature:
Straight gaudie Autumn decked in Purple pure.
Will to thee ripe clusters send,
Straight she thy footsteps will attend.
For fleet-heel'd Time with rapid motion flows,
And years subtracted from thy date bestows
On her. Straight with brazen brow
Will Lalage a husband woo.
More loved than Cloris, or nice Pholoe:
Her candid shoulders glittering, like the Sea
In the night with Moonshine died;
Or Gyges sprung from the Isle of Cnide:
Whom if thou rank'st among the Virgin Fyle,
His scarce-spy'd differnce easily might beguile
Quick-ey'd strangers, for his Grace
Of shev'led hair, and dubious face.
ODE VI. By Sir T. H. To SEPTIMIUS.
He wishes Tybur and Tarentum may be the seal of hi^ old age, whose sweetness
he praises.

SEptimius, ready bent, with me
Rude Cantabers, or Gades to see,
And those inhospitable Quicksands, where
The Moorish seas high billows rear.
Tybur, which the Argives built (O may)
That be the place of my last day:
May it my limit be, of ease
From journeys, warfare, and rough seas.
But if the Sister-Fates deny,
I Will to rich fleeced Galesus hie,
And thence down to Tarentum stray,
Erst subject to Phalantus sway.
That tract of land best pleases me,
Where not Hymettia's full fraught Be
Yields better honey, and where grow
Olives, that equal Venafro;
Where the middle air yields gentle frost,
And a long Springtide warms the coast,
And Aulon fertile in rich vines,
Envieth not Falernian wines.
That place, with all those fruitful hills,
Me with desire of thee fulfils:
There let thy due-paid tears descend
Over the warm ashes of thy friend.
ODE VII. To POMPEIUS VARUS.
Argument*
He gratulates that Pompey scome
In safety to his Native home.
O saepe mecum.
OF Thou reduced often to extremest thrall
With me, when Brutus was our General;
Who to Latiums liberty,
And Rural Lars restored thee
Pompey my chief'st associate? with whom I
Often many long-day drunk Wine copiously,
My bright hair with unguents filled,
From rich Malobathrum distilled.
I with thee bare the brunt of Philps Field,
And flying basely flung away my shield,
When those foiled soldiers swelled
With boasts, to blood-drencht earth were felled;
Pay Jove then thy vowed Junckets, and repose
Thy limbs out-tir'd with warfare's tedious woes
Under my Bay-shroud, nor spare
What hogsheads for thee destined are.
Let polisht Goblets freely flow about,
With mem'ry-thralling Massick wines: teem out
Sweet Oils from capacious cup:
Who strives to pleat a chaplet up
Of Myrtle, or moist Parsley? Who Is the guest,
Venus-throw signs Controller of the feast?
I Will play Thracian: pleased amain
To rant, my friend returned again.
ODE VIII. By Sir R. F. To BARINE.
That there is no reason why he should believe her when she swears: for the
Gods revenge not the perjuries of hansome women.

IF any punishment did follow
Thy perjurie: if but a hollow
Tooth, or a speckled nail, thy vow
Should pass. But thou,
When thou have bound thy head with slight
Untwisting oaths, are fairer by it:
And like a Comet spread'st thy rays,
The public gaze,
It boots thee to deceive the Ghost
Of thy dead Mother, and still boast
Of Heaven with their eter^ aboads,
And deathless gods.
Venus but laughs at what is done,
Her easy nymphs, and cruel son,
On bloody whetstone grinding ever
His burning quiver.
New suitors daily are inrol'd,
New servants come, nor do the old
Forsake their impious Mistress door,
Which they forswore.
Thee Mothers for their Fillies dread,
Thee gripple, Sires, and Wives new wed,
Least thy bewitching breath should fray
Their Lords away.
ODE IX. By Sir T. H. To VALGIUS.
That now at length he would desist to deplore his deceased Myste.

THe swelling Cloud, not always powers
On rugged Fields, impetuous showers:
Nor Caspian Sea ( Valgius beloved)
With boystrous storms, is ever moved:
Nor on Armenia's bordring shore,
Dull Isicles stand always hoar:
Or garden-groves with North-windes riv'd,
Or are Ash-trees of leaves deprived.
You still in mournful sort complain,
That death has your dear Myste slain;
Your love sets not, if Vesper rise,
Nor when from Phoebus, Hesper flies:
But thrice-ag'd N^stor did not still,
Tears, for Antilochus distill:
Nor Parents, nor sad Sisters, ever
To wail young Troilus persever.
Cease then at length thy soft complant,
And in our songs, now let us paint
Great Caesar's Trophies, and command,
And how conjoined to conquer land,
The Median stream, and Nyphate strong,
In lesser channels run along,
And Gelons to less limits tide,
In far more straightned Fields do ride.
ODE X. By Sir R. F. TO LICINIUS.
That Mediocrity, and Equality of the Mind, in both Fortunes, are to be
retained.

THe safest way of life, is neither
To tempt the Deeps, nor whilst foul weather
You fearfully avoid, too near
The shore to steer.
He that affects the Golden Mean,
Will neither want a house that is clean,
Nor swell unto the place of showers
His envied Towers:
The tempest does more often shake
Huge Pines: and lofty Turrets take
The greatest falls: and Thunder lops
The mountain tops.
A mind which true proportion bears,
In adverse hopes, in prosperous fears
The other lot. Jove Winters brings,
And Jove's give Springs,
It may be well, if now it is ill:
Sometimes Apollo with his Quill,
Wakes his dull Harp, and does not ever
Make use of's Quiver.
In boystrous Fortune ply thy Oar,
And using it stoutly to the shore;
Contract in too auspicious Gales
Thy swelling sails.
A Paraphrase on the same Ode, by S. W.
WOuld you a constant Fortune keep
Licinius? Trust not the false Deep;
And though black storms begin to roar,
As little trust the shore.
The man who loves the golden mean,
Has his Herth neat, and house swept clean:
Below't, he envies not the Court,
Above 't, he cares not for it.
Winds oft'nest tear the lofty Pine,
While its low growth defends the Vine;
Huge Piles in greatest ruins fall,
And Thunder levels all.
A gallant breast hope^ well at worst,
A change will come, though 't be long first;
And when it is come, he fears the best,
And dare not think of rest.
This Heaven will teach us every year,
Winter has Summer in the rear;
And when the Ebb does run most low,
The Tide ere long will flow.
Though it is bad now, 'twill soon be spent,
Apollo's Bow 's not always bent,
But sometimes he will the Muse bid sing,
And touch a better string.
When Fates are cross, then courage show,
Be wise when gales more prosperous blow;
Strike sail, and put not too far out,
The Wind may turn about.
ODE XI. By Sir T. H. To QUINTUS HIRPINUS.
Cares laid aside, let us live merrily.

WHat the Cantalrian stout, or Scythian think,
Divided from us by rough Adria's brink,
( Quintus Hirpinus) do not thou enquire,
Nor for life's use, which little does desire,
Be too solicitous. Sleek youth, apace
Hast's hence away, and with it beauties grace,
Dry-aged hoariness which furrows deep
Dispelling amorous fires, and gentle sleep.
The Summer Flowers keep not their Native grace*
Nor shines the bright Moon, with a constant face.
Why do thou vex thy mind, subordinate
Unto the counsels of Fernal Fate?
Why under this high Plain, or Pine-trees shade
In discomposed manner, careless laid
Anoint not we, and then to drink prepare?
Free Bacchus dissipates consuming care.
But (oh) what Boy Falernian wine's hot rage,
Will soon for me, with Fountain streams assuage?
Or, who will Lyde wish from close retire
Hlther to come? Boy, with her Ivory lire
Bid her make haste, and like Laconian maids
Tie her neglected hair in careless braids.
ODE XII. TO MAECENAS.
Argument.
Dire wars, and Tragic subjects, they
Incongruous are for Lyric lay.
Ly^^m^^ia's splendor Horace sings,
And such like amatorious things.
Nolis longa.
NOtedirous Wars on sierce Numantia's plain,
Nor hardy Hannibal, nor Scicilian main,
Purpled with Carthaginian blood, desire
Be warbled on soft Lyric wire:
Nor barbarous Lapiths, nor the liquor-swell'd
Hyleus, nor whom Alcides prowess quelled,
That brood of earth, whose dismal terror made
Aged Saturns glorious house afraid.
But thou ( Maecenas) in the looser style
Of an Historian, better can compile
Great Caesar's acts, and threatful Princes shown
Chained by the necks along the Town.
My Muse would treat of those melodious lays
Of thy dear Ladies, sweet Lycimnia's:
And of her clear refulgent eyes, and breast
With Flames of faithful love possessed:
Whom neither dancing postures mis-became,
Nor jestful skirmish, nor in sportive game
Fair virgins with incircling arms to inthral,
On famous Dians festival.
Would for the wealth rich Achaemenes ows,
Or all the riches fertile Phrygia shows,
Or the Arabs houses which well furnished are,
Exchange thy dear Lycimnia's hair?
While she for kisses wreaths her neck awry,
Or does with gentle cruelty deny
What, then her love, she rather covets t'ane:
Straight she will a^t^cipate again.
ODE XIII. By Sir R. F. To a Tree, by whose fall in his Sabine Villa, he was
like to have been slain.
That no man can sufficiently understand what to avoid: From thence he slides
into the praises of Sappho and Alcaeus.

A Planter with a (^) was he
That with unhallowed hand set thee,
A trap for the succeeding race,
And ignominy of the place.
He might as well have hanged his Sire,
Or practiced all the Poisons dire
Medea tempered, or have shed
His Guests blood sleeping in his bed:
Or if a worse crime may be found,
As to place thee upon my ground,
Unlucky wood; thee, stagg'ring trunk,
To brain thy Master when thou art drunk.
No man knows truly what to shun;
The Punick Seaman fears to run
Upon some Shelf, but does not dread
Another Fate over his head:
The Soldier, Shafts, and Parthian fight:
The Parthian chains and Roman might.
But Death had still, and still will have,
A thousand back-wayes to the grave.
How near was I Hells Jaundied Queen,
And Minos on the Bench to have seen,
And the described Elysian shades?
And Sappho, of her Countrey-maids
Complaining on Aeolian wire?
And the Alcaeus, with gold lyre
In fuller notes thundering a Fight,
Rattling a storm, fluttring a flight?
Both (worthy of a sacred pawse)
The pious Ghosts hear with applause:
But most the Fights, and Tyrants fears,
The shouldring throng drink with their ears.
What wonder, when the infernal hound,
With three heads, listens to that sound:
The Furies snakes their curles unknit,
Nor find revenge so sweet as ^t.
It Is Play-day too, with Pelop's sire,
And him that stole from heaven the fire.
Orion even his hunting leaves,
And greater pleasure thence receives*
ODE XIV. By Sir R. F. To POSTHUMUS.
That Death cannot be avoided.

AH Posthumus? the years of man
Slide on with winged pace, nor can
Virtue reprieve her friend
From wrinkles, age, and end.
Not, though thou bribe with daily blood
Stern Dis, who with the Stygian Flood
Does Gerion surround,
And Titius Acres bound.
Sad Flood, which we must ferry all
That feed upon this earthly ball,
From the King to the poor
Beggar that howls at door.
In vain avoid we Mars's fury,
And breaking waves that kill and bury:
In vain the sickly falls,
Fruitful of funerals.
Visit we must the sootie shore
Of dull Cocytus, the empry store
Of Daunus wicked stock.
And Sisyphs restless rock.
Thou must forgo thy lands and goods,
And pleasing wife: Nor of thy woods
Shall any follow thee,
But the sad Cypress-tree.
Thy worthy heir shall then carowse
Thy hoarded wines, and wash the house
With better Sack, then that
Which makes the Abbots fat.
A Paraphrase on the same Ode, by S. W.
1.
Time ( Posthumus) goes with full sail,
Nor can thy honest heart avail
A furrowed brow, old age at hand,
Or Death unconquered to withstand:
One long night,
Shall hide this light
From all our sight,
And equal Death
Shall few days hence, stop every breath.
2.
Though thou whole Hecatomb's should bring
In honor of the Infernal King,
Who Geryon and Tytio bold,
In chains of Stygian waves does hold:
He Will not prize,
But more despise
Thy sacrifice:
Thou Death must feel,
It Is so decre'd by the Fatal Wheel.
3.
The numerous Offspring of the Earth,
That feed on her who gave them birth;
Each birth must have its funeral,
The Womb and Urn's alike to all:
Kings must die,
And as (...),
As thou or I;
And though they have
Achievements here, there is none in the Grave.
4.
In vain we bloody battles fly,
Or fear to sail when wines are high;
The Plague or an infectious breath,
When every hour brings a new Death.
Time will mow
What e're we sow;
Both weal and woe
Shall have an end,
And this the unwilling Fates must send.
5.
Cocytus lake thou must waft over,
Thy tottered boat shall touch that shore;
Thou Sisypus ere long must know,
And into new acquaintance grow:
Shall with life,
Leave house and wife,
Thy loves and strife,
And have no tree,
But the sad Cypress follow thee.
6.
Mean while thy heir shall nobly quaffe,
What thou with hundred locks kept't safe,
Caecuhan wines, and wash the Flore
With juice would make an Emperor rore:
'Twill be thy lot,
Question it not,
To be forgot
With all thy deeds,
E're he puts on his Mourning weeds.
ODE XV. By Sir R. F. Against the Luxury of his Age.
OUr Princely piles will shortly leave
But little lands for ploughs to cleave;
Ponds out-stretch Lucrine shores,
Unmarried Sycamores
Supplant the Elmes. The Vi'let, Rose,
With all the junkets of the Nose,
Perfume the Olive-yards,
Which fed their former Lords:
And Daphne twists her limbs to shun
Tne sons rude Courtship. Not so done
By Cato's Precedent,
And the old Regiment.
Great was the Commonwealth alone,
The private small. No wide Balcon
Measured with private square
Gaped for the Norths cool air.
Nor the next turf might men reject;
Bid at the Public Charge to erect
Temples and Towns, alone,
Of beautiful new stone.
ODE XVI. By Sir R. F. To GROSPHUS.
That tranquillity of the mind is wished by all: But that the same is not
purchased by heaping up Riches, or obtaining Honors, but by bridling the
desires.

QUiet! the trembling Merchant cries,
Into Egean seas driven far;
When the Moon winks, and he descries
No guiding st^^.
Quiet! in War the T^raian bold;
Quiet! the Medes with quivers dight;
Not to be bought with gems, nor gold,
Nor purple bright.
For it is not wealth, nor armed troops,
Can tumults of the mind remove,
And cares, which about fretted roofs
Hover above.
His little's much, whose thrifty board
Slunes with a salt that was his sires:
W^ose easy sleeps nor fears disturb,
Nor base desires.
Why in short life eternal care?
Why changing for another Sun?
Who, having shunned his Native air,
Himself could shun?
Take horse, rude Care will ride behind;
Embarque, unto thy ship she crowds:
Fl^^ter them Stags, and the East Wind
Chasing the Clouds,
Let minds of any joy possessed,
Sweeten with that whatever gall
Is mixed: No soul that ere was blessed,
Was blessed in all.
The famed Achilles timeless died,
Old Tyth^n did his bliss outlive,
And Chance, what she to thee denied,
To me may give.
A hundred flocks about thee bleat,
And fair Sicilian heifers low;
To thee large neighing Mares curvete:
In scarlet thou,
Twice-dipt, are clad. Indulgent fate
Gave me a Graunge; a versing vein;
A heart which (injured) cannot hate,
But can disdain.
ODE XVII. by Sir R. F. To MAECENAS sick.
That he will not live after him.

WHy do thou talk of dying so?
Neither the Gods, nor I Am content,
Maecenas, that thou first should go,
My Pillar and great Ornament.
If thee, the one half of my soul,
A riper fate snatch hence: alas!
What should I stay for, neither whole,
And but the dregs of what I was?
That day shall end us both: Come, come,
I Have sworn't; and will not break it neither:
March when thou will to thy long home,
That journey we will make together.
Chimaera's flames, nor (were he rise
Again) Briareus hundred hands,
Should keep me back. It Is justice, this:
And in the Book of fate it stands.
Were I or under Libra born,
Or Scorpio my ascendant be
With grim aspect, or Capricorn
(The Tyrant of the Latian sea:)
Our stars do wondrously consent.
Benigner Jove reprieved thy breath
When Saturn was malevolent,
And clipped the hasty wings of Death,
In frequent Theater when thee
Thrice the rejoicing people clapped,
A falling Trunk had brained me,
Between if Faunus had not slept,
The guardian of Mercurial men.
Pay thou an ample sacrifice,
And build the Chapel thou vowd'st then;
For me an humble Lamkin dies.
ODE XVIII. By Sir T. H.
He affirms himself to be contented with a little, while others are wholly
addicted to their desires, and increase of riches, as if they should always
live.

NO guided roof, nor Ivory Fret,
For splendour in my house is set;
Nor are beams from Hymettia sought,
To lie a-thwart rich Colmns, brought
From Africa; nor I heir unkown,
Make Attalus his wealth, mine own.
No honest Tenants wives you see,
Laconian purples weave for me:
A loyal heart, and ready vain
Of wit I have, which does constrain
Rome's richest men to seek the love
Of me, though poor: Nor gods above
Do I invoke for larger store;
Nor of Maecenas ask I more.
To me my single Sabine field,
Sufficient happiness does yield.
One day thrusts on another fast,
And new Moons to the wane do have.
When Death (perhaps) is near at hand,
Thou fairest Marbles do command
Be cut for use, yet do neglect
Thy grave, and houses still erect:
Nay would abridge the vast Seas shore,
Which loudly does at Baiae rore:
Enriched little, less content,
With limits of the Continent.
Why often pull'st thou up the bounds,
TO enlarge the circuit of thy grounds,
Encroaching far from Confines known,
To make the neigbouring field thine own?
The husband, wife, and sordid brood,
With ancient household gods, that stood
In quiet peace, must be expelled:
Yet is not any Mansion held
For the rich Landlord, so assured,
As deep in Hell to be immured.
Then whither do you further tend?
The indiffrent earth an equal friend,
As willingly opens her womb,
For Beggars grave, as Princes tomb.
Gold could of Charon not obtain,
To bear Prometheus back again.
Proud Tantalus, and all his stock,
Death, with the bands of fate does lock:
And called, or not called ready stands,
To free the poor from painful bands.
ODE XIX. Upon BACCHUS.
Argument.
He filled with Bacchus power, assayes
TO ebuccinate his fame and praise.
Bacchum in remotis.
ON Rocks remote I Bacchus chanced t'espy,
Teach verse (o trust me ye posterity)
Listening Nymphs, and Satyrs there
With Goat-feet, and erected ear.
My heart appalled with sudden horror, I,
Of Bacchus full, shout Evohe on high:
Forbear Liber, o forbear,
So dreadful for thy horrid spear.
I may have stubborn Thyads for my theme,
A fount of Wine, and rivers running Cream,
Chaunt again how honey drils,
And from the hollow stem distills,
I thy blessed consorts glorious constellation,
I Pentheus Palace brought to desolation,
I may sing the dismal fate
Of Thracian Lycurgus state.
Thou turn'st Rivers, and the Indian Main,
Thou (soaked with wine) on distant mountains l^'ne,
Do Thrace women's tresses plait
In V^per-wreaths without deceit:
Thou, when those impious Giants climbed on high,
To Jove's Court Royal through the boundless sky,
Flung'st down Rhaecus with the claws
Of Leo, and his horrid jaws:
Although more prone to dances, sports, and plays
Thou were esteemed, nor fit for Martial frayes:
Yet did either war or peace
Indifferently thy genius please.
At thee gold-horn'd, F^end Cerberus did look
With harmless eye, and fawningly he shook
His tail, and with triple-head
Thy feet touched, when thou did recede.
ODE XX. By Sir T. H.
HORACE turned into a Swan, will fly all ever the world, whence he promises
the immortality of hi^ Poesy.

A Twofold Poet, through the liquid sky,
I with a strong unusual wing will fly:
No longer shall I of the Earth partake,
But out of Envies reach the World forsake.
I am not issued of ignoble strain,
Nor whom Maecenas pleases to retain
Under the title of beloved shall die,
Or in the Stygian lake forgotten lie.
Now, now, upon my legs a rugged skin
Is overspread, and I a Swan am seen
Upward transformed; a light and downie plume,
My fingers, and winged shoulders now assume.
And now a shrill-tune Bird become, I Will soar
And much more swift then Icarus, explore
The Lybian Syrtes, and the murmuring sand
Of Bosphor straights, and Hyperborean land.
Me, Colchos, and the Dacian, who does faign
Fear of the Marsian's arms shall entertain,
Gelons remote, and they who on the brink
Of I^er dwell, or Rhodanus do drink.
Banish from my thin Hearce your funeral mones,
Your ill bemoaning tears, complaints, and groans:
Clamor forbear, or fondly to confer
The needless honor of a Sepulcher.
The end of the second Book.
ODES. BOOK III.
ODE I. By Sir R. F.
That a happy man is not made by Riches or Honors, but by tranquillity of the
mind.

I Hate lay-Vulgar: make no noise,
Room for a Priest of Helicon:
I sing to noble Girls and Boys
Such verses as were never known.
Feared Kings command on their own Ground;
The King commanding Kings is Jove:
Whose Arm the Giants did confound,
Whose aweful brow does all things move.
One man may be a greater Lord
Of land then other: this may show
A nobler Pedigree: a third
In parts and fame may both out-go:
A fourth in Clients outvie all.
Necessity in a vast Pot
Shuffling the names of great and small,
Draws every one's impartial lot.
Over whose head hangs a drawn sword,
Him cannot please a Royal feast:
Nor melody of lute or bird,
Give to his eyes their wonted rest.
Sleep, gentle sleep, scorns not the poor
Abiding of the Plough-man: loves
By sides of Rivers shades obscure:
And rockt with West-windes, Tempe Groves;
That man to whom enough's enough,
Nor raging seas trouble his head,
Nor fell Arcturus setting rough,
Nor fury of the rising Kid:
Not hail-smit Vines and years of Dearth;
Sometimes the too much wet in fault,
Sometimes the stars that broil the earth,
Sometimes the Winter that was naught.
The Fish fear stifling in the sea,
Damm'd up. The Master Builder and
H's men, the Land-sick Lord too, he
Throws rubbish in with his own hand.
But fear and dangers haunt the Lord
Into all places: and black Care
Behind him rides: or, if on board
A ship, it is his companion there.
If Marble keep not Fevers out,
Nor purple raiment help the blind,
Nor Persian Ointments cure the gout*
Nor Massick Wines a troubled mind:
With envied posts in fashion strange
Why should I raise a stately pile?
My Sabine vale why should I change
For wealth accompanied with toil?
ODE II. By Sir T. H. To his Friends.
Boys are to be enured from their tender age, to poverty, warfare, and painful
life.

LEt th'able youth, himself enure
By sharp wars raught, want to endure:
And mounted on his horse, with spear,
Confront bold P^rthians, free, from fear:
Let him exposed to open air,
Live, and attempt the hard'st affair:
Whom when some warlike Tyrants Queen,
Or Virgin-marriage ripe has seen,
Afar from hostile walls, may cry
With sighs, which from sad passion fly;
O, that my Royal Lord, untrain'd
In Martial feats, would be restrained,
Not by fierce Combats fatal stroke,
That wrathful Lion to provoke,
Whom bloody Anger's direful rage,
In thickest slaughters does engage.
It is a sweet, and noble gain,
In Countries quarrel to be slain*
Death the swift flying man pursues
With ready steps: Nor does he use
To spare from unavoided wrack,
Youths supple hams, or fearful back,
Virtue, that never repulse admits,
In taintless honors, glorious sits,
Nor takes, or leaves Dignities,
Raised with the noise of vulgar cries.
Virtue (to worth Heaven opening wide)
Dauntless, breaks through ways denied.
And (taught) the Rabble to despise,
Forsaking earth to heaven flies,
Yea trusty silence is not barred,
From having a deserved reward.
He, who to blab the holy Rites
Of secret Ceres phane delights,
Under the same roof shall not be,
Nor in frail Vessel sail with me.
Often Jove neglected makes the just
To smart with those are stained with lust*
Seldom Revenge, though slow of pace,
Leaves ill foregoing men to trace.
ODE III. By Sir R. F.
A Speech of Inno at the Council of the Gods, concerning the ending of the war
of Troy, and the beginning which the Roman Empire should take from the Trojans.

AN honest and resolved man,
Neither a peoples tumults can,
Neither a Tyrants indignation,
Un-center from his fast foundation;
Nor storms that from the bottom move
The Adrian sea, nor thundering Jove:
If the cracked Orbs would split and fall,
Crush him they would, but not appall.
Pollux, and wandering Hercules,
Gained Heaven by such ways as these:
Amongst whom Augustus, leaning, sips
Immortal Nectar with red lips.
This way deserving Bacchus clomb
The high Olympus, with his own
Tamed Tigers, which Ambrosia feed,
And Romulus on Mars his steed:
Pleased Juno speaking a good word
On his behalf, at Council Board.
Troy, Troy, (through mine, and Pallas grudge)
A fatal and adultrous Judge,
And foreign woman overthrew,
With its false King and damned Crew,
Because Laomedon forsook
The Gods, and brake the Oath he took.
The Spartan Strumpets famous guest
Is now no more jewell'd and dressed:
No more does Priams Perjured house
Resist bold Greeks by Hectors prowes:
And wars, which I inflamed, are done;
My wrath then, and the Trojan Nun
's Abhorred Offspring, here I give
To his father Mars that he should live
In bowres of light, suck Nectar-bowls,
And be transcribed into the rolls
Of quiet Gods, I will abide.
So long as spacious seas divide
Ilium and Rome; so long as beasts
On Priamus and Paris breasts
Insult, and (undisturbed) the wild
Whelp in their tombs; let the exiled
Reign great in any other land:
The Capitol refu'gent stand;
And awful Rome with seven proud heads
Give Laws to the triumphed Medes:
Rouzing her self, left her extend
Her dreadful name to the worlds end;
Where mid-land seas part Africks soil
From Europe, to the floods of Nyle;
More valiant to despise hid gold,
(Which wisely Nature did withold)
Then force it to man's use, by sack
Of Temples, or by Natures wrack.
Whatever corner would impeach
Her progress, that, let her Sword reach:
Visit the stores of snow and hail,
And where excessive heats prevail.
Yet warlike Romans destiny,
On this condition I decree,
That they (too pious, and grown high)
Shall not re-build their Mother Troy.
With Troy! Troy's fate shall be revived,
And all her ominous birds retriv'd,
When second wars our self will move,
The Sister and the Wife of Jove.
If Phoebus harp a Brazen wall
Should thriee erect, thrice it should fall
( Razed by my Greeks) the wife, in chain,
Thrice mourn her sons and husband slain.
But whether saucy Muse? These things
Agree not with the Lutes soft strings.
The words of gods cease to repeat,
And with small voice matters so great.
ODE IV. By Sir R. F.
The Poet says, That he has been delivered from many dangers by the help of
the Muses; And that it has gone ill with all who have attempted any thing
against the Gods.

DEscend Thalia with a song
From Heaven; my Queen, I Would have it long
To the shril pipe or to the flute,
The viol or Apollo's lute.
Do 'st hear? or do I sweetly rave?
I hear in yonder trees, which wave,
Thy rustling robe, and in that spring
The tuning of thy silver string.
Me, amorous turtles (Poets theme)
As by my native Aufids stream,
A child oppressed with sleep and play,
Under a Mountain side I lay,
Fearless (for what has he to fear,
Who from his birth was Heavens care?)
With sacred Bays and Myrtle boughs,
On which no Beast did ever browse,
Covered, least Snake or ugly Bear,
Should do me hurt as I slept there;
Which set the neighb' ring Fields at gaze,
As wondering what should be the cause.
Whether I mount the Sabine hill,
Or with cold springs Preneste chill,
Or me the healing Bath allures;
Where ere I am: Muses, I Am yours.
Friend to your springs, with your songs rapt,
At lost Philippi Field escaped;
The fall of my own cursed Tree,
And shipwreck in Sicilian Sea.
Go you with me, I Will (dreadless) try
The Bosphorus that threats the sky,
And (traveling) defy the thirsty
Syrian sands to do their worst.
Visit the Britains, fierce to strangers,
The horse-fed Thracians bloody mangers,
The Scythians, whom no Sun does warm,
And none of them shall do me harm.
Great Caesar, you with Martrial toil
Tired out, and glad to breath a while
In Winter quarters with his men,
Refresh in the Pierian Den.
You give him mild advice; And well
From you he takes it. We can tell,
The Giants selves for all their troop
Of monstrous Bulkes, were Thunder-strook
By him that towns, and dreary ghosts,
Immortal Gods, and mortal hoasts,
The stupid Earth, and restless Main,
Does govern with one equal reign.
The horrid band and brotherhood,
Who (whilst upon their terms they stood)
Pelion to heap on Ossa strove,
Gave not a little care to Jove.
But what could Mimas, and the strong
Typhaeus, what Porphyrion long,
What Rhaecus, and with hurled trunk
(Torn up by th'roots) the fury-drunk
Enceladus, rushing against
Minerva's ringing shield advanced?
Here the devouring Vulcan stood,
There Matron Juno, and the god
That never lays his Quiver by,
Bathes in pure dews of Castaly
His dangling locks, haunts Delian woods,
Patros, and Rhodes, and Xanthus floods.
Uncounsil'd force with his own weight
Is crushed; a force that is temperate
Heaven it self helps: and hates no less
Strength that provokes to wickedness.
This truth Orion understands,
And Gyges with the hundred hands:
He, purposing chaste Dians Rape,
Could not her Virgin-arrows escape.
The Earth on her own Monsters thrown,
(Thundered to endless night) does groan
Over her sons: Aetna does rore,
Burning, and not consumed. No more
Can Tytiu's heart in Vulters claw,
Or wast it self, or fill her Mawe.
Offended Proserpine restrains
Perithous in three hundred chains.
ODE V. By Sir R. F.
The praises of Augustus, the dishonor of Crassus, the constancy of Regulus,
and his return to the Carthaginians.

JOve governs Heaven with his nod:
Augustus is the earthly God;
Bold Britains to the Empire bowed,
And Persians, with late trophies proud.
Could Crassus soldier lead his life
Yoakt basely with a barbarous wife?
And with Foe Father-in-law grow gray
In Arms, under a Medians pay!
(O fathers! and degenerate shame!)
His blood forgotten and his name,
Eternal Vesta, and the Gown,
Whilst there was yet a Jove, and Rome!
This feared wise Regulus his mind,
And so the base Accord declined,
Weighing the consequence, unless
The Captive Youth died pitiless.
I saw ( quoth he) our Ensigns stuck
In Punick fanes, without a stroke
Soldiers disarmed, Citizens
Their free hands bound behind with chains.
And the Ports open, and that field
Which Romans had incampt on, tilled.
All this I saw. Redeemed with gold
They Will grow, belike, in fight more bold.
Buy not iniquity. As stain
White wool 'twill never white again:
So, if true Virtue fall, despair
To stop her till the lowest stair.
A Hind out of the Tramels free,
And make her fight, then so will he
That rendered to a faithless foe,
And Carthaginians overthrow
In second War; That tamely took
The lash, and (Death but named) shook.
Why these (forgetting whence they came)
Confounded war with peace, O shame!
Great Carthage! thou have overcome
The virtue (more then troops) of Rome.
His chaste wife's kiss, and his small fry
Of Babes, he is said to have put by,
(As being a slave) and not to have took
From Earth his stern and manly look:
Till he the unwilling Senate brought
To vote the thing that he had sought:
Then through his weeping friends he went
Into a glorious banishment.
Though well he knew what torments were
Ready prepared for him there
By Barbrous men. Yet brake through all
His Kindred, and the crowded Hall
To beg of him he would not go,
No otherwise then he would do
From Clyents swarms, after the end
Of a long Term, going to spend
In sweet Campania the Vacation,
And give his mind some Relaxation.
ODE VI. By Sir T. H. To the Romans.
Of the corrupt manners of that Age.

ROman, resolve, thou shall desertless taste
Sins scourge, for Vice of Predecessor past,
Until thou do again repair
Decayed Temples, and make fair
The falling houses of the Gods disgraced,
And cleanse their images, with smoke defaced.
To think thee less than Gods, thy power commends;
Hence take beginnings, hither aim thy ends.
The Gods neglected, many woes
On Italy distressed, throws.
Twice Pacorus, and twice Moneses hand,
Our inauspicious armed troops disband:
Who with a plentious prey made glad,
To little chains more links do add.
The Dacian and the Ethiop fierce in wars,
Has almost raz't the City, rent with jars:
One with his Navy formidable,
With darts the other better able.
This age in vice abounding, first begins
Chaste stocks, and Nuptials to pollute with sins;
The woes which from this fountain flow,
People, and Country overthrow.
The Maid for marriage ripe, much joys to learn
Ionick dances, and can well discern
With art to sain, and quickly prove,
The pleasures of unlawful love.
Straight made a wife, in amidst of husbands cups,
She with young Gallants and Adult'rers sups;
Nor cares to whom she yields by stealth,
(When lights are out) loves lawless wealth.
But asked does rise, her knowing husband by,
To prostitute her marriage-modesty;
At Factors call, or Pilots hire,
Of lustf^l shame, a costly buyer.
That youth came not from such Forefathers strain,
Who did the sea with Punick blood distain:
Not by such hands did Pyrrhus fall,
Antiochus, nor Hannibal.
But in those days a brave and manly race
Of rustic soldiers lived in this place,
Well skilled in Plough and Sabine Spade,
And so to strict obedience made,
That if sharp Mothers bade, at their return
They on their shoulders brought logs hewed to burn,
When Phoebus changed had the mountains shade,
And weary unyoak'd Oxen homeward made,
And that night gave their toil dispense,
Chasing the Suns bright chariot hence.
What wastes not with Times devouring rage?
Our fathers life, much worse than Grandsires age,
Sees us more wicked, to produce
An Offspring fuller of abuse.
ODE VII. By Sir R. F. To ASTERIE.
He comforts her, being sad and solicitous for the absence of her husband.

ASterie, Why do thou mourn
For Gyges, shortly to return
On wings of Vernal air,
Rich in Sicilian War?
More rich in faith. He by a blast
After long storms, on Epire cast
His Widowed nights, steeps there
In many a watchful tear.
Yet Chloe's subtle messenger,
Showing what sighs it pulls from her,
Whilst in thy Flame she fries,
A thousand ways him tries.
She tells how the false Woman wrought
On credulous Pretus, till she brought
A cruel death upon
Too chaste Bellerophon.
Of Peleus near his fatal hour,
Whilst he shuns love, that is armed with power:
And (cunning) rakes from dust
All precedents for lust.
In vain: For deaf as Rocks to prayer,
He Is yet unmoved. But take thou care
Enipeus at next door
Do not thy love procure.
Though none with better skill be seen
To weild a Horse in Mars his green;
Nor with more active limbs
In Tyburs Channel swims.
Shut to thy gate before it darken,
Nor to his whining Music hearken:
And though he still complain
You Are hard, still hard remain.
ODE VIII. To MAECENAS.
Argument.
No reason that Maecenas should
It for an admiration hold,
He should Mars Calends celebrate,
Although he live in single state.
Martiis coelebs.
HOw I a Batch'lour spend my hours
On Mars his Calends, what mean flowers*
And Incense-bolls, and coals on green
Turf-altars seen,
Th'admir'st, O thou profoundly skilled
In either tongue. I almost killed
With falling tree, sweet Cates devote,
And white He-goat.
He yearly on this very day
Will fling the Rosin'd Can away,
To soak Wine, old as Tullus date
Of consulate.
Maecenas bouze the hundredth Cup
To thy friends health; Night-lamps set up
Upon fair day; from hence retire
All noise and ire.
Let pass all civil cares for Rome,
For Dacian Cottison's o'rcome:
Now Scyths with Bow unbended yield,
And quit the Field.
Heed not though Vulgars toil sustain;
Though private, public care refrain,
And using what time present brings,
Shun serious things.
ODE IX. By Sir. R. F. A Dialogue of Love and Jealousy, betwixt Horace and
Lydia.
Hor. WHilst I possessed thy love, free from alarms,
Nor any Youth more acceptable arms
About thy Alablaster neck did fling,
I lived more happy then the Persian King.

Lyd. Whilst thou ador'st not more another face,
Nor unto Chloe Lydia gave place;
I Lydia, soaring on the wings of Fame,
Eclipst the Roman Ilia with my name.

Hor. Me, Thracian Chloe now, rules absolute,
Skilled in sweet Lays, and peerless at her Lute:
For whom to die I would not be afraid,
If Fates would spare me the surviving Maid.

Lyd. Me, Calys, rich Ornitho's heir, does scorch
With a reciprocal and equal torch:
For whom I would endure to die twice over,
If Fates would spare me my surviving Lover.

Hor. What if old Venus should her Doves revoke;
And curb us (stubborn) to her Bra^en yoke:
If bright-trest Chloe I would henceforth hate,
And to excluded Lydia open the Gate?

Lyd. Though he be fairer then the Morning Star;
Thou, lighter then a Cork, and madder far
Then the vexed Ocean, when it threats the Sky,
With thee I Would gladly live, I Would willing die.

A Paraphrase on the same Ode, by J. W. Esquire.
Hor. Whilst I alone was dear to thee,
And only chief in thy embrace,
No Persian King lived life to me,
Or half so blessed or happy was.

Lyd. Till thy love roul'd, and did prefer
Chloes new face, before Lydia,
In fame, I (far surpassing her)
Was greater than Romes Ilia.

Hor. Chloes the Saint I pray to now,
Sweetly she sings, and plays of the Lute*
For whom, would Destiny allow,
My life should be a substitute.

Lyd. The same's young Calais (Orthniu's heir)
To me, for whom I should be glad
If I might die, though twice it were,
Would the same Fates but spare the Lad*

Hor. But say! if as before I burn?
Say I once more put on my chain?
Chloe shak'd off, and I return
To my first Lydia again?

Lyd. Though he is more glorious then a Star,
Thou then a Cork more fickle be,
Or pettish then the Sea, I swear
Once more to live and die with thee.

ODE X. Against LYCE.
Argument.
Harsh Lyce Advertised here
She would hard-heartedness forbear*
And some commiseration grant
To him, her humble supplicant*
Extremum Tanaim.
LYce had drunk of remote Tanais tide,
Or to some Barbarous Scythian been a bride;
Yet, me prostrate before thy doors, thou should
Bewail t'expose to Northern cold.
Hear'st how the Gates crack? how the woods resound
Amongst beauteous structures placed all around?
And how the air conglaciates the snow,
When all the Heavens serenely show?
All pride ungrateful unto Lovers shun:
Least Fortunes wheel should retrogradely run.
No Tyrrhene father has begotten thee
O^ hard-to-wo Penelope.
Although with thee nor Gifts, nor prayers avail,
Nor Lovers violet tinctures mixed with pale,
Nor thy Mate Love-struck with Pierian whore;
O spare thy suppliants I implore:
Thou more relentless than a rigid tree,
And Maurian Serpents not so cruel be,
My tender sides not always can sustain
At thy hard doors down-syling rain.
ODE XI. By Sir R. F. To MERCURY.
That he would dictate to him a song, wherewith to bend Lyde. The Fable of
Danaus Daughters.

O Mercury (for taught by ^ou
Deaf stones by the ears Amphion drew)
And Shell, whose hollow Belly (...)
(...) seven strings.
Once mute and graceless, now the tongue
Of Feasts and Temples: lend me a song
To third the maze of Lyde's prayer
Resisting ear.
Who like a three years Colt does fetch
A hundred rings, and's hard to catch;
Free from a husband, and not fit
For backing yet.
Thou make stiff Forests march, retreat
Prone rivers: Cerberus the great
Porter of Hell to thee gave way,
Stroak'd with a Lay*
Though with a hundred Snakes he curl
His head, and from his nostrils hurl
A filthy stream, which all bedrops
His triple chops.
Ixion too with a forced smile
Did grin. The tubs stood dry a while,
Whilst with thy Music thou did please
The Belides.
Tell Lyde that; that Virgin-slaughter,
And famous torment, the vain water
Coozning their Urnes through thousand drains,
And Posthume pains.
For cruel Maids laid up in store,
Cruel. For what could they do more,
That could with unrelenting steel
Their Lovers kill?
One only worthy Hymen's flame,
And worthy of immortal Fame,
Her perjured father (pious child)
Bravely beguiled:
Who said to her young Husband; Wake,
Least an Eternal sleep thou take,
Whence least thoo look: deceive my Sire,
And Sisters dire:
Who like so many Tigers tear
(Alas!) the prey: I (tenderer)
Will neither slay, nor keep thee thus
In The Slaughterhouse.
Me let my Savage father chain,
Because my Husband is unflain,
Or into farthest Africa
Ship me away.
By Land or Sea take thou thy flight,
Covered with wings of Love and Night:
Go, go, and write when thou art safe
My Epitaph.
ODE XII. To NEOBULE.
Argument.
They live in miserable thrall
Whom no refreshments cheer at all:
Stout Heber wounds with amorous dart
His Sweetheart Neobule's heart.
Miserarum est.
They Are wretched, who in love never recreate,
Nor with sweet Wines their maladies abate,
With fear of Uncles sharp reproof dismayed.
Thy basket, Neobule, Cupid takes,
And Liparean Hebrus luster makes
Thee leave thy web, and painful Pallas trade.
He than Bellephron can better ride
At hand-fights, foot-course still victorious tried,
When his oiled limbs are bathed in Tybers flood:
He cunning is to chase a roaming Heart,
O'r Champains, and transfix him with his dart,
And surprise Bores skult in the bushy wood.
ODE XIII. To the Fountain of Blandusia.
Argument.
He to Blandusia's Crystal Spring
A Kid for Sacrifice will bring:
And does the sweet delights recount,
Of that refriegerating Fount.
O fons Blandusiae.
BLandusian Spring, tralucenter than glass,
Worthy wine-offerings, decked with flowery grass,
I Will slay to thee to morn
A Kid crowned with youthful horn,
Choosing his mate, and conflicts, all in vain:
For a lascivious Offspring shall distain,
And file thy frigid flood
With mixture of Purple blood.
You Are free from Dog-stars servent influence.
Thou do thy sweet refreshing streams dispense
To Bullocks tired out,
And Herds roving all about.
Even thou shall be a far-renowned Spring,
Whilst I of Rocks crowned with the Ilex sing:
Whence the loud waters rush
Down headlong with vi'lent gush.
ODE XIV. By Sir T. H. To the Roman people.
This Ode contains the praises of Augustus returning out of Spain, after his
Conquest over the Cantabrians.

GReat Caesar who is said to go,
Like Hercules against his foe,
To purchase Bays by death, again
Victorious is returned from Spain.
The Wife that is with one husband pleased,
Let her come forth, the Gods appeased.
Octavia, Caesar's Sister, haste,
And mothers with your daughters chaste.
Attired in modest veil appear,
And sons returned safe draw near:
You Boys, and you now married train
Of wives from evil words abstain.
From me this new made Holy Day
Black sullen cares shall take away:
Nor fear I in great Caesar's reign
By force or tumult to be slain.
(Boy) crowns, and unguents now prepare,
And vessel kept, since Marsian war,
If any such concealed has been
By wandering Sportacus not seen.
Let hither shrill Neaera hie,
And hair perfumed in tresses tie:
But if the Porter make delay
With churlish answer, haste away.
White hoary hairs temper the mind,
To brawls, and quarrels erst inclined:
This in youths heat I could not brook,
When Plancus charge of Consul took.
ODE XV. Against CHLORIS.
Argument.
That Chloris (now well stepped in Age)
Should Lust and Wantonness assuage.
Uxor pauperis.
AT length, poor Ibicu's wife,
Affix a period to thy vicious life,
And unto thy reproachful trade.
And now that Death so near approach has made,
Amongst Maids leave playing, nor enshroud
Those fulgent stars with thy obscuring cloud.
Nor Chloris think that seems thee,
Which gracefully becomes thy Pholoe.
Thy daughter breaks open young men's doors
Better, like Thyas raged when Tim^r^l rores:
Renowned Luceria's Fleeces grace
The more when old, than any Lyric lays,
Or crowns with roses decked about,
Or hogsheads to the extremest dregs drunk out.
ODE XVI. By Sir. R. F. To MAECENAS.
That all things fly open to Gold: Yet HORACE is contented with his own
condition, in which he lives happy.

DAnae in Brazen Tower immured,
From night-adulterers, doors barred,
And of fierce dogs a constant ward
Would have sufficiently secured,
If Jove and Venus had not fooled,
The Jailer of the cloistered Maid,
(Though of his own shadow afraid)
Turning his Godship into Gold.
Gold loves to break through armed Guards,
And Castles that are Thunder-proof,
The Grecian Augur's sacred roof
Was undermined by rewards.
Gifts were the Macedons Petar,
With which he blew up City-gates,
Subverted Rival Kings and States,
And laid aboard their Men of War.
With growing riches cares augment,
And thirst of greater. I did well
To shrink my head into my shell,
Maecenas Knight-hoods ornament.
The more a man to himself denies,
The more indulgent Heaven bestows.
Let them that will side with the I's:
I Am with the Party of the No's.
A greater Lord of a small store,
Then if the fruitful Crops of all
Appulia I mine own did call:
In midst of so much plenty poor.
My little wood, and my pure stream,
And corn that never fails; makes me
A man more truly blessed, then he
That wears rich Africks Diadem.
Though neither Crossick Bees produce
Honey to me, nor clothing fine
Segovian flocks: nor Massick wine
Mellow in barrels for my use:
Yet (...) Poverty's away.
Nor, wished I more, would thou deny't.
Who, with contracted appetite
May easier my tribute pay,
Then if deputed Egypts King.
Large issues follow large supplies.
He, to whom Heaven nothing denies,
Owes an account of every thing*
ODE XVII. To AELIUS LAMIA.
Argument.
He Lamia's regal stem displayes
Forth in Encomiastic Lays:
Wills him his Genius to cheer,
Against the presaged storm appear.
Aeli, vetusto.
O Aelius, sprung from Lamus ancient name,
From whose stem all precedent Lamias came,
And thy family and tribe,
Which nothing Registers describe:
Thou from his loins draw'st thine original,
Who reigned first within the Formian wall,
And whose amply spread command
Raught Liris, laving Maric's strand.
An Eastern tempest shall with furious roar,
Fling leaves in woods, and leaves upon the shore:
If the aged Cow decry
A true presaging augury.
Lay, while thou can, dry faggots on the fire:
With lushious Wine to morrow feed desire,
A Pig fat, and tender slay,
And let thy Hindes keep Holy Day.
ODE XVIII. By Sir T. H. To FAUNUS;
Who being an infernal pestilent VVood-god, he prays that passing through his
Fields, he would be favorable to him and his.

FAunus, who after Nymphs do range,
Through my precincts, and fruitful Graunge
Pass gently, and propitious be
To flocks, and me.
A tender Kid the year shall end,
Full Cups of Liquor ( Venus friend)
We Will pay; Fumes shall on Altars fly
In odours high.
Beasts, when Decembers Nones appear
In grazy grounds make sportive cheer:
The jocund Clown in Meads does feast;
The Ox does rest.
The Wolf amongst frearless Lambs does stray,
Woods strew thee leafs upon this day;
The Ditcher joys with measured mirth
To tread the Earth.
ODE XIX. To TELEPHUS.
Argument.
At Telephus he scoffs, who whiles
He Histories obsolete compiles,
Of things which chiefly constitute
An happy life is wholly mute.
Quantum distat.
THe space 'twixt Inachus his reign,
And Codrus bravely for his Country slain,
And Aeacus his Kin, and fights
Fought under Sacred Ilium thou writes:
But of a Choan hogsheads price,
And who with fire cold water qualifies,
In whose house, and what hour to allay
Pelignian cold, thou not one word do say.
Boy, quick bring Cups for Cynthia's rise,
And for Midnight, bring the Augurs Cup likewise,
Murena's, and corrouze off Wine,
No less then three healths, no more then nine.
A Poet, who the unequal Tribe.
Of Muses loves, let him nine Jugs imbibe.
The Graces with naked Sisters joined,
Let them, for fear of brawlings, be confined,
And drink three Cups off, and no more;
O, how I love to frolic it, and roar!
Why sounds not still the Phrygian Flute?
Why Pipes and Harps permitted to be mute?
I parsimonious hands despise.
Strew Roses, and let out wild frantic noise
Arrive to envied Lycus ears,
And neighbor Maid unfit for Lycus years.
Mature-grown Chloe courts thee now,
Tel'phus graced with rank locks of comely show,
And bright as radiant Vesper: I,
I wasting ardour for my Glyc'raes fry.
ODE XX. To PYRRHUS.
Argument.
How dangerous a thing 'twould prove
T'abstract Nearchus from his love.
Non vides quanto.
PYrrhus, how dangerous it is, confess,
To take Whelps from a Lioness:
Straight thou scarr'd Ravisher wilt run,
When battel's done.
When she through crowds of youthful men
Shall to Nearchus turn again,
Great question it is who bears away
The greater pray.
As thou prepar'st thy speedy piles,
She whets her dreadful Tusks the whiles:
He (the Umpire) trampled down, they say,
The Victors Bay.
And wafted his sweet shiveled hair
With gentle blasts: like Nireas fair,
Or Ganymede snatched up from fountfull
Ida's Mount.
ODE XXI. To His VVine-vessel.
Argument.
He speaks to his Rundiet to effuse,
For Corvine's sake, choice Massick juice:
Thence takes occasion to define
The praises and effects of Wine.
O nata mecum.
KInd vessel, coaetaneous with my date,
Composed when Manlius bare the consulate,
Whether thou invite to weep,
Or jest, or brawl, or love or sleep,
Where'r mark thy choice Massick liquors hide,
Well-worthy broaching on some sacred Tide:
Now Corvinus thee injoyns,
Come down, and tap thy mellow Wines.
He, though well studied in Socratic books,
Contemns thee not with sour and rigid looks;
And grave Cato as is famed,
Was often with Bacchus gift inflamed.
Thou sometimes sett'st upon a gentle rack
Severe wits: Thou the wiser pates can make
With thy mirth creating juice,
Even all their secrets thought; effuse.
Thou do the Forelorn with hope fortify,
And make the poor man lift his horns on high,
Who drunk, nor the Scepters fears
Of Kings incensed, nor Soldiers spears.
For Bacchus, (Venus if in merry cue)
And graces loath to break the social Crew,
And lamps lighted, shall thou run,
Till Stars decline the orient Sun.
ODE XXII. Upon DIANA.
Argument.
He Diana's offices relates,
To whom his Pine he dedicates.
Montium custos.
O Tripple Queen of Woods and Hills,
Who freest parturient wombs from ills
At three Orizons, and do ever
Them safe deliver.
Accept the Pine that shrouds my Farm,
Which yearly I Will imbrew with warm
Bores blood, that sacrificed strike
With tusks oblique.
ODE XXIII. By Sir T. H. To PHIDILE.
The Gods are to be honored with pure hands, and the testimony of a well spent
age.

IF Rural Phidile, at the Moons arise,
To Heaven thou lift thy hands in humble wise:
If thou with Sacrifice thy Lars wilt please,
Or with new fruit and greedy swine appease,
Thy fertile Vineyard shall not suffer blast
From pest'lent South, nor parching dew be cast
Upon thy Corn, nor shall thy children dear,
Feel sickly Fits in Autumn of the year.
It is the long vowed victime, which is fed
Amongst Holmes, and Oaks on snowie Algids head,
Or which in fat Albanian pastures grew,
That shall the Priests sharp axe with blood imbrew.
To thee, who petty Gods do magnify,
With Myrtle branch, and sprig of Rosemary,
It nothing appertains their feasts to keep
With frequent slaughters of the fattest sheep.
If thy hand, free from ill, the Altar touch,
Thou shall the offended Gods appease as much
With gift of sparkling Salt, and pious meal,
As if thou vows with costly victimes seal.
ODE XXIV. by Sir R. F.
He inveighs against covetous men, who continually join houses to houses,
building in the very Sea it self: when in the mean time no buildings can free
them from the necessity of dying. He says the Scythians are happy, who draw
their houses in wagons, and till the fields in common. Moreover, denies that
corruption of manners, and license of sinning to be amongst these, which is
amongst the Romans. But for the rooting out of these evils, together with the
depraved desire of increasing riches, affirms, there is need of a more rigid
Discipline.

THough richer then unpoll'd
Arabian wealth, and Indian Gold,
Thou with thy works should drain
The Tyrrbene and whole Pontick Main;
Thou could not, when Death lays
On Thee his Adamanti^e mace,
Thy mind from terror free,
Nor body from mortality.
Wiser the Scythians,
Whose houses run on wheels like Waines;
And frozen Getes, whose Field
U^^ounded does free Ceres yield:
Nor is it the custom there,
To sow a land above a year;
And when that Crop is born,
The (...) it each by turn.
There women mingle not,
For Son-in-Law's a poisoned pot;
Nor govern: Or their Dou'^
Presuming, (...) adultrers power.
Their (...) to be well bred:
And Chastity, flying the Bed
Of others, their own trust
Persuading, and the price of Lust.
Oh! he that would assuage,
Our bloodshed and intestine rage,
If he would (...) have
His Countries Father on his grave;
Let him not fear to oppose
Unbridled license to the nose:
So shall he gain great praise
In after times; since (women days!)
We envy living worth,
But miss it when it is laid in earth.
For what do our laws stand,
If punishme^^ ^eed not (...) land?
What serves vain preaching for.
Which cannot cure our lives? if nor
Those lands which flames embrace;
Nor where the neighboring Boreas,
Shuts up the Ports with cold,
And snows fast nailed to the free hold,
The Mariner repel?
If crafty Merchants learn to quell
The horridst Seas? the fear
Of that crime Want making them bear,
And do all things, and balk
Severer virtues narrow walk*
Would Heaven we'd carry all
Our wealth into the Capitol!
Or in the next Sea duck
Our jewels and pernicious muck,
Fuel of all that is (...)!
If we repent as we ought,
Strike at the root of ills;
And mould we our too pliant wills
To rougher arts: the child
Of noble lineage cannot wield
A bounding horse of war,
Nay fears to hunt, more skilled by far
to stride off the Greek bowl,
Or the forbidden D^ce to trowl,
The whilst his perjured Father
Deceives his partners trust, to gather
For one that has no wit.
So ill got wealth grows fast, and yet
Something still short does come,
To make it up an even sum.
ODE XXV. Upon BACCHUS.
Argument.
The Lyric of God Bacchus craves,
TO induct him to his Bowers, and Caves.
Wherewith his influence repleat,
He may Augustus praise repeat.
Quo me Bacche.
WHere dragg'st me ( Bacchus) with thy power
Repleat, to what Grove, or obscure Bower
Am I haled, with transformed mind!
In what Reciuses is my Muse confined,
While Caesar's endless honor I
Advance to heaven, and rank with Jove on high:
I Will sing a glorious, and new verse,
Such as no man did ere before rehearse.
Just so lays Evias in a Muse
Awaked on lofty Mountains, where he views
Cold Hebers streams, and snowy Thrace,
And Rhodope where barbarous people trace.
O how do I a wandrer love,
TO admire the crags and solitary groves!
King of Flood-nymphus, and Bacchae's, who
Can with your hands tall Ash-trees overthrow:
No petty Theme in humble phraze,
No mortal subject shall my Muse deblaze.
Bacchus, sweet danger it is to chase.
A God, whose crest green Vine-branch Crownets grace.
ODE XXVI. To VENUS.
Argument.
The Poet now well struck in years,
His Lyre, and amorous Theams forlears:
And prays the Cyprian Queen to dart
One love-shaf^ at proud Chloes heart.
Vixi puellis.
I Lately with young Virgins did comply,
And was in Cupids camp renowned high:
Now my Engines (wa^s at end,)
And Lute I Will on this wall i^spend,
Bord'ring on Sea-born Venus'es left hand
Here, be^e let my enlightening Tapour stand,
With my leavers and my bow,
That borr'd-up doors can open throw,
Thou who do o'r blessed Cyprus Isle preside,
And M^mphis where no Thracian snow can bide,
O Queen, with ^ar fetched stroke
Once haughty Chloes ire revoke.
ODE XXVII. By Sir R. F. To Galatea going to Sea.
He deters her principally by the example of Europa.

LEt ill presages, guide the Ill,
A screecning Owl, or from a hill
A She-wolf mad upon the Flocks,
Or pregnant Fox,
And a Snake shaft-like shot athwart
Their horses way to make them start,
Their journey stop. What place is here
For provident fear?
Before the tempest boading foul,
Descend into the standing Pool,
My prayer shall from the Orient steer
The Kings Fisher.
Be blessed, wherever thou would be,
And Galatea think of me;
No ominous Pie thy steps revoakes,
No Raven croaks.
Yet pale Orion sad descends;
I know too well what it portends,
When black I see the Adriatic,
Or white the Iapick.
Let our foes wives, and all they love
The rising Kids blind anger prove,
And the vexed Ocean when it roars,
Lashing the shores.
Europa so, trusting her soft
Side to the ticing Bull, shriekt often,
The Rocks and Monsters to behold,
Though she was bold.
She that late picked sweet flowers in M^^es,
And wore meet Ga^l (...) N^mphs heads,
In a clear night could nothing spy
But Sea and Sky.
In pepulous ^rete arrived soon after,
O Sire, (quoth she) left by thy Daughter
And (...) my feeble breast
By love oppressed,
Whence whether rapt? One death's too small
to expiate a Virgins fall.
Do I (awake) true crimes lament,
Or (innocent)
Does some false Dream put me in pain?
Was It better through the horrid Main
To rove far off: or with my Father
Fresh Flowers to gather?
Had I that naughty Bull now here,
How with my nails I could him tear,
And break the horns about that pate
So loved of late!
Shameless I left my Sires aboads:
Shameless I pawse on death; ye Gods,
(If any hear) show me the way
Where Lions stray.
Ere my fair skin grow tand and loose,
And of the tender prey the juice
Run out; whilst I am plump I would
Be Tigers food.
Die hase Europa (whispers me
My Sire) behold you beckning tree!
The Zone from thy chaste waste unknit
To thy neck fit.
Or if sharp Rocks delight for speed,
This hanging cliff will do the deed:
Unless (being come of Royal kin)
Thou Had rather spin,
And be a barbrous Mistress thrall,
Her husbands trull. Venus heard all,
And Cupid falsely laughing now
Wi^ tunbent bow;
At length she said, This rage forbear;
That naughty Bull thou shall have here:
Prepare thy self against he returns
To break his horns.
Jove is thy Bull. These Fountains dry;
Learn to use greatness moderately:
Thy Thirds oth' World shall called be
Europe from thee.
ODE XXVIII. By Sir T. H. To LYDE.
He persuades Lyde to spend the Day dedicated to Neptune, pleasantly.

ON Neptunes feasts what else do we?
Straight ( Lyde) broach, and bring to me
Caecubian Wines laid up in store,
And let strong wisdom sway no more.
Thou see it is Mid-time of the day,
And yet, as if swift hours did stay,
A But thou spar'st, was Cellar-stall'd,
When Bibu^us was Consul called.
With mutual songs we will Neptune please,
(...) ^he green-hair'd Nereides.
On crooked Lyre sing thou with art,
L^tona, and swift Cynthia's dart:
Whilst our last strain her praise unfolds,
Who Cnidos, and bright Cyclads holds:
And Paphos with payr'd Swans does view;
The night shall likewise have his due.
ODE XXIX. By Sir. R. F. To MAECENAS.
He invites him to a merry Supper, laying aside public^ cares.

Offspring of Tyrrhene Kings; I have,
Waiting thy leisure in my Cave,
Of mellow Wine an unbroacht But,
With Spicknard and Rose buds, to put
Upon thy hair. Break off delay:
Do not moist Tybur still survay,
And Aesulaes declining hill,
And his that did his Father kill.
Leave fulsome plenty, and thy proud
Palace whose head is in a cloud:
Respite the love of smoke, and noise,
And all that wealthy Rome enjoyes.
Rich men are mostly pleased with change,
And cleanly meals in a poor grange,
Without their Tapestries, unplough
The furrows of a careful Brow.
Andromed now peeps with his star,
Now Procyon shows the Dog not far,
He barks, and Phoebus kindling Rays
Hasle to bring back the sultry days.
The Shepherd now with his faint Flock
Looks, panting, for a gushing Rock,
The horrors of a gloomy wood;
And no air stirs to crisp the flood.
Thou mind'st affairs of State, and
With fears for Rome) busiest thy thought fraught
What Scythians, what the B^ctrians think,
And those that distant Tanais drink.
Wise God has wrapped in a thick cloud
What is to come: and la^ghs aloud
When Mortals fear more then their share.
Things present manage with due care:
The rest are carried like a stream,
Which now runs calm as any dream
^^to the Tyrr^ene sea* anon
(Beyond all limits overflown)
Sweeps with (...) herds, and flocks,
And trees entire, are broken rocks,
Making the woo^^ and mountains roar.
That man has (...)
For a hard (...), that can say
Into his Soul, (...) to day.
To morrow (...) or rain,
Yet cannot or (...) vain,
^
^That which wa^ yesterday nioy'd.
Fortune that knows the (...) part,
To use her (...) with proud art,
Her fickle (...), now bestows
(...), now on another throws.
If she stay, (...) if she will pack,
^ gave her all her presents back,
(Like Wo^ers when a match is broke)
(...) wrapping me in my old cloak,
My virtue, marry the next hour
(...) Poverty with out a Dower.
When North winds bellow, it is not I
(...) scared to wretched prayers, and cry
Let not my Spice, my Silks increase
The riches of the greedy seas.
When men may be in Oars convaid
Through Pontick storms, then I will trade.
ODE XXX. By Sir R. F.
By writing Lyricks, he says, He has provided better for the Immortality of
his Name, then if he bad procured Brazen Statues, and Pyramids to be e^ected to
him. And intimates that his chief praise would be. That he was the first of the
Latins, who in this kind of Verse imitated the Greeks.

A Work out-lasting Brass, and higher
Then Regal Pyramids proud Spire,
I have absolved. Which storming winds,
The Sea that turrets undermines,
Tract of innumerable days,
Nor the rout of time can raze.
Totally I shall not die,
And much of me the Grave shall fly.
Posterity my name shall boast,
When Rome her self in Rome is lost.
Where like a King loud Aufid reigns,
Where Daunus (poor in stream) complains
To neighboring Clowns: I shall be sed
The man, that from an humble head
T'a Torrent fwoln did first inspire
A Roman Soul in Grecian Lire.
I labor with deserved praise;
Crown, crown me (willing Muse) with Baies.
The End of the Third Book.
ODES. BOOK IV.
ODE I. To VENUS.
Argument.
Arrived to Fifty nox, he should
His Pen from amorous Theams withold:
Yet night and day does Ligurine
his heart to fervent love incline.
Intermissa Venu:
THou Venus do commence again
Thy long suspended wars. O pray refrain:
I am not as I wont to be,
While gracious Cynera ruled over me.
Dire mother of sweet loves forbear
Me, now obdur'd and at my Fiftieth year,
T'incline to thy soft (...)
Where fair-teng'd young men's flattries court the to
In Paulus M^ximus (...),
Thou drawn with (...) more fitly shall corrouze,
And want on it: if thou desire
T'inflame thy flagrant Liver with loves Fire,
He, noble, and of Comely, race,
And a good pleader in his Clients case,
And for an hundred arts renowned,
Shall spread thine Ensigns through the ample round*
And when he laughs, more prevalent
Than those large gifts his Rival did present,
He under Cypress-roof shall make
Thee alli of Marble nigh the Albane lake.
There copious store of Fra^kincense
Shall thou snuff up, to recreate thy sense,
And lyve, with Phrygian pipe, and fl^te,
All shall thine ears prom^scuously salute.
There Youths and tender Virgina, they
Thy sacred power advancing, twice a day,
Shall with their candid feet rebound,
Like Pries^s of Bacchus three times from the ground,
No woman, nor young youth love I,
Nor am I prone to vain credulity,
Nor in carro^z^^g to c^^test,
Nor with f^^sh Flowers my temples to invest*
But why, (...) Lygurinus, why
Glide (...) tears thus slowly from my eye?
Why in the midst of language trips
My eloquent tongue with unseemly slips?
I, when surpised with gentle sleep,
Do thee (methinks) in my imbracements ^e^p:
Now o'r wood and Mars his plain,
O hard of heart / thee prosecute amain.
ODE II. By Sir R. F. To Antonius Julus, the son of Mark Anthony, the Triumur.
That it is dangerous to imitate the ancient Poets.

WHo thinks to equal Piudar, tries
With waxen wings to reach the Skies,
Like him that (falling) a name gave
TO his watery grave.
As a proud stream that swollen with rain,
Comes pouring down the hills amain,
So Pindar flows, and fears no drouth,
Such his deep mouth:
Worthy the Bays, whither he power
From unexhausted Springs a shower
Of lawless Dytherambs, and thunders
In bolder numbers:
Or sings of Gods, and Heroes (seed
Of Gods) whose just swords did outweed
The Centaures, and Chimera stout
Her flames put out:
Or mourns some youth, from his sad spouse
Unkindly torn, whose strength and prowes
And golden mind he lists to the sky,
And lets not die.
This Theban Swan, when he will sing
Among the clouds, raises his wing
On a stiff gale. I like the Be
Of Calabrie,
Which (toiling) sucks beloved Flowers
About the Thymie Groves, and Skowrs
Of Fount-well Tyber, frame a terse
But humble verse.
Thou Anthony in higher strains
Chaunt Caesar, when he leads in chains
Fierce Germans, his victorious brows
Crowned with Bay-boughs*
Then whom a greater thing, or good,
Heaven has not lent the earth, nor should
Though it refined the age to the old
Saturnian gold.
Thou shall sing to the public plays
For his return, and Holy Days
For our prayers heard, and wrangling pleas
Bound to the peace.
Then I (if I may then be heard)
Happy in my restored Lord,
Will join in the close, and o! (I Will say)
O Sunshine day!
And (thou proceeding) we will all sing,
Io Triumph! And agin
Io Triumph! At each turning
Incense burning.
A Hecatomb's required of thee,
And weaned Calf excuses me,
In high grass fat and frisking now,
To pay my vow.
Resembled in whose shining horns,
The increasing Moon his brow adorns;
Save a white feather in his head
All sorrel red.
A Paraphrase on the same Ode, by A. C.
1.
PIndar is imitable by none;
The Phoenix, Pindar, is a vast species alone;
Who er'e but Dedalus with Waxen wings could fly,
And neither sink too low, nor soar too high?
What could he who followed claim,
But of vain boldness the unhappy fame,
And by his fall a Sea to name?
Pindars unnavigable song,
Like a swollen Flood from some steep mountains pours along*
The Ocean meets with such a voice
From his enlarged mouth, as drowns the Oceans noise.
2.
So Pindar does new words and figures roll
Down his impetuous Dithyrambique tide,
Which in no Channel daignst' abide,
Which neither banks nor dikes control,
Whither the immortal Gods he sings
In a no less immortal strain,
Or the great acts of God-descended Kings,
Who in his numbers still survive and reign
Each rich Embroidred line,
By his Sacred hand is bound;
Which their triumphant brows around,
Does all their Starrie-Diadems outshine.
3.
Whither at Pisa's race he please
To carve in Polisht verse, the Conqueror^ (...)*
Whither the swift, the skilful, or the strong,
Be crowned in his nimble artful vigorous song,
Whither some brave young man's untimely Fate,
In words worth dying for, he celebrate
Such mournful, and such pleasing words,
As joy to his Mothers, and his Mistress grief assords.
He bids him live, and grow in fame,
Among the Stars he sticks his name;
The Grave can but the dross of him devour,
So small is Deaths, so great the Poets power.
4.
Lo, how the Obsequious wind and swelling air,
The Theban Swan does upwards bear
Into the welks of Clouds; where he does play,
And with extended wings opens his liquid way:
Whilst, alas, my timorous Muse,
Unambitious tracts pursues,
Does with weak unballast wings,
About the massy brooks and springs,
About the trees new blossomed heads,
About the Gardens painted beds,
About the Fields and flowery Meads,
And all inferior beauteous things,
Like the laborious Be,
For little drops of honey flee;
And there with humble sweets, contents her industry.
ODE III. By Sir. R. F. To MELPOMENE.
That be is born to Poetry, and by the benefit thereof, has obtained
immortality and glory.

WHom thou Melpomene
Have smiled on in his infancy,
Him neither Isthmian game
Shall ever for a wrestler fame;
Nor stout Olympic steeds
Victorious draw; nor Martial deeds
Show to the Capitol
A Lawrel-crowned General
For faming Kings: but floods
Which wash rich Tybur, and green woods
Their bushy locks grown long,
Make big with an Aeolian song.
Queen Rome has noted me
Of her own sacred Quire to be,
Where sweet-tongu'd Poets sing;
And now I fear not envies sting.
O Muse! whose sugard words
Are married to the golden Chords:
Who, if thou touch their tongues,
Giv'st to mute Fishes Swan-like songs:
It Is (all) thy Boon, that I
Am pointed at as I pass by
Romes Lyric: thine it is,
I live, and please, if I do this.
ODE IV. By Sir. R. F.
He celebrates the Victories of Drusus Nero (who was Son-in-law to Augustus
Caesar) over the Rhaetiars and Vindelicians: Also commemorates certain valiant
deeds of Claudius Nero.

AS the Armor-bearer of great Jove
(Made King of all that soars above,
For stealing him from Troy
The Ganymed.
yellow-tressed Boy)
Youth whilom and his Native courage
Drew from his nest ere he could forage:
And now soft Winds, being fair,
Teach him to from in the air
Unwonted steps: Anon more bold
With hostile force assaults a fold;
Resisting Snakes anon
For fight and prey sets on:
Or such as kids a Lion view
From tawny mother weaned new,
Ready in pastures sweet
To hansel his first teeth:
Such Rhaetians did behold and fly
Drusus beneath the Alps, who why
They carry at their backs
An Amazonian Ax,
I lift not to determine here:
Perhaps nor can. But this is clear
Their long Victorious bands
Subdued by a Boy's hands,
Felt what a mind right gor, and true-^red
under lucky roofs could do,
What Caesar's fatherly
Care of the Claudii.
A valiant man gets men of spirit;
Even beasts their fathers minds inherit;
Nor does the bird of Jove
Get a degenerous Dove.
But learning inward strength thrusts forth,
And Princely breeding confirms worth:
Still where good precepts want,
Good Plants turn recreant.
What unto Nero's, Rome thou ow'st,
Speak Alps, and Asdrubals red Ghost,
And that bright day to thee
The black Clouds made to flee:
The first, since the dire African
Through the Italian Cities ran
Like fire through Piny woods,
Or storms on Tuscan Floods.
Thenceforth thy youth with prosperous pains
Still grew; and thy religious fanes,
Sacked by the Punick sword,
Had their chased Gods restored;
And perjured Hannibal' began say
At length; Porr sheep (of wolves the prey)
We worry, whom to fly
Were a great victory.
The Nation that through flames of Troy,
And Tyrrhene billows did convoy
Their Gods, and Babes, and hoar
Sires, to the Ausonian shore,
Like a dark Oak on the rich top
Of Algidum, which Hatchets lop,
Grows by it loss, and takes
Strength from the very axe.
Not mangled Hydra more increast
Under Alcides, nor that beast
Jason, or he subdued
Of Thebes, more lives renewed.
Plunge them ith'sea; they swim fresh out:
Foyl them, with double force they will rout
The Conqueror: and sight
As in a Mistress fight.
Now shall I send no more proud Posts
To joyful Carthage. Lost, O! lost's
Now Asdrubal is slain,
The glory of our name.
What is it but N^ros can effect?
Whom Heavens with prosperous stars protect,
And their own prudent care
Clews through the Maze of War.
ODE V. By Sir R. F. To AUGUSTUS.
That he would at length return to the City. Describes the peace and happiness
which Italy enjoyed under his Government.

HEavens choicest gift, Romes greatest stay,
Now thou art too too long away:
The holy Senate urge thy word
For soon return, return. Afford,
Like day, thy presence; like the Spring
Give a new life to every thing:
The first, good Prince, our night will chase,
The second will prolong our days.
As a fond mother for her son,
Whom, having over seas been gone
Above a year, the envious wind
Keeps back from her embraces kind;
And now she eyes the Vane, and prays,
And from the crooked shore does gaze:
So, with a loyal passion struck,
The People for their Caesar look.
For now the Oxen walk in peace:
Corn, and white innocence increase:
The cleared Main the Seamen sail:
Faith promises, and dares not fail.
The married Bed unsoil'd remains,
Custom and law preventing stains:
Babes, like the father, praise the Mother:
Punishment is Sins Twin-brother.
Who fears cold Scythians? who the Medes?
Fierce sons of Germany, who dreads?
Whilst Caesar does in safety reign,
Who is afraid of Wars with Spain?
Each man his proper Field does till,
And hides the Sun behind his hill:
Returning then to sup with Glee,
His second course is praising thee.
For thee he prays, to thee propines,
Thee with his household gods he joins,
As, for like reason, thankful Greece
Did Castor and great Hercules.
Long last these golden Holy Days!
Thus Italy for thy life prays:
Sprinkled at night, not changed at morn,
When to dry labor they return.
ODE VI. To Apollo and Diana.
Argument.
He does in Saecularian verse
Phoebus, and Diana's praise rehearse.
Dive quem.
GOd, whose revenge for boasts, the crew
From Niobe sprung, and Tytius knew,
And great Achilles, who did Troy
Almost destroy.
The greatest soldier's not like thee,
Though Sea-bred Thetis son he be,
Who did with dreadful Javelin make
Troys turrets shake.
No Pine with keen edg'd-axe hewn down,
Nor Cypress with East-blasts o'r-thrown,
So amply fell, his Carcass found
On Trojan ground.
He never (as sculkt in horse compiled
For Pallas sacrifice) beguiled
Ill-id ling Troy, and Priams Court,
With dancing sport.
But publicly in flames had flung
(O dire?) each Grecian infant young,
Yea formless Embroyes not yet come
From Mothers womb;
Had not thy own, and Venus prayer
Prevailed with father Jove, to rear
Walls f^r Aeneas toils, of state,
And better fate.
O Phoebus shrill Thalias theme,
Who lav'dst thy looks in Xanthus stream,
Protect the honored Daunian Muse,
Smooth Agyeus.
'Twas Phoebus gave thee wit, and art,
And name of Poet did impart.
Ye noblest Maids, and youths of high-
Born ancestry;
Ye guarded in Diana's bounds,
Whose bow swift Stags, and Lynces wounds,
My Lesbian measures patron stand,
And guide my hand:
Chaunting (as of old) Diana's Sun,
And the still light-augmenting Moon,
Fructiferous, making Months to hie
On speedily.
Now wed, thou wilt say: I, who each Verse
Of Horace knew, did Lays rehearse
TO the Gods, when every age in use
Did feasts reduce.
ODE VII. By Sir R. F. To L. Manlius Torquatus.
Proposing the arrival of the Spring, and the equal necessity to all men of
dying, without hopes of living again, and proposing likewise the change and
vicissitude of all things, he invites to lead a merry and pleasant life.

THe snows are thawed, now grass new clothes the earth,
And trees new hair thrust forth.
The season's changed, and brooks late swollen with rain,
Their proper banks contain.
Nymphs with the Graces linkt dare dance around
Naked upon the ground.
That thou must die, the year and hours say
Which draw the winged day.
First Spring, then Summer, that away does chase,
And must it self give place
To Apple-bearing Antumn, and that past,
Dull Winter comes at last.
But the decays of time, Time does repair:
When we once plunged are
Where good Aeneas, with rich Ancus wades,
Ashes we are, and shades.
Who knows if Jove unto thy life's past score
Will add one morning more?
When thou art dead, and Rhadamanthus ^ust
Sentence has spoke thee dust,
Thy blood, nor eloquence can ransom thee,
No nor thy piety.
For chaste Hippolytus in Stygian night
Diana cannot light:
Nor Theseus break with all his virtuous pains,
His dear Perithous chains.
A Paraphrase on the same Ode.
THe snow is gone, the grass returns
To Fields, the Perucks to the trees,
Earth plays with her varieties.
Each River in Consumption mourns,
And humbly glides beneath her bourns,
Contained within her banks degrees.
The naked Graces lead the dance,
With whom the Nymphs in measures more,
The sliding years our hopes reprove;
Which to Eternity advance,
And the swift hours their speed inhance,
The day by snatches to remove.
Soft Western gales allay the cold,
On the Sprlngs heels the Summer treads,
It self then to destruction leads.
Where Autumn does her fruits unfold,
Straight comes the Winter stiff and cold,
And life with lazy humor deads.
Yet Moons may wane, and soon increase,
But when once we thither go,
Where wealthy men and worthy too,
Must all lay down their heads at last,
When their needless toyls are past,
To dust and ghost we vanish all;
Who knows that those great powers on high,
The present sum of these our days,
Which by to morrows reckoning raise?
Our heirs as well as we must die,
And from our clutcht hands all will fly,
Which our kind will to them conveys.
That once among the dead thou be,
And the just Judge do sentence give,
In glorious state on all that live:
Thee no extraction thence shall free,
No eloquence, no piety,
Thy life recover, or reprieve.
No Father can, though much he mourn,
From the dark vale of shade beneath,
Restore his guiltless Babe to breath;
Nor friend can make his friend return,
When once imprisoned in his Urn,
From cold forgetfulness and death.
ODE VIII. By Sir R. F. To Martius Censorinus.
That there is nothing which can make men more immortal, then the verses of
Poets.

MY friends, I would accommodate
With goblets, Grecian tripods, Plate
Of Corinth- Brass: and, Censorine,
The worst of these should not be thine:
That is to say, if I were rich
In those same antique pieces, which
Parrhasius and Scopas fame;
He skilled to paint, in stone to frame
This, now a God, a Mortal now.
But I have not the means; nor thou
A mind, or purse, that wants such knacks.
Verse thou do love. Thou shall not lack
For Verse. And hear me what it is worth,
Not inscribed Marbles planted forth
To public view, which give new breath
To great and good men after death:
Not the swift flight of Hannihal,
And his threats turned to his own wall:
Not perjured Carthage wrapped in flame,
By which young Scipio brought a name
From conquered Africa: speaks his praise
So loud as the Pierian Lays.
Nar, were Books silenced could thou gain
The Guerdon of thy virtuous pain?
What had become of Ilia's child
She bare to Mars, had darkness veiled
The merits of our Romulus?
From Stygian waters Aeacus,
Virtue and favoring verse assoils,
And consecrates to the blessed Isles:
A man that has deserved to have praise,
The Muse embalms; She keeps Heavens Keys,
Thus Hercules (his labors past)
With Jupiter takes wished repast:
The sons of Leda stars are made,
And give the sinking Seaman aid;
Good Bacchus, crowned with Vine-leaves,
His drooping Voraries relieves.
ODE IX. By Sir R. F. To LOLLIO.
That his writings shail never perish: Virtue without the help of Verses is
buried in oblivion. That he will sing Lollio's praises, whose virtue he now
also celebrates.

LEast thou should think the words which I
(By sounding Aufid born) compile
To marry with the Lute b'a skill
Never before revealed, shall die:
Though Homer lead the Van, the Muse
Of Pindar, nor Alcaeus heights,
Grave Stesichore, nor Caean sighs,
Are silenc't, or worn out of use.
Nor what of old Anacreon played,
Has time defaced: Love lights his fire*
And with his Quiver wears the Lyre
Of the yet fresh Aeolian Maid.
Helen was not the only she
A curled gallant did inflame,
The splendor of his Royal train,
And Gold and Pearls embroyderie.
Nor Teuc^r first that drew a strong
Cydonian Bow. Trojans had fought
Before: nor that age only wrought
Deeds worthy of the Muses song.
Nor valiant H^ctor, and the brave
Deiphob, were the only men
Received deep wounds upon them then,
Their children and chafte wives to save.
Men slasht ere Diomed was made:
But all are in oblivion drowned,
And put unmourn'd into the ground,
For lack of Sacred Poets aid.
Virtue that is buried, and dead Sloth,
Differ not much. Un-understood
Thou shall not die; nor so much good
As thou host acted feed the Moth.
Lollio thou art a man have skill
To fathom things: that being tried
In either Fortune, could abide
In both up-right, and Lollio still.
Of coverous fraud a scourge severe:
On whom the all-attracting Gold
Could with its Tenters never take hold:
Nor Consul of one year. When ere
Avertuous Magistrate, and true,
Shall call good, gain, bid Bribes avaunt;
Upon Opposers bellies plant
His conquering Flags; Lollio, that is you.
He is not happy that has much:
But who so can his mind dispose
To use aright what Heaven bestows,
He justly is accounted such:
If he know how hard want to bear:
And fear a crime, more then his end;
If for his Country, or his Friend
To stake his life he does not fear.
And strained amongst herbs my palate to delude?
Or some damned dose Canidia brewed?
When Iasons love Medea's heart had caught,
He chief, and fairest Argonaut;
Who bulls combined never yoked before,
With Garlic she besmeared him ore.
With this that harlot Glauca she bespred,
And on the wings of Dragons fled.
An influence so rageful never rent
Apulia's droughty continent,
Nor gore-steept garment ere more servent fri'd
On powerful Hercules his side.
But if thou 'gain provide me such a dish,
Maecenas merry friend, I wish
Thy sweetheart nicely may thy kisses fly,
And on the utmost Bed-stock lie.
EPODE IV. By Sir T. H. To Volteius Mena, Pompey's freed-man.
THat disaccord between us two I find,
Which Natures law has lambs and wolves disjoined.
(O thou, whose sides with Spanish whips are torn,
And galled legs with stubborn fetters worn.)
Though, proud of wealth, thou walk with pompous pace,
Fortune corrects not ignoble race.
See not when to the Capitol through the Town,
Thou stalk'st along clad in thy Six-ell Gown,
How Indignation limitless, and free
Of passers to and fro reflects on thee?
He, who was erst with Triumvirs smart blows,
Lashed till the loathing Beadle weary grows;
A thousand plough'd Falernian Akers brags,
And treads the Appian way with well pac'd-nags,
And on chief Benches sits (in despite
Of Otho's law) a most accomplished Knight!
What needs great Caesar, then to go about
So many goodly ships to furnish out
Against wretched Pirates, and the slavish hand,
This, this man dignified with prime command!
EPODE V. By Sir T. H.
A noble youth, whom Canidia, and other Witches had stolen, and set in the earth
up to the chin, purposing to famish him, that they might by Art Magic make a
Love-drink of his Liver and Marrow.

O God, who e're in Heaven do guide
The earth, and men which here abide,
What means this noise, and why on me,
Do you all look so rufully?
Ah, for thy childrens sake forbear,
If at such Births Lucina were.
By this vain Purple robe, I pray,
By Jove, who will not like your way,
Why frown you on me, Step-dame like,
Or beast, whom eager Hunters strike?
While here the trembling Lad does stay,
Made to dispoil from rich array
H^s tender body (which might force
The cruel Thracian to remorse:)
Canidia, whose unkembed head
Was with short Vipers filleted,
Commands from Graves wild Fig Tree torn:
And Cypress, which does Becres adorn:
Eggs steept in Blood of Toads, to bring,
With feathers from the Scritch-Owles wing;
Herbs of Iolco's baneful field,
And poisons, Thessaly does yield;
Bones snatched from jaws of hungry Bitch,
To burn with flames of Colchique witch.
Quick Sagan, who does waters fling,
Fetched from Avernus loathsome Spring,
Bristles her hair, as moody Bore,
Or the Sea-urchin near the shore.
While Veia free from all remorse
Of horrid deeds, the ground 'gan force
With stubborn spade; and hard she swet
That in it, the whelmed stripling set,
Might twice or thrice a day be plied
With view of viands, till he died:
In which, up to the chin he stood,
As they who wade within the flood.
That his drained Marrow, Liver dry,
Her with a Love-drink might supply;
When once his fainting eyes were spied
To sink at sight of food, denied.
Nay easeful Naples did believe,
And the neat Towns for receive
That Folia of Ariminum
Lustful ( man like) did thither come:
Whose spells have power from Orbs of light,
The charmed Moon, and Stars to fright.
Canidia here for spleen prepared,
With black teeth gnawing nails unpar'd,
What muttered she? what not? O ye
You conscious Arbiters with me,
Night, and Diana Queen of Rest,
Now we perform our dark behest
Be present here: your anger throw,
And powerful Godhead on my foe.
While fearful beasts close covert keep*
Charmed with the ease of gentle sleep.
Let the Suburran dogs report,
That all may jeer it, the resort
Of the old wanton, sleek with Nard;
Better my hands have n'ere prepared.
How, how! why do Medaea's charms
And deadly drugs cause greater harms,
Wherewlth she took revenge at full
On Creons daughter, that proud Trul,
When a Gown dipped in poyson'us Bane,
Turned the gift and Bride to flame?
But plant nor root in craggs concealed
Rests from my notice, unreveal'd:
Yet Varus, not with love in ure,
In beds perfumed, sleeps secure:
But, ah, he walks, freed by the spells
Of some, whose knowledge more excells.
O Varus, by strange drugs, to me
(Damned to endure much misery)
Thou shall return; nor thy sick mind
From Marsian charms shall comfort find.
A stronger Cup I will devise
Filled for thee, who do me despise.
Heaven shall below the Sea descend,
And over the Sea the Earth distend;
If thou like pitch in dusky fire
Consumest not with my desire.
The Boy sought them to sooth no more
With gentle words, as heretofore,
But doubtful what he first should speak,
Thus direfully does silence break;
Let charms and spells do what they can,
They cannot change the Fate of man.
I Will haunt you still: For settled hate
No sacrifice does expiate.
When forced by you my soul is fled,
I Will come a Fury to your bed,
And a sad Ghost your faces tear
(Such power on earth have Spirits here:)
And as the Nightmare, on your chest,
I Will vex, and scare you from your rest.
The thronging people in the street,
Base Hags, shall stone you, when ye meet:
Your limbs untomb'd the Wolves shall tear,
And Vulters to Esquiliae bear:
Nor (ah) my parents after me
Shall fail this spectacle to see.
EPODE VI. Against Cassius Severus, a revileful and wanton Poet.
Argument.
The surly and crabb'd qualities
Of Poet Cassius, he descries.
Quid immerentes.
WHy (currish Dog) do harmless guests assail,
But not against Wolves dare wag thy tail?
Why, if thou dare, with menaces so vain
Assault'st not me, who will turn again?
For like Colossian masty, or red-flect
Laconian dogs, which herds protect,
Through profound snowes with flat-cowch'd ear I Will chase
Whatever obvious game I face.
When the woods echo with thy dismal cries,
Thou snook'st at morsels before thine eyes.
Beware, beware: for I Will sharp horns prepare,
To push those that revileful are;
Like him whom cursed Lycambe slighted so,
Or Bupalus his tart-mouth'd foe.
What? if calumniated once, should I
Put 't up and childe-like pule and cry?
EPODE VII. By Sir R. F. To the People of Rome.
An Execration of the second Civil War waged after the death of Julius, by
Brutus and Cassius on the one side; on the other by Octavius, M. Anthony, and
Lepidus.

WHy, why your sheathed swords drawn again?
Whether rush ye, impious brood?
Have not the earth yet and the main,
Drunk enough of Latin blood?
Not that proud Carthage burnt might be,
Rival of the Roman State:
Nor the chaste Mistress of the Sea
Britain, on our Triumphs wait;
But that the thing the Parthians crave,
Rome, may make her self away.
Lions and Wolves this temperance have,
On their Kind they will not prey.
Is It a blind rage, or force more strong,
Or Crime drives you? Speak. They look
As pale as Death, and hold their tongue,
As their Souls were Planet-strook.
It Is so: dire Fates the Romans haunt,
And a Fratricidal guilt:
Since blood of Remus innocent,
On the cursed ground was spilt.
EPODE VIII. To a Lustful old Woman*
Argument.
The fulsome shape, and vicious life,
Of a lascivious aged wife.
Rogare Longo.
THou to demand of rot-consumed date,
What should my strength emasculate?
When all thy teeth black-furr'd with Canker show,
And Old Age wrinckle plows thy brow,
And filthy arse 'twixt buttocks wither-dry'd,
Like some raw-bon'd Cows gapes so wide.
But thy down-swagging breasts extub'rant teats,
Like Mares dugs kindle Cupids heats:
Thy down-soft belly, and thy spindle thighs,
Sustained on legs, which pregnant rise.
Live happily: let Statutes triumphal
Adorn thy pompous funeral:
Nor may more precious chains of pearl invest
'Ere any married woman's breast.
How is it that Stoic Treatises are by,
And amongst thy silken pillows lie?
Are rustic Loons less pollent at the sports?
Or does their courage less retort!
Whose -- that thou may urge to spend, Honor sit auribus.

Thou must with -- contend.
EPODE IX. By Sir T. H. To MAECENAS.
He beforehand feels the contentment he shall take from Augustus his victory
against M. Anthony, and Cleopatra.

When shall I Caecube wines, that stored lie
For banquets, glad at Caesar's victory
(So Jove will have it) in thy stately house,
With thee, my dear Maecenas, free carrouze?
Resounding notes that mingle Flutes with Lyre;
This, Dorique, speaking joy, that Phrygian, Ire:
As when Neptunian Pompey droven, fled
Through straigthned seas, with navy ruined,
Who Rome had threatened with those chains, which he
Had taken from treacherous Servitors, made free
The Roman Soldier by a woman tied
In slavish bands (ah this will be denied
By after times) lugs arms, earth, stakes, and tent,
Striving her withered Eunuchs to content;
And Phoebus amongst their ensigns does espy,
Her net-like and lascivious canopie.
But the bold French proclaiming Caesar's name,
Thence with two thousand Horse straight hither came;
And the swift prowess of hostile vessels lie
Turned to the left hand, ready set to fly.
O gladsome triumph! thou retard'st the drift
Of golden chariot, and young beifers gift:
O gladsome triumph! from Iugurthian war*
Thou brought no captain might with this compare:
Nor African, whose noble valors praise,
Did lasting monuments over Carthage raise.
The foe, by Sea, and Land, now vanquished fears,
And a black Cassock for a purple wears;
Not knowing whither adverse winds will cast
Him, on rich Crete with hundred Cities graced,
Or on the Quicksands with South-billows tossed,
Or the wide main in danger to be lost.
Boy, cups bring hither for a larger draught;
Let Chian, or the Lesbian grape be sought:
Or fill Caecubian wines without delay,
Which may a queezie loathing drive away:
The care, and fear of Caesar's happy state,
Let us with merry Bacchus dissipate.
EPODE X. Against Maetius a Poet.
Argument.
He wishes raging storms may rise,
And Maetius with wrack surprise.
Mala Soluta.
THe ship inauspica^ely quits the Bay,
And noisome Maetius hoists away.
Anster, see thou impe^uously rave,
Dashing both sides with furious wave.
Let gloomy Eurus with his storms adverse
The Tacklings and broke Oars disperse.
(...) such violent (...) extend,
As from high hills an Holm (...).
On pitchie nights let no stars luster shine,
When sad Orion does decline:
Nor let the Ocean tranquiller stand,
Than for the Grecians conquering band,
When wrathful Pallas, waving fired Troy,
Would impious Ajax sail destroy.
O how do thy industrious sailers sweat!
Thy self with pallid fear repleat,
Howling out sadly woman-like laments,
And vows, which ireful Jove resents:
When showry Notus lowdly bellowing,
In The Adrian Gulf does shipwreck bring.
But if the crooktly-winding shore display
Thy still stretched limbs for Corm'rants prey,
A lustful Goat, and a She-lambkin shall
A Sacrifice to tempests fall.
EPODE XI. To Pettius his Chamber-fellow.
Argument.
He Cupid-struck cannot the while
To compose Verses frame his style.
Petti nil me.
PEttius, I take no pleasure, as before,
In writing Verse,
Now Cupids arrows pierce:
Cupid, who me '^ove all inflameth sore
With wilder heat
Of Youths and Virgins neat.
Now three Decembers woods have shed their glory,
Since ore I gave
For Inachia to rave.
Oh shameful folly! what a Citie-storie
('lass) I became!
My junkettings I blame,
When paleness, silence, and long sighs exhaled
From lungs profound,
Descri'd my passions wound:
And I lamentful moan'd that wealth prevailed
Against honesty,
And distressed ingeny:
When debaucht Bacchus did my secrets broach
From heated breast,
With fervent liquors pressed.
But if free indignation once approach
My boiling blood,
And this distasteful flood
Expel, which naught allaies my malady:
Shame profligate
With great ones strife will hate.
When I, thou hearing, these extolled on high,
Charged to get home,
I roved with vagrant roam,
To those (ah) flintie thresholds, unkind posts,
Which as I li'd,
All bruised my shins, and side.
Me now Lyciscas love ore-rules, who boasts
TO exceed each she,
In soft effeminacie,
From whence no faithful counsels can me free
A friend affords,
Nor contumelious words.
A new flame of some Virgin it must be,
Or youth plump-round,
With long hair backward wound.
EPODE XII. Against a libidinous old Woman.
Argument*
He scolds a Whore, who did him court
To sat her Lust with Venus sport.
Quid tibi vis.
WHat mean thou Woman for black El'phants fit?
Why send'st me tokens, why are letters writ
To me nor vigorous, nor obtuse of nose?
For I quick-sented can as soon disclose
A Polype, or an armpits rammish scent,
As well nosed hounds explore where sows are pent,
What ^tench, what sweat her wizned limbs has drenched,
When (Natures kneener ardours in me quenched*)
She hastes to satisfy her unbridled lust:
Nor bides her all sweat-steeped cheeks cerust,
Or daubed with Crocodiles ordure: with mad reaks,
She now both Bed-stock, and the Matt'ress breaks:
Thus jears my Languors with revileful flout;
Thou with Inachia could hold longer out,
Yea, thrice a night: with me at once thou 'rt tired.
A Pox take Les^ia, who when I inquired
For tuff-back'd Actors, showed me thee so dull:
Choan Amyntas giving me my full,
Whose unfoyl'd -- more stiff erected --
Then ere a sapling in the lofty wood:
For whom were garments (which twice tincted show
In Tyrian purple) made? for thee I trow.
Least amongst his equals ere a guest should be
Whom his dear sweetheart better loved than thee.
Oh wretch am I whom thou eschews as much;
As Lambs fierce Wolves, or Goats the Lions clutch.
EPODE XIII. By Sir T. H. To his merry Friends, that they should pass the
VVinte^ pleasantly.
ROugh tempests have the brow of heaven bent,
And showers, and snows cause thickened airs descent:
Now Thracian North winds, Seas and woods affray;
Friends, let us take occasion from the day;
While strength is fresh, and us it well becomes,
Let Us old age banish, which the brow benumns.
Boy, see you broach those elder Wines were pressed,
When Torquat first the Consulship possessed:
Speak not of other things. God will, perchance,
Them to their Seat, with happy change advance.
Let us in Persian unguents now delight;
And with Cylenian harp put cares to flight:
As noble Chiron to Achilles sang;
Vnvanquish'^ Mortal, that from Thetis sprang,
Troy thee expects; which Simois rouling Tide,
And small Scamanders colder streams divide,
Whence thou no more (the Sisters so ordain)
With thy blew Mother shall return again.
All sorrow there, with wine, and Song depress,
(Sweet comforts of deformed heaviness.)
EPODE XIV. By Sir R. F. To MAECENAS.
That his love to Phryne, is the Cause why he does not finish his promised
Iambicks.

It Is Death, my sweet Maecenas, when so often
You ask me, why a soft
Sloth turns my sense, as if with thirsty draught
I had together quaft
L^the's oblivious lake into my blood.
It is a God, a God,
Forbids me finish my Iambicks, though
Promised thee long ago.
Be^^^ted thus Ana^rcon was it is said
Upon the S^mian Maid:
W^o so^^'d his love out to a hollow Lyre
With stumbling Feet. That fire
Cons^mes thee too. If fairer burnt not Troy
Besieged, in thy lot joy.
Me a Bondwoman, such a one torments,
As no one man contents.
EPODE XV. To his Sweetheart Neara.
Argument.
Our Lyric dolefully descryes
Faithless Neaeraes perjuries.
Noxerat.
'TWas night, and Cynthia lighted all the sky
Amongst Stars of less fulgency,
When thou, profaning Gods of power immense,
TO act my will did oaths dispense;
Not lofty Ivies the Ilex closer graspt,
Than thy limber arms me claspt:
While Lambs fled Wolves, and while Orions orb
Sailours bane, should seas disturb,
While unshorn Sol his hairy beams should dart,
Thou would mutual love impart.
Naeera! how my virtue thou'st bewail!
For less Flaccus spirit fail,
For cliftier rivals he will not brook one night,
And vexed seek those that will requite,
Nor once offended will he constant rest,
If certain grief pierce his breast.
But thou who now in favor happy reigns,
Proudly vaunt'st at my disdains,
Though rich in stock, and grounds, and to thy hands
Pactole roll his Golden sands:
Though truly vvrote oft-liv'd Pythag^ras,
And fair Nereus thou surpass;
Yet she will her love to others ('lass) translate,
But then I Will deride thy Fate.
EPODE XVI. By Sir R. F. To the People of Rome.
Commiserating the Commonwealth, in respect of the Civil Wars.

Now Civil Wars a second age consume,
And Romes own Svvord destroys poor Rome.
Whom neither neighboring Marsians could devour,
Nor feared Porsenas Tuscan power;
Nor C^pua's rival valor, mutinies
Of Bond-slayes, Treachery of Allies;
Nor Germany (blue-ey'd Bellona's nurse)
Nor Hannibal (the Mothers curse)
We (a blood-thirstie age) our selves deface,
And Wolves shall re-possess this place.
The barbarous foe will trample on our dead;
The steel-shod horse our courts will tread;
And R^m^lus dust (closed in religious Urn
From Sun and tempest) proudly spurn.
All, or the ^ounder part, perchance would know,
How to avoid this coming blow.
'Twere best I think, like to the Phocean^,
Who left their execrated lands,
And hou^es, and the houses of their Gods,
To Wolves and Bears for their aboads*
T'abandon all, and go where ere our feet
Bear us by land, by sea our Fleet.
Can any man better advice afford?
If not, in name of Heaven aboard!
But you must swear first to return again,
When loosned Rocks float on the Main,
And be content to see your Mother-town,
When Betis washes the Alps crown;
Or Appennine into the Ocean flies,
Or new lust weds Antipathies,
Making the Hind stoop to the Tigers love,
The ravenous Kite cuckold the Dove:
And credulous Herds, t'affect the Lions side,
And Goats the salt Sea to abide.
This, and what else may stop our wished return
When all, or the good part have sworn,
Fly hence! Let him whose smooth and unfledged breast
Misgives him, keep the rifled neast.
You that are men, unmanly grief give over
And sail along the Tuscan shore,
To the wide Ocean. Let us seek those Isle^
Which swim in plenty, the blessed soyles:
Where the Earths Virgin-womb unplough'd is fruitful,
And the unproyned Vine still youthful:
The Olive Tree makes no abortion there,
And Figs hang dangling in the air;
Honey distills from Oaks, and water hops
With creeking feet from Mountain tops.
The generous Goats without the Milk-maids call,
Of their full bags are prodigal;
No evening wolf with hoarse alarums wakes
The Flocks, nor breeds the up-land Snakes.
And far^^er to invite us, the plump Grain,
Is neither drunk with too much rain,
Nor yet for want of moderate watring dry;
Such the blessed temper of the sky.
Never did Jason to those Islands guide
His Pirat-ship, and whorish Bride.
Sydonian Cadmus never touched these shores,
Nor false Ulysses weary Oars.
No murrain rots the sheep, nor star does scorch
The Cattle with his burning torch.
When Jove with brass the Golden age infected,
These Isles he for the pure extracted.
Now Iron raigns, I like a Statue stand,
To point good men to a good land.
EPODE XVII. To CANIDIA.
Argument.
Canidia the Sorceress
He does his over-match confess:
And supplicates her to give over
Her spells, and torture him no more.
Iam, jam efficaci.
I Now su^mit unto thy powerful skill,
And beg by Proserpines imperial will,
And by Dianaes steady fixed decree,
And by thy Charm-books which effectual be,
To summon stars down from the Aetherial Sphere;
Thy Spells, Canidia, Oh at length forbear,
And cease, O cease this giddy whirling wind.
Proud Telephus, he dire Achilles mind
Moved to relent; though against him he had shown
His Mysian squadrons, and sharp Javelins thrown.
The Trojan dames did warlike Hector oil,
To ravenous birds, and dogs exposed for spoil;
When Priam quitting Troy, fell down prostrate
Before Achilles, ah, too obstinate.
Ulysses his industrious Sailors left
Their br^sled limbs of hispid skins bereft,
Circe appeased: then Reason did retreat,
With speech and wonted favor to its seat.
Thou now have plagued me in abundant measure,
O thou the Seamans and Merchants pleasure.
Youths blossom's faded, and my Purple hew,
My skin and bones are smeared with black and blew*
My hair's turned hoary with thy dismal oils,
No leisures free me from heart-racking toiles:
I Am cruciated night and day with ire:
Scarce can my grief extended lungs respire.
I wretch am now convinced to believe,
Sabellan charms (which I denied) can grieve
The heart, and Marsian Spells the head dispoil.
What would thou more? O sea, O land? I broyl,
As not Alcides stewed in Nessus gore:
Nor yet Sicilian Aetna rages more
With its ever flagrant embers: Thou, till I
Become light ashes scattered in the sky,
Fry'st me, as 'twere in Colchian poisonous forge.
When ends my pain? what tribute will thou urge*
O speak; And I religiously will pay
Whatever mulct's imposed; prepared to slay
Even Hecatombs, or with dissembling song
Chaunt thee for fair, for virtuous, and among
Heavens Or^es to glister as a glorious Sphere.
Castor and Pollux wrathful though they were,
And smote him ^lind did Helens honor stain,
Yet, won with prayers, restored his eyes again.
Even thou, who can from phrenzies set me free,
O (...) not sprung from Sires of base degree,
Nor skilled in poor men's urns, to dissipate
(...) silent ashes after nine days dare.
Thy heart is hounteous, and thy hands sincere,
Fruitful thy Womb, and the Midwi^e rinseth clear
(...) with thy fluent blood,
When thou from Childbed skip'^t with livelihood.
CANIDIA'S Answer.
Argument.
The (...) ^ill not be wo^
(...) his supplication:
(...) up and down,
(...) all ore the Town.
Quid obscratis.
WHy vainly pray'st thou to my lock'd-up ears?
A^ well the Rock the nake-stript Sailor hears,
When (...) Neptune with his billows beats.
Shall thou (Scot-free) scoff our Cocyttian feats,
Divulge licentious Cupids Sacrifice?
An Arch-priest-like of the Esquile Sorceries;
Revengeless blason our reproachful fames?
To truck with old P^lignian haggard dames,
Or mix dispatching Pills, to what end is it,
If thou can not refeind thy destined twist?
The Fa^es (poor wretch) prolong thy irksome date,
That still fresh torments may thy carcass bait.
Pelops his tell-tale Sire for rest out cries,
Wanting still what abounds before his eyes:
For Rest Prometheus Vultur-chain'd makes moan,
And Sisyphus his still down-tumbling stone
Would roll aloft, but Jove gain-saies. And now
Thou would thy self precipitately throw
From down steep clifts: Now Noric sword distain
In thine own Guts, and (loathing life) in vain
Striv'st with a Halter to conclude thy pain.
Then on thy hateful shoulders will I ride,
And make the earth stoop to my haughty pride.
I, who Wax. (...) can inspire with motion,
As thou (too curious) know, and whose dark notion
Can hale the Moon down by my abstruse Spells,
And raise the dead up from their silent Cells,
And fervent Phil^ers mix: Should I bewail,
My Magic Art against thee cannot prevail*
Verses sung in the Secular games every Century of years, pronounced for the
s^fety of the Roman Empire.
PHoebus and Dian, Grovie Queen,
Heavens ornaments; as you have been,
Still be you honored, ever (...):
Grant what we ask on holy Feast.
In which Sybi^l^'s verses ^each,
Cha^te maids, and youths not (...),
Unto those Gods songs to recite,
Who on the seaven-fold hills delight.
(Fair Sol) who in thy chariot bright,
Do call forth Day, and shutt'st up Night;
And other, and the same do come,
Naught greater may thou see than Rome.
Ilythia, open wombes we crave
For ripened Births, and Mothers save;
Whether we thee Lucina call,
Or Cynthia, which produces all.
Goddess, bring Children forth, and bless
Senates decrees, give good success
To nuptial laws, that those who wed,
May have a fruitful Marriage Bed.
That ten-times-ten full Orbs mature,
May us to songs and sports enure:
Thrice in the splendor of day light,
And thrice in shades of welcome night.
And you truth ^telling Fates, to past
Join future fortunes, that may last:
That stable limits may enclose,
What once to Mortals you propose.
That Cattle may, and Corn abound,
Wherewith fair Ceres shall be crowned:
And wholesome streams, with air as pure.
May n^triments to plants assure.
Ah Phoebus mild, withdraw thy dart,
To suppliant youths thy grace impart:
And Queen of Stars, who do appear
By-forked ( Luna) Virgins hear*
If Rome a work be of your store,
And Trojan troops held Tybers shore:
A part enjoined their seat to change,
And with success from home to range:
For whom secure, the row Troy on fire
Aeneas chaste in safe retire,
Free passage opened, and gave more
To them, then they possessed before.
O Gods to youth grant matters sage,
Gods give repose to quiet age;
And unto Romulus his blood,
Wealth, issue, honor, all that is good.
Let Venus, and Anchises strain,
Who give ye Oxen free from stain,
In Wars achievements bear the prize,
And courteous be to enemies.
The Median now by Sea and Land,
Fears Roman power, and conquering hand:
The Scythians now our friendship crave,
And haughty Indians truce would have.
Now Faith, Peace, Honor, modest look
And Virtue scorned, which forsook
Our City, dares return again,
And blessed Plenty freely raig^.
Phoebus, with radiant Bow, Divine,
Gracious among the Muses nine;
Who does with Heaven-inspir'd art,
To crazie bodies health impart:
If he Mount Palatine do grace,
The weal of Rome, and Latian Race,
To farther times and better end,
May he these Centuries extend.
And Dian who holds Aventine,
And Algidus, may she incline
To prayers of fifteen men, and hear
Our childrens vows with friendly ear.
Then I, and all well skilled in Lays,
Phoebus and Dians name to praise,
Go home, with certain hopes, that Jove,
And all the Gods these things approve.
The end of the Epodes.
SATYRS.
BOOK I.
SATYR I. By A. B. That Men are not contented with their Conditions.
HOw comes it (great Maecenas) that there is not
A man, who lives contented with that lot
Which choice inclined, or chance exposed him to,
But all applaud what others are and do?
Oh happy Merchant, then the Soldier says,
When by old age and toil his strength decays;
The Merchant when the insulting billows rise,
And toss his tottering Ship, Give me (he cries)
The Soldiers life, for he meets in a breath
A joyful victory or certain death.
The Lawyer when he hears his Clients knock
At's gate before the crowing of the Cock,
Admires the Country life, while the poor Swain,
Being from his home up to the City drawn
To follow Lawsuits, does conclude no men's
Conditions happier then the Citizens.
But the whole rabble of this sort of men
Would be so numerous it would tire the Pen
Of Scribbling Fabius; so I Will pass by those,
And draw the matter to this point: Suppose
Jove said, I Will make you what you would be; thou
Who were a Merchant, be a Soldier now.
Thou that a Lawyer were, shall now commence
A Husbandman; change sides, and so pack hence
You t'your new Calling, you to yours; Nay, nay,
Now your desires are granted, why do you stay?
Fond fools! you will not be happy, though you may.
Is it not reason then great Jove should be
Highly incensed, and declare that he
Will be no more propitious unto them,
But all their vain and various prayers contemn?
This is no laughing matter, nor would I
Be thought to speak all this in Drollery,
Though to blurt out a truth has never been
(In way of merriment) esteemed a sin.
The flattering Master thus his Boys presents
With Cakes, to make them learn their Rudiments.
But let us leave fooling, and be serious now;
The Clown that rends the pondrous Earth with his plough,
The cheating Tradesman, and the Soldier too,
The Seaman bold, who ploughs the Ocean through;
All these their various toils endure (they say)
Merely with this intention, that they may
When they grow old, with peace enjoy that store
Which their industrious youth had gained before.
Just like the Ant (for that is their pattern) small
In bulk, but great in thrift; who draws in all
That e're she can, and adds it to her store,
Which she foreseeing want, had heaped before;
And in the rage of Winter keeps within,
To feed on what her providence laid in:
But neither sword, fire, water, heat, nor cold,
Nor any thing keeps thee from getting Gold,
Only spurred on with that ambitious itch,
To have the World say, Thou art Devilish rich.
What good in thy vast heap of Treasur's found,
Which thou by stealth do bury under ground?
But if it be diminisht once, thou wilt say
Thy whole estate will dwindle soon away.
and if thou spend'st not out of it, what pleasure
^an'st thou take in a heap of hoarded Treasure?
(...) thy Barn held ten thousand sacks of Wheat,
^et thou can eat no more then I can eat.
Among thy fellow slaves when you are picked out
To bear all their provision about,
With which thy Shoulders galled and weary grow^.
Thou eat'st no more then one that carried none.
Or (tell me prithee) what the difference is
To him that makes the Rules of Nature his,
Whether he does a thousand Acres sow,
Or on a hundred does his pains bestow?
But oh (thou cri'st) men do great pleasure reap
In taking Gripes out of a plenteous heap.
Yet since out of a little thou do leave
As much as we have occasion to receive,
Why should thou thy vast Granaries prefer
Before our Willies, which much lesser are?
Or if thou have occasion to take up
Water enough to fill a Butt or Cup,
Why should thou say, thou have a greater will
Out of that river, then this spring to fill?
Hence it proceeds infallibly, that those
Who to their wills are superstitious,
Uncurb'd desire drives them to this and that,
Until at last they'ld have they know not what.
Whilst who confines his mind to Natures laws,
The troubled muddy water never draws,
Nor in the river does his life expire:
But most of men deceived by false desire,
Say, Noughts enough; 'cause they absurdly guess
At what men are, by what they do possess.
To such a Miser what is it best to do?
Let him be wretched, ^ince he will be so.
Thus that Athenian Monster Timon, which
Hated Mankind, a sordid Knave, but rich,
Was wont to say, When ere I walk abroad
The People hiss me, but I do applaud
And hug my self at home, when I behold
My chests brim-full with Silver and with Gold.
So Tantalus, being extremely dry,
Courts the swifte stream, which does as coily fly.
Why laughst thou Miser? if thy name should be
A little changed, the Fables told of thee,
Who on thy full cramb'd Bags together laid,
Do lay thy sleepless and affrighted head;
And do no more the moderate use on it dare
To make, then if it consicrated were:
Thou make no other use of all thy gold,
Then men do of their pictures, to behold.
Do thou no^ know the use and power of coin?
It buys bread, meat, and clothes, (and what is more wine;)
With all those necessary things beside,
Without which Nature cannot be supplied.
To sit up and to watch whole days and nights,
To be out of thy wits with constant frights,
To fear that thieves will steal, or fire destroy,
Or servants take thy wealth, and run away.
Is this delightful to thee? then I will
Desire to live without those Riches still.
But if the pains of stomach, or the head,
Or other sickness fix thee to thy bed,
Have thou a visitant to sit down by thee,
Who with due food and Physic will supply thee?
Or make the D^ctor rid thee of thy pain,
And to thy friends restore thee sound again?
Thy wife and children thy quick Death desire,
So do thy friends and kindred: Never admire
That they don't show thee love, thou merit'st none,
For before all thou preferr'st wealth alone.
If thou thy friends or kindred would retain,
And not be liberal, thy task's as vain
As his, who in the Field does teach an Ass
To Obey the bridle, and to run a race.
Make once an end of gaining, that the more
Thou have, the less thou'st tremble to be poor.
Begin to end thy labor, having got
That which thou did desire, and follow not
That rich Umidius, whose chests did so swell,
He measur'd's money which he could not tell,
So sordid, that he never did go higher
Then his mean Servants did, in his attire:
And to his dying day in fear he stood,
Least he should die merely for want of food;
Till his bold Con^ubine did boldly do
A Heroes act, and cut the Slave in two.
But now thou wilt ask me, whether I Would have thee,
A Miser or a Prodigal to be?
Thou still art in extremes; I would not have
Thee covetous, nor a vain squandring Knave.
'Twixt rough Visellius and smooth Tanais
The Eunuch, a vast difference there is.
There is a mean in things, and certain lines
Within which virtue still it self confines.
But I Will return from whence I came; are none
But greedy Slaves delighted with their own
Conditions? Do all praise each others lot,
And pine to see their Neighbors Goat has got
A Dug more full of Milk then theirs? and never
Themselves with the poorer sort of men compare:
(Though that is the greater number) but aspire
Still to ore-top this man and that, whose higher!
It curbs the Spirit of that person which
Tugs to grow great, when he meets one more rich,
So when the Chariots from the Barriers are
Let loose to run a Race, the Charioter
Minds still those horses which out-stript his own,
Slighting those which by the other are ou^ gone.
And hence it comes, we seldom find a man
That says He has lived happily, and can
Like a well-feasted-guest depart at last
Contented with that part of 's life that past.
Now it is enough; least you should think that mine
'S like Crispins Volumns, I will not add a line.
SATYR II. By A. B. That while foolish men shun one Vice, they run into another.
THe Players, Empricks, Beggars, and the noise
Of Fiddlers, all the roaring Damn-me boys,
And all that sort of cattle do appear
Extremely sad, and much concerned to hear
Their friend Tigillus is deceased; For he
Did treat them with great liberality.
While the close miser, least he should be thought
A prodigal; oth' contrary, gives naught
To his dear friend (though never so much he need)
To cloth his body, or his belly feed.
If one should ask the Prodigal, why he
By an ungrateful sottish gluttony,
That brave estate bequeathed him by his friends
And Ancestors, so prodigally spends;
And at great interest take up money too,
Merely in needless luxury to bestow:
His answer is, Because he scorns to be
Esteemed a sordid fellow, or that he
Has but a narrow soul: So up he is cried
By some, while others him as much deride.
Fufidius the Usurer fears to have
The Reputation of an unthrift Knave,
Rich both in moneys out at use, and lands,
But when he lends, he still detains in's hands
Five times the interest from the principal;
And where he finds his Debtors prodigal,
Those he gripes most severely: He inquires
For wealthy heirs new come of age, whose Sires
Had been close-fisted to them and severe.
Good God! what persons who shall come to hear
Such horrid actions, will not exclaim? But oh!
(You Will say) he does't for his livelihood. Oh no!
You cannot believe how much this love of Pelf,
Makes this vile Slave an enemy to himself.
Old Menedemus, whom the Comedy
Brings weeping in, and living wr^tchedly
For his lost son, could not himself torment
More then this sordid Beast. To what intent
All this is said, if you desire to know,
It only tends to this design, to show
That fools, when they attempt one Vice to slun,
Into the contrary do madly run.
This man his garment down to the ground does wear,
And that so short his privities appear.
Perfumed Rufillus wears a gaudie coar,
Gorgonius stinks as nastie as a Goat.
Men do observe no means, but this man's flames
Must be allayed only with Roman Dames.
Another does a common Queen admire,
That prostitutes her self to all for hire.
A man of note came from the public stews,
And, to applaud his action, he did use
Cato's Divine old Sentence, Bravely done,
Go on, and prosper in what thou have begun:
For when the rage of Lust inflames your blood,
It Is lawful to come hither, but not good
Another Nuptial bed to violate.
While Cupiennius cries out, I hate
To be applauded for this nicety,
Give me another wife, she is safe and free.
It Is worth the observation of all those
That would not have uncleanness prosperous,
To see how they are Plagued on every hand,
How often they fall into danger, and
How small, and seldom too, they pleasures gain,
And those corrupted with much grief and pain.
This leaps from th'top o'th'house, and thinks to fly,
But breaks his neck; and that is whipped till he die;
This as he flies, among thieves and robbers falls,
And that with his pur^e redeems his Genitals.
This is by Footmen buggar'd, and sometimes
Those members which commit these shameful crimes,
Do loose their Heads, and justly too; all say,
None but that rutting Galba dares lay, nay.
But it is more safe to venture your estate
In Ships, that are but of the second rate;
Daughters of Captives that have been made free,
Yet Salust played the fool as much as he
That does commit adultery; For he had
A generous Soul, and would be very glad
Of any good occasion, that he
Might but express his liberality,
(In modest manner though) he would dispense
His money to all freely, yet from thence
No damage came to him, no disrepute,
But still he loved a gentle prostitute.
This was that darling Vice he loved to th'life,
But still he cried, I Will meddle with no man's wife.
Just so Marcaeus did, who heretofore
Only admired an honorable whore,
And his Paternal Fortune fooled away
On a she-thing, that on the Stage did play.
Yet still he said, I thank my stars, that I
With wives of other men did never lie.
But if with wh^res and mimicks he would to do,
His fame more suffered, then his wealth came to.
What satisfaction can it to us bring,
To shun one person, and not every thing
That every way does hurt us? To destroy
Our reputation, and to fool away
The Estate our parents left us, certainly
Is a great vice, which way so e're it be.
So Villius, who had a mind to be
The Son in Law of Sylla, how was he
Severely punished? Mauled with Fists, nay more,
Stabbed with Steeletto's, then kicked out of door.
(Poor wretch! how was he chou'sd with name and style?)
But Longarenus lay with her the while.
Now if that Natural genius of his
Should say to him, when he had seen all this,
Sir, what do you mean? Do I require, when e're
I am enraged, the Daughter of a Peer
Or any married woman? what could he
Then answer to it? that woman's meat for me,
Who is descended of a noble stem.
But Nature teaches better things then them,
And quite repugnant too; Great Nature, which
In her own help is plentifully rich,
If we would rightly use them, and descry
What we should choose, from what we ought to fly,
Does it no difference appear to thee
By lust to perish, or necessity?
Then that thou may not that vain work attempt,
Of which thou surely wilt too late repent,
Pursue not Matrons; for the cost and pain
Will far surmount the pleasure thou can gain.
Nor is their Flesh more tender, nor are they
Mo^e clean-limb'd, whose attire is rich and gay,
And do with jewels deck their necks and ears,
(Such as the effeminate Corinthus wears;)
Nay oftentimes that Lass, who is plain and free,
Wears better Limbs then your great Madams be*
She does her mercenary Flesh expose,
Undeckt by art, and openly she shows
The ware she means to utter, nor will she,
If any part about her hansome be,
Proudly show that alone, nor strive to hide
Those parts, which Nature has not beautified.
So Princes, when they Horses go to buy,
Into the covered parts most strictly pry,
Least the same Horse, that is lovely to behold
With a small head, and a crest high and bold,
And a round buttock, the eager Buyer cheat,
Because he is lame, or foundred in his feet.
This they do well in; for we should not pry
On their perfections with a Lynxes Eye,
And be as blind as Hypsea was, when we
Their greater imperfections ought to see.
Oh comely legs and arms! (says one) and yet
She is pin-buttock'd, and has long-splay Feet,
Short-wasted, but a nose of such a size,
That all the Members shortness it supplies.
Thou can no part of a grave Matron see,
Except her face, the rest all covered be,
Unless it be of Catia, who, although
She be a matron, does unvailed go.
If thou attempt forbidden wives to win
To thy desires, they are encompassed in
With guards and walls? 'twill make thee mad to see
How many things there are to hinder thee.
There Is Guardian, Coachman, Tire man, Flatterer,
A gown to the heels, a vail that covers her;
And many more (...) envious things there be,
Make thee the (...), as (...) thou can not see.
A Lass never hinders thee, she will appear
In dress transparent, as she naked were;
That thou may by thine Eye discern, that she
Is straight in the waste, and that her anck^^ be
Not great, and gou^y; and her feet are nea^.
Does any man desire to have a chea^
Imposed upon him? and be made pay down
The price ere the commodity be shown?
But thou art like the Hunts-man, who does go
After the Hare up to the knees in Snow,
Which being caught, makes him a cheerful Feast,
Yet he will not touch a Hare brought ready dressed.
Thou scorn'st that Lass thou may with ease enjoy,
And court those that are difficult and coy.
But do thou think thy passions to appease
With such vain and impert'nent flames as these?
Has not wise Nature bounded thy desire?
Does it not more avail thee to enquire,
What she cannot be without, and what she may,
And pare what ere's superfluous away?
When thou art thirsty, m^st thou only drink
Out of a Golden goblet? or do think
All meat is loathsome, when you are hungry grown,
But Turlet, or the Phe^s^nt poult alone?
So when thy (...) flames grow strong and high,
Will thou not take (...) next thou can come by?
Be It Kitchen wench, or Scullion boy; or else,
Would have that (...) which so extremely swells?
I Am of another humor, for to me
That girl is best, that is easiest; and she
That I can soonest come at; and when I
Ask her the Question, sa^es Yes by and by,
As soo^'s my Servant is gone forth, or says
She Will gratify me, if the price I raise.
Those that are hard, and te^ious to be won,
Are for the feeble Eunuchs taste alone:
Give me a coming Lady, that never stands
Consid'ring long, nor great rewards demands;
But when I call her quickly comes to me,
Let her not ugly, nor yet cro^ked be,
But of good color, and clean-limb'd withal,
Of a good size, not by Chipe^ns made tall;
Nor let her by her painting make more fair
Her face and skin, then they by Nature are.
When such a Creature in mine Arms does lie,
She is m^ Love, my Queen, my Deity;
I call her by all names, nor do I ^oubt
When we our Deeds of Pleasure are about,
The barking Dogs, the breaking open of doors,
And all the Home disturbed with great uproars,
Her jealous husband will return to see,
How he is cuckolded by her and me;
While the poor woman starts from off her Bed,
Pale and affrighted, 'cause discovered,
And being conscious cries, Oh I Am undone!
I shall be fettered, and my Por^on's gone.
And I without my Breeches then m^st pack,
Barefoot and coat-less, all to save my back
From the dire Lash, or to preserve my Purse,
Or else my R^putation, which is worse.
For to be taken is a Crime, it is true,
And it is a pitiful misfortune too;
I dare be judged by Fabius, who does know
All this is true, for he has been serve ^so.
SATYR III. By A. B. That men are quick-sighted to pry into other men's
infirmities, and connive at their own.
ALl Songsters have this humor, that among
Their friends they cannot abide to sing a Song
If they are entreated; but they will never give ore
If not desired. This was heretofore
Tige^ius vice; Caesar who could command,
If by the friendship of his Father, and
His own, he did entreat but for one Air,
This Songster would not sing; yet if he were
Once in the humor, all the Supper long
He would to Bacchus sing, Song after Song;
His voice to the highest treble raised, and then
Descending down to th'lowest base again.
A most unsteady fellow, somet^mes he
Would run, as if pursued by's enemy;
Sometimes hee'ld slowly walk, as if he were
The Sacred host about the street to bear.
Sometimes attended with two hundred men
Heel'd walk, at other times with only ten.
Now Kings and Princes, and all great things be
The subjects of his talk: Anon (says he)
Give me a three-leg'd board, a shell to hold
A l^ttle ^alt, and to keep off the cold
A gown, though never so course; if you present
This poor abstemious person, who is content
Now with so little, with a thousand pound,
In five days there will not a Great be found
In's pocket: He the day in sle^p does pass,
And (...) all night long; there never was
A thing so much unlike so him as he
Was to himself: But some may say to me,
Pray what are you? Have you no crime at all?
Yes, Other vices, not perhaps so small.
When Menius absent, Novius did upbraid,
You Sir, do you hear? Do You know your self? (one said)
Or do you think to cheat us, as if we
Did not know what you are? Menius, said he,
Could wink at, and forget his own faults; this
Is both a vile and silly love, and'tis
Fit to be taken notice of, when with blear eyes
We overlook our own infirmities.
Why should we into our Friends errors pry
As narrowly as with an Eagles eye,
Or Basi^cks piercing look? 'twill come about,
As we do theirs, they will find our Vices out.
An angry man is no way fit to bear
The jeers, which from the Wits he is forced to hear:
They Will jeer him if ill shaved, or if his Gown
In a neglected posture hangs down:
Or if his Shoes are not well t^'d, though he
May be as honest as their Witships be.
Though he is a Friend, though a great Wit does lie
Within that Body, dressed so clownishly.
Examine well thy self, see if there be
The seeds of any Vices sow^ in thee;
By Nature or ill custom we discern,
Neglected Fields still over grown with Fearn,
Let Us raise our selves up to this frame of mind,
To be to our Friends infirmities as ^lind
As Lovers to their Mistresses can be,
Who either don't their imperfections see,
Or if they do, they are pleasing to them, th^s
Balbinus liked even Agnas Polypus.
I wish we all would err in friendship so,
And virtue on that error would bestow
A glorious name; for as the Father mild,
If he espies a frailty in his child,
He does not scorn, nor loath it, nor should we
The errors of our friends, if any be.
If a Son squinting goggle-eyes should have,
H^s Father calls him, Pretty winking Knave;
And he whose Child in stature^s no more
Then Sysiphus the Abortives heretofore,
Calls him his Chick^n; if he bend at knee,
He calls him Varus; if he hurl-foot be,
His Father l^sping calls him Scaurus: Thus
When a Friend lives something penurious,
Le^'s called good Husbandry, and when we find
One that to jeer or vapor is inclined,
Imagine his design is but to be
Very facetious in company:
If he be rough-hew'd, and will talk and rant,
Count him a downright man and valiant,
And when we meet with any person that
Is hot and surly, call him passionate.
This thing joins friends together, and when joined,
It still preserves them in a friendly mind.
But we the very virtues of a Friend
Do into Vices basely wrest, and bend
O^r mind those vessels to pollute, which are
Clear of themselves; if any person dare
L^ve vertuo^sly among us; base and low
We count him then, and if a man be slow
Of apprehen^on, we are apt to call
and thick-skul'd fellow; he that all
(...), whose Bosom does not lie
Exposed to any kind of injury,
Though he lives in a treacherous Age, wherein
Malice and Slander, and all kind of sin
Do grow and flourish, ought of right to be
Esteemed a prudent wary man, but we
Call him a subtle Iugler: If we spy
A^ open-hearted person (such as I
Often showed my self to you Maec^nas) which
With his perpetual and impertinent Speech
Disturbs men far more serious, when they
Do either read or study hard, we say
This fellow has not common sense, Alas!
How inconsiderately do we pass
Laws on our selves, unequal and severe,
Since no man without Vices ever were,
Or born, or bred, and that man is the best,
Who Is troubled with the fewest and the least.
Areal Friend will with my faults compare
My virtues; and if all my virtues are
More then my Vices, he that loves me would
Incline toth'most, as'tis fit he should:
So if to be beloved he has a mind,
He may by this means the same measure find:
He that desires his Wenns should not offend
His friend, must wink at the Pimples of his friend*
He that would have his faults forgiven must
Give pardon, if he take it, it is but just.
Now since the vice of anger, and the rest
Which do our foolish Nature thus infest,
Cannot be thoroughly rooted out, why may
Not equal judgment and right reason sway?
And why should not all punishments be fitted
Proportionably to the Crimes committed?
When a man bids his Servant lift a Dish
Off from the Table, and he eat the Fish
That Is left, or lick the sauce up, if that he
Should suffer death, should not his Master be
Esteemed more mad then frantic Labeo
By all those men, who are themselves not so?
How would the Masters crime the man's transcend
In greatness; nay in madness? If a Friend
Commit a fault, at which thou ought to wink,
Or else all men will thee ill-natured think,
If thou should scorn and hate him for it, and shun
H^s company, as the poor Debtors run
From that damned Usurer Druso, who when ere
The doleful Day of Payment does appear
To his poor Debtors, if they do not pay
Both principal and interest, how they
Come by it he cares not, he condemns them then
To stand with naked throats, like Captive men,
Not to be killed, but (what is far worse then it)
To hear those wretched Plays which he had writ.
Suppose my fudled Friend when he did sup,
Bepist the room or break my Mistress cup:
Or if he being hungry took away
That Chicken which in the Dish before me lay,
Must I fall out with him? What then if he
Should commit theft? Or break his trust with me?
Or should deny his promise? those by whom
All sins are equal held, when once they come
TO inquire into the truth they are at a stand;
For common reason, general custom, and
Profit it self, which is the Mother now
Of what is right and just, all disallow
This fond opinion: When in former time
Mankind, which of all creatures is the prime,
Crept out of 's Mother Earth, they were a kind
Of dumb and nasty Cattle, which inclined
To brawl for Mast, and Dens to lodge in to,
With nails and fists, and next with clubs, and so
In length of time, they fought with spears and swords,
Which need had taught them how to make, till words
And names by them invented were, whereby
They did their sense and voices signify
Unto each other, then they did begin
To build them Forts to live with safety in.
Then they enacted Laws, that none might dare
Play either Robber or Adulterer:
For before Helens days women have been
The cause of cruel wars. When men rushed in
On any women which they next came to,
At the first sight, as wild Beasts use to do;
Till like a Bull of the herd, a stronger come,
Kill the first Occupant, and takes his room:
But unremembred di'd those nameless men,
Wanting the Historians and Poets Pen.
We if we do consider former times,
Must grant that Laws were made for fear of crimes
As Nature cannot discern; what is right, what is wrong,
Nor separate good from ill, nor from among
Those things we ought to shun, pick out what we
Ought to desire, nor cannot by reason be
Made out, that he who on the Herbs within
His Neighbors Garden treads, does as much sin
As he that robs a Church, and steals away
What to the Gods there consecrated lay.
Let Us have a Rule, by which our pains may be
Proportioned to our crimes, and not that he
Who has deserved a little Rod alone,
Should with a horrid whip be (...) to the Bone.
That thou wilt with ferule strike I Will never suppose,
Him that deserves to suffer greater blows;
While thou hold'st thefts and robberies to be
Offenses only of the like degree,
And threatnest if thou reign once to chastise
Our petty faults and foul enormities
With equal punishments: if it be so,
That he who is a wise man's wealthy too,
A good Mechanic skilled in every thing,
The only gallant, and indeed a King.
What need'st thou wish to be a King, since thou
Art so already? Thou will ask me now
If I don't know what old Chrysipus said,
Though a wise man perhaps has never made
His Shoes and Boots, yet still a wise man is
A Shoo-maker; to what end is all this?
Just so Hermogenes, thoughs he is dumb, can
Sing well, and is a good Musician.
And in this sense, Alfenus when he threw
Away his tools, and shut up shop, and grew
A cunning Lawyer, who had been before
A Cobbler, was still Cobbler, and no more:
So the wise man's alone in every thing,
The skilfull'st Artist, and so he is a King.
The Roguing Boys (thou talk so like a Sot)
Will pull thee by thy Beard, if thou do not
That Scepter in thy hand thy cudgel sway,
And in Majestick-wise drive them away.
The cheated crowd that stand about thee, all
Prepare to kick thee, thou may bark and brawl
Till thou have burst thy Royal self, Most high
And mighty King, in brief thou Royally
Giv'st a whole f^r^hing, for thy Bath at once,
And have no guard to attend thee but that dunce
Chrispinus; But my pleasant fr^ends, if I,
Through folly should transgress, will pass it by
And when they do bewray their frailties, then
I in requital pardon them again;
And thus I live, though but a private man,
More happy then thy fained Kingship can.
SATYR IV. By A. B. A Discourse concerning POETRY.
THe old Greek Poets, Aristophanes,
Cratinus, Eupolis, and such as these
Who did write Comedies, where e're they had
One fit to be described, as very bad,
Such as a Thief, or an Adulterer,
Or Murderer, or such like men which were
Notorious in their lives, these all should be
With a brave bo^dness, and great liberty,
Expressed to th'life, and whatsoever is
Writ by Lucillius does proceed from this,
Those Poets he did imitate, their feet
And numbers only he did change, and yet
His wit was excellent, his judgment clear,
Only the Verses which came from him, were
Harsh and unpolisht; for this was his crime,
Two hundred Verses in one hours time
He ordinarily poured out with ease,
As if he did such weighty businesses;
Yet though his Verses like a Deluge flowed,
They Had something still above the common road:
He loved to scrible, but could not endure
The pains of writing Verses good and pure;
I never regard how much an Author writes,
It Is not the Volumn, but the sense delights.
I Will tell you; Once Crispinus challenged me,
Pointing with his Finger at me, Come (says he)
Take Paper, Pen, and Ink, fix place, and time,
Let Us both be watched, try which can swiftest rhyme;
I thank my Stars, Nature did me compose
So bashful, and so pusillanimous,
That I speak little, and but seldom too,
But his laborious lungs do always go
Like a Smiths Bellows, puffing breath so fast,
That he his Iron audients tires at last.
What luck that Scribbling Rhimer Fannius met?
That our grave Senate undesir'd have set
His silly Book and ugly statue too
In Caesar's Library? Whilst I that do
Both blush and tremble when I ever appear
In public, no rehearsing wit does care
To read my Lines to the undiscern^ng crew;
But here is the reason for it, there are but few
That love a Satyr well; most are afraid
Their Crimes may be like others, open laid.
Pick any person out of all Mankind,
He is to pride or avarice inclined;
This with the lust for's Neighbors wife runs mad,
That Is for the unnatural use of some fair Lad:
This loves to gaze on's money still, and that
Is ravished with the splendor of his Plate;
This to get wealth by merchandising goes,
Where the Sun sets, from the place where it rose,
Runs through all dangers headlong, and is tossed
From place to place as Whirlwinds blow the dust,
Fearing least he should loose his stock, or not
Increase that vast Estate which he had got.
All these hate Verses, and Verse-makers fly
That Beast the Poet comes 'ware-horns they cry:
To make the People laugh, these Fellows use
Not to regard what friends they do ab^se,
And whatsoever they write they forthwith to
The Politicians of the Conduit show,
Or at the Bake-house, that Old Women and
The Rouging Boys their jests may understand.
Much good may't do them, I on the other side
With the name Poet will not be dignified
Out of their number, whom the world does own
For Poets, I Am excluded, being none:
For to compose a Verse, or write as we
Do naturally speak's not Poetry.
That noble Title Poet those does fit,
Who have good Style, high Fancy, and quick wit;
And therefore some have asked whither, what I
Have written be Poem or Comedy,
Because no salt, no flame, nor spirit be,
Or in the words or sense which comes from me;
Which would be very Prose, but only I
My words to feet and numbers use to tie:
But in a Comedy the Poet brings
A Father raging in 'cause his Son clings
TO a common prostitute, and does refuse
That wealthy match which the old man did choose,
And being drunk walks in the open day
With a Torch flaming in a scandalous way.
Pomponius Father, if alive, would thus
Rebuke his Son for being leacherous;
It Is not enough to make Verse smoothly run
With fine culled words, but if they are undone,
And made plain Prose, would as unpleasant be
As the sour Father in the Comedy.
If from the Verses which I use to make,
And those which once Lucillus writ, you take
The feet and measure, and do discompose
The order of those words, and make them Prose;
Placing those words before which stand behind,
And so invert their order, you will find
The quarters of a Poet still appear
In every sentence, scattered every where,
Not like this Verse; When as the cruel jars
Of wars had broke our iron posts and bars.
So much for that; We Will take a time to know,
Whither this Poetry be right or no:
Now I would only ask whither to thee
A Satyr can justly offensive be.
The bawling Lawyers and the formal Judge,
When they in Gowns and with their Law-tools trudge,
Make Malefactors tremble, while that he
That Is innocent contemns their Pogeantry.
Though you are a malefactor, yer since I
Am no Informer, why do from me fly?
No Books of mine do prostituted lie
On public Stalls to tempt the enquiring Eye
Of Passengers, soyl'd by the greasy Thumbs
Of every prying nasty Cl^wn that comes.
I seldom do rehearse, and when I do,
It Is to my Friends, and with relunctance too:
Not before every one, nor every where;
We have too many that Rehearsers are,
In public Baths, and open Markets too,
In the Seild chambers, where their voices do
Double by repercussion, they rehear'e
In sipid notions tortured into Verse.
This pleases empty Fops, who never mind
True wit and sense, so rhyme and feet they find*
Thou say I love to jeer and study it,
To gratify my own ill-natured wit;
Where did thou pick up this Report? or who
Of my acquaintance e're reputes me so?
That person who back-bites his absent friend,
Or when another does, will not defend
His reputation; he that aims to be
The jester in all foolish company,
Ambitious of the Title of a Wit,
Ablab of 's tongue, who what e're you commit
Unto his trust, discovers and betrays,
And impudently lies in what he says:
This is a dirty fellow, such a one
Every true Roman is concerned to shun,
I Have seen a dozen men together feast,
And one has rudely jeered at all the rest,
Except his Friend, which entertained them all;
But being drunk at last on him did fall,
When wine (Truth's Mother) had unlockt his Breast,
Revealed those thoughts that there did smothered rest.
Thou who abhorr'st base Fellows, wilt suppose
This beast free, civil, and ingenious.
Whilst if I do discover and deride
Some powdered Coxcombs vanity and pride:
Or else some nasty Sloven, thou do fall
On me, as envious or Satirical.
If in thy presence any person does
Report Petillus Sacriligious,
Thou (as thy custom is) wile him defend,
And say Petillus was thy ancient Friend;
From Children you were conversant, and he
With Kindnesses was still oblieging thee,
The thought of him does much thy Spirit cheer,
That he is well, and thou enjoy'st him here:
But yet thou can not but admire how he
Himself could from that Judgment so well free.
Such Friends are like the Scattle-fish, whose skin
Is white without, but all black juice within;
This is the rust of Friendship, and this vice
(If any promise in my power lies)
I freely promise thou shall never find
In all my writings, no nor in my mind.
If I speak what is jocular and free,
You by the Law are bound to pardon me.
My honored Father, now deceased, did use
Into my mind these Precepts to infuse;
Observe (quoth he) their end who vice pursue,
And thou by that all Vi^es wilt eschew:
When he did press me to good Husbandry,
And thrifty frugal courses, and to be
Content with that Estate which he had got,
And did intend to leave me; do thou not
(Said he) observe the wealthy Albius Son
Into what want he is by wildness run?
See what a shabby Fellow's Barrus grown,
Barrus the Ranting'st Gallant of the Town;
A good instruction for young Heirs, that they
Should not their Patrimony fool away!
And when from love of Whores he would deter me,
He to Sectanus sad Fate would refer me,
That after married Wives I should not stray,
But use my Pleasures in a Lawful way.
(Quoth he) upon thy name 'twil be a Brand
If like Trebonius thou should be trappand,
Philosophy will with much reason show
What thou should shun, and what thou should pursue*
If thou can well observe those prudent ways,
In which our Fathers walked in former days,
And keep thy life and reputation free
From vice or scandal whilst you are under me,
I Am pleased: But when thy mind and body too
By age to full maturity shall grow,
I Will turn thee loose into the World. Thus he
Did in my Nonage wisely nurture me:
When he proposed a duty to be done,
He Would say, Thou have a fair example (Son)
For doing this, thou have before thine eyes
Those which to honor and great power did rise,
And if he would have me any vice to fly,
(Says he) A man may see with half an eye
This act which now thou art about to do
Is against honesty and profit too.
Since this man's name, and that is who did this thing,
With general scandal through the Nation ring.
And as one Gluttons death does much affright
Another, and suspends his appetite
For fear of death, so others infamy
Makes tender Spirits from those vices fly.
Thus I lived unconcerned in all those Crimes
Which ruin young men in these impious times,
Though I perhaps do'nt unpolluted live,
But have small faults, which men may well forgive,
And which my second thoughts and a true Friend,
And wiser age may teach me to amend;
For I Am not wanting to my self when I
Do walk alone, or in my Bed do lie.
Then I think with my selt, this way is best
And if I follow'r, I am truly blessed,
And to my Friends am grateful; but when I
Observe a person doing fool^shly,
Should I be such an Ass to make the same
Ill course my pattern, which has been his shame?
These are my private thoughts, and when I light
On a spare minute I do Verses write,
And this is one of those small sins which I
Am guilty of, which if thou should deny
To pardon, all of my Fraternity
Would come to help me; for we Poets be
A mighty number, and as once the Jews,
Romans to their Religion did seduce,
So we will dub thee a Brother of the Muse.
SATYR V. By A. B. A Journey from Rome to Brandusium
FRom spacious Rome to Aris once went I,
With Heliodorus in my company,
The best for Rhetoric that the Grecians had;
Our Inn was small, our entertainment bad.
From whence to Apii forum we did ride,
Where Sailors and lewd Victuallers most reside.
We made it two days work, which might be done
By those that had a mind in less then one.
The Appian Road we did not tedious think,
We traveled slowly, and did often drink:
Here, 'cause the water was unwholesome, I
Refused to eat a Supper, but sat by
While my Friends did; I longed to be in Bed,
^or night on the earth her sable wings had spread,
And stuck the Heaven with stars, but such a noise
Rose from the Sailors railing at their Boys,
And their Boys back again at them! So ho!
The Boat, the Boat! Plague on you, where do you go?
(Says one) you Rogue, you over-load the Boat,
You lie (says the other with an open throat)
Hold, hold, now it is enough: And thus while they
Harnest their Mules, and quarrel for their Pay,
They spent a whole houers time; the stinging fleas
And croaking Frogs denied me sleep and ease.
And now the Sailor being got quite drunk,
With nastie Wine begins to sing of 's Punck.
The Mule-man does the like of his: both try
Which should roar loudest for the Victory;
At length the Mule-man being weary grown,
Falls fast asleep; while to a neighboring stone
The lazy Mariner did tie the Barge
With the Mules traces which was gone at large
To graze; and likewise falls asleep till day,
Then we perceived the Barge was at a stay,
There being no Mule to draw her; thereupon
Out leaps a surly Fellow, and lays on
The Mule-man and the Salior head and side
With a tough Cudgel, which was well applied:
Then in four hours we ashore were set,
We washed our hands and faces, and did eat:
Then after Dinner three full miles walked we,
And came to Anxur, where the houses be
Covered with Polisht Stone, my honored Friend
Maecenas and Cocceius did intend
To take this Maritine City in the road,
Both being sent Ambassadors abroad
'Bout State Affairs, and using to compose
All differences which 'twixt Friends arose.
Here I anointed these sore Eyes of mine
With the most true Collyrium ex'lent Wine.
Then straight Maeoenas and three more I see,
Ingenious persons all, and forthwith we
With scorn pass by that petty Village, where
That Scrivener Luscus proudly ruled as Mayor.
With Mace and Chain, and Fur and Purple-gown,
Strutting and domineering over the Town,
And came to Formiae soundly tired at last,
Where our Friends gave good lodging and repast:
The next day was a blessed day, for we
Came to a Town where wine was good and free:
There Virgil, Varius, and Plotinus met,
Men of such Souls the World cannot equal yet,
Nor are there any in the World to me
So much obliging as those persons be.
But oh! what love, and what embracing 'twas?
And what rejoicing old between us pass?
No man in's Wits can any thing commend
Before a real and ingenuous Friend.
Next to a small Maritine village, near
Campania's Bridge we came, the Townsmen there
With Wood and Salt Maecenas did present
As fees, 'cause in an Embassy he went.
From thence to Capua betimes we came,
Virgil and I did sleep, Maecenas game;
That ^oilsome play at Ball no way complies
With Virgils stomach, nor with my blear eyes.
Hence we came to ( occeius house, which is
Seated beyond the Claudian Hosteries,
A stately house, where plenty did abound,
And there we splendid entertainment found.
And now (my Muse) assist me while I tell
That memorable squable which befell
Between Sarmentus that Buffoon, and one
Messius, whose Face with warts was overgrown;
And from what Noble ancient Family
These Combatants derived their pedigree;
The Ossian Nation unto Messius gave
His being, but Sarmentus was a Slave
Of this condition and original.
These two Tongue-combatants began their braul;
Thou Horse-fac'd Raskal ( says Sarmentus first)
At which we fell a laughing, like to burst.
Messius replies, Well be i^ so; what then?
(And Ox-like tossed his head at him again.)
Oh? (says Sarmentus) what a dangerous Cow,
Had not thy horns been qui^e sawed off, were thou,
Who art so cursed without them? thy old face,
(If possible) is uglier then it was* --
Since thy great men on one side, now we find
Cut out, it leaves an ugly ^rand behind
That botchy face of thine (...) ^s if thou
Had a Campama^ Cl^p upon thee now.
Thus he abused Messius ace, and bid
Him come and dance as Polyphemus did.
No vizard, nor yet buskins need'st thou wear,
Thy face and limbs cannot seem worse then they are.
Messius retorts as much; Thou Dog, (says he)
When will thy slaveship end? for though thou be
Now made a Scribe, thy Mrs. right thereby
Is not extinguished; tell me, Sirrah, why
Did thou so often run away from her?
Is not a pound of bread sufficient fare
For such a starveling slave as thou to eat?
And with such pastime we got down our meat.
At Beneventum our officious Host
Roasting lean Birds, was like himself to roast.
The pile of fire fell down, and scattered flame
Unto the roof of the old Kitchen came,
The hungry Guests, and Servants worse then those,
Being afraid their supper they should lose,
Began to scramble, and did more conspire
To snatch the victuals, then to quench the fire.
And now the Apulean Mountains did appear,
Which by (...) so scorched are,
These we had never chaw'd ore, but that there lay
Trivi^us to refresh us by the way;
But such a cursed smo^k did there arise
From the green Bo^ghs they burnt, it scorcht our ey^*
Here I the (...) of the company
Till Midnight aid in expectation lie
Of a false Wench, who promised to come to me,
But sleep did come, and that more good did do me:
But what I dreamt* and what on me befell,
My body and my sheets can only tell.
Thence four and twenty miles we were conveyed
By Coach, then in a little town we staid,
Whose name will not stand in verse, but yet there are
Plain signs to know it by, they water there
(The meanest of all things) sell, while trav'lers may
With fine bread gratis load themselves away.
Bread at C^nusiums gritty, water there
Is as at Equotutium, very rare.
Brave Diomedes of so high renown,
'Twas he, that built in former time, this town.
Here Varius parted from's, and weeping went,
While ^e his absence did as much lament.
To Rubi thence, we being tired, did get,
The journey long, and worse because 'twas wet.
Next day to Fishy Barus we repair,
The way was worse, but yet the Weather fair;
From thence to Gratia, which did seem to be
Founded in spite of the Water Nymphs, for we
Found wholesome Water greatly wanting there,
But we had ex'lent sport; for they did dare
Persuade me, that their Incense which they lay
Upon their Altars, would consume away
Without a fire, I Will never think it is true,
This story fits the uncircumcised Jew;
For I well know the Gods live free from cares,
And never concern themselves in man's affairs,
And when as Nature any thing does do,
Which Mortal men are most accustomed to,
I don't believe that it is the careful Gods
Send down this wonder from their high abodes;
Thence to Brandusium we our travels bend,
And here my paper and our journey end.
SATYR VI. By Sir R. F. To MAECENAS.
He reprehends the vain judgment of the people of Rome concerning Nobility,
measuring the same by antiquity of Pedigree, not by virtue; nor willingly
admitting to Magistracy any but such as were adorned with the former* That
there was no reason to envy him for the friendship of Maecenas, as for a
Tribuneship; since that was not given by Fortune, but acquired by the
recommendations of virtue. Lastly, shows his condition in a private life to be
much better, then (if he were a Magistrate) it could be.

NOt that the Tus^ans (who from Lydia came)
Have nothing nobler then Maecenas name;
Nor that thy Mothers, and Sires Grand-sire were
Generals of old, makes thee as most men, sneer
Thy nose up at poor folks, and such as me,
Born of a Father, from a Slave made free.
When thou affirm'st, It skils not of what kind
Any is come; if of a noble mind;
Thou deem'st (and right) that before Tullus reign,
(Who was a King, yet not a Gentleman)
Many a man of no degree, no name,
By great achievements to great honors came.
Levinus contrary ( Valerio's Son,
By whom proud Tarquin was expelled the Throne)
Him worthless, Even the people ( whom you know)
They scorned; Those fools that honors often bestow
On undeservers, doting on gay men,
Dazzled with shields and coronets. What then
Shall we do, lifted far above their Sphere?
The People to Levinus did prefer
A new man Decius; yet now, should I
Stand for a place, hoarse Appius would cry,
Withdraw! 'cause I Am no Gentleman: and shall,
When Horace meddles farther then his Naul.
But Honor takes into her golden Coach
Noble and base. Tullus, what have to touch
The Purple Robe (which Caesar forced thee quit)
And be a Tribune? Envy thou did get
Thereby, by whom in the dark thou would near been spide.
For when the people see a strange face ride
Up to the ears in Ermins, and a list
(Or more) of Gold; strait they demand, Who is it?
What was his Father? Just as when some youth,
Sick of the Fashions (to be thought, forsooth,
Handsome) inflames the fairer Sex, to call
His face in question, hair, teeth, foot, and small.
So when a man upon the Stage shall come,
And say, Give me the Reins that govern Rome,
I Will manage Italy, the State shall be
My care, I, and the Church likewise: Ods me!
It forces every Mortal to enquire
And know who was his Mother, who his Sire?
Shall then the Offspring of a Minstrel dare
D^splace this General, condemn that Peer?
Novius was one hole lower. Being the same
My Father was, you would think from Brute he came.
But if two hundred Draies obstruct a street,
Or with their Trumpeters, three Funerals meet;
Louder then all he chafes with brazen lungs,
And this is something to awe peoples tongues.
But to my self, the son of the Freed man,
O ( Envy cries) The son of the Freed man!
Maecenas, now, Because thy Guest: before,
Because a Roman Tribune's charge I bore.
These two are not alike: I may pretend,
Though not to office, yet to be thy friend,
Thou being chiefly in this case so choice,
Not guided by Ambition, popular voice,
Or by a chance: Virgil his word did pass
For me, then Varus told thee what I was.
When first presented, little said I to thee,
(For Modesty's an infant) did not show thee
A long-taild Pedigree: I did not say,
I bred Race-horses in Appulia:
Told what I was. As little thou replied'st,
(Thy mode) I go: at nine months end, thou bid'st
Me, of thy Friends, be one. Of this I boast,
That I pleased thee (who to distinguish know)
Not Noble, but of fair and Crystal thoughts.
Yet, if except some few ( not heinous) faults,
My Nature's straight (as you may reprehend,
In a fair face, some moles.) If ( to commend
My self) I am not given to avarice;
Not nastie, not debaucht, not sold to vice,
Loved by my Friends, obedient to the Laws,
Of all these things my Father was the cause.
Who though but tenant to one small lean Farm,
In Flavio's School would never let me learn.
When great Centurions sent their great Boys thither,
Their left arms crampt with stones, hung in a leather
Bag, with a counting-board; but boldly parts
With me (a child) to Rome: t'imbibe those arts
A Knight, or Senator, might teach his Boy;
That who had seen my clothes and my convoy
Of Servants, cleaving through a press, would swear
Some wealthy Grandsire did my charges bear.
Himself ( the carefull'st Tutor) had his eye
Over them all. In short my Modesty,
(Virtues first bloom) so watring from this Well,
He both preserved my whiteness and my smell:
Nor feared, lest any should in time to come,
Blame him he had not bred me still at home
To his own Trade: or I my self complain;
(The more his praise my debt,) if I have brain,
Of such a Father now shall I repent,
Like some that quarrel with their own descent,
Because their blood from Nobles did not flow,
Reason as well as Nature answers, No:
For if I should unweave the Loom of Fate,
And choose my self new parents, for my State,
In any Tribe: Contented with mine own,
I would not change to be a Consuls Son.
Mad, in the Vulgars judgment: But in thine
Sober, perchance: because I did decline
An irksome load I am not used to bear.
For I must seek more wealth straight, if that were;
And, to beg Voices, many a visit make,
Must at my heels a brace of Servants take;
For fear my honor should be seen alone,
To go into the Country, or the Town.
There must be Horses store, and Grooms thereto,
A Litter's to be hired too: Whereas now
It Is lawful for me on a Bob-tail Mule
To travel to Tarontum, if I wull;
My cloak-bag galling her behind, and I
Digging her shoulders. Not, with Obliquie,
Like Tullus, when in Tiber-Road he is seen
Attended with five Boys, carrying a skin
Of Wine, and a Close-stool: Brave Senator,
More decently then thou, and thousands more,
I could do that. Where ever I list I go,
Alone, the price of Broth and Barley know;
Crowd in at every Sight, walk late in Rome:
Visit the Temple with a prayer: then home
To my Leek-pottage, and Chich-pease, Three boys
Serve in my Supper; whom to counterpoise
One bowl, two beakers on a broad white slate,
A pitcher with two ears ( Earthen.
Campanian Plate)
Then do I go to sleep: securely do it,
Being next morning to attend no suit
In the great Hall (where Marsya does look,
As if loud Nemio's face he could not brook)
I lie till Four. Then walk, or read a while;
Or write to please my self; anoint me with Oil:
(Not such as Natta paws himself withal,
Robbing the Lamps.) When near his Vertical
The hotter Sun invites us to a Bath
For our tired Limbs, I fly the Dog-stars wrath,
Having dined only so much as may stay
My appetite: Loiter at home all da^.
These are my solaces: this is the life
Of men that shun ambition, run from strife.
Lighter then if I soared on Glories wing,
The Nephew, Son, and Grandson to a King.
SATYR VII. By A. B. A Braul between two Railing Buffoons.
THe venomous railing of that black mouthed thing
Who lately was prescribed Rupillius King,
Against that mungrel Persian, and how he
Revenged himself on King again; these be
Things (I suppose) notoriously known,
The talk of every Barbers shop in town.
This Persian being rich, his wealth did draw
Much business, and that business suits in Law;
And with Rupillius King, among the rest,
He had a very troublesome contest;
He was a surly fellow, proud, and bold,
And able King himself with ease t'out-scold,
Of such a bitter and invective speech,
That he even Billingsgate to rail could teach.
Now as to King, since nothing could compose
The differences which between them rose,
These two Tongue-combatants began their fray,
When Brutus governed wealthy Asia;
To the Hall they come contending eagerly,
Both matched as equally as Fencers be;
They made an exc'lent Scaene: First in the Court
The Persian pleads his cause, and made good sport,
Our General Brutus to the skies he raised,
And his victorious Army highly praised;
Called him the Sun of Asia, and all
His Captains he propitious Stars did call,
Except that Buffoon King (says he) who is far
More mischievous t'you all, than the Dog Star
Is to the Husbandman: thus on he ran,
And by his railing, bore that baffl^d man
Quite down before him; like a Winter flood,
Which drives down every thing that e're withstood
Its rapid motion, and by violence
Roots up the trees, and so the Axe presents.
Thus when two Warriers engage in fight,
And both of equal courage, skill, and might,
Honor's their aim, both scorn to yield or r^n,
The more their valor, the more mischiefs done.
So valiant Hector when he did engage
Against stout Achilles, such a deadly rage
Did animate them both, that nothing could
Satiate their fury but each others blood,
And death of one, merely 'cause both were stout;
Conquer or die both could, but never give out.
But when two Cowards quarrel, or if one
That courage has, contends with one of none;
(As Diomedes once with Glauceus did)
The Coward yields or runs for it, and instead
Of blows, gives bribes, and presents to his Foe,
Only to save his life, and let him go.
King rallies up his thoughts, and then retorts
Invectives false, and many of all sorts:
Just like a surly Carman, whose rude tongue
Out-rails all Passengers, be it right or wrong;
He had not wit to jeer, but rudely bauls,
And the smart Persian Rogue and Cuckold calls.
The angry Persian being so much stung
By the reproaches of the Italians tougue,
Cries out, Oh Brutus! by the Gods I pray,
Thou whose profession's to take Kings, away,
Murder this one King for me, thou wilt gain more
By this, then all the Kings thou have killed before.
SATYR VIII. By A. B. A Discovery of Witchcraft.
OF an Old Fig Tree once the trunk was I,
And as useless piece of wood laid by,
(...) Carpenter who found
Me lying so neglected on the ground,
Took me in hand to form me with his tool,
But whether he should make of me a stool,
Or a Priapus, was a thing that ^id
Long time perplex this politic work-mans head;
Till after long deliberation, he
For weighty reasons made a God of me.
Hence does my Deity proceed, and I
Here stand the thieves and birds to terrify;
The thieves I fright away with my right hand,
And my long pole which does erected stand;
My Crown of Reeds does drive the birds away,
That they dare not in our new Gardens prey.
The ground where I now stand was heretofore
A common Burying-place for all the poor,
Whose carcases in mean small graves were laid,
And this the public Sepulcher was made
For the meanest sort of people, those men which
Were much the poorer 'cause they had been rich.
The bodies of such spend-thrifts here were casts
As fooled their means away, and lacked at last.
A thousand foot in length, three hundred wide,
Which from the rest a Landmark did divide,
Whose plain inscription did describe to the Heirs,
Which ground was Sacred, and which ground was theirs.
Now men in the healthy Churchyard live, and where
Dead bodies stunk, the living take fresh a^r,
And on that green hill now we walk, which once
Was all deformed and covered ore with bones.
But yet the thieves and birds which hither come,
And haunt this place, are not so troublesome
To me, as those who charms and poisons use,
With which they do poor Mortal minds abuse,
These I can neither hinder nor destroy,
But in the silent nights, by Moonshine they
Into these Gardens steal, and pick up there
Dead humane bones and herbs that poisonous are.
Here that old Hag Canidia I spied
In a black garment close about her ti'd,
Barefoot she walked, her locks dishevelled were,
And that Witch-major Sagana with her:
Howling like Wolves, of pale and ugly hew,
They both appeared most ghastly to my view,
With their long nails to scratch the earth they went,
And with their teeth a Lamb in sunder rent,
Whose blood they poured into their new dig'd pit,
And conjured up the infernal Fiends with it,
Such Spirits as could answer to what ere
They did demand; two Images there were
Brought by these Hags, by which they did their knack
One made of wool, the other made of wax:
The Woollen was the greater, that it might
The little Waxen Image curb and fright.
This Wax Effigies stood cringing by,
As sinking under its servility,
One Hecate invokes; Tisyphone
Is charmed by the other: Serpents one might see,
And the infernal Dogs run out and in.
The bashful Moon for fear she should have been
A witness to these juglings hid her face,
And made our Sepulchers her lurking place.
If I lie t'you in any thing I Have said,
May the crows with their dung pollute my head!
May all the rogues and whores, and thieves in town,
Cast their base Excrements upon my crown.
What need I all those tricks to mention, which
Were done by Sagana that damned old Witch?
And by what Artifice the Ghosts and she
Discoursed together with variety
Of tones, now shrill, now flat, and how they did
Hide under ground by stealth the hairy head
Of an old wolf, with teeth of speckled snake,
Then with the Waxen image they did make
The fire to blaze: But that I might not be
A tame spectator of this foolery,
And those impostures unrevenged behold,
Of both those Hags so ugly and so old;
I from my Godships entrails backward spoke,
As thundering as a bladder when'tis broke;
Away run both the witches into town,
Out dropped Canidia's set of teeth, and down
Old Sagana her snakes and poisons threw,
And all her conjuring tools, off likewise threw
Her Periwig, 'twould make one break his heart
With laughter, to observe how one ^ound fart
Broke from a God, two Witches frights away,
And made them run from one more weak then they.
SATYR IX. A description of an impertinent prating Fool.
OF late along the streets I musing walked,
And to my self some learned whimsie talked,
When lo a wandering Trifler to me ca^e,
Whom scarce I knew, save only by his name;
And with familiar freedom took my hand,
Asking me, How I did? At your command
(Said I) God keep you Sir. He following still,
I turned about, and stopped to know his will.
What? don't you know me, man? ( said he) I too
A Virtuo so am as well as you.
The more I honor you, Sir, (I replied)
And still all ways to shake him off I tried,
In thousand different postures I did go,
Sometimes I walked apace, and sometimes slow;
Sometimes I whispered in my Foot-boys ear,
And all the while did sweat all over for fear.
Oh happy he! (to mutter I began)
Who hugs himself at an impertinent man!
Oh happy! who as well himself can feast
On the most foolish talker as the best!
In the mean time his tongue did gallop on,
Letting no street, nor sign, nor house alone:
At last, perceiving I did nothing mind,
(He said) you would fain be rid of me, I find;
But you, nor I have now not much to do,
I Will therefore wait upon you where you go:
Where lies your way? O Lord, pray Sir do not
Your self for me to so much trouble put;
My journey lies almost as far's the Tower,
To visit one you never saw before.
That Is nothing sir, I Am perfectly at leisure,
And a long walk with you I count a pleasure:
With that I shru^k my shoulder^, hung my ears,
As a dull Ass that too great lading bears.
Then he begins: If once you knew me sir,
You Would scarce to me would any wit prefer,
Who is there that can better verses write?
Or who with greater swiftness can indite?
Who of your friends can more gentely dance?
Or who can better teach the mode of France?
If you but hear me sing, you will confess,
I do exces the famed Hermogenes.
Here it was time to interpose: Have you
No mother Sir, nor other kindred, who
May want your company this present hour?
O no; pale Death did them long since devour.
The happier they; Nay then, in faith, go on,
Kill me out right, my friend, since thou have begun;
My last hour's come, and now I plainly see
Thou were intended by that Prophecy
Which my Nurse spoke, when I an Infant was,
Clapping my feet and smiling in my face,
She said; This Boy no poison, nor no steel,
No pain of Cough, or Spleen, or Gout, shall feel,
But by some fatal tongue shall be destroyed,
Talkers let him, when come to age, avoid.
Over against Guild Hall at length we came,
He pelting me, I miserably lame.
Gods so! It Is well remembered, hold, I pray,
I have a Cause here to be tried to day;
Good Sir come with me in, I Will straight dispatch.
In have, like dying men, this bough I caught.
In troth Sir I have no great skill in the Law,
My nod will keep no Judge or Jury in awe,
I Will softly walk before, and if you make
Good speed, you quickly me may overtak^.
Here the perplexed stood still, and scratcht his head,
What? shall I lose so dear a friend? ( he said)
Or by my absence loose my Cause? Nay Sir,
I pray regard your business, do not stir.
Let my Cause sink (or swim) I Will leave it here,
So I may self to such a friend endear.
So on he leads, and I found 'twas in vain
To spoil my teeth by champing of the chain;
Straight he resumes his first Discourse; And how?
How with my Lord stands your condition now?
My Lord's a prudent man, and private lives,
Never himself to much acquaintance gives;
You Will raise a mighty Fortune under him,
But yet me thinks it would great wisdom seem,
If you would take some course those to prefer
About him, who might still possess his ear
To your advantage, and if I were one,
You might be sure govern him alone.
You're quite mistaken Sir, we live not so
As you suppose, nor yet as others do;
No small Intrigues that family does breed,
No plots, nor little jealousies does feed:
None there does look with envious eyes upon
Another good, but loves it as his own;
Strange and unusual this which you relate,
But so it is, the more I Am passionate
To make one of your number. That you may
Without dispute, if you will but try the way;
A man so qualified as you appear,
Cannot be denied admission any where.
Well, to my self I will not wanting ^e,
I Will watch his hours, his servants I will fee;
I will salute his Chariot in the street,
I Will bring him home as often as we meet:
We Courtiers strive for interest in vain,
Unless by long observance it we gain.
While he did thus run on, who should we meet
But my friend C -- passing cross the street,
C -- straight found what kind of man he was,
Nor to see through him, needed he his Glass:
So when the usual complements were past,
I trod on's Toes, and softly him embraced;
I winkt, and shruug'd, and many signs I gave,
Which silently did his assistance crave:
But my unmerciful malicious friend,
Seemed not to understand what I intend,
Enjoyed my misery, and smiled to see
What small thin Plots I made to be set free.
Dear friend! do you remember who last night
Did us to dine with him to day invite?
I well rember it, but yet in troth
I have no mind to go, for I am loath
To break a fasting day, as we shall there,
That Is naught I have a dispensation here.
I Have none (says he) I Am going another way,
I Will keep my conscience, and the Church obey.
This said my witty Friend with cruel spite,
Leaves me even when the Butchers going to smite.
Under what cursed Planet was I born?
By my companion to be left forlorn!
Condemned to suffer this incessant breath,
And by perpetual chattring talked to death.
But now at last by great good hap there was
A Bailiff seas'd on him as he did pass;
O have I caughr you Sir, you must with me,
Pray Sir, will you against him witness be?
Along they go, I for revenge too joined,
But in the Hall we so great tumult find,
Such heaps of Women followed us, and Boys,
That I with ease escapt amidst the noise.
Sure great was my distress, when even a throng
Of Lawyers was relief against his tongue.
SATYR X. By A. B. Another Discourse of POETRY.
I Said indeed the Verse Lucilius writ
Were rough, it is true; and who is so void of wit,
T^ough never so much his Patron or his Friend,
That him against this censure can defend?
But in that very Page I said withal,
That with great Wit he does the City maul,
And did commend him for it much. But yet
Though I allow him that, I don't admit
Lucilius was so thorough-pac'd a Wit,
As to be good at every thing, for so
That fool Laberius Dogrel Rhimes might go
For exc'lent Poems, and be much admired.
Though It be a virtue, and to be desired
To make an Audience laugh well, yet there be
More things required to make a Poet; he
Must be caucise, his Verse must smoothly flow,
And not be clogged with needless words that grow
A burden to the Reader, who is tired
With reading that which he at first desired.
Sometimes it is good to use a doleful strain,
But most of all the brisk and aerie vain
Now play the Rhetorician, and then
To the Poetical raptures fly again.
Sometimes write like a Gentleman, whose part
Is to write easily without much art,
A Drolling merry style does better hit
Great matters, then a downright railing Wit;
The ancient Comic Poets on this ground
Are imitable, and to be renowned,
But those our spruce Gallants about the Town,
(Because they understand them not) cry down.
To sing what Calvus and Catullus writ,
Is the height of all their learning and their wit.
He that, say they, in's Latin Verses can
Mix ends of Greek, that that is the only man.
You aged Block-heads! who so dote upon
That Rhodian Dunce, Poet Pytholeon,
And think that Pie-bald way in which he went
To be both difficult and excellent.
But oh! an elegant discourse (you will say)
Made up of Greek and Latin words looks gay;
It Is just like Chian Wine when mixed among
The Wine that to Falernum does belong.
When thou would Verses make, imagine thou
Were for thy life to plead thy own cause now,
As did that criminal Petillus once,
Would thou thy Native language quite renounce,
While the Kings Council in their Mother tongue
Tug for thy Condemnation, right or wrong?
To ^nterlace thy speech, would thou incline
With foreign words, and like the Canusine,
Speak a compounded Gibrish? But when I
(Who am an Inland Poel went to try
To make Greek Verses, after midnight, when
Those things are real which are dreamt by men,
Romulus straight appeared to me, and told me,
All men would for as great a madman hold me,
If I attempt t'encrease that tedious store
Of the Greek Poets, too too large before,
As if I should Coals to New Castle send;
This to my Grecian versing put an end;
While swelling Alpin with his thundering Pen,
Murders poor slaughtered Memnon over again,
And by his barbarous Poetry destroys
Those things and persons which he goes to praise.
I sport my self with writing Lines, which never
Are spoken in Apollo's Temple, where
That pedant Tarpa does presume to sit,
And with much boldness judge of little wit,
Nor are they often obtruded on the Stage,
To cloy the Stomach of the queazie age,
As now our modern Fundanus does,
Who is in scribbling Plays facetious,
And with a subtle whore, a cunning knave,
Cheating old men, we the same fancy have
In all his Plays. And Tragic Pollio sings
In his three-footed Verse the deeds of Kings:
But our ingenuous Varius does produce
Better then any the Heroic Muse,
And the smooth Rural Muses do insp^re
Virgil with soft and most facetious fire.
Hence it is that I write better Satyrs then
That blundring Varro, and that sort of men
Who have so often tried to write, in vain,
Yet I fall short of our Lucilius strain,
Who first invented them; nor will I dare
To strip him from the Crown which did adhere
To His brows with so much glory; though I said
His Verses did run muddily, yet they had
More in them that deserved our great respect,
Then all those Vices which we should reject.
But, prithee tell me? Did thy learned eye
Nothing to be reproved in Homer spy?
Did not Lucilius himself think fit
To alter something of weak Accius wit?
Did he not laugh at Ennius lines, as though
Some things in them were not quite grave enough?
And when of thee he a discourse did move,
Thought thee as bad as those he did reprove?
And what should hinder, but when ever we
Do read Lucilius works, we well may see
If It were the imperfection of his wit,
Or crabbed Nature of the things he writ,
Would not permit the Lines he made to be
Elaborate, or run more evenly?
Or if that any Poet took delight
A Poem in Hexameter to write,
Contended only that he had made up
Two hundred Verses when he went to sup,
And after Supper just as many more,
Whose rhimes did run as Cassius heretofore,
More swift and raging then a Torrent does,
Which being condemned to fire, as story goes,
Was burnt to ashes with the Books he writ,
(The just reward of a voluminous wit)
If he were now alive, and all that e're
He found superfluous, away should pare,
He Would scratch his head were he a Verse to write,
And often to the quick his nails would bite.
He that wou^d write what should twice reading stand,
Must often be upon the mending hand,
Never mind the praise of the undiscerning Crew,
Content with learned Readers, though but few.
Art thou so mad thy Poems to expose
To Ballad-singers, and to Puppet-shows?
Now I (I vow) I Am like the bold wench, that
By all the people being baited at,
Since I (quoth she) am Minion to a Knight,
I all the inferior rabble scorn and slight:
Shall such an Arse-worm as Pantilius,
Disturb may thoughts? or when Demetrius does
Behind my back traduce me, or that Ass
Fannius (who once Tigellius Crony was)
Abuses me, his envious rage to vent,
Shall I shall foolishly my self torment?
No; let Maecenas, and such men of wit
As Virgil, will but read what I have writ,
With many friends and learned persons more,
Whose names I do industriously pass ore,
Whom I desire to smile on what I write
How ill soever; But if they should delight
Less then my expectation, I should be
Exceeding sorrowful: But as for thee
Demetrius, thee Tigellius that be
But Finding Rogues, go fret your selves and pine
Amongst your She-schollars at these lines of mine;
Sirrah, make all the haste you can, and look
That all I Have said be added to my Book.
The end of the First Book of Satyrs.
SATYRS. BOOK II.
SATYR I. By Sir. R. F.
He dilates upon the advice given him by Trebatius to write the actions of
Augustus, rather then Satyrs (as things that are dangerous to meddle with) and
shows way he cannot obey him.

SOme think I am to sharp a Satyrist,
And that I stretch my work beyond the list.
Others, what ere I write is neeless say,
And that like mine a thousand Lines a day
May be spun. What would thou advise me now
( Trebatius) in this case? Sit still. As how?
Not to write Verse at all, do thou aver
As thy Sense? I do. Let me never stir,
If 'twere not better. But I cannot sleep.
For that, swim Tyber (nointed) thrice: or steep
Thy brains at night in Wine. If thou must needs
Write, dare to write unconquered Caesar's deeds,
Great Rewards following. Father, that being it
I Would fain be at, my will exceeds my wit.
Not every Pen can paint in horrid Field.
Thick Groves of Pikes, Spears broke in Frenchmen killed,
And a hurt Parthian dropping from his Horse.
His justice though thou may, and his minds force:
As wise Lucilius those of Scipio,
I Will not be wanting to my self, if so
Occasion serve. The passage must be clear
When Horace words pierce Caesar's serious ear:
Whom, stroaking, if we think t'approach: 'ware heels.
Is not that better then in Verse that reels,
To jeer this Gull, that Prodigal, when each
Man thinks he is meant (tho quite from thy thoughts reach)
And hates thee for it? what should I do? being hot
In The head, and seeing double through the Pot,
Milonius frisks. Castor on Horseback fights:
The twin of the same Egg in Clubs delights.
As many thousand minds as men there be,
I Like Lucilius (better then both we)
My words in Meeter love to enclose and bind.
His way was, in his Books to speak his mind
As freely, as his secrets he would tell
To a tried friend: and took it ill, or well,
He held his Custom. Hence it came to pass,
The old man's life is there as in a Glass.
His steps I follow, whom you neither can
Of Luca call, nor an Appulian.
(For the Venusian both their borders ploughs,
A Colony of Rome, as old Fame shows,
The Sabells thence expelled to stop that Gate,
And be an Out-work to the Roman State.)
Yet I Would not harm a Chicken with my will:
For show and countenance bearing my Quill
Like a Sword sheathed; which why should I draw, not
Set on by Rogues? with Rust there may it rot
O Jove, Father and King: and none bereave
The peace I seek. But if there do, believe
Me they will rew't, when with my keen Style stung,
Through the whole town they shall in pomp be sung.
Servius, the penal Statutes (angered) threats
Canidia to Witch them, against whom she sets:
A mischief Turius, to all those wage Law
Where he is a Judge. That every one does awe
Them whom he fears, with that where his strength is,
And that by Natures Law appears in this:
Wolves smite with teeth, Bulls with the horn (this must
Be taught them from within.) With Scaeva trust
His long-lived Mother; my head to a groat,
His pious hand shall never cut her throat.
Not his? No more then an Ox bite, a Bear
Kick thee: but she shall die of poison. There
Now lies his skill. Me, whether (in effect)
The quiet Harbor of old age exspect,
Or Death with sable wings hover about:
Rich, Poor, at Rome, or by hard Fate thrust out
Into exile; in whatsoever way
Of life, I must write Verses: that is my play*
O Child! thy taper's near the end I doubt,
And that some great Man's brave will puff thee out.
Why? When Lucilius durst begin this way
Of writing Verses, and the skins did flay.
In which the outward-fair disguised their shame;
Were Laelius and he that won a name
From Carthage-raz'd, offended with his wit?
Or did they winch, Metallus being hit?
And Lupus stripped and whipped in Verse? yet he
Spouted his Ink on men of each degree:
None spared but Virtue and her friends. Nay when
Retired were from the Stage, and crowd of men,
Scipio's exalted virtue, and the mild
Wisdom of Laelius: Till the Broth was boild,
They both would play and toil with him, ungirt.
Though I in wit, and in condition, short
Am of Lucilius: Envy shall confess
Against her will, I Have lived nevertheless
Amongst great men: and (thinking to have stuff
Here, for her rotten teeth) find I am tough,
If learned Trebatius take me at my rate,
Nay truly I can find nothing to bate;
Only I warn thee, least through ignorance
Of settled Laws thou come to some mischance:
If any write base Verses against other,
It bears a suit. If base, I grant: but Father,
If any write good verse, that man's praised,
Caesar the Judge. If I the street have raised
By ba^^ing at a Thief, my self being none,
The (...) with laughter cracks, I (freed) go home.
SATYR II. By A. B. The benefits of Temperance and Frugality.
HOw great a virtue it is, and how it tends
To the good of humane life (my worthy friends)
To live abstemiously, is not to be
Learned at great Feasts made up of luxury,
Amongst your polished Tables spread in State,
Laden with Dishes of stupendous Plate,
Whose various splend our does amaze the Eye,
And make the puzzled appetite pass by
What Is good, and choose the worse: but when you be
Fasting, then come sift out this truth with me.
This is not my Sense only, but Offellus
That Country wit, this truth did long since tell us,
A prudent man, yet walked not by a rule,
Nor learned the formal Precepts of the School.
You Will ask, why fasting? give me leave I Will tell you*
You can no more with a full gorged belly
Know vice from virtue, then a Judge that is
Corrupt, discern 'twixt truth and falsities.
Suppose you had hunted hard, or used your force
To ride and manage a high-metled Horse:
Or you whose life before luxurious was,
Should on a Roman Soldiers duty pass,
Or should at Tennis play with might and main,
Whilst the delight makes you never mind the pain;
Or had you been at Quoiting, and had thrown
Into the yielding Air a pondrous stone,
Till your much exercise had driven away
That sustenance which on your stomachs lay,
When you are very dry and hungry grown,
Then I Would fain fee you let course food alone;
Or drink no Wine, unless you can procure
Racy, Canary, or what Claret's pure,
Or if the Butler's absent, or the Main
By storms protects her Fish from being slain,
A crust of bread dipped into salt well may
The barking of your empty stomachs stay.
You Will ask me how this virtue may be got?
True pleasure in the daintiest Dish does not
Consist, but in our selves, and any meat
Is to us Venson, if obtained by Sweat:
But no delicious Banquets can invite,
Or gratify the gorged appetite.
I doubt I shall not persuade you, but that men
Will feed upon dry Peacocks, rather then
The Fat, but common Fowl: Men's palats be
Corrupted with the very vanity
Of things, and still desire to taste that food
That Is very dear, and think it therefore good.
Peacocks with us the best esteem obtain,
Not for their Flesh, but for their gaudy Train,
As if it would men's Palats gratify,
To eat those Feathers they extol so high:
Or that the glorious show would not be spoiled,
When you shall see a Peacock stripped and boiled.
Although the flesh of Hens and Peacocks do
In nothing differ, it appears that you
Are fooled with various colors: Be so still
You Will wonder how I have attained this skill.
When you have a Pike presented in a Dish,
You ask impertinently, if that Fish
I^ the main sea, or in fresh waters caught?
And madly praise Mullets of three pound weight,
Which you must cut in pieces; but I see
Most men merely with shows delighted be:
Pray, for what reason do most men dislike,
(Though they love Mullets large) a well grown Pike?
Their curiosity's the reason for it,
'Cause Nature made Pikes long, and Mullets short.
When a man's stomach is once hungry grown,
He slights no food, the coursest Bit will down;
But the luxurious Glutton says, I wish
A pondrous Mullet wallowing in my dish;
Such fellows do only deserve to eat
With revenous Harpyes. I could wish their meat
Would with moist weather stink, and loathsome grow,
But their fresh Fish and Venson will do so;
And to their glutted Stomach nauseous be,
By their too fulsome superfluity,
When the crammed Glutton over-charg'd with meat,
To get new stomach does sharp Salads eat.
Yet sometimes homely Diet does appear
At mighty Princes Tables; for Eggs there
(Which are so common) sometimes may be seen,
And the black Olives on their Boards have been.
Though with the Crier Gallo 'twas not thus,
Who was for Luxury so infamous,
Because he Sturgeon first did bring to's Board,
What cannot the Sea Mullets enough afford?
The Turbet in the Sea did safely rest,
And Storks lay unmolested in their nest,
Till your luxurious May'r (that would have been)
Ingeniously brought their destruction in:
And now if any other person should
Cry up the roasted Cormorant, rare food!
Our Roman youth, who have only vicious wit,
Would praise and imitate both him and it.
Yet (as Offellus held) there is difference great
Betwixt the sordid and the frugal meat,
And men in vain do luxury eschew,
If they do Sordidness the while pursue.
So Avidienus, whom we do justly brand
With name of Dog, would eat wild Cornels, and
Kept ^^ll 'twas sour all the Wine he drunk,
And all his Oil intollerably stunck,
Which from his nasty horn, he, drop by drop,
Distilled upon the Colwort Sallet top
With his own hand, but he would never spare
To dowse it over with his dead Vinegar,
Though on his Birthday, or his Wedding Day,
Or other feast, clad in his best array.
What Diet then should a wise man beat?
And which of these two should he imitate?
Keep the mid-road, and both extremes beware,
Here lurks a Dog, and a feirce Wolf lies there.
So cleanly he should be as not to offend
By's nastiness the stomach of his friend;
Not be extreme in either hand in's treat,
Nor by too much, nor by too little meat;
Not like Albucius of old, who when
He entertained his friend would beat his men*
Nor negligent as Naevius, who at Feasts
With greasy water would present his guests.
This is a great vice also. Now, pray mind,
What good in frugal Diet you may find.
First you will be very healthy; for you know
Much harm to us from various meats does flow:
Think on that only Dish which was your fare,
How blithe and healthy after it you were!
B^t when men fell to mingling roast and boild,
And fish and fowl together, health was spoild!
The sweet meats turned to Choler, and tough phlegm
Bred a disturbance in the maws of them:
Observe how pale and sick a man does rise
From board, confounded with varieties;
Nay when the bodies over-charg'd, the mind
Is also in the discomposure joind,
And on the ground inhumanely does roll,
That part of Heavenly breath, the precious soul!
While he that does a slender Diet keep,
Can on the sudden lay his limbs to sleep,
And in the morning rise so fresh to do
Whatever business he is inclined unto.
And yet this temperate person sometimes may
Increase his Table on some Holy Day,
Or when he means his body to caress,
Which is brought low by his abstemiousness;
For years will steal on men, old age must be,
Because it is feeble, handled tenderly.
But if decrepid age on some men seize,
Or if they fall into some sharp disease,
What tender usage can be added more,
Then they being young and lusty had before?
Our Ancestors stale Venson used to praise,
Nor that they could not smell it in those days,
But 'twas with this intent, that if a Guest
Came some days after the ending of the Feast,
'Twere better he should on cold Venson fall,
Then for the Master to devour it all.
I would to God I had been brought forth then,
In that first age among those worthy men.
Do You value reputation, which to the ear
Is gratefuller then verse or Music are;
Great Turbets, and such costly Dishes do
Begat you damage and discredit too;
Besides your parents and your friends you must
Enrage, and prove to our own selves unjust;
And then in vain you will desire to die,
Not being worth a Groat a Rope to buy.
You Will say, such a poor Sneak as Thrasius,
Justly deserves to be rewarded thus:
But you have a great Estate, wealth without end,
As much as will suffice three Kings to spend.
What then? Can there no better way be found
To spend that Wealth, with which you so abound?
Why should so many brave men want? and why
Should the Gods ancient Temples ruined lie (thon
While you are rich? Vile wretch! Why wilt notthou
Out of thy needless store something allow
For thy dear Countries good? can thou suppose
Thy fate alone will still be prosperous;
Oh, how thine enemies will laugh at thee,
When you are reduced to want and beggary!
Which of the two can certainest rely
On his own temper in adversity?
That man whose pampered body and his mind,
Have ever been to luxury inclined,
Or that is content with little, and does fear
What may fall out, and wisely does prepare
In time of peace things requisite for war.
Now that you may believe this to be true,
When I was young I this Offellus knew,
A man of great Estate, yet spent no more
Then afterward, when robbed of all his store.
A man might see him with his cattle, and
His children tilling his allotted land,
And patiently bearing that he is
Farmer of that estate which once was his.
I never durst eat any thing (he would say)
But Caul and Bacon on a working-day;
But if an ancient friend with me had been,
Whom a long time before I had not seen,
Or a good neighbor came to visit me,
When rainy weather me from work set free,
I made him welcome, not with costly Fish,
A Pullet, or a Lamb served for his dish;
Dried Grapes and Nuts his second Course were made,
And double Figs were on the Table laid;
Then after Dinner' it was our recreation
To pass the Grace-cup round on Reputation.
A health to Ceres that our Corn might grow,
And smoothed with wine the wrinckles of our brow,
Let Fortune rage, and raise commotions new,
Can she make me live meaner (Boys) or you?
For Nature nere appointed him or me,
Or any else, proprietors to be
Of our own lands, though now the time is his
To turn me out, yet his unthriftiness
Or ignorance of tricks in law, or else
Who e're survives him, him at last expells,
This Farm which now by Umbrenas name is known
Was mine, but none can say, It is his own;
It Is thine, and mine, and his, live bravely then,
And in all troubles quit your selves like men.
SATYR III. By A. B. That every man is in something or other mad.
DAMASIPPUS and HORACE. Dam. THou writ'st so seldom, that there does appear,
Scarce a new Poem from thee twice a year,
But vainly spend'st thy time in looking over
Those things which thou have written heretofore:
I Am vexed at thee, that thou do thus resign
Thy self up to the sway of sleep and wine;
The Muses negligently laid aside,
And we of what we so desire denied.

Hor. What would you have me do?

Dam. Here thou have been
Retired ever since Christmas did begin,
Now you are at leisure, let us have something from thee
That may appease our longing, and become thee:
Come, strike up man, -- one Verse.

Hor. No,'twill not do.

Dam. Thou blam'st thy harmless pen, nay the wall to
Endures thy causeless rage for native guilt,
'Cause 'twas in spite of Gods or Muses built.
Thou did pretend, that if thou once could be
Out of this Town from noise and business free,
And to some little Country Vill retire,
In a mean Cottage by a little ^ire,
How many admirable lines should we,
As the effects of thy retirement see?
Else to what end did thou incumber thus
Thy self with Eupolis, Archilocus,
Menander, Plato, and such Books as those,
If thou wilt not write at all? do thou suppose
That by declining virtue thou shall be
Protected from the jaws of Calumny?
Thou will be laughed at for an Ass; come, loath
Those lewd enchantments of that Siren sloth;
Else all that honor which about thee shined,
Got by thy exc'lent parts must be resigned.

Hor. 'Pox on your too true council. Now (I pray)
The Gods to send a man to shave away
That formal beard of thine; but prithee how
Came thou me and my humor thus to know?

Dam. Since my Estates consumed I go no more
To the Exchange, as I did heretofore,
But having now no business of my own,
To other men I am a Broker grown;
In former time, I gave my mind to know
Whether a statue were well made or no;
What was well carved or painted, and what ill,
And how to fell or buy them I had skill.
If a rare picture any where I found,
I would not care to give a thousand pound,
Gardens and stately houses I could buy
And sell to great advantage, so that I
When I was seen through the City ride,
Here comes the Purchaser, the people cried.

Hor. I know it, and I cannot but wonder how
Thou come thus cured of that distemper now.

Dam. I Will tell you what seems strange, and yet it is true,
My old disease was driven out by my new,
As in some bodies there is wont to be
The Headache cured by a Plurisie,
Or one that has a Lethargy endured
Grows frantic, and beats him by whom he is cured.

Hor. Be thou as frantic as thou will, so as
Thou will not serve me as the Doctor was.

Dam. Good friend don't cheat thy self, even thou art mad,
And all the world are very near as bad.
If what Stertinius the Stoic says
Among prudent men, does merit any Faith,
That grave Philosopher at first taught me
These admirable precepts, and 'twas he
My Spirits in my great affliction cheered,
And willed me wear this Philosophic beard;
And from Fabritius Bridge return again
With spirit undisturbed and calm, for when
All my Estate was gone, I thither went
My Cap plucked over my eyes, with an intent
To drown my self, I fortunately spied
That learned Stoic standing by my side.
What do thou mean (quoth. he) young man? take heed
That thou do not an unbecoming deed,
You Are driven to this by shame that is very bad,
Fearing among mad men to be counted mad:
Consider first what madness is, and then
If it be in thee, and in no other men,
Go bravely hang or drown thy self for me,
I Will never speak a word to hinder thee.
He who to vicious folly is inclined,
And is by ignorance of truth led blind,
Is by the Stoic counted out of's wits,
This definition all degrees befits:
All persons, nay great Princes, every one
It comprehends, but the wise man alone;
Nay give me leave, and I Will demonstrate how
He who calls thee fool's as much fool as thou.
Like Trav'lers passing through a Wood, when they
Range up and down missing their ready way,
This to the right' that to the left hand strayes,
One error fools them both, though several ways.
And tho thou think you are mad, yet even he
Is not a jot less mad that laughs at thee,
Both to Fool-coats have like propriety.
There is one sort of fools that start and quake
At the Chymaeras which their fancies make,
Cries out rocks, fire, and water him detain,
When he is only walking on the plain:
Another which is full as mad as he,
Though in his humor he goes contrary,
Runs through all fire and water ventures life,
Though Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Wife,
Or (which is more) his Mrs. should stand by,
And warn him of the danger he is nigh,
Crying aloud, Take heed; he would care no more
Then Fusius the Actor heretofore
When he the part of Hecuba did play,
And should present her sleeping, down he lay
Drunk and asleep; Catien the Player who
The part of Polidore did also do,
Though he cried, Mother it is I call you, wake,
A thousand Catieni could not make
Her stir: I think that all the Vulgar be
In several humors as stark mad as he.
To buy old Statues you suppose I Am mad,
But was not he that trusted me as bad?

Hor. May thou now borrow money of me, and never
Pay me a farthing on it again, if e're
I say you are mad. Can it with madness stand
When thou art still on the receiving hand?
But is not that Shopkeeper madder far
Who slights a ready-money Customer,
And deals with thee on Credit? for suppose
A Debtor should acknowledge that he owes
A Thousand pounds to's Creditor, and should
Give it him under's hand, this is not good;
Nay, if he seal a Bill or Bond for it, or
What e're binds Debtor to his Creditor,
Recognizances, Statutes, Mortgages,
Judgments, and Executions, all these
A cunning Knave that knows the Querks of Law
Will no more value, then he does a straw:
When you arrest him he will laugh at all
Those troubles which on other men befall,
And thorough all the Cobweb-laws escapes,
Varying his tricks as Proteus did his shapes.
If by the conduct of affairs we can
Judge of a mad or of a prudent man,
Thy Creditor's a Coxcomb, who takes pain
To write in's Books what is never crossed out again.
Come, says Stertinius, hearken; nay, come near,
And mind what I shall tell you, whosoever
Is by a vain and lewd ambition swai'd,
And he whom sordid avarice has made
Look like a Skeleton, all those that be
Given up to a destructive luxury,
To doting superstition are inclined,
Or any such distemper of the mind.
Are all stark mad. The Miser stands much more
Then other men in need of Hellebore:
I doubt, all that Antycera produces,
Was meant by Nature only for their uses.
Staberius by his Will his Heirs enjoined
T'engrave (...) Tomb what Wealth he left behind.
And if they would not do it, he designed
They should a hundred pair of Fencers find
To treat the rout, and should provide a feast
As sumptuous as if Arius were their Guest,
And as much corn as e're in Afric grew,
This is my will (says he) what is it to you,
Whether't be well or ill? you will not be
My Unckles, and leave your Estates to me.

Hor. I think Staberius was a prudent man.

Dam. What do you think of his great prudence than,
When he enjoined his Heirs they should engrave
Upon his Tomb what moneys he did leave
Behind him? and in all his whole life time
Thought poverty to be the greatest Crime,
And abhorred nothing more, and if he should
Have di'd less rich, he thought himself less good.
For every thing divine and humane to
Virtue, wit, comeliness and honor do
Submit their Necks to riches splendid sway,
Which whosoever heaps together, may
Be noble, valiant, just, and wise; nay, King,
Or (if 'twere possible) a higher thing:
He hoped by's Wealth to get immortal fame,
As if he had by virtue raised the same.
How contrary was Aristippus mind
To this? That great Philosopher enjoined
His men to throw his Gold oth' Lybian shore,
Because the weight on it made them travel ^lower;
Which was the madder of these two think you?

Hor. I think there is no comparing of those two,
For that Example never prevails with me,
Which shows the truth but by its contrary.

Dam. Should a man load himself with Lutes, and yet
To play or sing, have neither will, nor wit?
Should one that knows not how to make a Sh^o^,
With Auls and Lasts cramb'd in a Budget go:
Should one to buying ships and anchors fall,
Who has no skill in Merchandise at all,
A mad man and a Buzzard he would be:
Called by all People, and deservedly.
What difference is there 'twixt these and those,
Who study gold and silver to enclose,
And know not how to use the Wealth they gain,
But from it as from sacred things refrain?
If one by a huge heap of corn should stand
Watching all day with a long club in's hand,
Yet every grain thereof must let alone,
Though never so hungry, and the corn his own,
But rather feeds on bitter barks of trees,
And for his drink takes Vinegar and Lees,
Though millions of Pipes in's Cellar lie
Of as good wine as e're blessed taste or eye,
And lies in straw in his old age, while all
His rich attire to moths and worms do fall
To feed on, or to rot in's Chest. It Is true
Such men seem mad but to a very few,
Because most people are as mad as these,
And much afflicted with the same disease.
Do thou hoard up all thy Estate for one
Who was thy Slave, or is perhaps thy Son,
Whom thou, accursed old wretch, thine heir wilt make
That he in drink may spend it for thy sake;
And all least thou should want: How much a day
Could thou from thy vast Treasure pare away,
That thou might feed on good and wholesome meat,
And wear apparel useful, clean and neat.
If thou can live in any manner, why
Do thou forswear thy self, and cheat and lie,
Plunder and filch from others? art thou in
Thy perfect Senses? if thou should begin
To stone the very slaves which thou did buy,
That thou art mad, the Boys and Girls would cry.
If by thy perjury thy guiltless wife
Is by the Judge condemned to lose her life,
That thou might get new Portion with another*
Or if by poison thou destroy thy Mother,
Merely t'obtain her jointure, how can thou
Be perfect in thy understanding now?
This is not done at Argos, where such things
Are done, and licensed by inhumane Kings;
Nor as Orestes once his Mother slew,
Which by her crimes she had provoked him to.
Do thou suppose the frenzy of his brain
Seized not till after he would his Mother slain?
Or was he not out of his wits before
He bathed his sword in her maternal gore;
Besides since that he was accounted mad,
He did no act reproveable and bad;
He never attempted Pilades to kill,
Nor yet Electra; only he said ill
To both, and cursed them both, calling her Witch,
And railed at him with all bad Language, which
From his enraged heart and tongue could flow,
Uttring what gaul and choler stirred him to.
Opimius, that Miser, was as mad,
For he did need that money which he had
Laid up in store, and used to drink the base
Vejentan Wine on solemn Holy Days,
In course Campanian Earthen pots, and on
Week-dayes drunk wine whose taste and spirit's gone.
This fellow fell into a Lethargy,
And his rejoicing Heir ran presently,
And ransackt all his pockets for his Keys.
An honest nimble Doctor this Disease
Cured in this manner; first he gives command
Into his room to bring a Table, and
Upon it his money out to pour,
And bring in diverse men to tell it over,
So raised him presently out of his fit,
And gave him this wholesome advice with it;
If thou keep not thy wealth thy self, thine Heirs
Will greedily seize on it, as if' twere theirs.
What, while I am alive? (says he) yes (says
The Doctor) therefore have a care always,
That thou may live, make that thy business too.
What (says the Miser) would you have me do?
Your veins (the Doctor says) will fail, you will die
Unless with meat and cordials you supply
Your fainting stomach: Nay, there is no delay,
Come, take this Cordial. Sir, what must I pay
For It? (quoth Opimius) O (the Doctor cries)
This Physick's of a very little price.
How much is that ( Opimius says) Four pence
(The Doctor said.) Alas what difference
(Says this damned Miser) is it whether I die
Of this disease, or by their theivery?

Hor. Who then are in their senses?

Dam. Those that be
Not fools.

Hor. But what do you suppose is he
That Is covetous?

Dam. A fool and mad man too.

Hor. Must he be wise that covets not?

Dam. No, no,

Hor. Why (prithee Stoic.)

Dam. I will tell thee why:
Suppose a Patient in his sick bed lie;
This man has not the Plague (the Doctor cries.)
Is he well therefore? may he safely rise?
No (says the Doctor) for the man may be
Afflicted with some other malady.
This man perhaps is not a perjured Knave,
Nor yet a sordid avaritious Slave,
Thank ^is good Stars for that; yet if he be
O'^e impudent, or else ambitious, he
Is mad and must pack to Antycera,
For what is the odds, whether you throw away
All your estate into the Sea, or not
Dare to make use of that which you have got?
Opidius a wealthy person, who
Had good old Rents, and at Canusium two
Very good Farms, which he 'twixt both his Sons
At's death divided (as the story runs)
Calling them to his Bed, he told them thus;
Since l've observed thee (my Tiberius)
Tell over thy Nuts, and in some private place
To hide thy Play-games with a careful face,
While thou (my Aulus) carelessly would play
With thine, and loose them, or give them away;
I am afraid lest madness should possess
The minds of both, though in a different dress,
And make one turn a Prodigal, and the other
Be covetous, contrary to his Brother;
And therefore he did beg of Heaven, that
One Son might never diminish his Estate,
Nor the other his increase, but be content
With that which he had thought sufficient,
And Nature had confined them to; and least
The itch of glory should their minds infest,
He by an oath enjoined them, that if e're
Either of them were Alderman or Mayor,
He should b' incapable to make a Will,
But live like one run mad, or out-lawed still.
Thou mad man! will thou spend what e're thou have
In gifts and presents, only that thou may
Walk on the Exchange in state? or else may be
Set up in Brass to keep thy memory?
When thy Hereditary Lands t'hast sold,
And spent thy Fathers Silver and his Gold:
Must you forsooth have such applauses made
As great Agrippa, Caesar's Kinsman had?
Or shall the Coward Fox, though crafty, dare
With the magnanimous Lion to compare?
A Country fellow that by chance did meet
With Agamemnon, asked him in the street,
Why ( Agamemnon) why did thou forbid
That Ajax body should be buried?
I am a King (said Agamemnon.) Nay
Then (quoth the Clown) I have no more to say.
But my commands were just, ( the King replies)
And if to any they seem otherwise,
I Will give him free leave to discourse the things.
The Country Clown replied, Greatest of Kings*
Heaven grant you may triumphant bring away
Your conquering Navy from the conquered Troy.
Propose the Q^estion (cries the King) and I
Will give an answer to it: Speak. Pray Sir, why
(Replied the Clown) should that Heroic wight
Ajax, who was so eminent for might,
And had so often preserved the Grecians, not
Second to any but Achilles, rot
Above ground uninterr'd, that Priam may,
And all his baffled Trojans laugh, and say
He by whose hand so many Trojans were
Denied their Graves, now wants a Sepulcher?
Ajax (says Agamemnon) being mad,
Did kill a hundred sheep, and said he had
Killed that renowned man Ulysses, and
That I and Menalaus fell by's hand.
But when at Aulis you did basely slay
Your beauteous Daughter, and on the Altar lay
Her body like a Calf for Sacrifice,
Vile man (said the Plebean) were you wise?
Why not? (says Agamemnon.) Quoth the Clown,
Pray what has Ajax in his madness done?
He with his Sword killed Cattle, but his hand
From murthering's wife and children still abstained;
True, he cursed you and Menalaus too:
But to his friend Ulysses he did do
No wrong: Nor yet to Teucer (says the King)
That I may Navy from the Shore might bring,
The Gods with blood I wisely pacified.
Mad King! 'twas your own (the Clown replied.)
Yes (quoth the King) with my own blood, it is true*
In which I did no act of madness show;
Who false things (says the Clown) with true, and bad
With good, together huddles, is stark mad;
And whether it be out of folly done,
Or rage, and madness, still the thing is one
Ajax in killing harmless sheep was mad,
And you in acting your great crime as bad;
Killing your guiltless Daughter to appease,
Those vain imaginary Deities;
Upon deliberation too; is your heart well
And pure, when as it did with passion swell?
If any in a Coach about should bear
A fine white Lamb, and garments for it prepare
As for a Lady, furnish it with money
And Servants, call it his dear, duck, and honey,
Provide a Husband for it; the Magistrate
Must seize upon this Lunaticks Estate,
And then the Guardianship of him commit
To the next Kin of his who has more wit.
But what if one his Daughter sacrifice
Instead of a mute Lamb, is that man wise?
No man will say it; and therefore wheresoever
Is vicious folly, madness too is there;
And he is a madman who is given to vice,
That fool whom brittle Honor does entice,
Is so transported with the various sound
Of Drums and Trumpets, that his Brains turn round.
Now as to luxury, reason does show,
That foolish Prodigals are mad men too:
There Is Nomentanus, who as soon as e're
He had received a thousand pounds, which were
Left him by's Father, he proclaimed straight
The Fowler and the Fisherman should wait
Upon his Worship, and all Tradesmen come
And bring their wares next morn to him at home!
Ba^ds, Pimps, Buffoons, and all that impious crew
Of sherking Tradesmen, which young Squires undo.
What followed then? They instantly appear
With their Commodities from far and near.
The Baud being at Rhetoric the best,
Makes a set Speech at th'instance of the rest;
May't please your Worship, ( quoth she) whatsoever
I or my Brethren have at home, or here,
Is at your service, send for it when you please.
Now mark the silly answer which to these
This youngker gives; Poor Huntsman thou do go
In heavy Boots, and watch all night in the Snow,
And for my Supper bring'st a Bore to me:
Thou Fisherman in the tempestuous Sea
Take me a Dish of exc'lent Fish, while I
Glutted with wealth and sloth supinely lie,
Unworthy such a Fortune to possess;
Your merits must make my great fortune less;
You Huntsman, there is a hundred pounds for you;
Here Fisherman, take you a hundred too;
Pimp, for thy Wives sake, take a triple sum,
For if I send at midnight she will come.
Aesop the Players Son, that Prodigal
In his luxurious prank, out-ranted all;
He plucked a Pearl out of his Doxies ear,
Which when he had dissolved in vinegar,
He quaffs it at a draught, as who should say,
(Damn me) I drink a thousand pounds a day.
Had he bin madder if he would thrown away
That Pearl into the Bog-house or the Sea?
Those Sons of Arrius, who were arrant Twins
In luxury, toys, love, and such vain sins;
No food upon those Gallants Tables came,
But Nightingals which could sing Walsingham.
How shall I rank them, among the wise, or no?
Must they to the Senate, or to Bedlam go?
If one who wears a beard should make Dirt pies,
Or please himself with Chariots drawn with Mice,
Or ride a Hobbyhorse, or at Push-pin play,
Who would not swear his wits were fled away?
If Reason does convince us that to fall
In Love, is the most childish thing of all;
And there is no difference if thou play'st with dirt,
And such vain toys (as when a child thou were)
And now you are grown a man thou do adore,
And whine and vex for some fair crafty Whore.
Pray, tell me, can you do like Polemon?
Who being drunk, run with a Garland on
Into the School of grave Xenocra^es,
With Ribons, Cushions, Handkercheifs; all these
He privately took off and threw away
When he heard what that temperate man did say;
And grew a grave man from a Cock-brain'd fool,
So that he did succeed him in that Scho^.
If you should offe^ to a froppish Boy
An Apple, he would refuse't; and if you say,
Take it (my pretty Child) he will deny;
But if you do not give it him, he will cry.
A puling Lover's such another Ass,
Who being shut out by his cunning L^ss,
Hankers about the door: What shall I do,
(Thinks he) shall I return to her, or no?
And though he uninvited would have gone,
Yet when by her he is but called upon;
Shall I go now (says he) or rather find
Some way to ease the troubles of my mind?
Shut out! and straight called in! and shall I go?
If she should beg her heart out, I Would say, No;
Parmeno was much wiser, though a Slave,
Master ( says he) those things which neither have
Reason nor measure, are not fit to be
Dealt with by Rule and rationality.
In that vein toy called love, these mischiefs are,
War, Peace, ill-grounded peace, and groundless war*
If any man should strive to fix and stay
Those things which by their Nature will away;
This way and that by every wind are blown,
And on blind Fortunes waves tossed up and down,
He does as ill, and is as much a fool,
As if he would be mad by art and rule.
When thou do laugh because a kernel hits
Thy Chambers roof, art thou in thy right wits?
And when thou do thy Mistress entertain
With Childrens prattle which cannot speak plain,
How can thou possibly be thought more wise
Then little Children are, which make Dirt pies?
Now to all Lovers follies add the guilt
Of all the blood which has by them been spilt,
Both of themselves and others, with a Sword
Let their devouring foolish Fire be stirred.
Was it not stoutly done of Marius? who
First his own Mistress, then his own self slew:
Was he not frantic? or will thou acquit
Him of that crime, of being out of's wit,
But of great wickedness wilt him accuse,
To give nicknames to things as people use?
There was an old man in the morn would go
Fasting about the streets, with hands washed too;
And to the Gods he would vehemently pray,
That he might never by Death be t'ane way,
It Is a small thing to you, ye Gods ( quoth he)
To give to one man Immortality.
If any Master were about to sell
Such men for Slaves, and should the Buyer tell
That they were persons perfect and complete,
Unless h' except their minds, he is a Cheat.
This sort of people does Chrysippus place
Among the fools innumerable race.
A superstitious Mother, whose young Son
Sick of a Quartan lay, as he had done,
Five months at least, to Jupiter did pray;
Oh Jove, who pains do send and take away,
If this poor Child of mine may be (quoth she)
Once from this shivering Quartan Ague free,
On the next day thou do a fast command,
In The morn in Tyber he shall naked stand.
Now when the Doctor, or good luck (that is more)
Did to his former health this Boy restore,
His doting Mother, by her Zeal beguiled,
Into the River put her Feav'rish Child;
Whose coldness did the Fever bring again,
So she her Son, which she would save, has slain:
But how came she so much out of her Wits?

Hor. Perhaps she is troubled with Religious Fits.

Dam. Stertinius, that 8th. wise man, told me
This as a friend, that I might armed be,
When any man hereafter called me mad,
I in revenge might say, he is as bad;
And teach him to look back, that he might find
That unknown part oth' bag which hangs behind.

Hor. After those losses which thou did sustain,
May thou sell every thing for so much gain;
But prithee tell me, Stoic, to what kind
Of madness do thou think I am inclined,
(For there are several sorts) but I suppose,
That I am free from every one of those.

Dam. When up and down the streets Agave bore
Her poor Child's Head which she cut off before,
Did she conceive that she was mad, (think you?)

Hor. Well, I Am a fool, I must confess, it is true;
Nay, I Am mad too; but (prithee) let me know
What kind of madness I Am addicted to.

Dam. I Will tell thee; First, thou have a building brain,
Next, though you are but an Urchin, thou would fain
Appear a propper Fellow: Thou laugh'st at
That little Fencer Turbo's strutting gate
When he is in Arms, with what a Spirit he goes,
And art not thou as much ridicul^us?
Do thou conceive it is fit for thee to do
What e're Maecenas power promps him to?
Will thou who art so much below him, dare
With such an eminent person to compare?
A careless Calf by chance did tread upon
A nest of young Frogs, when the old was gone;
One that escaped did to his Dam declare,
That by a huge great beast her young ones were
All trod upon and killed. How big was he?
Was he as big as I am now? ( quoth she:)
Then swelled her self. Bigger by half (replied
Frog junior.) What thus much -- bigger ( cried
The Beldame Frog) and still she did swell on,
Until at last, Oh, Mother! (says the Son)
Forbear your swelling, for you cannot be
(Though you should burst your self) as big as he:
This Picture very much resembles you.
Add Poetry to all thy madness now,
Which mixed with other Vices is the same,
As if thou should pour Oil into the flame:
Yet if a Poet had been ever known
To be a sober fellow, thou art one;
I Will not speak of thy horrid cholerickness --

Hor. Hold (prithee Stoic) hold. --

Dam. Nor of thy dress
That Is so fantastical, and so above
Thy Purse and Quality; nor of thy love
T'a thousand wenches and a thousand boys.

Hor. Good Damasippus follow thine own toys,
And now for shame my peccadilloes spare,
Which no pr^portion with thy Vices bear.

SATYR IV. By T. F. Esquire A Character of a Belly-god.
CATIUS and HORACE. Hor. Whence Brother Catius, and whither bound so fast?

Cat. Oh, Sir, you must excuse me, I Am in haste,
I dine with my Lord Mayor, and cannot allow
Time for our eating Directory now,
Though I must needs confess I think my Rules
Would prove Pythagoras and Plato fools.

Hor. Grave Sir, I must acknowledge it is a crime
To interrupt at such a nick of time;
Yet stay a little Sir, it is no sin;
You're to say Grace're Dinner can begin;
Since you at food such Virtuoso are,
Some Precepts to an hungry Poet spare.

Cat. I grant you Sir, next pleasure taken in eating
Is that (as we do call it) of repeating;
I still have Kitchin-Systems in my mind,
And from my Stomach's fumes a brain well lined.

Hor. Whence, pray Sir, learnt you these ingenious arts,
From one at home, or hired from foreign parts?

Cat. No names Sir, (I beseech you) that is foul play,
We never name Authors, only what they say.
1.
For Eggs choose long, the round are out of fashion,
Unfavory and distasteful to the Nation,
E're since the brooding Rump they are addle too,
In the long Egg lies Cock-a-doodle-do.
2.
Choose Colworts planted on a soil that is dry,
Even they are worse for the wetting (verily!)
3*
If Friend from far shall come to visit, then
Say thou would treat the wight with Mortal Hen,
Don't thou forthwith pluck off the cackling head,
And impale Corpse on Spit as soon as dead;
For so she will be tough beyond all measure,
And Friend shall make a trouble of a pleasure;
Steep't in good wine let her her life surrender,
O then she will eat most admirably tender.
4.
Mushromes that grow in Medows are the best,
F'rought I know there is poison in the rest.
5.
He that would many happy Summers see,
Let him eat Mulberries fresh off the Tree,
Gathered before the Sun's too high, for these
Shall hurt his Stomach less then Cheshire Cheese.
6.
Ausidius (had you done so 't had undone ye)
Sweetened his Mornings-draughts of Sack with honey,
But he did ill to empty veins to give
Corroding Potion for a Lenitive.
7.
If any man to drink do thee inveigle in,
First whet thy whistle with some good Metheglin.
8.
If thou art bound, and in continual doubt
Thou shall get no more in till some get out,
The Muscle or the Cockle will unlock
Thy body; trunck, and give a vent to nock;
Some say that sorrel steept in wine will do,
But to be sure put in some Aloces to.
9.
All Shel-fish (with the growing Moon increase)
Are ever when she fills her Orb the best;
But for brave Oysters, Sir, exceeding rare,
They are not to be met with every where;
Your Wall-fleet Oyster no man will prefer
Before the juicy Grass-green Colchester;
Hungerford Crawfish match me if you can,
There Is no such Crawlers in the Ocean.
10.
Next for your Suppers, you (it may be) think
There goes no more to 't, but just eat and drink;
But let me tell you Sir, and tell you plain,
To dress 'um well requires a man of Brain;
His pallat must be quick, and smart, and strong
For Sauce, a very Critic in the tongue.
11.
He that pais dear for Fish, nay though the best,
May please his Fishmonger more then his Guest,
If he be ignorant what Sauce is proper,
There Is Machiavel in the menage of a Supper.
12.
For Swines-flesh, give me that of the wild bore,
Pursued and hunted all the Forest over,
He to the liberal Oak never quits his love,
And when he finds no Acorns, grunts at Jove;
The Hamshire Hog with Pease and Whey that is fed
Sti'd up, is neither good alive nor dead.
13.
The tendrels of the Vine are Sallads good,
If when they are in season understood.
14.
If Servant to thy Board a Rabbet bring,
Be wise, and in the first place carve a wing.
15.
When Fish and Fowl are right, and at just age,
A feeders curiosity to assuage,
If any ask, Who found the Mystery?
Let him enquire no farther, I am he.
16.
Some fancy Bread out of the Oven hot,
Variety's the Gluttons happiest lot.
17.
It Is not enough the wine you have be pure,
But of your oil as well you ought be sure.
18.
If any fault be in thy generous wine,
Set it abroad all night, and 'twill refine,
But never strein't, nor let it pass through linen,
Wine will be worse for that as well as Women.
19.
The Vintner that of Malaga and Sherry
With damned ingredients patches up Canary,
With Segregative things, as Pigeons Eggs
Straight purifies, and takes away the dregs.
20.
An over charged stomach roasted Shrimps will ease.
The cure by Lettice is worse then the disease.
21.
To quicken appetite it will behove ye
To feed courageously on good Anchovie.
22.
Westphalia Hamm, and the Bolognia sawsage;
For second or third course will clear a passage,
But Lettice after meals! Fie on it! the Glutton
Had better feed upon Ram-alley-Mutton.
23.
'Twere worth ones while in Palace or in Cottage,
Right well to know the sundry sorts of potage;
There is your French Potage, Nativity Brot^,
Yet that of Fetter-lane exceeds them both;
About a limb of a departed Tup
There may you see the green Herbs boiling up,
And fat abundance over the furnace float,
Resembling Whale-oyl in a Greenland Boat.
24.
The Kentish Pippin's best, I dare be bold,
That ever Blew-cap Costardmonger sold.
25.
Of Grapes, I like the Raisons of the Sun;
I was the first immortal Glory won,
By mincing Pickle-Herrings with these Raisons
And Apples: 'Twas I set the World a gazing,
When once they tasted of this Hoghan Fish,
Pepper and Salt Enamelling the Dish.
26.
It Is ill to purchase great Fish with great matter,
And then to serve it up in scanty Platter;
Nor it it less unseemly some believe,
From Boy with greasy Fist Drink to receive;
But the Cup foul within is enough to make
A squamish creature puke, and turn up stomach.
27.
Then Brooms and Napkins, and the Flander tyl^
These must be had too, or the Feast you spoil,
Things little thought on, and not very dear,
And yet how much they cost one in a year!
28.
Would thou rub Alablaster with hands fabl^
Or spread a Diaper cloth on dirty Table?
More cost, more worship: Come, be Al-a-mode,
Embelish Treat, as thou would do an Ode.

Hor. O learned, Sir, how greedily I hear
This elegant Diatriba of good cheer!
Now by all that is good, by all provant you love,
By sturdy Chine of Beef, and mighty Jove,
I do conjure thy gravity, let me see
The man that made thee this discovery;
For he that sees the Original's more happy
Than him that draws by an ill-favored Copy;
O bring me to the man I so admire!
The Flint from whence brake forth these sparks of fire,
What satisfaction would the Vision bring?
If sweet the stream, much sweeter is the spring.

SATYR V. By A. B. A way to grow Rich.
ULYSSES and TIRESIAS* Ul. TO all that thou have told me heretofore,
Prithee, Tiresias, add this one thing more*
By what designs and means may I now be
As wealthy as I have been formerly?
Why do thou laugh?

Tir. Is It not enough, that thou
(Thou crafty Fellow) art restored now
To Ithaca, and do thy Gods behold
Which thy progenitors adored of old?

Ul. Oh, thou unerring Profit! do but see
How naked I Am returned, how beggarly,
(As thou fore-told'st) my Closets rifled all,
And that Estate which I my own could call,
Is all consumed by those Gallants that lay
Courting my Wife, while I have been away;
An honest man and of a Noble house,
If poor, is no more valued then a Louse.

Tir. Well then, since poverty affrights thee so,
In brief l'le tell thee how thou rich shall grow:
If any Friend send thee a brace of Phesants,
Or any other rarities for presents,
To thy next wealthy Neighbor, if he is old,
Send them away, so they are not given, but sold*
And if thy Garden or thy Field bring forth
Melons, or any other Fruits of worth,
Send to some wealthy man a taste e're thou
Do any of it to thy Lar allow;
For in this age our muck^admiring Elves
Adore rich men more then the Gods themselves.
Though perjured Rogues, ignobly born and bred,
Murdered their Brothers, and their Country fled,
Yet wait upon them when they do command,
And let them always have the upper-hand.

Ul. What? Shall I give the wall to such a base
Inferior Rascal as old Damon was?
At Troy I ever scorned it, there did I
Contend with Great ones.

Tir. Thou Wilt a Beggar die.

Vl. This heart will stoutly bear such things as these,
I have endured far greater i^ my days:
But prithee, learned Doctor, tell me how
I may get heaps of Gold and Silver now.

Tir. I Have told thee, and I Will tell it thee again,
Thou art a fellow of a subtle Brain;
Enquire what old Rich men are like to die,
Observe their humors, keep them company,
Ply them with Presents still, that thou may be
Named in their wills an heir, or legatee;
And if perhaps one or two subtle men
Nible the bait, and straight whip off again*
And escape thy hook, and thou art cheated so,
Do not despair, nor yet thy art forgo.
Next, if there be a Lawsuit great or small,
That side that is rich, and has no child at all
Be for, though unretain'd, and let thy Tongue
Beat down his Adversary, right or wrong;
Be the manne're so honest, and the suit
Never so just, or of so good repute,
If he has Children, or a Wife that may
Produce him Children, throw his Cause away.
But say to thy rich childless Client; Sir,
May't please your worship, or your honor! ( for
Titles of Honors, and such terms as these,
Do Mortals tender Ears most strangely please.)
It Is not your money, but your virtues have
Made me your Friend, your servant, may your slave;
I know the Riddles of the Law, and can
Menage your Suits; and I Will give any man
Leave to pluck out mine Eyes, if ever he
Can cheat or fool you, leave your Cause to me;
I Will take such care that you shall not loose a Groat,
Noe yet ^e laughed at; bid him take no thought,
But away home to's Country house, and there
His mind and body both repose and cheer!
Or else do thou thy self turn Advocate,
And for thy Client never cease to prate:
Endure the scorching heat, the piercing cold,
And then thou shall the gazing Clown behold
Jogging with his Elbow those that next him stand,
Look, look ( says he) how he endures it, and
How eagerly he pleads there for his friends,
Sure he has all the Law at's Fingers ^nds:
The Fish will come in sholes then to be caught*
And thou may fill thy Net at every draught.
Or if a rich man have an only Son
Lies dangerously sick and drawing on,
Be n't too officicus to the old man, least he
Thy purpose through thy diligence should see,
But gently screw thy self into him, and
Get thy self writ down, Heir at second hand,
That if to's Child any disaster come,
Thou next in order may supply his room;
It Is ten to one but this design will take,
And so his great Estate thine own thou wilt make.
If one desire thee to peruse his Will,
Seem to deny't, thrust it away, but still
So as to glance thine Eye on it, and see
What Legacies, and who is the Legat^e;
Let thy quick eye run all the Paper over,
Whether you are Heir alone, or joined with more.
Oftimes an o're-grown crafty Scrivener, which
By being in Offices grows wise and rich,
Cheats the next Kindred of the expected pelf,
Leaves the right Heir out, and puts in himself,
Makes him both needy and ridiculous too,
(As Aesops Fox did serve the gaping Crow.)

Ul. Art thou inspired? or do thou go about
On purpose with these ridling words, to flout
And to delude me? --

Tir. No, Laertes Son!
Whatever I say, will, or will not be done;
For great Apollo has bestowed on me
This admirable knack of Prophecy.

Ul. If it be lawful then, prithee unfold
The meaning of this Fable which thou have told.

Tir. The time shall come when our young Emperor, he
Who does derive his Royal Pedigree
From the Divine Aeneas, at whose beck
The sturdie Parthians shall submit their Neck,
And he shall grow so great by Sea and Land,
All Princes else shall stoop at his command:
Some crafty Courtier, as Coranus was,
Shall have a mind to a hansome strapping Lass,
And wed that Dog Nasica's Daughter, who
Will not a Groat on him with her bestow,
Nor yet will put her off at any rate,
Unless to one that has a vast Estate:
But here is the cheat, he bids the old man read over
His Will, which subtly was contrived before.
The griping sl^ve thinking he has his end,
Denies to view the Will, and does pretend
He aimed not at the Wealth, but to have one
Of Honor and of Merit to his Son.
What need I stand gazing on's Will (thinks he)
My Daughter must have all whatever it be:
But being much entreated, does peruse
The Will at last, and after diverse views,
Finds nothing is bequeathed to him or his,
But even to hang himself, or mourn for this.
One thing more I would have thee mind; where e're,
Thou of an old rich doting man do'sthear,
Who Is governed by his Serving-man, or by
His crafty W^nch; join in society
With those, and praise them to their Master, so
To him behind thy back they will praise thee too:
This trick will will help thee much; but nothing can
Avail so much as working on the old man.
If he writes Verses never so like an Ass,
Extol them to the Skies; and if he has
A mind to a Wench, send thy Penelope;
Do It of thine own accord; be sure that he
Don't ask thee for her; freely her present,
And wish she may to's Worship give content.

Ul. Do You think my Wife, who is so virtuous
And modest, who so stoutly did oppose
So many suitors, and continued chaste,
Will be seduced to another lust at last?

Tyr. They Would little Souls, and knew not how treat,
Nor to present a Lady that is so great:
Theirs was but Kitchin-love, they did desire
To fill their Bellies, not to slake their fire;
So thy Penelope continued chaste;
If she of one old man but once should taste,
She'ld share the gains with thee, and cease no more
Then dogs from sheep, when they have killed sheep before.
Nay wonder not at this that I have told,
I found it all to true when I grew old.
A damned old Hag who did at Thebes die,
Ordered this Funeral solemnity
By her last Will; her body she would have
Anointed over with Oil, and to her Grave
She ordered him who was to be her Heir,
On's naked Shoulders her oiled Corpse to bear,
And if by th'slippriness he let her fall,
What e're she left, he was to forfeit all:
He, while she lived, did (I believe) pretend
Great love to her, she'ld have it without end.
Walk war^ly, and see thou be not found
Wanting in duty, nor too much abound;
To sickly men, and such as are morose,
A prating fellow is most tedious.
Yet s^llen silence affect not at all,
But Dav^s-like be something Comical,
Thy Head on one side leaned, as if he were
A man of whom thou stood'st in mighty fear:
Be very dutiful, and if the Air
Blow never so little, bid him have a care
Of his most precious tender head, and when
He Is in a Crowd, get him straight out again,
And with both shoulders thrust aside all those,
Who do his easy coming out oppose.
And when he falls to talking bow thine ear,
If his own praises he delights to hear,
Ply him with high Encomiums, and fill
Him Bladder-like with swelling words, until
He lifts both hands up to the very skies;
An honest Servant! it is enough, he cries.
And when at length thou by his death shall be.
From this great care and tedious service free,
And being broad awaked shall hear it read,
Ulysses quarter-heir to him that is dead,
Then with a loud voice cry; And is he gone,
What? Have I lost my dear Companion?
Where now shall I another Patron find,
Who Is of so just and of so stout a mind?
Nay weep a little, if thou can; it is good
Thy inward joy should not be understood.
And if the interment should be left to thee,
Be sure thou do it with pomp and decency;
The Neighbors all about will celebrate
A funeral that is managed in great State.
If one of the oldest Coheirs chance to be
Infirm in's body, or cough dangerously,
Apply thy self to him, tell him he shall
Buy what to thy share by the Will does fall;
Whether't be house or ground, tell him thy mind
Is more to money then to land inclined.
But Proserpine recalls me to my Cell,
I must obey and go; Live long, farewell.

SATYR VI. By Sir R. F.
He says he lives content with what he has, and wishes no more. Then compares
the Commodities of the ease he injoyes in the Country, with the discommodities
of businesses and troubles which accompany the City life.

THis was my wish, A moderate scope of Land,
A Garden with a pl^n^eous Spring at hand:
And to crown these a plump of trees: Heaven gave
Better then this; It Is well, no more I crave
Good Mercury, make but these (...) endure;
If neither by ill ways I did procure,
Nor by ill ways shall waste them: if I escape
Longings: O that you Nook, which does ^ishape
My Field, were added! O that I might find
A pot of Gold! as ( Hercules to friend)
He did, who hired to delve another ground,
Bought the same Land he dug with what he found:
If what I have please me: if thou incline,
When I pray, Make my Flock, and all that is mine
Fat, but my wit; and as thou have ever done,
Stand my great Guardian. Therefore (when being flown)
Out of Romes Cage into the Woods, I put
Discourses in rough Verse, and horse my Foot)
Nor Fevers kill me, nor Ambitions itch,
Nor ^ickly Autumns making Sextons rich.
FATHER MATUTE: or Janus (if that style
Affect thee more) from whom their births, and toil,
According to the Julian year men date,
With thee I auspicate my work. When straight
Thou thy self hurriest me away to Rome
To be a Surety: Quick, least some one come
Before, that is more officious; Rain, or Blow,
And though the Colds shrink day to nothing, go
I must: and after, wrestle through a Crowd,
And crack my Lungs, t'undo my self aloud:
Injure, who ere is slower. Name of Mars!
What mean you? whose Solicitor? (Thus curse
Those men, upon whose Corns I tread) O! you
Hasting to serve Maecenas, care not who
You run over. I Will nere lie; this grieves me not:
It Is Music. But anon, when I have got
Esquiliaes misty Top, thousand affairs
Of other men fly buzzing in mine ears,
And sting me back and sides; Roscius requests
To morrow, Two, you would help him in the Requests.
The Secretaries pray you would not forget
A business that concerns the Public, Great,
And new, today: stay Quintus, get this Bill
Signed by Maecenas: If I can I will.
Nay, thou can do it; and presses me. It Is now
A seven years past, Maecenas does allow
Me of his Family, only t'advise
Whom he should take into his Coach in journeys,
To whom commit his Meddals: What Is a Clock?
Which Fencer will beat (think thou) or which Cock?
It Is a hard Frost: Will It bear another Coat?
With such like trifles as are safely put
In leaking ears. This Prentiship have I
Served under Envy's lash, more and more daily.
Our Friend Bowl'd with Maecenas the other day,
I, and they sat together at the Play:
(Some men have Fortune!) Blows there through the street,
A bleak news from the Change? straight all I meet;
G^odman: (for thou being near the Gods must know)
Do hear ought of the Dacians? In sooth, No.
Thou Wilt never leave jeering. Hang me, if I do.
The Lands th^n which the Emperor promised to
The Soldiers, in SICILIA shall they be
Allotted to them, or in Italy?
Swearing, I nothing know: Well, Go thy ways
For a deep pit of secrecy! and gaze.
Mean while my Taper wastes: scarce time to pray:
O Fields, when shall I see you? O, when may
I, rould in Books, or lulled in sleep and ease,
Opium life's cares with sweet forgetfulness?
When shall I taste the Pythagorean Bean
With fav'ry broth, and Bacon without lean?
O nights, and suppers of the Gods, which I
And mine, consume in my own Family;
Where my Clowns, born within doors, tear the ^east
I tasted to them; where the lawless guest
D^ies the unequal Cups, as his Complexion
Asks soaking showers, or moderate refection.
Then talk we not of buying Lands, nor school
Other men's lives: nor whether Caesar's Fool
Dance well, or not: But things of more concern,
Are our discourse, and which men ought to learn:
Whether to happiness do more conduce
Virtue or wealth? if we our Friends should choose
For ends, or honesty. What Is understood
Truly by Goods? and which is the chief good?
My Neighbor Cervius, interweaves his old
Fables, as thus: Aurelius wealth extolled,
(Forgetting with what cares it tortures him)
I Will tell you a Tale (quoth he:) Once on a time,
The Country Mouse received in her poor house,
Her ancient and good friend the City Mouse;
A mighty Huswife, and exceeding nigh,
Yet free in way of Hospitality.
In short, the Chick-pease she had laid for ^oard,
And unthrasht Oats she sets upon the Board,
Brings scraps of Bacon in her mouth, and dry
Barley; desiring with variety
(Had it been possible) to have o'recame
The stately niceness of the City-dame.
When the good wife her self on her Straw-bed,
(Leaving the best) on Chaff and Acorn fed.
At length, her guest: Friend, how can thou endure
To live in this Rock-side, moapt and obscure?
Wild Woods preferr'st Thou to a Town, and Men?
Come go with me. Since all shall die, and when
We go, our Mortal souls resolve to dust,
Live happy whilst thou may, as one that must
Be nothing a while hence. Drawn by this spell,
The Country Mouse skips lightly from her Cell,
And both their way unto the City keep,
Longi^g by night over the walls to creep:
And now 'twas midnight, and her foot each sets
In a rich house: where glittering Coverlets
Of Tyrian Die, on Ivory-beds were past,
And many Offals of a great feast past,
Lay in the Pantry heapt. Her Rural mate
Prayed to repose under a Cloth of State;
The City Mouse, like an officious Host,
Bestirs her self to fetch baked, boiled, and roast,
And plays the Carver, tasting all she brings,
She thinks the world well changed; and Heavens good things
Stretching, injoyes; when straight flies open the room,
And tosses both out of the wrought Couch plom,
Running like things distracted, but much more
When with Molossian Dogs the high roofs roar:
Then said the Country Mouse, No more of this,
Give me my Wood, my Cave, and Roots with peace.
The same by another Hand.
THis, this the sum of all my wishes was,
In a small farm my life obscure to pass,
Where I a Garden and a Spring might see,
A little Grave, or at the least a Tree:
But here the bounteous Gods have given me more,
Then all my largest hopes conceived before;
It Is well, I Am thankeful, and no more I wish,
But only that they should continue this.
If by no wretched gain I ever yet
Made my self guilty, that I might be great;
If by no vicious course, or squandring way,
I shall my life to poverty betray;
If I send up to Heaven no prayer like these,
O that kind Heaven would give me to possess
That narrow spot of ground which nere me lies,
And ^'re my Garden walks too high does rise!
Oh, that some luckie hit of Fortune would
Bring to my hands such unexpected good,
As once she did to a hired Plough-man, who
While he with usual hopes the Field did plough,
He found of hidden treasure so great store,
He bought the Field wherein he toiled before.
No, if my mind be equal in desires,
And to no more then what I have aspires,
Then let just Heaven keep my Estate from harm,
Keep my Lambs safe, that they may keep me warm^
Let me enjoy what is needful, and what is fit,
Have all things fat about me but my wit!
May the Gods be propitious still to me,
And be my guardians as they use to be.
And now in this so close and silent life,
Stole from the arts of Court and Cities strife,
What should I write but Humerous Satyrs here?
Satyrs the Woods inhabitants always were.
Here no ambitious Raptures heat my head,
Here no infection through the air is spread;
Here I in midst of tempests am secure,
Nor fear the fall of Chimneys every hour;
Here all the stormy winds that chance to rise,
Only bring ^ounder sleeps unto my eyes:
Or if sometimes their fury they do spend
On some tall Oak, and it asunder rend,
Their very mischief's useful here, and by
Their rage my wood-mans labor they supply.
But hold, while I my self thus flatter here,
Reckoning before each pleasure of the year,
I ^ad forgot that I su^pena'd was,
And up to London suddenly must pass;
Away I must, and ride through thick and thin,
There to arive before the Term begin;
To Horse I must what ever wind does blow,
Whether the days do long or shorter grow;
For all my shrugging, yet away I must;
Thither I come, and through the crowd I thrust:
Methinks the stream I do already feel;
As I pass through, sometimes I kick ones heel,
Sometimes another Corns I tread upon,
While they do curse and cry, whither do you run?
What ails you? why so fast? do not you see
That we by those before us hindered be?
To my Maecenas House I still press through,
Remembering to what company there I go,
That, that indeed is sweet to me; for there
Is pleasant company and healthy air
To me, who from the Sea-coals and the noise
Escaped, a while a mouthful there injoyes;
But when I tired and puffing thither come,
A hundred strangers business do hum
About my ears, a hundred trifles fall
Upon my head, back, shoulders, covering all.
Of my whole life the greatest part I Have spent,
Not with my self, or to my own content,
But in that pomp, which I of all things hate,
The acquaintance of chief Ministers of State,
Though all the employment I had with them was
Only to help some idle hours to pass:
Sir, my Lord such a one desires that you
Would be at Westminster at two:
There did a Merchant, Sir, for you inquire,
Your aid in some rich project to desire:
I pray Sir get his Graces hand to this,
He knows me, and it reasonable is.
And if I say I Will do my best in it,
Oh Sir (says he) if you but think it fit
To speak a word, the event I need not fear,
And then some Bribe they whisper in my ear;
All Is but for them to exe^cise the^r pride,
And all that want for business to deride,
While we within in private shut the while,
With such vain tattle do the time beguile:
What is the clock? it is very cold to day,
How do you like these Verses, or that Play?
Such were the grave affairs of State, that we
Transacted in our envied secrecy;
Yet by this means, 'twas noised about the Town
That I a mighty favorite was grown:
Do You hear the news? (says one) our friend did ride
Last night with my Lord Chancellor side by side;
He is a rising man, and happy me,
I him to day at least two hours did see
In private with his Highness, and his Grace
Gave him a Friendly smile as he did pass.
When once the World has taken this report,
Then all the Mounsieurs brisk about the Court,
Where e're I meet them kindly me salute,
You Are well met Sir, you know without dispute
How matters go; ( say they) for now you are
Acquainted with all Statesmen secrets here.
And how? and how? and when do you expect the Fleet?
When will the King set forth the Que^n to meet?
I know not. Come you are such another man!
Let all the Gods their judgments on me rain,
If I know any things. And what do you hear,
When did the Portuguez resign Tangier?
Is all in Ireland quiet still or no?
When will my Lord Lieutenant thither go?
Which way are things accommodated there,
For the old Irish, or the Purchaser?
Still I persist that I do nothing know,
At my reserv'dness they much wonder show;
That I Am a close and trusty man they swear,
Fit to be made a Privy-counsellor.
Thus I my time to ^uch vain fopperies give,
And only in my wishes truly live:
Oh, when shall I the Country see again,
When in a meadow, or a shady plain,
Shall I once more securely read and sleep,
And no account of the days motion keep?
But by a pleasant thoughtful idleness
Of humane life make the long journey less:
Oh Beans and Bacon! O delicious meal!
Such as the first and innocent men did eat
Of fruits, for which Pythagoras was wise,
When he all other dainties did despise;
Oh nights and suppers fit for Gods to eat,
For even the Gods have sometimes loved retreat.
There over my merry Servants I am King,
Yet fear no Poison in what e're they bring.
There free from all the gentle rudeness, which
The Laws of Drinking in the City teach,
One takes a Brimmer up, another cries,
Hold, hold, pray not too much, that will suffice.
All drink what e're they please, and none by stealth
Need put this Glass by, or escape that health.
There no discourse of other men comes in,
Nor who this Race, who did that Cock-match win,
Not who commands the fashion of the Town,
Who the best Actor is, Lacy, or Mohume?
We talk of things that nearer us concern,
And which it is more material to learn,
What kind of life a prudent man should choose,
Or to be rich, or to be virtuous;
What into strongest friendship men does bind,
Profit and interest, or the Goods oth' mind:
What of true happiness the nature is,
What are its measures, properties, degrees.
C -- the while (for he too did the same)
Forsook the world with me, and thither came
C -- still mingles things that are more gay,
Rough Morals with old Stories does allay:
Yet not that all our talk should stories be,
But only when they genuine come and free:
Then if some new arrived half-witted Guest,
(Half witted sure he needs must be at best,)
Admires the City and the glories there,
How splendidly these Lords or those appear,
Against him which such railery he disputes,
And with a Mouses Argument confutes.
By Mr. A. Cowley.
AT the large Foot of a fair hallow tree,
Close by plowed grounds, seated commodiously
His ancient and hereditary house,
There dwelt a good substantial Country Mouse,
Frugal and grave, and careful of the main,
Yet one who nobly once did entertain
A City Mouse, well coated, sleek, and gay,
A Mouse of high degree, who lost his way
Wantonly walking forth to take the air,
And arrived early, and belighted there
For a days lodging; the good hearty Host
The ancient plenty of his Hall to boast,
Did all the stores produce that might excuse,
With various taste the Courtiers appetite,
Chitches and beans, peason, and oats and wheat,
And a large Chestnut, the delicious meat
Which Jove himself were he a Mouse would eat;
And for a haut-guest there was mixed with these
The sword of Becon and the coat of cheese,
The precious relics which at Harvest he
Had gathe^'d from the Reapers luxury:
Freely (said he) fall on, and do not spare,
The bounteous Gods will for to morrow care.
And thus at ease on Beds of straw they lay
And to their Genius sacrificed the day:
Yet the nice Guests mind
(Though breeding made him civil seem and kind)
Despised this Country Feast, and still his thought
Upon the cakes and pies of London wrought.
Your bou^ty and civility (said he)
Which I Am surprised in these rude parts to see,
Shows that the Gods have given you a mind
Too noble for the fare which here you find:
Why should a Soul so virtuous and so great,
Loose it self thus in an obscure retreat?
Let Savage Beasts lodge in a Country Den,
You should see Towns, and manners, and know men,
And taste the generous luxury of the Court,
Where all the Mice of quality resort,
Where thousand beauteous she is about you move,
And by high fare are pliant made to love.
We all ere long must render up our ^reath,
No Cave or Hole can shelter us from Death;
Since life is so uncertain and so short,
Let Us spend it all in feasting and in sport.
Come (worthy Sir) come with me and partake
All the great things that Mortals happy make.
Alas, what virtue has sufficient arms
TO oppose bright Honor and soft pleasures charms?
What wisdom can their Magic force repel?
It draws this Reverend Hermit from his Cell.
It was the time when witty Poets tell,
That Phoebus into Tethys bosom fell,
She blushed at first, and then put out her light,
And drew the modest Curtains of the night.
Plainly the truth to tell, the Sun was set,
And to the town the wearied trav^llers get
To a Lords house, as Lordly as can be,
Made for the use of pride and luxury.
They come; the gentile Courtier at the door
Stopped, and will hardly enter in before.
But this, Sir, you command, and being so,
I Am sworn to obedience; and so in they go
Behind a Hanging in a spacious room,
The richest work of Mortelacks noble Loom.
They wait a while their wearied Limbs to rest,
Till silence should invite them to their f^ast,
Alont the hour that Cyn^hia's silver light
Had touched the pale meridies of night.
At last the various Supper being done,
It happened that the company was gone
Into a room remote, Servants and all,
To please their noble fancies with a Ball.
Our Host leads forth his stranger, and does find
All fitted to the bounties of his mind:
Still on the Tables half filled Dishes stood,
And with delicious bits the flower was strewn,
The courteous Mouse presents him with the best,
And both with fat varieties are blessed:
The industrious peasant every where does range,
And thanks the Gods for his lives happy change;
Lo in the midst of a well fraighted Pie
They both at last glutted and wanton lie:
When (see the sad reverse of prosperous fate,)
And what fierce storms on mortal glories wait,
With hideous noise down the rude Servants come,
Six Dogs before run barking into the room,
The wretched Gluttons fly with wild affright,
And hate their fullness which retards their flight.
Our trembling Peasant wishes now in vain,
That rocks and mountains covered him again:
Oh, how the change of his poor life he cursed,
This of all lives (said he) is sure the worst.
Give me again ye Gods my Cave and Wood,
With peace let tares and acorns be my food!
SATYR VII. By A. B.
HORACE and DAVUS. The miseries of a Debauched life. Dav. I Have overheard you,
and a mind I have (Slave,
To speak a word t'you, but being but your
I am afraid. --

Hor. -- Who art thou, Davus?

Dav. -- Yes,
Davus, who always to his Patron is
A Slave so loving and so true, that he
Deserves at length that you should make him free.

Hor. Go on, and use Decembers freedom now,
(Because our Ancestors did that allow.)
Speak what thou have a mind.

Dav. -- Most men delight
In Vice continually, and with all their might
Pursue their lewd designs: Many there be
Float up and down with much inconstancy.
Now they will lead a virtuous life, but then
They quickly tumble into vice again.
How fickle Priscus is! sometimes he'! be
With never a Ring on's hand, sometimes with three:
And every hour he will vainly change his Gown;
Sometimes he will lodge in the noblest house in Town,
Straight in the meanest Cottage he will lie,
And thence come forth looking so nastily.
Now he at Athens studies hard, but straight
Away he comes to Rome to fornicate.
So various in his life, as if he would been
Born in all shapes Vertunuus e're was in.
That Gamester Volanerius, when the Gout
Had racked and shrunk up all his joints throughout,
A Fellow by the day he hired and sed
To take the Dice, and throw them in his stead.
How much more constant men in Vices be,
So much the easer is their misery;
It Is better far to keep an equal pace,
Then sometimes slack and sometimes stretch the Trace.

Hor. Yet all this while thou tell nor to what end
(Thou sleering Knave) these fullen words do tend.

Dav. They Are meant of you. --

Hor. Why so (you Rogue?)

Dav. -- You praise
Men's fate and ways who lived in former days,
And yet if any God move you to use
The like your self, you obstinately refuse,
Either because you don't conceive what you
Your self affirm thereof is right and true;
Or else the truth you faintly do deftend,
And are not such a man as you pretend;
And when you stick so fast, you do desire
In vain to pluck your feet out of the mire.
The Country you admire when you are at Rome,
But when into the Country you are come,
A City life you above all things prize,
And Rome you vainly do extol to the skies.
When you are not invited forth to sup,
Your own safe Diet you do so cry up,
Pretending if you e're go forth, it is still
To please your Friend, but sore against your will:
And you're so pleased, and count your self so blessed,
When you are not invited out to feast.
But if Maecenaes send for you to come,
How all the house rings with your noise at home!
What, not the Barber come yet? -- Jack! -- who is there?
Where are these Ragues, my Servants? -- does none hear?
And then away you post to your Patrons feast,
Where Milvius that Parasite, and the rest
Which feed upon him, curse and rail, and speak
Base words of you, when they away must sneak.
One (I confess) did tell me to my face,
You did your pleasure in your Belly place;
And called you smell-feast, feeble, sluggard, sot,
What they could think, as Glutton, and Toss-pot.
Now since you are as bad as I can be,
Nay perhaps worse, why should you rail at me,
As if you're better? when you but disguise
With virtuous names the foulness of your vice.
When you were with another wife in bed,
And simply by his Slave discovered,
Trapand and apprehended, were not you
A verier fool then I? -- Nay, never go
To fright me with your surly countenance;
Bridle your passion, don't your fist advance,
While I impartially declare unt' you
That which Crispinus Slave revealed to me.
You're for a married woman, while your poor
Slave Davus is content with a poor --
Which of our crimes are greater, your or mine?
When heat of blood does me to the flesh incline,
I take a common wench, with whom I do
Such things as humane Nature promps me to;
And having done, I presently depart,
My name not blemished by it, nor my heart
Solicitous, where those who next there lie,
Be handsomer or richer men then I.
But when you lay your Ornaments aside,
And sneak along for fear you should be spied:
Are you not what you seem, when you become
Instead of a grave Senator a Groom?
And are into another Lodgings led,
With an old Cap to hide your powdered head;
'Twixt lust and fear such a contest is in you,
Your flesh and bones still trembling do continue.
What difference is it if you are bound for hire
To be destroi'd, whether by Sword or Fire?
Or to be thrust into a nasty Chest
With head and heels contracted to your breast,
Where by the Maid you have secured bin,
The Baud that is privy to her Mistress sin.
Has not the abused Husband then just power,
Both over his wife and over her Paramour?
More just over the Adulterer, yet she
Nor place nor habit shifts, nor publicly
Commits the sin; the woman is in fear,
And believes not your promised love to her:
But you're a voluntary Slave to your lust,
And with that raging Tyrant do entrust
All your estate; your safety, liberty,
Repute and life, things which so precious be.
And when you have escaped from all those Snares,
A man would think you should be full of fears,
And would by this take warning now, but you
Seek how to sin, and to be plagued anew.
Oh! you that make your self so often a Slave,
What bruit Beasts are so mad, that when they have
Made their escape by breaking off the chain,
Will to the snares expose themselves again?
You say, you are no Adulterer, nor I
A Theif, because I warily pass by
Your plate, but were the punishment away,
You to Adultery, I to Theft should stray.
Are you my Master, and so much a Slave,
To those ill powers which Dominion have
Over men and things? and have so often bin
Freed from your slavery, yet again get in?
Add this thing to the rest, which seems to me
An Argument of great validity,
If he that does a Slave serve and obey,
Is a Slaves Vicar (as you Scholars say)
Or but his Fellow-slave, pray tell me then
What must I be to you? for even when
You rule over me you are a wretched Slave,
To other powers, and no true motion have,
But are like wooden Puppets moved about,
Not by your Nerves within, but Wires without.

Hor. Who then is free?

Dav. He that is wise, and can
Govern himself, that, that is the true Freeman;
Whom prisons, want, nay Death, cannot terrify,
Who quells his vain desires, and valiantly
Contemns the froth of popular applause,
And squares his actions all by virtues laws:
No outward thing can alter him at all,
And Fortune's baffled if on him she fall.
Can you pick a description out of this,
Which may express your self? -- Your high Mistress
Demands a hundred pound a time of you,
And if not given her, pouts and looks askew,
And in a pet she thrusts you out of door,
Flings water on you to affront you more:
Then in another mood she calls you back;
And are you free? Come, come, withdraw your neck
Out of this shameful Yoke, and say I Am free,
Which you in this condition n're can be;
For you have a Master rigid and severe,
Does over your mind and body domineer;
And though you're tired, and able scarce to stir,
He cruelly rides on with switch and spur.
Pray Sir, when you so many hours lie lazing,
On some rare piece of Painting vainly gazing,
Wherefore are you more innocent then I,
When on a Battle I do cast mine eye,
With Char-coal or Red-oker rudely done,
And see the Fencers nimbly strike and shun
Each others blows, in various postures, so
As if the Fight were real, not a Show:
I must be called a loytering Rogue, but you
In ancient Painting for a Critic go.
If I pursue a hot well-sented Cake,
I am called Rascal; but when you do make
Your sumptuous Banquets with all luxury,
You must a noble person counted be:
Pray wherefore should my petty luxury
Be far more prejudicial to me,
Then yours that is greater is to you? if I
Indulge my Belly, I Am lashed presently:
And are not you punished as much as that,
Who on your Belly spend your whole Estate?
Feasts to perpetual Feasters odious are,
And Drunkards feet refuse their paunch to bear.
If a poor Boy sell his stolen Comb to buy
A bunch of Grapes, we blame him presently;
And yet that Bellie-slave goes blameless, that
To gratify his paunch sells his Estate.
Besides all this, you are not the same man
For two hours space together, neither can
You tell which way to pass your time away
As you ought, when you have a leisure day,
But Vagrant-like you from your self do fly,
Sometimes with wine or sleep you vainly try
To ease your mind, but wheresoever you go
Your guilty Conscience dogs and pricks you too.

Hor. Where Is e're a stone? --

Dav. -- At whom Sir would you throw,
If you could find a stone? --

Hor. 'S death! where is my Bow?

Dav. Alas! my Master's grown stark raging mad,
Or else makes Verses, which is full as bad!

Hor. Get hence, or to my Farm else, where I have
Sent eight already, I Will send thee the nineth Slave.

SATYR VIII. By I. W. Esquire A description of an unhansome Treat.
HORACE and FUNDANUS. Hor. How liked ye wealthy Nasidenus feast?
For yesterday, intending you my guest,
'Twas told me you were there, and from noon too.

Fund. Troth we were never merrier.

(Hor.) As how?
(And if it ben't too troublesome) declare
How he received you; what your bill of fare?

Fund. Our first encounter was a Lucan Bore,
Killed, the wind South, for so the Master swore;
About the Dish lay Lettice, Radish, Beets,
And such as whet the squeasie appetites,
As Skirworts, Pickled Herrings, and next these,
A Poynant sauce made of the Coan Lees:
This took away, two pretty Striplings come,
One wiped the Table, the other swept the room;
And, as you have seen an Attick Virgin go
To Ceres Sacrifice; straight other two,
A Black the one, brought each his basket in,
This full of Caecub, that of Chian wine:
When straight mine Host; Maecenas! if you like
A fuller bodi'd, or a greener, speak;
I have 'um both

(Hor.) Poor wealth! -- But prithee say,
What were your company?

(Fund.) On the first bed lay
My self, next me Thurinus and below
Was Varius; On the second, Bal^tro,
With him Vibidius, both Maecena's guests;
On the third, lay the Master of the feasts
'Twixt Nomentan, and Buffoon Portius,
That swoops whole Custards, ere ye say, what is this;
For his sake, the other came, who understood
The way of eating, and with his Finger could
Point out each sauce, and what was in it; while we
Eat Fish and Fowl, and such like trumpery;
Though yet, the best in season, as the Plaise,
And Turbats Belly which he carved me, was.
Next, came the blushing Apples, gathered
The Moon increasing; how they differed
From others, he can tell you best; when thus
To Balatro began Vibidius;
We Have fed our selves top full, and now must die
Quite unrevenged, unless we drink him dry;
And calls for bigger Glasses; at which word
Mine Host looked, as he would have sunk underboard;
So went and came his color, dreaming least
T 'have met with such stiff Drinkers, or a jest
So home, but rather thought, t'ave seen his wine
Deaded their palats, for 'twas hardly fine;
But to small purpose, for the Rundlet now
Was set a tilt, and round the brimmers go;
Only some one or two of the prime Guests
Made little spoil: -- But see! A second Feast;
A Lamprey stretched at length, swimming as 'twere
Amidst a shole of shrimps; On which, Mine Here
Cries note, This Fish was big with young when caught,
Or otherwise, 't'ad not been worth a Groat;
Then, for the rare Potage! But taste it pray!
The Oil in it right Campania,
T'has more ingredients, as Caviare,
The best white Pepper, Lesbian vinegar,
Italian wine. (But this, I dare be bold)
Not a drop of 't was less then five years old;
All this was in the boiling (that once done
Pour that of Chios in, or better none:)
I was the first e're boiled Elicampane,
And 'Ringoes in it; from Curtillus, came
Salt-water-craw-fish pickled, better far
Then such as brought us from beyond Sea are:
While thus mine Host, a piece of Tapstry's fall
Raised such a dust, it spic'd us, Dish and all;
We thought at first, 't' had been the house, but when
We saw there was no danger, cheered again;
But he (poor man) hung down his head, and cried
As if his Son had at that instant died;
Nor gave he over, till Nomentanus, thus,
Fortune our Foe, thou art a scurvy Puss!
Ah what a cruel Vixen the art! ah how
Do thou delight to mock us here below!
'Twas even as much as Variu's Towel could do
To keep his laughter in, when Balatro
Gib'd on, And since the course of life is such,
We cannot ( quoth he) admire your pains too much;
Is It fit, to make me handsomely received,
You should disquiet your self, and thus be grieved,
For fear the Bread be burnt, or the Potage
Ill seasoned, to be sure that every Page
Perform his office right: add to all this
What other accidents may fall amiss;
As this' oth' Hangings was, or that a Clown
Should stumble in, and run the Cup-board down;
But (General-like) Masters of Feasts reveal
That temper by cross hits, the good conceal:
At which, mine Host, Gods blessing on your heart!
So good a man, and boon Companion the art;
And with it clapped his Sandals on; when straight
There went a whisper round the beds. Hor. But what?
What laughed y' at next? Fund. Vibidius cries, I think
The Bottles broke, that we can get no drink;
And while they laughed at what was past, quoth he,
Balatro seconding, Mine Host for me!
How lively he returns! he looks as pert,
As if he would help our late mischance by art:
Which said, his Boys brought in a Charger filled
With several things; a Crane cut up, and grill'd
With Salt and Flower; and fed with with figs (to choose)
The well grown Liver of a Milk white Goose,
The Shoulders of some Hares, by much the best
Of all the body, a broiled Black-birds breast:
Ringdoves, their thighs cut off; things excellent
Had he not run so Damned a Lecture on it;
As the cause why, drawn from their Nature too:
But we revenged our selves, I Will tell ye how;
We did not taste one bit, but fled it more,
Then if a Witch had shook her Kercher over.

The end of the Second Book of Satyrs.
EPISTLES.
BOOK I.
EPISTLE I. By Sir R. F. To MAECENAS.
He says he dismisses his trifling studies, and embraces those that tend to
virtue: yet so as not to swear to any Masters words. And that these studies are
such, that there is none but may be bettered by them, if he but lend a patient
ear thereunto. In the end he reprehends the depraved judgment of men placing
virtue after wealth and honors, and caring more for the things of the Body
then the things of the mind.

MAecenas mentioned in my Odes, to be
Mentioned in all I write; thou would have me
(Enough seen, and applauded on the Stage)
To the old sport; I have not the same age,
Nor the same mind. Upon Alcides post
His Arms hung up, ere his won Fame be lost;
The Fencer that is wise, retires. I hear
A voice sound daily in my cleansed ear,
Free an old Horse, lest he (derided) lagg,
And, broken-winded, in the last act flag.
Therefore Love-songs, and all those toys adieu,
My work is now to search what is good, what is true:
I lay in precepts, which I straight may draw
Out for my use. If thou demand, whose Law,
What Guide I follow: Sworn to no man's words,
To this and that side I make Tacks and Bords.
Now plunged in billows of the active life,
At virtues Anchor ride contemplatise;
With ARISTIPPUS now yield to the stream,
More studying to get wealth, then to contemn.
As nights are long to them their Mistress fails:
To Hirelings, days: To curbed Wards years are snails:
So slow and so unpleasant my Time flows,
Till seriously I act, as I propose;
That which alike boots rich and poor, if done,
Alike hurts young and old, if let alone.
It rests, these rules I to my self apply.
Thy eyes will never pierce like Lynceus eye,
Scorn not to anoint them though if sore they are:
Nor, of a Wrastlers strength if thou despair,
Neglect to salve the knotted Gout. If more
'S denied, it is something to have gone thus fur.
Revenge and Avarice boil in thy heart:
There Is words and sounds will cut off a great part
Of thy disease. Swell'st thou with love of praise!
There is a Charm too which this Devil lays;
Reading a good Book thrice devoutly over,
The Envious, Wrathful, Sluggish, Drunkard, Lover:
No Beast so wild, but may be tamed, if he
Will unto Precepts listen patiently.
It Is Virtue, to fly Vice: and the first Stair
Of Wisdom, to want Folly. With what Care
Of Mind, and toil of Body, we avoid
Mean wealth, and honors hunt (Ambition's God!)
The unwearied Merchant runs to farthest Ind,
Through Fire, through horrid Rocks, Riches to find*
What thou thus fondly doat'st on, to despise,
Sit, learn, and hear from those that are more wise.
Whose Sword has won him Honor in true Fights,
Dusty Olympic Laurels, that man slights,
(Above those toys, and in his own self rowld.)
Gold excels silver, Virtue excels Gold.
O Romans, Romans, first seek money; then
Virtue. This drops from every Scriv'ners Pen.
This is the Doctrine old and young men preach,
Carrying a black Box danging at their Breech.
If of Sesterces forty thousand lack
Six or seven thousand only, though you make
It up in Virtues, Courage, Eloquence,
Faith, and the like; you are a Pletian, Hence.
But playing in the streets, the children sing
Another song: He that does well's a King.
Be this a wall of Brass, to have within
No black accuser, harbor no pale sin.
Now (sadly) which is better, Otho's Law,
Or the Bo^es Song, which gives a Regal awe
To him do^^ well? A song often sung of old
By manly Curii, and Camilli bold.
Counsels he better, that says, MONEY GET,
If thou can, well: but if not, get it yet,
That tho^ some piteous Play may nearer see?
Or he that bids thee, Brave, erect, and free,
To face proud Fortune? If ROME'S people now
Object, Why placed on our Bench vot'st not Thou
The same with us? abhorr'st not what we hate?
Affect'st not what we love? My answer's, That
The sly Fox once to the sick Lion made:
The footsteps that way all, make me afraid,
And from thy Den that I perceive no treads.
The People, It Is a Beast with many heads.
What, or whom should I follow? some by-places:
Some for rich Widows trade with Beads and Glasses,
And feed old men with Gifts, like Fish with bread,
That they on them may afterward be fed.
Many grow fat with Usury. But well,
Let several men have several minds. Now tell,
How long will any in the same mind stay?
Baiae? The World has not a sweeter Bay,
The Rich man cries: when straight the Sea and Lake
The joy of their arriving Lord partake.
Who, if an ominous Hare (forsooth) come thawrt
To morrow; Smiths unto the THE ANUM Cart
The Iron work. Has he at home a wife?
No life ( he says) like to the single life.
If not, None blessed ( he swears) but married men.
What knot can hold this changing Proteus? Then
The poor man (laugh) alters his eating room,
His Barber, Bed, and Bath: and sick of Rome
As much as rich men that keep Barks, to float
Upon the water, goes and hires a Boat.
If thou meet one, by an ill Barber nocht,
Thou laugh'st: If one in Scarlet breeches bocht
With Frize, thou laugh'st. But what if my mind fight
With it self? Seek that which it slighted, slight
That which it sought? all Rules of Life confound?
Turn like the Tide, build, raze, change square to round?
Thou think me mad in fashion, and laugh'st not,
Nor that I need to have a Doctor got,
And to be placed in Bedlam by the Mayre:
Though th'rt my Patron, and consumed with care
At the least fingers asking of thy friend
That honors thee, and does on thee depend.
In sum, a wise man's only less then Jove,
Rich, free, fair, noble; last a King, above,
The common rate of Kings: But chiefly sound,
That is to say, Unless his spleen abound.
EPISTLE II. By Sir R. F. To LOLLIO.
He says Homer in his Poems teaches fuller and better what is honest, then
some Philosophers; bringing arguments to prove the same. That in the Iliad,
what are the incentives of war to foolish Kings and Nations is described: and
in the Odyssee, by Ulysses example, what virtue and wisdom can do, is shown.
Then exhorts to the study of wisdom, as that which will heal the diseases of
the mind, which he reckons up. But teaches withal, that men must from their
tender age accustom themselves to such like precepts.

Whilst thou (Great Lollio) in Rome do plead,
I, in Praeneste, have all HOMER read:
Who, what is our good, what not; what brave, what base,
Fuller then Crantor, and Chrysippus, says.
Why I think thus (unless you are busy) hear.
The Lines, that tell how Greeks and Trojans were
Involved in a long War for Paris love,
Rash Kings and Nations foolishly reprove.
Antenors counsel was, to send the Cause
Of the War back. PARIS says, No: What Laws
Compel Kings to be safe? NESTOR, to piece
The difference, runs, betwixt the King of Greece
And Tethy's son: One boiling with Love's flame,
With anger both. The PRINCES, They Are too blame,
And the poor PEOPLE smart for it. Mischief, Strife,
Fraud, rage, and lust in Town, and Leaguer rife.
Again what virtue and what wisdom can,
He shows us in the example of the Ulysses,
Man
Of Ithaca: who ( Troy in ashes laid)
The Towns and Manners prudently survay'd
Of many Lands; and through the Ocean vast,
Returning home with his Companions, past
Many sharp Brunts, not to be sunk with stromes
Of adverse Chance. Thou know the Sirens charms;
And Circe's Cups: which had he greedily
And fondly tasted with his Fellows, he
Had served a Whorish Dame, and lived a Dog
On his on vomit, or mire-wallowing Hog.
The Suitors of Penelope were mere
Puppets, made only to devour good Cheer:
Raskals, who minded nothing but their skin,
And, that perfumed and sleek, to sleep therein
Till it was Noon: then thought it brave, to wake
With the same Lutes with which they rest did take*
Do Thieves sit up all night to kill and steal,
And cannot we rise to intend our Weal?
But if in health thou will not stir about,
Hereafter thou shall run (though with the Gout)
To a Physician: and unless thou knock
For Candle, and a Book, with the first Cock:
Unless to studies, and to honest things
Thou bend thy mind; with Love's or Envy's stings
Thou Wilt lie awake tormented. If a Fly
Get in thy Eye, it is pulled out instantly:
But if thy Minds Ey's hurt, day after day
That Cure's deferred. Set forth, you are half thy way.
Dare to be wise: Begin. He that to rule
And square his life, prolongs, is like the Fool
Who staid to have the River first pass by,
Which rowles and rowles to all Eternity.
Money is sought, and a rich wife for brood,
And a sharp Culter tames the savage Wood.
Let him that has enough, desire no more.
Not House and Land, nor Gold and Silver Oar,
The Body's sickness, or the Mind's dispel,
To relish wealth, the palate must be well.
Who fears, or covets: House to him and Ground,
Are Pictures to blind men, Incentives bound
About a gou^y Limb, Music t'an ear
Damned up with ^ilth. A vessel not sincere
Sowres whatsoever you put into it. Abstain
From pleasures: Pleasure hurts, that is bought with pain
The Cov'tous always want: your prayers design
To some fixed mark. The envious man does pine
To see another ^at: Envy's a Rack;
Worse, no Sicilian Tyrant ere did make.
Who cannot temper wrath, will wish undone
What, in his haste, he may have done to one,
To whom he (possibly) would be most kind.
Anger i^ a short madness: Rule thy mind:
Which reigns, if it obeys not: (...)
With chains, restrain it with an Iron bit.
The Quiry moulds the Horses tender mouth
TO his Riders will. The Beagle from his Youth
Is trained up to the woods, being taught to ball
(A Whelp) at the Bucks heads nailed in the Hall.
Now Boy, in the white paper of thy breast
Write VIRTUE: Now suck precepts from the best.
A pot, well seasoned, holds the Primitive taste
A long time after. If thou make no haste,
Or spur to overrun me, I am One
For none will stay, and will contend with none.
The same by Dr. W.
WHile you at Rome (my honored Lollius plead,
I Homer at Praeneste once more read.
Aquinas never so well, nor Lumbard taught
So fully yet, what is fair, or fit, or naught.
My reason's this (if you have no busy hours)
The story that relates Paris amors,
And Greece spent with the tedious Trojan Leager,
Shows us how silly Princes are, how eager
The giddy Rout. That should be moved which seems
The cause of the war, Antenor wisely deems.
But Paris to enjoy his stolen delight,
Thinks scorn to yield, Nestor to set things right
'Twixt Agamemnon and Achilles strives;
While Love the One, and both their passion drives.
The Officers are mad, and still the smart
Lights on the Commons; still they have the art,
What with their mutines, their plots, their sin,
To loose as much without, as those within.
But then, what virtue and good conduct can
Perform you will see; Ulysses is the man:
Troy wisely gained, he many Cities next
Views and their various Laws, is often perplexed
In hazards, storms himself and his he saves,
Not to be drowned in Fortunes roughest waves.
The Sirens charms you know, and Circe's bowl
Which had he quast with his Drunken-train, his soul
He Had lost, a brutish servant to the where,
A Shag-tail Cur ^^'had been, or miry Bore.
We are that rout, methinks, those Idle Knaves
Made to be crammed, Penelope's lewd braves,
Rising at Noon to wash, and powder hair,
And then with noise of Fiddlers lull our care.
Will you not wake? Fellons are only stirring
For mischief; for your safety you're demuring.
You Will easier now, then with a Dropsy run,
Call for a Book and Light before the Sun.
Your early thoughts in Virtue unemploy'd,
Will be with Love or fretting Envy cloyed.
You Will move an Eye-soar straight; and is it sense,
To let the Mind be cured a Twelve-moneth hence?
Begin: it is half the work: assume the power
To live: expect not for a fairer hour.
[So stays the Clown till the hasty Brook be dried,
But the everlasting streams still still do glide.]
We gripe for money still, marry for Goods,
(Such Wives are fruitful) grub and fill our woods.
Who has enough, why should he wish for more?
Did ever goodly seat, or Farms, or Store,
The sickly Landlord of his Quartan ease,
Or of his cares? the Owner must have health,
Who reaps a satisfaction from his wealth.
The carking Heart's not eased by bags or land.
(No more then Bleared-eye by Titians hand,
Or Gout by pultis, or the Ear in pains
With Rhume, by Ferabosco's melting streins;)
But what it holds, like musty Bottle spoils.
Pleasures ill bargains are, if bought with toils,
Desires are endless, till you fix the end,
Envy consumes for fatness of a friend;
Envy the worst of Plagues, the Tyrants scourge,
Anger let loose, the unwary mind does urge
To actuate revengeful thoughts, in haste.
Which afterward in cold blood you will distaste.
Anger's a shorter frenzy. Passion reigns
If It be n't enslaved, but curb it in with chains.
The managed Colt is by the Horseman taught
TO observe the Riders check: the Whelp is brought
(Since first he trail'd the Buckskin in the Hall)
To hunt abroad the Stag unto his fall.
Now (hopeful Boy!) counsels that wholesome are
Take early next thy heart: the seasoned Iar
Will hold his scent: now run, I Will but give aim,
I Will neither stop the swift, nor help the lame.
EPISTLE III. By A. B. To JULIUS FLORUS.
Advice to follow his Studies.

IN what part of the would Claudius fights now,
(My Julius ^l^rus) I desire to know:
Claudius our great Augustus Son in Law,
Whether to Thrace his Army's marched away.
Or whether Icy Heber them detain,
If on the Hellespont they still remain;
Or fruitful Asian hills and plains, or what
The learned troop of Drusius will be at.
These things I mind too, and what eminent wit
Will to posterity dare to transmi^
Those mighty things, which done by Caesar are,
How wisely he makes peace, how st^utly war:
What ex'lent piece will learned Titius write,
The Roman admiration and delight;
He that so bravely dares transfer the ^lame
Unto us Romans, which from Pindar came,
That scorns to dabble in the vulgar lak's,
And into the Ocean a brave Voyage makes:
How does he do? what does he say of me?
By his propitious Muses aid will he
Translate the Verses writ with Theban ^ire,
And tune them smoothly to the Roman Lyre.
Or with a tragic buskin does he rage,
And with high stately language fill the Stage.
And (prithee) how does Celsus deal by me?
That most incorrgible Plagiarie,
Who has been warned so often, and must be more,
To search for wit and sense from his own store;
And leave off pilferring out of Books that be
By others writ, and placed in the Library.
Least all the plundered Birds should stock together,
And from his gaudy back pluck each his feather;
And he of his stolen colors like the Chough,
Stand stripped, and make all Spectators laugh.
But what art thou about? with what rare stuff
Does thy Muse load her thighs? thou have wit enough,
And that well pollisht, not absurdly rough.
If thou will Orator or Lawyer be,
Or falst upon delightsome Poetry,
Thy wit away the Laurel justly bears;
But if thou can shake of those seeds of cares,
Where e're Celestial wisdom draws thou wilt go,
This work, this study, great and man men too
Should set upon, if we design to be
Dear to our selves, and to Posterity.
I prithee send me word, whether or no
Thou do such kindness to Munatius show,
As betwixt Friends and Brothers ought to be;
Or is your breach since you did disagree
So ill pacht up, that it will never close,
But every foot to it is old rancour grows;
Yet whether height of blood, or want of wit,
Inflamed your untamed spirits, it is not fit,
That your fraternal knot should be unti'd,
In what part of the world so e're you 'bide;
I Have a fat Heifer, which I Will gladly burn
In sacrifice for your desired return.
EPISTLE IV. By A. B. To TIBULLUS.
That he should live comfortably, and without Cares.

TEll me Tibullus, thou that do so far
Indulge such trifles as my Satyrs are,
What shall I tell my friends that thou do do
Now in that Country you are retired into?
Writing whole Volums: or have thou thy mind
Wholly to the healthy woods and walks confined?
Considering only to enjoy and do
Things which become a wise and good man too.
Thou art no thick-skull'd block-head; for wise Heaven
To thee an understanding Soul has given.
And with a fair Revenue does thee bless,
Which thou know how to enjoy as well's possess.
What could a Nurse for her deer Child beseech,
More then right understanding, and plain speech?
To live beloved in honor and in health,
To eat whole some Diet, and to want no wealth?
When you are tossed up and down' twixt hope and care,
Enflamed with anger and shrunk up with fear:
As soon as such a day is overpast,
Comfort thy self, that that is to be the last:
When an hour comes that brings thee joy and bliss,
If unexpected, Oh! how grateful is!
And when you are minded to laugh heartily
At a right Hog of Epicurus Sty
Come see me, thou shall find me plump and fair,
I, of this Corpse of mine, take special care.
EPISTLE V. By Sir R. F. To TORQUATUS.
He invites Torquatus to supper, which he says will be a frugal one. Exhorts
him (^idding farewell to Cares, and the desire of Riches) to give himself to
Mirth; and (seeming a little lightheaded with the joy of Augustus his
birthday) lashes out into the praises of drinking. Names three things whereof
he is studious in his entertainment, and the first of these, Cleanliness.

IF thou (a Guest) on a ^oyn'd-stool can sup,
And in a small Mess all the broth sup up:
I shall at home expect thee by Su^-set.
Wine thou shall drink of middle age, and wet
Minturnae's growth hard by. If thou have ought
That better is, command it to be brought,
And treat thy Host. Already the Logs burn,
And the scowr'd Pans shine, on thy score. Adjourn
Light hopes, and riches strife, and Mosco's Cause
To morrow; CAESAR'S birthday gives a Pawse
To toil, and leave to sleep. Without offense
We may spin out with chatting Eloquence
The Summer night. What do I care for wealth,
Unless to use? It Is a mad kind of stealth,
For one to rob himself, to enrich his Heir.
I Will quaffe, and sprinkle Roses, and not care
Though I Am thought wild for this. The rare effects
Of Wine! Love, hid in Blushes, it detects:
Hopes it ensures: it makes the Coward fight:
Learned the Ignorant: the sad heart light.
Whom have not flowing Cups eloquent made?
Whose debts (though nere so great) have they not paid?
I am the Man: and my charge I will make it,
(Willing, and not unfit to undertake it)
To have the Forms clean rubbed: the Napkins such
As may not curl our Noses up to touch:
That in the Platters thou may see thy face:
That no false brother carry from the place
Ought that is spoke: that all of a Suit be,
Septimius? Brutus? Sure Cards, these. Let Us see:
Then (if not taken up with better cheer,
Or by his Girl) Sabinus shall be here.
Each Guest may bring his shadow. But the sweat
Will be offensive, if too close we set.
Thy number, write: and (all things laid aside)
Thy Clients bobb'd, out at the back door glide.
EPISTLE VI. By A. B. To NUMICIUS.
Not to trouble himself with worldly matters.

NUmicius, to admire nothing at all,
Which in this world to Mortals may befall,
Is one, if not the only thing, which can
Make and continue thee a happy man.
Philosophy renders some men so bold,
They Are not affrighted when they do behold
The Sun and Stars so variously appear,
In all the different seasons of the year:
Or in unusual motions, why should thou
Be more transported with the things below?
Why should thou mind the treasures of the earth,
Those gums to which Arabia gives birth?
Or Silver, Gold, and precious jems, with which
Both Indies do the rest of the world enrich?
Pleasure or Honor, or those gifts which come
From the self-ended Citizens of Rome,
With what a mind and look should these things be
Possessed, or but reflected on by thee?
He that the contrary to this does fear,
His passions like the Admirers passions are.
A mind disturbed, which way soever it come,
On one side and the other is trouble some;
And sudden apprehension of all things,
To those that fear or love much terror brings.
What is it to the purpose, whether we
Desire and fear, and sad or joyful be?
Who when a thing befalls him, bad or good,
If more, or other, then he thought it would,
Do presently look blank upon it, and grow
A^tonish'd both in mind and body too.
The wiseman is an Ass, the just man grows
Unjust, if they would be too virtuous.
Go now, and gaze upon thy massy plate,
Thy Brass and Marble pillars made for State;
Thy costly Hangings of rich Tapestry,
And costly garments of the Tyrian Die,
And hug thy self when thou shall thousands see,
While thou art making speeches, gaze on thee.
Rise early in the morn, away to the Hall,
And till it is late at night there tug and bawl,
Least Mutius grow rich before thee, he
Who is by birth inferior much to thee.
Shall such a sneaking fellow, as he is
Be thy example, when thou should be his?
What ere is hidden time will bring to light,
And that will vanish, which now shines so bright.
Nay thou, who on the Exchange and at the Hall
Art so well known, and honored too by all,
Forsaking all these things, must go at last
Where our Forefathers are, whose days are past.
If thou do any sharp disease endure,
Use all thy Wits to get a present cure.
Will thou live well? who would not? Virtue is
The only way to gain true happiness.
And therefore all thy vanities thrown by,
To it courageously thy mind apply.
Make that thy business, and do not suppose
That to talk much is to be virtuous.
That words together put will virtue prove,
As Trees together put will make a Grove.
But if wealth be thy aim, pursue thy Trade,
Take heed no other Merchant do invade
Those Ports thou traffick'st to, and take from thee
Thy businesses which now so gainful be.
Heap up a thousand talents, then one more,
Add a third thousand, and then make'^m four.
This mighty Monarch Money to us sends,
Fair Wives, great Portions, Reputation, Friends,
This makes us Noble, though our Birth be base,
And giv^s our persons comesiness and grace;
That man who has his pockets lined with Chink,
All men ingenious and handsome think.
The Cappadocian King, though he had store
Of Slaves, was in's Exchequer very poor:
But be not thou like that unhappy King,
TO aboundin one, and not in every thing.
Lucullus was desired (the story says)
To lend a hundred Cloaks for some new Plays.
Where should I have so many Cloaks (said he)
But yet I Will look, and what I have send to ye.
A little after this he sends them word,
That he 5000 Garments could afford,
Which in his house lay by unknown to him,
And that they might have part or all of them,
That house is much unfurnished where there are
Not many things superfluous, and to spare.
Goods which the Owner knows not of, but may
Be unconcerned when they are stolen away.
If (as Mimnermus said) nothing can be
Delightsome without love and jollity:
Then live in love and jollitie; farewell:
If thou of any better Rules can tell
Then these, impart them candidlie;
If not, I pray, make use of these with me.
The same by J. W. Esquire
IF then, wealth only makes, and keeps man blessed,
Make that thy first of works, and leave it last:
If public Honor; buy some progging Slave,
May point thee who goes by, what names they have;
Pluck thee by the sleeve, and tell thee such or such
Are worth your hand, you cannot reached out too much:
His interest lies here, and to others there,
Make 'um your friends, and you are Consul clear,
Thus putting on a pleasant face to all,
As their years are, this son, him father call*
If eating be the business, let us away
In order to it; we stay too long, 'ti^ day*
Rouse our dull Servants, make one take the Nets,
Another hunting Poles, a third the Spear,
And so returning through the gaping Fare,
Lead a tall Mule home laden with a Boar,
Not killed (as they suppose) but bought before.
Let Us bathe on a full stomach, as forgot
Whither convenient for our health, or not.
Right Cerites, lawless; very Greeks that think
Their Country far of less esteem then drink.
If (as Mimnermus) nothing's to be done
That has not Love, and Pleasure in it, Let one
Live, and farewell; And if yo've better cheer,
Impart it pray, if not, be merry hear.
EPISTLE VII. By A. B. To MAECENAS.
That Liberty is more acceptable to a friend, than costly Entertainm^nt.

I Prom^s'd when I left you last, it is true,
Within five days to come again to you
Into the Country, and you looked for me
All August long, to come accordingly;
Yet I have failed you: now I Will tell you why;
Not that I slight such worthy company;
But your hard drinking kills me. I profess,
You Would love me better, if you would love me less.
If you would have me live long and heathfully,
Give me now I am well that liberty
Which were I sick, I Am sure you would allow,
For I fear s^ckness, though I Am healthy now.
In these hot Dog-dayes, when each little thing
That stirs the blood, does mortal sickness bring.
Autum the Sextons harvest, when we meet
Mourners and funerals in every street:
When Women send their Children out, for fear
They should be ^^lled by the City air.
The Lawyers venting mercenary breath,
Brings Fevers and (a happy riddance!) death.
But when the Winter comes, and heaven bestrews
The shabbed ground with frequent frosts and snows;
Then comes your Poet to the waters side,
Where he to (ndulge his body will abide,
And study very little. And (if you
Will give me leave) I Will wait upon you too
When gentle Zephr' blows (as Poets sing)
And the first Swallow ushers in the Spring.
Your favors do enrich me, not like those
Which the Calabrian Innkeeper bestows;
Who with crabb'd choaky Pears his guests did treat,
And rudely over-pressed them to eat.
Eat (if you love me) all these Pears, says he;
No (says the guest) I thank you heartily,
I Have eat enough already. Put up, pray,
Those you cannot eat, and carry them away,
(Says the free Host:) No (replies the Gue^t)
You are too liberal to me in your Feast.
Nay sill your pockets, ( quoth the Host) these toys
Are grateful presents to your Girls and Boys.
I Am as much oblig'dt' you ( says his friend)
As if with Pears you me home laden send.
Do as you please ( says the Host) but what you leave,
I Have Hogs which will be ready to receive.
Thus Prodigals and fools are free of that
Which these do vainlyst ght, those vainly hate*
Such roots ingratitude do always bear,
And will yield only that from year to year;
Whilst he that is both good and wise declares,
That he for worthy men himself prepares;
And can discern good men from bad, as well
As he can silver from brass-money tell.
It Is my design to answer the expectation
Of all the worthy persons in the Nation.
But if you would have me never leave you more,
My former strength of body, pray restore;
My black curled locks, which on my forehead grew,
And my bewitching nimble tongue renew.
Revive my witty merry sprightly vain,
And in my Cups my amorous flames again;
Oh! make me weep, or run stark mad, nay die
For Love, if my coy Mistress should deny.
A little Fox with hunger slender worn,
Crept through a crevice int' a hutch of Corn,
And, having filled his paunch, strugled in vain,
With his great belly, to get out again:
A Weezle spied him tugging at the chinck,
Gave him this good advice, Friend if you think
E're to creep out, you must become as thin
As you were when you did at first creep in.
I will apply this Fable, and restore
To you what e're you gave me heretofore
I love not to be crammed, for I despise
Those drowsy Banquets which the Vu'gar prize:
Nor for Arabias wealth would I destroy.
That ease and freedom which I now enjoy.
You Have often praised me for my modesty,
And I Have declared that you have been to me
A Father, nav a King, both to your face,
Nor said I less when you were not in place*
Try me, if I can cheerfully resign,
All those rich things your bounty has made mine.
'Twas not ill said by young Telemachus,
Son of Ulysses, who did answer thus
To Menelaus, profering to bestow
A horse upon him, Sir, I do not know
What to do with your Horse; for Ithaca
Is an ill place to keep a Horse in; Hey
And Grass are very scarce there, and there is no
Plains or Champaigne for Horse to gallop through:
Therefore pray keep your Presents, for they be
Fitter by half for you, than the are for me.
Mean things become mean men. I now do not
Admire Romes stately Palaces a jot,
But quiet Tybur and Tarentum be
My aim to live in for my privacie.
Philippus, a great Lawyer, when he came
From pleading home at night, grown old and lame,
Complained much, that the Court too distant was
From the Carina's that is his dwelling place.
The story says, that he by chance espied
One trimmed, that did in the Barbers shop abide,
Paring his nails with his Penknife; calls to's boy
(A Lad that was ingenious to obey
And quick t'observe his Masters mind) says he,
Demetrius, Go, ask and bring word to me
What yonder idle person is, and who,
And what Patron he is related to;
Where he was born, and what estate he has,
What his name is, and who his Father was.
The Boy went, asked, and told him presently,
Vultejus Mena was his name, and he
A Crier by profession, of a small
Estate, but he given to no vice at all;
Sometimes he up and down, did trade to get
Money, then stayed at home and lived on it.
Played with his little Children when alone,
And in a small house lived, but 'twas his own;
Followed his business, but his leisure days
Spend at the Artillery ground, or seeing Plays.
From his own mouth ( says he) I long to know
Whether all this which thou relat'st be so.
Therefore go tell him that his company
I much desire, pray him come sup with me.
The Lad goes, comes, and tells his Master, Sir,
I told the Gentleman, but he will not stir,
Neither indeed would be believe that you
Invited him, or what I said was true.
But wondering with himself, it is strange! says he,
What! an old, rich, great Lawyer, and so free!
But he was civil; and put off his bat,
Thanked you, as who should say -- here is this for that.
Did he deny me! -- Yes perversely too,
And slights, or else stands much in fear of you.
Next day the Lawyer in his sight appears,
As he sold Fripery to the Wastcoateers:
Gives him the first salute; surprised hereat,
The bashful Merchant lowly doffs his hat,
And goes to excuse the meaness of his trade,
Complains that he thereto a slave was made.
Begs Philips pardon, that he did not come
To Supper, when he was invited home;
But that which did seem to afflict him worst,
Was that he did not visit Philip first.
Came ( says Philippus) you have no other way
For pardon, but to sup with me to day.
I Will wait upon you, noble Sir, says he.
The Laywer tells him, that the hour was thre^*
Bids him in the interim mind his calling so,
That he by trading might the richer grow.
He talked at Supper what e're came in's way,
Said what he should, and what he should not say:
At length he takes his leave, and hies him home
To Bed. Next morning he does thither come,
And is observed so often there to wait,
And nibble at the Lawyers dangerous bait,
That he became his Clyent, after that
He every day at Philips table ^ate,
And on the Holy Days, when there were no
Pleadings, to Philips Country House they go
In his brave gilded Coach together, where
Vulteius praised the Sabin fields and air:
Which when the Lawyer found, it pleased him much:
Says he, My bodies constitution's such,
That hither I Will for good and all retire,
And live at ease here; only I desire
The company of such a friend as you,
That is so prudent and so cheerful too.
And if you will purchase something in this Town,
One hundred pieces I will give you down,
And I will lend another hundred to ye,
Merely to enjoy your pleasant company.
So (not to make more words on it then I ought)
A small Farm there, at length the Merchant bought.
Now he that was so spruce a Citizen,
Became one of the herd of Countrymen.
Of Sheep and Oxen's all his talk, and how
To plant young Trees, and go to Cart and Plough.
To all his Studies now he puts an end,
And to grow rich his mind does wholly bend.
But when his Kids were stolen, and Sheep did rot,
His Oxen killed at plow, his fields did not
Bring forth according to his expectation,
Grieved with these heavy losses, in a passion,
He takes his Horse at Midnight, and away
To the Lawyers house, whom when the Lawyer saw
With such a rustic discontented look,
You look (says he) my friend, as if you took
Overmuch care and pains. Truly, says he,
My honored Patron, if you would call me
By any name that fits me, let it be
A miserable wretch; and I entreat
You, by the God's and all that is good or great,
By all that is dear to you, that you will restore
Me to that life which I enjoyed before.
As soon as Philip had considered, what
Difference there was 'twixt what he would be at,
And what he so declined, Let him (says he)
Return to what he has been formerlie.
What fits us best is best; it is good and meet,
To make our shoes according to our feet.
The same by S. W.
I Promised but five days from you to stay,
And now all August I have been away;
But (dear Mocenas) if you would have me live
Lusty and strong, that freedom to me give,
(Now I fear sickness) as you would allow,
And bid me take, if I indeed were so.
Excuse your friend till sickly Autumn's over,
Autumn that is in funerals never poor;
When the fond Mother for her child looks pale,
And a full term, and business, croud's the Hall;
Where, whilst the drudg Sollicitour attends,
A Fever hastes his will, and Lawsuit ends.
But if sharp Winter clothes the fields with snow,
Your Poet down to your Country house will go,
And living there obscure, himself will spare,
And only for his look and health take care:
With hopes to visit you against at Spring.
And the first tidings of it with him bring.
Not as my Country Host his Pears does force,
Have you returned me full; Our fare's but course,
Yet feed (he says) I thank you I Have done well,
Do better then, these fruits we never sell:
Your Servant Sir. Nay those you shall take home,
You will more welcome to your children come.
I am obliged, as much as if I did
Take what you please; but I should thus be rid
Of that, with which I must to the Hogs be kind,
Who strait shall have, what ere you leave behind.
So Fools and Prodigals no gifts bestow
But what they hate, or what they do not know.
Yet this rank soil a thankless crop does bear,
Nor will it better yield another year;
But a wise man, though he the difference knows
'Twixt gold, and trifles, when he these bestows,
For worthy hands, says he, they were designed;
Nor me less worthy, say I, shall you find.
But if I must always with you remain,
Let me my youth and beauty have again;
My lusty back, smooth forehead, and blach hairs
Now all impaired, or changed, by age and ^ares;
Return my mirth and ralliary again,
And Cynare, whose loss I grieve in vain.
Once on a time, through a very little hole,
A hungry Fox into an Hen-roost stole,
And glutted there with Poultry, all about,
But all in vain, sought where he might get out:
The hole too strait was grown, his paunch too wide,
Which, at a distance, when the Weezel spied,
Sir Reynard said she, you must be as thin
If you would get out as when you first came in.
Urge me but thus, I Will quickly all resign,
Yet not so foolish am I to repine,
And a Swains sleep, before full tables choose,
Though for both Indies I Would no freedom loose.
My Modesty you heretofore have praised,
Nor have I less your worth with titles raised;
Father and King were the worst names I gave,
My self in every place I styled your slave;
And judge you now if I can well restore,
Or unsay what so often has been said ore.
Telemachus was wiser to refuse
Great Menelaus proffer; I Have no use
For Coursers, said he, nor have we good feed,
Or running with us, for so high a breed.
Rather, great Atreus Son, thy gifts retain,
And let them, where they better suit, remain.
A little does a little man content,
Give me no Palace, but a Tenement;
A Cortage at Tarentum will suffice,
And Rome compared with Tybur I Will despise.
Philip the famous Orator, one day,
As from the Bart he came, and thought the way
To him grown old, and wearied with the throng,
Thence to his Chamber, never seemed half so long,
Seeing ^'th' shade, close by a Barbers door,
One newly trimmed, that with light knife ran 'ore
Each single nail, and paired it with such grace
As if he studied to out trim his face;
Go (said he to his boy) inquire his Name,
What Father, whose Retainer, whence he came?
He Is called Vul^eius Mena (says the boy)
A Crier, that does little wealth enjoy,
But a good Name, (that to the whole World is known;)
Who sometimes; business has, and sometimes none.
Just enough for a livelihood, which yet
He does as freely spend (he says) as get.
Of mean acquaintance, but a house of's own,
And when he is either tired, or work quite done,
Can to a play or wrestling wager go;
All this I from himself desire to know,
(Replies the Sage) bid him to supper come
This night, whilst I before walk softly home.
How now! An't please you Sir he would scarce believe
I came from you, and wondering did receive
The Invitation. What else? And by me
Returns his thanks. Denied then must I be!
I think so, and he you does scorn, or fear,
Or else invited thus, would scarce forbear.
Philip next morning, as to Court he went,
Menas Good m^rrow did with his prevent,
And greeting gave the day, and ease from cares,
As to the People he exposed his Wares.
Vulteius to excuse himself began,
His pedling trade, and mercenary Chain,
That his commands he had not sought at home,
Nor was so happy as to see him come;
All this I Will pardon (said the Counselor)
But on condition you no more defer
Your coming to me, whom I now invite
The second time, to sup with me this night.
You shall command me, (Mena said;) Let three
( Philip returned) the latest minute be;
Till then your business mind -- But Suppers come;
Where when they would freely talked, my Guest goes home.
Yet like a Fish that nibles at the past
So long, that by the gills he is caught at last;
By often visits he become more bold,
Turns Client, and unbid a room does hold
At every Feast: By Philip is desired,
To go where in the Vacation he retired:
And out they ride. Mena commends the air,
And Sabine fields, with fruits all gay and fair.
Which Philip hears and smiles; but mirth and ease,
What may himself, or new retainer please,
Being his care, he gives him fifty pounds,
And lends him fifty more to buy such grounds;
Which done (for I Will make all the haste I can)
My City Crier, is turned Countryman:
Prunes his grown Vines, can stoutly hold the Plough,
Clime a tall Elm, and trim its highest bough;
Dies at his labor, and with care grows old,
And equals nothing to fat land, but Gold*
But when his Goats by Thieves, Sheep fell by the rot,
The field his hopes and charge answered not,
His Cattle died, his Ox at plow was slain,
Himself no longer able to restrain,
At midnight up he gets, and in a rage
Rode post to Philips house, his furthest stage;
Whom as the Lawyer saw all rough with hair,
And never shaved since they together were;
Vulteius, said he, you too thoughtful look,
As if more care than what is fit, you took.
Undone good P^tron, said he, I Am undone,
And by the name of Wretch must hence be known.
By your self therefore, and the God you adore,
Your own good Genius, I your help implore,
That but this once you would ease me of my pain,
And turn me to my former life again.
He whose past sta^e the present does excel,
Let him take quickly up if he would do well.
Return in time; For reason this requires
That a man's own foot measure his desires.
EPISTLE VIII. By A. B. To CELSUS.
That preferment should not transport him.

GO when I bid thee Muse, and wish my friend
Celsus, who now on Claudius does attend
As Secretary and companion too;
Much health bid him, Live merrily, and do
His business prudently, and if he doubt
What kind of business I am now about;
Tell him I promise ex'lent things, but I
At present live not well, nor pleasantly.
Not 'cause the Hail-storm broke our Vines, nor yet
Because our Olives by the immoderate hear
Are shrivel'd up, nor cause my Flocks that lie
In Fields remote are sick, but because I
Am sick in mind more then in body; for
I cannot endure to hear what men say, nor
To learn a Physical receipt that may
My great distemper cure or but allay.
My learned and true Physician me offends,
And I do peevishly rail at my friends,
Because they offer to deliver me
Out of my much bewitching Lethargy;
Those things which hurt me most I most pu^sue,
And what is good for me I still eschew.
At Rome I Tyber love, and when I Am come
To Tyber, I am mad to be at Rome.
After all this ask how he does, and know
How he proceeds, and how all matters go.
Ask him how he does Claudius please, and how
He and the Regiment do Cotton now:
If he says, Well; tell him, I Am glad to hear
That happy News: then whisper in his ear
This truth; In this promotion, Celsus, we
As thou demean'st thy self, will value thee.
EPISTLE IX. By A. B. To CLAUDIUS NERO.
On behalf of a Friend.

GReat Sir, Septimius understands how vast
That Princely love is which on me you cast,
And by entreaties has prevailed with me,
That I should praise him and present him to ye
As a man worthy every where to be
Received into your breast and Family.
Who only worthy men and things elect,
He thinks I Am honored with that great respect
To be your bosom friend, he knows my power
Better then I my self, for till this hour
I never tried it on you, and I used
What arguments I could to be excused*
But fearing least I might too far disown
Those Princely favors you on me have thrown,
And so be thought such a dissembling Elf,
That Is only beneficial to my self,
Therefore that I may not be thought to be
Ungrateful (that is the worst of infamy)
I Have put on suburb-brows, and if you can
Once pardon a necessiated man,
Who waves his modesty to serve his friend,
Accept this person which I recommend
Into your Household, and take this from me,
A stouter* better man you never did see.
EPISTLE X. By Sir R. F. To FUSCUS ARISTIUS.
He praises to Fuscus Aristius (a lover of the City) the Country life, with
which himself was delighted, and recounts the several Commodities thereof.
Withal deters him from ambition, which accompanies the City life, not that of
the Country.

TO Fuscus, the Towns Lover, health I wish,
That love the Country: diffring much in this,
In all else twins. Both like, dislike, what either:
A pair of old Doves bred of Eggs together.
Thou keep'st the Nest: I love to fly abroad,
To haunt sweet Brooks, the mossie Grott, and Wood.
What would thou have? I live and reign, when I
Have shunned those things thou praisest to the sky.
And like a Comfit-makers Prentice fled,
Clo^'d with Pres^rves, am better pleased with bread.
If one would live with all conveniency's,
And first in building the foundation is,
Where does frank Nature thrust out such a breast
As in the Country, with all good things blessed?
Where is it that the Winter's warmer? where
To cool the Dog-stars byte, is fresher air,
And the fierce Lyon's rage, when all his heat
Th'exalted Sun pours in, to make it great?
Where does less envious care our sleeps dispell?
Do Floores of Parian Marble look or smell
Like Flowers? The water when it heaves to burst
The leaden Pipes with which in streets it is forced,
Runs it so pure, as when melodiously
It quavers in the Rivers Falls? Even He
Affects to have Trees, who in the City builds,
And that his house should but survey the fields.
Drive Nature with a Pitch-fork ou^, she will back
Victorious (spite of State) by'a secret Track.
He that wants skill right Scarlet to descry
From counterfeit, will not more certainly
Be cosend in a Shop, then he shall be
That knows not true from false Felicity.
Him, whom a prosperous State did too much please;
Changed, it will shake. What thou admir'dst with ease
Thou can not quit. Fly great things: In a Cell,
Kings, and the Friends of Kings, thy Life may excel.
The Stagg superior both in Arms and Force,
Out of the Common-Pasture drove the Horse:
Until the vanquished after a long fight
Prayed Man's assistance, and received the Bit:
But, having beat the Victor, could not now
Bit from his Mouth, nor Man from his Back throw*
So He that fearing Poverty, has sold
Away his Liberty; better then Gold,
Shall carry a proud Lord upon his back,
And serve for ever, 'cause he could not lack.
Who fits not his Mind to it, his Estate
If little, pinches him: throws him, if great.
Wisely (ARISTIUS) thou will like thy lot,
And wilt chide Me, if mine content Me not:
If more I cark for, or if more I crave.
Who ere has Money, either it is his Slave,
Or it is his Master, as when two men tug
At a Ropes ends: W' are dragged unless we drag.
Given in Vacation, at that The Romans adored Vacation as a Goddess, by the
Name of Vacuna.
Goddess Cell:
Save that I have not Thee, perfectly well.
EPISTLE XI. By S. W. To BULLATIUS.
That Felicity consists not in any Place or Condition, but in tranquillity of
the Mind.

NOw you have Lesbos, and fair Samos seen,
At Sardis, Colopbon, and Smyrna been,
What think Thou, good Bullatius, is all true
That Fame reports? (for she knows less then you.)
Do they exceed the Common voice, or are
Their fields, with ours, unworthy to compare?
Is not our Tyber better then their Seas?
Or which of the Asiatique Cities please?
Does Lebedus, because you rested there,
And found that ease, you else sought every where?
It Is a poor place indeed to Gabil,
Yet there I Would choose to live retired and die;
( Forgetting all, of all my friends forgot;
Whom though they pity, yet they envy not.
Where from the shore I might behold the Main,
And rate my pleasures, by another pain.
Yet neither he, that does from Capua come,
Wet to the skin, and on his way to Rome,
Would take an Inn for home, or think a fire
Or Stove, though numbed with cold, his chief desire;
And seek no further, but his kind stars bless,
As one arrived to perfect happiness:
Nor for a storm should you for swear the Sea,
And sell your Barque, that you revenged might be.
To one that is safe Mit' lene and Rhodes are fair,
But as Furs in Summer, Silks in Winter are:
As Tyber is to swim in when it snows,
And as a fire in the midst of August shows.
While Fortune smiles, let Rhodes be pray^'d at Rome,
Chios and Samos fairest are at home.
Use the sweet Intervals the Gods allow,
Nor tell next year put off what may be Now.
That every place alike may seem to thee,
And thou alike content in any be.
If prudent Reason sets no bound to Care,
Nor can those Lands that bounds to the Ocean are;
And he that reaches them too late, shall find
The place is only changed, and not his Mind.
And yet we ride, and fail, and journies make,
Or happiness to find, or to overtake;
That which thou seek'st is ready at thy hand,
And Ulubrae may be the happy land;
For (friend) an even Soul can make it there,
And what we no where find, have every where.
EPISTLE XII. By A. B. To ICCIUS.
That the use of Estates makes men rich.

WHy do thou murmur Iccius, and repine,
Because Agrippa's wealth is more then thine?
Thou art his Steward if thou rightly use
Those fruits which his Scicilian lands produce;
Jove himself cannot give thee a greater store,
Therefore leave off complaining that you are poor:
For he is not poor, whom fortune does produce,
What e're is necessary for his use.
If thou can get good Diet, and warm Clothes,
Caesar's Estate cannot give thee more than those.
If at a Table stored with various meat,
Thou can abstemiously a Sallad eat,
Thou by that virtue wilt as wealthy be,
As if kind fortune had showered Gold on thee;
For thy firm soul will above money soar,
And thou will think all things inferior
To amiable Virtue, which alone,
To good men, is guide and companion.
Men wondered at Democritus when he
Sat in his Study, and his Hoggs did see,
Root up his Corn field, and his Garden spoil,
And he sat studying unconcerned the while;
His thoughts were set on higher things, and thou Will be as great an admirat^on now,
Who in this scabbed avaritious time,
Mind'st nothing mean, but aim'st at things sublime.
What bounds the Sea, what makes it ebb and flow,
What makes the year round so exactly go;
Whether the Planets move by their own power,
Or do obey some cause Superior;
From whence the Eclipses of the Moon proceed;
And how she is from her obscuration fre'd.
What means the jarring sympathy of things;
And whether good or evil from it springs;
Whether Empedocles deserve our faith,
Or that be righter which the Stoic says.
But whether thou delightest to feed on F^sh*
Or only Leeks and Onions be thy dish;
Receive my good friend Grosphus courteously*
And grant him freely what he asks of thee;
For he has so much modesty and wit,
That he will ask nothing but what is just and fit;
Friendship does come to a low market when
Any thing's lacked by good and worthy men.
But 'cause perhaps you have a mind to know*
How all affairs here in our City go;
Agrippa's valor has Cantabria won,
The Armenians too by Nero are overthrown.
Phraates does great Caesar's laws obey,
And on his knees submit to the Roman sway:
Besides this seasonable harvest yields
A plenteous crop in our Italian fields.
EPISTLE XIII. By A. B. To VINIUS ASELLA.
Instructions for presenting his Poems to Augustus.

AS I have oftentimes, and long since too,
Instructed thee; when thou to Court do go,
(Dear Vinius) I Would have my Poems be
Presented to Augustus sealed by thee,
When he is well, and of a cheerful mind,
And when to road them he is well inclined.
Do not by much ^fficiousness offend,
Or hurt me, whom thou studi'st to befriend:
Nor yet make men my Poems to conte^n,
Because thou importunely proferst them.
But if the Volume of my book should be
So cumbersome, that it should weary thee,
I Would rather thou should throw them quite away*
Than on thy soulders them like Dorsers lay:
And so make thy paternal name, because
It Is Asina, to signify an Ass:
And make thy self a Tabletalk, and be
Ridiculous to all Posterity.
Set all thy strength to '^^pass through thick and th^n*
And when thou have had thy will, and entered in
To Caesar's presence, use the matters so,
That prying Courtiers may not come to know*
That thou a load of Poetry do bear
Under thy arm, as if a Rustic were
Carrying a Lamb, or drunken Pyrrbia
Carried the stolen Quills of Yarn away:
Or as a Tenant when he gets a Rowse,
Carries his Cap and Shoes from's Landlord's house.
Nor tell the Vulgar that thou sweat'st to bear
Lines which will please both Caesar's eye and ear.
And though thou art courted never so much, press on,
Show no body a line. -- Well get thee gone,
Farewell, be careful that thou err'st not, and
If thou e're love me, break not my command.
EPISTLE XIV. By R. T. To his BAILIFF.
The difference betwixt a Country life, and a City life.

THou Bailiff of my Woods and pleasant Field,
Which served five dwellers once, and used to yield
Five Burgesses for Baria, by thee now
Conte^^^, let us try who weeds best, I or you;
Whither my mind or ground be better tilled,
Which is the better, Horrace or his field.
Though L^mias pity mourning the hasty fate
Of's Brother ravished from him do create
Occasion for my longer stay at Rome
Then ordinary, yet my heart's at home.
That strives to break all stops, for I prefer
The Country, thou the Town as happier.
Who likes another fortune, hates his own,
He is a fool that does accuse the Town
Or Country either, and does falsely find
Fault with the place, when all the fault's in's mind,
Which never fly's its self; when you were slave
To the Baths, and lived in Town, you used to crave
With silent Prayer to be removed to go
To be a Country man; now being so
You cover Baths, Plays, and the Town; you see
I Am constant, and when business urges me
(Which I of all things hate) to Rome I part
From thence, sad and afflicted at my heart.
Our fancies don't agree: what you despise
He likes that is of my mind, and decryes
What you commend; to such a strange degree
Are odds at present brought 'twixt thee and me.
A jolly Whore, and Unctious Sack does move
(I see it well) thee to this earnest love
Of the City, and because my ground yields quicker
Pepper and Frankincence, then Grapes for liquor:
Besides another grievance is, you lack
A Neighouring Tavern to afford you Sack.
And a she Minstrel that you to her sound
May dance over the pressed Earth some blundring round;
And yet thou till'st the ground, which lately Spades
Never touched, and feed'st with care the unharness'd Iades.
By thee the River too in time of need
By Damns is taught to spare the Sunny Mead:
Now, go to, and what thus divide* us hear;
Me who soft Robes and Powdered hair did wear,
And used with sparkling Cinera to sport
Freely, and Drink till midnight; now a short
Supper contents, and sleep upon the Grass
On a Bank-side, by which some stream does pass;
Nor do I yet believe it is a shame
Once to be wild, but never to be tame.
No body there does look askew with spite,
Or with black hatred poison or back-bite
Me when I thrive, none envy's there my gains,
My Neighbors joy with me when I take pains;
The City fare with Servants you do long
To eat, and crowd your self into the throng.
The subtle slave that wait's, and's called all hours,
Envy's thy use of Cattle, Wood and Flowers:
The Ox would be for the Saddle, the Horse for Plow,
Let all (say I) use well the Art they know.
EPISTLE XV. By R. N. Gent. To VALA.
The pleasure of Traveling.

Prithee, good Vala, write, what kind of Air,
What sort of Men, and what their Manners are
At Velia and Salernus; For I see
The Bajan Waters are not good for me;
And so Antonius tells me. And it is this
That makes the Bajans take it much amiss,
That in the Winter I cold Waters use:
Truly their My^^le Groves thus to refuse,
Thus slight their Baths, so talked of all about,
For being rare in curing of the Gowt,
Must make them grumble. But these men, that will
Cure a weak Stomach, or a Head that is ill,
With colder Springs, to Gabii must repair
Where colder Waters are, and colder Air.
But I Am advised to change, and when my Horse
Goes toward Baja, I divert his Course,
And tell him 't^s not thither I must go;
And then enraged I curb him in, and so
Make him to understand me; For, in truth,
A Horses Ears are in his bridled Mouth.
I prithee write which of the two excells
In Bread; and whether I out of the Wells,
Or out of Cisterns must the Waters take.
I come not for their Wines, but Waters sake,
In the Country any Diet does me please;
I love good Wine, when I go near the Seas.
Wine, that will drive away all Cares, and will
With swelling Hopes through Veins and Soul distill.
Wine that will make my Tongue with words to flow,
And make me Brisk when to a Girl I go.
Write me which place most Hares and Bores does feed,
Whose Rivers greatest store of Fishes breed;
That thence I may both Fat and Fair come home;
For thee to write, and me believe's all one.
When Maevius had his Patrimony spent
Profusely, then to live by's Wits he meant,
And turned a Iester, roving to and fro,
And made no difference 'twixt Friend or Foe,
But Jeered at all. One that would swallow more
Down his wide Throat, then would a Common-Shore,
What e're he got went down his Guts, and when
He mist of better Fare abroad, he then
Would feed on Guts and Garbage, and eat up
Of that more then three Ravenous Bears would sup.
When pincht with want hee'ld say each Gluttons Gut
Was to be seared; But when he would got a glut
Of better fare, and all consumed, hee'ld say
No wonder if Estates are spent this way,
For there is no pleasure underneath the Sun
Like Feasting, and a Belly like a Tun.
So I in want commend the thrifty Fare,
And eat such Victuals as the coursest are.
But when I light on better food, I then
Say those are wise, and those the happy men
That live in plenty where they can behold
Houses and Lordships purchased with their Gold.
EPISTLE XVI. By W. T. To QUINTIUS.
A Description of a Good Man.

ASk me no more my Quintius, whether I
Can in my Farm, grow rich by Husbandry,
By the retayl of Apples, Oil, or Wine:
View but the Model of what I call mine.
An entire Mountain, severed by a low
Vale, yet it is not altogether so
Obscure, but that the Morning Sun looks on,
The Evening airs it, e're he will be gone.
You cannot but praise the Climate: Come what though
My Quicksets are not Blackberry, or Sloe,
The Kernel does as well, if I can please,
And fat my stock with Acorns, take mine ease
Under a shady Oak, you must confess
To this, Tarentum is a Wilderness.
Watered besides with such a Spring, it may
Adopt a River, Hebrus it self, nay
Thrace cannot equal it, approved for all
Head maladies: it is a Purge natural.
In Autumn it is this sweet retirement pleases,
This keeps me proof (believed) against Diseases.
Rome says, yes boasts, you only happy are:
All is not true men say: Indeed I fear
They know more than your self does: He that wooed
Be so, must be not only wise, but good.
If at your Dinner you should have a sit
Of a chill Ague shake you, would you ^it
(Because your Guests say you look well) and eat
Until you can no longer hold your meat?
He is a modest Fool that will not disclose
He has a clap before it reach his Nose.
If one should tell you of a Victory
You lately had on Land, others by Sea,
Buzzing into your ears, that it is known
To Jove, you sought Rome safety, not you own:
You know this is the great Augustus's Due.
If when they call you Virtuosi, do
You make answer to the name, or can
You say I am that Learned Gentleman?
I do believe there is hardly one of us
But may be sometimes styled ingenuous;
Yet he that said so, can you know unsay
To M^rrow all that ere he said to day:
As a bribed Justice must if Caesar please,
Give up his Pa^ent, take his Writ of Ease.
If the Unconstant Crowd shall say, Let go,
You are'nt the men we praised: It must be so.
What if I Am followed with a Hue and cry,
Stop Theif, he has committed Burglary;
Or if my Pious Neighbors, should present
Me, a Loose Live^ or Incontinent,
Nay what if at Sessions I am tried
By a Nice Jury for a Parricide;
If I am sure, and know my Conscience clear,
Shall I then Blush, or else look Pale for fear?
False Honor pleases, but false Infamy
Affrights: Whom? Those that love to hear a Ly.
I wonder who it is you call Good; Your fine
And learned Barrister that can untwine
Statutes, Quote Reports, Books of Entries, pare
The Law, and split out Justice to a hair;
He that can knowingly give Evidence,
And smooth both Parties to a Reference!
Yet there is scarce one House in the whole Town,
But whispers this man Knave, for all his Gown.
If my man tell me thus; Sir, I never lay
One night from home, or wronged you: must I say
Be gone? I Will never trouble thee; If he
Says he never committed Felony:
Must I not prosecute, but say, Be free,
It Is pity thou should e're be hanged by me?
I am a Godly, Pious, Sober man:
Yes, yes; But do you think Sabellus can
Believe all this? The Wolf the trap eschewes,
The Hawk and Kite fly the suspected nooze.
Good Men will hate all Wickedness, because
They Virtue love more than they fear the Laws.
You if you think you can cheat handsomely,
All Is one, whether Clergy or Layety.
Although it is a small loss, if you nimne
But one Bean from a Quarter, it is a sin.
He Is only counted honest now adays
That the whole Parish looks upon, he prays
And cries Amen so loud at Church, although
Sometimes if you hearken close, he is as low
Whispering; Prithee sweet Devil give me leave
To cheat Devoutly, but let none perceive.
Give me a Cloak for all my Knavery;
What Is this man more than a Servant? or why
Do You call a Miser, Freeman? I have seen
A Boy make both stoop for a Groat of Tin.
He that still covets, still fears: I don't see
What ground you have to say this man is free,
H'as fled his Colors, forsook the Field, which
Flies to turmoil in buis'ness and be rich.
If you can sell your Prisoner, never kill,
But let him serve you; let the Hardy till
The Earth, turn Saylor, weather't out at Sea,
Import Biscuit; 'twill help the Granarie.
He that is truly wise will dare thus to
A Judge; Come Sir, let us hear the worst you will do:
Why I Will seize upon your Goods, take away
Your Money, Plate, nay all you're Worth: You may:
You shall be kept close Prisoner: No, I Will have
Death bail me, I can never be a Slave:
That touches him, ('twould any man) Do, Die
First, Death is the last Seen of Misery.
EPISTLE VXII. By R. N. To SCAEVA.
The way to get Great Men's Favor.

SCaeva, though thou art wise enough to tell
How to make use of thy Super'ours well;
Yet learn of thy unskilful Friend; and though
He that is blind may undertake to show
The way; yet mark, perhaps I may make known
Something thou will desire to make thine own.
If thou will hugg thy self with welcome Ease,
If Sleep till next days Sun arise does please,
If you are disturbed with the Hurry, and the Noise
Of Carts, and Coaches, and of Dam-me-Boyes,
I prithee to thy Country House repair;
For it is not Rich men only happy are;
Nor lives he ill, that lives and dies unknown:
But if thou wilt profit thine, and be more boon
Unto thy self, though poor, yet come unto
The Rich man's more delicious fare. It Is true
The Cynick said, that Aristippus would
Refuse the fare of Princes, if he could
Dine patiently on Sallads; He again
Said, that the Cynick would his Herbs disdain,
Did he but know what 'twas by Kings to be
Feasted. The Cynick's saying points at me.
But thou, my Friend, choose, and approve, and teach
Either of both their doings and their speech;
Or as thou art a young man yet, mark well
Why Aristippus bore away the Bell;
For he (as I by many often have heard)
That same morose Diogenes thus jeered,
I Jest for Kings, but to my profit; Thou
Only for the empty noise o'th People; Now
That Is the more Noble. I to ride the Kings
Great Horse desire, Thou aim'st at baser things.
But thou will say, Thou know no Poverty;
Yet poorer art, then he that gives to thee.
All sorts of life did Aristippus bless,
Aiming at great things, yet content with less;
But to thee none, whose only Robes and Fence
Were naught but Rags and helpless Patience.
If such a course of Life, so Traverstee
Can any man become, it is strange to me.
Though Aristippns never desire to be
Arrayed in Robes of Purple made, yet he
Could wear them; yea he could in comely sort
In Clothes, or good, or bad himself deport.
To thee a Scarlet Cloak did more abhor,
And rather fly it then a Snake, or Curr.
Give him his Clothes, else he with cold will dye,
And thine, the^ let the Fool his Fortune try.
TO atchieve great things, and Conquer, looks like Jove,
It shows a reach at things that are above.
It Is no disgrace for Subjects to comply
With generous Kings: all have not wealth laid by.
Fear of Success makes Cowards, be it so;
But he is the Man, that thorough stitch does go;
He is the Man, or none. One fears to ask
A Princes favor, it is too great a task
For his too narrow Soul. Another He
Begs boldly, and obtains. If Virtue be
Still Virtue, doubt not, but that man is wise
Who asks so, that he gains both Praise and Prize.
Poor men, if modest, will with some obtain,
While others sawcily shall ask in vain;
Here Is then the difference, whether your favors be
Humbly received, or snatched immodestlie.
The sum of all we aim at then here ends,
Be meek and modest with thy Richer Friends.
I have a Sister wants a Portion, and
A Mother poor, a Farm lies on my hand
That cannot maintain me; He that thus does say,
Does in effect beg Alms: Another may
Cant out his wants aloud, and keep a stir
And cry, Give me one piece of Bread good Sir:
A Crow, whilst feeding, if he would not Garr,
Would have less trouble and more Meat by far.
One that is expert in the Highway Strains,
That of the bitter cold, and storms complains,
That cries his Pocket's picked, and his small store
Of Money stolen, Iuggles but like a Whore,
Who weeps for her lost Chain, or cries ah me!
My Garter's ravished from beneath my knee:
Such common Cheats as these take all belief
From real Losses, and from real Grief.
He that is once thus choused, will sure beware
Of helping such as feigned Cripples are.
And though a Canting Cripple with tears
To be helped up, and by Osires swears,
And says, I Am lame, I do not mock, and then
Cries out; O help, help me hard hearted men!
The Neighbors rayl at him, and cry be gone,
Get help (you Rascal) where you are not known.
EPISTLE XVIII. By A. B. To LOLLIUS.
How to be a good Companion.

MY blunt friend Lollius, if I know thee right,
Thou do abhor to play the Parasite,
Where thou professest friendship; for so far
Differs a friend from a base flaterer,
As a grave Matron from a Strumpet, who
Differ in mind, in look, and gesture too.
But there is another vice as great as this,
That is a rough-hew'd clownish surliness,
When men unmannerly, unpleasant, rude,
Themselves on others saucily obtrude;
And indiscreetly blurt out words which be
Unfit, and called Virtue and Liberty.
Virtue's the mean betwixt two Vices, and
From Vices is fenced in on every hand.
Some being obsequious more then does befit,
Jeer such as at the lower end of the Table sit;
But when a great man nods, will tremble, and
What e're he says repeat at second hand;
As a poor Schoolboy says his Lesson over,
Which his harsh Master dictated before.
Or as the Mimick Eccho's back what e're
Verses or words by the Actor's spoken were.
Others dispute for trifles without end,
And for Straw-matters tooth and nail contend,
They Will rather lose their share in Heaven then they
Will Not be believed in whatsoever they say;
Or not speak freely what comes in their brain,
And that as impudently to maintain.
But what is the Question makes all this ado?
Which was the better Fencer of the two,
Caster or Docilis; whether Appium,
Or Numicus lead to Brundusium;
Who Is out of his Estate by gaming run,
Who by expensive Wenching is undone,
And what fantastic Fool goes at a rate,
In habit far above his mean estate.
On whom the in^atiate appetite of Gold
And Silver has got a perpetual hold;
Or else of some vainglorious fellow, which
Makes it his bu'siness to be 'counted rich.
The wealthy Patron, who is ten times more
Skilled in all Vices then he can that is poor,
Hates such concerning talk, and does abhor it,
And either hates the Blabb, or checks him for it.
Like a good Mother to her Daughters, he
Desires that meaner men should wiser be
Then he himself is, and more vir^uous too,
And tells you things that are perhaps too true.
Strive not with me (says he) I Have an Estate,
And that in me will folly tolerate;
You're a mean Fellow, and your Coat must be
Cut as your Cloth is: Don't compare with me.
Eutrapelus to whom he did intend
A mischief, he would costly habit send,
That so transported with that goodly hew,
He might take up strange hopes and counsels new,
Sleep all the day, mind nothing but his Whore,
Run into debt, and grow at last so poor,
He must turn Fencer, and for bread sell's blood,
Or drive Pack-Horses for a livelihood.
Other men's secrets never care to know;
But if a friend into thy bosom throw
A secret, and desire thee to conceal it,
Do not, though nere so drunk or mad, reveal it.
Thy own peculiar Studies never commend,
Nor what thy friend does fancy reprehend;
And if to hunt thy Patron minded be,
Don't thou lie puzling with thy Poetry.
'Twixt Zethus and Amphion, both twins, hence
There did arise a peevish difference;
Zethus, a Country Gentleman, inclined
To Hownds and Hawks; Amphion, gave his mind
Wholly to's Harp, but laid it quite aside
Until his brothers heat was pacified.
In small things it is good prudence to resign
Thy will to his whose power is more then thine.
And when he brings into the Champain ground
His hunting properties, Horns, Horses, Hound,
Lay by the unsociable Muses then
As recreations for old lazy men.
Go hunt with him, then sup and take thy share
Of what your sports produced, be it Bore, or H^re:
Among the Romans it is a Recreation,
Which is much used and in great Reputation.
Besides 'twill make thee healthy, and live long,
Especially since thou art sound and strong,
To keep in with the Dogs, and with the Bore,
By thy own strength to graple and over power:
Besides it is known that there is not any man
For feats of Arms like thee, or dares, or can.
When thou did fence or wrestle, oh! how loud
Rang thy Applauses from the admiring Crowd!
When but a boy the Soldiers duty thou
In the Cantabrian battle did pass through,
Under that General, whose conquering Sword
The Parthians has to Italy restored;
And in their Temples has set up again
Those Ensigns which had been from Crassus taken.
Do not withdraw thy self without a just
Excuse, nor lie still that thy parts may rust.
Although in all thy actions thou take care
They should be done exactly by the square;
Sometimes in the Country, thou descendst to toys,
Acting a Sea Fight with the little boys:
Two formal N^vies thou do then equip,
And armed Boys in both of them do Ship;
On one side for Mark Anthony, thy Brother
Was Admiral; for Caesar thou on the other.
Your Fathers little Lake was made by thee
For this great Fight the Adriatic Sea,
Where you the Action battle acted over,
And never gave off till one was Conqueror.
And if thy wealthy Patron does once find
Thee love those things to which he gives his mind,
Tickled with that he will extol to the skies
This very Play, and think thy folly wise,
I would advise thee further more (if thou
Did stand in need of an adviser now.)
When thou do talk of any man, take care
Of whom, to whom, and what thy speeches are*
Shun him that is inquisitive, for he
Will be as guilty of Garrulitie.
And his still gaping ears itch to reveal
What e're his friend intrusts him to conceal.
And it is impossible e're to recall
One syllable which we have once let fall.
And if thy Patron has a mind to toy
With a fair Lady, or a pretty Boy,
To his great House you must such reverence bear,
As not to fall in love with either there:
Least he that keeps them should prove so unkind
As to deny, and thou disturb thy mind;
Or (which is worst) should grant thee thy request,
And thou popt off with these, content must rest.
At first sight never commend a man, least thou
Hereafter blush for him thou praisest now;
For we are soon deceived, and to a Friend
We often unworthy men and things commend;
And therefore if one, whom thou did suppose.
Was a good person, should prove vicious,
And thou be so deceived praise him no more,
Say you are mistaken, and so give him over.
But if a friend that to thee's thoroughly known
Behind his back's traduced by any one,
Stick to him bravely; for our names depend
In absence on the courage of a friend;
Never let him carelessly endure a wrong
From any Cowardly reproachful tongue.
For is it not plain, that who maliciously
Back-bites thy friend, will do the same by thee?
When thy next neighbors house is all on fire,
It Is thy concern to make his flames expire;
For fire will gather strength if let alon^,
And with thy neighbors house burn down thine own.
By unexperienced men it is thought to be,
To wait on Great men great felicity;
But such as know what it is, care not to come
Among Great men, but count them troublesome.
For thy part now into the World the art got,
Make it thy business to go on, and not
Permit thy Vessel to ^ail back again,
What e're contrary Winds disturb the Main,
A merry man abhors a man that is sad,
And sad men hate all merry men as bad,
A dull man hates an active man, and so
A sprightly person scor^s a man that is slow.
The ^udling fellows, who past midnight drink,
Hate such as from their pro^er'd glasses shrink:
Though those that do refuse them truly swear
Wine vapors in the night pernicious are.
Look cheerfully in company; for he
That Is shamefac't 's generally thought to be
A fellow of mean birth and spirit, and all
Those that sit silent men do dogged call.
But above all converse with wise men still,
And read good Books, and learn from those the skill
How thou may easily pass through this World,
And not be vexed and up and down be hurld
By an insatiate desire, vain fear,
Or hopes of things that of small moment are.
Consider whether Virtue be produced
By learning, or by nature be infused;
What lessens cares; what makes a man to be
A friend to himself; whence pure tranquil^^ie
Proceeds, from Honor, or beloved wealth,
Or from a Life led (as it were) by stealth.
When I do to my Country Farm retreat,
By those cool streams which me refresh in hear,
What do thou think I think upon? or what
Beleiv'st thou, if I could, I would be at?
I only pray that small Estate, which I
Now have, may tarry with me till I die.
And those few days which I have yet to live,
(If Heaven to me any more days will give)
I may enjoy my self; of Books have store, and
Have necessaries for a year beforehand;
That I may never float 'twixt Hope and Doubt,
What an uncertain Hour may bring about.
But it is enough to pray those heavenly Powers
Who give and take at Will what we call Ours.
If I but live, and have my Pockets lined,
Let me alone to get a quiet Mind.
EPISTLE XIX. By A. B. To MECAENAS.
A Discourse of Poetry.

LEarned Mecaenas, if you will credit give
To old Cratinus, not a Verse can live,
Nor long be pleasant to us, which is writ
By such as from mere water suck their wit.
Since Liber has been pleased to rank all such
As have of Rapture a transcendent touch,
Among Fawns and Satyrs, the delightsome Nine
Did almost every morning smell of Wine.
And Homers praising Wine, made Poets think
The good old Man did much delight in drink.
Hence Father Ennius would not write a Line,
Till he had first got a good dose of Wine.
The Politics and great Affairs at Bar
We leave to those that grave and sober are,
But we'll withhold from such sour souls as theirs,
The high Prerogative of writing Verse:
As soon as this was publicly declared,
All Poets up the brimful Goblet reared;
And for the Laurel all night long they drunk,
And the next day of Wine all Poets stunk.
But was this Poetry? Shall every one
That with a surly look, and shabbed Gown
Walks without shoos and stockins through the Town,
As representing learned Cato, straight
His virtues and good manners imitate?
When Hyarbita aimed to gain the glory
Of rare Timagenes for Oratory,
Striving to speak with Eloquence and Wit,
He strained his Voice, so that his Lungs were split.
A pattern does delude a man when it is
Only pursued in that which is amiss.
Should I by chance look pale; Poets would fall
To drinking Cummin-seeds to look so all.
Oh servile herd of Imitators, who
Make me both angry with, and laugh at you,
And the base Drudgery which you're forced to do!
'Twas I first set my daring foot, where none
Had ever trod a step, but I alone.
Who on's own natural fancy does rely,
Leads as a Captain does his Company.
'T was I that first the Romans did inspire
With skill to write Iambicks for their lyre.
The numbers and the spirit I pursued
Of old Archilochus, but I eschew'd
His railing matter and invective way,
Which made poor old Lycambe to destroy
His daughter and himself; yet I hope you
Think not the Laurel is to me less due,
Because I have been fearful to invert
The very mode of Verses, and the Art.
The Masc'line Sappho did that Muse allay,
Which was harsh in Archilochus his way.
So did Alcaeus too, but different far
In matter and in method their lines are.
They sought no fathe'r in law to rhyme to death,
Nor made enraged wives resign their breath.
I being musical, him first did take,
And fit to the Roman lyre his numbers make.
Which never any durst attempt tell then,
And it is my glory that ingenious men
Such things as mine may come at and peruse,
As never were touched by any other Muse.
Now if you would the Reason know why some
Ungrateful Readers will cry up at home,
And hugg my Verses, but to all abroad
Basely contemn those lines they so applaud;
I Am none of those who sneakingly will court
The windy suffrage of the Vulgar sort
With my cast clothes, nor with a costly Treat.
I, that have heard the noblest wits repeat,
And judged their Verses too, scorn to comply
With formal paedagogues to teach their Fry
My Verses, nor am I fondly delighted,
When they in public Pulpits are recited.
Hence springs my misery! And now if I
Should say (which I can say ingeniously)
I am ashamed Comaedians should rehearse
My worthless lines in crowded Theaters,
And by their tone and action make those seem
Ingenious, which have no wit in them;
Some envious fellow will say, Horace, this
Only a copy of thy countenance is,
Thou do preserve thy Poems only for
The Princely ears of our great Emperor;
Presuming that none other but thy Muse
(Vainglorious Fop) good Poems can produce.
I dare not laugh at this, least I should be
More wounded by my struggling enemy.
I Am fain to cry out, I don't like the place,
And as my right demand a breathing space.
Fooling in jest often fearful strife begets,
And strife for victory produces pets;
From sudden pets do deadly fewds proceed,
And deadly fewds destructive wars do breed.
EPISTLE XX. By A. B. To his BOOK.
A Character of himself.

WEll Book, thou on the Stationers stall wilt lie,
Bound neatly to allure the gazers eye;
Thou hate'st to be sealed up, or else confined,
Which are things grateful to a modest mind.
It Is grievous to thee to be shown to few,
All thy ambition is for public view.
Thy father has not bred nor taught thee so;
But get thee gone, since thou'st a mind to go.
When once you are gone, thou wilt never return again;
When you are abused by the half-witted men,
Thou Wilt say; alas! wherein am I too blame?
What have I done, or said, that mis-became?
Thou will repent, what thou have rashly done,
And what attempt thy pride threw thee upon.
When thou shall find the Reader who admired
Thee so at first, become both cloyed and tired,
And roll thee up, and lay thee quite aside.
But if I Am not with anger Stupifi'd,
At this offense of thine, I can foretell
Thou will at Rome be entertained full well,
While thou art new, but when you are sulled grown
By vulgar Thumbs, thou will be let alone
For the dull moths, or sent to foreign parts,
To cover Letters, or put under Tarts.
Then I who unbeleiv'd, admonished thee
Of all these things, shall laugh as heartily
At thy misfortunes, as he who did pass
Over a steep cliff with an unruly Ass,
Who playing resty tricks so stirred the Gall
Of's Master, that he let him loose to fall;
Nay thrust him down the Rocks, for who (...)
(Q^oth he) what is minded to be gone away (...)
This will befall thee too, thou will at last
Among old doting Schoolmasters be cast,
Who in small Villages and far remote
When the warm Sun has a full audience brought,
Will read thee to their boys, then thou may say,
I Am son of one who was a slave made free,
Born to a mean Estate, but have increast
It so, my wings are greater then my nest.
What from my Ancestors thou take away
Of same, thou to my Industry must pay.
I was companion to the best of the Town,
Whether they were for Arms, or for the Gown.
Of a small stature, gray before my time,
And much delighted with a warmer clime.
Soon angry, and soon pleased; if any do,
How old I am, of thee desire to know;
Tell them I Am 44 years old this year,
When Lepidus and Lollius Confuls are.
EPISTLES. Book II.
EPISTLE I. By Sir W. P. To AUGUSTUS.
A Discourse of Poetry.

WHen you alone so many and so great
Affairs dispatch, of War and Peace do treat,
Still thinking how to save the State from harms
By wholesome Laws, good Manners, and just Arms;
I should the Public wrong, and cross that end
With tedious talk your precious time to spend.
Romu^us that ^ounded Rome, and Bacchus; who
Invented Wine, whereby Men great things do,
Though they were after death received among
The Gods, yet living did complain of wrong;
For though the ground from weeds and briars they freed,
Ta^ght and made men on delicates to feed,
Composed that common War and Scramble, which
Made men like Beasts; To each man's own, did pitch
Just bounds, did plant the Earth with Flowers and Fruits*
Yea built men Cities: yet the World, like Bruits,
Never knew, or found their worth, till 'twas too late,
Till those brave souls had passed the Common fate.
Nor he, that crushed the Hydra, and subdued
Predigious Monsters, when for reward he sued,
Could ever it or ease obtain; for still
Envy would says exploits were mean or ill.
So he, who does with new or nobler Arts
Assist the world, shall never win their hearts;
But him alive they will laugh at and despise,
Whom when he is dead they will extol to the skies.
Yet Sir to you, (though living) men allow
Honors divine, by you they will swear, they will vow
Upon your Altars, and confess that never
So great a thing appeared nor shall do ever.
Now though the world be very just and wise
In this one point, that in their critic eyes
You do excel all Greek and Roman Kings,
Yet they don't justly judge of other things,
But loath or envy every thing but what
Is dead or gone, or which cannot be got.
So Lovers of Antiquity do praise
The Laws and Customs of forgotten days,
Applaud those Articles and that ancient deed
To which the Sabines and Gabii agreed;
Admire the Liturgies and Rituals
Found in Ruins of old Abbey walls.
Because the Writings of the Greeks we deem
So much the better as they older seem;
If we should judge the same of what is here
But lately writ, we might as well infer
That Olives have no stones, nor Nuts no shell;
For how one follows the other I cannot tell.
We Are now at Rome arrived to the height,
As well's the Greeks; We paint, and sing, and ^ight.
If age do better Verse, like Wine, how long
Must Verses lie before they are smart and strong?
A Poet died an hundred years ago,
Shall he be reckoned as new Must or no?
Or for old wholesome Wine? Well! let him pass.
Another wants a year, or less: Alas
Shall he lose therefore all? Let him pass too:
Another wants a little more; Let Us do
The like for him; The whole Horse-tail we may
Thus hair by hair at length pluck quite away.
He that consults the Annals, or counts Years,
To try if Verse be good, TO whom naught appears
Ex'llent, but what has passed the Grave, may see
How wise and mighty Ennius, (even he
Who Is called another Homer) did not care
How ill his Promises performed were.
Naevius is got by heart and dearly sold;
So sacred are his Works because they are old.
Which of these two is best, Men cannot tell;
For Learning old Pacuvi^^ bears the bell.
Accius high strains are praised, Afranius Pen
Makes us believe Menander wrote again.
Plautus resembles Epicharmus; weight
Commends Coecilius, Terence gentle flight.
Their Plays do throng the Stage, from Livies days
Down to our times, These Men have worn the Bays.
Sometime the Vulgus hit, sometime they miss,
For when they say, That nothing Modern is
Equal, to what is old, much less preferred,
I boldly say, The Vulgar then have erred.
But if they will yield, That Ancients Wits have used
Words obsolete or harsh, and have amused
Men with their careless Thoughts, my hand and heart
Shall join with them, and Jove shall take our part.
I Would not explode, or scorn poor Livy's Verse,
Nor yet what Schoolboys sometimes may rehearse.
But would n't have't admired, because by chance
Some single Phrase proves good, or that a glance
Of wit does twinkle through the cloudy sky
Of vaprous or tempestuous Poetry.
I take it ill, That Men find fault, because*
A thing was lately writ, not for its ^laws,
Or botches; Yea, methinks I could lament,
That Doters on stale stuff are not content
With pardon and connivance for some lines
Scap^ from the Ancients, but cry, bays and shrines!
If one but doubts, Whether the Stage should be
Strewn over with Flowers and Saffron, when we see
Atta's things played, Our Gray-beards in a fume
Cry Modesty is gone: If one presume
To hint, that Roscius ever failed a tittle,
They Are angry too, because they value little
But what they valued young, or else because
They scorn from younger men to take new laws.
Now he that says the old Saliar Verse was high,
Seeming to know, who knows no more then I,
Does not applaud the Authors of those Songs,
But by his envy, us and our Wits wrongs.
If the old Greeks like us, would not allow
Ought that was new, what shall be ancient now?
Upon whose Works might we now safely look
To read and con them as a classick Book?
When War was past in Greece, when Wealth and Ease
Disposed men there to study, what did please?
Sometimes to Fence, or Vault, or the H^rse to ride;
Sometimes to carving they their minds applied;
Or else to Painting, where they would nicely see
How Ordnance draught and Colors did agree.
Sometimes 'twas Dancing, Music, Scenes and Stage,
That proved the pleasures of that wanton Age:
So does a Child cry to his Nurse for toys,
That are contemned by the bigger boys.
For, which of all the things we hate, or love,
Don't change? Or which are fortunes power above?
Thus from a prosperous State and plenty springs
Variety that gives all Gust to things.
At Rome 'twas heretofore a credit, and
A Mode in ones Office or Shop to stand
Waiting for Customers and Clients, all
The morning, to let out money, to call
On young men to be thrifty, and to hear
Old men's advice, thus went about the year:
But now the worlds changed, one humor runs
Through every vein; the Lawyers write Lamprons,
Merchants Burlesque, the only Trade's for Bays,
Your Gowty Statesman too venurous at Plays:
Even I that have renownc'd all Poetry,
Sick of the self-same Itch of writing lie.
For before day, when one cannot see to scrawl,
Do I scarce waked for Pen and Paper call.
He that was never at Sea, wisely refuses
To sail a Ship; He likewise that never uses
To practice Physic, dares not to dispense
Strong Purges, nor what stupifies the Sense.
Smiths do make Locks, and only Tailors clothes;
But they write Verse, that never could write Prose.
Now lets consider, What good this humor works;
Why first of all, no covetous Canker lurks
Within a Poet; naught can his soul intrude,
But how to fancy finely, and to allude:
When good are lost, when servants run away,
When tax is paid, when stoods the banks destroy,
He cares n't, plots no trick to cheat his friend
Or to devour his Ward; for to what end
Should men do so, who can eat Bread and Cheese,
Wear footed Stockings, and be warm in freeze?
Poets in Peace considerable are,
Though they are useless in the times of war.
Now if you will grant that small things may improve
Greatest affairs, we must our Poets love.
For first they teach our children how to speak
Plain and distinct, from telling lies 'em break,
Chide 'em for calling Names, Cursing, and Oaths;
Make them say Prayers, and keep clean their Clothes.
Poets write Story, and by example teach,
They comforts to the sick and needy preach.
When Boys and Girls in Procession sing
Anthems and Hymns, that God would bless the King,
Send Rain, or Harvest-weather, save the fruit,
Stop Plagues, and grant 'em any other suit,
Is It not the Poet that makes those heavenly charms,
And does more by 'em, then by Martial Arms?
Old Husbandmen and Worthies, such as could
Be happy with a little, heretofore would
(After their Corn was housed, or Sheep were shorn,
With Wife and Barns, and others who had born
Part in those labors) make an Holy Day,
Kill a fat Pig, eat Cream, drink Wine and Play,
Give Sacrifice, and sing to the heavenly Powers
What Poets composed at their inspired Hours.
Fescennine freedom by this means did grow,
Such whose each distich, some course flouts did throw:
This freedom for a while past well enough,
Until at length it grew so tart and rough,
So dirty and downright, not sparing any,
Though never so worthy men: At length when many
Had been abused, the few that had escaped free
Took care thence forward, that no more should be
Making a paenal Law, by which good men
Grew safe from the poison of Satyrick Pen.
Thus Rhymers were reduced for fear of drubbing
When no Scab was, quite to refrain from rubbing.
Greece being taken by the Romans, took
Its Conquerors; from thence came Art and Book
Into rude Italy, thenceforth the Rhymes
That were in use in the Saturnine Times,
Were obsolete; and as we grew more rich
In Things and Thoughts, so was improved our Speech.
'Twas a great while before our minds we bent
To read Greek Authors, and learn what they meant;
Till being in Peace, then when the Punick War
Was well composed, the Romans waded far
In Soph'cles, Thespis, and Aeschilus too,
Trying what they could in Translating do.
They did succeed; their smart and lofty Wit
The Tragic vein with grace enough did hit.
Com'dy tuey thought (because its subject was
Trivial and mean) was easy; But alas!
They did not dream how little pardon's given
To the poor Comic: How hard was Plautus driven,
The amorous Young man's humor to make good,
And his Curmudgin Fathers understood:
And paint the plotting Pimp? Porsennas Pen
Described with pains the flattering Trencher-men.
How slightly are performed some other parts
By those that nothing else lay to their hearts,
But to get Money? Let their Box to th'brim
Be filled, they care not, if the Play sink or swim.
Him that Vainglory stirs to write a Play,
How does Spectators negligence dismay,
As when they gaze and gape, and give no heed?
But then, What joy does good attention breed?
So slight and small a matter quells or raises
Minds that too much affect the peoples praises.
Adieu all writing Plays, if so be that
I pine when hissed, or when I Am humm'd grow fat.
Bold and sound Poets sometimes are cast down,
Even when the scoundrel Rabble of the Town,
Sailers and Butchers being quickly full
And glutted with strong Sense, call for the Bull;
Or (in the middle of an Act) the Bears
Or Fencers set together by the Ears:
Though when the better sort, and men of skill
Grow weary too, the Play it is like was ill.
When men have sat a good while at the Play,
And in disgust shall flock apace away,
Then is brought forth a pinnion'd King, and shown
Wagons of captive Dames, Corinth overthrown
In Pastboard models: Democritus would sneere
At such poor tricks, if he again were here;
He Would laugh to see a spotted Dromedary,
Spectators eyes off from the Play to carry;
In marking them he would more pleasure find,
So pleasing it is t'observe the peoples mind.
Moreover he considering what a din
Noise and confusion all the Stage is in,
Might think the slighted Poet did rehearse
Unto deaf Asses his elab'rate Verse.
For when the Actors first appear well clad
In Persian Silk, the People all like mad
Hum and clap hands, not for their ex'lent saying,
But for their Clothes and Purple gay arraying.
Now lest you think, that I disparage what
I cannot understand, or relish not;
I grant, that such a Poet may climb a Steeple
Up by a small slack rope, who can the people
Anger, appease, make laugh, or weep, or fear;
Whisk 'em to Athens, or Thebes, or keep 'em here;
Who by mere Words, can thus command men's fancy*
Is Master in Poetic Necromancy.
Such men encourage, and withal those who
Can the same thing without Drammaticks do;
For these you must provide, if you desire
To blow strong flames out of Poetic fire;
Or if you would sharpen Wit, and make collection
Of pieces nearest to divine perfection.
We Po^ts wrong our selves, (and I offend
As often as others) when we Books commend
Into your hands, when you perhaps are tired,
Or in the Bogs of some disaster mired.
Then, when we vex that any though our friend,
Should but one Verse even gently reprehend;
Or when we reading our own Verse, repeat
As Cud to be rechew'd what is tastless meat:
When full of our own sense, we do complain
That no man thoroughly weighs our skill and pains*
And when we think, that you Great Sir as soon
As e're we write, are bound to give a Boon,
That you should bid us write the Second Part,
And say Reward shall equal our Desert;
How e're it is good to know, with whom to trust
Great deeds, and who can save 'm from the dust.
Choeri'lus so well did Alexander please
With Verses not quite worth so many Pease,
As that the fort'nate Bard, Medals and Coins
Of precious Gold got for his Leaden lines.
Some Poets foul more with their dirty Pen,
Then can be cleaned again by better Men.
That Prodi'gal Prince who bought those simple Rhimes
At such a rate, was wise at other times,
Forbidding all but great Apelles hand
To draw his Picture; Nay he did command
That none should mold the figure of his face
Except Lysippe, who did it with grace.
Had this vain Prince no more skill in discerning
The hands of Artists, then the men of Learning,
One might have called him Thick-skul, and have sworn,
That in some foggy air he had been born.
But you are not abused in any sort
By the Gifts and Character and fair Report
Bestowed on Virgil and on Varius, then
Whom are not better, either Wits or Men.
The shapes of famous men are not so clear
In graven Brass, as do their minds appear
In well-pen'd Words: for my part I had chose
(Rather then broken Rhimes, resembling Prose)
To write heroic Verse, and those on you,
That all the world might your achievements know;
I would describe the Castles you have won,
And winding Rivers that below 'em run.
I would those barbarous Kingdoms represent,
The peace which you have forced where e're you went:
Then Ianus Temple I Would expose to view,
And Rome by the Parthi'ans feared, whilst ruled by you,
But Sir, low Verse cannot your Highness grace,
Wherefore to attempt it I have not the face.
For me to be pragmatical might prove
Your trouble, not my duty and my love:
Besides, if I fell short to do your right,
My faults would be remembered out of spite:
For Readers so malicious now are grown,
What Is bad they will con, what is good they let alone.
I hate such kindness as offends, and his
That draws my Picture uglier then it is.
Though gayly dressed, I value not a rush
The gaudy praises that must make me blush,
And dread to have my Name bedawb'd on Paper
Fit but to light Tobacco-pipes and Tapers;
Or else to wrap up wares of little price
In Chandlers Shops, at best but Plums and Spice.
EPISTLE ult. By I. D. To JULIUS FLORUS.
Another Discourse of Poetry.

BRave Nero's Favorite, My Julius
(I answer your complaining letter thus)
Suppose one had to sell, and you would buy
A Boy at Tibur born, or Gabii,
The owner plainly tells you; Sir you s^e,
He Is smooth, and fair, of perfect Symmetrie
In all his parts; and without more discourse,
Give me but so much money, he is yours.
This I dare vouch, he is apt, and quick to spy
The smallest motions of your hand, or eye.
He has a little Greek, and being young
May yet improve, he is pretty good at song:
But earnest praising Merchants often declare
Their craft, more then goodness of their Ware.
I have no need to sell, my stock's but small,
Yet what small stock I have, my own I call.
I Will tell you therefore all the worst I know,
Which I believe, none of the trade would do.
The truth is, once he played the idle Boy,
And fearing to be beaten ran away;
Now Take, or Leave; May he not safely now
Receive his money, having told you so?
Why should you sue, or call him cheat, when as
He told you, what an Idle Rogue it was?
Yet so you deal in chiding me; you know,
I told you likewise e're you went, how slow
I am in writing Letters, that as soon
You might almost make any Cripple run;
But yet you still complain of me, and chide
Because I do not write; Nay, and beside
You say I promised Verses; But for that,
Pray hear a story that I shall relate;
One of Lucullus soldiers went abroad
To forage, and dearly having earned his load,
In very pleasant manner, down he lies,
And snores all night; But e're he thought to rise,
All his Provant was gone; With that as Keen
As a she Woolf, he falls to Rave, and Grin,
Mad with himself, no less then with his foes,
And Careless which should die for it, out he goes
Gnashing his teeth, and whosoever he met,
He looked as fierce, as though he would him eat.
In this high Rage, he stormed a Fort himself
That was well fortified, and stored with wealth,
And laid about him with such force, they say,
As made the Guards give place, and run away;
For which exploit his very name was feared,
And Thousands given him as a just Reward.
Soon after this, the Praetors mind being bent
To take a certain Castle, straight he sent
To this great famous Soldier, and began
TO exhort him by the name of gallantaman,
Used all the Arguments, apt to excite
With Words, enough to make a Coward ^ight.
The Clown wiser then so, cries; Pray Sir hold,
Such work becomes poor fellows, I have Gold.
(Now to apply this) I at Rome was Bred,
And for some time the Poets there I Read;
At Athens next, where I learnt to descry
The Truth from falsehood by Philosophy;
But the unhappy times hindered my stay
In that sweet place, and hurried me away
From Books to Arms, and then I was engaged
In The Wars which Brutus with Augustus waged.
But e're long Brutus being overcome,
I narrowly escaped from Philippi home,
Stripped, and as poor as possible, and then
Having no way to live, but by my Pen,
Straight I betook my self to versi^ie,
Instructed by Ingenious Poverty.
But now grown past all needs (to pore on sad
Dull Poetry, would not men think me mad?)
I Am of the Souldi^rs mind, I Will sleep and seed,
Why should I not? let them take pains that need.
I find I Am growing old, and every year
Steals somewhat from me; Venus, Mirth, and Cheer,
Begin to lose their Gust; My Wits decline,
And my Poetic vein grows dry with time.
What e're I have been, I am scarce the same,
And will you have me dance now I am lame?
But if I did my faculty retain,
All would not like it; you the Lyrick strain
Do best affect: a second he commends
Hopping Iambicks, and a third contends
That nothing's good but what is Satirical;
And how is it possible to please you all?
Just so, as though I should three friends invite,
And each one of a different appetite;
Sir, Shall I help you here? No; I Am for this.
And, What think you? I Am for the other dish.
Are you so to? No Sir, I thank you, I
Like the first best: So it is in Poetry.
Besides all this, I wonder, you can guess
Amidst the labors and disturbances
Of this base busy Town, I should have rest
To write a word. One comes and makes request,
I would be surety for him; After this
I Am called to hear the Poets Exercise;
I Have friends to visit too; one in the Quirine,
The other (a fair distance) in the Aventine.
But yet you will say, the streets are fine, and still,
And one may walk, and think of what he will.
(Oh mighty quiet, fit for the ears of Kings!
These Carts and Coaches are such silent things.)
Here one comes with his Mules, all in a sweat,
Who used to bring home Carriages with meat;
There creaks an Engine, which the Builder uses
To wind up Timber to the tops of houses.
Here goes a Funeral, and there a Dray
Standing athwart the street blocks up their way.
Now a mad Dog directly at me makes;
Anon, I meet a Sow out of a Iakes,
(And must give her the wall) midst all this din,
Is It not a sweet place to make Verses in?
Poets true Bacchus Tribe, like him re^oyce
To sleep in shades, of arr from the Cities noise.
And would you have me do, as they have done,
Although I live in this lewd balling Town?
It Is no rare thing to see some that have spent
Seven years at Athens, in their studies pent,
Reading their eyes almost out; who yet after
Return dumb objects of the peoples laughter,
(And neither say nor write) here I am tossed,
And in a storm of trouble well nigh lost:
How can I grant, or you of me desire,
To sing sweet Lyricks to the joyful Lyre?
At Rome two Brothers were; this studied Law,
That was a Rhetor; both so given to claw
Each other, that their whole discourse was lies
In praise of one another faculties;
That called this Gracchus, He him Mutius.
Do not we Poets play the fool just thus?
I merry Lyricks write, Another he
Being more grave, delights in Elegy:
Yet both, as though undoubtedly inspired
With all the Nine, expect to be admired.
Do but observe, with what a stately grace
We stalk, and look round the reciting place.
But what great matter bring we, that should raise
Our Expectations to be crowned with Bays?
The Samnites us, and we the Samnites wast,
And yet we made the Samnites yield at last.
O rare! now he protests I shall no more
Be Horace, but Alcaeus; I adore
Him as Callimachus, but that is too little,
Then he is Mimnermus, or some greater title.
These waspish Poets thus I Am faign to please,
When I write, that I may gain their Suffrages.
But I Will be plagued no more; I Will neither write
Henceforth my self, nor hear when they recite.
Verses indeed if bad, there is nothing worse,
Nor more ridiculous, yet some fools of course
Love to be scribbling, and themselves extol,
For that at which all others laugh and droll.
He that would have his Poems take, must sit
Judge of his own language, as well as wit,
Like a grave Censor; words of no weight nor show
He must degrade, though they are loath to go,
And plead prescription. To recruit his store
With choice and good, old words he must restore,
Though they have lain long rejected and despised,
And take in new, what use has naturalized.
And as a River that runs clear and strong,
The soil inricheth, as it glides along:
So must his language be; it must not want,
But neither must it be luxuriant.
With smoother phrase he polishe's what is rough,
And throws out all the flat insipid stuff.
And as a skilful Actor, he must strive,
To imitate each Humor to the life.
For my part, I had rather far be thought
A trifling Poetaster, if that ought
I do please's my self, be it never so vain,
Than to write well, and to endure the pain
Of being vexed with Censures. There was one
At Argos, who did use to sit alone
In The Theater, fancying himself to be
Present at some ingenious Tragedy:
Hearkened and humm'd, till he thought all was ended,
Then clapped, and cried, It Is never to be mended:
'Bate only this, in other matters He
Was as discreet as any one could be;
He was a right good Neighbor; none more free
To treat his Friends with all civilitie:
Good to his Family; if he came nigh
A Rock or Lake, would heed how he past by:
Could not be charged with any desperate folly,
The worst was, he was highly Melancholy;
For this a lusty dose of Hellebore
He took, which did him to himself restore;
But being cured, he cried, and said, Alas!
Such an unhappy Remedy never was;
For now by this unfortunate Occasion,
I Have lost the pleasure of Imagination.
It Is time I should grow wise, and leave such toys
As Songs and Verses, proper sports for Boys.
Not weighing words, nor meas'ring out of sounds,
But scanning life, and tracing Virtues bounds.
Now thus I Will spend my Thoughts; If you or I
Had such a thirst, that we were always dry,
How much so e're we drink, we should be sure
To tell the Doctor often, and ask the cure.
Now you are rich, yet cover still to gain
More wealth, Is not this case the very same?
If one should say, such Herbs, or such a Course,
Will cure your wound, if still your wound grew worse,
Would you not cease to follow his Advice?
So you have heard, that he must needs be wise
To whom the Gods give Riches, yet you find
The Goods of Fortune have not changed your mind.
And will you still believe it, since you know,
By sad experience, that it is not so?
If to be Rich, could make one wise indeed,
And you were sure by that means to be freed
From hurtful Passions; then I would allow,
That none should be more Covetous than you;
But since it can no such effect produce,
Let that suffice that serves for present use.
If what I have, though small, be mine, (as it is)
And what one use's, in some sort is his:
(As the Civili^ns teach) then Orbus field,
And whatsoever fruit the same does yield,
Is mine; nay and his servants too, and all
He has, may truly me their Master call.
I give a little money, and receive
Grapes, Poultry, Wine, and what I please to have.
The difference is, I with a small expense
Buy what he purchased with vast Sums long since.
The Purchaser of all those fields that lie
About Aricia, and old Veii,
Has not a Sallet of his own in troth,
Nor one small stick to warm his stale-kept broth,
But what is bought; only he calls it His
As far as lies within such Boundaries.
Fond man! how can thou call that substance thine
Which varies like thy shadow? One hour's time,
One flitting hour, alters the property,
And either death, sale, force or flattery
Makes it another man's. For Heirs come on
As fast as waves, one e're the other's gone.
And since it is so, to what intent should I
Great Farms or Manors strive to multiply?
Or make new purchases? when as, Alas!
Death and the Grave mow down all flesh like Grass;
Sparing nor high, nor low, nor young, nor old,
Untouched with Pity, incorrupt with Gold.
And while we live, we may live, if we please,
Happy and well, without such things as these,
Gems, Ivory, Marble, Pictures, Plate, rare Cuts,
Garments like those in which the Sophy struts.
All that make bodies gay, or houses brave,
Some have them not, others don't care to have.
So of two Brothers, one delights to play
And drink; the other from the break of day
Till it be dark night, spends himself with toil,
Beating and burning the hard barren soil.
The only Reason that they differ thus,
Proceeds from a different Genius;
Which is as 'twere a little Deity,
Prescribing how to live, and when to die.
To some unluckie, to some Fortunate,
So constituting good or evil Fate.
For my part, I Am resolved that little wealth
I have, to use, and not to starve my self.
I will be moderate, yet I Will not forbear
Expense, lest I should grieve my greedy Heir,
Or make my Executor think much, to see
My Inventory spent in Legacy.
There is discretion to be used, for he
Is justly taxt with Prodigality,
That vainly wastes his Fortune; and no less
Is he to be accused of Greediness,
Who spares his Purse, more than his Reputation,
And will not spend upon a just occasion.
But he that has enough, and thinks it so,
Toils not for more, nor pines to see that go;
That sometimes makes a festival, and spares
A day for mirth to loose the bonds of cares:
That does no wrong, and is discreetly free,
That man's indu'd with Liberality.
Bless me from Poverty and Sordidness!
And then be my enjoyments more or less,
I Am still the same: To me it matters not,
Whether I Am carried in a bigger Boat,
Or in a less; The middle state's the best.
And mine is such, I neither am oppressed
With storms, nor flat at all with calms; my Sails
Are filled with equal and Indifferent Gales:
For health, wit, vertne, honor, wealth, I Am placed
Short of the foremost, but before the last.
Yet though a man be freed from Avarice,
That Is not enough, if any other Vice
Be suffered to bear sway. What? art thou free
From pride, and empty Popularitie?
Art free from raging anger, and the fear
Of cruel death, that dreadful Messenger?
Can laugh at superstitious fond conceits
Of Sprights, Dreams, Omens, all those vulgar cheats?
Art thankful for thy age that is past and gone,
And being older, Art thou better grown?
For as it cannot mitigate ones pain,
To draw one Thorn, whilst twenty more remain:
To hate one Vice is nothing, whilst the mind
Indulges Vices of another kind.
Until thou can thy life exactly frame
To Virtue's pattern, don't usurp the name.
But having played, and eat, and drunk thy share,
Get home, lest taking more than thou can bear,
The art mocked, and bob'd, and justled for thy folly,
By the Lads whose privilege is to be jolly.
HORACE, His ART of POETRY.
By B. I.
IF to a Woman's head a Painter would
Set a Horse-neck, and diverse feathers fold
On every limb, taken from a several creature,
Presenting upwards, a fair female feature,
Which in some swarthy fish uncomely ends:
Admitted to the sight, although his friends,
Could you contain your laughter? Credit me,
This piece, my Piso's, and that book agree,
Whose shapes, like sick-mens dreams, are feigned so vain,
As neither head, nor foot, one form retain.
But equal power, to Painter, and to Poet,
Of daring all, has still been given; we know it:
And both do crave, and give again, this leave.
Yet, not as therefore wild, and tame should cleave
Together: not that we should Serpents see
With Doves; or Lambs, with Tygres coupled be.
In grave beginnings, and great things professed,
Ye have oft-times, that may o're-shine the rest,
A Scarlet-peice or two, stitched in: when or
Diana's Grove, or Altar, with the bor*-
Dring Circles of swift waters that intwine
The pleasant grounds, or when the River Rhine,
Or Rainbow is described. But here was now
No place for these. And, Painter, hap'ly, thou
Know only well to paint a Cypress tree.
What Is this, if he whose money hireth thee
To paint him, has by swimming hopeless escaped,
The whole fleet wrecked? A great jarre to be shaped,
Was meant at first; why forcing still about
Thy laboring wheel, comes scarce a Pitcher out?
In short; I bid, Let what thou work'st upon,
Be simply quite throughout, and wholly one.
Most Writers, noble Sire, and either Son,
Are, with the likeness of the truth, undone.
My self for shortness labor; and I grow
Obscure. This striving to run smooth and slow,
Has neither soul, nor sinews. Lofty he
Professing greatness, swells: That low by lee
Creeps on the ground; too safe, too afraid of storm.
This seeking, in a various kind, to form
One thing, prodigiously, paints in the woods
A Dolphin, and a Boar amid the floods.
So, shunning faults, to greater fault does lead,
When in a wrong, and art less way we tread.
The worst of Statuaries here about
The Aemilian School, in brass can fashion out
The nails, and every curled hair disclose;
But in the main work hapless: since he knows
Not to design the whole. Should I aspire
To form a work, I would no more desire
To be that Smith; then live, marked one of those,
With fair black eyes, and hair, and a wry nose.
Take, therefore, you that write, still, matter fit
Unto your strength, and long examine it,
Upon your Shoulders. Prove what they will bear,
And what they will not. Him whose choice does rear
His matter to his power, in all he makes,
Nor language, nor clear order ere forsakes.
The virtue of which order, and true grace,
Or I am much deceived, shall be to place
Invention. Now, to speak; and then differ
Much, that might now be spoke: omitted here
Till fitter season. Now, to like of this;
Lay that aside, the Epicks office is.
In using also of new words, to be
Right spare, and wary: then thou speak to me
Most worthy praise, when words that common grew,
Are, by thy cunning placing, made mere new.
Yet, if by chance, in utt'ring things abstruse,
Thou need new terms; thou may, without excuse,
Fain words, unheard of to the well-truss'd race
Of the Cethegi; And all men will grace,
And give, being taken modestly, this leave,
And those thy new, and late-coyn'd words receive,
So they fall gently from the Grecian spring,
And come not too much wrested. What Is that thing.
A Roman to Caecilius will allow,
Or Plautus, and in Virgil disavow,
Or Varius? why am I now envied so,
If I can give some small increase? When, lo,
Cato's and Ennius tongues have lent much worth,
And wealth unto our language; and brought forth
New names of things. It has been ever free,
And ever will, to utter terms that be
Stamped to the time. As woods whose change appears
Still in their leaves, throughout the sliding years,
The firstborn dying; so the aged state
Of words decay, and phrases born but late
Like tender buds shoot up, and freshly grow.
Our selves, and all that is ours, to death we owe:
Whether the Sea received into the shore,
That from the North, the Navy safe does store,
A Kingly work; or that long barren fen
Once rowable, but now does nourish men
In neighbor-towns, and feels the weighty plough;
Or the wild river, who has changed now
His course so hurtful both to grain, and seeds,
Being taught a better way. All mortal deeds
Shall perish: so far off it is, the state,
Or grace of speech, should hope a lasting date.
Much phrase that now is dead, shall be revived;
And much shall dye, that now is nobly lived,
If Custom please; at whose disposing will
The power, and rule of speaking rests still.
The gests of Kings, great Captains, and sad Wars,
What number best can fit, Homer declares.
In Verse unequal matched, first sour Laments,
After men's Wishes, crowned in their events
Were also closed: But, who the man should be,
That first sent forth the dapper Elegy,
All the Grammarians strive; and yet in Court
Before the Judge, it hangs, and waits report.
Unto the Lyrick Strings, the Muse gave grace
To chant the Gods, and all their God-like race,
The conquering Champion, the prime Horse in course,
Fresh Lovers business, and the Wines free source.
The Iambick armed Archilochus to rave,
This foot the socks took up, and buskins grave,
As fit to exchange discourse; a Verse to win
On popular noise with, and do business in.
The Comic matter will not be expressed
In tragic Verse; no less Thyestes feast
Abhors low numbers, and the private strain
Fit for the sock: Each subject should retain
The place allotted it, with decent thewes.
If now the turns, the colors, and right hues
Of Poems here described, I can, nor use,
Nor know to observe: why (in the Muses name)
Am I called Poet? wherefore with wrong shame,
Perversely modest, had I rather owe
To ignorance still, then either learn, or knows.
Yet, sometime, does the Comedy excite
Her voice, and angry Chremes chafes outright
With swelling throat: and of the tragic wight
Complains in humble phrase. Both Telephus,
And Peleus, if they seek to heart-strike us
That are Spectators, with their misery,
When they are poor, and banished, must throw by
Their bombard-phrase, and foot-and-half-foot words:
It Is not enough, the elaborate Muse affords
Her Poem's beauty, but a sweet delight
To work the hearers mind, still, to their plight.
Men's faces, still, with such as laugh, are prone
To laughter; so they grieve with those that moan.
If thou would have me weep, be thou first drowned
Thy self in tears, then me thy loss will wound,
Peleus, or Telephus. If you speak vile
And ill-penn'd things, I shall, or sleep, or smile.
Sad language fits sad looks: stuffed menacings,
The angry brow; the sportive, wanton things;
And the severe, speech ever serious.
For Nature, first within does fashion us
To every state of fortune; she helps on,
Or urges us to anger; and anon
With weighty sorrow hurls us all along,
And tortures us: and, after by the tongue
Her truch-man, she reports the minds each thr^
If now the phrase of him that speaks, shall flow
In sound, quite from his fortune; both the rout,
And Roman Gentry, jeering, will laugh out.
It much will differ, if a God speak, than,
Or an Herce: If a ripe old man,
Or some hot youth, yet in his flourishing course;
Where some great Lady, or her diligent Nourse*
A ventring Merchant, or the Farmer free
Of some small thankful land: whether he be
Of Cochis born; or in Assyria bred;
Or, with the milk of Thebes; or Argus, fed.
Or follow fame, thou that do write, or fain
Things in themselves agreeing. If again
Honored Achilles chance by thee be seized,
Keep him still active, angry, un-appeas'd,
Sharp, and contemning laws, at him should aim,
Be naught so 'bove him but his sword let claim.
Medea make brave with impetuous scorn;
^no bewailed; Ixion false, forsworn;
Poor Io wandering, wild Orestes mad.
If something strange, that never yet was had
Into the Scene, thou bring'st, and dare create
A mere new person; Look he keep his state
Into the last, as when he first went forth,
Still to be like himself, and hold his worth.
It Is hard, to speak things common, properly;
And thou may better bring a Rhapsody
Of Homers, forth in acts, then of thy own,
First publishing things unspoken, and unknown.
Yet common matter thou thine own may make;
If thou be vile, broad-troden ring forsake.
For, being a Poet, thou may feign, create,
Not care, as thou would faithfully translate,
To render word for word: nor with thy slight
Of imitation, leap into a straight,
From whence thy Modesty, or Poems law
Forbids thee forth again thy foot to draw.
Nor so begin, as did that Circler late,
I sing a noble War, and Priam's Fate.
What does this Promiser such gaping worth
Afford? The Mountains travailed, and brought forth
A scorned Mouse! O, how much better this,
Who naught assays unaptly, or am ss?
Speak to me, Muse, the man, who after Trov was sacked,
Saw many Towns, and men, and could their manners tract.
He thinks not, how to give you smoke from light,
But light from smoke; that he may draw his bright
Wonders forth after: As An^iphates,
Scylla, Charybdis, Polypheme, with these.
Nor from the brand, with which the life did burn
Of Meleager, brings he the return
Of Diomede; nor Troyes sad War begins
From the two Eggs, that did disclose the twins.
He ever hastens to the end, and so
(As if he knew it) raps his hearer to
The middle of his matter: letting go
What he despairs, being handled, might not show.
And so well fains, so mixeth cunningly
Falsehood with truth, as no man can espy
Where the midst differs from the first: or where
The last does from the midst dis-joyn'd appear.
Hear, what it is the People, and I desire:
If such a ones applause thou do require,
That tarries till the hangings be ra'en down,
And sits, till the Epilogue says Clap, or Crown:
The customs of each age thou must observe,
And give their years, and natures, as they swerve,
Fit rites. The Child, that now knows how to say,
And can tread firm, longs with like lads to play;
Soon angry, and soon pleased, is sweet, or sour,
He knows not why, and changes every hour.
The unbearded Youth, his Guardian once being gone,
Loves Dogs; and Horses; and is ever one
IN the open field; Is Wax like to be wrought
To every vice, as hardly to be brought
To endure counsel: A Provider slow
For his own good, a careless letter-go
Of money, haughty, to desire soon moved,
And then as swift to leave what he has loved.
These studies alter now, in one, grown man;
His bettered mind seeks wealth, and freindship: than
Looks after honors, and bewares to act
What straightway he must labor to retract.
The old man many evils do girt round;
Either because he seeks, and, having found,
Does wretchedly the use of things forbear,
Or does all business coldly, and with fear;
A great deserrer, long in hope, grown numbe
With sloth, yet greedy still of what is to come:
Froward, complaining, a commender glad
Of the times past, when he was a young lad;
And still correcting youth, and censuring.
Man's coming years much good with them do bring:
At his departing take much thence: left, then,
The parts of age to youth be given; or men
To children; we must always dwell, and stay
In fitting proper adjuncts to each day.
The business either on the Stage is done,
Or acted told. But, ever, things that run
In at the ear, do stir the mind more slow
Then those the faithful eyes take in by show,
And the beholder to himself does render.
Yet, to the Stage, at all thou may not tender
Things worthy to be done within, but take
Much from the sight, which fair report will make
Present anon: Medea must not kill
Her Sons before the People; nor the ill*
Natured, and wicked Atreus cook, to the eye,
His Nephews entrails; nor must Progne fly
Into a Swallow there; Nor Cadmus take,
Upon the Stage, the figure of a Snake.
What so is shown, I not believe, and hate.
Nor must the Fable, that would hope the Fate
Once seen, to be again called for, and played,
Have more or less then just five Acts: nor laid,
To have a God come in, except a knot
Worth his untying happen there: And not
Any fourth man, to speak at all, aspire.
An Actors parts, and Office too, the Quire
Must maintain manly; not be heard to sing
Between the Acts, a quite clean other thing
Then to the purpose leads, and fitly 'grees.
It still must favor good men, and to these
Be won a friend; It must both sway, and bed
The angry, and love those that fear to offend.
Praise the spare diet, wholesome justice, laws,
Peace, and the open ports, that peace does cause.
Hide faults, Pray to the Gods, and wish aloud
Fortune would love the poor, and leave the proud.
The Hau'-boy, not as now with latten bound,
And rival with his Trumpet for his sound,
But soft, and simple, at few holes breathed time
And tune too, fitted to the Chorus rhyme,
As loud enough to fill the seats, not yet
So over-thick, but, where the people met,
They might' with ease be numbered, being a few
Chaste, thrifty, modest folk, that came to view.
But, as they conquered, and enlarged their bound,
That wider Walls embraced their City round,
And they uncensur'd might at Feasts, and Plays
Steep the glad Genius in the Wine, whole days,
Both in their tunes, the license greater grew,
And in their numbers; For, alas, what knew
The Idiot, keeping holy day, or drudge,
Clown, Townsman, base, and noble, mixed, to judge?
Thus, to his ancient Art the Piper lent
Gesture, and riot, whilst he swooping went
In his trained Gown about the Stage: So grew
In time of Tragedy, a Music new.
The rash, and headlong eloquence brought forth
Unwonted language; And that sense of worth
That found out profit, and foretold each thing,
Now differed not from Delphick riddleing.
Thespis is said to be the first found out
The Tragedy, and carried it about,
Till then unknown, in Carts, wherein did ride
Those that did sing, and act: their faces died
With less of Wine. Next Aeschylus, more late
Brought in the Visor, and the robe of State,
Built a small timbred Stage, and taught them talk
Lofty, and grave; and in the busk in stalk.
He too, that did in Tragic Verse contend,
For the vile Goat, soon after, forth did send
The rough rude Satyrs naked; and would try,
Though sower, with safety of his gravity,
How he could jest, because he marked and saw
The free spectators, subject to no Law,
Having well eat, and drunk: the rites being done,
Were to be staid with softnesses, and won
With something that was acceptably new.
Yet so the scoffing Satyrs to men's view,
And so their prating to present was best,
And so to turn all earnest into jest,
As neither any God, were brought in there,
Or Semi-god, that late was seen to wear
A royal Crown, and purple; be made hop
With poor base terms, through every baser shop:
Or whilst he shuns the Earth, to catch at Air
And empty Clouds. For Tragedy is fair,
And far unworthy to blurt out light rimes;
But, as a Matron drawn at solemn times
To Dance, so she should, shame faced, differ far
From what the obscene, and petulant Satyrs are.
Nor I, when I write Satyrs, will so love
Plain phrase, my Piso's, as alone t'approve
Mere reigning words: nor will I labor so
Q^ite from all face of Tragedy to go,
As not make difference, whether Davus speak,
And the bold Pythias, having cheated weak
Simo; and, of a talent wiped his purse;
Or old Silenus, Bacchus Guard, and Nurse.
I can out of known gear, a fable frame,
And so, as every man may hope the same;
Yet he that offers at it, may sweat much,
And toil in vain: the excellence is such
Of Order, and Connection; so much grace
There comes sometimes to things of meanest place.
But, let the Faunes, drawn from their Groves, beware,
Be I there Judge, they do at no time dare
Like men street-born, and near the Hall, rehearse
The^r youthful tricks in over wanton verse:
Or crac^ out bawdy speeches, and unclean.
The Roman Gentry, Men of Birth, and Mean
Will take offense at this: Nor, though it strike
Him that buys chiches blanch'r, or chance to like
The nut crakers throughout, will they therefore
Receive, or give it an applause, the more.
To these succeeded the old Comoedy,
And not w^t^out much praise; till liberty
Fell into fault so far, as now they saw
Her license fit to be restrained by law:
Which law received, the Chorus held his peace,
His power of foully hurting made to cease.
Two rest's, a short and long, the Iambick frame;
A foot, whose swiftness gave the Verse the name
Of Trimeter, when yet it was six-pac'd,
But mere Iambicks all, from first to last.
Nor is it long since, they did with patience take
Into their birthright, and for fitness sake,
The steady Spondaes: so themselves do bear
More flow, and come more weighty to the ear:
Provided, never to yield, in any case
Of fellowishp, the fourth, or second place.
This foot yet, in the famous Trimeters
Of Accius, and Ennius, rare appears:
So rare, as with some tax it does engage
Those heavy Verses sent so to the Stage,
Of too much haste, and negligence in part,
Or a worse Crime, the ignorance of art.
But every Judge has not the faculty
To note in Poems, breach of harmony;
And there is given too, unworthy leave
To Roman Poets. Shall I therefore weave
My Ve^se at random, and licent ously?
Or rather, thinking all my faults may spy,
Grow a safe Writer, and be wary-driven
Within the hope of having all forgiven.
It Is clear, this way I have got off from blame,
But, in conclusion, merited no fame.
Take you the Greek examples, for your light,
In hand, and turn them over day, and night.
Our Ancestors did Plautus numbers praise,
And jests; and both to admiration raise
Too patiently, that I not fondly say;
If either you, or I, know the right way
To part scurrility from wit: or can
A lawful Verse, by the ear, or singer scan.
Our Poets too, left naught unproved here;
Nor did they merit the less Crown to wear,
In daring to forsake the Grecian tracts,
And celebrating our own home-born facts;
Whether the guarded Tragedy they wrought,
Or't were the gowned Comoedy they taught.
Nor had out Italy more glorious bin
In virtue, and renown of arms, then in
Her language, if the Stay, and Care to have mended,
Had not our every Poet like offended.
But you, Pompilius offspring, spare you not
To tax that Verse, which many a day, and blot
Have not kept in, and (left perfection fail)
Not tent mes over, corrected to the nail.
Because Democritus believes a wit
Happier then wretched art, and does, by it,
Exclude all sober Poets, from their share
In Helicon; a great sort will not pare
Their nails, nor shave their beards, but to bypath
Retire themselves, avoid the public baths;
For so, they shall not only gain the worth,
Both fame of Poets, they think, if they come forth,
And from the Barber Licinus conceal
Their heads, which three Antichyra's cannot heal.
O I left-witted, that purge every spring
For choler! If I did not, who could bring
Out better Poems? But I cannot buy
My title, at the rate; I'ad rather, I,
Be like a Whet-stone, that an edge can put
On steel, though 't self be dull, and cannot cut.
I writing naught my self, will teach them yet
Their Charge, and Office, whence their wealth to fet,
What nourishes, what formed, what begot
The Poet, what becomes, and what not:
Whether truth may, and whether error bring.
The very root of writing well, and spring
Is to be wise; thy matter first to know;
Which the Socratick writings best can show:
And, where the matter is provided still,
There words will follow, not against their will.
He, that has studied well the debt, and knows
What to his Country, what his friends he owes,
What height of love, a Parent will fit best,
What brethren, what a stranger, and his guest,
Can tell a State-mans duty, what the arts
And office of a Judge are, what the parts
Of a brave Chief sent to the wars: He can,
Indeed, give fitting dues to every man.
And I still bid the learned Maker look,
O^ life, and manners, and make those his book,
Thence draw forth true expressions. For, sometimes,
A Poem, of no grace, weight, art, in rimes
With specious places, and being humor'd right,
More strongly takes the people with delight,
And better stays them there, then all fine noise
Of Verse meer-matter-less, and tinckling toies.
The Muse not only gave the Greek's a wit,
But a well-compass'd mouth to utter it,
Being men were covetous of naught, but praise.
Our Roman youths they learn the subtle ways
How to divide, into a hundred parts,
A pound, or piece, by their long compting arts:
There Is Arbin's son will say, Substract an ounce
From the five ounces, what remains? pronounce
A third of twelve, you may: four ounces. Glad,
He cries, Good boy, thou wilt keep thine own. Now, add
An ounce, what makes it then? The half pound just;
Six ounces. O, whence once the cankered rust,
And care of getting, thus, our minds has stained,
Think we, or hope, there can be Verses feigned
In juice of Cedar, worthy to be steeped,
And in smooth Cypress boxes to be keep'd?
Poets would either profit, or delight,
Or mixing sweet, and fit, teach life the right.
Orpheus, a priest, and speaker for the Gods,
First frighted men, and wildly lived, at ods,
From slaughters, and foul life; and for the same
Was Tigers, said, and Lions fierce, to tame.
Amphion too, that built the Theban towers,
Was said to move the stones, by his Lutes powers,
And lead them with soft songs, where that he would.
This was the wisdom, that they had of old,
Things sacred, from profane to separate;
The public, from the private; to abate
Wild raging lusts; prescribe the marriage good;
Build Towns, and carve the Laws in leaves of wood.
And thus at first, an honor, and a name*
To divine Poets, and there Verses came.
Next these great Homer, and Tyrtaeus set
On edge the Masculine spirits, and did whet
Their minds to Wars, with rimes they did rehearse;
The Oracles, too, were given out in Verse;
All way of life was shown; the grace of Kings
Attempted by the Muses tunes, and strings;
Plays were found out; and rest, the end, and Crown
Of their long labors, was in Verse set down:
All which I tell, lest when Apollo's named,
Or Muse, upon the Lyre, thou chance b' ashamed.
Be brief, in what thou would command, that so
The docile mind may soon thy precepts know,
And hold them faithfully; For nothing rests,
But flows out, that ore-swelleth in full breasts.
Let what thou fain'st for pleasures sake, be near
The truth, nor let thy Fable think, what e're
It would, must be: lest it alive would draw
The Child, when Lamia 'has dined, out of her maw.
The Poems void of profit, our grave men
Cast out by voices; want they pleasure, then
Our Gallants give them none, but pass them by:
But he has every suffrage can apply
Sweet mixed with sour, to his Reader, so
As doctrine, and delight together go.
This book will get the Sosii money; This
Will pass the Seas, and long as nature is,
With honor make the far-known Author live.
There are yet faults, which we would well forgive;
For, neither does the String yet yield that sound
The hand, and mind would, but it will resound
Oft-times a Sharp, when we require a Flat:
Nor always does the loosed Bow, hit that
Which it does threaten. Therefore, where I see
Much in the Poem shine, I will not be
Offended with few spots, which negligence
Has shed, or humane frailty not kept thence.
How then? Why, as a Scrivener, if h' offend
Still in the same, and warned, will not mend,
Deserves no pardon; or who'd play, and sing,
Is laughed at, that still jarreth on one string:
So he that flaggeth much, becomes to me
A Choerilus, in whom if I but see
'Twice, or thrice good, I wonder: but am more
Angry. Sometimes, I hear good Homer snore.
But, I confess, that, in a long work, sleep
May, with some right, upon an Author creep.
As Painting, so is Poesy. Some man's hand
Will take you more, the nearer that you stand;
As some the farther off: This loves the dark;
This, fearing not the subtlest Judges mark,
Will in the light be viewed: This once, the sight
Does please; this, ten times over, will delight.
You Sir, the elder brother, though you are
Informed rightly by your Fathers care,
And, of your self too, understand; yet mind
This saying: to some things there is assigned
A mean, and toleration, which does well:
There may a Lawyer be, may not excel;
Or Pleader at the Bar, that may come short
Of eloquent Messalla's power in Court,
Or knows not what Cassellius Aulus can;
Yet, there is a value given to this man.
But neither, Men, nor Gods, nor Pillars meant,
Poets should ever be indifferent.
As jarring Music does, at jolly feasts,
Or thick gross O^ntment, but offend the Guests:
As Poppy, and Sardane Honey; 'cause without
These; the free meal might have been well drawn out:
(...), any Poem, fancied, or forth-brought
(...) bettering of the mind of man, in ought,
^^ne're so little it depart the first,
and highest, sinketh to the lowest, and worst.
He, that not knows the games, nor how to use
(...) arms in Mars his field, he does refuse;
(...), who is unskilful at the Coit, or Ball,
(...) trundling Wheel, he can sit still, from all;
^est the thronged heaps should on a laughter take:
^et who is most ignorant, dares Verses make.
^hy not? I Am gentle, and freeborn, do hate
^ice, and, am known to have a Knights estate.
^hou, such thy judgment is, thy knowledge too,
^ilt nothing against nature speak, or do:
But, if hereafter thou shall write, not fear
To send it to be judged by Metius ear,
And, to your Fathers, and to mine; though it be
Nine years kept in, your papers by, yo' are free
To change, and mend, what you not forth do set.
The Writ, once out, never returned yet.
It Is now inquired, which makes the nobler Verse,
Nature, or Art. My Judgment will not pierce
Into the Profits, what a mere rude brain
Can; or all toil, without a wealthy vein:
So does the one, the others help require,
And friendly should unto one end conspire.
He, that is ambitious in the race to touch
The wished goal, both did, and suffered much
While he was young; he sweat, and freez'd again:
And both from Wine, and Women did abstain.
Who, since, to sing the Pythian rites is heard,
Did learn them, first, and once a Master feared.
But, now, it is enough to say; I make
An admirable Verse. The great Scurf take
Him at the last; I scorn to come behind,
Or, of the things, that never came in my mind
To say, I Am ignorant. Just as a Crier
That to the sale of Wares calls every Buyer;
So does the Poet, who is rich in land,
Or great in money's out at use, command
His flatterers to their gain. But say, he can
Make a great Supper; or for some poor man
Will be a surety; or can help him out
Of an entangling suit; and bring 't about:
I wonder how this happy man should know,
Whether his soothing friend speak truth, or no.
But you, my Piso, carefully beware,
(Whether yo' are given to, or giver are)
You do not bring, to judge your Verses, one,
With joy of what is given him, over-gone:
For he will cry, Good, brave, better, excellent!
Look pale, distill a shower (was never meant)
Out at his friendly eyes, leap, beat the groun'.
As those that hired to weep at Funerals, swoun,
Cry, and do more then the true Mourners: so
The Scoffer, the true Praiser does out-go.
Rich men are said with many cups to ply,
And rack, with Wine, the man whom they would try,
If of their friendship he be worthy, or no:
When you write Verses, with your judge do so:
Look through him, and be sure, you take not mocks
For praises, where the mind conceals a fox.
If to Quintilius, you recited ought:
He Would say, Mend this, good friend, and this; It Is naught.
If you denied, you had no better strain,
And twice, or thrice had 'ssayd it, still in vain:
He Would bid, blot all: and to the anvile bring
Those illl-torn'd Verses, to new hammering.
Then: If your fault you rather had defend
Then change: No word, or work, more would he spend
In vain, but you, and yours, you should love still
Alone, without a rival, by his will.
A wise, and honest man will cry out shame
On artless Verse; the hard ones he will blame;
Blot out the careless, with his turned pen;
Cut off superfluous ornaments; and when
They 're dark, bid clear this: all that is doubtful wrote
Reprove; and, what is to be changed, note:
Become an Aristarchus. And, not say,
Why should I grieve my friend, this trifling way?
These trifles into serious m^schiefs lead
The man once mocked, and suffered wrong to tread.
Wise, sober folk, a frantic Poet fear,
And shun to touch him, as a man that were
Infected with the leprosy, or had
The yellow Jaundies, or were furious mad
According to the Moon. But, then the boys
They vex, and follow him with shouts, and noise,
The while he belcheth lofty Verses out,
And stalketh, like a Fowler, round about,
Busy to catch a Blackbird; if he fall
Into a pit, or hole; although he call,
And cry aloud, Help gentle Countrymen,
There Is none will take the care, to help him then;
For, if one should, and with a rope make haste
To let it down, who knows, if he did cast
Himself there purposely, or no; and would
Not thence be saved, although indeed he could?
I Will tell you but the death, and the disease
Of the Sicilian Poet Empedocles;
He, while he labored to be thought a God
Immortal, took a melancholique odd
Conceit, and into burning Aetna leap't.
Let Poets perish, that will not be kept.
He that preserves a man, against his will,
Does the same thing with him, that would him kill.
Nor did he do this once; for if you can
Recall him yet, he would be no more a man:
Or love of this so famous death lay by.
His cause of making Verses none knows why;
Whether he pissed upon his Fathers grave;
Or the sad thunder-stroken thing he have
Defiled, touched; but certain he was mad,
And, as a Bear; if he the strength but had
To force the grates, that hold him in, would fright
All; So this grievous Writer puts to flight
Learned and unlearned; holding, whom once he takes;
And, there an end of him, reciting makes:
Not letting going his hold, where he draws food,
Till he drop off, a Horse-leech, full of blood.
FINIS.

