DISCOURSES, OR SERMONS ON SEVERAL SCRIPTURES.

BY THE Right Reverend Father in God, EZEKIEL, Late Lord Bishop of LONDONDERRY.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
ALthough the following Sermons need no Epistle to commend them to any
intelligent Reader, yet Custom having made it necessary to say something, for
the Satisfaction of the World, concerning the Posthumous Works of deceased
Persons, I shall therefore speak a few Words briefly.

The Reverend Prelate, the Author of them, was a Person of great Natural Parts,
and Excellent Learning, as well as of great Piety and Charity: One that adorned
the Church of England, whereof he was an Eminent Pillar, ruling well in the
Church of God, and therefore deserved double Honor, as the Apostle speaks: And
doubtless, his Reward is now great in Heaven, with his Lord and Master, whose
Service here on Earth was accounted by him as his highest Honor, and that
which he professed himself most ambitious of.

He was a Person of great Modesty and Humility; having very mean and low
Thoughts of himself, and his own Abilities; which was the Reason why the World
had so little Knowledge of him from the Press, having published nothing See his
Vanity of the World, and A Funeral Sermon, etc. Octavo.
but what he was constrained to, either by the restless. Importunity of
Friends, or the Commands of those that some Time were his Superiors.

But the Intendment of this Epistle being not to give the World an Account of
the Life of this Excellent Person, whose Praise is deservedly in the Church of
God, I forbear to add any thing farther concerning him, hoping it will shortly
be done by a more worthy Pen.

And as for the following Sermons, the excellent Style in which they are
written, and the exact Accuracy with which they are penned, may give abundant
Satisfaction unto All, in the Reading of them, that they are His Lordship's
own, and were fairly written with his own Hand, and copied out from thence,
since his Death, by one of his nearest Relations, and so transmitted unto the
Press.

The Subject Matter of them being agreeable to the Divine Inspirations of the
Holy Scriptures, will speak better for themselves, than the Words of any other
can. And that they may be very useful and profitable unto those that heard
them, and unto all that shall read them, is the hearty and sincere Prayer of
the Publisher. Farewell.

THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK, CONTAINING The Titles of the several Subjects
treated of therein, with the Texts of Scripture from which they are handled.
I.
The Folly of Sinners in making a Mock at Sin; from Prove. 14.19. Fools make a
Mock at Sin.
II.
True Happiness: A Sermon preached at St. Lawrence Jewry; from Rev. 22.14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the Tree
of Life, and may enter through the Gates into the City.
III.
The Resurrection of Jesus Christ: A Sermon preached on Easter Day; from Act.
2.24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the Pains of Death, because it was
not possible that he should be holden of it.
IV.
Brotherly Admonition: In several Sermons; from Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not
hate thy Brother in thy Heart: Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and
not suffer Sin upon him.
V.
The Dreadfulness of God's Wrath against Sinners: Explained in several Sermons;
from Heb. 10.30, 31. For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto
me, I will recompense, says the Lord. And again; The Lord shall judge his
People. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
^primatur,

Z. Isham, R.R.D. Henrico, Episc. Land. a Sacris.

THE FOLLY OF SINNERS In Making a Mock at Sin.

A SERMON ON PROVE. XIV. IX.

BY EZEKIEL HOPKINS, Late Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

THE FOLLY OF Sinners, etc.
PROVE. 14.9. Fools make a Mock at Sin.


WE are not generally to expect any connection, either of Sense or Sentences in
this Book of the Proverbs. Other parts of Scripture are like a rich Mine, where
the precious Ore runs along in one continued Vein: But this is like a Heap of
Pearls; which, though they are loose and unstrung, are not therefore the less
excellent or valuable.

The Text I have now read, is one of them, an entire Proposition in it self,
without relation to, or dependence upon any Context.

In it, The Division of the Words.
we have these things considerable.

First, The Character or Periphrasis of wicked and ungodly Men; and they are
said to be such as make a Mock at Sin.

Secondly, Here is the Censure past upon them by the All-wise God, and the
wisest of Men; they are Fools for so doing; Fools make a Mock at Sin.

The Words are plain and obvious; only the Phrase of making a Mock, may seem
subject to some ambiguity, and various acceptations; and indeed the Scripture
uses it in diverse Senses. Sometimes it signifies an abusing of others, by
violent and lewd Actions: So we read that the Hebrew Servant, Genesis 39.17.
says Potipher's Wife, came in unto me to mock me. Sometimes it signifies an
exposing of Men to Shame and Dishonor: So the wise Man tells us, Wine is a
mocker. Prove. 20.1.
Sometimes it signifies an imposing upon the Credulity of others things that
seem incredible and impossible: So we read in Genesis, when Lot had declared to
his Sons in Law the Destruction of Sodom, it is said, Genesis 19.14.
He seemed unto them as one that mocked. Sometimes it is taken for a failing in
our Promises, and thereby defeating, and frustrating the Expectations of
others: And thus Herod is said to be mocked by the wise Men, Matthew. 2.16
in Matthew. 2.16. But none of these are at all congruous to our present purpose,
nor applicable to the Words of the Text.

There are therefore two other acceptations of this Expression, What Is meant by
Mocking.
frequently occurring in the Holy Scriptures.

First, This Word Mock is commonly taken for scoffing, or bitter taunting at
others. Thus our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ suffered the Flouts and
Derisions of an insolent Rabble, who set him at naught, and mocked him, Luke
23.11.
as St. Luke speaks: Thus those blessed Martyrs and Confessors, that followed
his steps, are said to have endured the trial of cruel Mockings, Heb. 11.36.
as the Apostle tells us. And indeed this is the difference between a wise
Reprover, and a bitter Mocker; that the Words of the one are like Balm, both
soft and sanative; but the Words of the other are like sharp Swords, which cut
deep into the Minds of Men, and commonly make them rankle into Hatred and
Malice. And doubtless there are very many Spirits can sooner put up an injury
done them, than a cutting bitter scoff; because nothing expresses so much
Contempt, nor shows how despicable we account them, as a fleering Gibe.

Secondly, Mocking may be taken for slighting, and making no account of,
looking upon things or Persons, as trivial and inconsiderable. And thus it is
used in Job, where the Horse is said to mock at fear, Job 39.2.
when he rusheth into the Battle, and is not terrified; but rather enraged by
all the Horrors of War, When the Quiver rattleth against him, the glittering
Spear and the Shield. And so it is said of the Leviathan, Job 41.29. Job 41.29.
He laugheth at the shaking of the Spear, for he esteems Iron as Straw, and
Brass as rotten Wood.

Now in either of these two Senses may the Words of the Text be taken; when
they tell us, they are Fools that make a Mock at Sin.

For Sin may be considered, A twofold Consideration of Sin.
either as committed by others, or as committed by our solves; and it is
egregious Folly to make a Mock of either, so as to sport at the one, or to
slight the other.

First, They are Fools that make a Mock at other Men's Sins, so as to turn them
into a Matter of Jest and Raillery.

Secondly, They are Fools that make a Mock at their own Sins, so as to think
the Commission of them a slight and inconsiderable thing.

I shall very briefly speak of the First, and so pass on unto the Second
Particular.

First therefore, They are Fools that make a Mock at other Men's Sins.
They are Fools that make a Mock at other Men's Sins, so as to make them a
matter of Mirth and Pastime. This indeed is Sport for Devils, all whose
Recreation, and Hellish Solace, is the Sin and Wickedness of Men. The Damnation
of Souls is the Sport of Hell: And Thou who can rejoice in their Joy,
deservest likewise to howl under their Woes and Torments. We justly condemn it,
as a most barbarous and inhumane Custom amongst the ancient Romans, who brought
many selected Pairs of miserable Men into their public Theaters, only to
delight the Spectators with their Blood and Death. But this was an innocent
Recreation in comparison of thine, who take pleasure to see thy poor Brother
wounding and stabbing, yea damning his precious Soul. Go laugh at a wrethed Man
upon the Rack, or upon the Wheel; Laugh at the odd distorted Postures of
Epilepticks, or the Convulse Motions of Dying and Expiring Men; Sport thy self
with their writhed Looks, and antic Shapes of Misery: This is far more civil,
more humane, more pious, than to make those Sins thy Mirth, which will be thy
Brothers Eternal Woe and Anguish. What think thou? Could thou look into
Hell, that place of Torment? Could thou see there all the Engines of God's
Justice, and the Devil's Cruelty, set on work in the eternal Torture of those,
who perhaps once made as light of their own Sins, as thou do of other Men's;
would thou think this a pleasant Spectacle? Would thou sport and divert thy
self to see how they wallow in Fire and Brimstone, or how they circle and twist
themselves in unquenchable Flames? Certainly such a Sight as this would affect
thee with a cold Horror, and a shivering Dread: And how then can thou sport
thy self to see thy Brother damning himself, since it would fright thee to see
him damned? Believe it, Sirs; The Sins that now abound in the World challenge
our Tears and Pity: We ought to mourn and repent for those who do not, who will
not repent for themselves. It is a sad, and a doleful Sight to see so many
every where dishonor God, disgrace their Natures, and destroy their Souls; to
see some come reeling home, disguised in all the brutish Shapes that
Drunkenness can put upon them, ready to discharge their Vomit in the Face of
every one they meet: Others frantic with Wrath and Rage, and, like a Company
of Mad Men, Prove. 26.18.
flinging about Firebrarnds, Arrows, and Death: To see such woeful
Transformations, and the dire Effects that Sin and Wickedness have caused in
the World; certainly he that can entertain himself with Mirth at these things,
has not only forsworn his Religion, but his Humanity; and may, with much more
Reason, make the Miseries of poor distracted People, chained up in Bedlam, to
become his Sport and Pastime.

I know it will be here pretended, that surely it can be no such great Crime to
explode and hiss Sin off the Stage; nay, it were a proper Means to keep Men
from being generally so wicked, could we but make Wickedness more ridiculous in
them.

But, alas! Vice is now-adays grown too impudent to be laughed out of
Countenance; and those Methods of a scurrilous Mockery, which some plead for,
as rendering Vice ridiculous, have, I doubt, only made it the more taking and
spreading, and encouraged others to be the more openly sinful, by teaching them
to be the more wittily vile and wicked. Few will be deterred from sinning, when
they think they shall but gratify others, by making Sport for them; and stir
up, not their Indignation and Abhorrence, but their Mirth and Laughter. It Is
true, we read that Elijah mocked the Idolatrous Worshippers of Baal, and his
Scoffs and Taunts at them were very biting and sarcastical, and cut them much
deeper than they are said to cut themselves: But this he did in a serious and
zealous reproving of their Sins, not in a jocular and sportive Merriment. There
are two things in Sin, Impiety and Folly; we may lawfully enough scorn the one,
while we are sure to hate and detest the other: And a due Mixture of both these
together, Scorn and Detestation, are very fit to enkindle our Zeal for God, and
may oftentimes be a requisite Temper for him who is to reprove confident and
audacious Sinners. But to laugh and sport at others Wickedness, and to make the
Guilt and Shame of others our Mirth and Recreation, is both unchristian, and
inhumane; and we may as well laugh at their Damnation, as at that which will
lead them to it. Thus to make a Mock at Sin, is to make our very Mocks to be
our Sins; and argues us, not only profane, but foolish; for this is to laugh
and rejoice at our own Stain and Dishonor, and to abuse our own Nature, that
Nature which is common to us, as well as others; that Nature which, were it not
debased with Sin, renders us but a little lower than the Angels.

What a fair and glorious Creature was Man, before Sin debased and sullied him!
A Friend to his God, Lord of the Creation, made a little lower than the Angels,
being akin to them, though of a younger House, and meaner Extract, adorned
with all both natural and divine Perfections, till Sin despoiled him of his
Excellency, and made him who was almost equal to the Angels, worse than the
very Brutes that perish, sottish and miserable. And can thou laugh and sport
thy self at that which has ruined and undone thee, as well as others? Thy
Nature is blemished and corrupted as much as theirs. When we look abroad in the
World, and observe the abominable Wickednesses that are every where committed,
the Murders, Uncleanness, Blasphemies, Drunkenness, and all those Prodigies
of Impiety that every where swarm amongst Men; how by Lying, Stealing,
Swearing, Hos. 4.2.
and Committing Adultery; they break out, until Blood touches Blood. What else
see we now in all this, but the woeful Effects of our own corrupt Nature: Here
we see our selves unbowelled, and discover what we our selves are, at the price
of other Men's Sins; For as in Water, Prove. 27.19.
Face answers unto Face, so does the Heart of Man to Man. We have therefore
more reason to lament the Sins and Miscarriages of others, than to make a Sport
and Mock at their Wickedness, since we our selves are the very same, and prone
enough, without the Restraining Grace of God, either to imitate, or exceed them.

Hence then, First, Shows the Evil of tempting others to sin.
Consider what an accursed, horrid thing it is to tempt others to sin, only
that thou may afterward make Sport with them, and raise a Scene of Mirth
out of the Ruins of their Souls. I wish this were not as common a Practice, as
it is damnable. See what dreadful Woes God denounces against such, Habak.
2.15, 16.
by the Prophet: Woe unto him that gives his Neighbor Drink; that put thy
Bottle to him, and make him drunken also, that thou may look upon his
Nakedness; his Shame and Dishonor. Thou art filled with Shame, for Glory:
Drink thou also, and let thy Foreskin be uncovered; the Cup of the Lords Right
Hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful Spewing shall be on thy Glory.
Hence have these Devils (for that Name belongs to them who do his Work)
invented all those Artifices of Excess and Drunkenness, to draw on others to
debauch themselves, and their Reason, that they may have Matter to laugh at
their sottish Actions, and to boast how many they have made to fall under the
Puissance of their Riots. But certainly, if there be an Hell, as it is certain
there is; or if that Hell were not made in vain, as it was not; these wretched
Sinners can expect nothing else, but to have their Portion therein with those
Devils, whose industrious Factors they have been: And there the Cup of God's
Right Hand, a Cup of pure Wrath, and unmixed Fury, shall be given them, and
they be forced to drink it off, to the very Dregs and Bottom of it, spewing out
Fire and Brimstone eternally.

Secondly, Shows the Wickedness of those that sin, only to tempt others to sin.
Hence think how desperately impious, wicked Wretches they are, who sin only to
make others Sport; that buffoon themselves into Hell, and purchase the Pleasing
others with the dreadful Damnation of their own Souls: And yet, How frequent is
this in the World? How many are there, that will neither spare God, nor Heaven,
nor Scripture, nor Religion, nor common Modesty, if they come but in the way of
a Jest? Nothing, how sacred, how venerable soever it be, can escape them, if
they can but turn it into Drollery.

I need not mention what Tropes and Metaphors Men have found out to talk
lasciviously by; almost every one is perfect in that piece of Rhetoric: Nor
what strange, monstrous Lies some will aver openly, to raise either Mirth or
Wonder in Company. And that which is worst of all is, that now the Holy Bible
is become a mere Jest Book with them, a Common Place for Wit, and merry
Discourse; and the Devil again speaks Scripture out of these Men's Mouths; they
know no more of it, than what they abuse; and all their Meditations and
Comments upon it, are only how such and such Passages may be ingeniously
perverted, and turned into Burlesque, to heighten the Mirth of the next profane
Company they meet. Impious Wretches, that dare to violate the most tremendous
Mysteries of Religion, and expose their God to Scorn, his Oracles to Contempt,
and their own Souls to Eternal Perdition; only for a little Grinning and
Sneering of a Company of vain; yea, mad Fools, who think they commence Wits by
applauding Blasphemy! But these Wits, as they are profane and impious, so they
prove themselves very Fools, thus to sport themselves to death: Their Laughter
is rather spasmical and convulsive, than joyous; a Risus Sardonicus, caused by
Venom and Poison: They go down merrily to Hell, and frolic themselves into
Perdition.

And thus I have done with the first sort of Fools, namely, those that make a
Sport and Mock at other Men's Sins.

Second Particular is to show, They are Fools that make a Mock at their own
Sins.
that they are Fools who make a Mock at their own Sins, so as to think the
Commission of them but a slight, inconsiderable Matter. And here I shall show
you,

First, That wicked Men do generally account Sin a small, slight Matter.

Secondly, What it is that induces and persuades them to account so slight of
it.

Thirdly, Their gross and inexcusable Folly for so accounting of it.

First, That wicked Men do generally account Sin a small, inconsiderable
Matter, may appear from these three Things.

Slight Temptations make some Men sin.
are sufficient to make them rush boldly into the Commission of Sin: Any slight
inconsiderable Gain, and transitory, fading, washy Pleasure; yea oftentimes, a
mere Gallantry and Humor of Sinning, is enough to make them venture upon any
Crime, that the Devil, or their own wicked Hearts shall suggest to them: Yea
those very Things, for which they would scarce suffer a Hair of their Heads to
be twitch'd off, are yet forcible enough, to persuade them to lie or swear,
Sins that murder and destroy their precious Souls for ever! What is this but a
plain Demonstration, that they account Sin a mere Trifle, and look upon it as a
small and slight thing to offend the most high God.

Hard to work Sinners to a true Sorrow for Sin.
Turn the Mouth of all the terrible Threatenings that God has denounced in his
holy Word against them, and let them thunder out all the Woes and Curses that
are in the Magazine of God's Justice against them, yet these wicked Wretches
are not startled at it; but still hold fast their Confidence and Boldness, when
they have lost their Innocence and Integrity, and cannot, nor will not be
persuaded that God should be so angry and incensed for such small matters.

Repentance will suffice to make amends for all: They pacify their
Consciences, and think they appease God also, by crying him Mercy; and find it
as easy a matter to repent of their Sins, as it is to commit them. And
therefore certainly these Men must needs have very slight Thoughts of Sin, who
can be so easily tempted to commit it, and are so hard to be brought to repent
of it; or if they do, yet is it so slightly and superficially, as if they
feared the Amends would be greater than the Injury.

I come now to the Second Thing, and that is, Causes of Sinners making light of
Sin.
to show what it is that induces and persuadeth wicked Men to make so light of
their Sins.

Now there are these two things that make Sinners to account their Sins slight
and trivial Matters.

Sinners not being exemplarily punished causes them to make light of Sin.
Because they see so few Instances of God's dread Wrath and Vengeance executed
on Sinners in this Life; and those rare ones that are extant and visible, they
impute rather to Chance, than to the Retribution of Divine Justice: And
therefore, upon their own Impunity, and the Impunity of others, they conclude,
that certainly Sin is no such heinous thing as some sour, tetrical People
would fain persuade the World to believe: And so they cry Peace, Peace, to
themselves, Deuteronomy. 19 19.
though they go on in the Frowardness of their Hearts, adding Iniquity to Sin.
Because God so long winks at them, they conclude him blind, or, at least, that
he does not much disallow those Sins which he does not presently punish.
Indeed, it would be somewhat difficult to answer this Argument, were this
present Life the appointed Time of Recompense. No, but God reserveth his Wrath
and Vengeance to a more public, and more dreadful Execution of it, than any
can be in this Life. Though now thou feel no Effects of God's Wrath, yet,
believe it, the Storm is but all this while gathering: But when thou lanchest
forth into the boundless Ocean of Eternity, then, and perhaps never before
then, will it break upon thee in a Tempest of Fury, and drown thy Soul in
Perdition and Destruction.

Sinners make light of Sin, because it is no real Injury to God.
Another thing that makes wicked Men think so slight of Sin, is that it cannot
affect God with any real Injury; for as he is not benefited by our Services, so
he is not wronged by our Iniquities. It Is true, could our Sins reach God, could
they dethrone him, or rend off any of his glorious Attributes from his
immutable Essence, there might then be great Reason why God should so severely
revenge them, and we for ever detest and abhor them: But since his Glory is
free from any Stain, and his Being from any Wrong and Prejudice, our Sins are
nothing to him, nor is there any Reason we should judge them heinous and
provoking.

It Is true, O Sinner, thy Sins can never invade God's Essence; that is
infinitely above the Attempts of Men or Devils, but yet every wicked Wretch
would, if he could, dethrone God: Sinners would not have him be so holy, nor so
just as he is; not so holy in hating of their Sins, nor so just in punishing of
them; that is, they would not have him to be God; for it is necessary that God
should be as he is. Sinners do really contradict God's Purity, rebel against
his Sovereignty, violate his Commands, defy his Justice, provoke his Mercy,
despise his Threatenings, and hinder the Manifestations of his Glory to the
World: And is all this nothing? Every Sinner has so much Poison and Venom in
him, that he would even spit it in the Face of God himself, if he could reach
him: But because God is in himself secure from their impotent Assaults, Sin
shows its Spite against him in what it can; defaceth his Image wherever it
comes, abolisheth all Structures and Lineaments of God in the Soul, and would
banish his Name, his Fear, his Worship from off the Face of the whole Earth:
And therefore thou who art guilty of this Rebellion against the great Majesty
of Heaven, can thou yet think thy Sins to be slight and inconsiderable, and
not worth either the Cognizance, or the Vengeance of the Almighty? Believe it,
the Day is coming, and will not tarry, when that Guilt which thou now carriest
so peaceably in thy Bosom, and which, like a frozen and benumbed Serpent,
stirrs not, nor stings not, shall, when heated with the Flames of Hell, fly in
thy Face, and appear in all its native and genuine Deformities and Horror, and
overwhelm thy Soul with Everlasting Anguish and Torment; and then, but too
late, then will thou exclaim against thy self, as being worse than a Fool, or
Madman, for thinking so slightly of, and making a Mock at that which has
eternally ruined and destroyed thee.

And having thus showed you briefly, that wicked Men do make light of Sin, and
the Inducements that tempt them to it. I shall now, in the

Third place, The Folly of Sinners in making light of Sin, appears in that they
show you their great and inexcusable Folly in so doing. And certainly never
was any insensate Man, never any that was wholly abandoned by his Reason and
Understanding, guilty of a greater Folly than this is: For,

Hope to repent of it.
Is it not most egregious Folly and Madness for any to do that, which yet they
hope they shall live to repent that ever they did it? This is such a Folly, as
all the Extravagances of Fools could never match; and yet this most wicked Men
are guilty of: They boldly rush into Sin, only upon this presumptuous
Confidence, that they may hereafter be sorry that now they did it. In which
their Folly is doubly notorious, in that





Sinners Folly great, in venturing upon a certain Guilt, in hopes of an
uncertain Repentance.
In that they venture upon a certain Guilt, in hopes of an uncertain
Repentance. For either God may cut thee off, O Sinner, in the very Act of that
Sin which thou intendest to repent of hereafter: Or, if he afford thee Time for
Repentance, he may withold his Grace, and in his just and righteous, but yet
fearful Judgment, seal thee up under Hardness and Impenitency, that thou shall
go on, Romans 2 5.
treasuring up to thy self Wrath against the Day of Wrath. And if either of
these, through the righteous Judgment of God, should happen unto thee, what a
deplorable Fool will thou prove thy self to be, that sinnest out of Hopes of
Repentance, and of a Repentance which perhaps will never be granted? Alas! How
many has God, in his signal Vengeance, cut off, by some remarkable stroke,
with an Oath, or Curse, or Blasphemy in their Mouths, scarce fully pronounced?
How many, with their drunken Vomits gogling in their very Throats: How many,
while their Souls have been burning with their lustful Embraces, have even then
been cast into Hell, and burnt up with Everlasting Fire? Or, if Vengeance
should spare thee for a while, O Sinner, yet thou know not how soon it will
strike thee: It is great Folly to expect the Warning of a sick Bed; Death often
surprises by sudden Casualties, or by some Diseases as sudden as Casualties;
and there are many Ways of Dying, besides Consumptions, Agues, and Dropsies,
the lingering Forerunners of an approaching Dissolution. But if God should cast
thee down upon a sick Bed, he may justly visit thee, who have neglected thy
Soul in thy Health, with such Distempers as may make thee not only unfit, but
such as may render thee incapable of doing thy last kind Office for it. It is
Folly to expect the Admonition of Old Age: Alas! Eccles. 12.5.
the Almond-Tree does not every where flourish; and it is not one, to many
Thousands, that lay down an Hoary Head in the Bed of the Grave. Prove. 16.31.
But grant thou could be assured of the Continuance of thy Life, yet is it
not egregious Folly to sin in hope of repenting, when every Act of Sin will
make thy Repentance the more difficult, if not impossible? The older thou
growest, still the more desperate is thy Case; for thy Sins will be the more
rooted and habituated in thee, and thy Heart the more hardened to resist the
Grace of God: So that, upon all Accounts, thy Repentance is most uncertain; and
the longer thou continuest in Sin, still the more unlikely and improbable. And
then judge, thou thy self, whether it be not extreme Madness and Folly to make
so light, or no Account of Sinning, because thou make account of Repenting.
But

repent, Sinners great Folly to purchase the Pleasures of Sin with a bitter
Repentance.
yet none but Fools will take up the Pleasures of Sin upon the Sorrow, Anguish,
and Bitterness of a true and hearty Repentance. Do thou seriously consider
what Repentance is? It is not a transitory Wish, a warm Sigh, or a languishing
Lord have Mercy, in a Distress, or on a sick Bed; (and yet even these cannot be
without judging and condemning themselves for Fools, when they sinned:) No, but
Repentance is the breaking of the Heart, a rending of the very Soul in pieces:
The usual Preparatives to it are ghastly Fears and Terrors, sharp and dreadful
Convictions, that will even search thy very Bowels, break thy Bones, and burn
up thy very Marrow within thee. More especially does God deal thus terribly
with veterane, old, confirmed Sinners, making Repentance more bitter to them,
than to others, that they may see and confess themselves Fools, in indulging
themselves in their Sins, in hopes of repenting for them. Say then, when the
Devil and thine own Lusts tempt thee to any Sin; say, If I commit this Sin,
either I shall repent of it, or I shall not; if I never repent of it, as it is
a hazard whether I shall or no, what is there in Sin, that can recompense the
everlasting Pain of Damnation? If I shall repent, what is there in the Sin,
that can recompense the Anguish and Bitterness of Repentance? This is such an
unanswerable Dilemma, that all the Craft and Subtilty of Hell can never solve.
And if we would but always keep this fixed in our Minds, it were impossible
that ever we should make slight of Sin. While thou thus arguest, thou arguest
solidly and wisely; but to say I will sin, because perhaps I may repent, is
quite below the meanest Capacity that ever owned the least Glimpse of Sense and
Reason.

Sin will make Sinners a public Scorn to the whole World.
Is it not Folly to make a Mock at that which will be sure to pay thee home,
and to make a public Mock and Scorn of thee to the whole World? How many have
their Sins and Vices made infamous among Men? They are a Shame, and a Reproach
to all that are but of a civil and sober Converse; and as much lost to
Reputation, as they are to Virtue? But however, certainly all wicked and
ungodly Men shall be made a public Scorn and Derision to all the World, both
God, Angels, and Men: God will mock at them, he tells them so expressly, for so
the Wise Man speaks; Prove 1.25, 26.
Because you have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof; I
also will laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes; when your
Fear comes as a Desolation, and your Destruction comes like a Whirlwind. All
their Sins and Deeds of Wickedness shall then be exposed to the open View and
Contempt of Saints and Angels, who shall subscribe to the righteous Doom of
their Condemnation. Devils will then upbraid their Folly, and triumph that they
have outwitted them into the same most miserable and deplorable State with
themselves. Think now, O Sinner! How will thou be able to hold up thy guilty
Head, and thy amazed and confounded Face? Whither, Oh whither can thou cause
thy Shame to go, when Men and Angels shall point and hiss at thee, and thy
Folly shall be proclaimed as loud as the last Trumpet, which Heaven and Earth,
and all the World shall hear?

The Folly of Sinners to damn their Souls for Sin.
Is it not the Foolishness of Folly it self, to make light of that which will
for ever damn thee? Art thou such an Idiot, as to account Hell a Trifle, and
Damnation it self a slight Matter? What is it then that makes thee think Sin so
small and trifling a thing? For Hell, and Death, and Eternal Wrath are
certainly entailed upon it. Consider what a most cutting Reflection it will be
to thee in Hell, when thou shall for ever cry out upon, and curse thy self for
a wretched Fool, that ever thou should make slight of those Sins which would
damn thee. What was there in them, for which thou have forfeited Heaven, and
Everlasting Happiness, but only a little impure brutish Pleasure? And now that
it is past and gone, what remains of them, but only the bitter Remembrances?
Certainly thou will ten thousand times, and for ever call thy self an accursed
Fool for so doing, when it is too late to help it. Be persuaded therefore now
to be wise betimes for your Souls; else you also will, when there is no
Redress, curse your own Folly, that has brought upon you all those Extremities
of Woe and Anguish.

FINIS.
True Happiness. A SERMON PREACHED AT St LAWRENCE JEWRY, June the 17th, 1690.
ON REVEL. XXII. XIV.

BY EZEKIEL HOPKINS, Late Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

True Happiness. A SERMON PREACHED, etc.
REV. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have
Right to the Tree of Life, and may enter through the Gates into the City.


THese Words which I have now read, consist of these two Parts.:

First, A Proposition. And, Division of the Words.


Secondly, A Proof of this Proposition.

First, A Proposition, in these Words, that They that do God's Commandments,
are blessed.

Secondly, Here is the Proof of this Proposition, in these Words, that They
have a Right to the Tree of Life, and shall enter through the Gates into the
City.

It is the Connection of both these together, that I intend chiefly to speak
unto. Only give me leave, as a Preliminary to the ensuing Discourse, to show
you what is contained in the first and great Word in my Text; and that is the
Word Blessed.

There is therefore a twofold Beatitude, or Blessedness: The one is perfect and
consummate; the other initial and incomplete. The former is the Complexion of
all Good perfective of our Natures, and our entire and satisfying Enjoyment of
it. This Blessedness now is only attainable in Heaven; for God alone is the
Center of all Good, and all the Good that is desirable in this World, are but
so many Lines drawn from the Center, to the utmost Circumference of the
Creation. There is nothing that can supply the Wants, perform the Hopes, fulfill
the Desires, without Confinement circumscribe, without Cloying satisfy the
most enlarged Capacities of a Rational Soul, but only that God who is
infinitely, universally, and indefectively good; and therefore he alone is our
objective Happiness: and our formal Happiness is our Relation to, and Union
with this All comprehensive and Incomprehensible Good. Our Assimilation to him,
and Participation from him, of all those Perfections which our Natures are
capable of enjoying, but our Understandings not now capable of knowing. But
this consummate Blessedness, is reserved for our unknown Reward hereafter, and
is not that which my Text here speaks of.

There is therefore an imperfect and initial Blessedness, which consists in a
Preparation for, and a Tendency unto the other: As those are said to be
accursed, whose Sins and Vices prepare them for Eternal Perdition; so those
likewise are said to be blessed, whose Grace and Holiness prepare them for
Eternal Bliss and Happiness.

Now such as these are blessed in a fourfold Respect. Such as do God's
Commandments are blessed in Four Respects. I. In the Seed.


First, They are blessed, in Semine, in the Seed: They go forth bearing
precious Seed, and shall doubtless rejoice in a plentiful Harvest: So the
Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 97.11. Psalm. 97.11.
Light is sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the Upright in Heart. And
though they often appear Clods of Earth plowed up, harrowed, and broken with
Affliction; yet is there that blessed Seed cast into them, that will certainly
sprout up to Immortality, and Eternal Life, as all the Beauties of a Flower lie
couched in a small unsightly Seed: And so truly Grace is Glory in the Seed; and
Glory is but Grace full blown.

Secondly, In the First Fruits.
They are blessed in primitiis, in the First Fruits. They have already received
some part of their Eternal Felicity, in the Graces and Consolations of the Holy
Ghost; which are therefore called the First Fruits of the Spirit, Romans 8.23.
by the Apostle, Romans 8.23. and the Earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22.
2 Cor. 1.22. and the Earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14.
Ephesians. 1.14. Now, as the Earnest is always part of the Bargain, and the First
Fruits are always of the same kind with the whole Harvest, so is it here; the
Graces and Comforts of the Holy Ghost, are the very same now, that they shall
be in Heaven it self: And therefore the Apostle blesses God, Ephesians. 1.3.
who has blessed us with spiritual Blessings in heavenly Things in Christ.
Better indeed they shall be in Heaven, but not other: Here our Graces often
languish under the Load and Pressure of Corruption, but in Heaven they shall be
for ever vigorous and triumphant: Here our Waters of Comfort often fail us, our
Cistern is often dried up, and our Bottle spent; but in Heaven we shall for
ever lie at the Fountain of Living Waters, and take in Divine Communications,
as they immediately flow from the Divine Essence, without having them deadned
or flatted in the Conveyance. But yet, both by these imperfect Graces and
Comforts, we do truly and properly enjoy God; the Enjoyment of whom in any
measure is Happiness, but in the highest measure is Heaven it self. If
therefore the Mass and Lump be Blessedness, the First Fruits must be blessed
also.

Thirdly, Blessed in Hope. Titus 2.13.
They are blessed in Spe, in Hope; whence it is called by the Apostle, That
blessed Hope. A blessed Hope it is, because that which we hope for is Eternal
Blessedness. The Hope of worldly Things is commonly more tormenting, than the
Enjoyment of them can be satisfying. It is an Hope that vitiates and deflowers
its Object, and so mightily over-rates them in the Fancy, that when they come
to pass, our Hope is rather frustrated than accomplished: And were it not for
that Impatience, which is the constant Attendant of this Hope, it would be a
Problem hard to be resolved, whether Expectation or Fruition were the more
eligible Estate. Vain therefore and wretched must needs be the Hopes of those
things, which cannot answer what is expected from them; like a Golden Dream to
a Beggar, or the Dream of a furnished Table to one that is hungerstarv'd. But
now the Hopes of Heaven can never impoverish the Glories of it, for they are
infinite and inexhaustible; and God has laid up for his, that which the Heart
of Man cannot conceive.

A Christian's Hope has two Prerogatives above any worldly Hope. Two
Properties of a Christian's Hope.


One is, That it may attain to a full and final Assurance, as the Apostle
speaks to the Hebrews; where he calls it, Heb. 6.11.
The full Assurance of Hope unto the End. An Hope it is, because the Object of
it is a future Good desired and expected: But yet it is an Hope that is joined
with a full Assurance of the Event; an Hope that may flower up into such a
Certainty, as to have no Mixture of Fear or Doubting in its Composition; but
may be as sure of the Heavenly Inheritance, as if our Reversion were already in
actual Possession: Whereas Worldly Hope can never be secure, but some
Providence or other may interpose, to disappoint it.

The other Prerogative of a Christian's Hope, is, that though it be thus fully
assured, yet the Accomplishment of it shall always have the sweet Relish of
Surprise and Wonder; for the Happiness will be far greater than the Hope, and
the Inheritance larger than the Expectation; whereas Earthly Hopes, if they
grow to any degree of Confidence of Success, upon Frustration they turn into
Impatience and Rage: Or if perhaps they do succeed, the Sweetness of the
Accomplishment was long before sucked out and devoured by our greedy
Expectation; the Game is torn and eaten, before the Hunts-man can come in. And
upon both these Accounts, the pious and obedient Christian is blessed in Hope:
It is a blessed Hope that shall certainly be accomplished; and a blessed Hope,
the accomplishing of which shall infinitely exceed our Expectations, and fill
us, not with Shame, but Eternal Admiration and Wonder.

Fourthly, Blessed in Right.
They are blessed in Right and Title: And upon this very Account especially my
Text pronounces those blessed that do God's Commandments, because they have a
Right to the Tree of Life, and to enter in through the Gates into the City.

Now these Expressions, according to the Genius and Style of this whole Book,
are mystical and allusive; and for the explaining of them I must show,

First, What the Tree of Life is.

Secondly, What is this City, into which they have a Right to enter.

Thirdly, What it is to enter through the Gates into the City.

Fourthly, What Right it is which Obedience to God's Commandments gives us to
the Tree of Life, and to enter into the City.

For the First of these, What the tree of Life is.
What this Tree of Life is.

I answer, We find Mention made of this Tree of Life in two other places of
this dark Prophecy; the one is in Ver. 2. of this Chapter; Rev. 22.2.
On either Side of the River was there the Tree of Life, which bare twelve
manner of Fruits, and yielded her Fruit every Month; and the Leaves of the Tree
were for the healing of the Nations. But this, very probably, may be only an
Enigmatical Representation of the Doctrine of the Gospel; let us then consult
the other place, where Mention is made of this Tree of Life, and that is in
Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, Rev.
2.7.
that is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Now this carries a plain Allusion
to that Description of the Earthly Paradise of which we read, Genesis 2.9. where
it is said, Genesis 2.9.
God planted the Tree of Life in the midst of the Garden. Now this Tree of Life
was so called, not that it had any natural Virtue to perpetuate Man's Life to
Immortality, but only from its typical and sacramental Use; God having
appointed the Eating thereof as a Sign and Pledge of our Immortality, had we
continued in our Innocence and Obedience. And therefore we find, that upon the
Fall, God set a Guard upon this Tree, and as it were excommunicates sinful Adam
from partaking of this Sacrament of the Covenant of Works, which was both a
Sign and Seal of Immortality; signifying thereby, that Sinners have no Right to
Eternal Life, according to the Terms of the first Covenant: But this Right
being again restored to us by Jesus Christ, therefore they are pronounced
blessed that do God's Commandments, because they have a Right to the Tree of
Life; that is, to that Eternal Life and Immortality which is brought to light
by the Gospel, and to which the Tree of Life in Paradise was a Sacrament and
Emblem.

Secondly, What is meant by City.
Let us enquire what is this City, into which those that do God's Commandments
shall enter; and we have a most large and glorious Description made of it in
Chap. 21. of this Book, from Ver. 10. to the end of the Chapter. and, in brief,
it is nothing else but Heaven; Rev. 21.10, 14.
the New Jerusalem, that holy City, the City of the Living God, into which no
unclean thing shall enter. For without are Dogs, Rev. 22.15.
and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and
makes a Lie, Chap. 22.15.

Thirdly, What it is to enter through the Gates into the City.
What is it to enter through the Gates into this City.

I answer, Though in the foregoing Chapter this City is described to have
twelve Gates, and in them the Names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, to signify
to us, that through the Grace of the Gospel, there is a Passage and an Inlet
into Heaven for all those that are true Israelites; yet, in true propriety of
Speech, there is but one Way, and but one Gate to Heaven: Yea, and our Savior
tells us, that Way is narrow, and that Gate is strait; for so we find his
Words; Matthew. 7.14.
Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads unto Life, and few
there be that find it. The Commandments of God are this Gate to the Heavenly
City, and the two Tables of the Law are the two Leaves of this Gate, through
which every one must pass, that hopes to be admitted into the New Jerusalem.
And although David seems to make this Gate very large, when he tells us, Thy
Commandments are exceeding broad; Psalm. 119 96.
yet that is only to be understood concerning the Authority of its Injunctions,
not of the Liberty of its Indulgence. It is exceeding broad in the Extent of
its preceptive Power, for it prescribes Rules to all our Thoughts, Words, and
Actions, and to every Circumstance of each; but it is exceeding narrow and
strait in the Scope and Allowance that it gives us; that as soon may a Camel go
through the Eye of a Needle, as we pass through this Gate with the Burden of
one unmortified Lust, or one unrepented Sin.

that those that do God's Commandments may enter through the Gates into the
City? Can any enter in as a Thief, or a Robber, over the Wall? Or can any, as
an Enemy, scale those Eternal Ramparts, and take it by Invasion?

I answer; This is so expressed, to denote the free Access and Admission of
those into Heaven, who are careful to obey the Commandments of God upon Earth:
Such as these are free born Citizens of Heaven; their whole Estate, their whole
Traffic, all their Treasure and Livelihood is laid up there; they are free
Denizens by the Charter of the New Covenant, they may challenge Ingress as
their Right and Due; and he who has the Keys of David, Rev. 3* 7.
who opens and no Man shuts, and shuts and no Man opens, opens the
Door to these, and lets them into those Eternal Mansions, which he has
purchased and prepared for them.

The Fourth and last Query to be enquired into, What Right Obedience gives to
the Tree of Life, and to the Heavenly City.
is concerning that Right which Obedience to God's Commands gives us unto this
Tree of Life, and to this Heavenly City; that is, to Eternal Life and Glory.
Now here I shall branch out this Query into Two; and so I shall show you,

Obedience is, which gives us a Right to Heaven.

What that Obedience is that is mentioned in the Text.
What that Right is, that this Obedience does confirm.

I. What that Obedience is, that gives us a ^ight to Heaven.

I answer: Not Legal Obedience.
It is not a Legal Obedience, or a perfect personal Righteousness, that now
gives us this Right to Heaven; this is very plain, because to constitute this,
it is necessary that there be both Original Purity in our Natures, which since
the Fall is miserably vitiated and corrupted; and also a Sinless Perfection in
our Lives, in the constant Observation of every Iota of the Law, both as to its
Extention, and Intention; that we obey it in every part and tittle of it, and
that our Obedience unto every part be raised to the highest degree of Love,
Zeal, and Charity. This Title was once good, but it is now lost, by the Fall,
in the common Ruin and Rubbish of Mankind; and he who has not another Title,
upon better and easier Terms, will find Cherubims, and the Flaming Sword of
Divine Justice, set to guard the Tree of Life from his Approaches, as once they
did from guilty Adam.

It is Evangelical Obedience.
There is therefore another Obedience which gives a Right unto the Tree of
Life; and that is an Evangelical Obedience; which, according to the Grace,
Condescension, and Equity of the Gospel, shall be accepted unto, and rewarded
with Everlasting Happiness. Now this Evangelical Obedience consists not indeed
in Innocence and Perfection, but in sincere Desires, and proportionable
Endeavors after it; when we strive to the utmost to live holily, and to walk
more strictly with God, according to the Rules that he has prescribed us in
his holy Word: And it consists of two Parts; Mortification of our corrupt and
sinful Affections, whereby we die daily unto Sin: And the Spiritual Renovation,
and Quickening of our Graces, whereby we increase daily in spiritual Strength,
and make farther Progresses in Holiness and true Piety. And as it consists of
these two Parts, so has it also these two Adjuncts.



and prevalent Intercession for the Acceptance and Reward of our imperfect
Obedience.

Whosoever does thus sincerely do the Commandments of God, universally and
constantly, with his whole Strength and Mind, as though he expected to be saved
by the Merits of his own Works; and yet, after all, does so entirely rely on
the Merits of Jesus Christ for Salvation, as though he had never done any
thing: He it is, and he alone, who has this Right unto the Tree of Life, and
shall enter through the Gates into the Heavenly City. For he does his
Commandments out of a sincere Love; and God, who is Love, will own his
Sincerity.

Secondly, What Right bedience gives to Eternal Life.
I come now to consider what that Right is, which this Evangelical Obedience,
or doing the Commands of the Law, according to the Favor and Mercy of the
Gospel, does confer upon us, by virtue of which we may assuredly expect Eternal
Life. And here,

Right of Purchase, Not a Right of Purchase.
or Merit It is a foolish Presumption, and intolerable Arrogance, to think we
can deserve any thing at the hands of God, unless it be his Wrath by our Sins.
For,

In Merit there must be an Equivalence.
or at least a proportion of Worth between the Work, and the Reward: Which to
imagine between our Obedience, and the Heavenly Glory, is to exalt the one
infinitely too high, and to abase the other infinitely too low. What proportion
is there between a Cup of cold Water given to a Disciple of Christ, and that
Ocean of Everlasting Joy and Pleasure, which shall be the Reward of it? A Man
might more reasonably expect to buy Stars with Counters, or to purchase a
Kingdom with two Mites, than think to purchase the Heavenly Kingdom by paying
down his Duties, and good Works, which are no way profitable unto God, (For is
it any Pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous; Job 22.3.
or is it any Gain unto him, that thou make thy Way perfect?) and bear no
more proportion to the infinite Glory of Heaven, than a single Cipher does to
the numberless Sands of the Sea.

Grace to obey is given freely.
is freely bestowed upon us by himself; and therefore the Obedience we perform
unto him, merely by his own Assistance, cannot be said (without a grand
Impropriety) to merit any Reward from him. Such kind of Merit is but an idle
and frivolous pretense: For certainly, he who gives me Money to buy an Estate
of him, does as freely give me that Estate, as if I had never bought it of him,
but he had immediately bestowed the Land upon me, and not the Sum of Money.

Obedience is imperfect, All our Obedience is imperfect.
and therefore, if it deserve any thing, it is only Punishment for the Defects
and Failures of it. This Coin is not current, this Metal is base and
adulterated, the King's Stamp defaced and obliterated, the Edges clipped, and
the Superscription, which should be on both sides Holiness to the Lord, is on
the Reverse at least, A Sacrifice to Hypocrisy, Formality, and Vain Glory; and
therefore this counterfeit and base Alloy will not pass for Purchase-Money; and
had it what it deserves, it would be melted down in the Furnace of Hell.

Obedience is due from us.
which it is not, yet is it no more than our bounden Duty; and Duty can never
be meritorious. We are bound by the Law of Nature, and, as we are Creatures who
have received our Beings, and the Continuance and Preservation of them from
God, to employ our selves faithfully and assiduously in his Service; and if,
for our greater Encouragement therein, he has promised, and will bestow upon
us a vast and unconceivable Reward, we must attribute it wholly to the
Supererrogation of his free Bounty; for without this, all our Services were duo
to him before. Thus our Savior tells us, Luke 17.9, 10.
Does the Master thank the Servant because he did the things that were
commanded him? I trow not. So likewise ye; when you shall have done all those
things that are commanded you, say, (not in a complemental way, but with Truth
and Sincerity,) we are unprofitable Servants, we have but done that which was
our Duty to do. And therefore certainly, if we cannot deserve Thanks, much less
can we deserve so ample a Reward as Eternal Life: And therefore those that
think to purchase Heaven and Eternal Life by doing that which is not commanded,
nor their Duty, will find a fearful Disappointment of their presumptuous Hopes,
when they shall hear that sad Greeting, Who has required these things at your
hands?

This Right then of Merit and Purchase is excluded, and no Man can have a Right
to Heaven upon the Account of the Worth and Value of his Works.

There is therefore a Threefold Right which they that do the Commandments of
God have to Heaven, A threefold Right to Heaven.
and Eternal Happiness.

1. They have a Right of Evidence. 2. They have a Right of Inheritance. 3. They
have a Right of Promise.
Right of Evidence to Eternal Life. A Right of Evidence.
He is judged to have the best Right to an Estate, who can produce the best
Evidence for it. Now the best Evidence that can be shown for Heaven, is our
unfeigned Obedience: All other things that Men may rely upon to justify their
Title, will prove but forged Deeds, to which only the Spirit of Presumption or
Enthusiasm has set his Seal, and not the Spirit of God; and therefore we find
how miserably the Confidence of those Wretches were dismounted, and their Hopes
frustrated, who came with Lord, Matthew. 7.22.
Lord, Have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils, and
in thy Name have done many wonderful Works? All this may be, and yet be no good
Title, no good Evidence for Heaven; for if those who cast out Devils, have not
cast out their Lusts; if those who prophecy in his Name, by their Sins
dishonor and blaspheme that Name; if those who are Workers of Miracles, are
yet Workers of Iniquity, he professes against them, that he knows them not;
and commands them to depart from him for ever, as Workers of Iniquity; Matthew.
7.22, 23.
whereas on the contrary, we find a joyful and blessed Sentence pronounced upon
others, according to the Evidence brought in for them by their good Works; so
our Lord himself tells us, Come ye Blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25.30.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: for I was hungry, and ye gave me Meat;
for I was thirsty, and ye gave me Drink; a Stranger, and ye took me in; naked,
and ye clothed me; sick and in Prison, and ye visited me. This Particle [For]
is not a Note of Causality or Merit, but only of Evidence; for as Evidences
prove our Right to our Possessions, so likewise our Obedience and good Works do
effectually prove the Right which we have to Eternal Life, through Christ's
Purchase, and God's free Donation; and therefore the Evidence being clear, the
Sentence must in Equity proceed accordingly. God, as a just and righteous
Judge, instates them in the Possession of the Kingdom of Heaven, because they
visited, and releived, and cherished his Son in his Members: Not that their
Love to him, or their Charity to them purchased any such Right; but only proves
and evinceth it: It is not the Cause of their Justification, but a Reason why
God declares them justified; as the Deeds which I produce are the Reason why an
Estate is adjudged mine, though the Cause of my Title to it be either my own
Purchase, or another's Gift. As therefore those are said to have no Right nor
Title to what they pretend, who can show no Evidence for it; so those who obey
not the holy Will and Commands of God, have no Right to the Tree of Life,
because they have no Evidence to show, nor no Plea to urge for it, but will
certainly be cast in their Suit.

A Right of Heirship.
Those that do God's Commandments have a Right of Heirship, and Inheritance
unto Eternal Life; for they are born of God, and therefore Heaven is their
Patrimony, their Paternal Estate; for so are the Words of the Apostle, 1 John
2.29.
Every one that does Righteousness, is born of God: And if they are born of
God, then, according to the Apostle's Argumentation, If Children, Romans 8.17.
then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with Christ, who is the Heir of all
things. The Trial of thy Legitimation, whether thou art a true and genuine Son
of God, will lie upon thy Obedience to his Commands; For in this, 1 John 3.9,
10.
says the Apostle, the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the
Devil: Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; and whosoever does not
Righteousness, is not of God. Now if by our Obedience and Dutifulness it
appears that we are indeed the Children of God, our Father will certainly give
us a Child's Portion, and that is no less than a Kingdom. So says our Savior,
Luke 12.32
Fear not, little Flock; it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom.

3. A Right of Promise.
Those that do God's Commandments have a Right to Eternal Life, by Promise and
Stipulation; and therefore it is called Eternal Life, Tit. 1.2.
which God that cannot lie has promised. Indeed, the whole Tenor of the
Gospel is nothing else but the Exhibition of this Promise, and a Comment upon
it. This is the Sum of the Gospel, the Terms of the Covenant, Matthew. 19.17.
the Indenture made between God and Man; If thou will enter into Life, says our
Savior, keep the Commandments. And in another place our Lord tells us, Matthew.
7.21.
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.

And thus you see what Right it is, that Obedience to the Commands of God gives
us to Eternal Life: A Right of Evidence, a Right of Heirship, and a Right of
Promise.

But, may some say, Is not this again to establish the antiquated Covenant of
Works; Do this, and live? And does not this abolish the Law of Faith, He that
believes shall be saved? Is it not the Office of Faith alone to convey unto us
a Right and Title unto Eternal Life?

I answer, No, it does no prejudice unto Faith; for we still affirm, that our
original and fundamental Right to Heaven is grounded, not upon our Obedience,
but Christ's; not upon our Works, but upon his; his Merits and Purchase, which,
through Faith, are imparted and imputed to us. Yet give me leave to say, that I
think the Notion of Justifying and Saving Faith is very much, if not generally
mistaken by us: And as the Soul is the most noble, and most vital Principle of
Man, and yet is most unknown to him what it is, and how it operates; so Faith,
which is the vital Principle of Christians, and by which the Just are said to
live, is yet most unknown, both as to its Nature and Operations, unto the
Generality of them: Some place it in Assurance, some in Affiance and
Recumbence; some in one Act of Faith, and some in another; which are either the
Effects of Faith as true, or the Degrees of it as strong, rather than the
proper and adequate Nature and Essence of it; and then they mightily puzzle
themselves how to accord and reconcile Faith and Obedience in carrying on the
great Work of our Salvation, which yet were never at a variance about it, but
only in their mistaken Hypothesis: For what is Faith, but an Assent to a
Testimony? The very force and import of the Word can carry no other Sense: And
he that says he believes, must needs mean he believes some Record or
Testimony; or else he speaks that which neither himself, nor any other can
understand. Consequently therefore a Divine Faith must be an Assent to a Divine
Testimony; that is, to the Word of God contained in the Holy Scriptures. But
now if this Faith rest only in a bare and naked Assent to the Truth of Divine
Revelation, it is but Historical and Dogmatical; which, though it be a Divine
Faith in respect of the Objects believed, yet is it but Humane and Natural in
respect of its Principle and Motives. But when this Assent to the Truths of the
Scripture is joined with proportionable Affections to those Truths, and does
excite us to Actions conformable to the Discoveries of the Divine Will, there
this Faith is Justifying and Saving. And certainly this is not so very distant
from Obedience, as to be thought hardly reconcilable with it. As for Instance,
A Man may give a bare Assent to this great Gospel Truth, that Jesus Christ came
into the World to save Sinners, and yet this Faith may not save him, because it
may be unoperative, and pass no farther than the Act of the Understanding: This
is a dead Faith, which can never bring any Man to Heaven; yea, such a Faith as
the very Devils and Damned Jam. 2.19
Spirits in Hell have, who believe and tremble. Another Man believes the same
Truth, and assents to the same Proposition; but this his Assent influenceth his
Affections, and governs his Actions, in Conformity to the Nature and
Consequences of such a Belief: And because he is assured that Jesus Christ came
into the World to be the Savior of it, therefore he loves him, trusts in him,
relies upon him, hopes in his Promises, and obeys his Commands. And this,
indeed, What Saving Faith is.
is a true Saving, Justifying Faith; for Saving Faith is a firm Assent unto the
Truths of God revealed in the holy Scriptures, working in us proportionable
Affections and Actions. He who so believes the Glory of Heaven, as to have his
Endeavors thereby quickened to use his utmost Diligence for the obtaining of
it: He who so believes the Torments of Hell, as thereby to be terrified from
doing any thing that might expose him to so great and fearful a Condemnation:
He who so believes the Attributes of God, as thereby to be excited to fear him
for his Greatness, to love him for his Goodness, to imitate him in his Bounty,
Purity, and Holiness: He who so believes the All Sufficiency, Merits, and
Mediatory Office of Jesus Christ, as thereby to be engaged with all his Soul to
love him, to trust in him, to rely upon him alone for Salvavation, and to yield
to him all sincere Obedience, as the Law requires; such an ones Faith is Saving
and Justifying. So that you see there is no such Discord between Faith and
Works, as some would imagine; for that Faith that saves us, must work by Love;
Gal. 5.6.
and those Works which capacitate us for Salvation, must be the Obedience of
Faith, Romans 16.26.
as it is called, Romans 16.26.

Question? Yea, but remember that Salvation is a litigious Claim, and you have
a powerful Adversary that puts in a strong Plea against you, even the Justice
of God, and his Eternal Wrath and Vengeance; whose Title to us, were it but
better weighed and considered, would woefully stagger the Hopes of most Men, and
make their Faces gather Blackness, and smite their Hearts with Amazement, and
their Knees with Trembling. In a Matter of such infinite Importance, it highly
concerns us to examine our Right and Title, and to peruse and try our
Evidences, lest at the Day of Trial we be cast in our Suit, and pay dreadful
Damages unto the Justice of God.

Only those who do God's Commandments have this Right to the Tree of Life.
Christ has indeed purchased Salvation for all, Heb. 5.19.
but he is the Author of Salvation only to those who obey him, as the Author to
the Hebrews speaks: Heb. 2.14.
And, Without Holiness no Man shall ever see the Lord. The Inheritance is
indeed purchased, but where are your Evidences of your Heirship? Sirs, flatter
not your selves with any vain Conceits of the Mercy of the Gospel, in prejudice
to the Authority of the Law: The Commandments are the Statute Law of God's
Kingdom, the Gospel is his Court of Chancery; but neither Justice nor Equity
will relieve those who have not done their utmost to observe his Statute Law;
and therefore those who indulge themselves in their Sloth, and wilful Neglect,
both of what they ought, and might have done, do but deceive their Souls with
vain Hopes; they have no Right to the Eternal Inheritance, but their Portion
must for ever be, with Dogs and Swine, without the holy City, into which no
unclean thing shall ever enter. And if any think this Legal Preaching, let mine
ever be so.

THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST. A SERMON PREACHED ON EASTER DAY, FROM ACTS II.
XXIV.

BY EZEKIEL HOPKINS, Late Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST, etc.
ACT. 2.24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the Pains of Death, because
it was not possible that he should be holden of it.


CHristian Religion is founded upon such mysterious and supernatural Truths,
Introduction.
and the Principles of it are so paradoxal to the received Opinions of Mankind,
that the greatest Persecution it ever found in the World, was not so much from
Fire and Sword, Racks and Tortures, the evident Cruelties of the first Opposers
of it, as from the Magisterial Dictates of partial and corrupt Reason.

The Philosophers, whom Tertullian calls the Patrons of Heretics, have
established two peremptory Maxims, utterly repugnant unto what the Scripture
reveals to us, both concerning our Happiness and Comfort: The one is, Ex
nihilo, nihil habetur: Out of nothing, nothing can be made; directly levelled
against the Creation of the World. And the other is, A privatione ad habitum
non datur Regressus: There is no Restoration of the same Being, after a total
Corruption and Dissolution of it; which still continues a great Prejudice
against the Resurrection of our Bodies; which the Oracles of Reason have so
much troubled the World with, that whatsoever seemed in the least contradictory
to it, they judged contradictory to common Sense, and exploded it as ridiculous
and impossible. Under these great Disadvantages the Christian Religion
labored, whilst it not only owned the Creation of the World out of nothing,
formerly described by Moses; but more clearly and openly attested the
Resurrection of the Dead, which before was not either so clearly known, or so
clearly proved; for these Doctrines were held so absurd by the great Sophisters
of the World, whose Minds were too deeply tinctured with contrary Notions, that
they looked upon the Christian Religion as a Design rather to destroy Reason,
than to save the Soul; accounting it a very absurd thing to believe in a
crucified Savior, as being a Person weak and impotent; or the future
Resurrection, as being a thing utterly impossible.

We find the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.24.
complaining that the Greeks, who were then the great Masters of Wisdom and
Learning, esteemed a crucified Christ Foolishness, and thought those Men little
befriended by Reason, that would depend for Life upon one that lost his own;
and venture to take off the Shamefulness of the Cross, or to silence those
Scoffs that were cast upon them for their Credulity, who affirm the wonderful
Resurrection of a dead Savior, and his glorious Triumph over Death and the
Grave. For this seemed to them no other than to solve an Absurdity by an
Impossibility, and make Reason more suspicious, in that they judged the
Fundamentals of Reason must be overthrown, to make the Fundamentals of
Christianity any way tolerable or possible. Wherefore we find that even at
Athens, that great Concourse of Wits, where all the Sect of Philosophers made
their common Retreat; yet when St. Paul preached to them Jesus, and the
Resurrection, this Doctrine seemed so absurd and foolish to them, and so
contrary to all Principles of right Reason, that they forgot that Civility that
usually is found in Men of inquisitive Spirits, and brake out into open
Reproaches and Revilings; Act. 17.18
What will this Babbler say? because he preached to them Jesus, and the
Resurrection. No doubt they wanted not very specious Arguments to urge against
the Resurrection of the Body: As first, The Impossibility of a Recollection of
the dispersed Particles of Men, resolved into their Elements, and scattered by
the four Winds of Heaven; though it might be very well retorted on the
Epicureans, who disputed with St. Paul, against the Resurrection, that it was
not so unlikely a thing that there might be a Reunion of the scattered Parts
of the same Man, as the fortuitous Concourse of Attoms at the first Making of
the World; yet this Objection overbore and prevaild with Heathens, that when
they burnt the Bodies of Christians, they cast their Ashes into the Rivers, to
confute their Hopes of ever being raised again; from whenee they should be
carried away into an unknown Ocean, and there be made the Sport of Winds and
Waves. But what our Savior says upon the same Occasion to the Sadduces, may be
said unto these Men; You err, Matthew. 22.29.
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God: For unless their Parts could
be scattered beyond the reach of Omnipotency, unless they could be ground so
small, as to escape the Knowledge and Care of God, who orders and rangeth
every Mote that plays up and down in the Sunbeams, this Dispersion of the Body
proves not the Impossibility of their Union, because the Power and Providence
of God will gather up every Dust, and rally them together again, into the same
Place and Order as now they are.

Resurrection of the Body, may be the various Changes dead Bodies undergo;
being first turned into Earth, that again turned into Grass and Herbs, that
becoming Nourishment for other Men or Beasts, that Nourishment again passing
into their Substance, making a kind of Transmigration of Bodies, as Pythagoras
would have there was of Souls: which is very evident in the Case of
Anthropomorphites, and Men-Eaters, who have, of several parts of other Men's
Bodies, compounded their own. And so the same Question may be demanded, which
the Sadduces asked our Savior, concerning the seven Brethren that married the
same Woman, whose Wife of the seven she should be at the Resurrection? So here,
those Parts that belonged to so many Men, to which of them belong they in the
Resurrection, without detriment to the rest? Here the same Answer occurrs, that
Christ gave them; Matthew. 22.29.
You err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God; who is the best
Judge of Property, and can resolve all those Parts, by which any Nourishment
has been received by any other Creatures, unto their own proper Bodies again.

And thus it appears, these Arguments against the Resurrection of the Body,
amount not to prove the Impossibility of the Effect; but only the Supernatural
Almighty Power of the Efficient. Wherefore, granting the Resurrection
impossible, according to the Original Course of Natural Things, yet when an
Omnipotent Arm does interpose, which gives Laws unto it, who dares to say, the
Creature may be brought to such a State of Dissolution, as may out-reach the
Dominion of the Almighty Creator.

Upon these Grounds it is, that the Apostle urges, Act. 26.8.
why it should be thought a strange and incredible thing that God should raise
the Dead; and in the Text, that he asserts the Resurrection of Christ. And to
prevent any fallacious Cavils against it, he shows,

First, Division of the Words.
That God raised him from the Dead; and therefore it was not to be accounted a
thing impossible, since to God nothing could imply a Contradiction.

Secondly, He does not only assert the Possibility, but the Impossibility of
his final Continuance under the Power of Death. The Grave that grasps and
retains all other Mortals, was not able to detain him who has Immortality and
Life dwelling in himself: It was not possible he should be holden of it,
therefore God has raised him up, loosing the Pains of Death. Whom God raised
up: Here is the Efficient Cause of Christ's Resurrection, in the concurrent
Action of the whole Trinity; for all that God does out of himself, is ascribed
to all the Three Persons. Sometimes it is ascribed to the Father, Act. 3.13, 15.
as the Apostle speaks; The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God
of our Fathers, has glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up, and denied
the Holy One, and the Just, desiring a Murderer; and killed the Prince of
Life, whom God has raised from the Dead. Sometimes it is ascribed to the Son,
who by the infinite Power of his Divinity, raised up his Humane Nature from the
Grave: So our Savior himself tells us, I lay down my Life of my self: Joh.
3.18.
I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again. The same
may be collected of the Holy Ghost, from the Words of the Apostle; Romans 8.11
If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies by his
Spirit. Now if the Spirit of God can quicken our Bodies, the same Spirit also
can quicken the Body of Christ, since it is the same Spirit that quickens both
the Head, and the Members.

Having loosed the Pains of Death: In some Copies it is, Having loosed the
Pains of Hell; which possibly gave Occasion to that fond Opinion of some, that
Christ descended into Hell, and there underwent the Pains and Penalties of that
infernal Place, as full Satisfaction to the Justice of God; and that these were
the Pains God raised or loosed him from in his Resurrection. But this Conceit
is erroneous and extravagant, and deserves no serious Confutation, especially
because it plainly contradicts Christ's Consummatum est upon the Cross; for
when Christ had undergone his Sufferings on the Cross, Joh. 18.30.
he said, It is finished, and so gave up the Ghost. If Christ therefore did
undergo any farther Sufferings and Pains than those Sufferings he underwent on
the Cross, those Sufferings would have been so far from being completed and
finished, that they would have been but the Praeludium, and Beginning of his
Sorrows. Having loosed the Pains of Death, it implies no more but that God
raised Jesus Christ from Death, which, after many dolorous Pains, he suffered.
It follows, It was not possible he should be holden of it. This is that I
intend principally to insist upon; and here I shall show upon what Accounts it
was altogether impossible for Christ to be detained under the Power of Death;
and my Arguments for the Proof hereof are these that follow. Reasons why Christ
could not be held under the Power of, Death.


First, It was impossible Christ should be held under the Power of Death,
because of that great and ineffable Mystery of the Hypostatical Union of the
Divine and Humane Nature in the Person of Christ. Because of the Hypostatical
Union.
There are three Unions, the Belief of which are the Foundation of the greatest
part of the Christian Religion, which are wholly beyond the reach of Reason:
The Mystical Union of a Believer unto Christ: The Union, or rather Unity of the
three Glorious Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, in one Nature;
and this Hypostatical Union of two Natures in one Person, in the Mediator. It
is a Mystery Angels pry into, and adore, with Wonder and Astonishment, how the
Eternal, only begotten Son of God should assume Flesh to himself, in so close
and intimate a Conjunction, that though he be Eternal, yet he should be born;
though he be Immortal, yet he should truly die; and though he were truly dead,
yet he should raise himself to Life again. These are things that seem very
inconsistent one with another, yet they truly come to pass through this
miraculous Union, which transcends the Reach of Reason, as far as these things
do that of Nature. That the same Person that is Eternal, should be young; yea,
be born in the Fullness of Time. That the same Person that has Immortality and
Life dwelling in himself, should also die a shameful and accursed Death. That
the same Person that was truly and really dead, yet had a power to quicken and
recover himself, Joh. 10.18. And this was it which declared him to be the Son
of God with Power, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.4^
even by his Resurrection from the Dead. And indeed, if he had not risen from
the Dead, the Deity would have suffered in the Opinion of the World; nor would
they have believed him to be the Son of God, who would suffer himself to lie
under the Dominion of Death, longer than the End of his Death required it: And
this I shall demonstrate to you by two Arguments; only premising this, which is
a common and true Maxim among Divines; That when the Natural Union between
Christ's Body and Soul was dissolved, yet both Soul and Body did retain the
Hypostatical Union to the Divine Nature. The Divine Nature was united to the
Body of Christ, when the Soul was separated from it.

Resurrection of the Dead is not impossible to the infinite Power of God, so
neither can it be that that God who had a Will to assume our Flesh, should want
a Will to raise it up: That that God who so loved the Humane Nature, as to
associate it into Oneness of Person with himself, should yet suffer it to
continue under the power of Death, which is, of all things, most contrary to
his natural Inclinations. We see Christ, in his Agony, prayed most fervently
that the bitter Cup might pass from him, insomuch that he strained clotted
Blood through him; and certainly, one Ingredient into that Cup was the
Separation of Soul and Body by Death; which is that which even innocent Nature
it self abhorred, as destructive to him; yet having taken our Nature upon him
for this very End, that by Death he might destroy him that had the power of
Death, that is, Heb. 2, 14.
the Devil, he voluntarily submitted himself to undergo it; and this End being
fully accomplished by his Death, and the Truth of his Death likewise attested
by his lying three Days in the Earth, it was altogether impossible that that
Person who had an Abhorrence of Death, and a Power to raise himself, should
continue longer under the Arrest and Dominion of it. And this is the first
Demonstration of the Necessity of the Resurrection of Christ, upon the Account
of both Natures in one Person: As Man, so he abhorred the Separation of Soul
and Body; as God, so he was able to reunite them: So that having, as Man, a
Desire to live, and as God, a Power to live, it was impossible for him to be
holden of Death.

Miracle, have undergone such Changes after Death as ours shall do; and to
imagine the contrary, is but to feign one Miracle, to avoid the necessity of
another, even of the Resurrection. But now, it was utterly impossible that that
Body that was united to both Natures, by so close and unconceivable a Bond,
should ever see Corruption; that is, a Putrefaction in the Grave: This the
Scripture clearly asserts to us; Act. 2.28.
Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine Holy One
to see Corruption. And also, because all Bodies that are corrupted turn into
some other Thing, and some other Nature, according to that undoubted Maxim of
the Philosophers, Corruption unius est Generatio alterius: And so this horrid
and blasphemous Consequence would follow, that the Divine Nature of the Son of
God might have been joined to some other. So that it was necessary that Christ
should be raised again, before any Corruption or Putrefaction, by ordinary
Course of Nature, siezed upon him.

Thus I have proved by these two Arguments, that because of the Hypostatical
Union of the Divine and Humane Nature of Christ in one Person, it was
altogether impossible he could be holden of Death.

Secondly, Another Argument is this, It was impossible Christ should be holden
of Death, because of God's Veracity, and the Truth of those Predictions which
were before made concerning Christ, in those many Types and Prophesies of the
Old Testament; all which God's Faithfulness stood engaged to fulfill. I shall
only mention that famous Prediction which St. Peter here subjoins, as a Proof
of the Subject I am now treating upon: It was not possible, Act. 2 25, 27.
says he, that Christ should be holden of Death; for God, says the Apostle, as
David says concerning him; Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer
thine Holy One to see Corruption. And this Prophecy the Apostle quotes out of
the Psalmist; Psalm. 16.10
which, that it did not belong to David, nor did he speak it concerning
himself, when he indicted that Psalm, the Apostle proves, Act. 2.29, 30.
Ver. 29, 30. of this Chapter; where he proves that David was dead and buried,
and underwent the common Lot that all other dead Bodies did, putrefying and
mouldering away in the Earth; and therefore he was not that Holy One that
should never see Corruption, because that Prophecy must belong to such an one
who must so taste of Death; and this is clearly implied in the former
Expression, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, that is, in the State of the
Dead, for so is Hell to be understood there, as I shall show more at large:
Neither could it belong to any of those who, before Christ, were raised
miraculously from the Dead, and brought back out of the State of Death; yet was
it not in such a manner, that they were not to return again to it: So that if
they did not in the first, yet in their second Dying they saw Corruption. This
then could belong to none of them, and therefore must of necessity belong to
Christ. And since the Apostle lays so much stress on this Argument, give me
leave a little to consider the meaning of it, and how it is applicable to him.
And here I shall not trouble you with the various Opinions of those that have
attempted to interpret these Words, Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell; that
by this Hell, into which Christ descended, is meant the place of the Damned,
where he preached the Gospel to them, freeing those that would believe from
their Pains. Others think that this Hell, into which Christ descended, was one
great Partition of it, called Lymbus Patrum, the Repository of the Souls of
those Fathers who died in Obedience to God, and in Faith to the Messiah, before
Christ came in the Flesh: And the Reason of his Descent thither was, that he
might release those Souls from Chains, and carry them with him to Heaven; so
that ever since, that Mansion in Hell has been left void, without any
Inhabitants. But this Opinion is not capable of any sufficient Proof; I shall
therefore give you that Interpretation and Judgment which carries with it the
strongest Current, both of Scripture and Reason. The Word Hades, that we
translate Hell, is very often, by the Septuagint, in the Old Testament, used to
signify the Grave, or the State of the Dead. So in Genesis 44. Ishades, Genesis 44 31
we translate it the Grave, but it is the same Word that is used for Hell in
the Text. And thus the Word is used in other places of Scripture, as also in
other Authors, to signify the Place and State of the Dead, and of separate
Souls. And for the leaving the Soul of Christ in Hades, or in Hell, we must
know, that it is a thing that is not unusual in Scripture, to call a Man that
is dead by the Name of Soul: So the Septuagint translate that place in
Leviticus, Levit. 21.11.
They shall not be defiled with dead Souls, meaning dead Carcases, neither
shall they go into any dead Souls, the Word is dead Bodies. But not to detain
you any longer on this Speculation, though of great use for the right
understanding of this excellent place of Scripture: If we take Hell for the
Grave, we must take the Soul for the Body; Thou will not leave my Body in the
Grave: But if by Hell be here understood the State of Death, that is, the State
of Separation of Soul and Body, the Interpretation will be more easy and
natural, Thou will not leave my Soul in a State of Separation from the Body,
but wilt certainly unite them together again, and raise me up before I shall
feel Corruption. Thus I have given you the Interpretation of the Prophecy of
David, which, upon the Account of God's Truth and Veracity, was to take effect
in the Resurrection of our Savior; and therefore being foretold he should not
see Corruption, the Faithfulness of God was obliged within that time inviolably
to raise him up. And that is the second Reason why it was impossible Christ
should be holden of Death, because it was foretold of him, that his Soul should
not rest in Hell; that is, either his Body in the Grave, or his Soul in a State
of Separation from his Body.

Thirdly, God's Justice would not suffer Christ to lie in the Grave.
Another Argument is this: It was impossible Christ could be holden by Death,
upon the Account of God's Justice. For Justice, as it does oblige to inflict
Punishment upon the Guilty, so also to absolve and acquit the Innocent. Now,
though Christ knew no Sin, yet was he made Sin for us; that is, our Sins were
imputed to, and charged upon him, and so, through a voluntary Susception and
Undertaking of them, he became guilty of them: Hereupon Divine Justice siezed
upon him, as being our Surety, and demanded Satisfaction from him for our
Offenses: Now no other Satisfaction would be acceptable unto God, nor
commensurate to our Sins, but the bearing of an infinite Load of Wrath and
Vengeance; which if it had been laid upon us, must have been prolonged to an
Eternity of Sufferings; for because we are finite Creatures, we cannot bear
infinite Degrees of Wrath at once, and therefore we must have lain under those
infinite Degrees of Wrath to an infinite Duration: But now Christ being God, he
could bear the Load of infinite Degrees of Wrath at once upon him. In that one
bitter Draught, the whole Cup of that Fury and Wrath of God, that we should
have been everlastingly a drinking off, by little Drops, Christ drank off at
once. Now it is the Nature and Constitution of all Laws, that when a Person by
undergoing the Penalty that those Laws require, has made satisfaction for the
Offense committed, the Person satisfying ought to be protected as innocent. It
could not therefore consist with the Justice of God, that when Christ had
satisfied his utmost Demands, that any of the punishment due to our Sins, for
which he satisfied, should have lain upon him longer; for that would have been
no other than punishing without an Offense. Now nothing is clearer in
Scripture, than that Death is a punishment inflicted upon us for Sin: Rom 6 23.
So says the Apostle; The Wages of Sin is Death. And in another place, and 5.1^.
By Sin Death entered into the World, and Death passed upon all, because all
have sinned. From all which it follows, that as Christ taking upon him our
Sins, became thereby liable to Death; so having satisfied for our Sins, and
thereby freed himself from the Guilt that he lay under by Imputation, he was no
longer liable unto Death, which is one part of the punishment he underwent; so
that it could not have been agreeable to infinite Justice, that Christ should
have been holden of Death, who by his undergoing of Death, has sustained the
whole Load of God's infinite Wrath and Displeasure, and fully satisfied for all
those Sins that were imputed to him, and therefore ought in Justice to be
acquitted from all Penalties, and consequentially from Death.

Fourthly, Christ could not be holden of Death, because of his Mediatorship.
It was impossible Christ should be holden of Death, in respect of his Office
of Mediatorship: For having as our Mediator undertaken the desperate Service
of bringing sinful and fallen Man to Life and Happiness, he must of necessity
not only dye, but rise again from the dead, without which his Death, and
whatever else he did or suffered for us, would have been of no avail. There are
two Things requisite, before any real or eternal Benefit can become ours.

First, A meritorious purchase procuring the Thing it self for us.

Secondly, An effectual Application of that Benefit to us. The Purchase of
Mercy was made by the Death of Christ, by which a full Price was paid down to
the Justice of God. But the effectual Application of Mercy is by the Life and
Resurrection of Christ, Wherefore if Christ had only dyed, and not risen again;
if he had not overcome Death within its own Empire, and triumphed over the
Grave in its own Territories, it would have been to his Disappointment, and not
at all to our Salvation. The Loss of Christ's Life would not have procured Life
for us, unless as he laid it down with Freedom; so he had again restored it
with Power. Our hope of Salvation otherwise would have been buried in the same
Grave with himself; but what he died to procure, he lives to confer. It was
Ignorance of Christ's Resurrection from the Dead, Luke 24.16, 19, 20, 21.
that so staggered the two Disciples going to Emaus: They tell Christ himself a
sad Story of one Jesus of Nazareth, that was condemned and crucified, who,
while he lived among us, by his Word and Works testified himself to be the true
Messiah, we little thought of his Dying; and when he told us of his Death, he
likewise foretold us of his Resurrection the third Day; and behold, the third
Day is already come, and yet is there no Appearance of this Jesus: Verily, we
trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel; but now our
Hopes grow faint, and languish in us; for certainly, there can be no Redemption
for Israel by him who cannot redeem himself from Death. There was nothing in
the World did so much prejudice the Gospel, and hinder its taking place in the
Hearts of Heathens in the Primitive Times, as this of the Cross and Death of
Christ; for believing that he was lifted up upon the Cross, but not believing
that he was raised up from the Dead, they assented to their Natural Reason,
which herein taught them, that it was Folly to expect Life from him who could
not either preserve or restore his own.

It is true, it was Folly thus to hope, but that his Life applies what his
Death deserved; and our Salvation begun on the Cross, is perfected on the
Throne. And therefore the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15.17.
our Faith in a crucified Savior, and our Obedience to him is all vain, if he
had not risen again from the Dead: For unless he had risen from the Dead, he
could not have acquitted us from the Guilt of Sin, because he could not have
been justified himself. We are justified by the Righteousness of Christ, as the
Apostle speaks, in his Epistle to the Romans; Rom 4 25
which Righteousness he wrought out for us, both by his perfect Obedience to
the Law, and by his Submission to the Punishment of the Law: But yet this
Righteousness could not have availed to our Justification, had he not, after
the Fulfilling of it, risen again from the Dead; because he himself had not
been justified, much less could we have been justified by one who could not
have justified himself. And therefore we read, 1 Timothy 3.16.
Great is the Mystery of Godliness, says the Apostle; God manifested in the
Flesh, in his Incarnation; justified in the Spirit, by his Resurrection; seen
of Angels, in his Ascension. Had he not been raised and quickened by the Spirit,
that is, by the glorious Power of his Divine Nature, he had not been declared
just, nor could he have justified us: For this Declaration, that Christ was
just, was made upon the Resurrection of his Body from the Dead, by which he was
set free from all those Penalties due to our Sins that were imputed to him. If
therefore the Justification and Salvation of Sinners was a Design laid by the
infinite Wisdom of God, it must needs follow, that it was impossible for Christ
to be kept under Death, because that would have obstructed their Justification
and Salvation, and so would have brought a Disappointment upon the infinite
Wisdom of God, which was impossible to be done; and therefore consequentially
Christ could not be holden of Death.

The Application of this great Truth shall be briefly in these following
Inferences.

First then, If it was impossible for Christ not to have risen from the Dead,
it is evident then that Christ is the true Messiah: For had he been an
Impostor, or False Prophet, it would have been so far from an Impossibility
that he should not have been raised, that it would have been a very
Impossibility for him to have risen again; for neither could he have raised
himself, being a mere Man; neither would God have raised him, being a mere
Impostor and Cheat. When therefore the Jews called for a Sign from Christ, to
prove him to be the true Messiah, he gives them the Sign of his Resurrection,
in Matthew. 12.38, 39. Master, Matthew. 12.38, 39.
say they, we would see a Sign from thee. He answered and said unto them, An
evil and adulterous Generation seeks after a Sign, and there shall be no Sign
given to it, but the Sign of the Prophet Jonas: For as Jonas was three Days and
three Nights in the Whale's Belly, so shall the Son of Man be three Days and
three Nights in the Heart of the Earth. So again, when they tempted him at
another time, for a Sign of his being the Messiah, he still instances in his
powerful Resurrection from the Dead, in Joh. 2.18, 19. Joh. 2.18, 19.
The Jews answered and said unto him, What Sign show thou unto us, seeing
thou do these things. Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this
Temple, and in three Days I will raise it up So that still he made his Death
and Resurrection to be the infallible Proof of his being the true Messiah.

Secondly, If it were necessary that Christ should rise from the Dead, and that
he did do so, then certainly Sin is conquered; for the Sting of Death, and that
envenomed Weapon Death has, whereby it wounds, yea kills the Sinner, is Sin;
and as long as Death has this Sting in it, it could not have been conquered by
any Sinner. It is Sin that gives Death its Power to hold fast all those that
come within its reach; which since it could not do with Christ, it is evident
Sin is subdued by Christ, who was in its Arms and Grasp, but yet came safe out
from it, taking away the Sting and Weapon of Death with him.

Thirdly, If the Resurrection of Christ be thus necessary, and has been thus
effectually accomplished, we may comfortably from thence conclude the Necessity
of our own Resurrection; for the Head being raised, the Members shall not
always sleep in the Dust. Christ's Mystical Body shall certainly be raised, as
well as his Natural Body; and every Member of it shall be made for ever
glorious, with a glorious and triumphant Head.

FINIS.
Brotherly Admonition. IN SEVERAL SERMONS ON Leviticus 19.17.

By EZEKIEL HOPKINS, Late Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. for Nathanael Ranew, at the Kings-Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCI.

Brotherly Admonition. IN SEVERAL SERMONS.
LEV. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Heart: thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him.


WAving all Prefaces and Introductions, we may observe in these Words three
Parts. Division of the Words.


First, A Negative Command, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Heart: which
implies in it the contrary positive Precept, thou shall love thy Brother.

Secondly, A Direction how we should preserve our selves from this rancoured
Vice of Hatred, and express our more cordial Love, in the best Service we can
do for him; Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor.

Thirdly, A forcible Motive to excite us unto the performance of this Duty,
drawn from the Consideration of the great Benefit which will in likelihood
redound to him by the conscientious discharge of it. By this means thou will
not suffer Sin to lie upon him: implying, that if this charitable Duty of
Fraternal Reproof be neglected, he will still continue in his Sins, his Guilt
will remain upon him, and thou will be accessory to it.

I shall not consider any of these Particulars by themselves, but treat only of
what is here chiefly intended, namely, the necessity of that much neglected
Duty of Brotherly Reproof and Admonition.

And here I shall prosecute this Method with all possible Brevity and
Perspicuity.

First, Show you what Brotherly Correption is. Secondly, The Difficulty of it.
Thirdly, The Necessity of it. Fourthly, Lay down some Rules and Directions how
it ought to be performed. Fifthly, Lay before you some Considerations that may
be powerful Motives and Engagements to it.
First, What Brotherly Reproof or Correption is.

To this I answer in brief, What Brotherly Reproof is.
It is an Act of Love and Charity, whereby we endeavor to reduce our offending
Brother to Repentance and Reformation: And there are two ways of doing it,
either by Words or Actions.

First, Reproof is by Words.
By Words; remonstrating to them the greatness of their Sin, the Scandal they
give to others, either by encouraging, or sadning them; the Reproach they bring
upon Religion, and the Danger they bring upon their own Souls. But if they be
deaf to all these Admonitions, and continue obstinate and resolved in their
evil Courses, we are then to reprove them.

Secondly, Reproof may be by Actions.
By Actions; That where Words have proved ineffectual, we may try how Deeds can
prevail. Prevail, I say, either to deliver them, or, at least, to deliver thine
own Soul from Death. And this also must be done these two ways.

First, Reproof of Inferiors, is to be by Authority.
If they be our Inferiors over whom we have Authority, either as Magistrates,
or Parents, or the like; we ought, when Admonition and Correption is fruitless,
to reprove them by Correction and Punishment: If they will not hear, they must
feel Rebuke. This Discipline if it be seasonably and prudently used, is so far
from being any Act of Cruelty, that it is an Act of the greatest Kindness and
Charity that can be both to them and to others.

To them: Reproof tends to restrain f^^m Sin.
As it may restrain them from the commission of those future Crimes, to which
their impurity would else imbolden them. And thus to fall into the Hands of
Men, may be a means to keep them from falling into the Hands of God.

To others: As it may terrify them from following the Examples of such an ones
Vices, by seeing the Examples of his suffering. Thus the Punishment of some is
made to be come the Innocence of others.

Secondly, If Equals continue obstinate under Reproof, we must withdraw Society
from them.
If they be our Equals, over whom we have no Jurisdiction, nor coercive Power,
we are then to rebuke them, if they continue obstinate after Christian
Admonition, by withdrawing our selves from all necessary Converse with them;
not so as to deny them the offices of Civility, Courtesy, and our charitable
Assistance to promote their temporal Good; but to break off all Familiarity and
Intimacy with them: not to make such lewd and dissolute Persons our Friends and
chosen Companions. Thus the Apostle charges us, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6.
2 Thessalonians. 3.6. We command you, Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that you withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, and
not after the Tradition which he received of us. And this way of reproving them
ought to be so managed by us, that it may appear it does not proceed from any
sour, morose, surly Humor, disdaining or hating of their Persons, but merely
from conscience of our Duty toward the Glory of God, and to do an Act of Love
and Charity, as indeed it is, both toward them, and toward our selves.

First, Toward them: When you thus endeavor to shame them out of their
Wickedness, by discountenancing them in it. So says the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
If any Man obey not our Word, note that Man, and have no Company with him, that
he may be ashamed. And indeed, if a Man be not altogether profligate, if he be
not utterly lost to Modesty, it must needs make him reflect upon himself with
Shame and Blushing, that certainly he is grown a strange vile Wretch, a
loathsome and odious Monster, when all good and sober Men do thus carefully shun
and avoid him. Now Shame is a good step to Amendment: And a Blush the first
color that Virtue takes.

Secondly, Toward your selves: You are obliged to abandon them, as to reclaim
them, so to secure your selves: For Vice is very contagious, and it is unsafe
to converse with those, who have such Plague-Sores running upon them, lest you
be also infected.

Thus you see what this Duty of Brotherly Reproof is, and how in the general it
is to be performed, either in Words or Actions. And to these, two Things are
necessarily previous and antecedent,

First, Conviction of the Fault.
Instruction and Conviction. We ought to bring them to see their Fault before
we rebuke them for it; otherwise while we chide and do not inform them, it will
rather seem a proud design of quarrelling with them, than a conscientious
design of bettering them. And therefore we find how artificially Nathan
insinuates into David the hainousness and inhumanity of his Sin, and works in
him a Hatred and Detestation of that Person who was so cruel and devoid of
Compassion, before he comes to deal downright with him, Thou art the Man. And
could we but skilfully convince our Brother, by thus representing the
odiousness of such and such Sins, to which we know he is addicted, possibly we
might spare our selves in that which is the most ungrateful and displeasing
part of this Work, I mean personal Reflection, and leave it to his own
Conscience to reprove himself, and to apply it home, with, Thou art the Man.
And,

Secondly, We ought to watch over our Brother.
It is necessary that we watch over our Brother, not so as to be insidious
Spies upon him, officiously to pry into his Actions, and busily concern our
selves in all he does. This pragmatical Temper is justly hateful: And those who
thus arrogate to themselves to be public Censors, and to inspect the Lives and
Manners of others, making it their whole Employment to observe what others say
or do, that they may have Matter either to reprove or reproach them, are a
Company of intolerable busy Bodies. But yet,

First, By Caution.
We ought so to watch over our Brother as to give him timely Caution if we see
him in any danger through Temptation or Passion, and to admonish him to stand
upon his guard, to recollect himself and beware he be not surprised or injured
by such an approaching Sin.

And Secondly, The best season.
If we have observed any Miscarriages in him, we are to watch the best Seasons,
and all the fittest Circumstances in which to remind him of it, that so our
Reproof may be well accepted, and become effectual. For he that will venture
rashly to reprove without this Circumspection, may do more mischief to his
Brother by rebuking him, than he had done to himself by offending: Exasperating
and imbittering his Heart against Piety, for the Impertinencies, at least the
Indiscretions of those who profess it, and provoking him to sin the more out of
mere Opposition and Contradiction. And I am verily persuaded, and have in some
Cases observed it, that very many Sins owe themselves to the imprudence of
those who have taken upon themselves to be Reprovers, and would never have been
committed, if they had not indiscreetly gainsay'd it. Thus we see what this
Duty of reproving is, and what is necessarily required thereunto.

But indeed, Of the difficulty of Reproof.
which is the Second Thing, It is not so hard a Matter to know what it is, as
it is difficult conscientiously and faithfully to practice it. How few are
there in the World, I will not say skillful enough to do it well, but zealous
and conscientious enough to do it at all? Do we not every day see God fearfully
dishonored, observe his Name blasphemed, his Laws violated, his Worship
denied? Do you not daily see multitudes of wretched Creatures, whose Crimes not
onsy defy and outrage God, but stab and murder their own Souls; and yet who
is there that has that Zeal for God, or that Charity for his Brother, as to
interpose, and by a serious and fitting Reproof, vindicate the one from
Dishonor, or rescue the other from Perdition? There are enough that will make up
a sad Mouth, and whisper those things abroad, it may be out of very ill Ends
and Designs: but where almost is the Person that will dare to maintain the
Honor of God to the Face of those who boldly affront him; that will dare to
open their Mouths before those that will dare to open them against Heaven?
Certainly we can easily produce much more Reason for our Reproofs, than they
can for their Wickedness; and it were very strange, if we should not be able to
beat them off from their Confidence, when we have God and our own Consciences,
nay and theirs also, to side with us. Yet so it is that we are generally apt to
sneak and slink away from so troublesome a Task, and to let Iniquity pass
uncontrolled, yea triumphant. We are well content to let others sin quietly, so
that we may live quietly without troubling our selves with so hard and
difficult a Service. And that which makes it seem so difficult, is,

First, A sinful Fear; and,

Secondly, A sinful Shame, that seizes on the Spirits of Men, and takes off
the edg of holy Courage and Confidence, that are so absolutely necessary to the
performing of this Duty.

First, Fear of displeasing should not hinder reproving for Sin.
Many are afraid to reprove Sin, lest they should incur Displeasure, weaken
their secular Interest, ruin their Dependencies, and bring some Mischief upon
themselves, by exasperating the Offenders against them. But these are poor,
low, carnal Considerations. Where Matter of Duty is in question, it is very
necessary for every Christian to be of an undaunted Courage and Resolution, not
to fear the Faces of Men, nor to be frighted with a grim Look, or a proud Huff.
If he will seriously perform this Duty, he must remember, that he is pleading
for God, that he is saving a Soul from Hell, and therefore ought not to value
their Anger, nor his own Damage; but to steel himself against all such mean and
sordid Considerations. Indeed it shows a most pitiful Spirit in us, that we
should be more afraid of offending them, than they are of offending God. Shall
they be bold to sin, and we not bold enough to tell them of it? And yet such is
the Cowardice of the Generality of Christians, that they dare not appear for
God, or for Piety and Holiness, when they see them wronged by the Impudence of
boisterous Sinners; but those pitiful, little, base carnal Respects of what
they may lose, or what they may suffer by it, intervene, and make them sit
mopish, and over-awed, like Men in whose Mouths are no Reproofs; Psalm. 38.14.
whilst these wicked Wretches, who have all the Reason in the World to be
timorous and fearful, glory in thus outbraving and baffling them.

Secondly, Shame should not hinder Reproving for Sin.
Others again are ashamed to reprove Sin. And whereas many vile and profligate
Wretches glory in their Shame, these on the contrary are ashamed of that which
would be their Glory. Either they doubt they shall be thought but troublesome
and hypocritical Intermedlers; or else possibly being conscious to themselves
of many Miscarriages, they suspect their Reproofs will be upbraidingly retorted
upon themselves, and so by reproving the Faults of others, they shall but give
an occasion to have their own ripped up and exposed: And so they think it the
safer way to say nothing, lest by raking into other Men's Dunghills, they should
but furnish them with Dirt enough to fling back in their own Faces. And thus
between these two carnal Principles of sinful Fear, and sinful Shame, which are
so deeply rooted in our corrupt Natures, Reproof is commonly neglected, and it
is one of the hardest things in the World, to persuade Men to be true to God,
to their own Souls, and to the Souls of their Brethren, in a faithful discharge
of that Duty which is usually attended with such Disadvantages and Difficulties.

But though it be thus difficult; yet,

Thirdly, Reproof a very necessary Duty.
It is a most necessary Duty. The greatest good you can do in the World is to
pluck up these Briars and Thorns with which it is overgrown. Consider but how
insolent Vice and Wickedness is apt. to be where none do appear to check and
control it. If it can but once silence Virtue, it will quickly banish it. If
it can but put it to the Blush, it will quickly put it to flight. And when it
has once made us either afraid or ashamed to lay a Rebuke in its way, what
else can we expect but that it should overspread the Face of the whole Earth,
and like a general Deluge drown all Mankind, first in Sin, and then in
Perdition. There is no other way to prevent this great and sad Ruin, but for
every Christian vigorously to oppose himself to the growing Sins of the Times
and Places in which he lives, and with Courage and Resolution to decry that
common Profaneness, that gains Credit only by our Silence We know that Sin is a
shameful opprobrious Thing in it self, a Thing that disheartens and dispirits
the Guilty; They wear a Conscience about them that is still checking and
upbraiding them; and if we could but look into their Souls, we should see them
covered all over with Fear, Horror, and Confusion. They are generally
self-condemned Persons, and carry those Monitors within their own Breasts that
are continually reproving and tormenting them: And therefore that they may not
hear the Voice of their own Consciences, they live abroad, and rather converse
with any one without doors, than with themselves and their own troublesome and
clamorous Hearts. Now let it be our Care to stop up all Passages, by which they
think to make their escape. Let them find, that in whatsoever Company they go,
they shall meet with those that will no more spare them, than their own
Consciences; that Company is no Sanctuary for Sins and Guilt, and that they
shall be as sure to be Reprooved, as they dare to Offend. And when they are
thus everywhere beset, their Consciences exclaiming against them within, and
all that they converse with without, they will see a Necessity for it, either
to forsake their Vices, or the World, and be forced to be virtuous for their
own ease and quiet. And certainly till Christians do conspire together in this
Design, we may long enough complain of the abounding of Iniquity without any
successful Reformation. Abound it will, and grow impudent and imperious, unless
we join together to beat down its Credit, expose it to Scorn and Contempt, and
make that which is so really shameful in it self, to be the greatest Mark of
Infamy, Shame, and Reproach to any that shall dare to commit it.

But no^ this Duty of Reproving, require^ ^ot only a great deal of Christian
^^^titude and Courage, but also a gr^^ measure of Christian Prudence and
Discretion. We must not on^ be resolute and confident in doing it, but we must
do it likewise in such a fitting way as may be most likely to work a good
effect upon those whom we are to reprove. And therefore,

Rules for Reproof.
I shall give you some brief Rules and Directions, when you ought to reprove,
and how you ought to manage your Reproofs, so as they may be most beneficial to
your Brother. And some of them shall be Negatives, and others shall be
Positives.

First, For the Negative Rules, take these that follow.

First, We must not reprove without knowledge of the Offense.
I ought not to reprove my Brother, if I have no certain knowledge of his
Offense. And therefore those who upon a blind Rumor, or groundless Suspicion,
hastily conclude him guilty, and so fill their Mouths with Reproofs, show
themselves to be very much in love with this Office, and are a company of
impertinent busy-bodies, who start their Arrow before ever they see the Mark.
We must first be certainly informed, either upon our Personal Knowledge, or upon
the undoubted Testimonies of credible Witnesses, that he is Guilty; otherwise
in going about to show him his Fault, we shall but show our own Folly, and
Credulity, our Reproofs will be but Slanders, and our Charity in offering the
Cure, will not be half so great, as our uncharitableness in believing the
Disease.

Secondly, It is not necessary for me to reprove, where I have reason to
conclude that others of more Prudence and Interest in the Party, either have
already, or else will more effectually perform it: For otherwise it will appear
that we do not so much seek his Emendation, as to be Ostentatious of our own
Zeal and Forwardness. And besides, too many Reprovers may, instead of
reforming, rather irritate and provoke: Only here, beware thou do not retract
this ungrateful Office, upon slight Pretenses, nor think thy self excused,
because others are bound to do it. But consider seriously in thine own
Conscience, whether thou think they will be faithful enough in performing
it, or more dextrous than thou art in managing it; or that their Reproof will
be more acceptable and more prevalent with thy Brother than thine. If not, thou
art still obliged to it: And if thou refusest, know, that though he may die in
his Sins, yet his Blood God will require at thy Hands.

Thirdly, Sharp Reproof must not be for small Offenses.
We ought not to give sharp Reproofs for small Offenses. We must not
particularly, and with Accent and Emphasis reprove our Brother for every
involuntary slip, every Infirmity and Weakness, that bewrays it self through
some sudden Passion or Temptation, unless it be a Sin of Custom, or that which
carries with it some signal Aggravation, that renders it considerable, as well
in the Scandal as in the Guilt. It will be sufficient to pass by the rest, only
with a brief Animadversion upon them, enough to put him in mind that he forgot
himself in such and such Passages: And so leave the farther Reproof to his own
Conscience which will better do it for lesser Sins, than possibly we can. To
reprove small Faults with great vehemence, is always as ridiculous, and, may
sometimes prove as destructive a piece of Officiousness, as his who took up a
huge Beetle, and struck with all his Might, only to kill a Fly he saw sticking
upon his Friends Forehead. We must not thrust the Probe deep where the Wound is
but shallow: Nor be passionately concerned at our Brother's lighter Failings;
but so govern our selves, as still to reserve the more sharp and severe
Reproofs for the more foul and scandalous Offenses. For they that will
presently upon every slender occasion fly out into Exclamations, Detestations,
and all passionate Exaggeration of Rhetoric, will but lavishly spend the
vigor of their Zeal, and leave themselves no Art, no Methods to express their
greater abhorrence for blacker Crimes.

Fourthly, Reproof not to be given where it will exasperate.
We are not to Reprove those whom we have reason to believe are such desperate
Wretches, that our Reproofs would but exasperate them to sin the more for a
Reproof. To these, such would be no Acts of Love and Charity, but rather a
Design to destroy their Souls, and to heap more and heavy loads of Wrath and
Vengeance upon their Heads. Certainly if we have any sense of God's Glory, any
Tenderness and Compassion for our Brother's Soul, we ought to beware that we do
not inrage him the more, to dishonor the one, or to wound the other, by the
mistaken Charity of our Reproofs. And therefore, St. Austine speaks well, (De
Civitate Dei, lib. 1. cap. 9.) Si propter ea corripiendis male agentibus
parcit, quia opportunus tempus requirit, vel Iisdem ipsis metuit ne deteriores
ex hoc efficiantur, videtur esse concilium Charitatis. It is Charity not to
reprove those, who we believe will be the worse for our Reproofs. Alas how many
are there in the World, who when they are reproved (and that very justly) for
their Sins, presently fall a blaspheming and cursing, railing at Piety, and all
that profess it, violate the good Name of their Reprovers, and can hardly
abstain from offering violence to their Persons. Now such as these are past
Reproof, when once they turn Reproof it self into an Occasion of further
sinning. The greatest exercise of Charity to these, is to let them alone, and
not to increase their Damnation, by stirring up the virulency and rancour of
their Spirits.

Reproof is spiritual Physic for the Soul. Now as it is an imprudent Course to
administer such Physic to the Body, as will irritate, and not expel the
peccant Humors: So likewise it is very imprudent and unsafe, to administer
such Reproofs as we know cannot cure the Offender, but will only irritate his
Corruption, and render it the more turbulent, and him much worse than he was
before. And therefore some are themselves to be reproved, who with an imprudent
Zeal reprove others, without ever considering what Effects their Reproofs are
likely to produce, who, as soon as a Sin is committed, think themselves obliged
in Conscience, instantly to rebuke them for it, although not only they
themselves may be reviled, but the Name of God most horribly blasphemed upon
this very Occasion. It is indeed good to be zealously affected always in a good
Matter. Gal. 4.18.
But yet withal know, that as Zeal and Charity ought to be the Motive, so
Christian Prudence ought to be the Measure of all our Reproofs. And if you take
not the Advice of Discretion, your Zeal for God's Glory may but occasion his
Dishonor; and your Charity to the Souls of others, occasion their sorer Ruin
and Damnation. Certainly we are not obliged to reprove where we have reason to
suspect we shall rather do hurt than good. It would be but a cruel Charity, to
poison our Brother in his Physic, and to kill him in his Cure. And therefore
both Solomon, and a greater than Solomon, our Savior Christ himself, have
forbidden us to misplace Reproofs upon those who are desperate. Solomon tells
us, Proverbs 9.7, Prove. 9.7.
8. He that reproves a Scorner, gets to himself Shame; and he that rebukes
a wicked Man, gets unto himself a Blot. And again, Reprove not a Scorner,
lest he hate thee. And says our Savior, Matthew. 7.6.
Give not that which is Holy unto Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before
Swine, lest they trample them under their Feet, and turn again and rent you.
Where it is very plain from the precedent Verses, that he dehorts us from
lavishing out our Reproofs imprudently upon Dogs and Swine. Wicked and impure
Persons, on whom we have reason to think they will have no effect, but only to
inrage them, and make them fly out both against God and us, with the more
Violence and Madness. To reprove such, is but to cast up Water against an high
Wind, that will be sure to beat it back again into our own Faces.

And thus I have given you the Negative Rules in these four Particulars.
Reprove not without a certain knowledge of the Offense. Nor where others who are
likely to be more effectual, have done it already. Nor for every involuntary
slip. Nor those who are like to be the worse for it.

Let us now proceed to lay down some Positive Rules and Directions for the
right managing of our Reproofs. And here,

First, Time and Place must be observed in giving Reproof.
If thou would reprove with success, observe right Circumstances of Time and
Place: And let the one be as opportune, and the other as private as thou can.
We ought to observe the mollia tempora fandi, the soft and easy Hours of
speaking. And therefore the wise Man tells us, Prove. 15.23.
A Word spoken in season, how good is it? It is like Apples of Gold in Pictures
of Silver, that is, very beautiful and pleasing. There are some happy Seasons
wherein the most rugged Natures are accessible; and it is a great part of
Prudence in all our Concerns, if we would have them prosperous, to watch such
Opportunities, and to improve them.

Now usually it is no fit season for Reproof, Reproof not seasonable,


First, As soon as the Sin is committed.
Presently as soon as the Sin is committed; for then the heat is not over, nor
the uproar of the Passions and Affections appeased. In all likelihood a Reproof
as yet would but irritate. As Water falling upon a red hot Iron, does but cause
a great deal of Noise and Disturbance: So a Reproof just upon the very Act of a
Sin, does but make the Sinner fume, estuate and tumultuate the more. Nor yet,

Secondly, Reproof unseasonable in a time of Mirth.
Is a Time of Mirth and Joy fit for Reproof; for that will look like a piece of
Envy, as if we were malicious at their Prosperity, and therefore studied to
cast in somewhat that might disturb them; and so they will be apt to interpret
it. Nor,

Thirdly, Reproof unseasonable in a time of Sorrow.
Is a Time of exceeding great Sadness and Sorrow, a proper Season for Reproof;
for this will look like Hostility and Hatred, as if we designed utterly to
overwhelm and dispatch them.

But the fittest opportunity for this Duty, Reproof most seasonable when
Persons are most calm and sedate.
is when they are most calm and sedate, their Passions hushed, and their Reason
(with which you are to deal) again reseated upon its Throne. When they are free
from all inward Perturbations of Mind, and from all considerable Alterations in
their outward Estate and Condition. Then, if ever, they will listen to Reproof,
and take right Measures of the Sin for which you reprove them. But if we
reprove them when their Passions are in a Tumult, and all within in an Uproar
and Combustion, it is no wonder at all if either they reject or revile our
Reproofs; for we then accuse them before very corrupt Judges, viz. their own
Passions and corrupt Affections: And you may with as much Reason, and as good
Success, chide the Sea for being Tempestuous, when the Winds rage and are let
loose upon it. Chide a Man for being angry when he is angry, and what will you
get by it, but only some of his foam cast upon you? Let God himself expostulate
with an impatient Jonah, whilst he is in his fit of Impatience: Jonah 4.9.
Do thou well to be angry? and he will tell him snappishly to his Face, That
he does well to be angry, even to the very Death. There is no dealing with Men
while their Passions blind their Reason; This makes them as utterly incapable
of taking good Counsel, as if they were brute Beasts. Thou were as good thrust
thy Hand into a Wasps Nest, as come with Reproofs and Rebukes when the Swarm is
up, to be sure thou shall only go away with many a Sting and Wound, and thou
may thank thy self for no better timing thy Reproofs.

Indeed in Cases of great Importance and absolute Necessity, we may run this
Venture, and possibly succeed well in it. Thus Joab very sharply reproved
David, 2 Samuel 19.5, 6, 7.
when he so immoderately mourned for Absalom. And I think it is one of the
roundest Checks that ever a dutiful Subject gave to his Prince; but if he had
not taken that very time, the Case had been desperate, and his People had all
forsaken him, and therefore the necessity of Affairs would not permit him to
expect a more seasonable Address. Otherwise generally, it is more advisable to
wait a fitting and cool time. As God is said to come down in the cool of the
Day to reprove Adam. So likewise should we come in the cool season of a Man's
Passions, when all is quiet and temperate within, for then is there the
greatest probability of Success.

Secondly, Reproof must be with Gentleness and Meekness.
If thou would have thy Reproofs successful, reprove with all Gentleness and
Meekness, without giving any railing or reviling Terms. He that mingles
Reproach with Reproof, engages a Man's Reputation to side with his Vices: For
whilst we show any Bitterness in our Reproofs, and give them in villifying and
ignominious Language, the Vehicle will hinder the Operation of the Physic. For
they will look like the upbraidings of an Enemy; and it is a thing most
abhorrent unto Nature, to follow the Counsels and Advice of an Enemy. And
therefore the Apostle charge us, Gal. 6.1.
Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if a Man be overtaken in a fault, you that are spiritual,
restore such an one in the spirit of Meekness, considering thy self, lest thou
be also tempted, Which last Clause intimates to us, that we ought to deal as
tenderly with a fallen Brother, as we would desire to be dealt with our selves,
were we in the same condition. For having the same corrupt Nature, and being
subject to the like Temptations, we may likewise, through God's dereliction of
us, fall into the same Miscarriages. Now would thou take it well, if any
should revile and reprove thee, condemn thee for a rotten Hypocrite, as Job's
Friends did him; or draw hideous black Consequences from every failing and
weakness of thine? Certainly thou would not interpret this to be friendly and
candid dealing: No more do thou with others. It is a true Saying, that he who
would know his own Faults, had need have either a faithful Friend, or a bitter
Enemy; they will both be sure to do it to the full. But then the difference is,
that an Enemy's Reproofs are usually joined with Reproaches, and when we are
fallen, he will stand and insult over us. But a true Christian Friend will
faithfully represent our condition to us, pity us in it, and endeavor to help
and raise us out of it. And such should we be to all, not railing on them for
Hypocrites, or lost and desperate Apostates, for this certainly is not the way
to reduce them, but rather to confirm and harden them in their Sins. We should
not gripe nor press their Wounds, but rather gently anoint and chafe them. Our
Reproofs should be as Oil, smooth and lenitive, to soak into and supple the
Part affected. And therefore the Apostle again exhorts us, in meekness to
instruct those that oppose themselves. 2 Timothy 2.25.
But whilst we exclaim against them with bitter Invectives, and dip all our
Reproofs in Gall and Satyr, we may quickly make them loath the Medicine rather
than the Disease, and sooner break their Heads with such Rebukes, than their
Hearts for their Offenses.

Thirdly, Reproof must be quick and vivacious.
Though our Reproofs must be meek and gentle, yet must they be quick and
vivacious also. For as Charity requires the one, so does Zeal the other: And
the best and most equal Temper, is rightly to mix these two, that at once we
may show Meekness to his Person, James 1.20.
(for the Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God) and Sharpness
against his Sin, (for a remiss Reprover will but make a slow Penitent.) We
ought so to reprove, that he may not think we only jest and dally with him, and
for this it is necessary that we do it with all Seriousness, Gravity and
Authority, not playing about the Wound, but searching into the very depth and
bottom of it. And therefore we must use such words as are most significant of
our meaning, most expressive of our Grief and Sorrow for him, and which we
think most apt to expose the Vice that we reprove, and make it most odious and
hateful, keeping still within the bounds of a sober and friendly Redargution.
Hence the Apostle gives Titus this Advice, Tit. 1.13.
Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith. If they want Salt
and Vinegar, spare them not. This possibly may cleanse those Wounds that else
would fester and putrify. But here is required much spiritual Prudence to know
how to suit Reproof, according to the different Conditions and Tempers of the
Persons you deal with. Some must be launcht and searched to the very Quick
before they can be healed. Others require a gentle Hand. If they be proud and
stubborn, they need Corrosives. But for those who are naturally meek and mild,
a meek and mild Course will be easiest and most effectual. The Tempers and
Cases of particular Christians are so various, that there can be no Rules given
that may be applicable to every Condition. This must of necessity be left to
your Prudence and Discretion. Only this Rule is infallible, Be sure you flatter
none in their Vices, extenuate not their Sins; when thou come to reprove
them, do it not in sport: Let them see thou art in very good earnest, and tell
them their Sin, as it is in it self, without mincing the matter, or the
circumstances of it. For Men are always apt to impute somewhat of the Reproof
to the severity of him that gives it, rather than to the demerits of their own
Offenses. And therefore, if thou thy self shall speak but slightly of their
Sins, they will be ready to conclude that they were none, or at least so small,
that it was nothing but Officiousness, and the love of Censuring made thee take
notice of them.

Fourthly, Reproof ought to be given privately.
Let all thy Reproofs be given as secretly and privately as possibly thou
can; otherwise thou will seem not so much to aim at thy Brother's
Reformation, as at his Shame and Confusion. For if (as the Wiseman tells us)
Prove. 27.14.
a loud and clamorous Benediction given too officiously, is so far from being a
Blessing, that it is but a Curse and a Shame to a Man's Friend. Certainly then
a public clamorous Reproof must only tend to the Shame and Reproach of them
that receive it. Indeed there are some who offend openly before many: These,
(if there be no fear of irritating them to do worse) we ought openly to rebuke,
and to give them their Reproof in the Company where they have given the
Offense, so says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.20
Those that Sin rebuke before all; that is, supposing that their Sins be open
and public. But for others whose Sins and Miscarriages have been private, and
only known to our selves and a few others, we ought to reprove them in secret,
and to be tender not only of their Souls, but of their Reputation also. So is
the Counsel of our Savior, Matthew. 18.15.
If thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his Fault between
thee and him alone. And indeed this is a necessary piece of Prudence, not only
to preserve his Reputation and good Name as much as may be, but also,

First, To preserve the Reputation of Religion.
To preserve the Reputation of Religion it self, which a more public divulging
of his Offenses might much impair and discredit. And,

Secondly, To hinder the spreading of an evil Example.
To hinder the spreading of an evil Example, which also perhaps some or other
would make use of, to encourage them in the like Transgressions. And,

Thirdly, That they may be serviceable.
To preserve him serviceable for the future; for by reporting his Miscarriages,
thou lessenest his Credit, and thereby rendrest him less capable of doing good
than he was before. For though he may recover himself out of the Snare of the
Devil, and his Wound be healed, yet if his Faults have been made public, the
Scar will still remain: And this will be such a blemish to him, that having
lost much of his repute among Men, he will likewise lose much of those
Advantages he formerly had of doing good in the World; and thou by thy
imprudent Reproofs be the cause of it. Upon all these Accounts it is necessary
that thy Reproofs be managed with the greatest Secresy and Privacy that may be:
For, as St. Austine speaks well, if whilst thou alone know thy Brother to
have offended, and yet wilt rebuke him before all, Non es corrector sed
proditor; Thou art not a Reprover, but a Betrayer.

Fifthly, Superiors must be reproved respectfully.
Reprove not one who is greatly thy Superior, unless it be at a respectful
distance. Toward such we must not use downright and blunt Rebukes; but rather
insinunate things into them with Address and Artifice. What says Elihu, Job
34.18.
Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked, and to Princes, Ye are ungodly?
And indeed in this Case usually, it is most fit and decent that thy Reproofs
should not carry their own Shape and Form, but disguise them rather into
Parables or Entreaties, or into any such humble and becoming Method: Yet withal
let so much appear, as that they may well enough know thy drift and intent. For
it becomes the Wisdom and Station of Inferiors, so to order their Speech, that
if it can but be interpreted as a Reproof, their Superiors may and will
certainly know they meant it for such. Thus the Apostle bids us, 1 Timothy 5.1.
Rebuke not an Elder, but rather entreat him as a Father. For because their
Place and Calling required Respect and Reverence, therefore the Apostle would
not have them bluntly Rebuked, but that the Reproof should be clad in another
dress, that they might appear to be rather Entreaties than Rebukes.

We may observe likewise that when Nathan was sent immediately by God to
reprove King David, he does not attack him directly, and fall rudely upon him
for his Adultery and Murder, but clothes his Speech in a Parable, and when he
had so represented the heinousness of his Sin, so as by that means to make him
first reprove and condemn himself, then he tells him, Thou art the Man.

Sixthly, We must not be guilty of the Sins we reprove others for.
If thou would have thy Reproofs effectual, especially beware that thou thy
self art not guilty of those Sins which thou reprovest in another. It were
indeed a Temper to be wished and prayed for, that we could only respect how
righteous the Reproof were, and not how righteous the Person is who gives it.
For there is no more reason to reject sound Admonition, because it comes from
an unsound Heart, than there is to stop our Ears against good Counsel because
it is delivered perhaps by an unsavory Breath. Yet so it is, that when Men of
defiled Consciences and Conversations reprove others, they are apt to justify
themselves by recriminating, or else to think they do but sport and jest with
them: Or thirdly to hate them for gross Hypocrites and Dissemblers; or lastly,
to think they do but envy them their Sins, and that they would ingross all to
themselves. It was a true Observation of Pliny in his Epistles, Lib. 8. Epist.
22. That there are some, Qui sic aliorum visiis irascuntur, quasi invideant:
Who are so angry at other Men's Vices, as if they they envied them. It cannot be
hoped that the Reproof of such should ever take place. But when a Man of a
clear and unspoted Name shall reprove the Sins and Vices of others, his Rebukes
carry Authority with them, and if they cannot reform, yet at lest must they
needs daunt and silence the Offenders that they shall have nothing to reply, no
Subterfuges nor Evasions, but they must needs be convinced that their Sins are
as evil, as he represents them by his own Care and Caution to be avoided.

Fifthly, Motives for reproving our Brother.
The only Thing that remains is to propound to you some Motives that may
quicken you to the conscientious discharge of this much neglected Duty. And I
shall but name some few, and leave them to your consideration to be farther
pressed upon you. And here next to the express Command of Almighty God, whose
Authority alone ought to prevail against all the Difficulties that we either
find or fancy in the way of Obedience thereunto:

Consider, Benefit of reproving others.
First, the great benefit that may redound both to the Reprover, and Reproved.

First, Thou shall hereby provide thy self a Friend that may take the same
liberty to reprove thee, when it shall be needful, and for thy great good. And
it may very well be thought that the Apostle upon this Account requires us to
Restore our fallen Brother, Gal. 6.1.
with meek Reproofs, considering our selves, lest we also be tempted: That is,
that hereby we may purchase a true Friend, who will be as faithful to us, as we
have been to him. However, certainly it is the best and most generous way of
procuring to our selves true Love and Respect from those whom we have thus
reformed. Prove. 9.8.
So says Solomon, Rebuke a wise Man, and he will love thee. And in another
place, says he, Prove. 28.23.
He that Rebukes a Man, afterward shall find more favor than be that
flattereth with his Tongue.

Secondly, Thou will hereby entitle thy self to that great and precious
Promise, Dan. 12.3.
Daniel 12. That they that be wise, shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament; and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever. And to that other of the wise Man, Prove. 24.25.
To them that rebuke the Wicked, shall be Delight, and a good Blessing shall
come upon them.

Thirdly, Thou shall increase thy own Graces and Comforts more than possibly
thou could do by separating thy self from them. Thy Graces will be more
confirmed, because reproving of others will engage thee to a greater
Watchfulness over thy self. Thy Comforts also will be increased, because a
conscientious discharge of this Duty, will be to thee a great Evidence of the
integrity and sincerity of thy Heart.

First. The practice of this Duty will be greatly profitable unto him that is
reproved. How know thou but it may be a means to turn him from his Iniquity,
and so thou shall prevent a Multitude of Sins, Jam. 5.20.
and save a Soul from Death. And hereby likewise we shall frustrate one of the
great Designs and Artifices of the Devil, which is, to allure Men to Sin by the
examples of those Wickednesses that pass uncheckt and uncontrolled in the World.

Secondly, Tit. 3.3.
Consider that we our selves also were disobedient and foolish, serving diverse
Lusts and Pleasures, but were wrought upon either by public or private
Reproof. And why then should not we use the same Charity toward others, which
God has been pleased to make effectual toward us.

Thirdly, Consider that the Text makes it an apparent sign of hating our
Brother, if we forbear justly to reprove him. Thou shall not hate thy Brother
in thy Heart: 1 John 3.15.
thou shall in any wise reprove him. So that he who reproves not his Brother,
hates him. Now he that hates his Brother is a Murderer, says St. John. And no
Murderer has Eternal Life. Yea, we are guilty of Soul-Murder, which is so much
the more heinous, by how much the Soul is more precious than the Body.

Fourthly, Consider that the performance of this Duty, were it more universal,
would be the aptest and readiest means to prevent Schism and Division. The
grand pretense for Separation, is the wickedness of many who are
Church Members. Now our Savior's Method is, that such should be first reproved
and admonished, before they be cast out; but it is a most preposterous and
headlong Course that thousands in our Days take, who cast themselves out of the
Communion of the Church, for the Sins of those who deserve to be cast out; and
rather than they will perform this ungrateful Work of Reproof, choose to
separate; whereas if they would make use of our Savior Christ's Advice, Mat.
18.15, 16.
to reprove privately, and in case of Obstinacy, to convict publicly, there
would be, as no need, so no Pretense left for Separation; but either their
private Reproofs would prevail to reform, or their public Complaints and
Accusations, to remove Offenders.

Fifthly, Consider, that the neglect of this Duty, brings the Sin and Guilt of
others upon your own Souls. See for this that Scripture, Ephesians 5.11. Ephesians.
5.11.
Have no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove
them. If we reprove them not, we are Partakers of their evil Deeds, and deserve
to be Partakers of their Torments.

FINIS.
The Dreadfulness of God's Wrath against Sinners explained. IN SEVERAL SERMONS.
HEB. 10.30, 31. For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I
will recompense, says the Lord; and again, the Lord shall judge his People.

It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God.


THere are two principal Attributes of God, An Introduction.
which the Scripture propounds to us as the most powerful and efficacious
Motives to restrain us from Sin: And they are his Mercy, and his Justice. Mercy
tho it be a soft, yet is it a strong Argument to encourage us to Purity and
Holiness. And therefore says the Apostle, Romans 2.4.
Romans 2.4. The Goodness of God leads us to Repentance. And certainly that
Mercy that expresses it self so ready to pardon Sin, cannot but lay a mighty
Obligation upon the Ingenuity of a Christian Spirit to abstain from the
commission of it. He that can encourage himself in Wickedness, upon the
consideration of the infinite Free Grace of God, does but spurn those very
Bowels that yern toward him, and strike at God with his own Golden Scepter,
yea he tares abroad those Wounds which were at first opened for him, and casts
the Blood of his Savior back again in his Face. But because Ingenuity is
perished from off the Earth, and Men are generally more apt to be wrought upon
by Arguments drawn from Fear than Love, therefore the Scripture propounds to us
the consideration of the dreadful Justice of God arrayed in all the terrible
Circumstances of it, that if Mercy cannot allure us, Justice at least might
affright us from our Sins. And as those who are to travel through Wildernesses
and Deserts, carry Fire with them to terrify wild and ravenous Beasts, and to
secure themselves from their Assaults: So does the great God, who has to deal
with brutish Men, Men more savage than wild Beasts, he kindles a Fire about
him, and appears to them all in Flames and Fury; that so he might fright them
from their bold Attempts, who otherwise would be ready, to run upon his Neck
and upon the thick Bosses of his Buckler. Job 15.26.


And therefore in the four precedent Verses, we find the Apostle threatening
most tremendous Judgments against all that should wilfully trangress, after
they had received the knowledge of the Truth. He tells us, Verse 26. That there
remains no more sacrifice for their Sins: Nothing to expiate their Guilt, but
that they themselves must fall a Burnt-Sacrifice to the offended Justice of
God, consumed with that fiery Indignation that shall certainly seize and prey
upon them for ever. And in v. Heb. 10.28, 29.
28, 29. he sets forth the exceeding Dreadfulness of their Judgment, by a
comparison between those that violated the Law of Moses, and those that
renounce and annul the Law of Christ. He that despised Moses 's Law, who
himself was but a Servant, and his Laws consisted of inferior and less
spiritual Ordinances, yet a Despiser and Transgressor of these was to die
without Mercy; certainly much sorer Judgments await those, who reject the Laws
of Christ, and trample him, who is the Son and Lord of the House, under foot;
accounting his Blood unholy and profane, renouncing his Merits, and
blaspheming the Holy Spirit by which our Savior acted: Such as these, says the
Apostle, shall eternally perish with less Mercy, than those that died without
Mercy. Where by the way observe the strange Emphasis that the Apostle lays upon
this dreadful Commination; he tells us they shall be sorer punished, than those
that are punished without Mercy; to let us know, that as there are transcendent
Glories, such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it enter into the
Heart of Man to conceive, reserved in the highest Heavens for those that love
God; so also are there Woes and Torments, such as Eye has not seen, Ear heard,
nor can it enter into the Heart of Man to conceive, how great and insupportable
they are, prepared in Hell for those that hate him. They shall die with less
Mercy, than those that die without Mercy.

Now that we might not wonder at such a Paradox as this, the Apostle gives the
Reason of it in my Text, For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs
unto me, it is the Vengeance of God, and a falling into the Hands of God, and
therefore it is no wonder if their Punishments shall be beyond all extremity.
They fall under the Power and Wrath of an infinite God, which when we have
heaped Superlatives upon Superlatives, yet still we must express defectively,
and all that we can conceive of it falls vastly short of reaching but a faint
and languishing resemblance thereof. It is a State so full of perfect Misery,
that Misery it self is too easy a Name to give it; yea, whatsoever we can speak
most appositly of it, is but diminishing it; for because it is the Wrath and
Vengeance of an infinite God, it can no more be known by us, than God himself.
Plunge your Thoughts as deep into it as you can, yet still there remains an
infinite Abyss which you can never fathom. And O that the consideration of
this Wrath might cause us all to tremble before this great and terrible God,
that we might so fear it, as never to feel it; and be persuaded to fall down at
his Feet, that we may never fall into his Hands. And that we may be thus
affected, I have chosen this Text to set forth the Greatness and Dreadfulness
of that Wrath and Vengeance which the righteous God will execute upon all
stubborn and disobedient Wretches.

A Text that speaks to us, as God did to the Israelites from Mount Sinai, out
of the midst of the Fire and Blackness, Darkness and Tempest, in the Voice of a
Trumpet. And truly we have all need to have such rousing Truths frequently
inculcated upon us, for the best of us are Lethargical, and though sometimes
when our Consciences are pincht hard by a severe and searching Truth, we start
up and look abroad, yet as soon as the present Impression is over, we suddenly
close our Eyes, and fall asleep again in Sin and Security. There is a strange
Dullness and Stupor has seized us, that we can no longer keep waking than we
are shook.

And therefore as we use to apply Fire and burning Coals to Lethargick Persons
to awaken them; so we have need to heap Coals of Fire upon Men's Heads, to speak
with fiery Tongues, and thunder Woe and Wrath and Judgments against them, that
we may rouse the secure stupid World, and so at least scorch them into Life and
Sense.

In the Words we have these two Parts observable.

First, An Appropriation of Vengeance unto God, Vengeance belongs unto me, I
will recompense, says the Lord.

Secondly, The Dreadfulness of that Vengeance inferred, from the consideration
of the Author and Inflicter of it, It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands
of the living God.

I begin with the first of these, God's appropriating and challenging Vengeance
unto himself. Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord.
Which Passage the Apostle cites out of Deuteronomy chapter Deuteronomy. 32.35.
32.35, 36. To me belongs Vengeance and Recompense, and the Lord shall judge
his People. It is his great and royal Prerogative that he does sometimes make
use of in inflicting Judgments upon the Wicked in this World, but most
especially in the World to come. And to this future Vengeance, the Words ought
particularly to be applied. Now from this consideration, That Vengeance in a
peculiar Manner belongs unto the great God, hence we may observe,

That God himself will be the immediate Inflicter of the Punishments of the
Damned.

It is therefore here likewise called a falling into the Hands of the living
God, which denotes his immediate Efficiency in their Torments.

It is true, God does use several Instruments of Torture in Hell. There is the
Worm that never dies, and the Fire that never goes out, which I suppose to be
not only a Metaphorical, but possibly a Material Fire, elevated to such a
degree of Subtilty, as that it shall at once torture the Soul, and not consume
the Body. And this Fire the Devils, who are their Executioners, will be still
very officiously raking about them, using all their malicious Art to increase
their eternal Misery. But yet these things are but small Appendages, and only
the slighter Circumstances of their Torments; the most exact and intolerable
part of their Torture they shall feel inflicted upon them from another Fire, an
intelligent Everlasting, and therefore an unquenchable Fire, and that is God
himself, for so he is said to be, Heb. 12. ult. Heb. 12.29.
Our God is a consuming Fire.

And though we ordinarily speak only of Hell Fire, yet not only Hell, but
Heaven it self is full of this Fire; consult that place Isa. 33.14. Isa. 33.14.
Who among us shall dwell with the devouring Fire? who among us shall dwell
with everlasting Burnings? Would not one think at the very first sound of the
Words, that the Prophet speaks only of such as should be damned, of such as
should be cast into Hell, to remain there in everlasting Fire and Burnings? And
demands of them, who among them could endure this? No, but it appears plainly,
that this Fire and Burning is in Heaven it self, and the Prophet by putting
this Question, Who shall dwell with the devouring Fire and everlasting
Burnings? asks who shall be saved, and not who shall be destroyed? And
therefore in the 15th Verse, he tells us, that he shall do it, who walks
uprightly, and speaks uprightly, that despises the gain of Oppression, that
shakes his Hands from holding of Bribes, that stops his Ears from hearing
of Blood, and shuts his Eyes from seeing of Evil. Such a one shall dwell
with the devouring Fire; that is, he shall for ever dwell and remain with God
in Heaven. So that we see God is a Fire both to the Wicked, and to the Godly;
to the Wicked he is a penetrating torturing Fire, and they are combustible
Matter for the Wrath and Vengeance of God to prey upon; but to the Godly he is
a purifying and cherishing Fire only. And as Lightning does not only cleanse
and refine the Air, but rends Trees and Rocks in pieces, dissolves Metals, and
breaks through whatsoever opposes it in its passage: So this great and Almighty
Fire only refreshes and comfort the Godly, whereas it breaks and tears the
Wicked in pieces, and melts them down like Wax before the scorching Heat of it.
And though I deny not but there may be somewhat like that which we commonly
apprehend when we speak of Hell, some unquenchable Flames prepared by the
Wisdom and Power of God for the eternal Torment of those Wretches that shall be
cast thereinto; yet withal I think that their most exquisite Torments shall be
from that Fire that is God himself.

For if we observe it, it is said to be everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41.
Matthew. 25.41. Now the Devils are spiritual Substances, and flames of Fire
themselves. Psalm 104.4.
He makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers, that is his Ministering
Spirits, whether good or evil, whether the Ministers of his Wrath and
Vengeance, or the Ministers of his Mercy, He makes them Flames of Fire, Psalm
104.4. They are such piercing and subtle Flames that Lightning it self is but
gross and dull compared to them: Yet here is a Fire that shall even torture
Fire it self, a Fire that shall burn those Flames of Fire; and that is God, who
being a Spirit, and the God of Spirits, can easily pierce and insinuate into
the very Center of their Beings. So that the Damned in Hell shall for ever find
themselves burnt up with a double Fire, a Material Fire, suited and adapted to
impress Pain and Torment upon the Body, yet without wasting and consuming it;
And an invisible intellectual Fire, that shall prey upon the Soul, and fill it
with unspeakable Anguish and Horror, and this is no other than God himself.

And in this there is a true Parallel between Heaven and Hell; for as in
Heaven, though there are many created Excellencies and Glories which contribute
to the Beatitude of the Saints, yet their most substantial Happiness is derived
from their immediate fruition of God: So likewise in Hell, though there be many
created and (if I may so call them) many invented Tortures, yet the highest and
most intolerable Misery of the Damned, is from the immediate infliction and
infusion of the Divine Wrath into them, which no Creature does or can convey to
them in such a Manner and Measure as they there feel it, but God himself pours
the full Vials of it into their Souls. And therefore as the Saints are called
Vessels of Mercy, Romans 9.22.
so the Wicked are called Vessels of Wrath, fitted for Destruction, Romans 9.22.
Such Vessels into which God will pour in of his Vengeance, and fill brimm-full
with his Wrath and Fury for ever.

The Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. speaking of wicked Men, tells us, 1 These. 1.9.
That they shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of
the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. Where we must not think that this
Phrase [From the Presence of the Lord] denotes only that part of their
Punishment which we call poena Damni, or the punishment of Loss; but rather
that it denotes the efficient Cause of their poena Sensus, or the punishment of
Sense; not that their punishment shall only be, to be for ever banished from
his Presence, but that this Presence shall be active in inflicting Punishments
upon them, and we may well read it thus, They shall be punished with
everlasting Destruction, by the Presence of the Lord, and by the Glory of his
Power: For as God's glorious Power is effective of their Destruction, so also
is his Presence, the dread Presence of that consuming and tormenting Fire.

And thus much briefly for the first Thing observable in the Text, namely God's
appropriating Vengeance unto himself, Vengeance belongs unto me, and it is a
falling into the Hands of the Living God.

second Thing observable in the Words, and that is the dreadfulness of this
Vengeance inferred, from the consideration of the Author and Inflicter of it;
for because it is Divine Vengeance, and a falling into the Hands of the living
God, therefore it must needs be very terrible. And here I shall first take
notice of those Expressions that my Text affords, to set forth the Terror of
this Wrath. And then consider other Demonstrations of it. And here,

First, Consider that all other Vengeance is as nothing in comparison of that
which God takes on a damned Soul. You may possibly have heard of strange and
horrid Revenges that some cruel Men have carved out unto themselves, putting
those that have offended them to such Tortures as were altogether unfit for Men
either to inflict or suffer. All Histories abound with such Barbarities. I am
loath to offend your Ears so much as to recount them, let us only take an
estimate by the dreadful Revenge that David took on the Ammonites: 2 Samuel 12.
last.
2 Samuel 12. last. where it is said, He put them under Saws, and Harrows of
Iron, and made them pass through the Brick-Kilns. And all this Severity, (if not
to say Cruelty) was to revenge the insolent Affront done to his Ambassadors.
It is doubtless no small Torture to be burnt alive, for Fire is a searching
Thing, and eats deep into the Senses; but yet this kind of Death was a quick
and merciful dispatch in comparison of the others: Think what it is to be
stretched along, and to have the sharp spikes of an Harrow tare up your Flesh,
and draw out your Bowels and Bones after them: Or what it is to be sawn asunder
in the midst, and to have those small Teeth eat their way slowly through you,
while they jarr against your Bones, and pull out your Nerves and Sinews thread
by thread. How many Deaths think you were these poor miserable Creatures
compelled to suffer before they were permitted to die. Yet alas! these, and all
the witty Tortures that ever were invented by the greatest Masters of Cruelty,
are nothing in comparison of the Vengeance that God will take upon Sinners in
Hell: And therefore he says, Vengeance is mine, I will recompense. As if he
should say, alas, all that you can do one to another signifies nothing, it is
not to be called, nor accounted Vengeance, that is too great a Name for such
poor Effects. It is a Prerogative that God challenges to himself to be the
Avenger: And whatever Creatures meddle with, if they have not a Commission from
him, it is their Sin; and therefore private Persons, whom he has not invested
with any such Authority, ought not to take upon them to avenge their own cause.
Or if they have a Commission, yet all their execution of Vengeance is but
feeble and weak. We find in Ecclesiastical History that the Holy Martyrs have
often mocked at all the cruel Tortures of their enraged Persecutors, and God
has either taken from them all sense of their Pain, or else given them in such
strong Consolations, that they have triumphed and exulted in all the Extremity
of them; O how have they hugged the Stake at which they were to be burnt,
courted the Beasts that were to devour them, and been stretched upon the Rack
with as much content, as formerly they have stretched themselves upon their
Beds; and not so much suffered, as enjoyed their Deaths! God has so mercifully
taken off the Edg and Keeness of their Torments, to show that Vengeance is his
Right and Due, and that they are but contemptible things that one Man can
inflict upon another, scarce worthy to be called Vengeance. And besides, let it
be never so sharp and cutting, yet it cannot be long durable; the more
intolerable any Torments are, the sooner do they work our escape from them. And
though Spite and Malice may wish the Perpetuity of our Pain, yet it is not
possible for mortal Men to prosecute an immortal Revenge, the Death, either of
them, or our selves, will put a period to our Sufferings. And what a small
matter is it to undergo pain for a few days only, this is not worthy to be
called Vengeance, nor is it like that which the great God will inflict which is
both insupportable and eternal. And therefore,

Secondly, The Apostle calls it a falling into the Hands of the Living God. And
this denotes to us the Perpetuity and Eternity of this Vengeance. God for ever
lives to inflict it, and Sinners shall for ever live to suffer it; for they
fall into his Hands. God has, as it were, leased out a Life to every wicked
Man, he has his Term of Years set him, wherein he lives to himself, enjoying
his Lusts, and the Pleasures and Profits of this present World; and all this
while Vengeance intermedles but little with him: but when his Life is expired,
and his Years run out, he then falls into the Hands of the great Lord of all,
and becomes the Possession of his Vengeance and Justice for ever. And then, he
is the Living God, and such wicked Wretches must for ever live to endure the
most dreadful execution of his Power and Wrath. Were there any Term or Period
set to their Torments, should they when they have endured them thousands of
thousands of Years, afterward be annihilated, the expectation of this Release,
at the last, would give them some support; yea, it would be some solace to them
in their Sufferings to think that at last they should be freed from them: But
this is the Accent of their Misery, and that which makes them altogether
desperate, that it is for ever; for ever they must lie and wallow in those
Flames that shall never be quenched, and shall always be bit and stung with
that Worm that shall never die, they are fallen into the Hands of the living
God, who will never let them go as long as he lives, that is, never to all
Eternity. He is a consuming Fire, but yet spends not any part of his Fuel, he
consumes without diminishing them, and destroys, but yet still perpetuates
their being. A wise and intelligent Fire, (as Minutius calls him) that devours
the Damned, but yet still repairs them, and by tormenting still nourishes them
for future Torments. Sapiens ille ignis, urit and reficit, carpit and nutrit.
And when they have lain burning in this Fire all the Ages that Arithmetic can
sum up, Millions after Thousands, and Thousands of Millions, yet still it is
but the beginning of their Sorrows. O think with your selves how long and
tedious a little time seems to you when you are in pain, you complain then that
Time has leaden Feet, and wish the Days and Hours would roll away faster with
you, and you never find them so slow paced, as when they pass over a sick Bed.
Oh then what will it be when you shall lie sweltring under the dread Wrath and
Vengeance of the living God, the intolerableness of your Pain and Torment will
make every Day seem an Age, and every Year as long as Eternity, and yet you
must lie there an Eternity of those long Years. Me thinks this consideration of
Eternal Torments should astonish the Heart, and sink the Spirits of every
wicked Wretch; for though they were not to be so excessively sharp as they are,
yet the Eternity of them, is that which should make them altogether
intolerable. There is scarce any pain so small but it would make us desperate,
were we assured it would never wear off, that we should never obtain any ease
or freedom from it. What ever Pain we suffer, our usual encouragement unto
Patience is, that shortly it will be over: But now in Hell there is no period
fixed to their Torments, they are all eternal, and therefore whatsoever they are
for the Degree and Measure of them, yet are they utterly intolerable, at least
for their Duration and Continuance. Could thou shove away Millions of Years
with a Wish, yet all this would avail nothing; for there are as many Years in
Eternity as there are Moments, and as many Millions of Years as there are
Years, that is, it is an infinite and boundless Duration, and when thou have
struck thy Thoughts as deep into it as thou can, yet still thou art but at
the top of the heap, and it is still a whole Eternity to the bottom.

Thirdly, Consider also that the Wrath and Vengeance of God is most dreadful,
not only from the Eternal Continuance and Duration thereof, but also from the
excessive Anguish and Smart of those Torments that he inflicts; nothing that we
have ever felt, or can feel in this present Life, can come into any comparison
with them; and therefore the Text calls it, A falling into the Hands of God.
Here on Earth God's Hand does sometimes fall upon us, and it falls very heavy
too, and lays upon us fore and weighty Burdens; but these are nothing
considerable to our falling into the Hands of God. There is as much difference
between his Wrath and Displeasure falling upon us, and our falling upon it, as
there is between our having a few drops of a Shower falling upon us, and our
falling into a River, or into the Sea, and being overwhelmed with the great
Waters thereof; and yet how dreadful is it when God's Hand only falls upon us!
It was a sad Complaint of the Psalmist, Psalm 32.4. That God's Hand lay heavy
upon him. And Psalm 38.2. That God's Hand pressed him sore. Grievous Burdens and
sore Pressures may be laid upon us by this Hand of God, and that both as to
outward Afflictions, and inward Troubles.

First, As to outward Afflictions. How dreadfully does God stretch out his Hand
against some, making wide and terrible Breaches upon them; Some in their
Estates, some in their Relations, and some in their bodily Health and Strength.
Have you never been about the sick Beds of those that have roared out through
the extremity of their Pains, when every Limb has been upon the Rack, and God
has filled them with a Complication of loathsome, tormenting and incurable
Diseases? and yet all this is but only a falling of God's Hand upon them.

Secondly, As to inward Troubles: We see how God cramps some Men's Consciences,
breaths Fire and Flames into their very Souls, and makes deep Wounds in their
Spirits, forcing them through the extremity of their Anguish to cry out, they
are damned, they are damned; yea some have even wished that they were in Hell,
supposing those everlasting Torments would not be more unsufferable than what
they here felt. And indeed these inward Troubles are far more grievous than any
outward can be. We hear Heman crying out, that because of these Terrors of the
Lord, he was ready to die fron his Youth up. And whilst he suffered this Wrath
of God, he was even distracted with it, Psalm. 88.15.
Psalm 88.15. And Job, whose Patience is celebrated for bearing all his outward
Afflictions, his loss of Estate, of his Children, of his Health, with an
heroic Constancy, ( You have heard, says St. James, of the Patience of Job)
yet when God comes to touch his Spirit with his Wrath, then we hear of his
Impatience, he curses the Day of his Birth, and wishes that God would destroy
him, that he would let loose his Hand and cut him off. Job 6.9.
Job 6.9. And wherefore are these passionate Requests? why he tell us, Ver. 4.
The Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the Poison whereof drinks up my
Spirit: The Terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. And therefore
though he could patiently bear all that the rage and spite of the Devil could
do against him, when he touched his Wealth, when he touched his Children, yea
when he touched his Body, yet his Patience could no longer hold out, when God
came to touch his Soul and Conscience.

And yet the greatest Terrors of Conscience, whether in the Children of God to
their Reformation, or in the Wicked to their Desperation, are still but light
and small touches of his Hand in comparison with what shall be expressed
hereafter on the Damned in Hell. For,

First, To the Godly all these Afflictions are mixed with Love and Mercy. They
are brought upon them not as Plagues, but as Medicaments to do them good. But
in Hell all is Wrath, all is Fury, pure Wrath and Judgment without Mercy. And
certainly if those Sufferings which are inflicted in Love, and allayed with
Mercy, are yet so very dreadful to the People of God, how dreadful will the
Wrath of God be in Hell, where it shall be pure and unmixed, and nothing put
into that Cup which the Damned are there to drink of, but the rankest Venom
that can be squeezed out of all the Curses that ever God has donounced? And
then,

Secondly, To the Wicked all the Troubles and Terrors which they here endure
are nothing in comparison with what they must eternally suffer in Hell. They
are now only sprinkled with a few drops of God's Wrath, but in Hell all his
Waves shall go over them for ever. Here they do but sip a little of that Cup,
and taste a little of the Froth of it, and should they drink deeper, Earth
could not hold them, but they would grow drunk, and reel and stagger into Hell;
but there they must for ever drink the very Dregs of that Cup of Trembling and
Astonishment. And thou who now roarest and struglest like a wild Bull in a Net,
when God's Hand is only upon thee, what will thou do when thou shall eternally
fall into his Mighty Hands? Thou now cryest out of the Intolerableness of thy
present Pain: but, alas, had thou but felt one gripe of the Torments of the
Damned in Hell; had God and the Devil had but one blow apeice at thee, thou
would choose to live for ever here on Earth in the most exquisite Torture
that could be devised, choose to bear the sharpest Paroxisms of the Stone or
Gout, to be stretched upon the Rack, to lie broke upon the Wheel, to have thy
Flesh plucked off by fiery Pincers; thou would choose to suffer all these to
all Eternity; yea and choose them too as Recreations and Divertisements rather
than return again to that place of Torment; where not only the Eternity, but
the Smart and Anguish of them, is infinite and unconceivable. And as one Day in
the Joys of Heaven is better than a thousand Days, nay than a thousand Years in
all the impure and low Delights of Earth: So one Day in the Torments of Hell,
is far worse than a thousand in the sharpest Miseries we can possibly endure in
this Life.

Here our Pains usually are but partial, God aims and shoots with his Arrow
but at some one part of us: If he wounds our Spirits, yet this invisible Shaft
(like Lightning) passes through without making a Breach in our Bodies, or in
our 1Estates, we have still our Health and our Plenty left us. Or if he strike
the Body, usually it is but in one, or at most but in some few Places, and we
enjoy ease in the rest: But in Hell, God does as it were wrap the whole Man up
in Searcloth, and set it on fire round about them, so that they are tormented
in every part, neither Soul nor Body escaping, nor any Power or Faculty of the
one, nor any Part or Member of the other.

When we fall into the Hands of God, we are plunged into an Ocean of Wrath, and
are covered all over with his Fury and Indignation; the Understanding, Will,
Conscience, Affections, are all as brim-full of Torments as they can hold: For
what can be greater Anguish to the Mind than to know our Misery, and to know it
to be remediless? And what can be greater Anguish to the Will and Affections,
than most ardently and vehemently to desire freedom from those Torments, but
yet to despair of ever obtaining it? And what can fill the Conscience with
greater Anguish, than to reflect with infinite Horror and Regret, that it was
only Sinners own Folly and Madness that brought them to this woeful and
miserable Condition? How will they be ready even to rend and tear themselves in
pieces, their Consciences curse their Wills, and their Wills curse their
Affections, and their Affections the Objects that enticed them to the
commission of those Sins, the Revenges of which they must now eternally suffer?
And as for the Bodies of these Damned Souls, they shall after the Resurrection
and dreadful Day of Judgment, become all Fire, like a live Coal, Fire shall be
imbibed into the very Substance of them, and they not have so much as a drop of
Water afforded them to cool the tip of their Tongues. Luke 16.
Every Limb shall drop whole flakes of Fire and Brimstone, and they shall be so
scourged with knotted and twisted Serpents, as to be made all over one great
fiery Wound and Ulcer. And this is a third Consideration of the dreadfulness of
everlasting Vengeance; It is a falling into God's Hands.

Fourthly, Consider, it is a falling into the Hands of the Living God himself,
and not of any Creature. 2 Samuel 24.14.
Indeed we read in 2 Samuel 24.14. that David chose rather to fall into the Hands
of the Lord, than into the Hands of Men. It is true, when there is true
Repentance, and hopes of obtaining Mercy, this is far more eligible: for the
Chastisements of the Lord are full of Mercy; but the tender Mercies of the
wicked are cruel. But where all hopes and expectations of Mercy are excluded,
as they are in Hell, certainly there it is infinitely more dreadful to fall
into the Hands of a Sin-revenging-God, than into the Hands of all the Creatures
in Heaven, or Earth, yea or Hell it self. One would have thought it had been
terrible enough, if the Apostle had said, It is a fearful thing to fall into
the Hands of Devils, and so indeed it were, if we consider either their Power,
or their Malice: Certainly they can easily find out such tormenting
Ingredients, and apply them also to such tender Parts, that it would transcend
the Patience of any Man on Earth quietly to bear but what one Devil can
inflict. Do we not often see in the Illusions of black and sooty Melancholy,
what strange Fears and Terrors they can imprint upon the Fancy, what Horror
and Despair they can work in the Conscience, so as to make Men weary of their
Lives, and many times persuade them to destroy themselves, only to know the
worst of what they must suffer? And all this he can do out of his own Kingdom;
what then can he do when he has got Sinners into his own Territories, and
under his own Dominions? What exact Tortures can he inflict upon them there?
such indeed as we cannot tell what they are, and may it please God we never may.

And yet the Devil is but a Fellow Creature; but wicked Men are to fall into
the Hands, not of a Creature, but of the great Creator, into the Hands of God
himself, whose Power is infinitely beyond the Devils, so that he is the
Tormentor even of them.

Think then with thy self O Sinner, that if God binds and scourges, and
torments the very Devils, who yet do so insufferably torment the Damned, how
infinitely intolerable then is that Wrath which God himself shall inflict upon
them? Consider with thy self, if thou can not bear those Pains and Torments
which the Devils inflict, and if the Devils cannot bear those Pains and
Torments which God inflicts upon them; how will thou then, O Sinner, be able to
bear the immediate Wrath, Fury, and Vengeance of the great God himself?

Nay let me go yet a great deal lower; and suppose that God should make use of
common and ordinary Creatures for the punishment of wicked Men, who is there
that could bear even this? If God should only keep a Man living for ever in the
midst of a Furnace of gross and earthly Fire, how dreadful would this be! If
but a Spark of Fire fall upon any part of the Body, consider what an acute Pain
it will cause, much more if thy whole Man should be all over on a light Flame,
and thou for ever kept alive to feel the piercing Torment of it. And yet what
is our dull unactive Fire in comparison of that pure intelligent Fire, which
shall melt down the Damned like Wax, and lick up the very Spirits of their
Souls? Or suppose God who knows the several Stings that are in all his
Creatures, should take out of them the most sharp Ingredients, and from them
all make up a most tormenting Composition; if he should take Poison and Venom
out of one, and Fire and Scorching out of another, and Smart and Stinging out
of a third, and the Quintessence of Bitterness out of a fourth; and by his
infinite Skill, heighten all these to a preternatural Acrimony; if now God
should apply this Composition thus fatally mixed and blended together, unto any
of us, what an intolerable Anguish would it cause in us? And if Creatures can
cause such Tortures, what a dreadful thing then is it to fall into the Hands of
God himself? For when God conveys his Wrath to us by Creatures, it must needs
lose infinitely in the very Conveyance. When God takes up one Creature to
strike another, it is but as if a Giant should take up a Straw or Feather to
strike with; for though he be never so strong, yet the Blow can be but weak
because of the weakness of the Instrument; and yet alas how terrible are even
such weak Blows to us? What will it then be when God shall immediately crush us
by the unrebated strokes of his own Almighty Arm, and shall express the Power
of his Wrath, and the Glory of his Justice and Severity in our eternal
Destruction? And this is the fourth Demonstration of the dreadfulness of Divine
Vengeance.

Fifthly, Consider that the Apostle calls this Wrath, which the living God will
inflict upon Sinners by the Name of Vengeance. Vengeance is mine, I will
recompense it. Now Vengeance when it is whet and sharpened by Wrath, will enter
deep, and cut the Soul to the very Quick. God acts a twofold part in the
punishment of Sinners.

First, of a Judge. In relation to which their Eternal Torments are sometimes
called Condemnation; so 1 Timothy 3.6. we have mention made of the Condemnatition
of the Devil; 1 Timothy 3.6.
That is, that state of Woe and Wrath to which the Devil is for ever sentenced.
And Damnation, Mat. 23.33. How can you escape the Damnation of Hell? And
sometimes it is termed Judgment, Heb. 10.27. Heb. 10.27.
A certain fearful looking for of Judgment and Fiery Indignation. And in Jude
15. Jude 15.
to execute Judgment upon all the Ungodly. Which denotes that their Punishment
shall be inflicted upon them from God, as he is a Just and Righteous Judge.

And Secondly, God is an Avenger as well as a Judge. He is a Party concerned,
as having been wronged, affronted, and injured by their Sins. And in relation
to this, the Punishments that God will inflict upon them, are called Wrath and
Fury, smoking Anger and Jealousy: Deuteronomy. 29.20. Deuteronomy. 29.20.
The Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against that Man. Also,
Fiery Indignation, Heb. Heb. 10.27.
10.27. All which we find amassed and heaped together, Zeph. Zeph. 3.8.
3.8. My Determination (says God) is to gather the Nations, to pour upon them
mine Indignation, even all my fierce Anger; for all the Earth shall be devoured
with the Fire of my Jealousy. Now, all these Expressions signify to us the
terribleness of that Vengeance which God will take. For when the Wrath of Man
only stirs him up to revenge an Injury, he will be sure to do it to the very
utmost extremity of all his Power. And if the Revenge of a poor weak Man be so
dreadful a thing; how insupportable will be the Vengeance of the great God, who
assumes it to himself as part of his Royalty? Vengeance is mine. See that
terrible place, Nah. 1.2.
Nahum 1.2. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth: the Lord revengeth, and is
furious, the Lord will take Vengeance on his Adversaries, and he reserveth
Wrath for his Enemies. God reserveth Wrath for Sinners, and keeps it up in
store, even that Wrath which they themselves have treasured up against the Day
of Wrath. H^h

Now this Revenging-Wrath of God has these two things in it that justly make
it dreadful.

First, In that, Revenge always aims at Satisfaction, and seeks to repair
Injuries received, by inflicting Punishment on the Offender. This gives ease to
the Party grieved; and if this Revenge be commensurate to the greatness of the
Offense, he rests satisfied in it. And therefore, God speaking of himself
according to the Passions and Affections of Men, solaces himself in the
thoughts of that Vengeance he would take upon Sinners, Isa. Isa. 1.24.
1.24. Ah, I will ease me of mine Adversaries, I will avenge me of mine
Enemies. And, O think how dreadful that Revenge must needs be, that shall ease
the Heart of God, and give him satisfaction, for all the heinous Provocations
that Sinners have committed against him. For consider,

First, How great and manifold our Sins and Offenses have been, and every act
of Sin, yea the least that ever we committed, is an infinite Debt, and carries
in it an infinite Guilt, because committed against an infinite Majesty. For all
Offenses take their Measures, not only from the Matter of the Act, but from the
Person against whom they are committed: As a reviling injurious Word against
our Equals, will but bear an Action at Law, but against the Prince, it is
High Treason, and punishable with Death. So here, the least Offense against the
infinite Majesty of the great God, becomes it self infinite: The Guilt of it is
far beyond whatsoever we can possibly conceive: and yet what infinite Numbers
of these infinite Sins have we committed? The Psalmist tells us, They are more
than the Hairs of our Head, Psalm. 40.12.
Psalm 40.12. Yea, we may well take in all the Sands of the Seashore to cast
them up by. Our Thoughts are incessantly in Motion; they keep pace with the
Moments, and are continually twinkling, and yet, Every Imagination of the
Thoughts of our Hearts is evil. What Multitudes of them have been grossly wicked
and impious; Atheistical, Blasphemous, Unclean, Worldly, and Malicious! and the
best of them have been very defective, and far short of that Spirituality and
Heavenliness that ought to give a Tincture unto them. And besides the Sins of
our Thoughts, how deep have our Tongues set us on the score? We have talked our
selves in debt to the Justice of God, and with our own Breath have been blowing
up our everlasting and unquenchable Fire. And add to these the numberless crowd
and sum of our sinful Actions, wherein we have busily employed our selves to
provoke the Holy and Jealous God to Wrath, and we shall find our Sins to be
doubly infinite in their own particular Guilt and Demerit. And now, O Sinner,
when an angry and furious God shall come to exact from thee a full satisfaction
for all these Injuries, a Satisfaction in which he may eternally rest and
acquiesce, such as may repair and recompense his wronged Honor, think sadly
with thy self, how infinitely dreadful this must needs be. Assure thy self God
will not lose by thee, but will fetch his Glory out of thee, and take such a
Revenge upon thee as shall as much please and content him, as his infinite
Mercy does in those whom he saves and glorifies. And how great then must this
Vengeance be?

Secondly, Consider how dreadful a Revenge God took on his own dear Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ, when he came to satisfy his Justice upon him for our Sins.
His Wrath fell infinitely heavy upon him, and the pressure of it was so
intolerable, that it squeezed out drops of clotted Blood from him in the
Garden, and that sad Cry on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? And yet,

First, Our Lord Christ was supported under all his Sufferings by the ineffable
Union of the Deity. He had infinite Power for him, as well as against him;
infinite Power to bear him up, as well as to crush him. In Christ's Sufferings,
the Power of God seemed as it were to encounter with it self, and to run
contrary to it self in the same Channel. And as he had the support of infinite
Power in his Sufferings, so likewise had he in the greatest of his Angonies the
Ministry of Angels to comfort him, and to refresh the Droopings and Faintings
of his Humane Nature. And,

Secondly, The infinite Dignity of Christ's Person, being God as well as Man,
might well compound for the Rigor of his Punishments, and stamp such a Value
upon his Humiliation, that less degrees of Suffering from him, might be fully
satisfactory. For indeed it cannot be but an infinite Punishment, for an
infinite Person to be punished. But thou that art but a vile contemptible
Creature, made up of Mudd and Slime, have nothing in thy Nature wherewith to
satisfy the dread Justice of God, but only the eternal Destruction and
Perdition of it. Thou have no Worth nor Dignity, the consideration whereof
might persuade the Almighty to mitigate the least of his Wrath and Fury upon
thee: And when it falls in all its weight and force upon thee, thou have
nothing to uphold or support thee. It is true, the Almighty Power of God shall
continue thee in thy Being, but thou will for ever curse and blaspeme that
Support, that shall be given thee only to perpetuate thy Torments, and ten
thousand times wish that God would destroy thee once for all, and that thou
might for ever shrink away into nothing: but that, alas, poor miserable
Wretch will not be granted thee; no, thou shall not have so much as the relief
and comfort of dying, nor escape the Vengeance of God by Annihilation: but his
Power will for ever so support thee, as for ever to torment thee, which is only
such a Support as a Man is supported on the Rack or on the Wheel, supported so
as they cannot come off, the very Engine of their Torture upholds them. And as
for any help or relief the Ministry of Angels will afford thee, think what
solace it will bring thee, when God shall set on whole Legions of infernal
Ghosts, black and hideous Spirits, as the Executioners of his Wrath, who shall
for ever triumph in thy Woes and add to them, hurl Firebrarnds at thee, heap
fuel about thee, and fully satiate their Malice upon thee, as God satisfies
his Justice. And this is one Consideration of the dreadfulness of this
Vengeance, in that it aims at and exacts satisfaction for Sin, which will be
infinitely intolerable, because our Sins are infinite both in Number and
Heinousness. And because Jesus Christ, who was to satisfy not for his own, but
for the Sins of others, though he were upheld by the Divine Nature, and
possibly underwent not such Acrimony of Wrath as the Damned do, yet his
Sufferings were unspeakable and unknown Sorrows: And how much sorer then shall
wicked Men bear for their own Sins, when Justice shall come to reckon with
them, and to exact from them to the very utmost Farthing of all that they owe?

Secondly, Consider that Revenging Wrath stirs up all that is in God against a
Sinner. Wrath when it is whet and set on by Revenge, redoubles a Man's Force,
and makes him perform Things that he could not do in his cold Blood, it fires
all a Man's Spirits, and calls them forth to express their utmost Efforts. So
this Revenging Wrath of God draws forth all the Force and Activity of his
Attributes, and sets them against a Sinner, and how dreadful then must that
Execution needs be? We see what great Works God can perform when he is not
stirred up thereunto by his Wrath and Indignation. He speaks a whole World into
Being, and speaks it with a cold and calm Breath. Certainly it was no small
piece of work, to spread out the Heavens, and lay the Foundations of the Earth,
and to work all those Wonders of Creation and Providence which we daily behold;
but yet all these Things God did, (if I may so speak) without any Emotion. But
when he comes to take Vengeance upon Sinners, he is then inflamed, all that is
in God, is as it were on fire. Jealousy, says Solomon, is the Rage of a Man,
Proverbs 6.34. Prove. 6.34.
Now when God's Jealousy shall be stirred in him, think how impetuously it will
break forth in the fearful effects of it. Isa. 42.13.
Isa. 42.13. The Lord shall stir up Jealousy like a Man of War; he shall cry,
yea, roar, he shall prevail against his Enemies. If the calm and sedate Works
of God are so great and wonderful, how great then will his Vengeance be, when
Anger, Fury, and Indignation shall excite and whet his Power to show the very
utmost of what it can do? And therefore we find that though God had inflicted
dreadful Plagues upon the Israelites in the Wilderness, and had shown mighty
effects of his Power and Vengeance, yet we find the Church blesses him, That
he turned away his Anger, and did not stir up all his Wrath. Psalm. 78.38.
But in Hell God stirs up all his Wrath, every thing is set and bent against
the Damned: And as to the Saints in Heaven, every Attribute of God concurs to
make him merciful and gracious to them. So to the Wicked in Hell, all the
Perfections of God conspire either to stir up and kindle his Wrath, or else to
assist him in the execution of it upon them. The infinite Wisdom of God
contrives their Punishments, and which way to lay them on, so that they shall
be most sharp and poinant. The Power of God that rouses it self against them,
and proffers all its Succors and Assistance unto Vengeance. The Eternity and
Unchangeableness of God come in as a dreadful Addition, and makes that Wrath
which of it self is insupportable, to be also everlasting? Yea that sweet and
mild Attribute of God, his Mercy, the only Refuge and the only comfort of
miserable Mankind, yet even this turns against them too, and because they
despised it when it shone forth in Patience and Forbearance, will not now
regard them when they stand in need of its Rescue and Deliverance: So that all
that is in God, arms it self to take Vengeance on Sinners: And O think how sore
and fearful that Vengeance will be, when God shall put forth all that is in
himself for the executing of his Wrath upon impenitent Sinners! And thus I have
done with the Demonstrations of the Dreadfulness of God's Wrath taken from the
Words in the Text, Vengeance is mine, I will recompense it. It Is a fearful
thing to fall into the Hands of the living God.

Let us now consider some other Demonstrations of the Greatness of this Wrath.
And,

First, It appears to be exceeding dreadful in that it is set forth to us in
Scripture by all those things which are most terrible to Humane Nature. God
makes use of many Metaphorical Expressions of things most grievous to our
Senses, that from them we may take an hint to conceive how intolerable his
Wrath is in it self. It is called a Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19.
1 Peter 3.19. where mention is made of the Spirits in Prison; that is, the
Souls of those Men to whom the Spirit of Christ in Noah went, and preached in
the Days of their Mortal Life, but for their Disobedience are shut up under the
Wrath of God in Hell. And certainly Hell is a Prison large enough to hold all
the World. Psalm 9.17. Psalm. 9.17.
The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God. A
Prison it is where the Devil and wicked Spirits are shackled with Chains of
massy and substantial Darkness. 2 Peter 2.4. They are, 2 Pet. 2.4.
says the Apostle, reserved in Chains of Darkness unto the Judgment of the
great Day. And they are there kept in everlasting Chains under Darkness, not
one Cranny in this great Prison to let in the least ray or glimpse of Light. It
is called a Place of Torment, Luke 16.28. Luke 16.28.
It is a Region of Woe and Misery, wherein Horror, Despair, and Torture for
ever dwell, and are in their most proper Seat and Habitation. It is called, a
drowning of Men in Destruction and Perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. One would think
that to be drowned, might signify Death enough of it self; but to be drowned in
Perdition and Destruction, signifies moreover the fatalness and the depth of
that Death into which they are plunged. It is called, a being cast bound Hand
and Foot into utter Darkness, Mat. 22.13.
Matthew. 22.13. A being thrown into a Furnace of Fire, to be burnt alive, Matthew.
13.42, 50. It is called, a Lake of Fire, Rev. 20.15.
Rev. 20.15. into which wicked Men shall be plunged all over, where they shall
lie wallowing and rolling among Millions of damned Spirits, in those infernal
Flames. And this Lake is continually fed with a sulphurous stream of Brimstone,
Rev. 19.20. And this Fire and Brimstone is that which never shall be quenched.
Mat. 3.12.
Matthew. 3.12. He will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire. And lastly, to
name no more, it is called everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Matthew. 25.41. Mat. 25.41.
And now we are arrived at the highest pitch of what Sense can feel, or
Imagination conceive. Or if it be possible that in your deepest Thoughts you
can conceive any thing more dreadful than this, you may call it a Sea of molten
Brimstone, set all on fire, and continually spewing out sooty dark Flames,
wherein endless Multitudes of sinful Wretches must lie tumbling to all
Eternity, burnt up with the fierceness of a tormenting and devouring Fire,
scourged with Scorpions, stung with fiery Serpents, howling and roaring
incessantly, and none to pity, much less to relieve and help them, grinding and
gnashing their Teeth through the extremity of their Anguish and Torture. If now
you can fancy any thing more terrible and dreadful than this, Hell is that, yea
and much more: For these things are Metaphorical; and though I cannot deny but
some of these may be properly and literally true, yet the litteral sense of
these Metaphors do but faintly and weakly show us what the least part of those
everlasting Torments are.

Secondly, Another Demonstration of the dreadfulness of this Vengeance is this,
That it is a Wrath that shall come up unto, and equal all our Fears. You know
what an inventive and ingenious thing Fear is, what horrid Shapes it can fancy
to it self out of every thing: Put but an active Fancy into an Affright, and
presently the whole World will be filled with strange Monsters and hideous
Apparitions. The very shaking of a leaf will sometimes rout all the Forces and
Resolutions of Men: And usually it is this wild Passion that does inhance all
other Dangers, and make them seem greater and more dreadful than indeed they
are. But now here it is impossible for a wicked Man to fear more than he shall
certainly suffer. Let his Imaginations be hung round with all the dismal Shapes
that ever frighted Men out of their Wits; let his Fancy dip its Pencil in the
deepest Melancholy that ever any Soul was besmeered with, and then strive to
pourtray and express the most terrible things that it can judge to be the
Objects of Fear, or the Instruments of Torment, yet the Wrath of the great God
vastly exceeds all that Fear it self can possibly represent. See that strange
Expression, Psalm 90.11. Who knows the Power of thine Anger? according to thy
Fear, so is thy Wrath. That is, according to the fear Men have of thee, as
dreadful and as terrible as they can possibly apprehend thy Wrath to be, so it
is, and much more. Let the Heart of Man stretch it self to the utmost bounds of
Imagination, and call into its Aid all the things that ever it has heard or
seen to be dreadful; let it (as that Painter, who to make a beautiful Piece,
borrowed several of the best Features from several beautiful Persons) borrow
all the dreadful, all the direful Representations that ever it met with, to
make up one most terrible Idea; yet the Wrath of God shall still exceed it: He
can execute more Wrath upon us than we can fear. Some wicked Men in this Life
have had a Spark of this Wrath of God fall upon their Consciences, when they
lie roaring out under Despair and fearful Expectations of the fiery Indignation
of God to consume and devour them. But alas this is nothing to what they shall
hereafter feel. God now does but open to them a small chink and crevice into
Hell, he now does but suffer a few small drops of his Wrath to fall upon them.
And if this be so sore and smart that their Fears could never think of any
thing more dreadful than what they now suffer: O what will it be then when he
shall overwhelm them with a whole deluge of his Wrath, and cause all his Waves
to go over them? Fear him, says our Savior, who is able to destroy both Soul
and Body in Hell; yea, I say unto you, Mat. 10.28.
fear him. And yet when we have feared according to the utmost extent of our
narrow Hearts, yet still his infinite Power and Wrath is infinitely more
fearful than we can fear it.

Thirdly, Consider the principal and immediate Subject of this Wrath of God,
and that is the Soul, and this adds much to the dreadfulness of it. The acutest
Torments that the Body is capable of, are but dull and flat things in
comparison of what the Soul can feel. Now when God shall immediately with his
own Hand lash the Soul, that refined and spiritual Part of Man, the principle
of all Life and Sensation, and shall draw Blood from it every Stripe, how
intolerable may we conceive those Pains and Tortures to be? To shoot poisoned
Darts into a Man's Marrow, to rip up his Bowels with a Sword red hot; all this
is as nothing to it. Think what it is to have a drop of scalding Oil, or melted
Lead, fall upon the Apple of your Eyes, that should make them boil and burn
till they fall out of your Heads; such Torment, nay infinitely more than such,
is it to have the burning Wrath of God to fall upon the Soul. We find that
Spirits which are infinitely inferior unto God, can make strange Impressions
upon the Souls of Men: and shall not the great God much more, who is the Father
of Spirits? Yes, he can torture them by his essential Wrath. And that God, who,
as the Prophet Nahum speaks, Nahum 1.6.
can melt Mountains, and make Hills and Rocks flow down at his Presence, can
melt the Souls of the Damned, like lumps of Wax; for in his Displeasure he does
sometimes do it to the best of Men even in this Life, Psalm. 22.14.
Psalm 22.14. My Heart is melted like Wax in the midst of my Bowels.

Fourthly, The Dreadfulness of this Wrath of God may be demonstrated by this,
That the Punishment of the Damned is reserved by God as his last Work. It is a
Work which he will set himself about when all the rest of his Works are done,
when he has folded up the World, and laid it aside as a Thing of no further
use, then will God set himself to this great Work, and pour out all the
Treasures of his Wrath upon damned Wretches, as if God would so wholly mind
this Business that he would lay all other Affairs aside, that he might be
intent only upon this, having no other thing to interrupt him. Think then how
full of Dread and Terror this must needs be, when God will as it were employ
all his Eternity about this, and have no other thing to take him off from doing
it with all his Might. God has reserved two Works, and but two for the other
World; One is the Salvation of the Elect, and the other is the Damnation of
Reprobates.

Now it is remarkable that God's last Works do always exceed his former: And
therefore we find in the Creation (...) World, God still proceeded on from more
imperfect kind of Creatures to those that were more perfect, until he had fully
built and finished, yea carved and as it were painted this great House of the
Universe; and then he brings Man into it as his last Work, as the Crown and
Perfection of the rest: So God likewise acted in the manner of revealing his
Will unto Mankind, first he spoke to them by Dreams and Visions, but in the
last Days (as the Apostle expresses it) he has spoken unto us by his Son. So
also in the Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, and Exhibition of the
Messiah, first he was made known only by Promise to the Fathers, then in Types
and obscure Resemblances to the Jews, but in the latter Days, himself came and
took upon him the form of a Servant, and wrought out a complete Redemption for
us. So usually the last Works of God are more complete, perfect and excellent
than the former. Now God's punishing-Work is his last Work, and therefore it
shall exceed in Greatness all that ever went before it. In his first Work, the
Creation of the World, he demonstrated his infinite Power, Wisdom, and Godhead;
but in the Destruction of Sinners, which is his last Work, (...) will manifest
more of Power and Wisdom, than he did in his creating them; and how fearful a
Destruction then must this needs be? God has variety of Works that he is
carrying on in this World, and if his Glory does not perfectly appear in one,
he may manifest it in another. But when he shall confine himself only to two,
as he will in the World to come, the saving of the Godly, and the damning of
the Wicked, and this without any variety or change, certainly then these shall
be performed to the very utmost of what God can do: for as he will save the
Saints to the very utmost; so likewise will he damn and destroy Sinners to the
very utmost.

Fifthly, Another Demonstration of the dreadfulness of this Wrath shall be
drawn from this Consideration, That God will for ever inflict it for the
glorifying of his Power on the Damned. Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show
his Wrath, and make his Power known: And 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. They shall be punished
with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory
of his Power. Now certainly, if God will inflict eternal Punishments upon them
to show forth his Power, their Punishments must needs be infinitely great. For,

First, All those Works wherein God shows forth his Power, are great and
stupendous. Consider what Power it was for God to lay the Beams of the World,
and to erect so stately a Fabric as Heaven and Earth. The Apostle therefore
tells us, That by the Creation of the World, is understood the eternal Power of
God, Romans 1.20. When God showed his Power in creating, O what a great and
stupendous Work did he produce! And therefore certainly when God shall likewise
show his Power in destroying, the Punishments he will inflict will be wonderful
and stupendous.

Secondly, Consider God can easily destroy a Creature without showing any great
Power, or putting forth his Almighty Arm and Strength to do it. If he only
withdraw his Power by which he upholds all things in their Beings, we should
quickly fall all abroad into nothing: So easy is it for God to destroy the
well-being of all his Creatures. But now if God will express the greatness and
infiniteness of his Power in destroying Sinners, whom yet he can destroy
without putting forth his Power, yea only by withdrawing and withholding it; O
how fearful must this Destruction needs be! Alas we are crushed before the Moth,
and must needs perish, if God does but suspend the influence of his Power from
us. How dreadfully then will he destroy when he shall lay forth his infinite
Power to do it, who can easily do it without Power?

And thus I have laid down some Demonstrations of the dreadfulness of the Wrath
and Vengeance of God, five of them drawn from the Words of the Text, and five
drawn from other Considerations. I shall now shut up with two or three Words of
Application.

First, Then be persuaded to believe that there is such a dreadful Wrath to
come. I know well, you all profess that you do believe, that as there are
unconceivable Rewards of Glory reserved in Heaven for the Saints, so that there
are inexhaustible Treasures of Wrath reserved and laid up in Hell for all
ungodly and impenitent Sinners. But O how few are there that do really and
cordially believe these things: Men's own Lives may be evident Convictions to
themselves of their Atheism and Infidelity: For the true reason of all that
dissoluteness which we see abroad in the World proceeds much from hence,
because Men are not persuaded that these dreadful Terrors of the Lord which
have now been set before us, are any thing but an honest Artifice. They look
upon them as things only invented to scare the World into good order, and to
awe Men into some compass of Civility and Honesty: They think all those
tremendous Threatenings that God has denounced in his Law to be things intended
rather to fright Men than to do execution upon them. And whereas one of the
most effectual Motives to Piety and an holy Life, is to be persuaded of the
Terrors of the Lord, these are not yet persuaded that there are any such
Terrors: But assure your selves these are not the extravagant Dreams of
Melancholy Fancies, nor the Politic Impostures of Men that design to amuse the
World with frightful Stories; but they are sad and serious Truths, such as
however you may now slight and contemn, yet shall you be woefully convinced of
by your own experience, when after a few years, or possibly a few days, you
shall be sunk down into that Place of Torment, that Gulf and Abyss of Misery,
where the great God shall for ever express the Art, and the Power of his
Vengeance in your everlasting Destruction.

Secondly, This speaks abundance of comfort to all those whose Sins are
pardoned, and they delivered from the Wrath to come. Look what Spring-tides of
Joy would rise in the Heart of a poor condemned Malefactor, who every moment
expects the stroke of Justice to cut him off, to have a Pardon interpose and
rescue him from Death. Such, yea far greater should be thy Joy who art freed
merely by a gracious Pardon, from a Condemnation infinitely greater and worse
than Death it self. When we look into Hell, and consider the Wrath that the
Damned there lie under, O to behold them there restlesly rolling to and fro in
Chains and Flames, to hear them exclaim against their own Folly and Madness,
and to curse Themselves and their Associates as the causes of their heavy and
doleful Torments; how should we rejoice that though we have been guilty of many
great and heinous Sins, and have ten thousand times deserved Hell and
everlasting Burnings, yet our good and gracious God has freely pardoned us our
Debts, and freed us from the same merited Punishments.

Thirdly, This also should excite us to magnify the Love of our Lord Jesus
Christ toward us, who though he knew what the dreadful Wrath of God was, how
sore and heavy it would lie upon his Soul, yet such was his infinite Compassion
toward us, that he willingly submitted himself to be in our stead, took upon
him our Nature, that he might take upon him our Guilt; and first made himself
wretched, that he might be made accursed. He drank off the whole bitter Cup of
his Father's Wrath at one bitter draught, received the whole sting of Death
into his Body at once; falls and dies under the Revenges of Divine Justice,
only that we might be delivered from the Wrath that we had deserved, but could
not bear. O Christian, let thy Heart be enlarged with great Love and
Thankfulness to thy blessed Redeemer; and as he thought nothing too much to
suffer for thee, return him this Expression of thy Thankfulness to think
nothing too much, nor too hard to do or to suffer for him.

Fourthly, You that go on in Sin, consider what a God you have to deal withal;
You have not to do with Creatures, but with God himself. And do you not fear
that increated Fire that will wrap you up in Flames of his essential Wrath, and
burn you for ever? Consider that dreadful Expostulation that God makes, Ezekiel.
Ezekiel. 22.14.
22.14. Can thy Heart endure, or can thy Hands be strong in the Day that I
shall deal with thee, says the Lord? The very weakness of God is stronger than
Man: God can breath, he can look a Man to Death; Job 4.9. Job 4.9.
By the Blast of God they perish, and by the Breath of his Nostrils are they
consumed: They perish at the Rebuke of thy Countenance, Psalm 80.16. Psalm.
80.16.
O then tremble to think what a load of Wrath his heavy Hand can lay upon thee,
Isa. 10.12.
That Hand which spans the Heavens, and in the Hollow of which he holds the
Sea. What Punishment will this great Hand of God in which his great Strength
lies, inflict when it shall fall upon thee in the full Power of its Might? And
tell me now, O Sinner, would thou willingly fall into the Hands of this God,
who is thus able to crush thee to pieces, yea to nothing? O how shall any of us
then dare, who are but poor weak Potsherds of the Earth, dash our selves
against this Rock of Ages? Indeed we can neither resist his Power, nor escape
his Hand: and therefore since we must necessarily sooner or later fall into the
Hands of God, let us by true Repentance and an humble Acknowledgment of our
Sins and Vileness, throw our selves into his merciful Hands, and then to our
unspeakable Comfort we shall find that he will extend his Arm of Mercy to
support us, and not his Hand of Justice to crush and break us.

FINIS.

