THE GENTLEMAN'S JOCKEY, AND Approved Farrier: INSTRUCTING In the Natures,
Causes, and Cures of all Diseases incident to HORSES. WITH An Exact and Easy
Method of Breeding, Buying, Dieting, and otherwise Ordering all sorts of
Horses, as well for Common and Ordinary USE, as the HEATS and COURSE. With
diverse other Curiosities collected by the long Practice, Experience and Pains
of J. H. Esquire, Matthew Hodson, Mr. Holled, Mr. Willis, Mr. Robinson, Mr.
Holden, Thomas Empson, Mr. Roper, Mr. Medcalf, and Nathaniel Shaw.

The Fourth EDITION.

Virg. Georg. L. 3 Tantus amor Laudum, tantae est Victoria curae,
Aequum est noscere Equos, atque Johannem Obolum.
LONDON, Printed for Hen. Twyford in Vine-Court Middle Temple, and Nath. Brook
at the Angel near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1676.

TO THE READER.
AFter so many Essays, and some of them not of the meanest, which have been
made concerning this point, let it not be thought a presumption to offer known
Experiments. For although there have been many great Masters, who have in many
points offered their knowledge in public to the World in this Matter, yet have
not altogether said so much, but that a Well-wisher may have liberty to cast in
his Gleanings And though it is said, Facile est inventis addere, yet such
Additions have wrought that high improvement of Arts, whereof in this Age the
World boasts. Esculapius, who by the Ancients was Deified for his first
Practice in Physic; yet was after undone by Galen, whose Works are still
famous, even beyond Esculapius's Name; yet has later Learning queried much in
Galen, and Paracelsus not afraid even to Arraign him. If these in that so
renowned Art of Pharmaceuty have thus varied and amended by Practical
Experiments, why may not this little Manual (as it makes a Supplement) be
looked upon with an impartial eye: If the Subject of it in Practice has been
worth the Experimenting by such able hands, it cannot be less worth thy
Reading. And though you expect more then you find, yet I dare say you shall
find more then you expect. Whoever is a Gentleman, or a Soldier that loves his
Horse, will find the Advantage thereof in any Experiment; and the honest
Country man, whose habitation perhaps may be some miles distant from a Farrier,
having this Book, may at an easy charge Cure his own Cattle. Use it with the
same Freedom I offer it; And I dare believe you will find no less Advantage
than many Honorable Persons have done, upon occasion, as these Medicines and
Experiments have been Applied, and well Approved: and therein your satisfaction
will be an amends for all our past Care and Labor.

THE TABLE.
A.
AGe, How to know a Horses Age. 63, ad 67 Anbury, a remedy for it. 103, 270
Apoplexy, or Palsy. 135 Antocow, a disease in a Horse, and how cured. 276
B.
BRead for a Running Horse, how and of what to be made: The first. 17, 18 The
second bread. 27 The last bread. 29, ad 34 Botts cured. 62, 63, 84, 230, 282
Back Sinew-strain cured. 72 Blood. To cure pissing blood. 84, 113, 131, 158,
283 Back, Swelling there, how cured. 85 Breed of Horses, how to order. 92
Bleeding at Nose, to stop. 110, 235, 238 Burning. To cure a Horse burnt by a
Mare. 113 Bruise inward, remedy for it. 149 Back-swancked Horse, how to remedy.
159 Blow, or other mischance, causing swelling about the Head. 162 Brisket
swelled, how cured. 216 Button-farcey oured. 218 Belly-ach, or Belly-bound. 281
Blood. To stop in any part. 288 Blood-spavin, etc. 266
C.
COld, a Medicine for it. 59, 70, 84. 150, 154, 181, 208, 209 Cut, or hewing on
the Legs, cured, 78 Canker in the horses mouth, how to cure. 83, 111, 223
Colts, when best to wean them. 97 What is the best feeding for them. 98, 100
When they may be handled. 101
Cough, old or new, how to cure. 111, 151, 153, 236 Canker in the tongue, a
Remedy. 112 Canker in the head.. 160 Cods bruised, or bitten, how to cure. 169
Cords, a Disease, the cure. 220, 271 Cold, either old or new, to cure with
safety. 236, 237, 241, 242, 275 For a Curb, the Remedy. 244 For the Cough, a
good Receipt. 257 Cramp, or Convulsion of Sinews. 274 Colic, how to cure. 281
Colt Evil cured. 283 Canker, in the Nose: 288 Crick in the Neck. 253 Hurts in
the Cronet, Quitterbone or Matlong. 268
D.
DIet, how to diet a Horse for a match. 7. ad 15 Dung of a Horse to be
observed. 49 Directions to use Medicines: 170 Diapente, how made. 222
Decoction, what it is. 265 Drugs, to be put into a Glister. 266 Dropsy, how to
cure. 280
E.
EYe, a Water for sore Eyes or dim sight. 71 Enterfairing, how to help or hide
it. 82 Eye, a stroke or bite of the Eye, cured. 84, 146, 147 To take a film
from the Eye. 106, 134 Diseases in the Eyes, and their cure. 286
F.
FEeding of a horse to be observed. 51 Farcey cured. 79, 83, 107, 114, 136,
137, 212, 215, 217 Founder, Frettize, etc. cured. 79 Flaps in a horses mouth,
how to cure. 103 Fundament, or Mother fallen out, the cure of it. 108, 282 Foot,
a stub or other hurt in the Foot. 109 Falling Evil, how to cure. 111 Founded
Horse, how to cure. 118, 183, 258 For the Chest Founder. 124 Fistula, how to
cure. 128, 251 Feeding Cattle, observations concerning the same. 145
Foot-foundring, the Cure. 156 Fever in a Horse to cure. 232 Falling Evil, the
Remedy. 273 Foundring in the Body, how to help. 278 Frictions, for a Horse. 286
Falling of the Crest, Manginess. 254 Defending of a Horse from Flies. 277
G.
GRound to run on, how to be chosen: 56 For the Glanders, a Medicine. 58, 69,
81, 251, 275 Balls for the same. 60 Grease fallen into the Legs, how to be
cured. 81 Galls between the Legs, how to prevent. 82 Garget, to cure. 129, 157,
158 Gall: To help the overflowing thereof. 158 Griping or Fretting, in a Horses
belly. 229 Glanders, a preparatory drink. 248, 249 The black drink for the
Glanders. 250 Gangrene in the Foot, a Remedy for it. 251 A Glister for a sick
or surfeited Horse. 261, 267, 268, 269, ad 272 Glisters, and their use. 264,
285 How to be made. 266 When to give it. ibid. The length of the Glister-pipe.
267
Gall diseased. 279
H.
HEats: What Heats are necessary for a Running Horse. 15 Horses hair to be
minded. 57 Hudson's Medicines. 58 Horses hoofs to be made tough and strong. 80
Brittle Hoofs cured. 82, 139, 141, 191 Horses for Hunting, Pleasure, or Travel.
87, ad 92 How to breed Horses. 92 How to handle a sturdy Horse. 99 Hurle-bone*
out of joint, helped. 175 Heat sudden and great, that the Grease is melted. 181
Horse, to make him thrive. 192 Horse-spice, how made. 223 Headache in a Horse,
cured. 273 Hide-bound. 276 Hungry Evil, how cured. 278 Halting by strain, or
stroke. 259 Hoofs infirmities of all kinds. 265
I.
IVes. A Disease. Remedies for the same. 133 Inflammation, how to cure. 169
Imposthume in the Ear, how to cure. 287 Any other Imposthume. 288 Itch in the
Tail, etc. 257 Interfering, or Shackle-galls. 264
K.
KErnels under a Horses Throat, how to cure. 152, 163 Knobs, old and hard, the
Remedy thereof. 165, 274 Knees, broken, swelled and hard. 165 Kidneys. Pains
therein remedied. 282
L.
LAxativeness, or extreme Looseness, cured. 68, 180 Legs swelled, or Gourded,
the Remedy for them. 75, 76, 215, 216 Leprosy cured. 79 Lice, how to kill.
109, 139, 148, 276 Lask, or Bloody Flux, to cure. 281
M.
MUzzle, the use of it for a Horse. 19, 20 Mange cured. 78, 86, 161, 233 Mules,
a Disease, cured. 82, 113 Mares not good for the Race: 92 When first to be
covered, and how to be ordered then. 93, 94, 95 How to make them fruitful. 95
How to be cured when ready to Fool. 96
Murren, how to cure. 129 Mallender, to cure it. 135, 180, 261 Moulten Horse,
how to cure. 141 Mourning of the Chine, a Remedy for it. 275 Mares. Particular
diseases in them, and their remedies. 284 Mouth Diseases, Bloody Rifts, Liggs,
Lampreys, etc. 252
N.
NAvel Gall, how to cure. 113, 140, 163 Nightmare, the remedy for it. 278
Neesing for a Horse. 286
O.
OBservations for Sickness and Health in a Horse. 48 Overreach, or a tread of
the Heel, cured. 84, 188, 262 Over-gorged, Horse or Cow, how to cure. 130
P.
PRivy-parts of a Horse to be minded. 54 An excellent Purgation for a Horse. 68
Pearl, Pin, and Web, or any film on a Horses Eye. 80 Prick in the Foot, how to
cure. 115, 189 Pestilence in a Horse, how to cure it. 123, 124, 129 Piss, to
make a Horse piss. 126, 149, 199 Poll Evil, to cure. 127, 177 Poison, for a
Horse or Cow that is poisoned. 130 A Purge, for peccant humors by surfets. 255
A Purge by Grass in Summer. 261 A general Purge. 262, 263, 264, 285
Planet-struck, how to cure. 273 Palsy, the Remedy. 273
Q.
QUitter-bone, how to cure. 117, 245
R.
RUnning Horse, how to order him. 5, 6, 20, 21, 22 How to keep him the second
fortnight. 16 How to keep him the third fortnight. 27 The last fortnights
keeping. 28
Rules how to buy a Horse. 34, ad 45 Ringbone, cured. 77, 78, 144. 224 Rats
tails, cured. 82 Rowel, how to put in a French Rowel. 104
S.
SCowring, the first scowring of a Running Horse. 27 How to Order him after.
24, 25 Sickness of a Horse in general. 46, 47 State of a Horses Body, which the
best. 52, 53 Sweating of a Horse to be observed. 56, 57 Strain in the Shoulder,
a Remedy. 59 For a Sinew Sprung-horse. 60 Stone cured. 69 A Scowring for a
Horse. 70, 138, 141, 147 Strain or Swelling a Medicine. 72, 73, 74, 85, 117
Splint and Spavin cured. 77, 78 Scratches, a cure for them. 77, 83, 84, 85,
155, 156, 227 Surbate cured. 79, 115 A Salve for a Sore or Swelling. 80 For the
Spleen, a Remedy. 86, 280 Stallion, his diet. 96 How long he will continue. 97
Sore or Swelling, to rot it. 103, 125 Sleeping Evil, cured. 110, 273 Splent,
how to take out. 120, 121, 179, 260 Swelling under the Iaws. 125 Staggers, a
Remedy for it. 131, 132, 206 Sinew-strain in the Leg. 140, 163, 164, 177
Strangling, the cure of it. 148 Shaw's Receipts. 160 Strain in the Pastern,
Back, or Sinews. 166, 254, 257 Salve of Soap and Brandy, how to be boiled. 166
Swelling in general, the cure. 167 Shoulder-strain, a Remedy. 172, 175 Stifle
in the Stifling-bone. 176 Scrupin, what, and its cure. 179 Stub in the Foot or
Heel. 188 Surfeit, the cure. 192, 195, 203, 256, 277 Squinzey, or Strangling,
the cure. 200 Stumbling, to help it. 222 Spavin, the cure of it. 225, 238 Star,
how to make it in the Forehead of a Horse. 226 Strangullion, how to remedy it.
228, 283 Suppositor for a House. 258, 259, 260, 285 The Strangle cured. 288
Swaying the back. 256 To draw out Stubs or Thorns. 269 Spur-galling. 272 Sinews
being cut 273
T.
THorn or Nail, to draw out. 102 Tired Horse, how to help. 277 Teeth, or Loose
Teeth. 251
V.
URine of a Horse to be observed. 50, 51 Vein that swells upon blood-letting.
112 Vives, a Disease, how cure. 200, 287 Vomits, to cause a Horse to vomit. 243
Venom drunken, the cure of it. 285 Venomous wounds, etc. 275
W.
WAter, how and when to be given a Horse. 55 Wind-gall, and strain in the
Shoulder. 74, 263 Wind, a Glister for it. 86 Wind-Colick, a Glister. 86, 87,
134 Wound, a drier for a green wound. 102 How to lay open a Wound. 103 An
ointment to heal any Wound. 105, 106, 107, 114, 116 To clean any Wound. 109
Wound, a water to cure it. 122 Water Farcion, the cure. 133, 217 New Wound, a
Remedy for it. 149, 188 Wind-broken, how to cure. 154 Worms, the cure for them.
235, 260, 282 Pain in the Withers. 255 Wounds in the Feet, etc, 267
Y.
YEllows, a Remedy for it. 124, 205, 275 Yard foul and furred, to cure the
same. 191
THE Gentleman's IOCKY and Approved FARRIER


London Printed for H Twyford in Vine court Middle Temple and N Brook at ye
Angel in Cornehill 1671

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE READER, OR, A gaining of satisfaction to all reasonable
Practisers, and confuting the wilful self-conceited.
I Will not dispute the several opinions of men in this Kingdom, touching the
keeping of the Running Horse; because I know many are idle and frivolous, some
uncertain, and a few in the right way: Only in this I would clear one Paradox,
which is strongly maintained, and infinitely pursued by many of our best
Professors; And that is the limitation and length of time, for the preparing
or making ready of an Horse for a Match or great Wager.

There be diverse, nay some which I know carry the Goddess Isis on their backs,
that affirm an Horse, which is exceeding fat, foul, newly taken from grass
soil, or lofty, liberal, and unbounded feeding, cannot be brought to
performance of his best labor under six Months, five is too little, and four
an act of impossibility; by which they rob their noble Masters of half a years
pleasure, thrust upon them a tiring charge to make the sport loathsome, and get
nothing but a Cloak for ignorance, and a few false got Crowns, which melt as
they are possessed.

Yet as Heretics cite Scriptures, so these find reasons to defend want of
knowledge.

As the danger of so early exercise.

The offense of grease too suddenly broken.

The moving of evil humors too hastily, which leads to mortal sickness.

And the moderation or helping of all these by a slow proceeding, and bringing
of the Horse into order by degrees and times, or, as I may say, by an ignorant
sufferance.

These reasons, I know, have the show of a good ground; for the early exercise
is dangerous, but not if free from violence.

To break grease too suddenly is an offense unsufferable; for it puts both the
Limbs and the life in hazard, but not if purged away by Scowrings.

The hasty stirring up of humors in Body, where they superabound, and are
generally dispersed, and not settled, cannot but breed sickness.

But not where discretion and judgment evacnateth them in wholesome sweats and
moderate stirrings.

And for the moderation of all these by the tediousness of time, as two Months
for the first, two Months for the second, and as many for the last. It is like
the covering of a Gangrene in an old man, better to dye than be dismembered,
better lose the prize, than bear the charge: for I dare appeal to any noble
judgment (whose purse has Experience in these actions,) if six Months
preparation, and the dependances belonging to it, and his person, do not devour
up an hundred pound wager.

But you will demand of me, What limitation of time I will allow for this
purpose of preparation? And I answer, that two Months time is sufficient at
any time of the year whatsoever; and he that cannot do it in two Months, shall
never do it in fifteen.

But reply they, No Scowring is to be allowed; for they are Physical, then
unnatural; they force nature, and so hurt nature; they make sickness, and so
impair health: Because nature works every thing her self, and though she be
longer, yet she has less danger.

I confess that slibbersauce scowrings, which are stuffed up with poisonous
Ingredients, cannot choose but bring forth Infirmity; but wholesome scowrings
that are composed of beneficial and nourishing Simples, neither occasion
sickness, nor any manner of infirmity, but bring away grease* and all manner of
foulness in that kind, that one week shall effect and cleanse away more than
two Months of delat^ry and doubtful forbearance.

Because no man in this lingering course can certainly tell which way the grease
and other foulness will avoid: as whether into his Ordure, which is the safest;
into sweat, which is hazardous; into his limbs, which is mischievous; or remain
and putrify in his body, which is mortally dangerous; since the issue of all
these falls out according to the strength and estate of the Horses body, and
the diligence of the keeper; and if either the one fall in power or the other
in care, farewell Horse for that year; all this nevy cannot choose but confess,
only they have but one broken Crutch to support them, which is, they know no
scowring, therefore they will allow of no scowring. Against Barbarism I will
not dispute, only I appeal to art and discretion, whether purgation or
sufferance (when nature is offended) be the better doers.

To conclude, Two Months I allow for preparation, and according to that time,
I have laid directions. My humble suit is, out of a sincere opinion to truth
and justice, so to allow or disallow, to refrain or imitate.

OF THE RUNNING HORSE, And diverse other Choice Secrets Not formerly published.
The first ordering of the Running Horse, according to the several estates of
their Bodies.
WHen a Horse is matched (or to be matched) for a running Course, you are
principally to regard the estate of the Body, in which the Horse is at the time
of his matching, and this estate of body I divide into three several kinds.

1. The first is, if he be very fat, foul, and either newly taken from grass or
soil. 2, The second, if he be extreme lean and poor, either through
over-riding, disorder, or other in firmity. 3. The third, if he be in a good
and well liking estate, having had good usage and moderate exercise.
If your Horse be in the first estate of his body, you shall take longer time
for matching, keeping, and bringing into order, as two Months at the least, or
more, as you can conclude your wager.

If your Horse be in the second estate of Body, that is, very poor, then you
shall also take as long time as you may, yet you need not so much as in the
former, both because grease cannot much offend, and exercise may go hand in
hand with feeding.

If your Horse be in the third estate of Body, (which is a mean betwixt the
other extremes) thena Month or six weeks may be time sufficient to diet him
for his Match.

Now as you regard these general estates of bodies; so you must have an eye to
certain particular estates of bodies: as if a Horse be fat and foul, yet of
free and spending nature, apt quickly to consume and lose his flesh; this Horse
must not have so strict an hand, neither can he endure so violent exercise, as
he that is of a hard disposition, and will feed and be far upon all meats and
all exercises.

Again, if your Horse be in extreme poverty, through disorder or misusage, yet
is by nature very hard and apt, both soon to recover his flesh, and long to
hold it; then over this Horse you shall by no means hold so liberal and tender
an hand, nor forbear that exercise, which otherwise you would do to the Horse,
which is of a tender nature, a weak stomach, and a free spirit. Provided
always, you have regard to his limbs, the imperfection of his lameness.

Thus you see how to look into the Estates of Horses Bodies, and what time to
take for your matchings.

I will now descend to their several orderings and dietings, and because in the
fat Horse, is contained both the lean Horse, and the Horse in reasonable estate
of Body, I will in him show all the secrets and observations, which are to be
employed in the dieting and ordering of all three, without any omission or
reservation whatsoever. For truth, Sir, I have Vowed unto you, and truth I will
present you.

How to diet an Horse for a Match, that is fat, foul, and either newly taken
from Grass or Soil, being the first Fortnight.
IF you match an Horse that is fat and foul either by running at Grass, or
standing at Soil, or any other means of rest, or too high keeping, you shall
for the first fortnight at least rise early in the morning before day, or at
the spring of day, according to the time of the year, and having put on his
Bridle washed in Beer, and tied to the Rack, take away the dung and other
foulness of the Stable, then you shall dress the Horse exceeding well, that is
to say,

You shall first curry him all over from the head to the tail, from the top of
the shoulder to the knee, and from the top of the buttock to the hinder
cambril; then dust him all over, either with a clean dusting cloth, or with an
horses tail, or such like thing, made fast to an handle, then curry or rub him
all over with the French brush, beginning with his forehead, temples and
cheeks, so down his neek, shoulders, and forelegs, even to the setting on of
his hoofs, so along his sides, and under his belly; and lastly, all about his
buttocks, and hinder legs, even to the ground. Then you shall go over all those
parts which the brush has touched with your wet hand, and not leave, as near
as you can, one loose hair about him, nor one wet hair; for what your hands did
wet, your hands must rub dry again: you shall also with your wet hands cleanse
his sheath, his yard, his stones or cods, and his Tuel; and in dead not leave
any secret place uncleansed, as ears, nostrils, fore-bowels, and between his
hinder thighs. Then you shall take an haircl-oth, and with it rub the Horse all
over in every part, but especially his face, eyes, cheeks, between the chops,
on the top of his forehead, in the nape of the neck, and down his legs,
fetlocks, and about his pasterns.

Lastly, You shall take a clean woollen cloth, and with it you shall rub the
Horse oll over, beginning with his head and face, and so passing through every
part of the Horses body or limbs, which has been before mentioned; then take a
wet Mane-comb, and come down mane and tail. When this work is finished, take a
fair large body-cloth, of thick warm housewives Kersey* (if it be in the winter
season, or of fine corten, or other light stuff, if it be in the Summer season)
and fold it round about the Horses body; then clap on his Saddle, and girt the
foremost girth pretty strait, and the other girth somewhat slack, and wisp it
on each side the Horses heart, that both the girths may be of equal straitness,
then put before his breast a warm breast-cloth, and let it cover both his
shoulders.

When the Horse is thus accoutred and made ready, you shall take a little beer
into your mouth and spirt it into the Horses mouth, and so draw him out of the
Stable, and take his back, leaving some ordinary Groom behind you, to trim up
your stable, to carry forth dung, and shake and toss up your litter. For you
are to understand, and it is a general principle, that your Horse must stand
upon good store of fresh dry Litter continually, both night and day, and it
must ever be of Wheat-straw, if possible, or Oat-straw, if forced by necessity.
As for Barley-straw, and Rye-straw, they are both un wholesome and dangerous,
the one does heartburn, the other causes scowring.

When you are thus mounted, you shall walk forth your Horse foot pace, (which
we call racking) for you must neither amble, nor trot, at least a mile or two,
or more, upon smooth and sound ground, and as near as you can to the steepest
hills you can find: there gallop your Horse very gently up those steep hills, and
rack or walk him softly down, that he may cool as much one way, as he warmeth
another. And when you have thus exercised him a pretty space then seeing the
Sun beginning to rise, or prettily risen, you shall walk your Horse down either
to some fresh River, or some clear Pond that is fed with a sweet Spring, and
there let your Horse drink at his pleasure.

After he has drunk, you shall gallop and exercise him moderately as you did
before; then walk him a pretty space, and after offer him more water: If he
drink, then gallop him again; if he refuse, then gallop him to occasion thirst;
and thus always give him exercise both before and after water.

When he has drunk (as you think sufficiently) then bring him home gently,
without a wet hair about him: when you are come to the stable door (before
which your Groom shall throw all his foul litter continually from time to time)
you shall there alight from his back, and by whistling stretching the Horse
upon the straw, and arising the straw up under the Horse, see if you can make
him Piss, which if at first he do not, yet with a little custom he will soon be
brought unto it, and it is an wholesome action, both for the Horses health, and
for the cleanly keeping of the stable.

When these things are performed, you shall then bring the Horse into his
stall; and first tie his head up to the rack in his bridle, then with hard
wisps rub all his four legs down with as great strength as you can, then
unloose his brestcloth; rub his head, neck, and breast, exceeding much with a
dry cloth: then take of his Saddle, and hang it by; and after take of his
Body-cloth; then rub over all the Horses body and limbs, especially his back
where the Saddle stood; and then clothe him up first with alinnen sheet, then
over it a good strong housingcloth, and a bove it his woollen body-cloth, which
in the winter is not amiss to have lined with some thin cotton, or other
woollen stuff, but in the heat of Summer the Kersey it self is sufficient.

When you have girt these Clothes about him, stop his sursingle round with
reasonable big, soft, and thick wisps; for with them he will lie at best ease,
because the small hard wisps are ever hurtful.

After your Horse is thus clothed up, you shall then pick his feet, and stop
them up with cow dung, and then throw in to his racka little bundle of hay, so
much as a halfpenny bottle in a dear Inn, well dusted, and hard bound up
together, and this he shall tear out as he stands on his bridle.

After the Horse has stood on his bridle more than an hour, or an hour and
half, you shall then come to him, and first rub his head, face, and the nape of
his neck with a clean rubber, made of new rough hempen cloth, for this is
excellent for the head, and dssolveth all gross and filthy humors, and then
you shall draw his bridle, and with a very clean cloth make the manger so clean
as may be; and if he has scattered any hay therein, you shall gather it up and
throw it back into his rack; then you shall take the quantity of a quart, or
better, of sweet, dry, old, and clean dressed Oats, of which the heaviest and
the whitest are the best, as those which we call the Poland Oats, or the cut
Oats, for those only are wholesome, the other which are unsweet breed
infirmity, those which are moist cause swelling in the body, those which are
new breed worms, and pain in the belly, and they which are half dressed deceive
the stomach, and bring the Horse to ruin. As for theblack Oats, though they
are tolerable in the time of necessity, yet they make full dung, and hinder a
man's knowledge, in the state of the Horses body.

This quart of Oats you shall put into a Sieve that is somewhat less than a
Riddle, and a thought bigger then a Reeing Sieve, such a one as will let a
light Oat go through, but will keep a full Oat from scattering. In this Sieve
you shall ree, dress, and toss your Oats very much, that there may be neither
dust, nor any other foul thing in them: And so give them to the Horse to eat,
and if he eat them with a good stomach, you may then sift, and give him as much
more; and so let him rest, till it be near eleven of the clock. Then come to
the stable again, and having rubbed the Horses head, neck, and face, you shall
then take another quart or better of Oats, and as before, toss and ree them
through your Sieves, and so give them the Horse. Then closing up your windows
and light, that the Horse may remain so dark as is possible, leave him til one
of the clock. And here you are to understand that the darker you keep your
Horse in your absence, the better it is, and it will occasion him to feed, lie
down and take his rest, where otherwise he would not. And therefore we commonly
use to arm the stals, wherein those Horses stand, round about, and aloft, and
over the rack, with strong Canvas, both for darkness, warmth, and that no filth
may come near the Horse.

At one a clock or thereabouts, come to the Horse again, and sift and dress him
another quart of Oats, as before showed, and give them him: after you have
rubbed well his face, head, and nape of the neck, then putting away his dung
and making the stable clean and sweet, give him a little knob of hay, and so
leave him till four of the clock in the evening, if it be in the Summer; after
three, if it be in the Winter and short season.

At four a clock in the evening come again to the Stable, and having made all
things clean, then bridle up the Horse, having wet the snaffle with beer, and
tied him up to the rack, then take off his clothes and dress him in all points,
and every way as was showed you in the morning. After he is dressed, then
clothe and saddle him, as was also showed for the morning: then bring him
forth, and do your best to make him piss and dung upon the foul Litter at the
stable door: then mount his back* and ride him forth, as you did in the
morning, but not to the hills, if possible you can find any other plain and
level ground, as Meadow, Pasture, or any other earth, especially if it lie
along by the River. But in this case you can be no chooser, but must take the
most convenient ground you can find, to make a virtue of necessity. There air
your Horse in all points in the Evening, as you did in the Morning, galloping
him both before and after his water, then racking him gently up and down, in
your raking you must observe even from the Stable door in all your passages,
especially when you would have your Horse to empty himself, to let him smell
upon every old and new dung you meet with all, for this will make him empty his
body, and repair his stomach.

After you have watered your Horse, and spent the Evening in airing till within
night, (for nothing is more wholesome or sooner consumes foulness than early
and late airings) you shall then air him home to the Stable door, there alight,
and whatsoever you did in the morning either within doors or without, do the
same also now at night, and so leave the Horse on his bridle an hour or an hour
and an half. Then come to him again, and as you did in the fore-noon, sodo now,
rub well, draw his bridle, cleanse the manger, put up his scattered hay, sift
him a quart and better of oats, and give them him and so let him rest till nine
of the clock at night.

At nine of the clock at night, which is bedtime both for your Horse and your
self, come unto him, and first rub down his legs hard with hard wisps, then
with a clean cloth rub his face, head, chaps, nape of the neck and fore-parts.
Then turn up his clothes, and rub over his fillets, buttocks, and hinder parts:
then put down his clothes, and sift him a quart of Oats, and give them him.
Then put into his Rack a little bundle of hay (as has been before showed) toss
up his Litter and make his bed soft, and so betake both him and your self to
your rests till the next morning.

The next morning (as the morning before) come to the Horse before day, or at
the break, according to the season of the year, and do every thing, without the
omission of any one particular, as has been formerly declared.

And thus you shall keep your Horse constantly for the first fortnight; in
which by this double daily exercise you shall so harden his flesh, and consume
his foulness, that the next fortnight (if you be a temperate man) you may
adventure to give him gentle heats.

Now touching his heats, you are to take to your self these four Considerations.
FIrst, That two heats in the week is a sufficient proportion for any Horse of
what condition or state of body soever.

Secondly, That one heat should ever be given upon that day in the week on
which he is to be run his match. As thus, for Example.

If your match is to be run upon the Monday, then your fittest heating days are
Mundayes and Fridayes, and the Monday to be ever the sharper heat; both because
it is the day of his match, and there is three days respite betwixt it and the
other heat.

If the match-day be on the Tuesday, then the heating days are Tuesdays and
Saturdays.

If it be on Wednesday, then the heating days are Wednesdayes and Saturdayes
by reason of the Sabbath.

If on the Thursday, then the heating days are Thursdayes and Mundayes, and so
of the rest.

Thirdly, you shall give no heat (except in case of extremity) in very rainy
and foul weather; but rather to differ hours, and change times, for it is
unwholesome and dangerous. And therefore in case of showers and uncertain
weather, you shall be sure to provide for your Horse a warm lined hood with
linen ears, and the nape of the neck lined to keep out rain, for nothing is
more dangerous than cold wet falling into the ears, upon the nape of the neck
and the fillets.

Fourthly and lastly, Observe to give your heats (the weather being seasonable)
as early in the morning as you can, that is, by the spring of the day: but by
no means in the dark, for it is to the Horse unwholesome and unpleasant, to the
man a great testimony of folly, and to both an act of danger and precipitation.

The second Fortnight's keeping.
NOw to descend to your second Fortnight's keeping; touching your first
approach to the Stable and all other by-respects, as cleansing, shaking up of
Litter, and the like, you shall do all things as in the first fortnight. Only
before you put on his Bridle, you shall give him a quart or better, of clean
sifted Oats, which as soon as he has eaten, you shall then bridle him up, and
dress him in all points, as was declared in the first fortnight, you shall
clothe him, saddle him, air, water, and bring him home in all points, as in the
first fortnight; only you shall not put any Hay in his Rack to tear out, but
only draw with your hand as much fine sweet Hay (which you shall toss and dust
well) as you can well gripe, and let him as he stands on the bridle tear it
out of your hand, which if he do greedily and earnestly, then you may give him
another and another, and so let him stand on the bridle an hour or more after.
Then come to him, and after rubbing and other ceremonies, before declared,
performed; sift and dust up the quantity of a quart of Oats, and set them by:
Then take a loaf of bread, that is at least three days old, made after this
manner,

The first Bread.
TAke three pecks of clean Beans, and one peck of fine Wheat, and mix them
together, and grind it to pure meal.

Then searce and bolt through a reasonable fine range, and knead it up with
great store of barm and lightning, but with as little water as may be; labor
it in the Trough with all painfulness, tread it, break it, and after cover it
warm, and let it ly a pretty space in the Trough to swell: then after knead it
over again, and mold it up into big Loaves, and so bake them well, and let them
soak soundly; after they are drawn from the Oven, turn the bottoms upward and
let them cool.

At three days old you may adventure to give this bread, but hardly sooner,
for nothing does occasion surfeit, or is more dangerous than new bread; yet if
necessity compel you that you must sooner give this bread, or that the bread be
danck and clammy, so as the Horse takes distaste thereat, then cut the loaf
into thin shives, and lay it abroad in a Sieve to dry, and then crumbling it
small amongst his Oats, you may give it without danger.

But to return to my purpose where I left: when you have taken a loaf of this
bread of three days old, you shall chip it very well, then cut it into thin
shives, and break three or four shives thereof (which may countervail the
quantity of the Oats) very small, and mix it with the Oats you had before
sifted, and so give them to the Horse.

About Eleven of the Clock you shall come to the Horse, and having performed
your by-Ceremonies, before spoken of, you shall give him the same quantity of
bread and Oats as you did in the morning, and so let him rest till the
afternoon.

At one of the Clock in the afternoon (or after, if you intend not to give him
an heat the next day) you shall feed him with bread and Oats as you did in the
forenoon, and so consequently every meal following for that day, observing
every action and motion, as has been before declared.

But if you intend the next day to give him an heat (to which I now bend mine
aim) you shall then only give him a quart of sweet Oats, and as soon as they
are eaten, put on his bridle, and tie up his head, not forgetting all
by-Ceremonies, before declared. Then dress him, clothe him, saddle him, air and
water him, as before showed: also bring him home, and order him, as before
showed, only give him no hay at all

After he has stood an hour on the bridle, give him, as before a quart of
clean sifted Oats; when he has eaten them, you shall then put on his head a
sweet clean washed muzzle, and so let him rest till nine of the Clock at Night.

Now touching the use of the Muzzle; and which is the best, you shall
understand, that as they are most useful, being good and rightly made; so they
are dangerous and hurtful, being abused or falsely made.

The true use of them, is to keep the Horse from eating up his Litter, from
gnawing upon Boards and mud-Walls, and indeed to keep him from eating any
thing, but what he reciveth from your hand.

These muzzles are sometimes made of leather, and stamped full of holes, or else
close, but they are unsavory and unwholesome; for if it be allom'd Leather,
the allom is offensive; if it be liquor'd, the grease and ouze are full as
unpleasant: besides, they are too close, and too hot, and both make a Horse
sick, cause him to forbear rest, and retain his dung longer in his body, then
otherwise he would do.

The best Summer-muzzle, is the Net-muzzle, made of strong packthred, and knit
exceeding thick, and with small mashes in the bottom, and so enlarged wider and
wider up to the middle of the Horses head, and then bound about the top with
strong tape, upon the near side a loop, and on the far side a long string of
tape to be fastened unto the Horses head.

The best winter muzzle, is that which is made of strong double Canvas, with a
round bottom, and a square Lattis window of small tape, before both his
nostrils, down to the very bottom of the Muzzle; this must also have a loop and
a string to fasten it about the Horses head.

At nine of the Clock at night coming to the Horse again, after your
by-Ceremonies, before taught, are performed, give him a quart of clean sifted
Oats; and as soon as he has eaten them, put on his muzzle, toss up his Litter,
and leave him to his rest.

The next day early in the morning before day, come to the horse (if he be
standing on his feet) but if he be laid, by no no means disturb him.

Now whilst he is lying, or if he be standing, take a quart of clean Oats well
sifted, and rub between your hands, and wash them in a little strong Ale or
beer, and let them not be too moist for fear of offense, and so give them to
the Horse.

As soon as he has eaten them, bridle him up, and hang by his muzzle in some
sweet place, then unclothe him, and dress him, as has been before showed;
after put on his body-cloth, and breastcloth, and Saddle him: then being ready
to go forth with him, take his Bridle-rein and draw it over the top of the
rack, so as you may draw his head aloft. Then take a new laid Egg, washed clean,
and breaking it in his mouth make him to swallow it down, then wash his tongue
and mouth with a little beer, and so lead him forth of the stable.

At the door see if he will piss or dung, then take his back and rack him
gently to the Course, ever and anon making him smell upon other Horses dung,
whereby he may empty himself the better.

When you are come within a mile or thereabouts, of the starting Post, you
shall alight from the Horses back, and take of his Body-cloth, and
Breast-cloth; and then girt on the Saddle again, then sending away your Groom
both with those clothes, and the clean dry rubbing clothes, let him stay at the
last end of the race till you come. Then your self rack your Horse gently up to
the starting Post, and beyond: make your Horse smell to that Post, as you shall
also do at the first Post, which we call the weighing Post, that he may thereby
take notice of the beginning and ending of his Course. And there start your
Horse roundly and sharply at near a three quarters speed, and according to his
strength of body, ability of wind, and cheerfulness of spirit, run him the
whole Course through. But by no means do any thing in extremity, and above his
wind and strength; but when you find him a little yield, then give him a little
ease, so that all he does, may be done with pleasure, and not with anguish; for
this manner of training will make him take delight in his labor, and so
increase it, the contrary will breed discomfort, and make exercise irksome.

Also during the time that you thus course your Horse, you shall with all
carefulness note upon what grounds he runs best; as whether upon the hill,
whether on the smooth earth, or on the rough, whether on the wet, or on the
dry, or whether on the level, or the earth that is somewhat rising, and
according as you find his nature and disposition, so maintain him for your own
advantage.

When you have thus coursed the course over strongly and swiftly, and after a
little slightly gallop him up and down the field, to rake his wind and cheer
his spirits, you shall then (your Groom being ready with your clothes and other
necessaries) ride to some warm place, as under the covert of some hedge, bushes
or trees, into some hollow dry ditch, pit, or other defense from the air, and
there alight from his back, and first with a grasing knife, or scraping knife,
as some call it, made either of some broken Sword blade, some old broken Sithe,
or for want of them, a thin piece of old hard Oaken wood, fashioned like a
broad long knife with a sharp edg: And using this with both your hands, scrape
off all the sweat from your horse in every part of him, wheresoever you find
any wet: And thus do till you find there will no more sweat arise, and ever and
a non move and stir the Horse up and down, and then with dry clothes rub the
Horse all over exceedingly. Then take off the Saddle, and having glassed,
scraped and rubbed his back, put on his bodycloth and his brest-cloth, and then
set on the Saddle again and girt it; then gallop the Horse gently forth, and
again a little space ever and a non rubbing his head, neck, and body, as you
sit on his back; then walk him about the Fields and Downs to cool him, and when
you find that he dries a pace, then rack him gently homeward, sometimes
racking and sometimes galloping. But by no means bring him to the Stable, till
you find he have not one wet hair about him, when you have brought him to the
Stable-door dry, there dismount, and having enticed him to piss and empty
himself, then lead him into his stall, and there tie his head gently up to the
Rack with his Bridle; which done, presently, as having prepared it before, give
the Horse this Scowring following, and made in this manner.

The first Scowring.
TAke a Pint of the best sweet Sack, and put thereto better than an ounce of
the clearest, and purest Rosin, bruised to a very fine dust, and brew them
together exceeding much; then when the Sack and it is incorporated together,
put thereto half a pint of the best Sallet Oil, and brew them also well
together: then lastly, take a full Ounce and an half of brown Sugar Candy
beaten to Powder, and put it in also: then mull also upon the fire, and being
lukewarm, and the Horse newly come in from his heat, as before I showed you,
draw his head up to the rack, and with an horn give him this Scowring, for it
is a strong one, and this takes away, and avoideth all manner of moulten
grease, and foulness whatsoever.

The Ordering of the Horse after this Scowring.
AS soon as you have given the Horse this Scowring, presently let your Groom
fall to rubbing of his Legs, and do your self take off his Saddle and clothes,
and finding his Body dry, run slightly over it with your Curry-Comb, after with
the brush. Then dust well, and lastly, rub all his body over exceedingly well
with dry clothes, especially his head, nape of the neck, and about his heart;
then clothe him up warm, as at his other ordinary times, and wisp him round
with great warm wisps, and if you throw over him a little loose blanket, it
will not be amiss in these extraordinary times, especially if the season be
cold.

Your Horse must fast full two hours after the receipt of his Scowring, but yet
depart not your self, or your Groom out of the Stable, but stay and keep the
Horse stirring and walking, partly by extraordinary noise and clamor, and
partly by action about him, or making him move up and down, as he stands.
There is nothing more hurtful to the Horse, or working of the Medicine, than
sleep, stilness, and rest, and nothing better or more available to the working
of the Medicine, than action and motion, for they make the spirits lively, and
stir up those humors which should be removed, when rest keeps the spirits
dull, and the humors so enclosed and reserved, that nature has nothing to
work upon.

After your horse has fasted upon his bridle two hours, or more, then you
shall take an handful of Wheat-ears, being your pollard, that is, without rough
beards, and coming to the Horse, first handle the roots of his ears, then put
your hands under his clothes against his heart, upon his Fillets, Flanks, and
on the nether part of his Thighs, and if you find any new sweat to arise, or
any coldness of sweat, or if you see his body beat, or his breath move fast,
then forbear to give him any thing, for it is a pregnant sign, that there is
much foulness stirred up, on which the Medicine working with a conquering
quality, the Horse is brought to a little heart-sickness. Therefore in this
case you shall only take off his bridle, and put on his Collar, then toss up
his litter that he may lie down, and then absent your self (having made the
Stable dark and still) for two hours more at the least, which is the utmost end
of that sickness:

But if you find no such offense, then you shall proffer him the ears of wheat
by three or four together, and if he eat this handful, then give him another.

After he has eaten the Wheat-ears, you shall then give him a little bundle of
Hay, such as has been before declared, and draw his Bridle, rubbing his head
well.

An hour or better after he has had his Hay, you shall sift him a quart of the
best Oats, and to them you shall put two or three handfuls of spelted Beans,
which you shall cause to be reed and dressed, so clean as possible, from all
manner of huls, dust, and filth whatsoever, so as there may be nothing but the
clean spelted Beans themselves. To these Oats and beans you shall break two or
three good thick shives of bread, clean chipt, and give all unto the Horse, and
so leave him to his rest for near three hours or there abouts.

At evening, before you dress your horse, give him the like quantity of Oats,
spelted beans and bread, and when he has eaten them, then bridle him up and
dress him, as before showed; after he is dressed, clothe him up, for you shall
neither saddle him, nor ride him forth; for you shall understand that this
evening after his heat, the Horse being inwardly foul, and the Scowring yet
working in his body, he may not receive any water at all.

After the Horse is dressed, and has stood an hour and half upon his bridle, you
shall then take three pints of clean sifted Oats, and wash them in strong Ale
or beer, and so give them to the Horse; for this will inwardly cool and refresh
him, as if he had drunk water.

After he has eaten all his washed meat, and rested upon it a little space, you
shall then at his feeding times, which have been spoken of before, with Oats
and spelt beans, or Oats and bread, or all together, or each several and simple
of it self (as you shall find the stomach of the Horse best addicted to receive
it) feed him that night in plentiful manner, and leave a Know of hay in the
Rack when you go to your bed.

The next day, very early as may be; first feed, then dress, after clothe,
saddle, then air him abroad, and water him, as has been before showed: after
bring him home and feed him with Oats, spelt Beans, and Bread, as was last of
all declared; only very little hay, and keep your heating days, and the
preparation the day before, in such wise as has been also formerly declared,
without any omission or addition. Thus you shall spend the second Fortnight, in
which your Horse having received four heats soundly given unto him, and four
Scowrings, there is no doubt but his body will be inwardly clean: you shall
then the third Fortnight order him according to these Rules which hereafter
follow.

The third Fortnights keeping.
THe third Fortnight you shall make his Bread finer than it was formerly. As
thus.

The second Bread.
YOu shall take two pecks of clean Beans, and two pecks of fine Wheat, grind
them on the black stones, searce them through a fine range, and knead it up
with barm, and great store of Lightning; working it in all points, and baking
it in the same sort as was showed you in the former Bread.

With this Bread, having the Crust cut clean away, and being old (as was before
showed) with clean sifted Oats, and with clean dressed spelt beans, you shall
feed your Horse this Fortnight, as you did in the Fortnight before, you shall
observe his dressing, airing, and hours of feeding, as in the former Fortnight;
also you shall observe his heating days, and the day before his heat, as in
the former Fortnight, only with these differences.

First, you shall not give his heats so violently as before, but with a little
more pleasure; that is to say, if the first heat be of force and violence, the
second heat shall be of pleasure and ease, and indeed none at all to overstrain
the Horse, or to make his body sore.

Next, you shall not after his heats, when he comes home, give him any more of
the former Scowring, but instead thereof, you shall instantly upon the end of
your heat, after the Horse is a little cooled, and clothed up, and in the same
place where you rub him, by drawing his head up aloft as you sit in the Saddle,
or raising it up otherwise, give him a Ball somewhat bigger then a French
Wall-nut, hull and all, of that confection, which is mentioned before, of the
true manner of making of Cordial Bals.

The Fourth and Last Fortnights keeping.
NOw to return again to my purpose, having thus spent the three last
Fortnights, you shall the fourth and last Fortnight make your Horses bread much
finer than either of the former.

The last Bread.
TAke three pecks of fine Wheat, and put one peck of clean Beans, grind them to
powder on the black stones, and bolt them through the finest Bolter you can
get; then knead it up with very sweet Ale-barm, and new strong Ale, and the
barm beaten together, and also the Whites of at least twenty Eggs, in any wise
no water at all, but instead thereof some small quantity of new milk. Then work
it up, and labor it with all painfulness that may be, as was showed in the
first Bread; then bake it and order it, as was declared in the other.

With this Bread (having the crust cut clean away, and with Oats well sunned,
beaten, and rubbed over with your hands, then new winnowed and sifted, and most
finely dressed, that there may be neither light ones, nor foul ones, nor any
false grain amongst them; and with the purest spelted Beans that can be tried
out) feed your Horse at his ordinary feeding times, in such wise as you did in
the Fortnight last mentioned before.

You shall keep his heating days the first week of this last Fortnight, in
such wise as you did in the former Fortnight: but the last week you shall
forbear one heat, and not give him any heat five days before his Match at the
least, only you shall give him long and strong Airing to keept him in wind*

You shall not need this Fortnight to give him any Scowring at all.

If this Fortnight, Morning and Evening, you burn upon a Chafingdish and coals
in your Stable of the purest Olibanum or Frackincense mixed with Storax and
Benjamina, to perfume and sweeten the room, you shall find it exceeding
wholesome for the horse, and he will take delight therein.

In this Fortnight, when you give your horse any washed meat, wash it not in Ale
or beer, but in the Whites of Eggs or Muskadine, for that is more wholesome and
less pursy.

This Fortnight give your horse no hay at all, but what he takes out of your
hand after his heats, and that must be in little quantity, and clean dusted and
dressed, unless he be an exceeding evil feeder, and mavelous tender, and a
great belly-looser.

The last week of this Fortnight, if your horse be a foul feeder, you must use
the Muzzle continually, but if he be a clean feeder and will touch no litter,
then three days before your Match is a convenient time for the use of the
Muzzle.

The morning the day before your Match, feed well both before and after Airing,
and Water, as at other times, before noon and after noon, scant his proportion
of meat a little.

Before and after Evening Airing, feed as at noon, and water as at other times,
but be sure to come home before Sunset.

This day you shall cool the horse, shoe the horse, and do all extraordinary
things of Ornament about him: Provided there be nothing to give him offense, or
to hinder him in feeding, or any other material or beneficial action: for I
have heard some horsemen say, that when they had shoed their horse with light
shoes, and done other actions of Ornament about them, the night before the
course, that their horse has taken such especial notice thereof, that they
have refused both to eat and lie down. But you must understand that those
horses must be old, and long experienced in this exercise, or they cannot reach
at these subtle apprehensions: for my part, touching the nice and strait
platting up of horses tails in the manner of Sakers or Docks (which is now in
general use) howsoever the ornament may appear great to the Eye, yet I do not
much affect it, because I know, if an ignorant hand have the workmanship
thereof, he may many ways give offense to the horse, and in avoiding
cumbersomness breed a great deal of more cumber; therefore I wish every one
rather to avoid curiosity, which they call necessary Ornament, than by those
false graces to do injury to the horse.

Now for the necessary and indifferent things which are to be done unto the
horse* I would rather have them done the day before, than on the morning of the
Course, because I would have the horse that morning to find no trouble or
vexation.

The next morning which is the Ma^ch-day, come to your horse before day, take
off his muzzle, rub his head well, and give him a pretty quantity of Oats masht
in Muskadine, if he will eat them, or else in the Whites of Eggs; or if he
refuse both, then try him with fine dressed Oats dry and mixed with a little
Wheat, or with your lightest Bread: as for Beans forbear them, of any of these
foods give him such a quantity as may keep life and soul together: then if he
be a Horse that is an evil emptier, and will reretain meat long, you may walk
him abroad, and in the places where he used to empty, there entice him to
empty, which as soon as he has done, bring him home, put on his Muzzle, and
let him rest, till you have warning to make ready and lead forth: but if he be
a good and free emptying Horse, then you need not stir him, but let him lie
quiet.

When you have warning to prepare for leading out, then come to your Horse, and
having washed his snaffle in a little Muskadine, take off his Muzzle and bridle
him up: But before you bridle, if you think the Horse too empty, you may give
him three or four mouthfuls of the washed meat last spoken of, then bridle up,
then dress: after having pitched your Saddle and Girths with Shoemakers wax, set
it on his back, and girt it as gently as may be, so as he may have a feeling
but no straitness. Then lay a very white sheet over the Saddle next his skin,
and over it his ordinary clothes, then his bodycloth and breast-cloth, and wisp
them round about with soft wisps: then if you have a counterpane or cloth of
State for braverie's sake, let it be fastened above all: when this is done, and
you are ready to draw out, then take half a pint of the best Muskadine, and
give it him with an Horn, and so lead him away.

In all your leadings upon the Course, of gentle and calm motions, suffering
the Horse to smell upon every dung, that thereby he may empty himself; and in
special places of advantage, as where you find rushes, long grass, ling, or
heath, or the like, walk your Horse, and entice him to piss: But if you find no
such help, then in special places upon the Course, and chiefly toward the
latter end, and having used the same means before, break some of your wisps
under the Horses belly, and so make him piss.

Also in your leading, if any white or thick foam or froth arise about the
Horses mouth, you shall with a clean handkerchief wipe it away, carrying a
small bottle of clear water about you, wash your Horses mouth now and then
therewith.

When you come to the place of starting, before you unclothe the Horse, rub and
chafe his Legs with hard wisps, then pick his feet, and wash his mouth with
water, then unclothe him; mount his Rider, Start fair, and then refer all the
rest to God's good will and pleasure.

General Observations, Helps and advertisements, for any man when he goes
about to buy an Horse.
THere is nothing more difficult or intricate in all the Arts of Horsemanship,
than to set down constant and uncontrollable Resolutions, by which to bind
every man's mind to an unity of consent in the buying of an Horse: For
according to the old Adage, That which is one man's meat, is another man's
poison; what one affects another dislikes. But to proceed according to the Rule
of Reason, the precepts of the Ancients, and the modern practice of our present
conceived Opinions, I will, as freely as I can, show you those Observations and
Advertisements, which may strengthen and fortify you in any hard and difficult
Election.

First therefore, you are to observe, that if you will elect an Horse for your
heart's contentment; you are to take to your self this principal consideration:
Namely, the end and purpose for which you Elect him; as whether for the Wars,
for* Running, Hunting, Travel, Draught, or Burden; every one having their
several Characters, and their several faces, both of beauty and uncomeliness.

But because there is but one Truth, and one perfection, I will, under the
description of the perfect Horse, that is untainted, show all the imperfections
and attaintures, that either nature or mischance can put upon the Horse of
greatest deformity.

Let me then advise you that intend to buy a Horse, to acquaint your self well
with all the true shapes and excellencies which belong to an Horse, whether it
be in his natural and true proportion, or in any accidental or outward increase
or decrease of any Limb or Member; And from their contraries, to gather all
things whatsoever that may give dislike or offense.

To begin therefore with the first Principles of Election, you shall
understand, that they are divided into two special heads: the one general, the
other particular.

The general Rule of Election, is first the end for which you buy, then his
breed or generations, his color, his face and his stature: and these are said
to be general; because the first, which is the end for which you buy, is a
thing shut up only in your own breast.

The other which is his breed, you must either take it from faithful report,
your own knowledge, or from some known and certain Characters, by which one
strain or one Country is distinguished from another: As the Neapolitan is known
by his hook* Nose, the Spaniard by his small Limbs, the Barbary by his fine
Head, the Dutch by his rough Legs. the English by his general strong knitting
together, and so forth of diverse others.

As for his color, although there is no color exempt utterly from goodness,
for I have seen good of all, yet there are some better reputed than others, as
the Daple gray for beauty th Brown Bay for service, the black silver-hair* for
courage, and the Lyard or true mixed Roan for countenance: as for the Sorrel,
the black without white, and the unchangeable Irongray, they are reputed
choleric; the bright bay, the flea-bitten, and the black with white marks, are
Sanguinists; the blanke-white, the yellow dun, the kite glew'd, and the
Pidebald, are Phlegmatic; and the chestnut, the mousedun, the red*bay, and the
blew-gray, are melancholy.

Now for his Pace, which is either Trot, Amble, Rack, or Gallop, you must re^er
it to the end also for which you buy; as if it be for the Wars, Hunting,
Running, or your own private disposition, then the trot is most tolerable. And
this motion you shall know by a cross moving of the Horses Limbs, as when the
far fore-Leg and the near hinder-Leg, or the near fore-Leg and the far
hinder-Leg, move and go forward in one instant. And in this motion, the neater
the Horse takes his Limbs from the ground, the opener, the evener, and the
shorter he treads, the better his pace; for to take up his feet sturnly shows
stumbling and lameness, to tread narrow or cross shows enterfering or falling:
to step uneven shows toil and weariness, to tread long shows overreaching.

Now if you elect for ease, great Persons Seats or long Travel, then Amble is
required, and this motion is contrary to trotting, for now both the feet on one
side must move equally together, that is, his far fore-Leg, and the far
hinder-Leg, and this motion must go just, large, smooth and nimble; for to
tread false takes away all ease, to tread short rids no ground, to tread rough
shows rolling, and to tread nimbly shows a false pace that never continues, as
also lameness.

If you elect for Buckhunting, for galloping on the Highway, for Post,
Hackney, or the like then a Racking pace is required, and this motion is the
same that Ambling is, only it is in a swifter time and shorter tread, and
though it rid not so much ground, yet it is a little more easy.

Now to all these parts must be joined a gallop (which naturally every Trotting
and Racking Horse has) the Ambler is a little unapt thereunto, because the
motions are both one, so that being put to a greater swiftness of pace, than
naturally he has been acquainted withal, he handles his legs confusedly and
out of order, but being tamed gently, and made to know and understand the
motion, he will as well undertake it, as any Trotting Horse whatsoever. Now in
a good gallop, you are to observe these virtues.

First, That the Horse which takes his feet nimbly from the ground, but does
not raise them high, that neither rolleth, nor beats himself that stretches
out his forelegs, follows nimbly with his hinder, and neither cutteth under
the knee, (which we call the swift cut) nor crosses, nor claps one foot upon
another, and ever leads with his far fore-foot, and not with the near.

This Horse is said ever to gallop most comely, and most true, and is the
fittest for speed, or any other like employment.

If he gallop round, and raise his fore-feet, he is then said to gallop
strongly, but not swiftly, and is fittest for the great Saddle, the Wars, and
strong encounters.

If he gallop slow, yet sure, he will serve for the highway; but if he labor
his feet confusedly, and gallop painfully, then he is good for no galloping
service, besides it shows some obscure lameness.

Lastly, touching his stature, it must be referred to your own judgment, and
the end for which you buy him; ever observing, that the biggest and strongest
are fittest for strong occasions, as great burdens, strong draughts, and
double carriage, the middle size for pleasure, and general employments, and the
least for ease, street-walks, and Summer-Hackney.

Now touching the particular Rule of election, it is contained in the Discovery
of natural deformities, accidental, outward or inward hidden mischiefs, which
are so many, are infinite, that it is a world of work to explain him; yet for
satisfaction sake, I will, in as methodical manner as I can, briefly and
according to the best conceited opinions, shown or can be observed in this
occasion.

first therefore, When an Horse is brought unto you to buy, being satisfied for
his breed his pace and color, then see him stand naked before you, and placing
your self before his face, take a strict view of his countenance, and the
cheerfulness thereof, for it is an excellent Glass wherein to see his goodness;
Asthus, If his Ears be small, thin, sharp, pricked, and moving, and if they be
long, yet well set on, and well carried, it is a mark of beauty, goodness and
metal; but if they be thick* laved, or lolling, wide set on, and unmoving, then
are they signs of dullness, doggedness and ill nature.

If his face be clean, his forehead swelling outward, the mark or feather in
his face set high; as above his eyes, or at the top of his eyes, if he have a
white star, or a white rach of an indifferent size, and even placed, or a white
snip on his Nose, all are marks of beauty and goodness: but if his face be fat*
cloudy or scouling, his forehead flat as a trencher, which we call mare-saced,
the mark in his forehe ad stand low, as under his eyes; if his star or Rach
stand awry or in an evil posture, or instead of a snip, his Nose be raw and
unhairy, or his face generally bald, all are signs of deformity; if his Eyes be
round, bright, black, shining, staring, or starting from his head; if the black
of the Eye fill the pit, or outward circumference, so that in the moving none
(or very little) of the white appears, all are signs of beauty, goodness and
meral; but if his eyes be uneven and of a wrinkled proportion; if they be
little (which we call Pig-eyed) both are uncomely signs of weakness: if they be
red and fiery, take heed of Moon-eyes, which is the next door to blindness; if
white and walled, it shows a weak sight, and unnecessary starting or finding of
boggards; if with white specks, take heed of the pearl, pin and web; if they
water or show bloody, it shows bruises; and if they matter, they show old
over-riding and festred Rheums, or violent strains, If they look dead or dull,
or all hollow and much sunk, take heed of blindness, at the best the Beast is
of an old decrepit Generation; if the black fill not the pit, but the white is
always appearing, or if in moving the white, the black be seen in equal
quantity, it is a sign of weakness and dogged disposition.

If handling of his Cheeks or Chaps, you find the bones lean and thin, the
space wide between them, the thropple or windpipe big as you can gripe, and
the void place without knots or kernels; and generally, the jaws so open, that
the neck seems to couch within them, they are all excellent signs of great
wind, courage, and soundness of head and body; But if the chaps be fat and
thick, the space between them closed up with gross substance, and the thropple
little, all are signs of short wind, and much inward foulness; if the void
place be full of knots and kernels, take heed of the strangle or glanders, at
least the Horse is not without a foul cold.

If his jaws be so strait, that his neck swells about them; if it be no more
but natural, it is only an uncomely sign of strait wind, and pursiness, or
grossness; but if the swelling be long and close to his chaps like a whetstone,
then take heed of the Uvies, or some other unnatural imposthume.

If his nostrils be open, dry, wide and large, so as upon any straining the
very inward redness is discovered; and if his Muzzle be small, his mouth deep;
and his lips equally meeting, they are all good signs of wind, heat and
courage; but if his nostrils be strait, his wind is little; if his Muzzle be
gross, his spirit is dull; if his mouth be shallow, he will never carry a bit
well; and if his upper lip will not reach his nether, old age or infirmity
has marked him for carrion; and if his nose be moist and dropping, if it be
clear water it is a cold, if foul matter then be ware the glanders, if both
nostrils run it is hurtful, but if one then most dangerous.

Touching his teeth, and their virtues, they are at large set down in another
Chapter touching the Horses age; only remember you never buy an Horse that
wants any, for as good lose all as one.

From his Head look down to his Breast, and look that it be broad,
out-swelling, and adorned with many feathers, for that shows strength and
endurance: the little braest is uncomely, and shows weakness; the narrow breast
is apt to stumble, fall and enterfere before; and the breast that is hidden
inward, and wants the beauty and division of many feathers, shows a
weak-armed heart, and a breast that is unwilling and unfit for any toil or
strong labor.

Next look down from his Elbow to his Knee, and see that those fore-things be
rush-grown, well horned within, sinewy flesh, and without swelling, for they
are good signs of strength; the contrary shows weakness* and are unnatural.

Then look on his knees, that they carry an equal and even proportion, be
clean* sinewy, and close knit, for they are good and comely; if one be bigger
and rounder than another, the Horse has received mischief; if they be gross,
the Horse is gouty; and if they have scars or hair broken, it is a true mark of
a stumbling Jade, and a perpetual faller.

From his knees look down his Legs to his Pasterns, and if you find his Legs
clean, fat, and sinewy, and the inward bougth of his knee without a seam, or
hair broken, then he shows good shape and soundness; but if on the inside,
there are excressions, if under his knee be Scabs on the inside, it is the
swift cut, and he will ill endure galloping; if above his Pasterns on the
inside you find Scabs, it shows enterfering. But if the Scabs be generally over
his Legs, it is either extreme foul keeping, or a spice of the mangy; if his
Legs be fat, round and fleshy, he will never endure labor; if on the inward
bougth of his knee you find seams, scabs, or hair broken, it shows a mallander,
which is a cankerous ulcer.

Look then on his Pastern, the first must be clean and well knit together, the
other must be short, strong, and upright standing, for if the first be big or
sweld, take keed of the sinew-strains and gurding; if the other be long, weak,
or bending, the limbs will hardly carry the Body without tiring.

For the hoofs in general, they would be black, smooth, rough, rather a little
long than round and hollow, and full sounding, for a white hoof is tender, and
carries a shoe ill; a rough, gross, seamed hoof shows old age or over-beating*
brittle hoofs will carry no shoe, an extraordinary round hoof is ill for foul
ways or deep hunting; a flat hoof that is pummissed shows foundering, and an
hoof that is empty and hollow-sounding shows a decayed inward part, by reason
of some wound or dry founder. As for the Crownet of the hoof, if the hair be
smooth and close, and the flesh fat and even, all is perfect; but if the hair
be staring the skin scabbed, the flesh rising, then look for a ring-bone, a
Crown-scab, or like mischief.

After this, stand by his side, and first look to the setting on of his head,
and see that it stand neither too high nor too low, but in a direct line; and
that his neck be small at the seting on, and long growing deeper and deeper,
till it come to the shoulders, with an high, strong, and thin Crest; and his
Mane thin, long, soft, and somewhat curling, for these are beautiful
Characters; where as to have the head ill set on, is the greatest deformity, to
have any bigness or swelling in the nape of the neck, shows the poleevil, or
beginning of a Fistula: to have a short thick neck like a Bull, to have it
falling at the withers, to have a low, a weak, a thick or falling crest, shows
want both of strength and metal, and to have much hair on the Mane shows
intolerable dullness, to have it too thin shows fury, and to have none, or too
shed, shows the worm in the mane, the itch, or else mangies

Look then to the chine of his back, that it be broad, even and straight* his
ribs well compassed, and bending outward, his fillets upright, strong and
short, and not above four fingers between his last rib and his huckle-bone, let
his body be well let down, yet hidden without his ribs, and let his stones be
close trust up to his body, for all these are marks of good perfection. Whereas
to have his chine narrow, he will never carry a Saddle without wounding; and to
have it bending or Saddle-backt, shows weakness; to have his ribs fat, there is
no liberty for wind; to have his fillets hanging long or weak he will never
climb an hill well, nor carry burden; and to have his belly clung up and gant,
or his stones hanging down close or side, they are both signs of sickness,
tenderness, or foundering in the body, and unaptness for labor. Then look upon
his buttock, and see that it be round, full, plump and in an even level with
his body; or if long, that it be well raised behind, and spread forth at the
setting on of the tail, for these are comely and beautiful: the narrow
pin-buttock, the Hog or Swine-rump, and the falling or downlet-buttock are full
of deformity, and show both an injury in nature, and that they are neither fit
nor becoming for Pad, Foot-cloth, or Pillow.

Then look to his hinder thighs, or gascoyns, that they be well let down, even
to the middle joint, thick, brawny, full and swelling, for that is a great
argument of strength and goodness; where as the clean, lank, slender thigh,
shows disability and weakness. Then look upon the middle joint behind, and see
if it be nothing but skin and bone, veins and sinews, and rather a little
bending then too straight, then it is perfect as it should be; but if it has
chaps or sores in the inward bougth or bending, then it is a S^^landar.

If the joint be swelled generally all over, then he has gotten a blow or
bruise, if the swelling be particular, as in the plot or hollow part, or on the
inside, and the vein full and proud; if the swelling be short, it is a
blood-spaven, if hard, it is a bone-spaven, but if the swelling be just behind,
below the knuckle, then it is a curb.

Then look to his hinder legs, and if they be clean fat, and sinewy, then all
is well, but if they be fat, they will not endure labor; if they be swelled,
the grease is molten into them; if they be scabbed above the Pasterns, he has
the Scratches; if he have chaps under his Pasterns, he has the Pains, and none
of these but are dangerous and noisome.

Lastly, for the setting on of his tail, where there is a good buttock, there
the tail can never stand ill, and where there is an ill buttock, there the tail
can never stand well, for it ought to stand broad, high, flat, and a little
touched inward.

Thus I have showed you true shapes, and true deformities, you may in your
choice please your own fancy.

Certain Infallible Helps and Cures for those Infirmities which are most
dangerous, and do commonly attend all Horses; especially the Running Horse.
First of Sickness in general.
Whenever upon any occasion you shall find your Horse to droop in
Countenance, to forsake his meat, or to show any apparent sign of sickness; if
they be not great, you may forbear to let blood, because where blood is spent,
the spirits are spent also, and they are not easily recovered; but if the signs
be great and dangerous, then by all means let blood instantly, and for three
mornings together; the Horse being fasting, give him half an ounce of the
Powder called Diahexaple, brewed either in a pint of the purest and finest
sirrup of Sugar, being two degrees above the ordinary Molosses, or for want
thereof Molosses will serve the turn, or where all are wanting, you may take a
pint either of Carduuswater, or else Dragon-water, or a quart of the sweetest
and strongest Ale-wort; and this must be given him in a Horn, and if the Horse
have ability of body, ride him in some warm place after it, and let him fast
near two hours more. At noon give him a sweet Mash, clothe warm, and let him
touch no cold water.

Now for the exact and true making of this Powder, which I call Diahexaple,
because no man, that I know, either Apothecary or other, does at this day make
it truly, partly because it is an experiment lately come to my knowledge, by
conference with Learned Physicians, and partly because our Medicine-makers are
in Horse-Physick less curious than they should be; through which errors there
is produced to the world abundance of false mixtures; which both deceive the
honest Horse-master, kills the harmless Horse, and disgrace the well-meaning
Farrier.

To repair all which, I will here set down at large the true manner of making
this admirable Powder, together with the virtues and operations thereof.

Take of the grains of Paradise, of Ivory and Myrrh, of the roots of Enula
Campana, of Turmerick and Gentian, of each a like quantity; then beat and
searse them into a subtle Powder, and give the Horse such a quantity, as is
before directed. This resists the putrefaction of humors, comforts and
strengthens the in ward parts, opens obstructions, helps the Lungs, and if
taken in time, not only recovereth the Horse, but preventeth many other
distempers.

Certain necessary Observatins and Advantages for every Keeper to observe in
sundry accidents.
THere is no unreasonable Creature of pleasure subject to so many disastrous
chances of Fortune as the Horse, and especially the Running Horse, both by
reason of the multiplicity of Diseases belonging unto them, as also the
violence of their exercise, and the nice tenderness of their Keeping. And
therefore it behooves every Keeper to be armd with such Observations as may
discern mischiefs, and those helps which may amend them when they happen.

Observations for sickness and health.
THe first Observation therefore that I would arm your Keeper with all, is to
discern sickness from health. As thus.

If you find in your Horse heaviness of countenance, extreme looseness, or
extreme costiveness shortness of breath, lothing of meats, dull and imperfect
eyes, rotten or dry cough, staring hair, or hair unnaturally discovered, a
staggering pace, frantic behavior, yellowness of the eyes and skin; faint or
cold sweat, extraordinary lying down or beating, or looking back at his body,
alteration of qualities and gestures, no casting his coat, leanness,
hide-bound, and the like; all these are apparent signs of distemperature or
sickness.

Observations from the Dung
IT is necessary that our Keeper observe the Horses Dung, for it is the best
tell-troth of an Horses inward parts, yet he must not judge it by a general
opinion, but a private discourse with himself, how the Horse has been fed,
because food is the only thing.

As Thus

If the Dung be clear, crisp, and of a pale and whitish-yellow complexion,
hanging together without separation, more than as the weight breaks it in the
falling, being neither so thin that it will run, nor so thick but it will a
little flat on the ground, and in deed both in savor and substance some what
resemling a sound man's ordure. Then is the Horse clean, well fed, and without
imperfection; if it be well colored, yet fall from him in round knots or
pellets: But if all his Dung be alike, then it is asign of foul feeding, and he
has either too much Hay, or eats too much Litter, and too little Corn.

If his Dung be in round pellets, and blackish or brown, it shows inward heat
in the body, if it be grease, it shows foulness, and that grease is molten but
cannot come away; if he does avoid grease in gross substance with his dung, if
the grease be white and clear, then it comes away kindly and there is no
danger; but if it be yellow and putrified, then the grease has lain long in
his body, and sickness may follow if not prevented: if his dung be red and
hard, then the Horse has had too strong heats, and costiveness will follow; if
it be pale and loose, it shows inward coldness of body, or too much moist
feeding.

Observations from the Urine.
AS the Keeper has thus a principal respect to the Horses dung, so he shall
take some little Notes from the Urine also: and though they be not altogether
so material as the other, because according to the opinion of Physicians, Urina
est Meretrix, Urine is a deceiver; yet it has some true faces. As thus, The
Urine which is of a pale yellowish color, rather thick than thin, of a strong
smell and a piercing condition, is an healthful sound and good Urine; but if
you find any note or complexion contrary to these, then in the Horse is some
imperfection. As thus, If the Urine be of an high and ruddy complexion, either
like blood or inclining to blood, then has the Horse either had too sore
heats, been overridden, or ridden too early after winter grass, if the Urine be
of an high complexion, clear and transparent, like old March Beer, then the
Horse is inflamed in his body, and has taken some surfeit.

If the Urine carry a white cream on the top, it shows a weak back, and
consumption of seed.

A green Urine shows a consumption of the body.

An Urine with bloody streaks shows an Ulcer in the Kidneys, and a black thick
cloudy Urine shows Death and Mortality.

Observations in Feeding.
AGain, Our Keeper must observe, that if there be any meat, drink, or other
nourishment, which he knows good for the Horse, if the Horse refuses to take
it, in this case he shall not violently thrust it upon the Horse, or by force
cram him therewith; but by gentle degrees and coming enticements, and by
process of time win him thereunto; rempting him when he is most hungry or most
thirsty, and if he get but a bit at a time or a sup at a time, it will soon
increase to a greatter quantity, and ever let him have less then he desires.
And that he may the sooner be brought to it, mix the meat he loves best with
that he loves worst, the drink he loves the best, with that he loves the
worst, till both be made like familiar, and so shall the Horse be a stranger to
nothing that is good or wholesome.

Observations in Case of Lameness.
AGain, Our Keeper must observe ifhis Horse be subject to lameness or stiffness
of joints or sinews, surbayting or tenderness of feet, first to give him his
heats upon soft and smooth carpet earth, and to forbear stony ground, hard high
ways, cross furrows, till extremity compel him.

Observations from the state of the Horses Body.
IT is good for our Keeper to observe, that the strongest estate of body (which
I account the highest and fullest of flesh, so it be good, hard, and without
inward foulness) to be the best and ablest for the performance of Wagers; yet
he must herein take to himself two considerations; the one, the shape of the
Horses body, the other, his inclination and manner of feeding.

For the shape of Horses bodies, there be some Horses that be round, plump, and
close knit together; so that they will appear fat and well shaped, when they
are lean and in poverty; others are raw-boned, slender and loose knit together,
and will appear lean, deformed, and in poverty, when they are fat, foul, and
full of gross humors.

So likewise their inclinations, some Horses (as the first before named) will
feed outwardly, and will carry a thick rib, when they are inwardly as clean as
may be, and without all manner of foulness.

There be others (as the latter) that will appear clean to the eyes, and show
nothing but skin and bone, when they are full of inward fatness, and have guts
as full as may be. In this case the Keeper has two helps to advantage his
knowledge, the one outward, the other inward.

The outward help is the outward handling and feeling of the Horses body,
generally over all his ribs, but particularly upon his short and hindmost ribs;
if his flesh generally handle soft and loose, and your fingers sink into it as
into down; then is the Horse foul without question: But if generally it be hard
and firm, only upon the hindmost rib it handles soft and downy; then it is a
pregnant sign, there is grease and foul matter within the Horse, which must be
avoided, how lean or poor soever he appear in outward speculation.

The inward help is only sharp exercise and strong scowrings, the first will
dissolve and melt the foulness, the latter will bring it away in abundance.

If your Horse be fat and thick, and as it were closed up between the chaps, or
if his jaws handle fleshy and full, it is a sign of much foulness both in the
head and body; but if he handle thin, clean, and only with some lumps or small
kernels within his chaps, then it is only a sign of some cold or poze newly
taken.

Observations from the Privy Parts.
IT is good for our Keeper to observe his Horses stones if, if he be stoned,
for if they hang down side or long from his body, then is the Horse out of lust
and heart, and is either sick of grease or other foul humors; but if they be
close couched up, and lie hid in a very small room, then is the Horse in health
and good plight.

Observations from the Limbs.
IT is good for our Keeper to observe every night, before he runs either match
or heat, to bathe his Horses legs well, from above the Knees, and above the
Cambrels downwards, with either Dogs-grease, which is the best, or Trotters
oil, which is the second, or the purest clarified Hogs grease that can be got,
which is most tolerable, and to work it in with his hands, and not with melting
at the fire; and what he gets not in the first night, will be got in the next
morning, and what he gets not in the next morning, will be got in when he comes
to unclothe at the end of the Course; so that you shall need to use Ointment
but once, but the Fricass or Rubbing, as often as you find opportunity

Observations for the giving of Water
OUR Keeper shall observe, that albeit I give no directions for the watering of
his Horse in the Evening after his heat, yet he may in any of the three latter
fortnights (finding his Horse clean, and his grease consumed or gone away)
somewhat late at night, as about six of the Clock, give his Horse water in
reasonable quantity, being made Milk-warm, and fasting an hour after it

Also, if the weather be unseasonable, then you shall at your watering hours
water in the house with warm water, putting a little quantity of hot water into
a greater of cold, and so make it Milk-warm; if you throw a handful of
Wheat-meal, Bran, or Oat-meal finely pounded, but Oat-meal is the best.

Observations in the choice of Ground to Run on
OUR Keeper shall observe, that if the ground whereon he is to run his match be
dangerous and apt for strains, slips, over-reaches, and the like, that then he
is not togive all his heats thereon; but having made his Horse acquainted with
the nature thereof, then either to take part of the course, as a mile, two or
three, according to the goodness of the ground; and so to run his Horse forth
and back a gain, which we call turning heats: Provided always, that he end his
heat at the weighing Post, and that he make not his course less but rather more
in quantity than that he must run; but if for some special occasions he like
not part of the Course, then he may many times, (but not ever) give his heats
upon any other good ground, either forth-right and turning or round about any
spacious and large field, where the Horse may lay down his body, and, run at
pleasure.

Observations from Sweating.
OUR Keeper shall take special regard in all his airing, heating, and all
manner of Exercise and Motion whatsoever, to the sweating of his Horse, and to
the occasions of his sweating: as if an Horse sweat upon little or no occasion,
as walking foot-pace, standing still in the Stable, or the like, it is then
apparent that the Horse is faint, foul fed, and wants exercise; but if upon
good occasion, as strong heats, and the like, he sweat, if his sweat is white,
frothy, and like soap-suds, then is the Horse inwardly foul, and wants also
exercise; but if the sweat be black, and as it were only water thrown upon him,
then is the Horse in good lust and good case.

Observations from the Horses Hair.
OUR Keeper shall observe well his Horses Hair in general, but especially his
neck and those parts which are uncovered, and if they be sleek, smooth, and
close, then is the Horse in good case; but if they be rough and staring, or any
way unnaturally discolored; then is the Horse inwardly cold at the heart, and
wants clothes and warm keeping, or else there is some sickness creeping upon
him.

Many other Observations there be, but these are most material, and I hope
sufficient for any reasonable understanding.

MATTHEW HODSON'S Medicines.
A Medicine for the Glanders.
TAke a quart of red Vinegar, being no Wine Vinegar, put it over the fire, and
put thereto two spoonfuls of English Honey, two spoonfuls of Elecampane, beaten
into fine Powder, and searse it through a fine Searser, and as much Roch-Allum
as the bigness of an Egg, beaten into fine Powder, half a Pint of Sallet Oil,
put in your Sallet Oil after all these have boiled together one quarter of an
hour, then take it off the fire, and let it stand until it be Milk-warm, then
give your Horse six spoonfuls in each nostril with a little horn: after you
have given this drink, ride him two or three turns and no more, then tie his
head down to his foot for the space of four hours; then let him fast four
hours: you must give this drink at nine several times, being three days betwixt
every drink; every second day after he has had his drink, give him Chickens
guts warm, rolled in beaten Bay Salt, and put them down his throat, giving him
warm water and wet hay all the time you give him this drink. and this will
amend the Glanders, and the mourning in the Chine. Probatum est.

A Medicine for any Cold that is not the Glanders.
TAke two spoonfuls of Pepper well beaten, two spoonfuls of Mustard, four
spoonfuls of Sallet Oil, four roasted Onions roasted very soft, and cut them very
small; then take two spoonfuls of Elecampane made into fine Powder, mingle all
these together, and make them into Balls with fresh Butter, and give your Horse
three Balls at a time. Nine Balls given at three times will cure him*, so you
travel him upon it.

For a Strain in the Shoulder
TAke two ounces of Oil of Pumpillion, and two ounces of Oil of Spike, two
ounces of Lint-seed Oil, rub these Oils well together upon his shoulder, and
warm it in with an hot iron, then let him be blooded in the shoulder and hopple
his forefeet together, and this will cure him.

A Cure for a Sinew-Sprung Horse.
TAke a pint of Lin-seed Oil, and boil it, then put in three pennyworth of
Aqua-Vitae, and stir them together, then anoint your Horses Leg with it, and
this will cure him

The true manner of making those Balls, which Cure any violent Cold or
Glanders, which prevent heavy Sickness, which purge away all molten grease,
which recover a loose stomach, which keep the heart from fainting with
exercise, and make a lean Horse fat suddenly.
TAke of Anni-seeds, of Cummin-seeds, of Fenugreek-seeds, of the fine searse
powder of Ellecampane roots, of each two ounces beaten, and searst to a very
find dust; then add to them two ounces of brown Sugar Candy beaten to powder*
and two ounces of the flour of Brimstone; then take an ounce of the best juice
of Licoris, and dissolve it on the fire in half a pint of White Wind; which
done, take an ounce of the best Chemical Oil of Anni-seeds, and three ounces of
the sirrup of Coltsfoot; then of Sallet-Oyl, of fine live Honey, and the
purest sirrup of Sugar or Molosses, of each half a pint: then mix all this with
the former powders, and with as much fine wheatflour as will bind and knit them
all together, work them into a stiff paste, and make thereof balls, some what
bigger then French wall-nuts, huls and all; and so keep them in a close
Gallypot, for they will last all the year; yet I do not mean that you should
keep them in the pot in Balls, for because they cannot lie close, the Air may
get in and do hurt, as also the strength of the Oils will sweat outward, and
weaken the substance; therefore knead the whole lump of past into the Gallypot,
and make the Balls as you have occasion to use them.

Now for the use of these Balls, because they are Cordial, and have diverse
excellent virtues, you shall understand, that if you use them to prevent
sickness; then you shall take one of these Balls and anoint all over with sweet
butter, and so give it to the Horse in the morning in the manner of a Pill:
then ride him a little after, if you please, otherwise you may choose, and feed
and water him abroad or at home, according to your usual custom, and this do
three or four mornings.

If you use them to cure either Cold or Glanders, then use them in the same
manner for a week together.

If you use them to fatten an Horse, then give them for a fortnight together

But if you use them in the nature of scowring to take away molten grease or
foulness, then instantly after his heat and in his heat you must use them.

Again, If you find your Horse at any time has taken a little cold, as you
shall perceive by his inward rattling; if then you take one of these Balls, and
dissolve it into half a pint of Sack, and so give it the Horse with a Horn, it
is a present remedy.

Also to dissolve the Ball in his ordinary water being made milk-warm, it
works the like effect, and fatneth exceedingly.

To give one of these Balls before travel, it prevents tiring; to give in the
height of travel, it refreshes weariness; and to give it after travel, it
saves an Horse from surfeits and inward sickness.

An approved Cure for the Botts, and all manner of Worms, of what nature soever.
TAke a quart of new Milk, and as much of the purest clarified Honey as will
make it extraordinary sweet; then being luke warm, give it to the Horse very
early in the morning, he having fasted all the night before; which done, bridle
him up, and let him stand tied to the empty Rack for more then two hours.

Then take half a pint of White Wind, and dissolve into it a good spoonful or
more of black Soap, and being well incorporated together (the Horse having*
stood two hours as aforesaid) give it him to drink, and let him fast other two
hours more after it, and the worms will avoid in great abundance.

Another most excellent Receipt for the Botts or any Worms, which is most easy
and most certain without sickness.
TAke the soft downy hairs which grow in the Ears of an Horse, and which you
clip away when you poll him, and the little short tuft which grows on the top
of his forehead, underneath his foretop, and having a pretty quantity of them,
mix them well with a pottle of sweet Oats, and so give them to the Horse to
eat, and there is not any thing that will kill worms more assuredly.

An uncontrollable way how to know the Age of any Horse.
THere are seven outward Characters by which to know the age of every Horse; as
namely, his Teeth, his Hoofs, his Tail, his Eyes, his Skin, his Hair, and the
Bars of his Mouth.

First
If you will know his Age by his Teeth, you must understand that a Horse has
in his head just forty Teeth, that is to say, six great wang Teeth above, and
six below on one side, and as many on the other, which makes twenty four, and
are called his grinders. Then six above and six below in the forepart of his
mouth, which are called gatherers, and make thirty six. Then four Tushes, one
above and one below of one side, and one above and one below on the other side,
which is just forty.

Now the first Year he has his Foals Teeth, which are only grinders and
gatherers, but no Tushes, and they be small, white, and bright to look upon.

The second Year he changes the four foremost Teeth in his head, and they will
appear browner and bigger then the other.

At three Years old he changes the Teeth next unto them, and leaves no
apparent Foals Teeth before, but too of each side above, and two below, which
are also bright and small.

At Four Years old he changes the Teeth next unto them, and leaves no more
Foals Teeth, but one on each side, both above and below.

At five Years old his foremost Teeth will be all changed, but then he has his
Tushes on each side complete, and the last Foals Teeth which he cast, those
which come in their place will be hollow, and have a little black speck in the
midst, which is called, the mark in the Horses mouth, and continues till he be
eight years old.

At six years old, he puts up his new Tushes, near about which you shall see
most apparently growing a little Circle of new and young flesh at the bottom of
the Tush, besides the Tush will be white, small, short and sharp.

At seven years old, all his Teeth will have their perfect growth, and the mark
in the Horses mouth before spoken of, will be plainly seen.

At eight years old, all his Teeth will be full, smooth, and plain, the black
speck or mark being hardly to be discerned, and his Tushes will be more yellow
then ordinary.

At nine years his fore-most Teeth will show longer, yellower, and fouler, then
at younger years, and his Tushes will be bluntish.

At ten years old, in the inside of his upper Tushes, will be no holes at all
to be felt with your fingers end, which till that age, you shall ever most
perfectly feel; besides the Temples of his Head will begin to be crooked and
hollow.

At eleven years of Age, his Teeth will be exceeding long, very yellow, black,
and foul, only he will cut even, and his Teeth will stand directly opposite one
against another.

At twelve years old, his Teeth will be long, yellow, black, and foul, but then
his upper Teeth will overreach and hang over his nether Teeth.

At thirteen years old, his Tushes will be worn somewhat close to his Chaps,
(if he be a much ridden Horse) otherwise they will be black, foul, and long,
like the Tushes of a Bear.

Second.
If an Horses Hoofs be rugged, and as it were seamed, one seam over another;
and many, if they be dry, fou!, and rusty, it is a sign of very old age; as on
the contrary part, a smooth, moist, hollow, and well sounding Hoof, is a sigu
of young years.

Third.
If you take your Horse with your Finger and your Thumb, by the stern of the
Tail, close at the setting on by his Buttock, and feeling there hard; if you
feel betwixt your Finger and your Thumb of each side his Tail, a joint stick
out more than any other joint, of the bigness of an Hasel-nut, then you may
presume the Horse is under ten years old; but if his joints be all plain, and
no such thing be felt, then he is above ten, and may be fifteen.

Fourth.
If an Horses Eyes be round, full, and staring from his head, if the pitts over
his Eyes be filled smooth, and even with his Temples, and no wrinckles either
about his Brow, or under his Eyes; then the Horse is young: If otherwise you
see the conrrary, it is a sign of old age.

Fifth
If you take up a Horses skin on any part of his body, betwixt your Finger and
your Thumb, and pluck it from his flesh, then letting it go again, if it
suddenly return to the place from whence it came, and be smooth and plain
without wrinckle, then the Horse is young and full of strength; but if being
pulled up, it stand, and not return to his former place, then he is very old
and wasted.

Sixth
If an Horse that is of any dark color, shall grow grissel only above his
Eyebrows, or underneath his maiu, or any Horse of a whitish color, shall grow
meanelled with either black or red meanels universally over his body, then both
are infallible signs of extreme old age.

Seventh.
If the Bars in his mouth be great, deep, and handle rough and hard, then is
the Horse very old, but if they be soft, shallow, and handle gently and
tenderly, then is the Horse young, and in lust.

And thus much of the Age of an Horse.

An Excellent Purgation, when any Horse is sick of his Grease, or any
Costiveness.
TAke a pint of good old White Wind, and set it on the fire, then dissolve into
it a lump half as much as an Hens-Egg, of Castile Soap; and strain them well
together on the fire, then take it off, and put into it two good spoonfuls of
Hempseed beaten into fine dust, and an ounce and an half of the best
Sugar Candy beaten to fine powder, and brew all well together; Then having
warmed the Horse, to stir up the Grease and other foul humors, give him this to
drink, and walk him up and down a little after it, to make the potion work;
then set him up warm, and after a little stirring him up and down in the stall,
if he grow sickish, give liberty to lie down, After two or three hours fasting,
give him a sweet Mash. Then feed as at other times.

For Laxativeness or extreme Looseness.
TAke a quart of red Wine, and set it on the fire, then put into it an ounce
and half of Bolearmony made in fine powder, and two ounces and an half of the
Conserves of Sloes; Then stir and mix them well together, after take it from
the fire, and put to it a spoonful or two of the powder of Cinnamon. And
brewing all well together, give it the Horse.

Let him fast two hours after it, and let him eat no washed meat.

Hay is wholesome, so is Bread and Oats, if they be well mixed with Beans or
wheat, but not otherwise.

An Infallible help for the Stone, or pain of Urine, causing Sickness.
MAke a strong Decoction (that is to say) boil your first quantity of Water to
an half pint, three times over, with keen Onions clean pilled, and parsley;
Then take a quart thereof, and put to it a great spoonful of London-Treacle,
and as much of the powder of Eggshels finely searc't, and give it the Horse to
drink, and thus do diverse mornings, if the infirmity be great; otherwise, when
you see the Horse offended.

An approved Medicine to cure and break any old grevious, festred and rotten
Cold, and to dry up a foul running Glanders.
TAke a pint of the best Verjuyce, and put to so much strong Mustard made with
wine-Vinegar, as will make the Verjuyce strong and keen thereof; Then take an
ounce or more of Roach-Allom, and beat it into fine white Powder, then when you
give this to the Horse, so with a Knife or Spoon, put some of the Allom into
the Horn, and so give it the Horse; part at his mouth, and part at both his
Nostrils, but especially that Nostril which runs most: Then ride and chafe
him a little after it, then set him up warm. At noon, give him a warm Mash, and
at all times give him no cold water, but when the Horse may have exercise after
it. And thus drench the Horse three days together, and it will be sufficient.

Another for a Violent Cold.
TAke of Wine Vinegar half a pint, and as much Sallet-Oyl, brew them well
together, and then put to it an ounce and half of Sugar Candy in fine powder,
and so give it the Horse, and stir him a little after. This is exceeding good,
but it will occasion sickness for a small season.

An excellent Scowring, when other Scowrings will not work.
TAke of sweet Butter a quarter of a pound, half so much Castle-soap, beat them
well together, then add to them two spoonfulls of Hempseed, bruised, of
anniseed a spoonful, bruised, of Sugar Candy an ounce, of Rosin finely bruised
half a spoonful, work all these into a paste, and give it the Horse in the
manner of Pills, immediately after his heat, or when you have warmed him, and
stirred up the grease and foulness within him.

An admirable Water for any sore Eye, or to clear any dim sight, as the
Moon-eyes and the like.
TAke the stone called Lapis Calaminaris, and heat it red hot in the fire, then
quench it in half a pint of White Wind, and thus do twelve times together. Then
add unto it half so much of the juice of Housleek, and with this, bath the Eye
twice or thrice a day, and it is excellent against any imperfection therein.

Another Water, no less precious for the Eyes then the former.
TAke a pint of Snow-water, and dissolve it into three or four drams of white
Vitriol, and with this water wash the Horses Eyes, three or four times, and the
effect is great and strange.

The Master Medicine of all Medicines, for a Back Sinew-Strain, or any grief,
pain, straightness, shrinking, or numness of joints or sinews.
TAke a fat sucking Mastive whelp, flay it, and bowel it, then stop the body as
full as it can hold, with gray Snails, and black Snails; then roast it at a
reasonable fire, when it begins to warm, bast it with six ounces of the Oil of
Spike, made yellow with Saffron, and six ounces of the oil of Wax; Then save
the drippings, and what moisture soever falls from it, whilst any drop will
fall from the Whelp, and keep it in a Gally-pot.

With this ointment anoint the strain, and work it in very hot, holding a hot
bar of iron before it; And thus do both Morning and Evening, till the Cure be
finished.

St. Antayne his only Excellent Medicine, for any Strain or Swelling.
TAke Cummin-seeds, and bruise them gross, and boil it with the oil of
Camomile, then add to it so much yellow Wax, as will bring it to the body of a
Cerrot or Plaster, and spread it on either Cloth or Leather, and very hot
apply it to the grief. It is wonderful sovereign for any man also.

Another for any desperate old Strain, whether it be in the Shoulder, Joints,
Hips, or Back-sinews.
TAke of the best Aqua-vitae a pint, of oil de Boy, of oil of Swallows, and of
black Soap, of each half a pint, work and labor all these together, till they
come to a thin ointment, then take of Camamoile, and of red Sage an handful,
of Rue, and of Misseldine an handful, dry them, and bring them to a very fine
powder; Then mix them with the former ointment, and bring all to a gentle Salve.

With some of this Salve, made as hot as the Horse can suffer it, anoint the
Strain, and hold an hot bar of Iron before the grieved place, chafing it in
with your hand as much as may be, and thus do once a day, and in nine days the
Cure will be effected.

An Excellent Charge for any New Strain, or offense on the Sinews, or any grief
proceeding from heat.
TAke the whites of six Eggs, and beat them well with a pint of white
Wine-Vinegar, and an ounce of the oil of Roses, and as much of the oil of
Mintils; Then take four ounces of Bolearmonie, and as much Sanguis Draconis,
and with as much fine Bean-flower, or wheat flower, but Bean-flower is the best
as will thicken it; bring it to a stiff Salve, then spread it about the grieved
place, and renew it as it dries.

A perfect Cure for any Sinew-Strain,
TAke a live Cat* either wild or tame, and cut off her head and tail, then
cleave her down the chine, and clap her hot, the bowels and all upon the
strain, and remove it not for forty eight hours, and the effect is great.

Markham's own Balm, which has never failed him, for any Strain in the
Shoulder, or other part, hidden or apparent; Or any Wind-gall, Pain or Swelling
whatsoever.
TAke ten ounces of the best and purest Goosegrease, and melt it on the fire,
then take it off, and put it into four ounces of the Oil of Spike, and an ounce
of the Oil of Origanum, stir them very well together, then put it up into a
Gallipot.

With this Ointment anoint the grieved part, the Ointment being made exceeding
hot; and rub and chafe it in with all painfulness, holding an hot bar of Iron
before it, and thus anoint once in two days, but rub and chafe it in, twice or
thrice a day at the least, and give the Horse moderate Exercise.

This is approved and infallible.

For swelled or Gourded-Legs, whether it be by reason of the Grease falling
into them, or other accident, as Scratches, Pains, Mules, etc.
IF your Horses Legs be swelled only, because the Grease is fallen into them, and
that there is no other outward Ulcer; neither will the bathing with cold water,
and other outward helps assuage it: Then you shall take a piece of strong
course woollen Cloths and thereof make him an Hose, a pretty deal larger then
his Leg, to reach from the lower part of his pastern, up to the Cambrel, or to
the Knee, and make it close and straight at the pastern, and wide above. Then
take a pottle of Wine Lees (if you can get them) or else the grounds or Lees of
strong Ale or Beer, and set them on the fire, and boil them well; then put to
them a pound of clarified Hog's Grease, and when it is melted and stirred well
together, take as much Wheat-Bran as will thicken it, and bring it to the bo,
die of a Pultis, with this Pultis as hot as the Horse can fuffer it (only you
must not scald) fill the Hose or Hoses, and then close the Hose at the top.

With this Pultis let the Horse stand two days, then the third day open the
Hose at the top, but stir not the Pultis, only take molten Hog's Grease, hot as
the Horse can suffer it, and with a spoon pour it unto the Pultis on every
side, till it will receive no more, for this will renew the strength of the
Pultis. Then close up the top of the Hose, and so let the Horse stand other two
days, or three. Then you may open the Leg and rub it down, and if you find
strong occasion, you may apply another new Pultis, if not, your cure is wrought.

Now if besides the swelling of his Legs, your Horse has Ulcers, or Chaps, or
Scratches, Pains, Mules, or the like:

Then you shall first apply the former Pultis, in all respects as aforesaid;
then after five or six days application, when you take the Pultis away, you
shall take a quart of old Urine, and put to it half a handful of Salt, as much
of Allom, and half an ounce of white Copperas, and boil it till all be mixed and
incorporated together; then with this water very hot, wash the sores once or
twice a day, and after a little drying, anoint them with the ointment called
Aegyptiacum, and is made of Vinegar, eight ounces, of Honey twelve ounces, of
Verdigrease two ounces, of Allom one ounce and an half; boil it to that height,
till it come to a red Salve; and it will both kill the malignant humors, and
also heal and dry up the sores.

Another approved Cure for the Scratches, or any Disease of that nature.
TAke of Hog's Grease eight ounces, of Brimstone, of Lime, of Gunpowder, of each
three ounces, of black Soap eight ounces, and of Soot as much as will suffice
to bring the rest to a Salve, boil the Hog's Grease and Soap together, and bring
the other hard simples to a fine powder, and so mix all together, and make a
black ointment; with this anoint the sores once a day, after they are cleansed
and made raw.

For any Splint, Spaven, Ringbone, Curb, or any other hard Knot or Excression.
FIrst, having taken view of the Excression, clip away the hair as far as the
excression goes, and a little thought more; then take a piece of Allom'd
Leather, made as big just as the place you have bared, and fit it to the same
proportion. Then take a little Shoo-makers Wax, and spread it round about the
very edge or verge of the same, leaving all the inward or middle part empty,
and not touched with the Wax, according to this Figure O. Then take of the herb
called Sparagus, which has the virtue to raise Blisters, and bruising it in a
Mortar, lay some thereof on the Leather, in the void and empty place, which
ought to contain the just quantity of the Knot or Excression, and bind it fast
thereon; suffering it so to lie (if it be in the Spring or Summer time, when
the Sparagus has its full strength and virtue) two or three hour. ^But if it
be in the Winter, then it has less virtue; Then it is not amiss to revive the
strength of the Herb, if you add to it a drop or two of Origanum, and let it
lie a day, and and be sure to tie up the Horses head for two hours for fear of
biting it away.

When you have taken off the Plaster, anoint the place with Train-oyl warm and
you shall find no Excression.

An approved Cure for the Swift Cut, or any hewing on the Legs whatsoever.
TAke a pint of White Wind, and put to it two or three spoonfulls of Honey. and
stir them well together, then boil them till they be well incorporated
together, and brought to the body of an ointment. Then take it from the fire,
and put in as much Turpentine, as there was Honey before, and stir all well
together. Then strain it with this Salve somewhat hot, bath the Sores twice a
day, and it is a most specdy healer.

For any Farcy, Mangy, Scab, or Leprosy, whether in the Mane or otherwise.
FIrst let Blood, then take a quart of old Urine or Vinegar, and break into it
a quarter of a pound or better of the best Tobacco, then set it on the fire of
Embers, where it may simper and not boil, and so let it stew a whole night;
then strain it, and with this water wash the infected place, whether it be in
the Mane, or any other obscure place, and it is a certain Remedy.

For any Founder, Frettize, Surbait, or any imperfection in the Feet.
FIrst pare thin, open the heels wide, and take good store of blood from the
Toes; then tack on a Shoe somewhat hollow; after, take of the best
Frankincense, and rolling it in a little fine Cotton-wool or Bombast, with an
hot iron melt it into the Foot, betwixt the Shoe and the Toe, till the Orifice
where the blood was taken be filled up. Then take half a pound of Hogsgrease,
and melt it on the fire, then mix it with Wheat bran, till it be as thick as a
Pultis. Then boiling hot as is possible, stop up the Horses foot therewith;
then cover it with a piece of an old Shoe, and splent it up, and so let the
Horse stand for three or four days, then if occasion serves, you may renew it,
otherwise the cure it wrought.

To make Hoofs grow quickly; and to be tough and strong.
TAke of the Juice of Garlic seven ounces, of old Hog's Grease two pound, of
Asses dung (for want of it Cows dung) an handful, mingle them, and boil them
all well together; then with this, both stop the Horses foot, and anoint the
Crownets of the Hoofs, and the effect is great.

A general Salve for any Sore or Swelling.
TAke Turpentine, Black-Soap, Hog's Grease, Green Treat and Pitch, of each a
little quantity, mix and boil them all well together, and apply it warm to the
grief.

For a Pearl, Pin, and Web, or any Film on an Horses Eye.
TAke a new laid Egg, and roast it very hard, then cleave it in-sunder
long-wise, and take out the yolk; then fill the empty holes with white Vitriol
finely beaten, and close the Egg again. Then roast it the second time, till the
Vitriol be molten; Lastly, beat the Eggshell, and all in a dish, and strain it,
and with the moisture that comes from it, dress the Eye. This is approved.

For Grease fallen into the Legs to help them at twice dressing, and to help
the Scratches.
TAke of Train-Oyl, of Nerve-Oyl, of Oil de Boy, of each half a pint, and the
bigness of an Egg in Allom, boil them all well together; then having cleansed
the Sores, and opened the Pultis, if there be any, with this salve anoint the
Griefs, and it is a speedy Cure.

For the Glanders, an approved Cure.
TAke a quarter of a pint of Verjuice, three spoonfuls of Sallet-Oyl, and two
spoonfuls of Aqua-vitae, put one half into one Nostril, the other into the
other Nostril, being bloodwarm; then ride the Horse somewhat speedily for
twenty or forty score, and only spare him when he coughs; then set him up warm,
and at Noon give him a warm Mash: Lastly, if you find him to grow sick, give
him warm Milk from the Cow.

To stay the Glanders for a time, till you may make sale of your Horse.
TAke a pound of Elder-bark, being the green and not the gray, beat it in a
Mortar and strain it; then put that juice to a quart of Ale, and so give it to
the Horse: do this for three mornings together.

An approved Cure for the Pains, Mules, Rats-tails, and the like.
TAke green Vitriol half a pound, and boil it in a pottle of running Water,
with Allom, Mustard, Sage and Hysop; of each an handful, Now the night before
you apply this, anoint all the Sores with strong Mustard, after they are made
raw; then the next day wash them with the Water before showed, and the Cure is
certain.

To help an Horse that galls between the Legs, either through heat or evil
dressing.
TAke a raw Egg, and crush it between the Horses Legs, and rub the gall well
therewith, after the Sores are made dry,

For Enterfairing, to help it or hide it, for a small time.
FAsten a new Cord to his Dock, and having made diverse hard knots thereon, draw
it between his Legs, and fasten it to his Girths, or otherwise, rub great store
of Starch between his Thighs.

The best Receipt that can be for brittle Hoofs.
TAke Dogs-grease a pound, and clarify it up with Rosemary; then mixing it
with half so much Cow Dung, boil it, and hot or cold stop the Horses foot
therewith.

To cure the Scratches
TAke a penny worth of Verdigrease, a pennyworth of Red-lead, the like quantity
of Soap; mix these together, and apply them plaister-wise, letting it lie three
days and three nights, You must cut the hair close.

For the Farcy.
TAke about one handful of Rue, and about ten cloves of Garlic, and pound
them together; then take one penny worth of Aquavitae, and strain them through
a Cloth; then take a little black Wool to drink up that moisture, and put into
each Ear half the Wool, then sew up the Ears together, then cut the fore head
of the Horse, and put into the hole the inner rind of an Elder, about an inch
long, or something more: keep him from wet falling into his Ears the first day
and night.

Approved by Mr. Holled.

For to cure the Cankers in a Horses mouth.
TAke half a pint of the best White Wind Vinegar, and half a pound of the best
Roch-Allom, and an handful of red Sage, and boil them all together, and so
wash the Hories mouth and tongue.

Approved, W. B*

An approved Cure for the Pains, Mules, Rats-tails, and the like.
TAke green Vitriol half a pound, and boil it in a pottle of running Water,
with Allom, Mustard, Sage and Hysop; of each an handful, Now the night before
you apply this, anoint all the Sores with strong Mustard, after they are made
raw; then the next day wash them with the Water before showed, and the Cure is
certain.

To help an Horse that galls between the Legs, either through heat or evil
dressing.
TAke a raw Egg, and crush it between the Horses Legs, and rub the gall well
therewith, after the Sores are made dry,

For Enterfairing, to help it or hide it, for a small time.
FAsten a new Cord to his Dock, and having made diverse hard knots thereon, draw
it between his Legs, and fasten it to his Girths, or otherwise, rub great store
of Starch between his Thighs.

The best Receipt that can be for brittle Hoofs.
TAke Dogs-grease a pound, and clarify it up with Rosemary; then mixing it
with half so much Cow Dung, boil it, and hot or cold stop the Horses foot
therewith.

To cure the Scratches
TAke a penny worth of Verdigrease, a pennyworth of Red-lead, the like quantity
of Soap; mix these together, and apply them plaister-wise, letting it lie three
days and three nights, You must cut the hair close.

For the Farcy.
TAke about one handful of Rue, and about ten cloves of Garlic, and pound
them together; then take one penny worth of Aquavitae, and strain them through
a Cloth; then take a little black Wool to drink up that moisture, and puta into
each Ear half the Wool, then sew up the Ears together, then cut the fore head
of the Horse, and put into the hole the inner rind of an Elder, about an inch
long, or something more: keep him from wet falling into his Ears the first day
and night.

Approved by Mr. Holled.

For to cure the Cankers in a Horses mouth.
TAke half a pint of the best White Wind Vinegar, and half a pound of the best
Roch-Allom, and an handful of red Sage, and boil them all together, and so
wash the Hories mouth and tongue.

Approved, W. B.

For to cure the Scratches.
TAke Soap and Salt and mix them together in your hand, and keep his Feet dry,
and tie a linen Cloth about them, and it will cure them.

Approved at Stanton.

For a Horse that has a Cold.
TAke new Butter unwashed, and without Salt and mix with it brown Sugar Candy,
Anniseeds, and Liquorish; but if the Horse rattle in his head, put in two
cloves of Garlic made in balls: do this three mornings together.

Approved, W. B.

For a Beast that staleth Blood.
TAke one quart of strong Ale, and a red Her ring cut into small pieces, and
let it lie a steeping in the Ale; then give the Beast it with a Horn, and it
will stay the in-bleeding of the Beast. Robinson.

For the Botts.
TAke Salt and Water, and give the Horse it in a Horn. Approved, Tho. Emson.

For a Horse that has got an Overreach, or a Tread of the Heel.
FIrst search itwell to the bottom, and take out all the Gravel, and wash it
with Stale, then take a good handful of Nettles, and a good handful of Salt,
put them in a cloth, and bind them to the sore; do this two or three mornings
together, then set the shoe on with a leather under it, then pour in some
Hog's Grease scalding hot, after that pour in Rosin scalding hot, presently
after which put in some Wheat-bran.

Approved. Pepper.

For a Horse that has got a stroke, or a bite of the Eye
TAke a little Honey with a little grated Ginger; mix them together, and put it
into the Horses eye with a feather; do this three mornings together. Approved
by me W. B.

For the Scratches.
TAke Verdigrease and burnt Allom, mix them together, and so apply it, keeping
the Horse dry. Approved, W. B.

For the swelling of a Horses Back.
TAke Flax or Flax Tear, with the whites of Eggs and Wheat Flour, beat them
all together, it will take the swelling down.

Approved, Tho. Emson.

For a strain
Hog's Grease is very good for a Sinew-strain, or any other part of the Horse.

Approved by me W. B.

For a Horse that is mangy.
TAke a gallon of strong Ale, and a pound of Tobacco-stalks, half a pound of
Allom a pint of Salt, one pennyworth of Mercury; boil these all together until
they be half boiled away; the day before let the Horse blood, and Curry him
with a Comb; when the Horse is dressed, wash the Manger with scalding Water, and
smoke the Saddle with Allom or Brimstone, burnt Hay or Straw. Approved Mr.
Wills.

For the Spleen.
MAke a Plaster of Oxycrocium, and spread it upon sheeps leather, lay it to
the pain, and let it lie till it come off of it self.

Mr. Holden.

A Glister to expel the Wind.
TAke Fennelseeds and Anniseeds, two spoonfuls of each, and bruise them; a
little Camamile flowers. Rosemary flowers, Pellitory of the Wall, Peneroyal and
Camamile, of each of these half a handful. Mr. Holden

A Glister for the Wind-Colick.
TAke a quart of thin Posset Drink, Peneroyal, Pellitory of the Wall, of each
an handful; Mallows and Plantin, of each half an handful; and Cummin-seeds and
Sasafrage-seeds, of each one spoonful bruised; Camamile flowers one spoonful,
boil them down to half the Posset-ale, take half a pint thereof, dissolve
therein half an ounce of the Electuary, called Electuarium de baccis lauri.

Medcalf.

For the Wind Colic.
BOylone spoonful of Cumminseeds with a few Camamile flowers, in Posset Drink,
good to drink for the Wind, for one that is Costive in his Body.

Medcalf.

How to order, feed, and keep any Horse for Pleasure, Hunting, or Travel.
I Would have your Keeper of these ordinary Horses, to rise early in the
morning, by the spring of day, or before. according to the season of the year,
and to sift the Horse the quantity of near three pints of good old dry Oats,
and to put to them an handful or two of spelted Beans, Hulls and all, and so
give them to the Horse.

After he has eaten them, let him dress him according to the order of good
Horsemanship.

First, curry with the Comb, then dust, then curry with the Brush, then dust,
then rub with wet Hands, after with a clean Woollen cloth, after with a clean
Linen cloth, then pick all obscure places; Lastly, comb down the Main, and
Tail. Then saddle him, and ride him forth to water. then warm him both before
and after very moderately. so bring him home dry without sweat.

Then cloth him up after you have rubbed his head, body, and legs, and let him
stand on his Bridle more then an hour, then give him the former quantity of
Provender, and the same in kind.

After he has eaten his Provender, give him into his Rack a pretty bundle of
Hay, and so let him rest till after dinner.

When you have dined, give him the former quantity of Provender, and the same
in kind, and so let him rest till the evening; only renew his Hay, if there be
occasion.

At evening dress him well, as in the morning, then ride him forth to water,
and do as you did in the morning.

When you come home, and have clothed him up, let him stand on his Bridle as
before; then give him the former quantity of Provender, and so let him rest
till nine of the Clock at night; at which time give him the former quantity of
Provender, and a pretty bundle of Hay, and so let him rest till the morning.

This you shall do concerning his Ordinary keeping at home, where the Horse
has rest, and that you may dispose of hours as you please; but if you be
either in Travel, or Sport, or other occasion, so that you cannot observe these
particular times, then you must divide the main and whole quantity of Meat,
into fewer parts and greater quantities, and give them at the best convenience;
ever observing to give the least quantity before Travel, as a 3 part before
Mounture, and the two other after you come to rest.

Nor would I have you to distract your mind with any doubt or amazement,
because I prescribe you five several times of Feeding in one day, as if it
should either over-charge you, or over-feed your Horse: Questionless there is
no such matter, when you look into the true proportion; for it cannot be
denied, but whosoever is worthy of a good Horse, or good Means to keep a good
Horse, cannot allow him less than one Peck a day; nay the Carrier, Caerter,
Poulter and Packhorse will allow half a peck at a Watering, and this allowance
which I set down comes to no more; for 15 pints of Oats, and one pint of
Spelt-Beans up-heaped, make two gallons, and that is one peck of Winchester
measure. Now to give it at twice, fills the stomach more, makes the digestion
worse, and the appetite weak; whereas to give less, but more often, the stomach
is ever craving, the digestion always ready, and the appetite never wanting: so
that health (without disorder) can never be a stranger.

Therefore once again, thus much for ordinary keeping.

But if you intend to give an Heat, as to Hunt, Gallop, Travel, or the like,
which I would wish you do once, twice, or thrice a week; Then observe all your
former observations; only the night before give him little or no Hay at all.

In the morning early before his Heat, and before his dressing, give him three
or four handfulls of clean sifted Oats, washed either in strong Ale or Beer;
Then dress him, Saddle him, and give him his Heat.

But if it be sudden and violent, then let it be when the Horse has emptied
himself very well.

After his heat Rub him very well, and bring him dry into the Stable.

Then after he is Clothed up warm, let him stand on his Bridle at least two
hours, then give him a little bundle of Hay to tear out upon his bridle, and an
hour after feed him as has been before showed: Only with the first Oats give
him an handful or better of Hempseed, well dusted and mixed.

At night warm him a little water, and give him it lukewarm, then an hour
after give him his Provender, and a pretty bundle of Hay, and so let him rest
till the next Morning.

The next Norning do all things as in his Ordinary keeping.

Let him stand on Litter both night and day; yet change it often, and keep the
Planches clean.

If you intend to Travel or Journey in the Morning, then give no Hay, or but
little the Night before, If you Journey in the Afternoon, then give no Hay, or
but little in the Morning.

In Journeying ride moderately the first hour or two, but after according to
your occasions. Water before you come to your Inn, if possible; but if you
cannot, then give warm water in the Inn after the Horse is fully cooled.

Trotters Oil is an excellent Ointment being applied very warm, and well chafed
in, to keep your Horses limbs and sinews nimble, and to help stiffness and
lameness.

Neither wash your Horse nor walk him; for the first endangereth foundering in
the body or feet, and breeds all surfeits; the latter is the ground of all
strong colds. which turn to Glanders and Rottenness: but if necessity compel
you to either, as foul ways and long stays, then rather wash your Horses legs
with pails of Water at your Stable-door, than to endanger him in any Pond or
River.

And for Walking, rather sit on your Horses back to keep his spirits stirring,
than to lead him in hand, and with dull spirits to receive all manner of
mischief.

This I think sufficient for clean and Ordinary keeping.

An Order how to breed Horses.
The choice of your Stallion and Studd Mares.
FIrst and principally you must foresee, that your Stallion and Studd Mares be
both of good and lively nature, and not subject to any natural diseases. For as
heavy Horses and Mares will breed Colts of roilish and heavy nature, so if they
be infected with any natural disease, their Colts for the most part shall be
troubled with the same disease.

Wild Mares be not best to keep for the Race.
IT shall be well done that you handle all your Studd Mares, and make them tame
and easy, whereby, besides the commodity you may have of their work, which
cannot hurt their taming if they be soberly handled, you may be sure at all
times to remove them from one Pasture to another, to bring them to be covered,
and to take their Colts from them without great trouble; whereas wild Mares be
not only cumbersome to keep, but also oftentimes do destroy the Colts in their
bellies with their rashness, when you should handle them or any of their
fellows.

At what age your Mare is first to be handled and covered.
THe best age to take up your Mare to make her tame, and to break her, is when
she shall be two years old and the vantage, and so you may the year following,
when she shall be fully three years old and upward, put her to your Horse to be
covered, which in my opinion is the best age to put her first to the Horse,
although some Writers be of opinion, that it is best that she be first covered
at two years old.

How to enforce your Mares to come to be strained.
YOu may most conveniently bring her to be covered of your Stallion, if four or
five days before you will bring her to your great Horse, you cause to be put to
her in some close Pasture, kept and fenced for that purpose, some small stoned
Nag to woo her, that she may abide your great Horse, foreseeing that he be in
no wise unfettered longer than some diligent man does look on; for if the Nag
be at liberty at any time after she is disposed to take the Horse, she will be
sure to be covered of him, though he be lower than she by a cubit.

The Order of covering.
WHen you do perceive that your Mare will abide the Nag, and does show other
tokens that she is desirous to be covered, you must cause your great Horse that
shall cover her to be provendred, and not to drink much the night before he
shall cover her. Then in the morning following, at the Sunrising, you may
bring him to your Mare, or her to him, in some such place as neither of them
can leap out of; where when he has covered her twice or thrice, let her remain
feeding on Grass, with her Colt kept by her without water, but let your Horse
be taken up, well rubbed and well provendred to the next evening. And then put
him to your Mare again where you left her, and let him cover her as often as he
will that night, except you see your Horse chafe so much that he will mar
himself.

How to use your Mare which is covered.
ANd so must you of force be driven to take him from her the second time, till
the morning following, at which time (except your Mare be satisfied with that
which was done before) you must put to your Horse the third time, and when he
has covered her as often as he will, between four of the clock in the morning,
and eight of the clock before noon, take up your Horse, and let your Mare be
led into some water to the mid-side at least, where she may drink water; but
not too much; and then let her be led and turned to the whole stud, where no
other Horses must come for a whole Month at the least to beat her.

How to make that no mare shall go barren.
ANd when you have thus severally caused to be covered all your Mares, you must
about Lammas, in the Month of July, or beginning of August, get a Mare or two
which have not been covered that year before, and enforcing them to he horsed
by such means as before appointed, when they shall be ready to be covered, you
must turn them with some other Stallion, whom you esteem not as your best Horse
among your stud of Mares; and so he covering that Mare, or Mares, you turned in
with him unto the stud, shall cause the rest (if any of them have not conceived
at their first covering) to come to that Horse again; whereby you shall be
sure to keep no Mare barren all the year, but to have of every Mare a Colt,
though not by your best Horse: you may suffer that Horse to run amongst your
Mares three weeks or a month. But if you turn him into your stud, putting no
Mare in with him ready to be covered, he will at his first entry beat all your
Mares, and so happily hurt all your Mares which had conceived before, and so do
more hurt than good.

What time of the year is best for your Mares to be covered.
The best time of the year to have your Mare covered, is from the end of May to
the end of July, and then shall your Mare, which always goes with Foal one year
lacking a month, Foal in such time of the year as she shall find plenty of
grass to nourish her self and her Colt withal. whereas if you suffer her to be
covered in February, March, or April, she will foal so rathe in the year, that
oftentimes being bare, and not covered of the Winter past, she does hunger both
her self, and mar her Colt, for lack of feeding.

To Diet your Stand for the time he shall cover.
HEre is to be noted, that although your Stalland standing at hard meat will
not miss to get a Colt on your Mare going to Grass, (if she be ordered and
enforced as before) yet the best diet for him for the whole time he shall
cover, is to feed on Grass, when he has tasted of the Grass with them, he will
like his Hay the worse; and also there is more danger in breaking of his wind
in feeding rather on Hay than Grass.

How your breeding Mare is to be used when she shall foal.
YOur breeding Mare that has a Colt in her belly, must fourteen or fifteen
days before she foal be taken from the stud, and with some other gentle Mare or
Gelding be put in some other rank Pasture well fenced for that purpose, which
will not only make her lusty, and soon ready to be covered, and able to foal
without danger, but also give plenty of milk to her Colt when he is first
foaled.

How many years a Horse will serve to cover your Mares.
YOur Stallion used as is before, will serve for six or seven years, to cover
every year seven or eight Mares and do you service the rest of the year
besides, whereas turned abroad to your Mares, he can do you no other service,
neither will he last above three years.

The best age for Horse or Mare to get or bear Colts, and how many years they
will continue good
THe best age for Horse or Mare to get or bear Colts, is, for the Mare, from
three years old till ten. And for the Horse, from four or five years till
twelve, and after that age the Colts of them wax heavy, weak and slothful.

What time of the year is best to wean the Colts from their Dams,
THe best time of the year to wean your Colts is at Candlemas, or Shrove-tide,
after the time as your Colt is Foaled, wherein you must use much diligence, for
if your Colt be not well weaned, well Summered, and well Wintered, the three
first years and namely the first year when he moaneth for his Dam, he shall
seldom or never come to be a good Horse. And therefore when you wean your
Colts, you must bring them to some house ordained for the same purpose, clean
out of the hearing of their Dams, wherein they must be pinned, and not to come
abroad the first fourteen days out of the hearing of their Dams, whereunto you
must have pasture adjoining wherein they may play, and feed every fair day
after the fourteen days past, from the time ye begin to wean them, till grass
be fully sprung in May, and put them into some such pasture, as commonly your
Milch kine be fed in, where they may neither, feeding in high and rank grass
hurt their Reins, or grow thicknecked, nor for lack of feeding hinder their
growth, but feeding in a short sweet grass, may prove well till they have
forgotten their Dams

What feeding is best for Colts, from two years old upward.
THis is a general ground, that wet lying and lack of feeding in the winter,
and old rank feeding in summer, from two years old forwards, does mar the most
part of our whole breed in England, which in my opinion, well ordered, would
breed the best Horses for all kind of service, of the whole earth; for as wet
lying and lack of good feeding in the winter, does breed a heartless ill shapen
Horse, subject to all cold and watery diseases both in his body and limbs; so
over rank feeding in the summer, chiefly from two years old upward, does breed
an evil reined, and a slothful horse, ever ready (being overladen with fat
flesh) to be more founderd, and to catch the Glanders and Cough upon every
Cold. And therefore your best feeding of your horse Colts from two years old
upward for the summer feeding, is, where he may have a large walk, and hungry
short feeding, and not yet so bare but that he may (traveling for it) feed
himself full once in a day, and that he hinder not himself of his growing, but
in any wise keep your Horse Colts from knowing any Mare till they be five years
old,

Why English Horses being taken up so young, are not good.
THe cause why our English Horses be taken up so young, as I heave heard sundry
of our chief Horse-masters say, is, for that our Horses being great and well
fed, if they should run till they should come to their full strength, would be
so sturdy and mischievous to break, that they would rather mischieve themselves
and their Breaker, than be made tame; which in my fancy is but a vain opinion.
For there was never so sturdy nor so wilful a Horse, which would not be tame
and easy to handle, with watching and hunger, within one month at the
furthest, if his Keeper will use diligence.

The way to handle a sturdy Horse.
ANd that may most conveniently be brought to pass, if at the first coming into
the house, before he will suffer his Keeper to handle him and to take up his
feet, he do put no meat before him, but let him take all his feeding at his
Keepers hands, and so shall you make him gentle and tame without strives or
striving; and the order before appointed in his breaking, being the Colt of a
tame Mare, and fed some part of every winter at hand in the house, will
acquaint him with the man, and make him almost tame before he be taken up,
which Colt shall seldom prove a fearful or a blenching Horse.

The using of Horses after they be handled.
ANd for Conclusion, whosoever does use to keep his Horse bridled after riding
till he be in good temper, and almost cold, and does not give him water nor
meat, being hot, neither does ride him fast upon a full stomach; shall seldom
or never have his Horse lame or sick, if he breed him as is aforesaid, before
he take him up.

What feeding is best in Winter for Mares, Weanlings, of two years old.
ANd for the Winter feeding you must use one order for your Mares, and
Weanlings two years old in several places, which is a hovel or house made for
them adjoining to your winter pasture, wherein you must sometime in the evil
weather, in a rack made for that purpose, give them some fodder, and be sure
that they be brought into that house every night that is like to prove wet, but
in the frosty days and nights, it is best to pin them abroad.

You must in any wise keep one pasture nigh to the house that you feed your
Mare Colts in the winter time, which pasture may not be fed in before
Shrove-tide, because that time and the middle of May (before which, grass is
not sufficiently sprung in most places for Horses to feed on) is the most time
of danger to hunger-bane of all the year, in which time, if your Colts growing
all the Summer following, will make your Colt Mares so bare that they shall not
be able to foal, nor give their Colts sufficient suck.

At what age Colts may best be handled.
WHen your Horse-Colt has been bred as is afore-appointed, the best age in my
opinion to take him up to break, is when he shall be full four years old and
the vantage, or if you may spare him and have good close ground to keep him in,
rather at five years old and the vantage, for then will his joints and sinews
be strong and well knit, his hoof ever tough, and not brittle, his eyesight
good, his chine strong, so that you cannot hurt him, neither in breaking nor in
reasonable riding, besides he will last a good Horse till he be 24 or 25 years
old, whereas if you will take him up at two or three years old; as we commonly
do, you shall find him afterward many times blind, brittle, hoofed, weak
backed, full of windgalls and splints, and show himself to be an old stiff
Horse, before he come to be ten years old, as the most part of their Spanish
Horses do, because they are taken up so young; which is, because that in Spain
they have no good close ground to let their Colts run longer in, and not for
any other Commodity.

Approved Receipts, For the Curing of all Diseases Incident to HORSES.
Receipt. I. To draw out any Thorn or Nayl, in any place.
TAke Dod monds, which are house Snails, and sees them in Butter and apply
them, and they will draw out any Thorn or Nayl: And so will the Roots of Reeds,
if they be bruised and laid to, being bound to the wounded place with a linen
cloth: He may run out, but to stand in is better. Proved.

II. A perfect Drier of a Green Wound, or any other Sore.
TAke Soap and unslaked Lime, and mix them well together; but before you lay it
to, wash the wound or sore with a little White Wind Vinegar, and then apply it.
Proved.

A Marrow-bone burnt and made into powder, and strewed on a Sore or wound is a
great Dryer.

III. For any Anbury.
TAke a hot Iron and make it very sharp; and take the Anbury in your hand, and
sear it off to the bottom with a red hot Iron: Then mix a little beaten
Verdigrease and Train-oyl together, heat them and anoint the place once a day
till it be whole. Proved.

IV. For the Flapps in an Horses mouth.
TO know this, you shall perceive his Lips to be swelled on both sides of his
mouth, and that which is in the blisters is like the white of an Egg; you must
cut some slashes in it with a knife, then rub it once with Salt and it is cured.

Proved.

V. To rot a Sore or Swelling.
ANoint the Sore or swelling with cold Bacongrease once in two days, till it be
soft, then open the skin with a Penknife at the bottom of the Sore, and let
out the filth; and so heal it up with your healing Salve. Proved.

See the water and Green Ointment.

VI. Directions how to lay a Wound open, and where; and how to miss the Veins
under it, be it in Body or Legs.
WHen you cut a Sore open, lay it drayning at the bottom, or a little lower: Be
sure always to do this; To miss the Master Vein, if it lie lengthwise in the
body, be sure to cut under the Vein; If it be a Sore upon the Leg, that lies
right over the Vein, then cut it sidewayes of the Vein right up and down. If a
Sore happen to be hollow a great length, be it in Body or Legs, then cut a hole
at the lowest place, that the filth may drain from the Sore the better, then
put in your finger under the Vein, and when your finger is past the Vein
upwards as far as it will go, cut at your fingers end another hole, and if you
fee occasion, turn your finger to another place, and at your fingers end cut
another hole. If you chance at any time to cut a Vein in pieces, put in a piece
of a Hares -- skin with the wool on, or Cony wool, but Hares is best, and this
will stop the bleeding. Proved.

That Hares wool will stop bleeding sooner than most things: See Receipt, To
stop bleeding in Veins that be cut.

VII. The way to put in a French Rowel.
THat is, upon the lowest part of the Horses breast to that side that is lame,
you shall with a sharp knife cut the skin through, not cross the breast but
right down, half the length of your finger, then put your finger between the
skin and the flesh, and raise the skin from the flesh round about the hole the
breadth of a six pence, then take a piece of the upper leather of a shoe, and
cut it in the manner of this Figure here prescribed; cut the piece of Leather
round, and then cut out a hole

round, as you see by the figure, then put a Needle and a thread through it, as
you may perceive by the two pricks in the top and bottom of the hole; then take
a Tobacco-pipe or a quill, and cut it so that the wind may go through it; and
put one end into the hole of his breast upwards and blow in the wind, and beat
the wind upwards to the top and all over his shoulder; when you have blown it
two or three times, run the Needle and thread once through the Rowel and once
through the skin, and draw the Rowel into the cut: When you have thus placed
the Rowel in the cut, with the hole of the Rowel right against the hole that
you have cut in the breast, so that it may not move: then with your Needle and
thread run a stitch or two overthwart the cut to keep in the Rowel, as you are
directed in the Margin: When you have done thus, anoint it with a piece of
butter, and let the Rowel stand a week in the hole, and then cut the thread and
take it out. This is the best Rowel that is. Proved.



Your breath must not smell of Tobacco when you blow the skin up (for a sweet
breath is best,) if it do, the place will swell the more.

VIII. A rare Green Ointment to heal any Wound, old or new, quickly
TAke an handful of water-Betony, as much of Comfry, of Mugwort; red Sage,
Sage of Bethlehem, by some called Jerusalem Sage, of Sothern-wood, of Rue, by
some called Herb of grace, of Rosemary, of each of these an hand full, boil all
these in a pint of May Butter, and as much Mutton Suet, and when it has boiled
a while, take it off the fire and strain it through a cloth, and put it into a
pot for your use. This Ointment will last good a year. Proved.

Before you lay this Ointment to, wash the Wound first with the Water which you
have in Receipt. 38.

IX. To take a Film off an Horses Eye.
YOU must take as much of Dialthaea as the bigness of a Walnut, and put to it
the powder of Verdigrease as much as an Haselnut, mix them well together* then
every day Put into his Eye as much of it as the bigness of a Pease; this will
take of any Film whatsoever.

Proved.

X. A Medicine to defend and keep back humors from a Wound, so that it may heal
the sooner.
TAke two pints of Tartar, or the dregs of White Wind Vinegar, but the Tartar
is better; and put in as much Bolearmonick as contain to an Egg, an handful of
white or bay Salt, and an handful of great Burdock leaves, or the Roots, wash
the swelled place, and round about the Swelling with this once a day; this will
hasten the cure very much, if you do so wash it with this, and apply to the
wound your healing Salves or Ointments, as you may in this Book be furnished
with store of them for that purpose. Proved.

XI. Another for the same.
TAke a pint of Verjuyce, and put to it three pennyworth of Camphire cut very
small, boil them together a quarter of an hour, and when it is almost cold put
it into some glass or pot, and wash the swelled place round about it once a day
with this, till it be healed with other Medicines.

This will much further the Cure of any Wound or Sore, where humors do fall
down to it, whilst you do apply other Medicines to heal up the Sore or Wound:
For these defensives are for no other purpose, but to keep back humors that
hinder Sores or Wounds from healing.

Proved.

XII. A rare Receipt for a Farcion.
TAke Mullin, by some called Higtaper, it has a great woolly leaf, it grows
close by the ground upon the banks of Ditches or in the highways side,
Chickweed, Groundsel and Wood Betony, of each an handful, cut them small and
boil them all in a quart of Ale, and when it is lukewarm put in two
pennyworth of Quicksilver, and give it him to drink fasting: The third day
after give him the like proportion, warm water all the while to drink, and to
stand in. Proved.

XIII. For a Horse that has his Fundament fallen out; or for a Cow that has
the Mother fallen out.
TAke an armfull of Willow boughs, and dry them on a hot Hearth, when they are
dry sweep the Hearth as clean as you can, and set them on fire and burn them to
ashes, then take the ashes and searce them through a fine boulter, and before
you strew on the powder of the ashes, wash the Fundament with warm water to
make it as warm as the body, then strew on the finest of the ashes, and put the
Fundament up into its place, then tie a line to the Horses tail, and bring it
between his hinder Legs, and fasten it to a Surcingle under his belly pretty
straight; using this means his Fundament will be kept up, and in a very short
time, it will be knit firm and strong again. If the Mother of a Cow come forth,
use but the aforesaid means, and you will find it a perfect remedy. both
proved.

White Pepper beaten finely and searced through a fine searce, the Fundament
being well warmed with warm water or milk, and after warmed with a warm cloth,
and then this beaten Pepper strewed upon it, and so put up and his tail tied
close between his Legs, as before, you will find it very good.

A Marrow-bone of a Bullock burnt in the fire, and beaten to fine powder, is,
for a Wound, a great and good dryer and healer, and will skin a Wound. Proved

The inward and outward bark of a Willowtree, first dried, and afterward the
hearth being swept very clean, burnt to ashes, and the ashes sifted through a
fine boulter: the finest of these ashes is good to dry up any Sore, nothing
like it. These ashes are likewise a great binder for a looseness in Horses or
Cows bodies. Proved.

XIV. To kill Lice of horses and Cows.
TAke a quantity of Hog's Grease, and anoint the Horse underneath the Mane, and
upon the ridgebone of the back; it will burst them all presently.

XV. For a Stub or other hurt in or about the Foot.
TAke Beeswax, Pitch, Hog's Grease, and Turpentine, boil them together in an
earthen pan, but put in the Turpentine a little before you take it off the
fire, and stir it well together, make the wound clean and pour it in scalding
hot, dip hards or tow in it, and stuff the place where it is hurt full with it,
and it will heal it in a short time; this will last a year. Proved.

XVI. To Cleanse any Wound old or new.
TAke the Roots of Elder and beat them to powder, and boil them with
English-Hony* It is good to cleanse any Sore old or new. But take this for a
general observation, that before you dress any Wound, let it be where it will
about the Horse, wash it clean first with Whitewine wine Vinegar, and then
dress it with your Salve.

Proved.

XVII. For the Sleeping Evil.
THe signs to know it are, The Horse will stand sleeping in a corner
continually, with his head hanging down to the ground, it takes away his
memory. The Cure is to be performed thus: Let him blood on both sides the neck
in the morning fasting before he drink; let him blood also in the mouth, in the
third furrow in the roof of his mouth, and after he has bled well, give him
this Drink: Take of Camomil and motherwort together three handfulls cut small,
and boil them in two quarts of Running water half an hour, and then give the
Horse a pint once in two days fasting, the third day give him the rest fasting,
and three or four hours after give him warm water; and a little comfortable
Mash made of ground Malt put into scalding hot water after it comes of the
fire, keep him in the house warm the time of the cure, and fume his head as you
do for the Staggers, and this in a short time is a perfect cure. Proved.

XVIII. To stop bleeding at the Nose.
THe chief cause thereof is the thinness of the Vein in the head; you must let
him blood in both the Plate veins, and then wind a thumband of wet Hay about
his neck, and throw cold wate upon the thumband till you see the blood to
stanch; the thumband must be so long, that it may be wound from his ears to his
breast very lightly.

XIX. For the Falling Evil in an Horse.
THe Falling Evil will cause him suddenly to fall down, and to lie sprauling
with his heels, and foaming at the mouth, like a man that has the Falling
sickness; you shall know whether he be subject to fall often by feeling him by
the gristles of his Nose, which will be cold if he be subject to it. The Cure
is, to let him blood on both sides of his neck, after he has bled, in the
morning before he drink, give him this Drink: Take Miseltoe that grows upon
an Apple Tree, the leaves are like Ivy leaves, dry it and rub it to powder, and
use it at your leisure: give him of this powder of Miseltoe one spoonful in
half a pint of Sack, and keep him in the house till he be well, and give him to
drink water lukewarm. Proved.

You may add to the Miseltoe three drams of the Electuary, called Theriaca
Diaresseron, or the Oil of Pepper one dram, or a dram and an half.

XX. For a Cough old or new, or the heaving of his Lungs.
TAke the Root of Gentian, which you shall have at the Apothecaries, slice it,
dry it; and beat it to powder, give the beast as much of this powder as will
lie upon a shilling in half a pint of his own water, give this to him fasting
once in three days, and so continue every third day, till you see his Cough and
Heaving to abate or be quite gone, the cold of his water must be just taken
off, and he must stand in all the time of the Cure. This for an old Cough or
heaving of the Lungs, is the best Cure in the World.

Proved.

XXI. For a Canker in the Tongue.
YOU shall see his mouth and tongue raw within, you shall know it by his
stinking breath and his roping slavering: Which to Cure, take as much Roch
Allom as contain to an Egg, boil it in three or four spoonfuls of Whitewine
Vinegar, with a spoonful of English Honey, and an handful of Columbine leaves
cut small, wash his tongue once a day till it be whole: It will be cured in two
or three times dressing; you may tie a rag about a stick and wash his mouth.
Proved.

XXII. For a Vein that swells upon letting Blood
AS when the wind gets in it will do, or when a fleam miscarries it will do the
like. For the Cure of which, take white Pitch, black Pitch and Rosin, of each a
like quantity, boil them together and lay it on hot with a flat stick, and then
flock it, and this doing once in four or five days will take down the swelling,
do it all over the swelling, if once will not do, do it oftener: he must stand
in with dry meat the time of the Cure. You may anoint it with the Oil of
Populion; or apply Soap and Brandy.

Proved.

XXIII. For a Navel Gall,
TAke and cut off the loose skin first with a knife, and apply to it this
Salve: Mix as much as a Walnut of Verdigrease, with a spoonful of Dialthaea,
and a pint of Train Oil, and it will cure it: if it be old done and hard, cut
out the crush, and sear the wound within with a hot Iron, and then dip some
Cotton in the green Ointment, and put it in as a Tent. Proved.

XXIV. For a horse that pisses Blood.
TAke of Tarragon a spoonful and steep it in white wind, and as much
Poppy-seed beaten, as will lie on a shilling, give this in the White Wind, and
it is a certain cure: Give this fasting: Probatum est.

XXV. For the Mules.
YOU shall know this by the staring of the hair above the fore part of his hoof
on his after-Leg, and by the dew that stands on his feet above the hoof. For
the Cure: Take Lynseed Oil, and black Soap of each a like quantity, boil them
together, and before you anoint his Sore at any time, wash it clean and dry it,
and then anoint it with the aforesaid Salve, and it will cure. Proved.

XXVI. For a Horse burnt with a Mare.
YOU shall know this by the mattering of his Yard within: For Remedy take a
pint of vvhite-Wine, boil in it a quarter of a pound of Roch Alum, and when
it is boiled and cool, it must be squirted in with a Syringe, as far into his
Yard as you can, this will cure him in a few times doing. Proved.

XXVII. A precious Ointment that will cure any Wound, old or new.
TAke half a pint of refined Sallet Oil, and put it into a Skellet, then put to
it a quarter of a pound of Rosin, boil these together, and when it is boiled,
put in three pennyworth of Verdigrease beaten to a fine powder, stir them
well together, and keep it for your use; if the vvound be hollow and deep, put
in a tent of this Ointment to the end of the vvound, anointing it beside:
Proved. Train Oil and Verdigrease melted together, will heal and skin any
wound* well and quickly.

XXVIII. For a Farcyon.
YOu must first give him the drink that is made with Running water, in that
Receipt which you are to give once in three days; For this Farcyon, you must
in the morning before he has drank, give him that drink made of the Running
water, the same morning sear the head of every bud with a hot Iron, then take
yellow Arsenick and beat it to powder, and mix it with black Soap, as much
Arsenick as a Hasel-nut, to as much black Soap as a spoon will hold, or a
little more, then lay on a little at a time for once and no more, lay it on no
where but just on the top or head of the bud of every Farcion, as much as
contain to a Pease will serve, being laid upon the top or head of every
Farcion, and within one Week you shall see them all drop out; then do nothing
but anoint the hole with Sallet Oil once a day till it be whole, and it will
cure him; be sure to do as I have directed and no otherwise, for Arsenick is
rank Poison, and a great eater. Proved

XXIX. For Solebatted with going without Shoes.
FOr a Horse that is Solebatted by going without Shoes, you must first pare
him close toward the Toe, then take a Penknife, and with the point cut a
little hole through the bottom of the Hoof, a matter of half an inch from the
Toes end right over the vein, and let the vein bleed a quarter of a pint, then
set on his Shoes pretty hollovv within the feet, and boil Tar, Tallovv and
Turpentine together, and pour it into his foot or feet scalding hot, and stuff
in Wool or Hards after it, to keep and make it stay in; you may put in flat
sticks betvveen his Shoes, and the bottom of his Hoof, and it is cured with
once putting in. Proved.

XXX. For Pricking in the Foot.
WHen a Horse is pricked in the Foot, when he stands still he will mostly
stand upon his Toe: and if at any time a Smith prick a Horse, then before you
take off his Shoe to pare his Foot, take your pincers and try by nipping him
with them where the ailment lies, or by knocking in of the Nail upon the head
with your Hammer; as soon as you see where the ailment is, take off his Shoe,
and pare him by degrees with the butter is and your drawing Knife, when you
have found the bottom of the wound, and have made it clear to your mind, then
take Turpentine, fresh Butter, with a little black Pitch boiled together, and
pour it in scalding hot, then dip some hards or Tow in the same, and stuff it
well between the Shoo and Foot, you may take a piece of upper Leather or
Sole-Leather and do it between the Shoe and the Hards, or you may splinter it
in with sticks: But if it be a long Channel Nail that struck into his foot on
the Road as you rid him, or as you wrought him, then pluck the Nail out, and
heat it presently red hot, and put it into the hole so far as it went in at the
first; when you have thus seared it with the red hot Nail, which will keep it
from rankling and festring, then melt Turpentine and fresh Butter, with a
little black Pitch together, and pour it in scalding hot; then clap on the
Shoe, and stuff the foot with Tow or Hards, keeping it in as before you were
directed, this will cure certainly. Proved.

XXXI. An Ointment to skin or heal any Wound or hurt
TAke two spoonfulls of Dogs grease, one spoonful of black Soap, and as much
Roch Alom burnt and beaten to powder as a Hasel-Nut, put the burnt Alum in
when the other are melted and taken off the fire, and stir them well together
in an earthen Vessel, and you may keep it a year or more: not tried, but it is
very probable.

XXXII. To take down any Swelling being new, whether it be broke or not broke.
TAke two pintes of red Wine-Vinegar, and boil in it sour handfulls of
Foles-foot leaves, not cut, but vvrung a pieces with your hand, when it
begins to boil, put in two handfulls of Bay Salt, and when the Salt is melted
in it, take it off the fire, and when you use it, heat it as hot as you can
endure your hand in it, and with it anoint the place once a day till it be
assvvaged: This also is a very likely Medicine, but by me not tried.

XXXIII. For a Quitterbone, though far gone and hard to cure.


TAke off a quarter of the hoof right under the Quitterbone, that it may drain
the better, you may do it after this manner that this figure directs. Take a
dravving Knife, and dravv it down after this manner, to the quick on both
sides and below, according to the figure then take hold with a pair of
Pincers presently below the piece of Hoof, then pull it away, when it is
off, lay a piece of Hares skin to it lightly to stanch the blood, and do not
look to it in twenty four hours, then take all the Hares-skin away, and wash
it once with Wine-Vinegar, and scald it with Butter and Salt boiled together as
hot as may be, to kill the rankling* and to keep it from dead flesh, do this
three times once every other day: And then take Verdigrease as much as three
Hasel-nuts beaten to powder, then take a quarter of a pint of Wine Vinegar, and
as much Honey, boil them together with the Verdigrease, and keep it continually
stirring the time it boyls, which must be half an hour, then take it off the
fire, and put it into a Pot or Pipkin, and anoint the wound with it once a day
till it be whole; when it is whole, then anoint the Hoof to make it grow, with
Tar, Tallow, Turpentine, Dogs-grease boiled together, put in the Turpentine a
little before you take it off the fire, and stir it well, keep him dry in the
house the time of the cure: forbear to pull off the Hoof if you think you can
cure him without, for that will take a long time the curing, to make the Hoof
complete; this is a certain way, but it is none of the readiest, this way is
when all other ways fail.

XXXIV. For a Foundred Horse.


TO take out the Soals of his Feet you must pare the Foot thin, then at the end
of the Frush you must cut the Hoof after this manner, as this Figure shows. Cut
the middle of the Soal just at the Frushes end, in the fashion of a Hens
tongue, and raise it a little with the point of your Knife, as you may see in
the midst of this Figure, which I have made near the fashion of a Horse Hoof,
when you have cut and raised the little piece at the Frushes end, then take
your Penknife, and with the point thereof, prick the vein till it bleed, the
vein lies right under the little piece in the middle of the foot at the Frushes
end, when it has bled, close down the piece of Hoof again, then let him stand
in the Stable the time of the Cure, and not drink his water abroad, when you
see him halt, and that you think it is festred enough between the Soal and the
quick, round about the bottom of the Hoof, being thus festred, the soal will
come out easier by a great deal and with less danger of pulling away the veins
with the Soal of the foot; if you let it fester in this manner, before you pull
it out, you must take your drawing Knife, and draw the Hoof to the quick, round
about the Soal within the Hoof, as you may see by this Figure: When you have
drawn it to the quick round about, then raise the soal at the Toe, and take
hold of it with a pair of Pinsers, and pull it upwards to the heel; and so pull
it quite out: when it is out, apply Hares wool to Hstanch the blood, and within
24 hours take away the wool again, then wash the soal of the foot with
Chamber-lye, then set on the Shoe and put in Pitch, Turpentine and Hog's Grease
melted together, of each an equal proportion, dipping hards or Wool in the same
Medicine, and apply it to the bottom of the Foot, stuff it in with splinters,
or a soal of Leather to keep it it; apply this Medicine three times in a week
or ten days, three times is enough: You must never take out the Soals of both
his fore feet at one time, for then he will never be able to stand; hereafter
in another Chapter I will give you the practice of another, which in my
judgment is far more easy for the Beast than to fester the Foot; which is,
first to cord the foot-lock hard, that it may not bleed, then to draw round
about the Soal to the quick, and so to pull out the Soal without festring, by
cording of it; it will not bleed at all after you have pulled out the Soal, so
that you need not to take care to stanch the blood, but as soon as you have
pulled out the Soal, you may wash it with Chamber-lye and then put in the
aforesaid materials: After you have set on the Shoe, stuff it as you were
before directed.

Proved.

XXXV. For a Splent.
YOu must cast the Horse first, then you must beat the place with a blood-stick
or other stick till you feel it soft; then fleam in three or four places upon
the splent, and squeese out the blood with your stick, your fingers and thumb,
then take as much Hogs grease as a Wallnut, as much Bolearmoniack, and
Brimstone as much, beat these two last to powder, and mix them with grease, and
spread it upon a sheet of gray Paper, and lay it upon the splent, then heat a
Brick very hot, and dry the Medicine in it, then melt some black Pitch in an
Iron pan, and dip some flocks in it, and dab it on all over the splent close,
that it may lie on sure, and when the flocks come off, the splent will come
out, but if the flocks come off before the splent, then lay on more flocks till
the splent come out, and as soon as it does come out, wash it with a little
White Wind Vinegar, and then anoint it with Sallet Oil and Turpentine melted
together; anoint it cold till it be whole, once a day, and in a weeks time the
splent will come out and be whole: This you may do, but it makes a great
blemish, it takes away hair and flesh, and sometimes the hair comes no more:
You shall have a Receipt hereafter for this purpose, that will not take off the
hair nor break the flesh: It is a very gallant one, that will lay the splent
flat in a few hours.

XXXVI. For a through great Splent.
BEat it and fleam it, as you were directed in the other, then take as much
Crown Soap as an Egg, and mix it with as much Bolearmoniack on purpose that
none may know that you use any thing but Soap, lay it on a piece of gray
Paper, and heat a Brick hot and dry it in, as you did the former, this is much
of the nature of the former. Proved.

XXXVII. For a Splent great or small, an excellent one.
IF it were never meddled with before, be it great or small, this will cure it:
First, take a piece of Leather as broad again as will cover the Splent, then
take of Cantharides which is a fly that you may have at the Apothecaries, and
beat them to powder or very fine, take of them half a quarter of an ounce at a
time, mixed with as much Nerve Oil, as contain to half a Wallnut, bray them
well together, and lay them upon a piece of Leather, and bind it on for eight
or ten hours, and then take it off, and stroke it down with your Fingers and
Thumb twice or thrice a day, till you see it quite fallen: This Medicine will
dissolve the Splent into a Water, and you shall see it sweat out drops of
water, doing it with your fingers and Thumb every day: If it be a great through
Splent lay it on twice, if it be a little one, but once doing will serve; he
must stand in all the time of the Cure; you may ride him after you have taken
the Medicine off, take a piece of Tape to bind it on: Make no more at a time
than you shall use, it will not last as to do good. This will not diminish a
hair, but sink it flat. This Medicine is not to be laid to a Splent that has
been formerly meddled with, where the swelling still remains, and the hair is
come off* and the skin very thin; the Medicine is too strong, and will soon eat
the thin skin a pieces in such a case. Proved to be right good.

XXXVIII. A Water to cure any old Wound, or green, in Man or Beast.
TAke half a pound of Bolearmoniack, a quarter of a pound of white Copperis,
two ounces of Roch Alum, beat your Roch Alum and Copperis small, and put them
into a Pipkin, and melt them together, and when they are cold, put them with
the Bolearmoniack into a Mortar; and beat them all together to a fine powder,
then take a pottle of Running Spring water, where the Spring boyls with a blew
sand at the bottom, if possible, rather than in any other Spring, set this
pottle of Spring Water on the fire with a close Skellet, till it be scalding
hot, and then put it into a clean earthen Pitcher, and put two spoonfuls of
this powder into the water, and stir it up well together, before you let it
stand to settle, and when the water has stood two or three days settling;
then skum off the upper most froth, put the water into another Pitcher clean
from the dregs, and afterward use it when you have occasion: But when you
use it either for man or beast, vvarm the water as hot as can be endured
either by man or beast: When you vvash any vvound of a man, let the cloth lie a
while wet upon the vvound, and wet a double cloth in the same water, and
bind it on plaster wise, renewing it two or three times a day: For any
vvound, old or new, alvvaies vvash it first with this water, and then apply
the green Ointment to it afterward, which you shall find in R. VIII.

Proved

XXXIX. A Receipt to cure a Horse Pestilence.
TAke of Wormwood a handful, of Rue a handful, of Selendine roots a handful, to
be cut small, then put them into a quart of Aloes Milk, boil it till it comes
to a pint. Then strain it, and put to it half a pound of fresh Butter, then
give it the Horse in the morning fasting, pretty vvarm, and keep him from
drinking two days, and if he does drink, let it be cold water; and if grass
may be had let him ear grass.

Another Receipt for a Febula, or Horse-Pestilence.
TAke one ounce of Storax, one ounce of Benjamin, one ounce of Betony, a
quarter of an ounce of English Saffron, these being beaten all to a powder, put
them into a quart of new Ale, and give it to the Horse to drink; Let him not
have any warm water, but keep him as before, from any drink two days, and let
him eat grass, if to be had.

XL. For the Yellows.
YOu shall know this by his faint sweating at the roots of his Ears and the
white of his Eyes will be yellow; you must first let him blood in the Neck
veins, or on both sides of the Neck; then take Elder Leaves, Cellendine, and
Camomile, of each a handful, cut them small, and give them to the Horse in a
pint and a half of the best Beer being heated lukewarm, fasting; you may run
your Cornet-horn into the third roof in the palate of his mouth, keep him warm,
and give him warm water to drink for a day or two, and this drench will
certainly cure him.

Proved.

XLI. For a Chest-Founder.
To know this, he will go crimpling, and stand stradling, and covet lie to
down: Take six penny-vvorth of the Oil of Peter, and bath it well into his
breast, rub it in well at the first, then dry it lightly with a hot Iron: this
with once doing will be a perfect Cure: Not tried but very likely.

XLII. For a swelling under the Jaws, when a Horse has the strangling.
FOr a swelling of this nature, take nothing else but Bacon-grease and anoint
it, which will if it be hard, suddenly soften it with twice anointing, and when
it is full ripe let it out; some use to burn the swelling with a Candle before
they anoint it, and it will cause it to break the sooner; let it out with the
point of a Penknife, and sometimes there will come out a pint of filth, when
it is clean out, put in some white Salt: when any sore is soft, let it out with
the point of a Penknife, lay it drayning as much as you can, with all the
advantages you can: If it be a sore in any other place than the Throat, rot it
with Bacon-grease, and open it, and put it out, and heal it with the green
Ointment mentioned in R. XXXVIII. You must have a care of veins, that you do
not cut them:

Proved.

XLIII. For a Sore.
IF a Horse has a Sore in his side or else where, rot it first with
Bacon-grease, then open it in the midst, and let the hole below enough; that
you may put your finger in from the middle of the wound downwards, cut it in
the midst, and slash it quite down to the bottom, it will drain the better, and
heal the sooner a great deal: Heal it up with the green Ointment, dressing it
once a day, and always before you lay your green Ointment to the wound, wash it
with the rare water to heal any wound first. This is that I advise you, when
you wash a wound with this water, dry it with a clean linen cloth, before you
lay your green Ointment to: This water and green Ointment will heal any wound
old or new, if you observe and do as I have directed; if there be any proud
flesh in any sore, be the sore in what place it will, scald it with Butter and
Salt, and it will eat it off, and help to heal it presently Proved.

XLIV. To make a Horse piss, that is troubled with the Wind-Colick, or
Obstruction in the Bladder.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Castle Soap, and scrape it small, then put to it
two ounces of Dialthaea, which you shall have at the Apothecaries, bray them
well together in a Mortar, and then make them up in Balls about the bigness of
a Barbers, wash-ball, and keep them for your use, they will last a year, one
Ball crumbled into a pint and a half of strong Beer heat scalding hot, will
dissolve the Ball, then let it stand till it be but luke warm, and give it the
Beast with a horn; with this he will empty beyond expectation, as long as any
thing is in him: Let him fast an hour after he takes it* Proved.

XLV. To cure a Poll Evil, which grows upon the top of the Head.
YOu may know it when it begins to breed, by its growing bigger than ordinary,
upon the top of the head; if it be pretty big, take a hot Iron, and sear it
round about the Poll Evil, till the skin look yellow; as this Figure does show
you.



Then take another red hot Iron made of this fashion, and make so many holes
with this Iron, as the Cross will give you leave and no further, make all
these holes with the point of this last Iron, within the compass of the seared
place, as you may see the pricks in the Figure, so many pricks so many holes,
the bigger it is you may make the more, the lesser the fewer; these holes being
thus made, take a piece of yellow Arsenick as big as a wheat-kernel, and put it
into one hole, and so do the like to every hole; then at the same time, lay on
every hole over the Arsenick, a piece of black Soap to stop the Arsenick in;
after all these beat some Arsenick fine to powder, and mix as much of the
Powder with black Soap as contains to half a vvall-nut, to anoint the place
where first the Iron seared it round, but no where else, and within three
weeks it will be ready to come out; all that is within the compass of the
round Ring, the Arsenick will eat to the bottom, if you see it hang but by a
little at the bottom, then you may adventure to cutit out, otherwise let it
alone three or four days longer* and then cut it out close at the bottom: After
you have cut it clean out, then wash it with the water that is good to cure any
old Ulcer, or green Wound, and if you see or find with your Instrument, that
there is any hole at the bottom, or suspect that there is any dead flesh there,
squirt the water aforesaid with a Syringe or Squirt to the bottom, till all the
dead flesh be eaten out, this water will do it quickly, which when you see,
anoint it with Sallet Oil upon a Feathers end once a day, till it be quite
whole; if the hole go forwards to his ears, let him stand in at dry meat; if
the hole go backward; let him run abroad at grass, because, be holding down his
head, the filthy matter cannot spread further, but must come back to the main
Wound; this Observation will much further the Cure: Again if this disease
happen in Winter, when no flies are stirring, anoint it and heal it with Sallet
Oil, if this disease happen in Summer, when the flies are busy, anoint it then
with Train Oil, which you shall have at the Curriers; if this disease of a
Poll-Evil or a Fistula, chance to be overgrown with Bags or Bunnies of proud
flesh, while you are healing of it, then do nothing but scald it with Butter
and Salt and it will soon remedy that.

XLVII. For a Fistula.
THe mark of the Fistula is after this manner, the Fistula always hangs on
either side the top of the Cress, as you may see by this Figure. The same way,

and the same means will cure this as you used to the Poll-Evil, with the
Instrument with a cross, you must make so many holes as you see pricks within
the Figure, and you must do in every thing as you did in the last: Mark, you
must make three holes upon the top of the Wollis, which is the top of the Neck
or Cress, which is in the midst of the Fistula, and you must make two holes on
either side. Proved.

XLVII. For the Plague, Pestilence, Garget, or Murrain, in Horse or Beast only.
YOu must not let blood in this Disease, you shall know it by these signs: He
will hang down his head, and will gum thick Atter at the Eyes, as big as your
fingers end, and much, and will go weakly, staggering, and his Head will
oftentimes swell very big, and will fall away of his flesh suddenly, and yet
feed very well; the Cure is thus: Take as much Diapente as a Haselnut, as much
Dialphera, as much London Treacle, as much Mithridate, as much Saffron, a
handful of Wormwood* an handful of red Sage, Rhubarb as much as an Hasel-nut,
two Cloves of Garlic; boil all these together in two pints of good Beer, till
it come to a pint and a half, then give it him lukewarm fasting, and keep him
very warm; and the next thing you give him must be a Mash made of ground Malt,
let him drink warm water for a Week, and sometimes bursten Oats, now and then a
little clean sweet Hay, it is his sweating that does the Cure: If one Drink
will do no good, give him another three days after to make all sure, it will
not make him much sick: Half of the proportions of this drink, will do wondrous
well for a Cow, if she have the like disease. Not tried, but very probable.

XLVIII. For a Horse or Cow that is poisoned by licking of Venom, or is
over-gorged with Clover-grass, or Turnips, by greedy feeding.
EIther Horse or Cow will swell and slaver very much, and will be so extremely
full, as if they were ready to burst, and the skin to crack; if they drink soon
after it, so much the worse: but if he be but alive when you give him this, it
will cure him in a quarter of an hour, for it will work as soon as it is in his
body: For the cure, Take a quarter of a pound of Castlesope, and scrape it
thin, and put to it two ounces of Dialphera, which you shall have at the
Apothecaries, bray them in a Mortar small together, and make them up in Balls
as big as a Barbers Wash-ball, and lay them by till you have occasion to use
them, one Ball is enough for one Beast to cure this Disease; you must dissolve
the Ball in a pint and a half of Strong beer scalding hot, and give it
lukewarm, the hotter the Beer be, the sooner it will dissolve; but if haste
require crumble the Ball in as small as you can, and give it him down with a
horn, he will soon be empty with pissing and scowring. Proved.

XLIX. For a Horse or Cow that makes Redwater.
TAke three or four Onions, one pound of lean Beef roasted on the Coals till
you may beat it to powder, Bolearmoniack as much as the bigness of an Egg, one
handful of gray Salt, chop and beat them altogether, and put them all into a
quart of Strong-beer, take Ale if you can get it, and give it to the Beast, and
presently after it, give her a dishful of Cheese-runnets of almost a pint; do
but this once or twice fasting; and let the Beast fast two or three hours after
it, and it will cure. Proved.

L. For the mad Staggers.
THe signs of this disease are, He will foam at the mouth white, and will seem
dull-headed, and will have at that time a blew film over his eyes, and will
wander much up and down, be sure to let him blood on both his Neck veins,
within one or two days after he complains, and in the third furrow in the
pallet of his mouth, with the point of a Cornet-horn, you may run an Awl into
the gristles of his Nose, something above his Nostrils; the bleeding at the
Mouth and the Nose will ease the pain in his head. The cure is, Take a handful
of Rue, by some called Herbgrace, three Cloves of Garlic, a spoonful of Salt,
a spoonful of Vinegar, and two spoonfuls of Aqua-vitae, bruise all these
together well, and then put the one half into one Ear, and the other half into
the other Ear, with a little Wool after it; put the Liquor in with a spoon
first, and then the Herbs, and then the Wool; and then tie or stitch with a
Needle and Thread the Ears up very fast, with two listing Garters, then
presently fume him at the Nostrils through a Funnel, with the stalks and
pillings of Garlic, beaten in a Mortar with Mastick or Frankincense mixed
together; of these make pellets as big as a bullet, and lay them upon a
Chafing Dish of fresh Coals, and the smoke will go up through the Funnel into
the Head, and much comfort and cleanse the brain; Fume his head three times a
day till you see him mend, at the same time beat Red-weed seed which grows in
Winter-Corn, by some called Poppy-seed, very small, and give as much of the
powder at each Nostril as will lie upon a six pence, in two half hornfuls of
any Beer, do this every morning: Or thus, if you cannot get Poppy-seed, then
give him white Poppy-vv^te^, which you may likewise have at the
Apothecaries, and give at each Nostril a spoonful and a half a teach time: It
will make him sleep so soundly, that you may walk upon him from the Head to
the Tail and he will not stir, he will lie as if he were dead for a time,
his sleeping will mightily refresh him: After you have given it unto him, you
will see him, before he fall down, to buckle and salley, till at last he
will tumble down. Let him stand in a dark room and vvarm, where he may see
no light, let him have bursten Oats, and Mashes of ground Malt; let his drink
be cold Water, that which you put in his Ears, must remain there twenty four
hours and no longer: Put Wool, Flax, Lint, or a Rag after it, stitching is
better than a Garter, for that will make the Hair come white. Proved, a rare
Cure.

LI. For the Water Farcion.
IT will come by the Horses feeding upon low watery Ground, and in Pits where
the Grass grows above the Water, for there he will lick the Water up as well as
the Grass, this kind of feeding will cause Horses sometimes to swell mightily
under the Belly and Chaps: To cure it, cause a Smith to make an Iron like a
fleam at a Nails rod end, then heat it red hot, and strike it easily but just
through the skin in many places upon the swelling, and no where else, and you
shall see abundance of yellow, gray, oily water come out pouring; this being
done, wash it with Chamberly and Salt, as hot as you can endure your hand in
it, wash it but three or four times, and it is a certain Cure. If the swelling
be very big, mix with the Chamberly and Salt as much Bolearmoniack as a Walnut,
boil them together, and wash it.

Proved.

LII. For the Ives.
YOu may see them grow in a Roll betwixt the hinder part of his Jaw Bone and
his Neck; if they get the roots of his Ears there is great danger: The Cure is,
Let blood in both the Neck veins, then take two spoonfuls of Pepper, as much
Hog's Grease, and as much Vinegar, and work them up together, and put them one
half into one Ear, and the other into the other Ear, and Wool, Flax, Lint, or
Rags, which you have at hand after it, and stitch up his Ears close with a
Needle and Thread for 24 hours, and it is a certain Cure. Proved.

In the time of the Cure, let him stand in the House; give it him fasting, any
water cold or warm, any meat, only let him stand in the house three or four
days after it.

LIII. For the Wind-Colick.
IT comes by means of long fasting, and then the Wind gets into the Bag-gut
with one end, and then when the Horse comes to meat, he feeds so hungerly that
he never chews his meat, and it goes down unchewed and undigested, and stops
the wind in the Gut, that it puts the Horse to abundance of misery. It causes
the slime in the Gut to be so extremely hot, that the Horse will do nothing but
tumble and wallow, and covet much to lie upon his back, with all four feet
right up: The Cure is, First, to prick him in the Mouth and let him bleed well,
then rub his Mouth well with a handful of Salt, then give him this Drink. Take
a pint of Brine and boil it, but do not scum it, and put thereto a handful of
new Hens-dung, and give him it lukewarm, at any time when this disease
happens; then ride him an hour before he drink, and three hours after it. The
Signs: He will stand crimpling with all four together, and lay himself down
very easily, and will rather look full then empty: If he be cold in the Mouth
no Cure; if he be warm in the mouth, there is hope in four or five hours to
abate the pain. Either present cure, or present death. Proved.

LIVE. For a Film in an Horses Eye.
TAke a piece of the saltest Beef you can possibly get, dry it in an Oven, and
beat it to powder, take as much of Licorish-sticks, dry them, and beat them to
fine powder, and searee it through a cloth, blow the powder into his Eye once a
day, and it will take off the film in three or four times doing: If a Rheum
attend the Eye at the same time, to stop it, dip a little Flax or Hards in some
melted Rosin, and lay it in the hole of the Horses Eye: I was told it would
stop any Rheum, but have not tried it.

LV. To cure a Mallender.
FIrst rub it dry with a cloth, then anoint it with Crown-Sope and red Mercury
precipitate mixed together, when you have anointed it once, pluck the hairs
which grow in it, and upon the edge of it, out; then dress him three times
more; once in two days dress it, then anoint it with Sallet Oil, and it is
cured. But always before you anoint it you must rub it dry. Proved.

LVI. For an Apoplexy, or Palsy.
TO know this Palsy, the Signs are these: It either will take him in the Neck,
that he cannot put down his head to the ground, or in the After-parts that he
cannot rise, the Sinews of his flank will be hard, if you feel them with your
hand. The Cure is thus: Take six pennyworth of the oil of Peter, and anoint the
place grieved with it at one time, and dry it in with a hot Iron, if you anoint
the After-part of him, then lay upon him the Litter of a hot reeking Muckhil,
and lay a Cloth over that to hold it on, renewing it four times a day: If it be
in the Neck, after you have anointed it and dried it in, make a Thumb-band of
the longest hottest Dunghill Litter that you can get, and wind it round about
his Neck something loose, that he may eat and drink: Let the Thumb-band be so
long, that it may go so often about his Neck that it may reach from his
Shoulders to his Ears.

Probatum est.

LVII. For a Fareine that lies all over the Body of a Horse.
FIrst, Bleed those Buds that do not dye, wash them with the water that you
have for any old Ulcer, and this will cure them and kill them; wash them once a
day, then take a pottle of running water, and boil it in two spoonfuls of
Hempseed beaten to powder, and two handfuls of Herb-grace cut small; boil all
these together, till it come to a pint and a half, and give it the Horse
fasting; do this once in three days, or three times in nine days, let him
stand in the night before, and not drink; you may give him three or four hours
after it a Mash, or warm water, and then Hay. This very Drink, given to a Cow
or Bullock after letting blood in the Neck, will make them thrive exceeding
fast if it be given them at the Spring of the Year, and then turned out to
Grass. If a Cow, or Bullock, do not thrive, but is lean, scurvy, hide-bound,
and her hair stand right up, do but let blood, and give her this drink, and she
will mend presently upon it. Proved.

LVIII. For a Farcion only in the Neck or Head of a Horse.
FIrst, Let blood in the Neck veins, then take two spoonfuls of the juice of
Hemlock, and two spoonfuls of the juice of Housleek, and mix them together, and
put the one half into the one Ear, and the other half into the other Ear; you
must mix two spoonfuls of Sallet Oil with the Housleek and Hemlock, and then
put them altogether into his Ears. Put a little Wool, Flax, or Tow after it,
stitch up his Ears, and at the end of twenty four hours, unstitch them and take
out the stuffing; give him a Mash two or three hours after, and warm Water to
drink: You may give him any meat to eat, only wash the Buds with the Water for
an old Ulcer, till he be whole.

Proved.

LIX. A rare Medicine to make an Horse scour that is Hide-bound, that is
Moulten, that does not thrive nor fill: and to lay his Coat if it stand right
up.
IF a Horse be Moulten, give him this scouring Medicine suddenly fasting: If an
Horses skin cleave to his Ribs, we say he is Hide-bound: and if an Horses Coat
stand right up staring, and do not lie smooth, or if he do not fill well, it is
then to be judged the Horse is surfeited, foul, and out of health. To cure all
these at once or twice at the most, and make your Beast thrive gallantly, give
him this scouring Medicine: Take half an ounce of Aloes and beat it to powder,
and put it into a pint of Butter made afterward round, put the Aloes in three
or four balls of Butter, and roll the balls in as much of the powder of Jallop
as will lie upon a six pence, wash down the balls with a pint and a half of
strong Beer lukewarm: Let him fast three or four hours after, then give him a
Mash or bursten Oats, and warm water to drink, for two or three days. Ride, or
work him moderately, and the Horse will thrive the better.

Proved often.

LX. To stop a thin Scouring in Cow or Bullock, or any other Creature.
TAke a quarter of a pint of Verjuyce, and as much Bolearmoniack beaten to
powder as a Walnut, stir it well up and down in the Verjuyce, and give it to
the Beast. Proved.

LXI. To kill Lice in Cattle.
TAke a broad woollen List, as broad as your hand that will go round about his
Neck, then wet the List well in Train-Oyl, and sew it about the Beasts Neck,
and the Lice will come to it, and it will kill them if there were never so
many: Daub some about the Beast in several places, and they will come to it,
and it will kill them. No flies in Summer will come near any Wound or Sore
wherewith this is applied, for it will kill them. Proved.

LXII. To make Hoofs that are brittle grow quickly, and to make them firm and
strong.
TAke of Garlic 7 ounces, Herb-grace three handfuls, of Allom beaten to powder
7 ounces, of old Hog's Grease two pound, of Assesdung, or for want of it
Cow Dung, an handful; beat and cut them all small, and mix them altogether, and
boil them altogether well; then with this Ointment stop his Fore-feet, between
his Shoes and the bottom of his Feet, and keep it in with a piece of Leather,
or Sole-Leather of a Shoe; let it be betwixt his Foot and Shoe. And besides,
you should do well to anoint the outsides of his Hoofs all over; do this till
you see his brittle Hoofs to grow tough and strong, you will find the effect to
be great. Proved.

LXIII. To heal a Navil-Gall, Sore-back, or a Set-fast.
TAke a quarter of a pint of Train-Oyl, and boil in it as much beaten
Verdigrease as half a Walnut, put it into a Pot and keep it for your use: This
very Medicine will heal any Navil-gall, Set-fast, or Sore-back suddenly: And no
Flies will dare to touch or come near it, if they do they dye presently. Proved.

LXIV. For a Sinew-strain in the Fore or After-Leg.
A Sinew-strain, is always upon the Sinews which grow behind on the Fore-leg,
and behind upon the Sinews of the After-leg, above the Foot-lock joint, upon
the back part of the Fore-leg, and upon the back part of the Afterleg, much
about the Ancle-bone; it will be swelled and knotted when it is thus
over-strained, you may see and discern it by his going, and by the swelling; if
you nip it between your Fingers and Thumb, he will quinch at it very much: For
the Cure; Take Nerve-oyl and Turpentine of each a pennyworth, and mix them
together, and lay it on at two or three several times or more, till it be well;
and always dry it in well with a hot bar of Iron when you lay it on, anoint it
two or three days distance, you must rest him in the time of the Cure.

Probatum.

LXV. A Scouring Drink.
WHen you let a Horse blood, save the blood with a Bowl or Dish, and put
thereunto a handful of Salt, take the blood as it comes from him, and stir it
and the Salt together with your hand, that it may not clot, and give it him
again to drink with a Horn fasting; whether it be the blood of another Horse,
or his own blood, it matters not much. Give him warm Water to drink once.
Proved.

LXVI. For Brittle Hoofs.
ANoint them with an equal proportion of Dogs-grease, Turpentine, and Tar, all
boil together a little while, and it will make them grow strong and tough; put
in the Turpentine but a little before you take it off the fire.

Proved.

LXVII. For a Horse that is Moulten, and breaks out.
WHen you see Swellings appear like Bags, about the Girting place under the
Horses belly: First, anoint it with Bacon-grease once every day till it be
rotten; then lance it in one place to make the filth come out, with the point
of your Penknife, stroke your hand pretty hard upon it, squeez out all the
filth, then anoint the Swelling with Train-oyl all over, and wind a linen
Cloth about a sticks end, and dip it in Train-Oyl, and with it wash the wound
well within. If the Swelling run under the belly to the Cods-ward, then get a
Smith with a Nail at a Rods end, to beat a piece in the fashion of a Fleme,
then heat it red hot, and strike him just through the skin, in six or eight
several places, thereafter as the largeness of the Swelling is, and as your
discretion shall guide you; when you have flemed it, and squeezed it, that all
the filth is out, then daub on Chamberlye and Salt scalding hot, and then
anoint it with Train-Oyl within and without, the Train-Oyl will heal it alone;
anoint it once a day at first within and without, and once in two or three
days as it heals: You must always have a care of any wound, that the cold and
wind get not in, if it do it will swell much, and in such a case you must
anoint about the wound, all over the Swelling, with the Oil of Populeon, and
that will take the Swelling down certainly, be it in what place it will. Both
proved.

LXVIII. A Scouring Drink to cleanse his Kidneys if they be pained.
FIrst, heat a pint of strong Beer in a Skellet, and scum it, and put in a
pennyworth of Treacle-Jean, and give it him lukewarm; it will cleanse his
Kidneys and Guts much, three or four hours after it, give him a Mash, warm
water the first day and no longer. Let him stand two or three days. Probatum.

LXIX. For a fleshy Knot that is moving from the place where it grows.
LEt it grow where it will, if you by feeling upon it with your Fingers and
Thumb feel it moving, and something soft upon the place where it grows, then
take the knot in your hand, and with the point of your Knife slit a hole in the
middle, and cut the knot out; if it bleed much, sear it with a hot Iron to
stanch the blood; then stuff the wound with Hares-wool, or Coneys-wool, but
Hares-wool is best to stanch blood. The nextday take out the wool, and wash it
clean with White Wind Vinegar; then dry the wound with a clean linen cloth,
then heal it with your blew Medicine, or green Ointment, which I take to be
best, but the blew Medicine is good: Always before you anoint the wound, wash
it with the water which you have for an old Ulcer, if it grow rank, if not, you
shall not need to do it: Tie a Rag about it to keep the Dirt out. Dress it once
a day till it be whole. Proved.

LXX. For a Cow that has a Garget in her Dug or Udder.
YOu shall know when she-hath the Garget in her Dug, for then she will not give
down her Milk: For remedy, let her stand in some House or Yard the Night before
you let blood, the next Day in the Morning fasting, let her blood on both sides
of the Neck, then give her this Drink: Take a handful of Higtaper, by some
called Mullin, and cut it small; it grows by the sides of Dikes, and in
Highways, it has a long stem with a broad woolly Leaf; and afterward boil
it a little in a pint of Beer, and give it her lukewarm fasting: This with
once giving will make her give down her milk freely.

Proved.

LXXI. For a Ring-bone.
A Ring-bone grows just upon the instep, as we use to say upon the forepart of
the hinder Leg, just above the Hoof, in a hard knob as big as a Walnut: First,
the Beast must be cast, or else you must tie up his contrary Leg with a strong
Rope, till you strike four or five holes in the Ring-bone, at the very edge of
it. Let every hole be an equal distance from other, then take white Mercury or
Arsnick beaten to powder, as much as will lie upon your Fleme, and put it into
one hole, and as much likewise in the same manner into every hole, binding it
on for twenty four hours:

LXXII. Another for the same.
TAke quick and unslaked Lime, newly taken from the Kiln, which must be well
burned, and the best burned you may know by its lightness; make your Lime into
fine powder, and lay it upon the place swelled all along of a good thickness,
and bind upon it a linen Cloth made fast about the foot, and so put the Horse
into the Water a pretty while, then take him forth and unbind his foot, and he
is infallibly cured.

For the burning of the Lime in the Water, does kill the Ring-bone even unto
the Root thereof, with this Receipt I have cured not so few as an hundred
Horses. But when you are thus to dress your Horse, let him be brought close to
the Water wherein he is to be ridden, that so soon as you have applied the Lime
unto the Ring-bone, you may presently put him into the Water. Proved.

LXXIII. Observations concerning the ordering of Cattle, as Cowes, etc. in the
time of feeding, when there is great fullness of Grass: As in the Months of May,
June, and July.
THen in those Months must be your care to let them blood: For at that time of
the Year they never digest their meat so well as in Winter: And those raw
digestions, do hinder many inward passages, which causes bad blood. Which to
help, you must let them blood in the beginning of the Month of May, and let
them stand in some close yard the Night before; And the Night after, give them
a handful of Hempseed a piece: Now for the Pestilence, Gargil, and Murrain,
they are infectious, contagious Diseases, none like them; they proceed many
times from hard driving, heats and colds, hunger, or any other thing breeding
corrupt humors; as by drinking when they are hot, or feeding upon gross, foul
and corrupted foods, as in low grounds after floods, when the Grass is
unpurged, and the like. And sometimes it comes from some evil influences of
the Planets, corrupting the Plants and Fruits of the Earth: And sometimes from
Cattle too: And from diverse such like causes. But howsoever, when these
Diseases begin, certain it is that they are most infectious, and if there be
not great care taken, they will leave but few alive of a great many, for the
one infects the other. These Diseases are easily known, they will hang down
their heads, and run Atter at the Eyes, will swell on the Lips, and all on one
side of the Cheek, and under the Tongue, and sometimes at the roots of the
Ears: The Cure is, to separate the sound from the sick, a good distance of
place from the Air where the sick breathe, then let them blood on the
Neck-veins, and give every one a spoonful of Diapente in a pint of Verjuyce: If
you cannot get Diapente, take a spoonful of Treacle-Jean, and give it in a pint
of Verjuyce: Thus give them a good quantity of old Urine, and a handful of new
Hens-dung, stir the Urine and Hens-dung well together, and give it to the Beast
lukewarm, keep him in the house a Week after: These for Cows or Bullocks be
prime Receipts* Proved.

LXXIV. For a Bite, Blow, or Film in the Eye.
TAke as much white Copperis as the bigness of half a Walnut, and beat it very
fine, the same quantity of Verdigrease beaten to powder: Bray these two well
together upon an Iron-spade, or in a Mortar, then mix them with as much fresh
Butter as a Walnut; put into the Eye as much of this as the bigness of a Pease,
once a day until it be well and clear. Proved.

LXXV. A precious Ointment for an Horses Eye, either for Bite, Blow, or Film.
GO to the Apothecaries, and buy the stone called Lapis Calaminaris, it is of a
blew color; heat it red hot, then take it out and quench it presently in a
pint and a half of Whitewine* and so heat it, and quench it as before 12 times
one after another; then add unto the Wine half so much of the juice of
Housleek, well stamped and strained, and stir them up well together, dip a
Feather in this water, and dress it two or three times a day, till the sight be
recovered.

Proved.

LXXVI. A gallant Scouring to make a Beast thrive, Winter or Summer.
TAke a handful of Groundsel, called by some Sertion, half a handful of
Red-sage, half a handful of dried or green Wormwood stripped, you must shred them
all small, and boil them in a pint and a half of strong Beer, and when it comes
off the fire, put in a piece of Butter, as big as an Egg: You may put in as
much of the powder of Mechoacan as will lie upon a shilling at three or four
times: I know it purges Slime and moulten Grease in Lumps, and works very
kindly: Give him warm Water to drink, evening and morning for three or four
days after: A Mash of Malt once a day, or once in two days, if your Horse do
not fill well, and that his Coat stand right up staring, or be Hidebound, give
him this.

LXXVII.
IF you let blood in the Neck or Temple-vein* you must always Cord the Horse.
Take this for a Rule.

LXXVIII. For a Strangling in the Spring.
TAke a handful of Elder-buds, as much of dried Wormwood, half an handful of
Mercury, as much of Tansey, cut these small, and boil them in a pint of strong
Beer, and it will serve for three drinks, three days distance between drink
and drink. Give it him fasting in mornings, give a Mash three hours after, warm
Water for a day or two, let him stand in all the while. If he be swelled
between the Jaws, anoint it with Bacon-grease once in two or three days, till
it be rotted, and then let it out, and heal it with your healing-salves. Proved.

LXXIX. To kill Lice in Horses or Cows.
TAke two pennyworth of Quicksilver, and work it well with Fasting-spittle upon
the Palm of your hand till the Quicksilver be killed, then take the whites of
two Eggs and bray them with the Quicksilver and Spittle, till they be as an
Ointment, spread these upon a List that will go round about the Beasts Neck,
let it be as broad as four fingers, first cut away the hair, and then tie your
List round about, and sow it up; they will come to it, and it will kill
abundance of them; and in several places about the Beast daub on some Train-oyl.

LXXX. To make a Horse Stale or Piss.
TAke as much Castle-sope as a Walnut, boil it in a pint of strong Beer a
little while, and give it him lukewarm, it will make him piss. Proved.

LXXXI. For an inward Bruise with any Fume or Stub.
TAke a pint and a half of strong Beer, and one ounce of Bolearmoniack, and
boil them a little together, and give it him with a Horn lukewarm. It is very
good for an inward bruise of a Beast: The greasy sort is best. Proved.

LXXXII. For a Horse that has rent his flesh about the Belly or elsewhere, or
for any new wound.
TAke a pint of Whitewine Vinegar the sharpest you can get, boil it in half a
quarter of a pound of Bolearmoniack, after it has boiled a little, and when it
comes off the fire, put into it a little piece of Butter, and bathe the place
grieved once in two days, and in two or three times dressing it will cure:
This is a plain and easy Cure.

LXXXIII. For an old Cold with a Cough.
TAke as much fresh or salt Butter as an Egg, and make it hollow as a Pie, and
put as much Tar into it as a Walnut, then close up the Ball very round, and
roll it in the Seeds and strippings of Wormwood cut small: To make two Balls of
the Butter and Tar is better, give him this in a pint and a half of strong Beer
in the morning fasting, he having stood in the night before; keep him in house
three or four days after, give him warm Water, the cold just taken off it, for
two days, the water must be no warmer at any time: If you see he does not fill
well, and has left his Coughing, then four or five days after give him the
same again, and order him as before: When you have given him this, ride him a
hand-gallop for three or four miles, till he sweat well; but a mile before you
come at home, ride him very softly to cool him: Set him up warm, Litter him
well, clothe him with a couple of warm cloths, tie him up to the Rack upon the
bit for three or four hours, if it be five or six hours it matters not, when
you un-bit him, give a Mash first, or warm Water first, then clean Hay, and
take off one of his clothes; after one or two days you may work him, so you do
it moderately: This is not so good for a new Cold, as for an old Cold. Proved.

LXXXIV. For a strangling in the Guts: the Cough of the Lungs: For clearing the
Pipes, and giving much breath.
IF you be to run your Horse for a wager, give him two of these Balls a week
before: I make them thus. Take as much of fresh or salt Butter as the bigness
of an Egg and an half, part it in the midst as near as you can, hollow it in
the fashion of a Pie, mix and bray together with your Butter half an ounce of
Anniseeds beaten to powder: then make a Pie of your Butter and Anniseeds thus
mixed, and put into it three quarters of a spoonful of Syrup of Horehound into
each Ball, and close up the Ball close that the Syrup may not come out: Make
your Balls no bigger then a Barbers Wash-ball, or but a little bigger if you
do, for it is not good to give Balls too big; then warm a pint and a half of
strong Beer lukewarm, and fill the Horn with Beer, and before you put it in,
put in one of the Balls, having pulled out his tongue with your left hand
before; when his tongue is out, put the Ball into his mouth as far as you can,
then hasten two Horns full of Beer after it to wash it down, do the like with
the next Ball as you did with the first, then take his back, and ride him for
three or four miles a hand-gallop, till he sweat well, for this reason: Because
the Diseases in this Receipt, as they come with a heat, so the speediest and
best Remedy is to drive them away with a heat: The second reason is, That a
Drink will take no more place in a Horse for heats and colds, than to give a
Horse a Drink and walk him about the Yard. Therefore for Diseases of this
Nature, ride him till he sweat soundly: A mile before you come at home, ride
him but a foot pace, that he may be set up something cool, then tie him up to
the Rack, cover him with two clothes, stuff him and litter him very warm, cover
his head and body to keep him from the cold, let him stand four or five hours
before he eat or drink; then when you unbit him, give him a Mash, or some Water
lukewarm, or some clean Hay, and take off one cloth, and keep him warm. If
this will not do, a week after give him the same again, and give him warm Water
but two days after it, and then cold water; a week before your Horse goes to
grass give this, and a week after he comes from grass; give it three or four
times a year; and it will keep your Horse in gallant health, it will fat a
Horse: It will make him sick, but fear nothing: But if you give your Horse too
much at a time, that it makes him extraordinary sick, give him a pint of Milk
as it comes from the Cow, or heat the Milk lukewarm. Proved many times. This is
a rare Receipt.

LXV. To waste the Kernels under the Horses Throat, cheaply and suddenly.
FIrst, sear the Kernels with a Candle, then take of fresh or salt butter, and
lay a piece upon a red piece of Cloth, and rub it well in, and in a Fortnights
time the Knot will be quite gone, and if his Nose run, it will stop when the
Kernels are gone: Anoint the Knots once a day for a week in the time of his
Cure. If it be in Summer let him run out, and in Winter stand in. Proved.

LXXX. For a Cough of the Lungs.
TO know this, the Horse will cough hollowly and gruntingly, he will hang down
his head when he coughs, his flanks will beat, he will fetch his breath short:
For Remedy, Let him stand in the night before, the next day in the morning
fasting, give him a spoonful of the Syrup of Horehound, and a spoonful of the
flower of Brimstone, and put these two into a pint and a half of strong Beer
heated lukewarm, and give it him fasting; take him and ride him three or four
miles presently upon it, till he sweat well, ride but a foot pace within a mile
of home, be careful to set him up warm: Litter and clothe him warm: Let him
stand in not above two or three nights, if it be in Summer; after that turn him
out from ten a Clock to three a Clock, for two or three days, and then turn
him out for altogether; the more moderately you work him, the better he will
thrive: It will take away his Cough, clear his Pipes, and make him thrive much
after it. If there be a white, thick, clayey water near, let him drink there,
it is a warmer and more fattening Water than any other; give warm Water not
above twice; this Drink will clear his Pipes, and drive it from his Lungs: You
may put in as much of the powder of Mechoacan, as will lie upon a shilling, at
three times. Proved.

LXXXVII. For a Broken-winded Horse.
TAke Bores-dung and dry it to powder, and put a spoonful of it into two pints
of Milk as it comes from the Cow, or otherwise heated lukewarm, and give it
him: If you see that this proportion will not make him sick the first time you
give it, then give him two spoonfuls more of the powder, and in four or five
times giving, it will perfectly cure. This Drink must be given every third day.
A spoonful of the powder of a Hedgehog, by some called an Urchin, does
infinitely help in this case. Proved.

LXXXVIII. For a Cold in a Beast, either in Winter or Summer.
TAke an Egg-shel full of Tar, half an ounce of Red-stone Sugar, half an ounce
of Anniseeds beaten small, half an ounce of Tobacco beaten, half an ounce of
Liquorish cut and beaten very small, 2 ounces of Brimstoue beaten small, a
quarter of a handful of Herb-grace cut small; after that these things are thus
beaten and stirred up together, make them up into three Balls of a like
bigness, then put two pints of strong Beer lukewarm, and the first hornful of
Beer that you give him, put a Ball into it, and do so likewise to the second
and third; and then give him the remainder of the Beer. Let him not drink for
four or five hours after, give him a Mash, and afterward Hay to eat: Let him
stand in for three or four nights if it be in Summer, after the first days
giving, work him every day moderately* and the Beast will thrive the better. If
once will not take away his Cough, and cause him to belly, give him another;
keep him warm, and it is a Cure. Proved.

LXXXIX. For the Scratches.
THey are upon the After-heels of a Horse in the Pastern and above: For Remedy,
take two pennyworth of black Soap, as much as an Egg, of the newest Hens-dung
as you can get, Oyster-shels put into hot Embers five or six, they must be put
in overnight, and raked up so, that they may be well dried by the morning,
then beat them to powder, and bray them altogether like an Ointment, and apply
it to the Horses sore Heels every morning and evening, the Horse must not come
in the Water till you see he is cured: Always rub his Heels very clean before
you rub in the Ointment, and you shall find it a certain Cure in two or three
times dressing.

Proved.

XC. For the Scratches.
Overnight let his Heels and Legs be bathed well in Beef-broth, the next
morning rub his Legs clean, and then apply this Ointment to heal it. Take two
pennyworth of Gilts-grease two pennyworth of Speck-oyl at the Curriers, made of
shreds and cuttings of Leather, two pennyworth of Verdigrease beaten small, two
pennyworth of Train-Oyl; put all these into a Pipkin, and set it on the Coals
to melt, but stir them till they be melted; then once a day anoint him with
this Ointment, till his Heels be well, which will be whole very suddenly: Chafe
it, and rub it in with your hand very well, let him come in no water nor dirt
till he be whole, when Horses have been so swelled, crannied and stiff, that
they could not go, but fall down: This has cured them. Proved.

XCI. Another for the same.
IF at any time a Horses Leg swell, but especially in the month of March, ride
him into a River where the Water runs swiftly, up to the Mid-leg, and there let
him stand not above a quarter of an hour; then when you set him up in the
Stable, take a Wisp and a Payl of Water, and dash the Water against his Legs,
till they be clean. This is a Cure for swelled Legs in a very short time, that
is when they are not broken out, but only swelled. Proved.

XCII. For Foot-foundring.
THat Foot which is foundred, he will set before the other: For Remedy, pare
him down to the quick, if he bleed it matters not, then set on his Shoe very
hollow, then take Flax or Tow, and make a pretty thick Cake thereof, and spread
Venice Turpentine thereon a good thickness; then lay it all over the bottom of
the Hoof, and put a piece of the upper Leather of a Shoe to keep it in: At 3
days end lay on a new Plaster as before. If his Foot grow again, pare him to
the quick again, and every third day lay on a new Plaster, till you see him go
better; he must run abroad in low grounds; this Plaster will draw down the
humors exceedingly. Continue thus doing, and if he have not been foundred too
long, this will cure him in a month or very little more, perfectly. To further
the Cure, you may let him blood at the Toes, nevertheless the place should not
be dirty that he goes in.

Proved.

XCIII. For the Garget in the Throat of a Cow.
IF you have an Ox, or Cow, or Bullock, that has the Garget in the Throat, it
comes for want of Water; it will cause a swelling under the sides: The Remedy
is, first to cast the Beast, then cut the skin through in the midst of the
swelling, and flea the skin from the flesh so far as any swelling goes, then
take of the whitest Wood-ashes that you can get, sifted fine, mix them with
some moldy, stale, old Piss, stir them well together, and wash the Sore
therewith.

Proved.

XCIV. Another for a Garget at the Root of the Tongue of a Cow.
A Garget at the Root of the Tongue, is a certain swelling under the Root of
the Tongue, which causes his head and face to swell also, and to froth at the
mouth, he will then for sake his meat, with often gulping in his throat. The
Remedy is, first cast him in soft straw, from bruising his body, then take his
Tongue in your hand and pull it out as far as you can, and with the point of a
sharp Penknife; slit down the middle Vein an inch, right under the Tongue, and
there will come forth black blood, and water which comes from the Gall, then
rub the place with Salt and Vinegar mingled together, and it will cure. Proved.

XCV. For the Garget in the Guts of a Cow, or Bullock.
THe signs are these: The Beast will run at the Eyes, drivel and slaver at the
Mouth, with a sad heavy countenance: For Remedy, take an Egg-shel full of Tar
and put it down her Throat, then take two handfuls of Salt, and put it into a
pint of Verjuyce, and put it down the Beasts Throat with a Horn, then drive her
to and fro till she dung: Keep her fasting four hours after. Proved.

XCVI. For the overflowing of the Gall, in a Cow or Bullock.
THe signs are extraordinary fullness of the Body, and slavering at the mouth:
The Remedy; Take an Egg-shell full of Tar, and put it down her Throat, having
before a pint of Verjuyce or Vinegar, and a pennyworth of Cloves beaten; boil
the Verjuyce and Cloves together, and when you take it off the fire, put in two
good handfuls of Salt, and give it her lukewarm with a Horn, immediately after
the Egg-shell full of Tar, and drive her to and fro. Proved.

XCVII. For a Horse or Cow that makes Redwater.
TAke a Red herring with a hard Row, and cut it as small as you can, and put it
into a quart of strong Beer, and give the Beast it lukewarm, and in twice
giving it is a Cure:

Proved.

XCVIII. For a Horse that is Back-swanckt, or for a Strain in the Kidneys,
being over-burthened in the Hinder*part, or in Race-running, or by being
over-strained in the Back.
TAke a fat hot Sheeps-skin, just as it comes from the back of the Sheep as
soon as she is killed, mix four pennyworth of Nerve-oyl, and four pennyworth of
Turpentine well together, and besmear or anoint the inside of the Sheepsskin
all over, and clap it to the place of the back where the grief lies, which
commonly is in the Navil-place of the backbone: In that part of the backbone,
is a horse mostly swanckt of, when you have thus laid it along his backbone,
make a Crupper to go under his Tail to keep it on, and a breast plate before,
and fasten them together, to girt it upon him for a month till his back be knit
and strengthened. Proved.

Here follows Nathaniel Shaw's Receipts, which are all approved things: and
he is accounted as able a Farrier as any is in London. I have both proved my
self, and seen him prove most of them, both Inward and Outward; and although
the former Receipts in this Book will do much good: Yet these go beyond them in
many things, both for cheapness and readiness of the Cure. I shall begin with a
Disease in the Head called the Canker.

C. For a Canker in the Head.
A Canker is a Disease in the Head, and sometimes will set upon the Eyes, and
sometimes in the Nostrils: You shall know it by his rawness, and it will run a
yellow Water. For Remedy, Take half a pint of Sallet-oyl, one ounce of the Oil
of Turpentine, three ounces of Burgundy Pitch, and one pennyworth of
Verdigrease beaten fine; put all but the Verdigrease into a Pipkin, and let
them boil together a pretty while, then take it off the fire, and put in the
Verdigrease, and let them all boil together to a Salve, but if you have not a
great care, the Verdigrease will make all boil over, to prevent which, always
have another Pipkin stand by in readiness, that if it boil over you may put
some into that; then put them together again, and set them upon warm embers,
and let it gently boil till you see it come to a Salve, being neither too hard
nor too soft; you must stir it all the while it boyls, then take it off, and
keep it for your use: If you use this Medicine for a Canker in the Nostrils,
first tie a rag about a sticks end, and dip it in some Whitewine Vinegar and
some Salt, and run it up his Nostrils to do off all the scales: When you have
washed it clean, take a Feather, and if it be not long enough tie two together,
and dip it in the cold Salve, and run it up his Nostrils but once a day: If it
be a Canker in the Head, Face, or Eyes, take a little Tow, and rub the Canker
till it bleed, and when it leaves bleeding, anoint it with a Feather dipped in
the aforesaid Salve, and strew some Wheat-bran upon the Salve, it will hold on
the better: Dress it once a day, till you see it heal, and then once in two or
three days, whilst it heal up: Observe this Rule in all outward Cures, for it
is needful, let him stand in all the time of the Cure. Proved.

CI. For a dry scurvy Mange, although it be from the Head to the Tail, of
Horse, Cow, Dog, or any thing else.
FIrst, scrape off all the Scurff with an old Curry-comb or piece of Knife,
then take two ounces of the Oil of Turpentine, and as much strong Beer, mix
them together, and shake them well in a Glass Vial, then anoint the Horse where
he is pild and mangy; a Week after dress him again if you see any matter y
running places, else not; tie him up with a strong Halter, till it has done
working, for it will smart terribly: When you have killed the Mange, to make
the hair come again, wash it two or three times with a little strong Beer now
and then, and it will make the hair come quickly and thick. Let the Beast stand
in at dry meat the time of the Cure. This is a rare Receipt. Proved.

CII. For a blow or any other mischance, which causes a swelling about the
Head, Face, Jaws or Chaps.
FIrst, Let blood in the Neck-vein, on the side the Head swells, if he swells
on both sides let him blood on both sides: Then give him this Drink to prevent
a Farcy; take an ounce of Turmerick, and an ounce of Anniseeds, of Redsage,
Wormwood, Herbgrace, of all three but a handful, cut them small, and put all
into a quart of strong Beer, and give it the Beast cold, for they are hot of
themselves, fasting in a morning, and let him fast four or five hours after it;
give him warm Water to drink but for once, so soon as you have given him his
Drink, apply this charge hot with a flat stick, dab on the swelling, a quarter
of a pint of Aqua-vitae or Brandywine, which is the spirit of Aqua-vitae, but
Brandy is best, mixed with a pennyworth of Crown-sope, according to the bigness
or smalness of the swelling; make a quantity of these two things which you
apply as a charge; this charge of these two things, will take down any swelling
old or new whatsoever. soke it in with a red hot Iron; apply it but once, it
will not come off in fourteen or fifteen days, it will sink it quite flat, or
break it. Proved.

CIII. For a Navil-Gall.
TAke Brandy-wine cold, and dab it on with your hand, or with a Rag, it will
take it down in a few times dressing, if the skin be not broken. Proved.

CIV. For hard Kernels under the Throat.
MIx Soap and Brandy-wine together, and apply it to the Kernels hot, then heat
it in with a hot Iron; it will either sink them flat, or break them. Proved.

CV. For a New Sinew strain.
APply Soap and Brandy once hot, and heat them in with a hot Iron: but first
you must clip the hair away in the Pastern right over the Shackle-veins, and
then let blood on both the Shackle-veins, and then apply the Charge; letting
Blood will much further the Cure. Let the Sinew-strain be before or behind, you
must let blood if you will have a speedy Cure: Letting blood thus, and applying
the Charge, will take his lameness away in eight and forty hours, with once
doing at the most: Do not ride him in four or five days after you have laid on
this charge: This Soap and Brandy heat well in with a hot Iron, it will not
come off in 14 or 15 days, and when you see the scurff to rise, anoint it with
Trotters-oyl, which is made of Sheeps-feet boiled, anoint it once in two days
to strengthen the Sinews, till he go well; you may ride him in four or five
days, and for four or five days, or a week, keep him out of the Water, after
you have applied the Charge, and it will be a perfect Cure. Proved.

CVI. For an old Sinew-strain that is swelled and hard, on Fore or After-legs.
FIrst, clip away the hair right over the Shackle-veins on the Pastern, and you
will see to strike the Shackle-vein the better: when it has bled, apply two
ounces of the Oil of Turpentine, mixed with two ounces of strong Beer, and put
them into a glass Vial, and shake them well together, bath most of it in with
your hand upon the Vein or swelling, and three or four days after it has done
swelling, and begins to be scurfie, lay a Charge of Soap and Brandy, heat it
well in with a hot Iron, and it will take it quite down in a week or a
fortnights time, you may ride him in five or six days: When you see the Charge
to scurf and pill, you may anoint it with Oil of Trotters once or twice. Proved
very certain.

CVII. For any old, hard, and crushy Knobs, or Swellings, that have been a long
time, let them be never so hard. Do thus,
FIrst, anoint it with an ounce and a half of the Oil of Turpentine, and as
much strong Beer mixed together, and put it in a Glass and well shaken
together, and bathed in with your hand; and three or four days after, the
Charge of Soap and Brandy, applied and well heared in with a hot Iron; and four
or five days after you may ride him where you please, it will take it quite
down. Proved.

CVIII. For old broken Knees much swelled and hard, that have been long healed
up.
FIrst, mix an ounce and a half of the Oil of Turpentine, and the like quantity
of strong Beer, shaking them in a Glass together; then bathe it in with your
hand upon the swelled Knee: two or three days after, apply the charge of Crown
Soap and Brandy hot, and let it lie on till it come off of its own accord; it
will much lessen, if it do not take it quite down; let him stand in: The Oil of
Worms is a great mollifier of a hard and bony part, and hard swellings. Proved.

CIX. For a Strain in the Pastern, Back, or Sinews.
A Charge of Crown-sope and Brandy-wine applied hot, and heated well in with a
hot Iron, is mavelous good; keep him out of the Water for a week after, till
you see him go well. This Soap and Brandy-wine is an absolute cure for a Strain
newly taken, or new swelling, or soft swelling; but if it be old done, and the
swelling as hard as a bone, then you must first anoint it with the Oil of
Turpentine and Beer, and two or three days after apply the Charge of Soap and
Brandy, and it will take it quite down. Proved.

CX. How to boil the Charge of Soap and Brandy to a Salve.
THis Soap and Brandy, when you are to boil them, let them boil till they come
to a white Salve, then lay it on hot with a flat stick, always when you dress
a Beast, this is how to boil it, and make the Charge: It will make a Horse
swell much, but within three or four days after it has taken its course, it
will fall as flat as may be. For all these lamenesses, the Beast must stand in
for four or five days, you need not take above a quarter of a pint of Brandy,
and a pennyworth of Crown-sope: For a Horse that is cast in a Ditch, and is
much swelled and bruised above the Head and Body with beating of himself: Let
blood in this case, first in those Veins where you see most cause, and let him
blood as discretion shall teach you, and then apply the Charge of Crown-sope
and Brandywine hot all over the swelling with a flat stick, and heat it well in
with a hot Iron, and let him stand in the house the time of his cure, and you
shall find it to be a very perfect and ready cure.

Proved.

CXI. For a Swelling that comes by reason of Wind or Cold getting into the
Wound, how to take it away, whether it be in the Head or any part of the Body.
IF the swelling in the Head cause a thick film over the Eyes, then follow the
directions under written: If the swelling comes by reason of Wind or Cold
getting into the wound, to take out the heat and rankness of the swelling, you
must anoint it all over with an ounce of the Ointment of Populeon, or more if
the swelling be great; anoint it twice a day at first, and as it falls fewer
times will serve; in the mean time do nothing to the wound, till the swelling
be almost gone; when the swelling is almost gone or down, wash the wound with
Chamberlye and Salt, or Vinegar and Salt, and heal it up with your healing
Salves: If he get a wound in his Face or Head, and the Wind get in and cause it
to swell, when you have taken away the swelling by anointing it with this
Populeon, it may be you shall see your Beast to have lost his sight, by reason
of some thick film that has covered his Eyes. For Remedy, when you have first
taken down the swelling, do thus: Slit a little hole upon the bone of the Cheek
with a sharp pointed Penknife, and then put in your Cornet-horn, and work up
the point thereof between the skin and the flesh, close up to the Eye, then
take a little bit of new Canvass, and cut it three square, and roll it up round
the length of your Thumb, mix some Salt and fresh Butter together, and strew
some Salt upon the Butter, although the Butter be salt, and spread it on both
sides the Canvass; then roll it up round and thrust it up into the hole, and
there let it be, over it lay a little piece of Canvass, with some Burgundy
Pitch spread upon it, to keep out the cold and wind, and it will draw and drain
the Eye very clean and clear; this being done, put a little piece of fresh
Butter, with a corn or two of Salt into the Eye, and put in a piece of Butter
into the hollow hole above the Eye, anoint and rub it well in, that it may
drain down the Eye: For a blow with a Cudgel, Whip, Stick, or a Haw in the Eye,
though you think the Horses Eye would go out, this course taken, will remedy it
in a short time.

Let blood in the Temple-vein for a hot Rheum, and likewise when a Horses
eyesight fails with hard riding or much straining; nevertheless, you must
strike the fleme cross the Vein, and then the Rheum will stop, and the Vein
will knit up of it self; this is a main means to stop a hot Rheum that comes
down to a Horses Eye: when you let a Horse blood on this Vein at any time, you
must cord him about the Neck, and when he has bled as much as you think good,
to keep the cold and wind out of the Vein, you should do well to pitch and
flock it: For a hot Rheum, hard riding, or overmuch straining. Give this Drink
fasting, to clear the Stomach, and cleanse the Blood and Lights (viz.) one
ounce of Turmerick, half a quarter of Aquavitae or Brandy, two or three
spoonfuls of Whitewine Vinegar, a quart of the best Beer, give it lukewarm:
but if there be a kind of whiteglass in his sight, then it can be no cure.

Likewise, if you have a young Horse that you think will be Moon-blind, then
you must take up the Temple-vein in the wane of the Moon, doing with your
Cornet-horn as before you were taught, and put a piece of Butter in his Eye,
and a piece in the hole of his Eye: If it be a hot Rheum, his Eye will water
and look red below the Eye, let him come into the cold Wind as little as you
can: If it be a film, if it be thick, white, blew, though it has been for half
a year, then do as ye were just directed in this Receipt, and no otherwise.
Proved.

CXII. For a hot Inflammation or soft Swelling* that is new done, whether
broken or not broken.
ANoint it with the Oil of Populeon, and rub it in cold with your hand once a
day, or twice at the most, till it be down. Proved.

CXIII. For a Bruise or Bite upon the Cods of an Horse, that cause them to
swell much.
FIrst, Bath them well in warm Whey or Milk, but Whey is best, let it be as hot
as the Horse can endure it, bath it for three or four days together; then make
a Bag to put his Cods therein to keep them warm, anoint his Cods with the Oil
of Populeon cold, once or twice a day, till you see the swelling of his Cods
abate, which when you see, apply the Charge of Crown-sope and Brandy-wine, to
take down the rest of the swelling, and to knit the Veins and Strings of his
Cods again: Lay it on hot, and heat it well in, three or four days after ride
him into a River, if you can, or Pit, up to the belly, and you shall see it
fall in a short time. If the Cods be swelled much, and it have been long done,
and is hard, then do not meddle with it. Proved.

CXIV. To keep in your Medicine, and keep out the Wind.
OVer your Medicine, lay a Plaster of Burgundy Pitch, and it will keep in your
Medicine and keep out the Wind, whilst you take down the swelling with the Oil
of Populeon, but Culpepper says that the Ointment of Populeon is better.

CXV. Directions.
IF at any time a Horse come to you with swelled Legs, and that has been
poisoned with other Farriers Medicines: First, before you apply any thing of
your own to it, bath his Leg or Legs with Whey as hot as he can endure it, to
wash off the poison of their Medicines, and to make his Legs clean. Whey will
not take off the hair if it be not off before, it will cool gallantly, it is
better than Milk: But if you cannot get Whey then take Milk; after you have
thus bathed it in warm Whey or Milk, you may fall to work according to your
judgment, as it is in hardness or softness: This Book will tell you, whether
you shall take it away by Drinks or Ointments, or by both: Look the Receipts
for a dry Surfeit, and the Receipt for a Pocky Farcion Horse: Look the following
Receipts for a dry Surfeit, and there you shall see the Purge of Aloes to be
given inwardly, and other things to be applied outwardly to the hard swelling:
If it be a Surfeit that comes down out of the Body, and falls into the Legs
before or behind, and breaks, and runs moist, watery, or attery, stinking filthy
matter, then look the following Receipts for a foul, rank, pocky Farcion Horse.
And give him the first Drink there mentioned at the beginning of the Receipt;
one or two of those Drinks will dry up the moist humors, that fall out of his
Body into his Legs. Note, That where the filth breaks out of the Chaps, if the
Crannies be very great, and if you see that the filthy matter that comes out of
those Crannies, are like to rot the Sinews of the Legs, then use the following
Receipt, which is for Pains and Scratches, made of Honey, Pepper, and Garlic.
The Drink given inwardly, and this Receipt applied outwardly to the Crannies of
his Legs, are incomparable, for the Drink at once or twice giving, will dry up
the humor; in his body, although never so many or so violent, and the Salve
will heal up his Legs suddenly and to purpose. This is enough to direct you,
especially for dry Surfets that fall out of the Body into the Legs, and there
settle and become very hard: And likewise for surfets that fall out of his
Body, and break, stink, and run, watery, yellow, thick, and sometime thin mattry
filth in the Legs: if after you have made a Cure of these, and see your Horse
gaunt, and does not fill well, then give him the Purge of Aloes to scour and
cleanse him; and after that your Cordial, Whitewine, and Honey, all mentioned
in the following Receipts in this Book, which is for a dry Surfeit: And when a
Horses Cods are subject to swell often, give him this Purge of Aloes that is for
a dry Surfeit, which is when the Grease is melted, and afterward settled and
dried in his Body. It is good for a Horse that is gaunt and will not fill, and
we say is gut-foundred, and his hair stands right up. The Cordial of Whitewine
and Honey is mavelous good to beget and continue a stomach to his meat, being
given after his Purge, as you are fully directed in the Receipt for a Horse
that is swelled in his Cods, and that has a dry Surfeit, and runs at the Nose.
I say in the following Receipts you shall there find them altogether in order.

CXVI. For a Shoulder-strain.
FIrst, tie up his sound Leg very sure with a List or Garter, then walk or
drive him upon three Legs, that he may lay the weight of his Body upon the lame
Leg, till he begin to sweat at the Ears and Cods with pain; this is, because
you may see the Plait-vein the plainer appear; then let down his lame Leg, and
you shall see the Vein yet plainer than you could when his Leg was tied up: If
you cannot see the Vein plain enough when his Leg stands upon the ground, then
heat but a little Water, and clap it on with your hand upon the Vein, and then
you shall certainly see the Vein appear a great deal bigger, that you may let
it blood, then when you see the blood is come into the Plaitvein, and that the
Vein is plain enough to see and feel, tie up his lame Leg again, and let him
blood in the Plait-vein, on that side the bottom of his Chest his lame Leg is
on: Let him bleed a quart or two, or more, the greater the lameness is, the
more let him bleed: after he has bled about a quart upon the ground, presently
put into a Bowl a good handful of Salt, and let him bleed a quart or more into
that Salt: you must stir the Salt and blood altogether, all the while he
bleeds into the bovvl, because it may not clot, then set the Blood and Salt by,
and stop the Plait-veine with a piece of Lead, that may nip the mouth of the
Vein together again that it may not bleed: You must have in a readiness an
ounce, or an ounce and a half of the Oil of Turpentine, and as much strong
Beer, put them both into a Glass Vial, and shake them well together: When you
have thus shaked the Oil and Beer together, bathe it well in with your hand
about his Breast, and all his Shoulder over, and the bottom of his Breast,
betvveen his Legs, and half way down to his knees; bathe it and clap it well
in with your hand, presently after take the Blood and Salt, and bathe and clap
that upon the former; then set him up into the Stable to meat, and with a List
or Garter, tie both his Forelegs together as close as you can, a Girt or
Surcingle will serve to tie his Legs. The next day untie his Forelegs, take
him out and walk him, and if you see he go any thing well, take his back and
ride him gently a Mile, and set him up again, and tie his Fore-feet again, as
close as you did before; If he go not well the first day, do but walk him the
second day, and not ride him; and the third day after his first dressing, do
not only tie his Legs, but flat a stick on both sides in the fashion of a
wedge, about the breadth of a sixpence, take it and drive it in between the
Toes of his Shoes, and the Toe of his Foot fast, so that it may not come out,
and always whilst he stands still in the Stable, tie his Legs close, and peg
him with a Wedge, and when you walk or ride him abroad, untie his Legs and take
out the Wedge: do this every night and day till he grow sound, which will be
within two or three days, if it be a Strain newly taken: To let blood once,
and anoint it once with the Oil of Turpentine and Beer, and once with the
blood and salt, is enough with the help of tying his Legs together, and
driving in a wooden Wedge as you were before directed: For a vvrench in the
Shoulder, or when a Horse has pulled his Shoulder out of his place, and the
Shoulder is fallen the breadth of a man's hand or more, or if he be splayed on the
Shoulder, do nothing contrary to what you were directed before in this
Receipt, either for matter or manner; for if it be but lately done, it is as
speedy a Cure for the one as for the other. And if you do as you are here
directed, I am persuaded there is not a better or speedier way to be taken
under the Sun. I cannot give praises sufficient to the vvorth of it. Proved in
all.

CXVII. For an old Strain in the Shoulder.
THe foregoing direction in the last Receipt, is most incomparably certain,
for an old hurt in the Shoulder, and is for this as absolute a Cure in one
Weeks time as any is under the Sun. Proved.

CXVIII For the Hurl bone out of Joint, or a little miscarried.
THis Hurle-bone is much about the midst of the Buttock, and is very apt to go
out of the Socket with a slip or strain. The Oil of Turpentine and Beer is
mavelous good, used as before you were directed, for a Horse that has gotten
a mischance in the Hurle-bone: After you have shaked them together in the
Glass* take of it, and as near as you can, pour a little of it right over the
Socket of the Hurl-bone, the breadth of the palm of your hand, and rub it in
with your hand. It will make the skin to purse up and be very sore, and you
must anoint him on the bravvn and thick part of the inside of the Thigh, and so
down to the Stifle, and anoint him down to the very -- --.

In the time of the Cure, drive in a wooden Wedge in the contrary Foot
betvveen the Toe and the Shoe, and so let him stand day and night: If you see
your Horse mend and go better, you may then ride him every day, so as when you
set him into the Stable, you peg him with a Wooden Wedge, this course being
taken, will in a very fevv days cure him, and make him go complete.

Proved.

CXIX. For a stifle in the Stifling-bone.
IF your Horse be stifled that you see the stifling bone is out of his place;
then first, swim him in a Mill-pool for half an hour, till he sweat behind
his Ears, in which time or before, the bone will be in his place again: then
lead him gently home clothed, and keep him in the Stable vvarm; as soon as he
comes into the Stable, peg him on the contrary foot behind, all the time of his
Cure whilst he stands still in the house; and as soon as he is dry, take Soap
and Brandy mentioned in the foregoing Receipts, and lay it hot to the grieved
place, and heat it well in with a hot Iron, it will swell a little at first,
but it will soon fall; it will strengthen the grieved place much, and in a
short time it will be a perfect Cure: Or thus, you may for a stifle after
svvimming, peg him as soon as he comes into the stable, and so do alvvaies
when he stands in the house, and when he is dry rub in half an ounce of the
Oil of Turpentine, and as much strong Beer shaked together in a Glass. It will
cause it to swell something more than Soap and Brandy, but it is admirable for
a stifle, and a speedy Cure. Observe, that svvimming is not good for any
strain, but only to bring a stiflebone right into place again, and you may try
it for that, but not for a strain. The Beast must stand in the House all the
time of his Cure.

Proved.

CXX. A speedy Cure for a Sinew-strain, old or new.
FIrst, Let blood in the Shackle-veins, which are in the Pastern, for it will
much further the Cure: Then take the fattest Cat you can get, kill her, and
flea her as soon as you can possible, then bruise the flesh and bones of the
Cat small, and lay it upon a cloth, and bind it close to the Sinew-strain, from
the Pastern up the Legs, as far as it will go, and as warm as you can: you must
take out her Guts before you bruise her flesh, or lay it too; and you must,
after you have let blood in the Shackle-vein, bathe the Sinew-strain with
Aqua-vitae, and rub it in cold with your hand, and then afterward lay the
flesh of the Cat on a cloth to the place: Of all cures for a Sinew-strain this
is the best and speediest, wind a cloth two or three times about the Leg, when
you have laid the Cat on, to bind it on, because a Cat draws and knits
mightily: Let him not come into the Water till he be cured.

Proved.

CXXI. For a Poll-Evil in the Head of an Horse.
IF you take it at the first swelling, then do thus: Take half an Ounce of the
Oil of Turpentine, and anoint the swelling therewith, so far as it is swelled,
and let it sink in and take its course for four or five days, in which time
the skin will be shrunk up like a purse: At the four or five days end, if you
see the swelling begin to fall, then take Burgundy Pitch, and Black Pitch of
each two ounces, and one ounce of Mastick, put them into a Pipkin and melt
them; then take a flat stick and spread it all over the swelling, then take the
shearings of cloth or flocks, and do them thick on with your hand upon the
Pitch till it be hot, when your Plaster comes off, which it may be will be a
fortnight or a month. If then you see the Oil and the Plaster have killed the
venom of it, and taken down the swelling, then do no more to it. Again, if you
see, when your Plaster comes off, that it is much swelled, or that there be
proud flesh in it, then if it be not broken, lance it, and if there be any dead
or proud flesh in it cut it out, then fill the hole or wound with fine Tow,
Flax, or Hards, to dry the blood up; and there let it lie five or six hours,
then take it away, and put in some of the Medicine which you use for a Canker
in the Head, Face, Eyes, or Nostrils of a Horse, vide Receipt C. With this
Medicine dress it once a day at first, and as it begins to heal, dress it once
in two days; this Medicine will heal it suddenly; cut a hole at the edge or
lower part of the swelling, to lay it a draining, and it will heal a great deal
sooner, dab and throw on good store of Wheat-bran upon it when you lay it on,
when your Plaster comes off, look upon the top of the Poll-Evil, to see how
far the dead, proud, white, jelly flesh goes, cut it all out with your Incision
knife, till you come at the red flesh which is sound; the Veins will bleed
much, and spin again when you come at the quick; but let not that hinder you
from cutting out all the dead, proud flesh, which if you cut all out clean, you
cannot do amiss, only take heed you do not cut the white Paxwax, which runs
along the top of the Neck, which some call a Cress; it is white, and you may
easily see it; if you cut that, his Neck will fall and look basely, therefore
have a care. There is a white Pith in a Poll-evil near the top of the Neck by
the Paxwax, take your Nippers and pull it out, it will come out like a Plug,
there is no such thing in a Fistula; when you have pulled it out, put some of
your Medicine to it, and it will heal it apace: Let not the dead flesh be left
in the wound, but cut it clean out, although the wound seem never so broad: The
same cure and the same way is to be used for a Fistula; the Beast must stand in
the time of the Cure.

Proved.

CXXII. For a through Splent on both sides of the Leg, by some called a Great
Bone-S^rupin.
FIrst, Tie the Horses head close to a strong Post, then tie up his contrary
Leg, then bruise and beat the Splint on both sides with a Blood-stick, or
Bed-staff, beat it till it be something soft, if he will not endure the beating
of it standing, cast him with a rope; after you have beat it soft, Take of the
Oil of Riggrum 12 pennyworth, and rub it on with your fingers on both sides,
upon the very splent and no where else; you shall have of this Oil but a little
for a shilling. Tie up his head for two or three hours; for it will smart, and
tie up his contrary Leg, this way will take off the Hair a little, but it will
grow again of the same color presently: If it be never so big, do but thus two
or three times, and within a weeks time it will be quite fallen, one dressing
will serve for a small Splent, or for a blood Splent; this way will a little
break the hair, but not the skin. If you will, you may turn him out. Proved to
be admirable.

CXXIII. For a Mallender.
FIrst, Clip away the hair which grows upon it, and about it, then rub the
Scabs off with a Hair-cloth, or the back of your Scissars, or Knife; this
rubbing of it will cause it to run a yellow matter, take a Linen Cloth, and
wipe away the filth clean, then take four pennyworth of the Oil of Riggrum,
and mix it with a little of your own Dung, and lap it on with a flat stick upon
a Linen Cloth, and bind it to for a Week, then make it clean, and dress it
again, and it is a Cure. After your first dressing, you may ride him or turn
him out. Proved.

CXXIV. For a looseness in the Body of any Beast.
TAke a pint of Red-wine, or for want thereof a pint of Claret, warm it in a
Wine-pot upon the fire, then put an Ounce of beaten Cinnamon therein, and give
him it a little warm, you may put thereto the yolks of two new laid Eggs, once
or twice is a Cure; give him warm Water at night, and cold Water next day, and
ride him upon it. Proved.

CXXV. For a Cold in Summer, or when a Horse does not fill.
Boil a quarter of Red-stone Sugar in a pint of Sack, till it be dissolved, and
then take it off the fire, and put in two spoonfuls of Sallet Oil, and give it
lukewarm: ride hard when you have given it unto him: Give him warm Water for
three or four days after, keep him warm, give him now and then a Mash.

Proved.

CXXVI. For a sudden great heat, as in Hunting, Racing, or hard Riding, that
the Horses Grease is melted.
THis you shall know by the panting of the Horse that Night he comes in so hot,
for if he be over-ridden and his Grease melted, you shall know it by his
panting at the Breast, and Girting-place, and heaving at the Flank; you shall
see the Night he comes in, and the next day morning, that his Body will be
mighty hot: For Remedy, Take and give this, to purge him and cleanse him, and
to qualify the heat and working of his Body: Take one pint of Sack, and put to
it one ounce of Diascordium, beaten small, mix them together, and give it to
the Beast at any time cold, but in the morning fasting is the best; give him
warm Water for three or four days after; give him bursten Oats, boiled Barley,
and Mashes made of ground Malt, keep him well littered, and clothed warm. If he
forsake his meat, and you see he has lost his stomach, to bring him to his
stomach again* give him two ounces of Honey, and half a pint of Whitewine mixed
together, and heated lukewarm; in the morning, after he has drank cold water,
you may give him it with a Horn: It will make him piss, clear his bladder, and
bring him to his stomach again. After you have given him it, ride him a mile or
two gently, and set him up warm, at night ride him a mile or two again, and
litter him well, and keep him warm: Thus do for three or four days, or a week;
at three days end, give him the Wine and Honey as before you were directed: If
you see, notwithstanding all these means used, that he will not fall to his
meat, and that he is bound in his belly, and dungs very small; then give him
this Cordial two or three times, in two or three days, betwixt each Cordial
giving. Take three pints of stale Beer, household brown Bread, the quantity of
half a penny Loaf, boil these two well together, then take it off the fire: and
put into it a quarter of a pound of Honey, and a quarter of a pound of fresh
Butter, give him this Cordial lukewarm fasting, and ride him a mile or two
every Evening and Morning, as well when you do not give it to him, as when you
do; ride him fairly* and clothe and litter him up vvarm: this Cordial will
bring him to his stomach, and cause him to be loose bodied, and dung soft,
although he be vveak, and have little or no stomach, four or five hours after
his Cordial, the first thing you give him, boil him half a peck of Oats, and a
pound of Fenygreek together in water till they be burst, and the water
wherein these were boiled, pour it from the Oats into another Payl, and put
some cold water to it, and when he drinks let him drink of this water; for
the Oats and Fenygreek, throvv some of them into the Manger hot, and if he be
loath to eat them, then strevv some Wheat-bran upon it, and it is very likely he
will eat all together: This course taken in every particular, will bring your
Horse to a stomach, and raise him suddenly. Look the Receipt follovving for a
dry Surfeit, and when the Horse's Cods are swelled, and he runs at the Nose; and
there you shall see the purge of Aloes. A fortnight or three vveeks after he is
thus melted, and that you have given him the former things, to give him this
Purge of Aloes, will do the Beast a great deal of good in this case: I am
confident it is good: Or give him as much of the powder of Mechoacan, as will
lie upon a shilling at three or four times, that is very good in a pint of
Wine, or a quart of strong Ale. Proved.

CXXVII. For a Foundred Horse.
FIrst, tie a List or Blood-cord hard about the Pastern, and that will keep the
Blood up into his Leg, that it cannot come down into his Foot, when you have
taken out the Soal, set on his Shoe something hollow and broad, then untye the
string about the Pastern, and knock the outside of the Hoof, and the blood
will come pouring out: Let him bleed well, then put a handful of Salt into the
bottom of the foot, and put as many Hards, Flax, or Tow after it, as will fill
the bottom of the Foot, take two or three flat sticks, and lay them between the
Hards and the Shoe, a piece of stiff Soal-Leather will do as well; at the end
of 24 hours take the Hards away, and take a handful of Nettle-tops, and a
handful of Salt, and beat them together, and lay them to the bottom of the
Foot, and to keep them in, take Hards and Splinters, as you were directed
before; at forty hours end, take the Hards away, and apply the same quantity of
Nettles and Salt, mixed with as much Hogs Grease as contains to an Egg, and
beat them altogether in a Mortar, and lay them to the Soal of the foot, and
Hards and Splinters as before* with this last Medicine you may dress his foot
once or twice more if you see cause; after you see the Horse goes a little
well, set on another Shoe, formed with a broad Web, and let it stand broad and
easy, and in ten days time the Horse will go very well and sound: when you
come at your journeys end, wash his Legs clean, and when his Legs are dry, make
a Poultis of a quarter of a pint of Whitewine Vinegar, and a quarter of a pound
of Sheepskidney Suet cut very small: Let these two boil a pretty while in a
Skellet, and when it comes off the fire, put two or three handfuls of Wheatbran
to it, and stir them all together, and make it thick like a Poultis, and lay it
to the bottom of the foot; then Hards and Splinters as before you were
directed; then spread the rest of the Poultis upon a long piece of Linen Cloth
and lay it hot to the hair round about the top of the Hoof and the Foot-lock,
and let it come under the bottom of the Hoof, lay it to as hot as you can; let
every Poultis lie on forty eight hours: Three or four Poultisses laid to in
this manner, will do the Horse much good, and cause his foot to grow and shoot
out, and give him much ease, so as in a very short time he will go very sound.
If an Horse be bruised in the bottom of his foot with a stone, or any other
thing, this Poultis will give present ease: For a foundring, the Beast must
stand in till the bottom of his foot be grown again. I hold it best to take out
but one soal at a time, because if you take out both at a time, the Horse will
not be able to stand: Some take out Frush and all, some take out nothing but
the bare Soal, and leave the Frush. The way is, first cord the Pastern, then
pare the Soal, and then raze it round about the Soal to the quick, as near the
inside of the outward shell of the Hoof as you can with a drawing knife, then
raise the Soal at the Toe, then lay hold with a pair of Pincers; and pull it
quite out, but beware you break not the Veins in the foot.

Proved.

CXXVIII. For a Back swanckt in the Fillet of the Loin: or for a Wrench in the
Backbone, about the Navel place: or for a strain in the Kidneys, by being
over-burthened in the Hinder-parts, or over-strained in the Kidneys in
Race-running.
IF you see any of these mischances to fall upon the Back or Hinder parts of
your Beast, then do thus and no otherwise, for all those mischances
above-written. Take a hot Sheeps-skin fleaed of a Sheep newly killed, apply it
as hot as you can, with the fleshy side from his Rump, all over to the midst of
his Backbone, if it will reach so far: Let it lie on twenty four hours, and at
the end of that time, lay another hot Sheeps-skin in the same manner to it, if
need require, and you see the first will not do: Let the grief be never so
great, two hot skins will do it, with the help of the Drink next under written;
but if the hurt be not great, the Sheeps-skin will do it alone. It will make
the Horse to sweat much, it will draw out all the bruise, and strengthen the
back of the Horse exceedingly in a short time: But if your Horse be so weak
that he cannot stand nor go, then take a Sack or two, and Ropes, and throw them
over a Balk, and hang him for nine or ten days; when you first hang him, clap
a hot Sheeps-skin to his Rump and Back for twenty four hours, and at the end of
the time, lay another hot Sheeps-skin to, and then no more: In the time of this
Cure, give him this Drink if the strain be great: If it be but small, this
Drink can do no hurt, but a great deal of good: Take Polygonatum commonly
called Solomon's Seal, you may have it at the Apothecaries, but it is dear;
take ten roots of it that may weigh three ounces, Polypodium of the Oak a
quarter of a pound, two handfuls of Wood-betony, or for want thereof, as much
Garden-betony, cut it small, and if the roots be dry, beat them to powder; if
they be green cut them thin; then take a Gallon of strong Beer, or somewhat
more, put it into a Kettle, and put the other three things to it, and let them
boil till the Beer be boiled half away, then take them off the fire, and put
into it a quarter of a pound of Butter, and a quarter of a pound of Honey, and
give the Horse of this to drink three times in nine days, in the morning
fasting, and give him warm Water to drink all the while, with a handful of Bran
put into it: give him of this Drink a quart at a time. Buy of these Roots
green, dry them, and beat them small, and keep them from wind and air for your
use: If you cannot get the root of Solomon's Seal, make use of the other
things, they may do well without, but better with it. Let him stand in the time
of the Cure. To this Drink you may add Pennyroyal, Clarey and Comfrey, they
are all knitting and strengthening Herbs.

Proved.

CXXIX. For a new Wound made with a Stake, or such like thing, Stub or Fork.
First, wash the Wound well with Butter and Vinegar melted together, then take
a Clout and tie it about a sticks end, and dip it in some Linseed Oil, and run
it to the bottom of the wound, anoint it well, and in a short time nothing but
this will heal it and kill the Gangrene of it. If the Wind get into the Wound,
and cause it to swell, anoint it with the Oil of Populeon round about the
swelling: Train-oyl and Verdigrease melted together, will heal and skin any
Wound well and quickly. Proved.

CXXX. For a Stub in the Foot or Heel: For an overreach with the Toe of the
Afterfoot, upon the Heel of the Fore-foot: A Tread or Cut above the Hair, or
when a Stone has cut a Horses Leg.
FIrst, wash the Wound with fair Water, or with Water and Salt: when the Wound
is dry, take a big Onyon, or two or three small ones to the bigness of a great
one, a spoonful of Pepper beaten small, as much Crown-sope as the bigness of an
Egg, these three things must be beaten to a Salve, and laid upon a
Linen Cloth, and laid to the Wound four and twenty hours, and at the end of
that time dress it as you did before, and so continue doing every four and
twenty hours till it be whole: If this quantity of Medicine be too little,
make more: As you see it heal, dress it but once in two or three days. This
Onyon Salve will prevent a Quitterbone, if you lay it to before it break. This
Salve is good to heal and cure all these hurts.

Proved.

CXXXI. For a Horse that is pricked in the shooing, and afterward festred.
FIrst, open it well, and take out all the corruption to the very bottom, so
far as the Nayl did go, then take three or four House-snails, a little Salt, as
much Soap as a Walnut, beat them altogether, and lay it to the place that was
pricked four and twenty hours, till you see it begin to heal, then dress it but
once in two days; and in three or four dressings it will be whole: When you
lay this Medicine to the bottom of the foot, lay some Flax, Hards or Tow over
it, and over that a piece of Leather or Splinters to keep the Hards and
Medicine in: And if it break out, or be soft above the top of the Hoof, lay
some of this Medicine to, and bind it on with a Linen rag. Proved.

CXXXII. For a Horse that is pricked with a long Channel Nail.
FIrst, search it with your Buttris and drawingknife, till you find where the
Channel Nail went in, open it well and give it all the ease you can, search it
to the bottom with a little Tow at your Instruments end, then drop ten or
twelve drops of the Oil of Turpentine into the hole, take a little Tow or fine
Lint at your Instruments end, and dip it in the Oil of Turpentine, and put it
in Tent-waies, then mix a little Crown-sope, a little Salt, and a little Pepper
beaten together, and lay it over the former, and Tow or Hards over it, and a
piece of Leather and Splinters over it to keep it in: The Shoe must be taken
off when you dress it, and after to set it on again, dress it once in four and
twenty hours, till it be whole. If you find that after three or four times
dressing, that the Horse is in great pain still, and that you fear a breaking
out above the hoof, then take out the Soal of his Foot, and apply the Medicine
in order, as you were directed for a foundred Horse in Receipt CXXVII. Do with
this just as you are there directed, to make the Soal come again; after his
Foot begins to grow again, take as much Hogs Grease as an Egg, and the like
quantity of Burgundy Pitch, mix them together, and lay a pretty quantity
thereof in the bottom of the Hoof, and lay Hards or Tow over that, and a piece
of Leather or Splinters over it, as you were formerly directed. Dress it every
day for three or four days: this Grease and Pitch will much nourish his Foot,
and strengthen it and keep it from drying up. Let him stand in the time of his
Cure, and then if you please you may turn him out abroad. Proved.

CXXXIII. For a Brittle Hoof.
LAy the Poultis to the bottom and top of the Hoof and Foot, as you have
directions for a Foundred Horse, in Receipt CXXVII. Lay that Poultis to, and in
three or four times dressing, it will make his brittle Hoof tough and hard as
you can desire. Let him stand in the time of his Cure. Proved.

CXXXIV. For an Horses Yard, foul and furred without, so that he pisses in the
Cod.
TAke some fresh Butter and Whitewine Vinegar, and melt them, then pull out his
Yard, and do off the filth with your hand, and wash it with the Butter and
Vinegar till it be clean, squirt some of it into his Yard with a Syringe, it
will much help him in this particular.

Proved.

CXXXV. When a Horse does not thrive, and when his Coat stands staring and does
not lie smooth: For an inward dry Surfeit, that causes the Cods to swell,
sometimes continually, and sometimes betwixt times. When the Grease is melted,
and afterward set and dried in his Body, and his Legs sometimes swelled. For
an Horse that is Gaunt and will not fill, or is Gut-foundred, when he is
Costive in Body and Dungs small. To procure a Stomach. The following Directions
are admirable good for all these following Distempers.
FIrst, make your Purge thus: Take an ounce of fine Aloes, the best is that
which shines and glisters, an ounce will cost you a shilling, beat it to
powder, take a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, bray and mix these two well
together, and put a handful of Wheat-bran to it, to make it stiff like a piece
of Dough or Paste, then roll it up in Balls made big in the midst, and sharp at
both ends, this quantity will make four or five Balls; then hold up his Head
with a Drenching-stick, and take his Tongue in your Left Hand; and put in one
Ball to the root of his Tongue if you can, that he may swallow it the better;
put your finger under his Tongue, then give him a Hornful of strong Beer cold
after it; then give him a second Ball, and a Hornful of Beer to wash it down,
and so do in like manner by all the rest, then ride him a Mile gently, and set
him up warm; Let him not eat not drink for five or six hours after it, then
give him a little clean Hay at Night, not before, and some warm Water to drink,
with some Wheat-bran put into it; the next Morning give him warm Water to drink
in the same manner, and ride him a Mile gently, and tie him to the Rack for an
hour after, then you may give him what meat he will eat, at Night warm Water
and Bran again; the third day in the Morning after he has done purging, give
him cold Water, and before you ride him after his cold Water, give him two
ounces of Honey, and half a pint of White Wind heated a little warm, to make him
piss and to clear his bladder, and to beget a stomach; then ride him a Mile or
two gently, and at Night air him again, and so do Morning and Evening till he
be well, litter him well, and keep him warm: If you see that after his Purge,
and after you have given him the Honey and Whitewine, he do not fall to his
meat, but is still bound in his body, and dungs very small, then give him this
Cordial fasting two or three times, and let there be two or three days betwixt
each Cordial giving. It is thus made; Take three pints of stale Beer, course
Household bread the quantity of half ae penny Loaf, when these two are well
boiled together, take it off the fire, and put into it a quarter of a pound of
Honey, and a quarter of a pound of fresh Butter, give him all these together as
a Cordial lukewarm, then ride him a mile after it, and set him up warm, and tie
him up to the Rack for three or four hours after it, then give him a Mash of
bursten Oats or Barley, and warm Water with Wheat-bran in it, till the Horse be
come to his stomach, and be loose bodied again, which in two or three times
giving he will be: The foregoing Purge is admirable good for a dry Surfeit, and
for a Horse that is bound in his body, and dungs small: The Cordial with
Whitewine and Honey, is admirable good for a Horse that is weak, and has little
stomach, to bring him to a stomach again: When at any time for the fore going
Diseases, you give a Mash of bursten Oats, to half a peck boil a quarter of a
pound of Fenygreek with them, and put some of them into the Manger hot, if he
be loath to eat them, because of the taste of the Fenygreek, throw some
Wheat-bran over them, and he will eat them; this is the only way to bring your
Horse to a stomach, and raise him suddenly: Concerning his swelled Cods, and
swelled Legs, as soon as his Purge has done working, take the Charge of Soap
and Brandy, and dab it on his swelled Cods, or swelled Legs, with a flat stick
as it comes boiling hot off the fire; three or four days after it has taken
its course, whilst he stands in the house, take and ride him into the River up
to his Saddle-skirts, with the stream and against it, half a quarter of an hour
at a time, wash him thus once every day, or twice, till you see the swelling
quite down his Cods or Legs, which will be in very few days, once laying on
the Charge is enough. If it be a dry Surfeit, give the Purge first, and
afterward the Cordial, of Whitewine and Honey: But if he have a Cold, and run
at the Nostrils, then first give him the following Drink made of Anniseeds,
Turmerick, Brandy or Aqua-vitae, Vinegar and Beer, and three days after give
him the Purge, and if you see his stomach to fail him, give him the Cordial;
when a Horse is fat and lusty, and then melted, and the Grease set within him,
in this case use the Purge first: But if he be fat and sick both together, then
give him the Whitewine and Honey and Cordials, as you are before in this Receipt
directed, to bring him to a stomach first, and when you have done that, then
give him the Purge, and order him after it as you are there directed. If there
be hard Kernels between his Jaws or Chaps at the same time, the Charge of Soap
and Brandy laid hot upon them, and heated well in, in once doing it will either
sink them flat, or break them: And if they break, wash them with Butter and
Vinegar, and let them heal up of themselves. All proved to be good and certain.

CXXXVI. For a moist, hot, running Surfeit, that falls out of his Body into his
Forelegs, and sometimes into his After-legs, and sometimes into all four.
THis Surfeit comes with Colds and Heats, which are diverse ways taken; when it
falls out of his Body into his Legs, and runs hot, moist, white, yellow, thin,
thick, stinking Water or Matter, in this case, the Horses breath will stink and
smell very strong, and his Legs will swell and stink extremely, when this
Surfeit breaks in his Body and falls down into his Legs, at his first going out
of the Stable, he will hardly draw his Legs over the Threshold, and he will be
so stiff that he can hardly stir in the Stable, but will hold up his Leg to his
Midribs, and although this Disease be never so violent in breaking out, or
causing his Legs to swell and run, yet you need not fear Remedy for him, if you
observe these Directions following. First, keep him fasting all the Night
before, or give him but a very little meat, to keep his jaws from falling; the
next day in the Morning before he drink, let him blood on both the Neck-veins,
and let him bleed well, then uncord him, and give him this Drink following,
which will much purge and dry up his gross humors in his body, and cleanse his
blood: Take one ounce of Aristolochia, one ounce of Turmerick, one ounce of
Anniseeds dry, and beat the Turmerick and Anniseeds small, and grate the root
of Aristolochia; put all these together, with one handful of Rue, and a handful
of Wormwood green or dry, and one handful of Red-sage, one handful of green
Fennel, if it be Winter that you cannot get green, then take two ounces of
Fennel-seeds, and beat them small, and put to the rest of the things, and all
put into an earthen pot or pan, and put to them three pints of running and
Spring Water, and there let them lie in steep all Night; the next Morning
before you give it to him, ride him a Mile till he be a little warm, and give
it to him cold as it stood all night, then after that ride him a Mile again,
and let him stand upon the bit six or seven hours, and then give him a little
Hay, and after that warm Water and Bran; the next Morning ride him to the
River, let him drink but once a day, and ride him two or three Miles after it:
At three days end give him the former Drink fasting, and follow the Directions
before named in this Receipt; and so continue doing, by giving the former Drink
at every three days end, till you see you have dried up the gross humors in
his body, and caused them to cease running and swelling; you may work him three
or four hours in a day to get him a stomach; let it be in Winter or Summer;
keep him in the house with dry meat; when he is cured you may turn him out:
Wash his Legs clean in some River up to the Hams, and keep his Legs as cool as
you can all the time of the cure: One or two of these Drinks given at three
days distance, will dry up the humors in his body, which feed the swellings
in his Legs, Cods, or elsewhere; these Drinks will make him run at the Nose
white or yellow: If he fall from his meat, you may the third day after his
Drink give him a Cordial, as it is set down in the foregoing Receipt; and then
a Drink, and then a Cordial of White Wind and Honey: Now if there be great
Chaps or Crannies in his Legs, as it is a hundred to one but there will, by
reason of the extreme heat and continual running of the moist fretting humor,
to heal them up although never so big, yea though the Sinews were almost rotted
with the filth; to prevent which, and to heal it also, take this gallant
Receipt following which is for Pains and Scratches, and if it were never so
ill, in a short time it will heal it. The way to order the Horse and make the
Salve is thus: In this case you must not ride him into the River or Water at
all, but you must first take two or three payls of fair Water and wash his Legs
clean, then clip away all the Hair close to the Skin, so far as his Legs are
Crannied or Scabby, then wash his Legs clean with another Payl of fair Water,
and let him stand till his Legs be dry, then take half a pound of Honey, an
ounce of beaten Pepper, and ten heads of Garlic, beat them well altogether in
a Bowl till they come to a Salve, divide this Salve into two parts, spread the
one half upon half a sheet of gray Paper, and the other half upon the other
half sheet of Paper, then take a broad piece of Linnencloth and lay it upon the
Paper, and so lay the Plaster to the Crannied place, and the cloth over it,
and sew it on fast, that it may not come off, let this Plaster lie on two
days, make a small Thumb-band of Hay, and wind it about his Legs and over the
Plaster for two days, at the end of which take all off, and take a
Linnencloth and wipe the Chaps of every Cranny in his Legs or Heels clean, and
then lay on a fresh Plaster, and do as you did before, in three or four times
dressing it thus, it will be whole: He must not come into the Water all the
time of his Cure. If you have an Horse that his Sinews are rotten, broken or
cut, or much putrified, then apply none but this Medicine to it, and it will
draw, cleanse, and knit them together again. It is for a Sinew in this nature,
the best cure in the World. After you have thus drencht him inwardly, and cured
the swelling of his Legs outwardly: If you see he look gaunt, and has no
stomach to his meat, and do not fill and thrive well, if he be sick and weakly,
give him Whitewine and Honey, the Cordials mentioned in the foregoing Receipts,
to bring him to his stomach again, then and not before give the Purge of Aloes:
But if your Horse be gaunt, and girt up in his Body, if he be in any heart, and
will eat his meat, in this case give the Purge first, and then your White Wind
and Honey, and your Cordials, as you are directed in the foregoing Receipts, to
bring him to his stomach: If you do as you are here directed, all along
throughout the whole Receipt in every particular, you need not question but,
through Gods blessing, you shall have the desired success you look for. All
Proved.

CXXXVII. To make a Horse Stale free, and constantly.
TAke half a pint of White Wind, one ounce of Ivy-berries beaten to powder, and
put to the Whitewine, let it lie in steep all night, then give it to the Horse
next morning fasting, do not heat it at all, but ride him after it a mile or
two, then tie him up to the Rack, two, three, or four hours after it: This is
very good for the Wind-colick, and to make a Horse piss freely, do this every
morning till you see him piss free; this will cleanse the Kidneys of all sand
and filth; it is very good for the Stone and Gravel. These Berries you must
gather when they are black-ripe, which is about Lent or Shrovetide, if you
gather them green, or when they are full ripe, put them in a platter, and dry
them in the Sun till they be fit to beat to powder, and give them as you were
directed: It is as good for a Christian as for a Horse: Nettleseeds is a great
provoker of Urine, you may put a handful to the Berries and Wine. Proved.

CXXXVIII. To cure the Vives under the roots of the Ears.


FIrst, Let him blood on both sides of his Neck, then clap a pair of Barnacles
upon his Nose, and take a red hot Iron, with the edge as thick as the back of
your Knife, and with it make a strike from the root of the Ears upon the middle
of the Swelling, downwards to the lowest part of the Swelling in this manner,
as this figure directs you, three strikes from the long; burn it till the skin
be yellow, and then sear it no more, when it is thus seared, anoint the
Swelling with a little Butter or Hogs Grease, if you anoint it once or twice,
it is enough; if you sear him deep you must anoint him the oftener.

Proved.

CXXXIX. For the Squinsey, or Strangling, or Cold that breaks out at the Nose,
and has run a year.
THe Squinsey breeds the Canker in the Mouth, and at the roots of the Tongue:
At that time the Horse has in his Wesand pipe and Stomach, a great deal of
tough, thick phlegm, and when he cougheth much, as he will, thinking to void it,
it will come in lumps into his mouth, and he will swallow it down again, and at
that time his breath will be very hot, and his Mouth very red, and if he have a
Canker in his Throat, or at the root of his Tongue, or in his Mouth, you shall
discern it smell by the heat and stinking breath. To cure the Canker, See
Receipt C. and there is also the Receipt, and here also will cause a present
Cure. Now to cure the Strangling, or a Cold that runs at the Nose, or has done
for half a year or more, or Squinsey when he is troubled with tough thick
phlegm: For these three last mentioned, take these following Ingredients, and
give them as you are directed: First, one ounce of Anniseeds, an ounce of
Turmerick beaten to powder, half a quartern of Brandy or Aqua-vitae, half a
dozen spoonfuls of Whitewine or Vinegar, a pint and an half of strong Beer, put
all these into a Skellet, and heat them blood-warm, and give it to the Beast
fasting, then presently run the point of the Cornet-horn into the third furrow
in the roof of his Mouth, and let him bleed, then walk him a mile and set him
up. Clothe and Litter him warm. Let him stand upon the Bit four or five hours,
he will sweat with his Drink till one drop follow another. If you see he be
sick and desirous to lie down, you may let him: Give him no Mashes but only
warm Water to drink, with an handful or two of Wheat-bran put into it, and the
next Morning warm Water and Bran again; and presently after give him two ounces
of Honey, and half a pint of Whitewine; or half a pint of Wine-vinegar, if you
have not Whitewine, walk him a Mile after it: The third day in the Morning
after this Drink, in the beginning of the Receipt, give him this Cordial; three
pints of stale Beer, Houshold-bread a piece as big as a great Tossed, and crum it
in, a quarter of a pound of Butter, put them into a Skellet together, and heat
them a little upon the fire, and when you take it off, put in a quarter of a
pound of Honey, stir them together, and give it him blood-warm fasting; then
ride him a mile, and set him up warm clothed and littered. Three or four hours
after, give him warm Water and Bran to drink: Every two or three days for a
Cold, whether it cause the Beast to run at the Nose or no, or be in Glanders.
In course of Physic, after his drink, give him this Cordial to bring him to a
stomach, it will help to kill the Canker in his mouth or throat, clear the
Guts, and cleanse the Lights; with one drink of Whitewine and Honey, and these
Cordials, he will be in a very short time cleared and cured. If in the time of
his Cure, he has hard Kernels between his Jaws, apply the Charge of Soap and
Brandy, which will either quite sink them, or break them. Again, if there be
not Kernels, but hard swellings in the Jaws; as most part there is when he has
the Strangling; in this case also apply the Charge of Soap and Brandy, and heat
it well in: If this Swelling do break in the time of the Cure, let it run and
heal up of it self: If the Swelling between his Jaws be soft all over, and in
the midst of the Swelling the hair begins to scale off, you may then put in the
point of your Knife a little way through the skin, and let it out; if it be not
full ripe, it will heal up with proud rank flesh, and there will be a knot
between his Jaws, which is an ugly blemish; therefore heal it up with nothing,
but let it heal up of it self. In the time of any of these Cures, air and ride
him out two or three times every day, it will do him abundance of good, if you
do not ride him too hard, but gently. If that which comes out of his Nose be
yellowish, and afterward turns white, there is hope of perfecting the Cure;
the Drink will make him swell, and be very sick, but it will do him a great
deal of good.

Proved.

CXL. For a Horse that has a dry Surfeit in his Body, and falls away in his
Flesh: That has a weak Cough, and is in a Consumption.
THe Signs of this Disease are, He will not thrive but be gaunt-bellied, and
dried up in his Body, and cannot cough but gruntingly, by reason of the Cold
and Surfeit, and great soreness in his Body: The Remedy is this, First, ride him
a mile, and then let him blood in the bottom of the belly, at the lower end of
all the Spurvein, after he has bled well, give him this Drink, one ounce of
Anniseeds, half an ounce of Diapente, four pennyworth of English Saffron, one
ounce of Syrup of Coltsfoot, one ounce of brown Sugar Candy, one ounce of
Bay Berries, four or five spoonfuls of Whitewine Vinegar, a pint and a half of
strong Beer, put all these into a Skellet, and heat them lukewarm, and give it
to the Beast fasting, and ride him two or three furlongs after it; then tie him
up to the Rack, and let him fast five or six hours after his Drink, and clothe
and litter him up very warm; then unbit him, and give him a little sweet Hay
till night, then give him warm Water and Bran to Drink. The next day in the
morning before he eat or drink, burst half a peck of Oats, with two ounces of
Fenygreek, two ounces of Coriander-seeds for want of Coriander, two ounces of
Caraway-seeds, burst them altogether well, and give him them before he eat or
drink. And at noon give him warm Water and Bran, and after three or four days
end, give him this drink after the first drink: One ounce of Anniseeds beaten
small, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun, an handful of unset Leeks cut small,
two quarts of mild Beer, boil all these together in a Skellet till half be
consumed, then take out all the Raisins, and beat them in a Mortar, stones and
all, take some of the Liquor wherein they were boiled, and wash the Mortar
clean therewith, and put it again into the Kettle amongst the rest, then take
the Kettle off, and put in as much Butter as an Egg, and let it melt, and give
him this drink fasting, walk him a furlong or two, and tie him up to the Rack
for five or six hours, and clothe and litter him up warm, then give him Hay,
and at Night warm Water and Bran: The next day have in readiness some Oats,
Coriander-seeds, or for want of them, some Caraway-seeds, burst them together
by eleven or twelve a Clock, and throw some of them into the Crib, as you were
directed before, and if he refuse to eat them, strew some Wheat-bran over them,
and that will cause him to eat them, give him but a few at a time. After this
second Drink given, you shall see the Horse within two or three days, to void
at the Nose yellow Glanders, or some other color; ride him moderately twice a
day, and keep him warm in the Stable. And two or three days after you have
given him this last Drink and warm Water, then and not before, water him at the
River, and presently after it give him every Morning two ounces of Honey, and
half a pint of Whitewine mixed together, heated lukewarm, you may give it him
abroad or in the Stable, it matters not where; once in three or four days
fasting, you may give him a Cordial, made of Beer, Honey, Bread, and Butter, the
very same, and you must so order it, as you were directed in the foregoing
Receipt. And these Drinks, Honey and White Wind, and your Cordials, will make
him come to his stomach in a short time, and thrive very much, put the Water
wherein the Oats and Seeds were burst, into a Payl of cold Water, and let him
drink of that as much as you can: when an Horse is fat, and the Grease set in
his body, if he have a stomach, then give the Purge of Aloes first, but if he
be fat and sick, and has no stomach, then give him Honey and Whitevvine, and
his Cordials first, and afterward his Purge of Aloes. Proved*

CXLI. For the Yellows.
THe Signs are, his Eyes will be stripped with red, and be yellow, and his
Lips will be pimpled and look yellow: The Cure is, Let him blood on both his
Neck-veins; after that, give him this Drink; one ounce of Turmerick and
Anniseeds beaten small, a quarter of a pint of Whitewine Vinegar, half a
quarter of a pint of Aqua-vitae, put them all into a Skellet, and heat it
lukewarm and give it to the Beast; put a spoonful of the flower of Brimstone,
into the first Horn-full that you give him, pour it down his Throat, and then
give him all the rest of the Drink, one Horn-full after another; tie him up to
the Rack for three or four hours, and then give him wet clean Hay, and at night
Water and Bran, or a Mash: If you have not the aforesaid things in a readiness
by you, then give him an ounce of Horse-spice, which you shall find mentioned
in the following Receipts, and there you shall find how to make it, and for
what to give it, and when, and likewise how to keep it by you: If one Drink be
not enough, give him the second; if he do not fall to his meat at three days
end, give him a Cordial or two, warm Water for the first day and no more, and
cold Water afterward: Two or three days after his Drink, work him moderately;
If you cannot get Turmerick, take an handful of Selendine: if one Drink will
not, two will cure him. Proved.

CXLII. For the Staggers.
IT comes at first of some corrupt blood, or gross or tough humors oppressing
the brain, from whence proceeds a vaporous spirit, dissolved by a weak heat,
which troubles all the head: The Signs be these, Dimness of Sight, reeling and
staggering to and fro, he with very pain will thrust his head against the
Walls, and forsake his meat: For Remedy, do these things in order as you are
here directed: First, take a pretty long straight stick, of the bigness of a
Tobacco-pipe, smooth it well, and cut a notch or crotch at one end, then run up
the stick to the top of his head, and job a little hard and turn the stick,
then pull it out, and he will bleed freely. It is bad to cord him about the
Neck in this Disease; when he has bled well in the head, give him this Drink,
an ounce of Anniseeds, an ounce of Turmerick beaten small, half a quarter of a
pint of Aqua-vitae, a pint and a half of mild Beer, a pint of Verjuyce, or if
you have not Verjuyce, then take a quarter of a pint of Whitewine Vinegar, and
put it to the Beer, and all the rest together, and heat them lukewarm, and give
it to the Beast in the morning before he drink, as soon as you have given it
him, take a handful of Herbgrace and beat it small in a Mortar, a pennyworth of
Aqua-vitae, and put half the Aqua-vitae into one Ear, holding it upright in the
hollow of your hand, and put half the Herbgrace after it, and put Wool, Tow, or
Hards after it to keep it in, then tie up the Ear with a Woollen List or
Garter, and so do the like with the other Ear, stitch up his Ears with a Needle
and Thread, or otherwise with your List tie up both his Ears together, and at
twenty four hours end, unstitch or untye his Ears, and take out the Wool and
Herbgrace; the next day in the morning, let him blood on both sides his Neck,
and save of the blood a pint or more, which you may do in a Bowl, and put
thereto a handful of Salt, and stir it well together, and give it the Horse
fasting, four or five hours after give him sweet Hay, and at Night warm Water
and Bran: after you have given him the first Drink, tie up one of his
Forelegs, and strew good store of Litter under him, and he will lie down and
take his rest, and come to himself within a day or two, or else be soon dead;
the Vinegar will make him piss, and the Aqua-vitae will make him sleep, if he
comes not to his stomach with taking the Vinegar or Verjuyce before mentioned,
then give him Honey and White Wind, and the Cordial; as you are directed in the
Receipt for a dry Surfeit. After any sickness, give him when he comes to eat his
Provender, Bran and Pease, or Bran and Beans; when you let him blood in the
Head with your Cornet-horn, let him blood in the third furrow of his Mouth, and
let him bleed well, and let him blood in the gristle of his Nose, with a long
Bodkin, or Shoo-makers Awl.

CXLIII. For a cold newly taken.
TAke half an ounce of Diapente, two pennyworth of Sallet-oyl, and two
pennyworth of Treacle, put them into a pint and a half of strong Beer, and give
it to the Beast lukewarm fasting, give him warm Water for two days, and a Mash
of ground Malt, and keep him warm in the time of the Cure. Proved.

CXLIV. For an old Cold, which causes the Horse to run sometimes at one
Nostril, and sometimes at both, and has done for a year together, and is
knotted with Kernels under his Throat between his Jaws.
THe Cure is thus: Take an ounce of Turmerick, an ounce of Anniseeds, beat them
small, one ounce of Lignum-vitae, you shall have it at the Apothecaries, a
quarter of a pint of Aquavitae, a quarter of a pint of Whitewine Vinegar, one
handful of un-set Leeks beaten small in a Mortar, wash the Mortar with Beer,
put all these together with a pint and a half of strong Beer; give them to the
Beast fasting lukewarm, and tie him up to the Rack six or seven hours, and
litter and clothe him up warm; at the end of that time, give him a little sweet
Hay, and at night give him some warm Water and Bran; the next morning give him
warm Water and Bran again, and presently after, give him two ounces of Honey,
and half a pint of Whitewine lukewarm; then ride him three or four miles after
it, cloth and litter him warm when he comes in; whilst he is abroad, boil him
half a peck of Oat, with two ounces of Fennygreek, and two ounces of
Coriander-seeds, burst them altogether, and give it him; the third day morning,
give him a Cordial made of three pints of stale Beer, a quarter of a pint of
Honey, as much Butter, a good piece of Houshold-bread, put in the Honey and
Butter after the Bread and Beer is boiled together, and give him his Cordial
fasting lukewarm, the fourth day morning, give him this Drink, one ounce of
Polypodium, one ounce of Bay Berries, an ounce of Long pepper, one ounce of
brown Sugar Candy, beat them all small and put them into a quart of mild strong
Beer, heat it lukewarm, and before you give it him, ride him a mile, and then
give it him, and ride him two or three miles after it, cloth and litter him up
warm, after he has fasted some four or five hours, give him bursten Oats, with
two ounces of Fenygreek, and two ounces of Coriander, as before; if you have no
Coriander, then take two Ounces of Carraway-seeds, and give him that Night of
the Oats and Seeds, and put the Water where the Oats and Seeds were boiled,
into some cold Water, and let him drink that and no other; when you have rested
him a Week, then give him the first Drink mentioned in this Receipt, and follow
him as you are directed every day; in the third Week give him the same things
again, in the same manner and at the same distance of days, in all points as
you did the first Week, and in three or four Weeks it will be a Cure: The first
Drink does loosen the filth, and open the Lights and set them a running. The
Cordial is, Whitewine and Honey will keep him to his stomach, help him to avoid
filth at the Nose and Mouth, and will much nourish him within, they do cleanse
the stomach, breast and bowels, and do much waste the Squinsey in the Throat,
they do cut the tough thick phlegm. If you order these things as you are in many
places directed, and air him moderately once or twice a day, the Horse will
soon be sound again. The last Drink of Polypodium, Long-pepper, and
Bay Berries, is a purger of the Veins, Blood, and Liver, and will stay the
wasting of the Body: That day morning you give him the first Drink, apply the
Charge of Soap and Brandy, made in a Salve, to the Kernels between his Jaws,
and in a weeks time it will be fallen flat, and not break, lay the Charge on
scalding hot, and heat it well in: If you see the yellow matter to become
white, there will be the greater hopes of the speediness of the Cure, Proved.

CXLV. For a Canker in the Mouth.
YOu shall know it by these Signs; He will slaver at the Mouth, and the Roots
of his Tongue will be eaten with the Canker, the sides of his Mouth will be
hot, raw, and yellow: If the Canker have eaten any Holes in his Mouth, and
caused many sores, then take a pottle of running Spring Water, an handful of
Red-sage, a dozen sprigs of Rosemary, an handful of unset Hysop: If this
disease happen in Summer, then add five or six Walnut-leaves, and a quarter of
a pound of Roch-allum, put all these into a Kettle, and let them boil till they
be half consumed, then put all into an earthen Pan, and let it stand till it be
cold, you need not take out the herbs, but when you use it, take ten or twelve
spoonfuls of this Liquor, then pull out his Tongue with one hand, and have in a
readiness a Linen cloth tied at a sticks end, dip it into the Liquor, and wash
his Mouth and Throat all over, then pull out his Tongue again, and throw a
handful of Salt into his Mouth; then presently after it, dip another sticks-end
tied with a Rag into Tar, and put it all over his mouth where the Sores are;
and once in three days give him a Cordial, and Whitewine and Honey, made as you
may see before, and the same quantity: Ride or work him upon it. This Water,
Salt, Tar, Whitewine and Honey, and Cordials, will bring the Horse to a stomach,
cleanse his stomach, loosen his body: It will take away the heat of his
stomach, and comfort his stomach, and cut the tough phlegm there; it will cure
the Canker in a very short time, except his Tongue and Mouth be very much eaten
indeed; you need not wash his Mouth afterward with the Water and Tar, for the
Wine and Honey, and the Cordials, will heal it alone, and work the aforesaid
effects. Let the Hay and Provender you give him, be clean and moist, it will be
the better. Give him no Chaff, for that will stick in his Mouth and fester it.
Proved.

CXLVI. To cure a Foul, Rank, Pocky Farcion, which runs all over an Horse, or
in any particular part of his Body.
AN Horse that has the Farcion, if his breath smell very strong, and stink,
then do not meddle with him, for his Lights are rotten, and there is no Cure
for him, for he is as full of them within as without. But if his breath be
sweet, there is no question of the Cure: First, for all knotted, budded
Farcions, separate the sound from the sick, for this Disease is infectious,
they will take it one of another. This Disease comes first of Colds and
Surfets: For Remedy do as follows; Give him but a little Hay overnight, to
keep his Jaws from falling; the next day morning, let him blood on both sides
of the Neck, and let him bleed well; then give him this Drink: One ounce of
Aristolochia, an ounce of Turmerick, one ounce of Anniseeds, beat your
Turmerick and Anniseeds small, and grate the root of Aristolochia, and put them
all together, with one handful or two of Lungwort or Liver-wort, Herbgrace, one
good handful of Red-sage, a handful of green or dried Wormwood, one handful of
green Fennel, and if it be Winter that you cannot get it green, then instead
thereof take two ounces of Fennelseeds, cut the Herbs small, and beat the
Seeds, and put them all to steep in three pints of running Spring Water, and
let them lie in steep all night, the next day morning before you give it him,
ride him a Mile till he be vvarm, at his return give it him cold as it stood
all night; then ride him gently a mile after his Drink, set him up warm clothed
and littered; let him stand upon the Bit seven or eight hours, then unbit him
and give him a little sweet Hay, and at night warm Water with some Wheat-br^n
in it, the next day morning ride him to the River, and let him drink, but let
him drink but once a day, but ride him well upon his watering, and at the end
of three days, give him his former Drink again, and order him as before; work
him moderately all the time of his Cure: Be it in Winter or in Summer, for this
Disease keep him in the House with dry meat; when he is cured, you may turn
him out, or keep him in the stable which you please; when he is cold, wash him
twice a day up to the back, soak him well in the River, and at three or four
days distance, if you see need require, give him two or three Drinks more,
ordering him as before: As soon as you have given him the first Drink, with the
end of your Cornet-horn let him blood in the furrow in the top of his mouth.
These Drinks will make him run at the Nose much white or yellow matter, and
they will make him spevv at the mouth much filth; these Drinks will much purge
and dry up all the gross humors in his body, and cleanse the blood: After these
Drinks given, you shall see the Farcions to appear with red heads, and they
will drop out of themselves, and where you see them ready to drop out, apply
this Medicine; Take a quarter or half a pound of Roch-allum, and put it into
the fire, and you shall see it run and be all of a Cake, then take it out and
beat it to powder, and mix as much as you think you shall use with your
fasting Spittle, till it be like an Ointment, and there where you see they are
ready to drop out, lay a little of this upon the head of the bud, which is the
head of the Farcey, and where you see they are hard in the flesh let them
alone, for some will dye, and the rest will drop out of themselves; ride him
up and down in the River twice a day, as far as the swelling goes, a good
while after the Alum and Spittle have taken place: These drinks will kill
and dry up any pocky Gangrene Farcion, let it be in the head body, legs, yea
although it be run all over him, it will dry them quite up. These Drinks with
the Soak in the River, and the Alum and Spittle, will make a speedy Cure.
Proved.

CXLVII. For a Farcey in the Head.
IF it be in the Head and no where else, then blood him in both the Neck-veins
in the morning before he has drank, then give him the former Drinks for a
pocky Farcey, and no Drink else, and after that with your Cornethorns point
let him blood in the third Furrovv of the roof of his mouth, and tie him up to
the Rack for five or six hours, then give him a little clean Hay, and at night
some vvarm Water and Bran: I say if it be in his head, and no where else, and
that some certain small buds do there appear; then do nothing but blood him in
the Neck-veins, and give him the Drink, and bleed him in the palate of the
mouth, and at the very same time apply the Charge of Soap and Brandy, as hot as
you can, and heat it well in; lay it not upon the head of the buds, but lay it
all over the swelling, and in a short time, with the Drink using, the Farcey
will dye, and the swelling will fall. Proved.

CXLVIII. For a swelling in the Forelegs, or After-legs.
IF the Beast have a great Surfeit, that falls down into his Fore or After-legs,
if you think it will come to a Farcey, and you see it grow very hard, or two or
three buds appear, you shall prevent it by giving him two or three Drinks for
the pocky Farcion, at three days distance between every Drink, and by charging
the swelled Legs with Soap and Brandy, if it be not broken before: If you fear
a Farcey, or see a few buds, do thus three or four days, after the Soap and
Brandy is laid on, ride him into the River half a quarter of an hour at a time,
twice a day. Proved.

CXLIX. For a Swelling in the Brisket, below the Chest.
IF it be a Surfeit that swells in the Brisket, or in any other part of the
Beast, if you think it will come to a Farcey, and you see two or three buds to
appear; then give him two or three Drinks for the pocky Farcey, at three days
distance between each Drink; Let the swelling be broke or not broke, lay the
Charge of Soap and Brandy hot on, above the buds, and heat it well in; after
the buds appear, lay the Alum and Spittle upon it: These Remedies are enough
for Diseases of this Nature. Proved.

CL. For a Swelling with a Blow upon the Chest or any other part.
IF the Swelling comes by means of a blow, be it where it will, be it hot or
cold, if it be not broken, lay nothing to it but the Charge of Soap and Brandy,
and heat it well in, and in four or five days it will either quite sink it, or
break it: If it break, see from page and there you will meet with directions
for the purpose. Proved.

CLI. For a Farcey that is broken out in the Legs.
IF you see it to be thus, then do not Charge it, except you see it to swell
above those buds, up to the body-wards, and then in such a case lay on the
Charge of Soap and Brandy to stop it from running higher, as you are in many
places in this Book taught before, upon the swelling all over above the buds,
but not upon the buds below, only let him blood on the Neck-veins, and in the
third Furrow in the roof of his Mouth, and then give him one or two of the
pocky Farcion drinks, at three days distance, till you see all the swelling
killed and dried up, with the Charge of Soap and Brandy, and the Drinks. Those
buds that are broken, lay the Alum and fasting Spittle upon them, and they
will dry and heal up, for those that are in the flesh, some will dye in the
flesh, and some will drop out. This is a certain Cure. Proved.

CLII. For a Water-Farcey.
THe Signs to know it from a Pocky Farcey, are these; He will swell in great
Bags as big as your head, sometimes most along under the Belly, and sometimes
about his Chaps and under his Jaws. The Remedy; Take a Nail-rod, and make it
bending at the end the length of a fleam, so as it may a very little more then
go through the skin, at this end make it red hot, and with it strike many holes
all over the swelling, and you shall see the yellow water come out pouring, and
the swelling, whether in his Jaws or Chaps, or under his Belly, suddenly fall
quite down; this done; to qualify the heat of the Iron, rub a little Soap upon
it, and give him but one Drink for this, which you give for the pocky Farcion:
The more you work any Farcey Horse, the sooner the Cure will be done, and the
better he will thrive. If your Horse be poisoned with any poysonable Medicine,
your often putting him into the cold Water, will destroy the working of it,
that it will not go any further; Give him warm Water to drink, and let him
stand in the House the time of the Cure.

Proved.

You may work any Far^ied Horse with another, but let them neither stand
together, nor feed together; And to make all sure, give the sound Horse one or
two Drinks at three days distance, which you give for a pocky Farceyed Horse,
and those Drinks will prevent a Farcey of the sound Horse.

CLIII. For a Button-Farcey.
THis Farcey you shall know by these Signs: The Horse will be full all over of
Bunches and Knots, some as big as Pease; some as big as Nuts, they lie in
bubbles in the skin, and are easy to be seen: First, let blood on both sides
his Neck, and let him bleed well: The next thing is, take a little Housleek,
and beat it and strain it through a fine Linen Cloth, and put it into his
Ears; then take an ounce of Aristolochia, and grate it small, the tops of Rue
an handful, as much Hogs Grease as an Egg, beat these three last together till
they be like a Salve, as soon as you have put in the Housleek into each Ear
alike, divide the other into two parts, and put the one half into one Ear, and
the other half into the other Ear, and put some Wool after it to keep it in,
then stitch up his Ears with a Needle and thread, and tie a List hard about his
Ears that he may not shake it out, then tie the List of both Ears together a
little straight, when you have done thus, with the Point of your Penknife make
a little hole in his Forehead, and after that, with your Cornet-horn raise the
Skin from his Forehead the breadth of your hand, round about the hole with your
Knife, then take a Red-dock root, and slice it, and put into the hole three
pieces of it, which will be enough at once, it will draw a great deal of
corruption out of it, the corruption that comes out will scald the hair off;
after the strength of the root is gone, it will drop out of it self; when you
see it is dropped out, anoint it with a little fresh Butter* after you have put
in the Root, lay a Plaster of Burgundy Pitch over it to keep out the wind and
cold; Let him fast seven or eight hours, and let him stand upon the Bit, you
shall see him slaver, champ and foam as if he were ridden, give him warm Water
and Bran at night, let it be in his Ears two days before you pull it out.
Taking this course, you shall see the Knots and Bunches to fall in a short
time, and the hair will come again upon his Forehead.

Proved.

CLIV. To cure the Cords; which is when an Horse can neither lift up his Head
to the Rack, nor put his Head to the Ground, no not to his Knees.
YOu may know this Disease by the Signs above, the cause thereof comes by
reason of an extreme cold which lodges in the stomach, and cause the cords to
set and shrink quite up, so that the Beast can neither lift his Head up nor
down, but only to eat meat out of the Crib; in this case a Horse is afraid to
lie down, and if he be laid, he cannot rise. The Remedy; First, make him a
comfortable Drink of these things; Take half an ounce of Diapente, one ounce of
Anniseeds beaten small, three pennyworth of English Saffron, dry it by the fire
in a Paper, and crumble it small with your fingers, two ounces of Honey, two
ounces of fresh Butter, a pint and a half of strong Beer, a quarter of a pint
of Whitewine Vinegar, put all these things together, and set it on the fire
till the Butter and Honey be melted, and no longer; then take it off, and give
it the Beast lukewarm fasting, then walk or ride him till he be warm, then set
him up, and tie him upon the Bit five or six hours, clothe and litter him up
warm, after it give him a little Hay, and then a Mash, and no warm Water that
night but the Water in his Mash; give him the next day in the morning another
Mash, and about nine or ten of the clock warm Water and Bran, and thus keep him
for four or five days; look where the Sign is, if it be in the Head or
Stomach, do not cut him, for it will not be so well, yet you may cut him,
although the Sign be there, but it will not be so well. In cutting observe
this; You must cut him at the very bottom of the Breast, you shall see the
Vein, and under the Vein lies the great Sinew, as big as a Tobacco-pipe steal,
just by the inside to the top of his Leg, when you see where the Vein lies,
draw the skin aside which lies over the Vein, and cut that part of the skin an
Inch or more, which may just fall upon the Vein again, this being cut with your
Cornetshorn point, make a little way and you shall see a blew film lie over the
Vein; chafe it a pieces till you come to see the Vein, with the point of your
Cornet-horn, then draw the Vein aside with one hand, and put your Cornet-horns
end under the Sinew, and raise the Sinew up above the skin with your
Cornet-horn, and cut it quite asunder, let it go, and put a little Butter and
Salt into the Wound, and afterward heal it up with some of the aforementioned
healing Salves; walk him an hour at a time twice a day for a Week together. If
you find that with the first Drink, the Cold breaks at his Nostrils, then give
him the same Drink again at three or four days distance between each Drink,
and order him as you are at the beginning of this Receipt directed. If need
require, give him a third Drink. It is an extreme Cold that shuts the Cords,
this Drink will break the Cold, and in a short time the Beast will do well, and
stir his Head again,

Proved.

CLV. For a Stumbling Horse.
FIrst, tie him up with a Halter close to a Post that stands in a Shop-window,
then take your Knife and cut a hole length-waies down to his Lips, end-wards in
the midst of his Nose, between his Nostrils the length of your Thumb, when you
have cut through the Skin, then do off the red film with your Cornet-horns end,
and you shall see a white flat Sinew lie before your Eye, take the point of
your Cornet-horn and put under it, and raise it above the Skin, then pull it
hard out with your Cornet-horn, and turn your Cornet-horn about, then pull it
the second time, and turn your Horn again, and so the third time; in this
doing, you shall see him bring his Hinder-legs to his Forelegs almost, when
you have thus pulled and turned the Sinew two or three times about the
Cornet-horn, then cut the Sinew under the Cornet to the Lips end, but cut not
the Sinew upon the Cornet, nor about it; when you have cut it let it go, and
put a little Butter and Salt into the Wound, then over it lay a Plaster of
Burgundy Pitch to keep out the wind, and you shall see the Horse go very well,
and never stumble afterward.

Proved.

DLVI. How to make Diapente.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Aristolochia, a quarter of a pound of Myrrh, half
a pound of Bay Berries, the outward Husk pilled off, two ounces of white Ivory,
two ounces of Hartshorn, the round root of Aristolochia is better than the
long, cut the outward Rind, and then grate it small, do not dry it, but after
you have grated it, beat it small by it self, or with the other things in a
Mortar; then put them into a fine Sive, and searse the finest out, then put the
biggest into the Mortar again, and beat it as small as you can, then searse the
finest from that, and beat the rest again, and so do and searse it till you
have done all very fine, then put it into a Bladder, and keep it for your use:
Of this Diapente you may give an ounce at a time, although you give other
things with it. An ounce of Diapente is a good Drink alone in a pint of strong
Beer for a new taken cold.

Proved.

CLVII. How to make Horse-spice.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Anniseeds, a quarter of a pound of English
Liquorish, a quarter of a pound of Grains, a quarter of a pound of
Fennel-seeds, a quarter of a pound of Flower of Brimstone, more or less, these
are the proportions to make the Horse-spice, slice the Liquorish and dry it,
and beat them altogether. If you will you may put in half a pound of
Elicampana, first dried, and then beaten small in a Mortar with the rest of the
things; you may either put all these together, or else keep them severally by
themselves. An ounce of this Horse-spice, with a spoonful of Sallet-oyl, and a
spoonful or two of Jean-Treacle, is a good Drink (for a Country man, who will
give but a shilling or eighteen pence) in a quart of strong Beer, this Drink is
for a Cold, and to make a Horse thrive, and to prevent Diseases; if any man
upon letting his Horse blood, will have him likewise to have a Drink, give an
ounce of this Horse-spice in a pint of strong Beer heated lukewarm in a morning
fasting, let him stand in the House, and give him warm Water to drink, and a
Mash. Proved.

CLVIII. To Cure a Ring-bone.
THis Ring-bone always grows upon the In-step a little above the Hoof on the
Afterleg, about the bigness of a Walnut, sometimes bigger, sometimes lesser, in
a hard long crushy substance. The Cure is; first, take up the Vein of the
inside of the same Leg where the Ringbone grows, then to make a certain Cure of
it, burn it with a hot Iron that is of the thickness of the back of a Knife,
upon the top of the Ringbone so far as the Swelling goes, and with your hot
Iron make three strikes downwards, and three strikes cross them, as you may see
in this Figure: burn it but till it look yellow and no more, then take a
Horse-nail, and drive it through a pretty big stick, so that the point may come
through as much as may go through the skin, and make it just to bleed, strike
the point of the Nail into the seared Lines in every side 3 or 4 holes, then
take an handful of Salt, and rub it hard in with your hands, a quarter of an
hour after, lay this Charge to the Ring-bone, as much Burgundy Pitch as a
Walnut, and as much black Pitch, half an ounce of Mastick, boil them

altogether till they be melted, then take a flat stick and spread it on good
and hot, then flock it with Sheremans flocks, and dab them on close, this
before it comes off, will lay it as flat as can be: He must not be ridden of a
Fortnight, he must stand in the first night, and afterward he may stand in or
run out, so as he run in dry ground, this will be an absolute Cure in once
dressing. Proved.

CLIX. For a Spavin as big as an Egg.
IT grows upon the inside of the Hough of the After-leg: First, beat it with
a Bloodstick until it be soft, then anoint it with six pennyworth of the Oil of
Origanum upon the Bone-Spavin which you bruised, put your Oil into an
Oyster-shel, or some such thing, and rub it in with your fingers, no where but
upon the place which you bruised: Two days after the Oil has taken its
course, take two or three ounces of the Oil of Swallows, and anoint the
Cordsinews in the bent of the Leg, to reach and give liberty to the Sinews that
are shrunk, lay on of the Oil of Swallows but half an ounce at a time, and lay
it on no where else, but upon the sinews on the bent of the Leg; after that the
Oil of Swallows is well soaked in, you may ride him or work him: This Oil of
Swallows does much leng then and give liberty to the Sinews, at three or four
days distance you may lay on half an ounce more. If Blood-bags come in the
Spavinplace at the same time the Bone-spavin comes, then do not sear it with
your Iron by no means, but only lay the Charge of Soap and Brandy hot on, and
heat it well in with a Bar of Iron, and for certain it will cause it to fall.
An able Farrier is of that opinion, that the Receipt in -- will speedily make
it to fall, if first you beat the Bone-spavin with a Blood-stick, and
afterward apply the Cantharides and Nerve-oyl, as there you shall find it set
down* Proved.

CLX. To make a Star in an Horses Forehead.
FIrst, With a pair of Scissars cut away the Hair close to the Skin, in such a
place as you would have the form of a Star to be, then take a piece of red
Brick, and rub it hard upon every place, where you have clipped away the Hair,
rub it till it be at the roots of the Hair, then wipe it clean with a Linen
Rag, then make a Plaster of Burgundy Pitch, and spread it upon a Linen Cloth,
no longer nor wider than the form of the Star it self, then a little before you
lay it on, lay a hot Iron upon the Pitch to soften it, that it may stick on the
better, then clap it to the place, as a Plaster fit for the Star, and lay a
hot Iron upon the back of the Plaster to heat it, then over the first Plaster
lay another Plaster a little broader, heating the second as you did the first,
and so let it stick on till it come off of it self, which may be a month; when
these Plasters come off, then to make the Hair come white in the place where
you would have the Star be, take a little Honey and Butter, more Honey than
Butter, and mix them together, and anoint the Star once in three days, and do
so for that distance of days four or five times, and in a quarter of a year
you shall see the thing desired, he may stand in the House or run abroad, you
may work him or ride him: I know nothing to the contrary, but that a man with
this course taking, may make a mark in any form, what he pleases, and where he
pleases about the Beast, whether in his Buttockus, Sides, or any other place
as well as the Forehead.

CLXI. For the Pains or Scratches, or rotten broken Cuts, putrified Sinews,
this Receipt will cure in a wonderful manner.
IF it be the Pains and Scratches, do thus; Take a pail of fair Water, if two
or three, and wash his Legs clean, and clip away the Hair close to the Skin so
far as his Legs are crannied or scabby, then with a pail or two of fair Water
wash his Legs clean again, and let him stand till he be dry, then take half a
pound of English Honey, one ounce of beaten Pepper, ten Heads of Garlic, put
all these into a Boul or Cup; and beat them together till they come to a Salve:
If the Pains and Scratches be on both Legs, then divide the Salve into two
parts, and lay one half upon one sheet of Paper, and the other half upon
another half of gray Paper, and take a broad piece of Linen Cloth, and lay it
over the Paper, and lay the Plaster to the hinder part of his Legs, where the
sore always is, and sew them on with a Needle and Thread pretty hard, so as it
may not come off, sew it close in the Footlock, and all the way up so far as
his Legs are scabby, and let it lie on two days, you must make a small
Thumb-band of fine Hay, and wind all over his Legs, and over the Plaster, and
let it remain as long; at two days end, take a Linen Cloth and wipe the Chaps
of every Cranny and Crack in his heels clean, then lay on a fresh Plaster, and
do as you did before in every particular; and at two days end take away that
Plaster, then lay on another, and let it lie on three days, and when you take
that off, and see, if need require lay on another Plaster, and let it lie on
three days more, and in three or four times thus dressing, it will be quite
dried up, and whole. Let him not come in the Water all the time of his Cure. If
his Sinews be rotten, broken, cut in pieces, or much putrified, then apply this
Medicine as before, and let it lie on the same time as before, and as it heals
dress it the seldomer, and bind a Thumb-band of Hay over the Plaster, and keep
him out of the Water, and in the House all the time of the Cure. This Salve
will draw clean, and knit the Sinews together again in a wonderful manner. It
is for Pains, and Scratches, and Sinews in this nature, the best Cure in the
World. If one or two of the pocky Farcies Drinks were given in this case, I am
confident it would much further the Cure, and dry up those humors in the Body
which feed the Scratches in his Legs.

Proved.

CLXII. For the Strangullion in an Horse.
THe Signs to know it are; It much differs from that, when an Horse cannot
Stale, and differs from the Disease called the Gripe or Fret in the Guts,
which will put an Horse to abundance of pain, and make him to tumble and
wallow: This Disease called the Strangullion, if a Horse have it he will look
gaunt and cannot piss, he will offer, and stand straining to piss, but cannot,
his Bladder will be ready to burst, with extreme fullness and heat of his water,
for present Remedy do this; Take a pint of Claret Wine redded well, and put
into it an ounce of Ivyberries beaten small, one ounce of Parsley-seeds beaten
small, and give it him at any time; once doing is enough.

Proved.

You may likewise see for the Gravel and Stone what is given to a man, and you
may give it him.

CLXIII. For Fretting or Griping in an Horses Belly.
THis Disease will make the Horse to tumble and wallow with all four feet
upwards, with a griping wind in the Guts, you shall see some Horses in such
extreme pain, that they will swell therewith as if they would burst, and will
endanger the breaking of their Bladder, and in this case they cannot dung. For
Remedy, Take a quart of cold Salt-beef or Pork brine, if you cannot get a
quart, get a pint, put it into a Horn and pour it down cold: After this brine
is down, anoint your hand and arm with Sallet-oyl or Butter, and rake him, and
pull out as much Dung as you can to give him all the ease you can, then take a
good big Onion, and peel off the outward rind, then cut it length-waies and
cross-waies in many places, then roll it up and down in a handful of Salt, and
what Salt it will take up, put it into a hollow pie of Butter, but before you
put it into his fundament, anoint your hand and arm with Butter and Sallet-oyl,
and run up the Onion thus rouled in the Salt and put into the Butter, as far as
you can, and there leave it; then tie up his tail close to his rump as you can,
being tied with a Cord, fasten the Cord to his Girths, that it may keep in the
Onion and Butter, then lead him out and walk him, and in a quarter of an hours
time it will purge exceedingly. It will cleanse his Maw much, and cleanse his
Guts, and kill the Worms, let his Tail be tied but a little while that he may
purge freely, prick him in the Mouth with your Cornet-horn, the first thing you
do. The next day morning give him a comfortable Drink, made of an ounce of
Horsespice, a quarter of a pint of Whitewine Vinegar, with a pint and a half of
strong Beer, put them together, and give it the Beast lukevvarm fasting, and he
will do very well after it: Give him bursten Oats, or a Mash for two days
after it, and vvarm Water the day you give him this Drink. Proved.

CLXIV. To kill Botts or Worms.
YOu shall know whether your Horse be troubled with Botts or Stomach-vvorms
by these Signs, he will squitter and dung them, and all of a sudden he will
dung very small; in this case he will void small white Worms of himself, he
will be much knotted under his over-lip, the roots of his Tongue will be
fiery and yellow, his breath hot, sweat much as he stands in the Stable, and
will be very faint: Now if you see him to sweat in the Stable, then know
for certain that he is far gone, and is in great danger. For Remedy, Take
Turmerick and Anniseeds of each an ounce, one pennyvvorth of the Flovver of
Brimstone, half a quarter of a pint of Brandy or Aqua-vitae, beat the Anniseeds
and Turmerick small, and then put all together into a pint and a half of strong
Beer, except the Brimstone, and that lay upon the top of the Horn, when you are
ready to give him the Horn into his mouth, give this Drink fasting, and let him
fast four or five hours after it, and stand upon the bit; give him to drink
warm Water at night, the next day cold Water, ride him after it, this Drink
will work pretty strong. If he have not been lately let blood before, let him
blood in the Neck-vein, and in the third furrow in the roof of his mouth, with
the end of your Cornet-horn. This Drink at once giving will kill the Botts, and
take him off his faintness, and much cleanse and purge him of tough gross
humors in his body, upon which the Worms do breed. Culpepper says, that
Box-tree leaves are excellent good to kill the Botts in Horses, they are hot,
dry, and binding, you may put in a handful of them into this Drink, and try
conclusions. Proved.

CLXV. For a Fever in a Horse.
THe Signs are, The Horse will fall suddenly sick, and be very weak, he will go
heavy and sad, as if he would tumble down, and be gaunt in his belly, fall from
his meat, and look weakly in his Eyes, hang down his head, and stand drooping:
when this sickness first takes him, he will tremble and quake, as if he had an
Ague: For this Disease take no blood from him by any means, it is death if you
do. The Remedy is, Take half an ounce of Diapente, one ounce of Bayberries,
half an ounce of Long-pepper, beat all these together, then take half an ounce
of Diascordium, and put all these into a pint and a half of strong Beer, heat
it lukewarm, and give it to your Horse at any time of the day, for this Disease
is dangerous, and will admit of no delays; clothe and litter him up very warm;
the Diascordium in the Drink will cause him to lie down and sleep; after the
Drink has done working, and the Horse done sweating, then give him half a pint
of Whitewine, and two ounces of Honey, mix them together, and heat them
lukewarm, and give it him in the Stable, and after you come to air him, you may
give it him abroad; three or four hours after, give him a Cordial made of three
pints of stale Beer, and a quarter of a pint of Honey, and a quarter of a pound
of Butter, and a good piece of household bread, boil them a little together, and
give it him lukewarm, and set him up for that night; give him warm Water and
Bran at night, next morning fasting give him the Cordial again, and at nine or
ten a clock, warm Water and Bran, at two or three a clock, Whitewine and Honey,
and at night warm Water and Bran, and afterward, now and then a Cordial, and
Whitewine and Honey, and moderate ayring will soon bring him to his stomach,
when you see he is able to walk abroad* air him once or twice a day, it will do
him much good. These Cordials, Wine and Honey, and ayring of him, will cause the
Beast to amend apace. After he comes to eat his meat pretty handsomely, take
some blood from his Spur-veins, the Frets from him, swetting will do him much
good. If he lie down and sleep, it will bring him down to his senses, and the
Horse will mend much in twenty four hours. If Diascordium do not make him take
rest according to your mind, then you may take as much Poppyseeds as will lie
upon a sixpence, in two half Hornfuls of any Beer, if you cannot get
Poppyseeds, which some call Red-weed-seeds, then buy White-poppy-water at the
Apothecaries, and give at each Nostril a spoonful, and that will make him sleep
heartily.

Proved.

CLXVI. For a dry inward Mange.
THe Signs are these; his Hair will come off by plats, and sometimes it will
come all off from head to tail, and there will be a dry Scurfie Mange, as well
where the hair comes off, as where it stays on, it is an extreme heat of the
blood which causes the hair to scale off, and causes the dry Mange in his
body. If his body be dried up and wasted, that the Horse be miserable lean and
overcome with it, then give him this one Drink and no more, not else, viz. One
ounce of the flower of Brimstone, two ounces of Rosin beaten small, one ounce
of Turmerick beaten small, one ounce of Anniseeds beaten small, put all these
except the Brimstone, into a quart of strong Beer heated lukewarm, and give it
him fasting, and put the Brimstone at the mouth of the Horn, to put it down
with the other things, tie him up to the Rack for four or five hours, then give
him warm Water and Bran, at night bursten Oats; the next day after, give him in
his Provender two spoonfuls of Rosin beaten to powder, at night the like; the
next day the like, and then no more; This is to cleanse and purge away the
Mangy surfeit that is in his body, and causes the outward Mange: Also do thus,
two or three days after his Drink, scrape off all the Scabs and Scurf clean
with the back of your Knife, or some other thing for that purpose, till the
Blood and Water appear. Then presently mix an equal proportion of Oil of
Turpentine and Beer together as will serve, and shake them well together in a
Glass Vial, and anoint the Horse all over but once, and it is an absolute Cure.
It will smart terribly, tie him close for an hour, till it have taken its
course. But if you be merrily disposed, as soon as you have dressed him all over
with it, bid the Fellow go home with him and set him up, but believe it, he
will not hold him long, for the Beast will run away with him, and kick and
wallow, and rub in a most strange manner, that one would think he were stark
mad, but it will have done smarting in half an hour. It is a gallant Receipt.
If the Horse be not much pined and shrunk of his flesh, do nothing but anoint
him once outwardly, and give him this Drink, and the Oil of Turpentine and
Beer, will kill the Mange of a Beast, Dog, Bullock, or any thing with once
dressing. Proved.

CLXVII. To stop bleeding at the Nose, or in the Mouth, where the Fleam or
Knife has cut a great Gash: Or when you have cut the Vein in a Quitter-bone,
and it bleed that you know not how to stop it.
FOr any of these, when nothing will stop it this following will; First, take a
Chafingdish of hot Coals, and burn three or four Linen Rags upon the Coals,
laying them one upon another, and let the Horses Mouth be over the smoke all
the while, as the blood does fall out of the Horses Nose and quench them, so
you must blow them up with your breath again, till the Coals have burnt the
Rags as black as a Cole, which when you perceive, take them as they are burnt
black and bled upon by the Horse, and put them up into each Nostril an hand
high, then hold up his Head, and have in readiness three or four quarts of
strong Beer, and pour it down his Throat, to wash down the smoke and clotted
blood which lies in his Throat. If he snort the burnt Rags out, have other
burnt hot Rags in a readiness to put up his Nostrils: And you must remember as
well when you fume him, as when you have stopped his Nostrils with burnt Rags, to
be often pouring down his throat cold Beer, because the blood returning a
contrary way will choke him: This course taken will stop bleeding at the Nose
of a man. If an Horses mouth be cut with a fleam at any time, when you let him
blood in the Mouth, and the fleam glance and cut a gash in his Mouth, and that
it bleed so that you know not how to stop it, then take some of these burnt
Rags and lay them as hot into the Wound as you can, and afterward take another
clean Rag and lay it over the Wound to keep in the burnt Rags, and tie on each
side his Teeth a small string overthwart to keep it close to for 24 hours, at
the end of which time you may take off the Cloth, but let the burnt Rags lie in
the Wound as long as you please, for they will draw and heal mightily, when
they come out you may put in more, and do as you did before: and so for a
Quitter-bone, is you cut it till all the Veins bleed; and you cannot stanch the
blood, then take of these hot burnt Rags and fill the hole full, and they will
stop the blood in a very short time, and let it lie there for 24 hours, and
they will draw it as white as can be, so that you may see what to do afterward:
This will stop the blood either at Nose, or in any Wound. Proved.

CLXVIII. For a Cold new or old, or a Cough wet or dry.
TAke of Rue one handful, chop or stamp it very small, and put to it a penny
worth of Anniseeds beaten to very fine powder; make it up in Pills with sweet
Butter, and so give it to your Horse in a pint and an half of Ale or Beer
fasting, ride him upon it, and let him fast four or five hours after it: Do
this every third morning till you see his Cough quite gone. This has been
found to be most sovereign for an Horse that has a Cold, whether newly or
formerly taken; or for a wet or dry Cough: It is also most excellent for an
Horse that has been overridden, or any ways wronged by labor.

Proved.

CLXIX. For a young Horse that has taken a new Cold.
TAke Water and Salt as much as will suffice, brew them well together, make it
Bloodwarm and give it him, and do after as is necessary. This I find to be
singular good to be given to a young Horse, that has newly taken cold.

Proved.

CLXX. For a new taken Cold with a Coughing?
TAke of Bays, of Anniseeds, and of Liquorish, of each half a pennyworth, of
brown Sugar Candy one pennyworth, make all these into powder, and sew them up
in a fine Linnenrag, and so tie it to the Bit or Snaffle of the Bridle, and so
ride a Journey and travel him: If it be a Cold newly taken, it will cure him in
a shore time. This I have tried and found to be good, for it will cure both
Cold and Cough, if it be thus used with riding and exercise.

Proved.

CLXXI. For the Botts.
TAke as much black Soap as a Walnut, as much flower of Brimstone and a little
Garlic bruised, put these into a pint and an half of strong new Beer, or sweet
Wort, steep it all night, and give it the beast next morning fasting, and tie
him up to the Rack three or four hours after, then give him warm Water and what
meat you please. Proved.

CLXXII. For a Blood-Spavin.
FIrst, Take a strong Shop-halter, and put the Noose or Head-stall about his
Neck close to his shoulders, then take the other end of the Halter, and take
the contrary After-foot from the ground, which the Blood-Spavin is not upon,
and put the other end of the Halter about his Pastern, and draw it with the
Halter from the ground, and tie it to the Head-stall of the halter, that he may
not set it down; by doing thus, you may take up the Vein and sear him as he
stands, but the best way will be to cast him, and to tie his other three Legs,
and let that be at liberty, then before you take up the Vein half a foot above
the Spavin-place, in the small of the Ham in the inside of his Leg, you must
first draw the skin cross with your fingers on one side of the Vein, then cut a
hole in the skin an inch and an half long down his Leg thus in that part of the
skin which will lie right over the Vein, then let the cut go, and the Skin will
lie over the Vein, then with the point of your Cornet-horn length-waies as the
wound is cut, chafe and fret the thin skin or film a pieces, that you may see
the Vein lie blew, then with the point of your Cornet-horn, by degrees run it
between the Vein and the Skin, and raise the Vein above the Skin, and after
that put two short Shoomakers ends between the Vein and the Flesh, a little
distance one from the other, to tie or take up the Vein after it has done
bleeding; then and not before, with the point of a Penknife, slit a little
hole length-waies in the Vein, not cross the Vein by no means, for fear of
cutting the Vein a pieces, you must open the Vein as it lies upon, the Horn,
and when it has bled enough, tie the ends that you before put under it, above
the slit of the Vein pretty hard, and tie the other bonds end below the slit of
the Vein pretty just, and leave the bonds end an inch long hanging without the
Skin to keep the hole open, that the matter may come out at it, and that the
Skin may not heal up, before the wax threads have eaten the Vein a pieces,
which will be within a Week; when you have tied up the Vein, as is shevved
you; then put into the hole or vvound a little piece of Butter and Salt mixed
together, to heal it up: after all this, before you let down his Leg (in case
you do it standing) but whether you do it standing or lying this you must do,
Take a Nail-rod at the same time, and make it with a thick edge bending or
hook't back, heat it hot, and make in the bent of the Leg with it one long
strike dovvnvvards, sear it besides the Sinevvs till the skin looks yellow,
make the searing thus

in the bent of the Leg besides the Sinews, but not upon the Sinews, as the
foregoing figure shows you, and thus you must sear him on the inside and on the
outside of the Knee; where you see the swelling appear, there you must sear him
likewise with one Line and two crosses, cross it in this manner. After you have
thus seared it, then apply this Charge; A quarter of a pint of Brandywine, or
for want thereof a quarter of a pint of Aqua-vitae, and a pennyworth of
Crownsope, boylthem together till they come to a white Salve, then lay it all
over the Swelling as hot as you can, with a flat-stick, and heat it well in
with a bar of Iron, once laying on this Charge is enough; when this has lain
on a Week, then ride him, whether he halt or not, so you ride him moderately,
then take an ounce of the Oil of Swallows, and rub it well in with your hand
upon the Sinews of the bent of the Leg, to retch and give liberty to them, use
of this Oil every four or five days, and in four or five times dressing, it
will be a Cure. After he come from work or riding at any time, and his Legs be
washed and dry, then rub on this Oil upon the bent of his Leg, and upon the
Sinews, you need not heat it in now with a hot Iron, but rub it well in with
the palm of your hand, and within a fortnights time the blood Spavin will not
be seen, and the swelling will be quite gone: If you take a a BloodSpavin at
the first coming out of a young Horse, then do but fire it lightly, and lay the
former Charge to, and in once dressing it will be a complete Cure. Proved.



CLXXIII. For an old Cold.
IF you see cause, take blood from the Neckvein, otherwise not, then instead of
giving him Oats, give him Wheat-bran boiled in water after this manner. ( viz.)
Set a Kettle over the fire almost full of water, and when it begins to boil put
in your Bran, and let it boil a full quarter of an hour, then take it off, and
let it stand till it be almost cold, and about four or five of the Clock in the
Morning, give it him as hot as he can eat it, and for his Drink give him the
same water, and at Night give him Oats and White water to drink, and let him be
covered and littered up warm. If it be in Summer, let not the Stable be too
hot, for that will take a way his stomach, and make him faint* And when you
give him his water at night, always give him as much of this powder as an
Eggshel will hold amongst his Oats, to which you must keep him eight days
together, or longer if you shall see cause; the boiled Bran is that which
dries up all his corrupt and gross humors, which was the cause of his cold:
Now the Powder is this, (viz.) Take of Cummin-seeds, Fenygreek, Sileris
Montani, otherwise called Sisilers, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger, Linseed, of each
of these two ounces, quick Brimstone six ounces, make all these into fine
powder, and mix them all well together; it must be given him in his Oats the
quantity that was prescribed before; but he must first be watered with White
water; and then presently let him be well rubbed all over, and clothed and
littered vvarm, and an hour bdfore you give him his Oats, put into his Rack a
little sweet Wheat-straw, and let him eat thereof an hour or better, and then
and not before give him his Oats mixed with this powder, which having eaten
give him Hay at your pleasure, and with doing thus his Cold will be gone in a
short time, and the sooner if you air him an hour before Sunset, and an hour
after Sunrising* if the Sun shine mark that; keep up his stomach with
White Wind and Honey, and the Cordials, or with what else you think best of.
Proved.

Now, if this cold bring with it a violent Cough, as is often seen, then use
this Receipt following.

CLXXIV. For a Cold with a violent Cough.
FIrst, give him the Wheat-bran boiled, together with the Powder, with his
Oats, as is directed in the foregoing Receipt, but not above three or four
days, or till you see he has purged sufficiently, for that the said Powder
dispersed the corrupt and gross humors that are in his body, which do occasion
the Cough; and when you perceive that he has purged sufficiently, keep him
notwithstanding to his White-water, which is no other thing than water made hot
in a Kettle, and then put in some Wheat-bran, or Barley-meal, let him eat the
Bran as hot as he will, and drink the Water a little warm: But always an hour
before you water him, take a stick a little bigger than your thumb, of well
nigh a foot long, and wrap a Linneu cloth about it four or five times, first
dipped in oil of Bays and put into his mouth; and with some Leather-thong or
piece of small Cord, fasten it to either end of the stick, and so fasten it
over his Ears like the head-stall of a Bridle, like as Smiths do when they burn
a Horse for a Lampra's; Let him drink with this stick thus in his Mouth, and so
stand with it an hour after at the least, that he may lick and suck up the said
oil, and after the three or four days are expired, and that you see he has
purged sufficiently, which is a little before mentioned, then when you give him
the Oats, give him amongst them this other Powder following; (viz.)
Fennel-seeds four ounces, Fenygreek two ounces, and Cardimum one ounce, beat
them but grossly, or else he will blow them away when he eats his Oats, put one
spoonful into his Oats, and keep him warm, and use him as is prescribed in the
foregoing Receipt, and you will find it to do him much good.

Proved.

CLXXV. A rare Receipt to cause an Horse to vomit.
TAke two of the greatest Roots of Polypodium as you can get from the Oak, wash
and scrape them very clean, and tie it to his Snaffle or Bit, then let it be
steeped in oil of Spike a whole Night, and in the Morning fasting, put on his
Bridle with the Roots tied to his Bit, and ride him softly and fairly an hour
or better with it in his mouth, and if he be troubled with any Rheumatick or
Phlegmatic humor, or with any cold or filthy matter, which may any way pester,
clog, or annoy his stomach, this very thing will force him to vent and vomit it
up at his mouth or nose, and it will cause him to cough and sneeze much, that
you shall see him to send forth a great abundance of filth, and evil slimy
matter from his stomach and head, and in a short time he will become very clean
in his body, for this will both refine his blood, and exhaust all the watrish
humors in such sort, as by temperate ordering of him, and doing as heretofore
is prescribed, you may keep him a long time sound, perfect, and serviceable;
and this you may give to an Horse newly taken from Grass, or to any other Horse
that has taken a Cold, or to any other filthy, foul, foggy or pursy Horse
whatsoever: And this upon trial, upon all occasions before mentioned, you shall
find to be most admirable; this being done, I conceive it to be very good to
give them Whitewine and Honey, and the Cordial formerly set down. Proved.

CLXXVI. For a Curb.
THis Curb always grows upon the backpart of the heel of the knee of the
hinder Leg, in a hard substance; I shall give no more signs, for it is easy to
be seen: The remedy is this, first tie up the contrary Leg as you do for a
blood-Spavin, then with an hot Iron fear it length-waies down his Leg upon the
Curb, till the skin look yellow, then draw your hot Iron cross it, as you did
for a blood-Spavin, in two or three places, then presently take an Horsenail
and drive it through a stick, so that the point of the nail may come a little
through the stick, the breadth of a straw, or a little more, then set the point
of the nail to the fired places, and strike it in some ten or twenty times,
according as the burning goes in several places, and as you see occasion, then
take a handful or two of Salt, and rub it well in with your hand to stop the
blood, and half an hour after wipe the Salt off, and apply the charge of Soap
and Brandy hot on, and heat it well in with a bar of Iron, and as your Iron
cools, flake it over it to dry it in the better, let the charge lie on till it
comes off of it self; you may ride him every day after three or four days, in
the mean time let him stand in the Stable. Proved.

CLXXVII. For a Quitterbone, Old or New.
THis Quitterbone always grows just above the top of the Hoof on the Hinder
Foot, and sometimes on the Instep just above the Hoof, and sometimes above the
Hoof on the side of the Foot, but be it in any place this is the Cure: First,
take up the vein in the small of the Leg, if the Quitterbone be on the inside
of the Leg above the Hoof, then take up the vein on the inside of the Leg: If
it be on the outside of the Leg, then take up the vein on the outside, this is
the way to further the Cure, and make all sure by taking up the vein which does
feed it. You may see how to take up a vein, if you look into the Receipt for a
Blood-Spavin.

For the taking up of a vein is all alike, be it where it will be, after you
have taken up the vein let it bleed well, and put into the wound some Butter
and Salt: Then with a little Towe, or Hards, or a Linen Cloth wound about your
Instrument's end, search the Quitterbone to the bottom, and where you see the
matter come out there put in your Instrument; when you have searched the wound
and made it clean, put into it a piece of white Arsenick as big as a small Bean
and put a little Tow after it, and lay a little Tow upon the top of the
quitterbone, with a Linen cloth next, and a Woollen cloth over all, tied on
fast that it may not come off; then tie him up to the Rack with a strong Halter
one day, till the anguish of the Arsenick be over, for fear he come at it with
his mouth; let the Arsenick lie in forty hours, then take out the Hards, and
you shall see the hole in the quitterbone look very black, and swelled more
than it was before: It is the effects of Arsenick, therefore you need not fear,
but as soon as you have pulled off the Clothes and Hards from the place, you
may put his foot into a pail of cold water for a quarter of an hour, and let it
soak; or if the River be near that you can lead him into it, if it be clear
water, so that no sand or dirt get into the wound, and let him stand and soak
his Leg there for a quarter of an hour, for his Leg must be once a day soaked,
either in a pail of clean water or in the River, for a week together, take off
his wet hard Clothes, and tie on dry ones, this is all you have to do till you
see the Core of the Quitterbone come out, which when you see, make this
Medicine to heal it up: Take a pennyworth of good Honey, put it into a Pipkin,
and when it begins to be hot, put in a penny worth of Verdigrease, and three or
four spoonfuls of White Wind Vinegar, boil them all together for half an hour,
then take it off the fire, and when it is cold take a little fine Towe and dip
into it, and put it into the wound, and lay a little dry Towe or Hards over
that, and a Linen cloth over them, and bind them on with a string, and so
dress it once a day till you see it begin to heal, and then dress it but once
in two days, and as you see it heal dress it the fewer times till it be whole:
There will be a little space bare where no hair will come, put in Arsenick but
once, and although you tie him up to the Rack because his mouth should not come
to the Arsenick, yet give him meat for all that; do but remember these two last
Cautions, and you need not question the Cure, for it will be speedy. Proved.

Now suppose you meet with a Quitterbone that has been a long time in other
Farrier's hands, that have so corroded and poisoned it that it is much swelled
about the Pastern and Leg: In this case, you must first take up the vein on
that side the Leg that the Quitterbone grows on, to keep the humor back that
feeds it, then put in as much Arsenick as a Bean, as you were directed before,
and so doing as it is there expressed, soaking his Leg as yon are therein taught,
and when the Core is out* heal it with the same Salve that is there prescribed,
but if there grows proud flesh in it whilst you are a healing of it, then scald
it with Butter and Salt, and that will keep the proud-flesh down; An old hurt
in the foot may come to be a quitterbone, and break out above the Hoof, but a
quitterbone will never break out in the Sole of the foot. Except you take up
the vein, a quitterbone is a very hard thing to cure, after the Core is come
out, it will not be amiss before you go about to heal it, to wash the sore well
with Whitewine Vinegar, and then to wash it with the wattr mentioned in Receipt
XXXVIII. and then apply the healing Salve mentioned in the foregoing Receipt.

CLXXVIII. A Preparation before you give the Black Drink for the Glanders, in
the next following Receipt.
FIrst take blood from him, if you do find it gross or phlegmatic, for
otherwise he cannot possibly mend, then instead of Oats give him every Morning
about 4 or 5 a clock Wheatbran prepared, for four or five days together, and
the Water to drink that the Bran is sodden in, as you may see in the Receipt
for an old Cold, which is to qualify and dry up the moist and bad humors
abounding in him, and then let him blood in the Neck, if you have not before.
The next day rake him with your hand, and then give him this Glister: Make a
decoction of Mallows one pint and a half, and put into it four ounces of fresh
Butter, and of Sallet oil a quarter of a pint, administer it Blood-warm, and
then with a strap of Leather tied to his tail and put between his legs, and the
other end fastened to the Sussingle, so straight, that the tail may be close to
his Tewel or Fundament, that he cannot purge till it be loosened: This done,
mount his back and ride him gently an easy trot or foot-space for half an
hour, then set him up clothed and littered, with the Bit in his mouth three
hours, during which time he will purge kindly, then give him White water and
Hay, and at night a few Oats, for he must be kept to a spare diet: The next day
mix well together the powder of Brimstone and fresh Butter, and anoint all
along two Goose-feathers, and run a thread through either of their Quills ends,
that you may fasten the thread to the top of the head-stall of his Bridle, and
run them up as high as you can into each nostril, and so ride him an hour or
two, and this will purge his head and lungs, and cause him to send forth much
filthy matter; but when you set him up take them out, and an hour after give
him Hay and White water, and Bran prepared, which he should have before you
ride him abroad: The next day give him his Glister again, and let him rest for
that day, but ordered in all things as before; the next day use the
Goose-feathers again, and order him as you did before: And all this is but to
prepare him for this after-Drink that follows, but you must observe to keep
him always warm, and let him be ever fasting and empty, before you give him
any Physic, and air him Evening and Morning if the Sun shine, or the weather
be warm or calm: Then three days after give him this Drink following, which is
called the Black Drink.

CLXXIX. The Black drink for the Glanders.
TAke new-made Chamberlie, and of the best and strongest White Wind Vinegar of
each half a pint, then take of Mustard Seed two or three spoonfuls, and make
Mustard thereof with Vinegar and grind it well, then put your Vinegar and
Chamberly to the Mustard, and stir them well together, then take of Tar and
Bay Salt of each alike, as much as may suffice, incorporate them well together,
and convey so much thereof as two or three Eggshels will hold, their meat being
first taken out; having prepared these things, keep him over night to a very
spare diet, and the next morning take and ride him first, till he begin to
sweat* then give him the Eggshels filled with Tar and Salt as before
prescribed, and as soon as he has taken that, give him with a Horn the
aforementioned drink made of Chamberly, Vinegar and Mustard, all at the mouth,
except two small hornfuls which must be powered into his Nostrils, which when he
has taken, ride him again as much as you did before, set him up, and clothe
and litter him warm, and so let him stand upon the Bit until three or four a
Clock: then un-bit, and give him a warm Mash, and order him in all things as is
usual for Horses taking Physic. Give him this Medicine or Drink every other
third day, if the Horse be strong, and if he be weak in body, once in three or
four days: And this is an infallible Cure in three or four times giving, if it
be rightly given, though he be far spent.

Proved.

CLXXX. To cure the Glanders running at the Nose: Also all Colds, and Rheums.
FIrst observe this, always when you give him Oats, put some Honey to them, and
rub them very well together betwixt your hands, continue to do thus, till he
leave running at the Nose: This is one of the best and most certain Cordials
that I know, for it disperseth all the Phlegm and Choler, it also purges the
Head and Brain, it purifieth the Blood, it venteth evil Humors, it causes a
good digestion, and freeth a Horse from Glanders, Colds, Catarrhs, Rheumes,
running at the Nose, etc.

Proved.

CLXXXI. For a Fistula or Gangrene in the Foot, by reason of some Channel-Nail,
which has lain long and deep in the Foot, that breaks out above the Hoof, and
causes the sole of the foot to come out, and causes the Leg and Pastern to
swell very much.
IF this Nail cause the sole of the foot to come out, and do break out above
the Hoof, and cause the Pastern and Leg to swell, but in case the Sole of the
Foot be not come out, then take it out as you were directed formerly, by
girting the foot-lock hard, and when you have taken out the Sole of the foot as
you are there directed, search the wound with a little Towe at the Instruments
end, to see which way and how far the Cannel-Nail went; when you see where the
holes are, drop in ten or twelve drops of the oil of Turpentine, and take a
little fine Towe, or a little Lint at your Instruments end, and dip it in the
Turpentine, and put it in Tentwaies, then over this Tent lay to the bottom of
the Hoof a handful of Nettle-tops, and a handful of Salt well beaten together,
stuff his foot well with Towe, and let it lie on twenty four hours, and ever
when you dress it take off the Shoe, and when you have dressed it tack on the
Shoe again, dress it thus once a day with a Tent dipped in Turpentine, and laid
to the Sole first, and then the Nettles and Salt over that, till you see the
Sole come on a little, and when you see it a little grown, then apply the
Poultis following in this manner (but not before) and lay over the Poultis,
Hards or Towe, and over the Towe a piece of Leather, and over the Leather
splinters of wood with his Shoe taken off, and set on again as you were showed
in another place; let him stand dry and in the house till he be whole, which
will be in a few days; the Poultis must lie on the first dressing twenty four
hours, the second dressing forty eight hours, the third dressing forty eight
hours, and so continue till the Sole of the foot be grown firm and strong
again: The Poultis is thus made, Take half a pint of salt Beef or Pork brine,
and put it into a Skillet, a quarter of a pound of Kitchinstuff grease, and
when you have boiled these two a pretty while together, put some Wheatbran to
it, and make it not too thick nor too thin; when you have taken out his Sole,
and untied the Cord about his Pastern, if it bleed much, then put a handful of
Salt into the bottom of the Foot, with Towe, Hards or Flax, between the Sole of
the Foot and the Shoe, and Splinters and a piece of Leather over it, to keep it
in, at twenty four hours take it off, and lay on the Nettles and Salt as you
were before directed, but no otherwise: Thus much for the Cure of the sole of
the Foot. But mark what follows, which belongs to the foregoing Receipt;
which is, when the nail in the foot does not only cause the Sole of the foot to
come out, but also breaks out above the Hoof, and causes a Gangrene or
swelling in the Pastern, and so up the Leg. In this case, after you have
searched it with a little fine Towe or Hards, with your Instrument's end, then
drop into the hole a few drops of the oil of Turpentine, and after that put in
a tent dipped in the oil of Turpentine into the hole as far as you can, and
immediately apply the Poultis, laid upon a large Linen cloth, to the swelling
in the Pastern, and up the Leg so far as the swelling goes, and bind it close
to with another cloth that it may not come off, tie him up to the Rack for
seven or eight hours, that he may not pull it off with his mouth, let it lie on
the first dressing twenty four hours, and for the other dressings the time you
were directed before, till the Swelling be down, and the Sore be whole: always
put in a tent dipped in the oil of Turpentine, before you lay this Poultis to, or
any other thing: If the Hoof come off and it swell, and break out above the
Hoof, if all these happen together at once, you must observe the distinct
directions. The Cure of that in the sole of the Foot, from that which breaks
out above the Hoof, and apply each Cure to each Disease; In this case the
Poultis must be first applied above the Hoof, because when the sole of the Foot
is taken out, you must not lay the Poultis to the sole of the Foot till it be a
little grown, and further, with the great pain and continual holding up his
Foot from the ground, his Sinews in the bent of his leg will be shrunk; to
remedy which, use the oil of Swallows, as you may see for a Blood-Spavin in
Receipt CLXXII. But if you cannot get the oil of Swallows, if his Sinews be
knit or stiff, then rub in some Trotters-oyl, which is made of Sheeps-feet, it
is to be had at the Tripehouses, but for want of either of these, boil some
Hog's Grease and Aqua-vitae together, and rub it in with your hand cold, which
Receipt is incomparable for shrunk sinews.

Proved.

CLXXXII. For a strain in the Coffin joint, or a Sive-bone in the Socket of the
Hoof.
FOr Remedy, Take off the Shoe, and then pare the bottom of the Foot as thin as
you can, till the blood do almost appear; you shall know in what place the
strain is in, by taking the Foot in your hand, and wrying it to you and from
you, if it be there he will shrink at it much when you thus turn his Foot, when
you find where it is, make this Poultis and lay it to hot. Take a pint of
powder-Beef or Porkbrine, and a quarter of a pound of Kitchin-stuff grease, put
them into a Skillet, and boil them together half an hour, then take some
Wheatbran and put to it, make a Poultis thereof, not too thick nor too thin,
then set on the Shoe again, and put a good quantity of this Poultis as hot as
you can into the sole of the foot, then stuff the sole with Towe or Hards, and
either splinter it in with a flat stick, or with a piece of a sole of Leather,
to keep it in, and let it lie on forty eight hours, then take a long linen
cloth and spread the rest of the Poultis scalding hot all about the top of the
Hoof, the Pastern, and up the Leg so far as the swelling goes, and let it lie
on 48 hours, at the end of which take it off and lay on another, and let it lie
on as long, and so likewise a third or fourth, till you see him go sound, which
will be in a very few days, and after a weeks time he will not complain of it:
If you have occasion to ride him, after the third dressing you may ride him
eight or ten miles moderately; a little before you set him up wash his Legs,
and when they are dry take off his Shoe, and lay the Poultis to as before: This
Poultis is nothing differing from that in the Receipt before. Proved.

CLXXXIII. A Purge for filthy Slime, and to carry away the peccant Humors,
which Surfets have engendered in the Body.
TAke a pint of White Wind, or a quart of new Ale, which you can best get, as
much of the best powder of Me^hoacan as you can take up with a shilling at four
times, put them together and give it lukewarm, ride him gently a mile or two
and set him up warm, and let him stand upon the Bit five or six hours, then
give him a warm Mash, and half an hour after give him Oats and Bran mingled
together a little at a time, wet his Hay that night: This will make the slime
to come away in great flakes upon the Dung; if after this his stomach fail,
then give him Whitewine and Honey, and the Cordial. This is a very rare purge,
but before you give it, use the directions in the Receipt next following.
Proved.

CLXXXIV. For an Horse that is sick and surfeited of Colds, whether in Winter
or in Summer.
FIrst let him Blood, then give him this Purge afterward: Take of Aloes
Siccatrina two ounces made into fine powder; then make it up into Pills with
fresh or sweet Butter, and give it the Horse over night, he having been kept
fasting the whole day before, and instead of Hay, Straw, or any other meats
hard of digestion, 2 or 3 days before you give him this Purge, or any other
Purge, let his meat be either Wheat or Rye-bran, as you may see in a Receipt or
two a little before, or you may give him Bread made on purpose with Beans,
Pease, and some Rye in it, or else Oats well sifted both dry and sweet, and let
his drink be White-water only, which is nothing else but Wheat-bran sodden in
Water; the next day in the Morning early, after he has taken the Pills, give
him either a sweet Mash, or for want thereof White Water, for that will make
his Pills to work the more kindly that Day, then let him fast till night,
during which time he will purge freely; then at Night give him White water, and
after Oats and Bran, and give him for all Night Hay sprinkled with water. If he
be strong bodied, it may be he will not purge the first day, but the second day
be sure he will: in the mean time give him Mashes, Wheat-Bran boiled, and White
water or clean Oats, and after his purging keep him warm and well littered,
keep him to White water for two or three days after, or longer, and when you
give him cold water, let it not be with excess, this is an excellent purge.
Proved.

CLXXXV. For a strain in the Pastern of an Horse.
Take of the grounds of Beer called Heild, that is* when all the Beer is drawn
quite off, Hens Dung* Nerve oil, and fresh Grease that never had Salt in it,
make a Poultis thereof and lay it to: This is admirable for a strain in the
Pastern or Foot-lock, and will make a speedy Cure. Proved.

CLXXXVI. For an Horse-Cough.
Take five or six Eggs, and lay them in sharp White Wind Vinegar, till the
shells be somewhat soft, then take his tongue in your hand, and put them down
his throat one after another: give them fasting, and let him neither eat nor
drink of five or six hours after, ride him a mile or two after you have given
it him, give him warm water to drink for once and keep him warm. This will Cure
him forthwith.

Proved.

CLXXXVII. A suppository to supple the Guts, to dissolve and send forth all dry
and hot Excrements.
FIrst Rake him, then take a great Candle of four in the pound, and cut off
three Inches at the smaller end, then anoint the other part being the bigger
end, with Sallet oil or fresh Butter, and soput it up into his fundament, then
hold his Tail to his Tewel half an hour, or tie it close to his Tewel with a
strap of Leather, and fasten it to his Sussingle, and in half an hours time it
will be dissolved, then let loose his Tail and leap his back, and trot him up
and down till he do begin to empty and purge himself, for by this means it will
work the more kindly, this is the most gentle of all suppositories. Proved.

CLXXXVIII. Another Suppository to be given, that you dare not without peril of
his life, give him any thing else inwardly: Then give him this.
TAke of common Honey six ounces, of Saltnitre one ounce and a half, of
Wheat-flowr and of Anniseeds in fine powder, of each one ounce, boil all these
together to a stiff thickness, and so make it into Suppositories, anoint these
as you did the former, and your hand also, and so put it up into his Fundament
the length of your hand, then tie his Tail between his Legs, for half an hour,
in which time the Suppository will be dissolved, then ride him and order him as
before. This is very good, especially in case of Surfeits or inward Sickness,
rake him first and keep him warm. Proved.

CLXXXIX. A Suppository to purge Phlegm.
TAke a piece of Castle-soap, pare it and bring it into the fashion of a
Suppository, put it into his Fundament and order him as before.

Proved.

CXC. A Suppository to purge Choler.
TAke Savin as much as will suffice, and stamp it to Mash, and stamp with it
Stavesacre and Salt, of each two ounces, boil them in common Honey, as much as
will suffice to make it thick, and so make it up into Suppositories, and
Administer one of them like as you are before shown, and order him accordingly.

CXCI. A Suppository to purge Melancholy.
TAke a Red Onion and pill it, and jagg it cross-waies with your Knife, and so
administer it, and order him as before.

CXCII. Another Suppository.
TAke a pint of common Honey, and boil it till it be thick, and make it up into
Suppositories as it cools; and administer it as before, and order him also in
the like manner: This Suppository purges evil humors, it cools and
comfort the body very much, and causes a good appetite to meat. Proved.

CXCIII. Directions for Suppositories.
FIrst observe this: When at any time you do administer either Potions,
Glisters, or Suppositories, you must do it in a Morning fasting: Except
necessity urge the contrary.

Secondly, you must not at those times suffer him to drink cold water, no not
with exercise, but either sweet Mashes or White water.

Thirdly, it is very needful before you administer any of these, that you Rake
him; and be sure you keep him warm.

A Suppository is but a preparative for a Glister or Purge, to make that way
that they may purge the better.

CXCIV. To kill Worms.
TAke Bears-foot and Savin, Lavender Cotton, the flower of Brimstone, give it
him in sweet wort; it will kill the Worms, and turn them into slime; Ask for
the powder of Caroline at the Apothecaries, it is as admirable a thing to kill
Worms as can be, you may give three or four pennyworth at a time, in a pint
and a half of sweet Wort. It is a very safe thing.

Proved.

CXCV. To purge by Grass in Summer.
IF your Horse be surfeited, or has been over labored the Winter before, then
turn him out when the Grass is in the best heart: Now that Grass that will
purge most and best, is a new mowen Meadow, for that will rake his Guts very
well, nor will he in such a place gather flesh; therefore let him go there not
above fourteen or eighteen days, and then put him into some other Pasture,
where the Grass has not been touched with a Sith, and there he will belly
well, and in a short time recover much flesh, and be very fat and lusty; This
purging will scowr him bravely, and send away all ill humors and surfeits, and
ease his Limbs marvellously well, and do his legs and feet much good, and
refine his corrupt blood, and make him nimble and full of spirit. Also to mow
green Rye before it be eared is most wholesome, for it scowreth, cleanses, and
cools the body very much, so do the leaves of Sallow, and the leaves of the
Elm-tree.

CXCVI. A Glister for a Sick, surfeited, Diseased Horse.
IF your Horse be newly taken from Grass, and that you hold it needful his body
should be cleansed from bad humors, which either his Grass or former Surfeits
might bring: First Rake him, and then give him this Glister following, ( viz.)
Take Mallows three handfuls, Marsh Mallow Roots cleansed and bruised two
handfuls, Violet leaves two handfuls, Flax-seed three spoonfuls, and as many of
the Cloves of white Lilly Roots, as you may easily hold in your hand; boil all
these in fair water from a Gallon to a Wine quart, then strain it, and put
thereto one ounce of Sena, which must be infused or steeped in the Liquor three
hours standing upon the hot Embers, then put thereto half a pint of Sallet oil,
and then administer it Glister-wise blood-warm, and cause him to keep it half
an hour or longer if you can; and the best time to give this Glister, is 3 or 4
days before the full or change of the Moon, but if occasion be, you may give
it any other time; this Glister is to be given to a foggy fat Horse, which
otherwise cannot be kept clean. It purges the Guts abundantly, and it is
chiefly to be given an Horse that is newly taken from Grass. And the next day
after you have given him this Glister, give him this drink following.

CXCVII. A Purge.
TAke the strongest Ale-wort one quart, of Honey a quarter of a pint, of London
Treacle two ounces, mix and brew them all together, and give it him blood-warm;
then keep him upon the bit six hours after, warm clothed and well littered, and
give him a sweet Mash, and White water, and Rack him with sweet Wheat-straw,
Oats, and Bran, this both purges and comfort; two or three days after,
give him this Drink following.

CXCVIII. Another Purge.
TAke a pint of White Wind, and put into it one ounce of Sena, and let it steep
all night, next morning betimes strain it, and put into it one ounce of the
best Aloes made into fine powder, half an ounce of Agarick, and a spoonful of
powder of Liquorish, mix and brew them altogether, and so give it to your Horse
blood-warm, and ride him gently a quarter of an hour after it, and so set him
up warm, well clothed and littered, and let no cold air come to him, nor let
him eat nor drink of six hours after; and at night give him a sweet Mash, or
White water, and let his Rack-meat be sweet Wheat-straw, Oats and Bran; the
next day let him blood, and prick him in the third Furrow of his Mouth, and if
his blood be bad, take two quarts from him, but if good, scarce a quart: keep
him warm, and give him sweet Mashes or White water, and put into his Drink
either the powder of Brimstone or of Fenygreek, or Turmerick, or of Elecampana,
one or more together, according as he will be brought to like and take them;
which being well mixed, put thereof into his Drink a spoonful at a time. And
this is very good to cool the blood, purge Choler, and other peccant humors,
and to purify and refine the Blood. And this is not only good for Horses newly
taken from Grass, but for other sick, surfeited, diseased Horses.

CXCIX. Another Purge.
TAke one ounce and a quarter of Gentian, slice it thin, boil it in a quart of
Beer till it come to a pint, and give it him blood-warm; It will make him very
sick for a short time, but you need not fear, for it will do him much good; let
him fast after it five or six hours, and then give him a Mash or White water,
and the next day give him this following.

Mingle Honey with his Oats, and rub the Honey and Oats well together between
your hands, and continue thus doing till you see him quite cured, which will be
when he has done running at the Nose. This is one of the best Cordials I know,
for it disperfeth all Phlegm and Choler, it purges the head and Brain, it
purifieth the Blood, it venteth evil Humors, it causes good Digestion, and
freeth an Horse from Glanders, Colds, Catarrhs, Rheums, running at the Nose,
and the like, as you may see set down before, which is the same with this; this
and the Purge before going you must give one after another, And for the Honey
and his Oats mixed together, I conceive you may give them in other causes; as
when an Horse is troubled with cold Rheums, running at the Nose, Glanders,
Phlegm, or Choler or such like.

CC. Of Glisters and their use
A Glister is given as a preparative to a purging Drink, and a Glister by
cleansing the Guts refreshes the Vital parts, and prepares the way before;
wherefore I advise every Farrier before he give a Drink, whether purging or
otherwise, if the Horse be not at that time soluble in body, that after
Blood-letting, the next day he give a Glister, this done he may the better give
what is requisite; otherwise if he give the Drink before the Glister, he may
stir and provoke the evil humors, which by reason of much costiveness and
Wind, and other impediments in his Guts, do attempt to make their passage by a
contrary way, which cannot be done without great hazard to the life of the
Beast. I therefore advise, if the beast be costive and bound in his body, to
give a Suppository or Glister First, and after his Purging drink.

CCII. What a Decoction is.
A Decoction is a broth made of diverse Herbs, as Mallows, Marshmallows,
Pellitory, Camomile, and sometimes white Lilly roots, and such like things
which we do boil in water to a third part, and sometimes we use instead of
herbs and water, to take the fat of Beef-broth, or the broth of a Sheep's head,
Milk, Whey, or sum such kind of Liquor.

CCII. What quantity of Broth or Decoction is put in to make a Glister.
FOr the quantity, we do administer according to the Age, strength and
greatness of the Horse; for if he be of a strong and able body, of large growth
and stature, fat and lusty, in this case we put in three pints; but if he be of
a small growth, weak, sick, feeble or, lean, in this case a quart is enough; we
use to put in half a pint of oil, of Salt two or three drams, and sometimes we
put in Verjuyce, and sometimes Honey, as we see cause: Drugs we use, as Sena,
Cassia, Agarick, Anniseeds, oil of Dill, oil of Camomile, oil of Violets,
Sugar Candy, and such like.

CCIII. For the quantity of Drugs put into a Glister.
FOr the quantity of Drugs, you ought not to exceed the quantity of three
ounces in one Glister at the most, neither put in above four ounces of Butter,
and let it be but bloodwarm when you administer it.

CCIV. What time is fit for an Horse to keep his Glister.
When you give it him, let him be empty, and before he do receive it, Rake him:
After you have given it him let him keep it half an hour, it will do it the
more good, the longer he keep it the more good it will do him, hold his Tail
close to his Fundament all the while.

CCV. The length of the Glister-pipe.
THe best Instrument wherein to give an Horse a Glister, is a Pipe made of
purpose, which ought to be twelve inches in the Shank, which must also be put
home: And when the Glister is put into his body, then draw a way the pipe by
degrees not all at once.

CCVI. A Glister for a Horse that is bound in his body and cannot dung.
TAke the fat of Beef-broth (if he be Sick, weak and lean) a pint and a half is
enough, if he be big, fat and lusty, you may put in two or three pints, put to
it half a pint of English-hony; and two drams of white Salt, mix them well
together, and administer it Glister-wise blood-warm, then clap his Tail close
to his Tewel for half an hour or longer, and if then it do not work, as I am
confident it will, ride him up and down a gentle trot for half an hour more,
but not till he sweat, then set him up warm clothed and littered, and let him
stand upon the Bit four or five hours, in which time he will purge kindly, then
unbit him and give him sweet Hay, and an hour* after that, give him White
water, and he may drink any cold water in a day or two after, and this is the
best cure for this Malady. This Glister will open and loosen the body, bring
away all offensive humous, remove all obstructions engendered in the body by
means of excessive heat, it cleanses the Guts, and purges away all slimy
substance. And this you will find to be the best remedy for a Horse that is
costive and bound in his body, and that cannot dung. This has been often
proved.

CCVI. For another Glister
TAke two handfuls of Melilot, two handfuls of Pellitory, if you can get
neither of them, then take two handfuls of Camomile, but Pellitory is the best
if it can be gotten, boil any one of these in a Decoction of water to a third
part, then ad to it of Sallet-oyl and of Verjuyce of each half a pint, of Honey
four ounces, of Cassia two ounces, mix all these together and administer it
lukewarm, and order him as in the first Glister. It will open the Gut and body
very well, and will take from him all hurtful and oftensive humors. It will
carry away all Spungy matter. It will allay the biliousness and sharpness of
humors, cleanse inward Ulcers, and much refresh and comfort the vital spirits*
But if you find that by giving too great a quantity your Horse purges and
scoureth, longer or more violently than you think is meet and good, or for fear
it should stir up in him more bad humors upon the sudden, then you may easily
allay it with this following Glister*

CCVIII. A Glister restringent to stop looseness.
TAke of the Decoction in the Glister aforegoing a pint, and put thereto as
much Cow's Milk as it comes warm from the Cow, and put also thereto the yolks
of three new laid Eggs, well beaten and mixed together, and give it blood-warm:
This Glister is only to be given to a Horse that is very laxative or does empty
himself too much, which is occasioned oft-times by over much debility or want
of strength, or when nature is very much offended: You may give this Glister as
often as need shall require, and till you see his looseness stop.

CCIX. A Glister for a fat foul-bodied Horse, that is newly taken from Grass,
or for any sick, surfeited, diseased Horse.
TAke three handfuls of Marsh-Mallow roots cleansed and bruised, Violet leaves
of each two handfuls, Flax seed three spoonfuls, the Cloves of white Lilly
roots a small handful, boil all these together in fair water, from a gallon to
a Wine quart, then strain it, and put thereto of Sena one ounce, which must be
steeped in the Liquor three hours standing upon the hot Embers, then put
thereto half a pint of Sallet oil, and being blood-warm administer it
Glisterwise, causing him to keep it above half an hour: And the best time to
give this, is three or four days before the full or change of the Moon, yet it
may be given with much benefit at any other time. This Glister purges the Guts
abundantly, and is chiefly to be given to an Horse that is newly taken from
Grass.

CCX. A Glister for Melancholy.
TAke of Whey a quart, of Anniseeds in fine powder two pennyworth, the leaves
of Mallows two handful, boil all these together till the Mallows be soft, then
strain it, and put thereto of sweet Butter four ounces, and when the Butter is
melted, give it Glister-wise bloodwarm. This purges Melancholy, it causes a
good Appetite which before was wanting, it refreshes the dulled Spirirs, and
causes a good Digestion, if the Horse be kept warm and well tended.

CCXI. A Glister to be given in case of a desperate Sickness: It helps
Fevers: is good against the Pestilence and all languishing Diseases, most
excellent against Surfeits either by Provender or otherwise: And will give
great strength in short time, if it be rightly made and carefully given.
TAke of the Oil of Dill, oil of Camomile, oil of Violets, and Cassia, of each
half an ounce, of brown Sugar Candy in powder three ounces: Then take of Mallow
leaves a handful, and boil them first to a Decoction in fair water, then strain
it and put thereto the before-named Ingredients and give it blood-warm. This is
most sovereign to be given in case of a desperate Sickness, and for all the
Diseases aforementioned.

CCXII. A Glister for the Pestilence and all Fevers.
TAke half an ounce of the pulp of Coloquintida the seeds and rind taken away;
of Gum dragant three quarters of an ounce; boil all these in three quarts of
water to a quart with Centory and Wormwood, of each half an handful, and a
quarter of an ounce of Castorium, strain it and dissolve it into the Decoction
of Gerologundium three ounces, and of white Salt three drams, and of Sallet oil
half a pint, and then administer it Glister-wise blood-warm, this has been
often proved to be most excellent good for the Diseases above mentioned.

CCXIII. A Lenitive Glister.
TAke the Decoction of Mallows and put to it either of fresh Butter four
ounces; or of Sallet oil half a pint, and give it Glister-wise blood-warm; this
is the gentlest Glister of any before prescribed, for it is both a loosener,
and a great cooler of the body, and does infinitely ease pain. Also it is good
for Convulsions or Cramps, and most singular against costiveness, proceeding
from any sickness or surfeit by Provender or Foundring in the Body.

CCXIV. A Glister for the Colic or any Sickness or Gripings in the Gutts or
Belly.
TAke Salt water or new made Brine two pints, dissolve therein a pretty
quantity of Soap, and administer it Glister wise, bloodwarm; this is averred to
be the most excellent for the Colic, or any Sickness or griping in the Guts.

CCXV. Of Sickness in Horses.
SIcknesses in general are of two sorts, One offending the whole Body, the
other a particular Member; The first of them not visible; The other apparent,
and known by its own demonstrations. Of the first then, which offends the whole
Body, as Fevers of all sorts, the Quotidian, Tertian, Quartan, and Hectic,
Fevers Pestilential, Fevers accidental, or the general Plague, are known by
these signs: much trembling, panting, sweating, and sallow countenance, hot
breath, faintness in labor, decay in stomach, costiveness in the body, any or
all of which when you perceive; First let the Horse blood, and then give him
Treacle: Take of Celedine roots and leaves a good handful, as much of Wormwood,
as much of Rue, wash them well and then stamp them in a Mortar* which done boil
them in a quart of Ale, then strain them, and add to the Liquor half a pound of
sweet Butter, then being lukewarm give it to the Horse to drink.

CCXVI. Of the Headache, Frenzy or Staggers.
THe Signs to know these Diseases, which are all of one Nature, and all of one
effect Mortal, hanging down of the head, reeling; The Cure is, to let the Horse
blood three mornings together, after walk him a while, then clothe him, cover
his Temples over with a plaster of Pitch, and keep him exceeding warm, let his
meat be little and his Stable dark.

CCXVII. Of the Sleeping evil.
THe Sleeping Evil or Lethargy in Horses, proceeds from cold Phlegms, moist
humors which bind up the vital parts, and make them dull and heavy: The signs
are, continual sleeping or desire thereunto. The cure is, to keep him much
waking and twice in a Week to give him as much sweet Soap as a Duck-Egg in the
nature of a Pill, and after give him to drink new milk and Honey.

CCXVIII. Of the Falling Evil, Planet-struck, Nightmare, or Palsy.
ALthough these Diseases have several faces, and look as if there were much
difference between them, yet they are in nature all one, and proceed all from
one offense, which is only cold Phlegm, thick humor engendered about the Brain,
and benumming the Senses, weakening the members sometimes causing the Horse to
fall down, and then it is called the falling Evil, sometimes weakening but one
Member only, and then it is called Planet-struck, sometimes oppressing a Horses
stomach and making him sweat in his sleep, and then it is called the
Nightmare, sometimes spoiling one special Member by some strange contraction,
and then it is called the Palsy. The cure for any of these infirmities, is to
give the Horse this purging Pill: Take of Tar three spoofuls, or of sweet
Butter the like quantity, beat them well together with the powder of Liquorish.
Annis-seeds and Sugar Candy till it be like a paste, then make it into three
round Balls, and put into each Ball two or three Cloves of Garlic, and give
them to the Horse, observing to warm him both before and after, and keeping him
fasting two or three hours both before and after.

CCXIX. Of the general Cramp, or Convulsion of Sinews.
CRamps are taken to be contracting or drawing together of Sinews of any one
member, but Convulsions, are when the whole body, from the setting on of the
head to the extremest parts are generally contracted or stiffened. The Cure of
either, is first to chafe and rub the member contracted with Vinegar and common
oil, and then rap it all over with wet Hay, or rotten Litter, or else with
woollen Clothes, either of which is a present remedy.

CCXX. For any Cold or Cough whatsoever, wet or dry, or for any Consumption or
Putrefaction of the Lungs whatsoever.
A Cold is got by unnatural Heats and too sudden cooling, and these Colds
engender Coughs, and these Coughs putrefaction, and rotteness of the Lungs: The
Cure therefore for them all in general, is to take a handful or two of the
white and greenest Moss, which grows upon an old Oak, or any old Oaken Pale or
Wood, and boil it in a quart of Milk till it be thick, and being cold and
turned to a jelly, then strain it and give it to the Horse lukewarm every
morning, till his Cough cease.

CCXXI. Of the Running Glanders, or mourning of the Chine.
TAke of Auripigmentum two drams, of Tuslagsinis as much made into powder, then
mixing them together with Turpentine till they be like Paste, and making
thereof little Cakes, dry them before the fire, then take a Chasingdish of
Coals, and laying one or two of the Cakes thereon covering them with a Tunnel,
and when the smoke arises, put the Tunnel into the Horses Nostrils, and let
the smoke go up into his head, which done ride him till he sweat; do this once
every morning before he be watered, till the Running at his Nostrils cease, and
the Kernels under his Chaps be lessened.

CCXXII. Of Hide-bound or Consumption of the Flesh.
HIde-bound or Consumption of the Flesh, proceeds from unreasonable travel,
disorderly Diet, and many Surfeits. It is known by a general dislike and
leanness over the whole body, and by the sticking of the skin close to the body
in such sort, that it will not rise from the body: The Cure is, first to let
the Horse blood, and then to give him to drink three or four mornings together
a quart of new Milk, with two spoonfuls of Honey, and one spoonful of course
Treacle; Let his food be either sodden Barley, warm Grains, and Salt, or Beans
splitted in a Mill, his drink Mashes.

CCXXIII. Of the Breast-pain or any other sickness proceeding from the heart,
as the Antocow and such like.
THese Diseases proceed from too rank feeding and much fatness, the signs are;
A faltering in his fore legs, a disableness to bow down his neck, and a
trembling over all his body: the Cure is to let him blood, and to give him two
mornings together, two spoonfuls of Diapente in a quart of Ale and Beer, for it
alone puts away all infection from the heart.

CCXXIV. Of Tired Horses.
IF your Horse be tired injourneying, or in any Hunting match, your best help
for him, is to give him warm Urine to drink, and let him Blood in the mouth to
suffer him to lick up and to swallow the same: then if you come where any
Nettles are, to rub his mouth and sheath well therewith, then gently to ride
him till you come at the resting place, where set him up very warm, and before
you go to bed give him six spoonfuls of Aqua-vitae, and as much provender as he
will eat, the next morning rub his Legs with Sheeps-feet oil, and it will
bring fresh nimbleness to his Limbs.

CCXXV. Of Diseases in the Stomach, as Surfeits, lothing of Meat or Drink.
IF your Horse with the Glut of Provender, or eating raw food, has given such
offense to his stomach that he casts up all he eats or drinks, you must
then give him comfortable things; as Diapente or Trephenicon in ale or Beer,
then keep him fasting; Let him have no food but what he eats out of your
hand, which would be bread well baked, Oats, and after two or 3 bits, a Lock of
sweet hay, and his Drink should be only new milk, till his stomach have gotten
strength, and in a bag you shall continually hang at his Nose sour brown bread
steeped in Vinegar, at which he must ever smell, and his stomach will quickly
come again to his first strength.

CCXXVI. Of foundring in the Body.
FOundring in the Body is of all Surfeits the mortallest and soonest gotten; it
proceeds from intemperate riding an Horse when he is fat, and then suddenly
suffering him to take cold, and there is nothing sooner brings this infirmity,
than washing a fat Horse: The signs are sadness of Countenance, Staring hairs,
stifness of Limbs, and loss of Belly: The Cure is only to give him wholesome
meat, and bread of clean Beans, and warm drink, and for two or three mornings
together, a quart of Ale-brewed with Pepper and Cinnamon, and a spoonful of
Treacle.

CCXXVII. Of the Hungry Evil.
THe Hungry-Evil is an unnatural and overhasty greediness in an Horse to devour
his meat faster then he can chew it, and is only known by his greedy snatching
at his meat as if he would devour it whole: The Cure is to give him to drink
Milk, and Wheat meal mixed together a quart at a time, and to feed him with
Provender by little and little till he forsake it.

CCXXVIII. Of the Diseases of the Liver, as Inflammations, Obstructions, and
consumptions.
THe Liver which is the Vessel of Blood, is subject to many Diseases, according
to the distemperature of the Blood, and the Signs to know it, are a stinking
Breath, and a mutual looking toward his body. The Cure is, to take
Aristolochia longa, and to boil it in running water till half be consumed, and
let the Horrse drink continually thereof, and it will cure all evils about the
Liver.

CCXXIX. Of the Diseases of the Gall, and specially of the Yellows.
FRom the overflowing of the Gall, which is the vessel of Choler, spring many
mortal Diseases, especially the Yellows, which is an extreme faint mortal
Sickness, if it be not prevented in time: The Signs are, yellowness of the Eyes
and Skin, and chiefly underneath his upper Lip next to his fore-teeth, a sudden
and faint falling down by the high way, or in the Stable, and an universal
sweat over all his body: The Cure is, first to let the Horse blood in the neck
or mouth, or under the Eyes; then take two pennyworth of Saffron, which being
dried and made into fine Powder, mix it with sweet Butter, and in manner of a
Pill, give it in Balls to the Horse three mornings together; Let his drink be
warm, and his hay sprinkled with water.

CCXXX. Another for the same.
TAke a pint or more of Milk, and make a Posset of it, with strong Ale or Beer
a pint or more, take off the Curd clean, then take two ounces of Castle-sope,
pare it in thin small slices, and boil it in the Posset Drink about a quarter
of an hour, then when it is but Lukewarm give it the Horse to drink, then take
his back and ride a gentle pace an hour together, set him up warm: This has
been often tried upon Christians as well as Horses, they taking and walking and
stirring upon it an hour or more, taking it but two mornings together; it never
failed of curing those that had been so far spent with it, that they have been
given over by all men.

CCXXXI. Of the Sickness of the Spleen.
THe Spleen which is the Vessel of Melancholy when it is overcharged
therewith, grows painful, hard and great, in such sort, that sometimes it is
visible: The signs are much groaning, hasty feeding, and a continual looking to
the left side only. The cure is, take Agrimony, and boil a good quantity
thereof in the water the Horse shall drink, and chopping the leaves small, mix
them with sweet Butter, and give the Horse two or three good round Balls
thereof in the manner of Pills.

CCXXXII. Of the Dropsy, or evil Habit of the Body.
THe dropsy is an evil habit of the Body, which is engendered by Surfeits, and
unreasonable labor, alters the color and complexion of the Horse, and
changes the hairs in such an unnatural sort, that a man shall hardly know the
Beast with which he has been most familiar. The cure is, to take a handful or
two of Wormwood, and boil it in Ale or Beer a quart or better, and give it the
Horse to drink Lukewarm morning and evening, and let him drink his water at
noon,

CCXXXIII. Of the Colic, Belly-ach, or Belly-bound.
The Colic or Belly-ach, is a fretting, gnawing or swelling of the Belly or
great bag, proceeding fromwindy humors, or from eating of green corn or pulse,
hot grains without salt or Labor, or bread Dough-baked: and bellybound is when
a Horse cannot Dung: The cure of the Colic or Belly-ach is, to take good
store of the herb Dill, and boil it in his water that you give the Horse to
drink, but if he cannot dung, then you shall boil in the Water good store of
the herb Fumitory; and it will make him dung without danger or hurting.

CCXXXIV. Of the Lask or Bloody Flux.
THe Lask or Bloody Flux, is an unnatural Looseness in a Horse's body, which
being not stayed, will for want of other Excrements make a Horse void blood
only, The cure is, to take a handful of the herb Shepherds-purse, and boil it
in a quart of strong Ale, and when it is Lukewarm take the seeds of Woodroof,
stamp them and put them in, and give it the Horse to drink.

CCXXXV. Of the falling out of the Fundament.
THis comes through infinite mislike and weakness. The Cure is, take
Town-cresses, and having dried them to powder, with your hand put up the
Fundament, and then strew the powder thereon, after it lay a little Honey
thereon, and then strew more of the powder with the powder of Cummin, and it
helps.

CCXXXVI. Of Bots and Worms of all sorts.
THe Bots and gnawing of worms is a grievous pain, and the Signs to know them
are; the Horses often beating his Belly, and tumbling and wallowing on the
ground, with much desire to lie on his back: The Cure is; take the seeds
bruised of the herb Ameos, and mix with it Honey and make two or three Bals and
make the Horse swallow them down.

CCXXXVII. Of pain in the Kidneys; pain to Piss, or the Stone.
ALL these Diseases spring from one ground, which is only Gravel and hard
matter gathered together in the Kidneys, and so stopping the Conduits of the
Urine: The signs are, that the Horse will only strain to piss, and that often,
but cannot. The Cure is to take a handful of Maiden hair, and steep it all
night in a quart of strong Ale, and give it the Horse to drink every morning
till he be well: This will break any stone whatsoever in a Horse.

CCXXXVIII. Of Pissing of Blood.
THis comes with over-travelling a Horse, or traveling him sore in the Winter
when he goes to grass. The Cure is, take Aristolochia Longa and boil it in a
quart of Ale, and give it the Horse to drink Lukewarm, and give him also rest.

CCXXXIX Of the Strangullion.
THis Disease is a soreness in the Horses Yard, and an hot burning when he
pisseth: The Signs are, he will piss often, yet but a drop or two at once: The
Cure is, to boil in the water he drinks good store of the herb Hogfennel, and
it will cure.

CCXL. Of the Colt-Evil, Muttering of the Yard, Falling of the Yard shedding of
the Seed.
ALL these Evils proceed from much Lust in a Horse, and the Cure is the powder
of the herb Avens, and the leaves of Betony, stamp them well with White Wind to
a moist Salve and anoint the Sore therewith, and it will heal all imperfections
of the Yard: But if the Horse shed his seed, then beat Venice Turpentine and
Sugar together, and give him every morning a good round ball thereof, till the
seed stay,

CCXLI. Of the particular Diseases in Mares, as Barrenness, Consumption, rage
of Love, casting Foles, hardness to Fool: and how to make a Mare cast her Fool.
IF you would have a Mare barren, Let good store of the herb Agnus Castus be
boiled in the water she drinks: If you would have her fruitful then boil good
store of Motherwort, in the water: If she lose her belly, which shows a
Consumption of the womb, you shall then give her a quart of Brine to drink,
Mugwort being boiled therein: If your Mare through high keeping, grow into
extreme Lust, so that she will neglect her food through the violency of fleshly
appetite, as it is often seen amongst them, you shall house her for two or
three days, and give her every morning a ball of Butter and Agnus Castus chopped
together: If you would have your Mare cast her Fool, take a handful of Betony
and boil it in a quart of Ale, and it will deliver her presently: If she cannot
Fool take the herb horse-mints, and either dry it or stamp it, and take the
powder of the juice, and mix it with strong Ale, and give it the Mare and it
will help her: If your Mare from former bruises or strokes, be apt to cast her
Foles, as many are, you shall keep her at Grass very warm, and once a week give
her a warm mash of drink, this secretly knitteth beyond expectation.

CCXLII. Of drinking Venom, as Horse-Leaches, Hens-Dung, etc.
IF your Horse have drunk horse-leaches, eaten Hens-dung, Feathers, or such
like venomous things, which you shall know by his panting, swelling or
scowring; you shall take the herb Sowthistle, and drying it beat it into
powder, and put three spoonfuls thereof into a pint of Ale, and give it the
Horse to drink.

CCXLIII. Of Suppositories, Glisters, and Purgations.
IF your Horse by Sickness, strict Diet, and too vehement Travel, grow dry and
costive in his Body, as it is ordinary, the easiest means in extremity to help
him, is to give him a suppository: The best of which is to take a Candle of
four in the pound, and cut of five inches at the bigger end, and thrusting it
up a good way into his Fundament, presently clap down his Tail and hold it hard
to his Tewel, for a quarter of an hour, or half an hour, and then give him
liberty to dung: But if this be not strong enough, then you shall give him a
Glister. And that is, Take four handfuls of the herb Annise, and boil it in a
pottle of running water till half be consumed, then take the Decoction and mix
it with a pint of Sallet Oil, and a pretty quantity of Salt, and with a Glister
pipe give it him at the Tewel. But if it be too weak, then give him a Purgation
thus: Take twenty Raisins of the Sun stoned, and ten Figs slit, boil them in a
pottle of running water till it come to a jelly, then mix it with the powder of
Liquorish, Annis-seeds, and Sugarcandy, till it be like Paste, make it into
Balls, and roll it in sweet Butter, and so give it the Horse to the quantity of
three Hens Eggs.

CCXLIV Of Neesings and Frections.
THere be two other excellent helps for sick Horses, as Frictions and Neesings;
The first to comfort the outward parts of the Body, when the vital powers are
astonished, the other to purge the head when it is stopped with phlegm, cold and
other thick humors: And of Frictions, the best is Vinegar and patch Grease
melted together, and very hot chafed into the Horses Body against the hair: and
to make a Horse Neese, there is nothing better then to take a bunch of
Pellitory of Spain, and tying it to a stick put it up into the Horses Nostrils,
and it will make him Neese without hurt or violence.

CCXLV. Of the Diseases, in the Eyes, as watery Eyes, Blood-shotten Eyes, Dim
Eyes, Moon Eyes, Strokes on the Eyes, Warts in the Eyes, Inflammation in the
Eyes, Pearl, Pin, Web, or Haw in the Eye.
UNto the Eye belongs many Diseases, all which have their true Signs, and
their Names; And as touching that which is watery, blood-shotten Dim,
Moon-stricken or Infla, med, they have all one cure. Which is, to take
Wormwood, beat it in a Mortar with the Gall of a Bull, strain it and anoint the
Horses Eyes therewith, and it is an approved Remedy: But for a Wart, Pearl, Pin
or Web, which are Evils growing in or upon the Eyes, to take them off; take the
juice of the herb Betony, and wash his Eyes therewith, and it will waste them
away: For the Haw every Smith can cut it out.

CCXLVI. Of the Impostume in the Ear, Poll-Evil, Fistula, Swelling after
Blood-letting, any Galled Back, Canker in the Withers, Setfast, Wens,
Navel-Gall, or any hollow Ulcer.
THese Diseases are so apparent and common, that they need no other Description
but their Names, and the most certain Cure is, to take Clay off a mud or Loam
wall strawes and all, and boil it in strong Vinegar, and apply it Plaster-wise
to the Sore, and it will of its own nature search to the bottom and heal it,
provided that if you see any dead or proud flesh arise, that then you eat or
cut it away.

CCXLVII. Of the Vives.
FOr the Vives, which is an Inflammation of the Kernels between the chap of the
Neck of the Horse, Take a Pennyworth of Pepper, Swines grease a Spoonful, the
juice of a handful of Rue, Vinegar two spoonfuls, mix them together, and then
put it equally into both the Horse's Ears, then tie them up with two flat
Laces, shut the Ears that the Medicine may go down, which done let the Horse
blood in the Neck and in the Temple-Veins, and it is a certain Cure.

CCXLVIII. Of the strangle, or any Boil or Botch, or other Impostume whatsoever.
ALL these Diseases are of one nature, being only hard boyls or Impostumes,
gathered together by evil humors either between the Chaps or elsewhere on the
Body: The Cure is, take Southern-wood and dry it to powder, and with
Barley-meal and the yolk of an Egg make it into a Salve, and lay it to the
Impostume, and it will ripen it, break it and heal it.

CCXLIX. Of the Canker in the Nose, or any other part of the Body.
TO heal any Canker in what part soever it be; Take the juice of Plantain, as
much Vinegar, and the same weight of the powder of Allom, and with it anoint
the sore twice or thrice a day, and it will kill it, and cure it.

CCL. Of Stanching of Blood, whether it be at the Nose, or proceeding from any
Wound.
IF your Horse bleed violently at the Nose, and, you cannot stanch it, then you
shall take Betony and stamp it in a Mortar with Salt, and put it into the
Horses Nose, or apply it to the wound and it will stanch it; but if he be
suddenly taken in riding by the High way, or otherwise, and you cannot get this
Herb, you shall then take any Woollen Cloth, or any Felt hat, and with a Knife
scrape a fine Lint from it, and apply it to the place bleeding and it will stop.

CCLI. Of Pain in the Teeth, or loose Teeth.
FOr any pain in the Teeth, take Betony, and seethe it in Ale or Vinegar till
half be consumed, and wash all the Gums therewith; but if they be loose, then
only rub them with the leaves of Enulacampana, or Horse-holm, after they have
been let blood, and it will fasten them.

CCLII. Of Diseases in the mouth, as blood-Rifts, Liggs, Lampras, Camery,
Inflammaytion, Tongue burnt, or the Barbes.
IF you find any infirmity in the Horses mouth as the bloody Rifts, which are
Chaps or Rifts in the Palate of the Horses mouth; The Liggs, which are little
Pustula's or Bladders within th-Horses Lips: The Lampra's, which is an
excrescence of flesh above the teeth: The Camery, which are little Warts in the
roof of the mouth: Inflammation, which is little Blisters; Barbes, which are
two little Papps under the Tongue: Or any hurt on the Tongue by the Bit or
other, wise: you shall take the leaves of Wormwooda and the leaves of
Shurewort, and beat them in, Mortar with a little Honey, and with it anoint the
Sores, and it will heal them: As for the Lampra's they must be burned.

CCLIII. Of the Crick in the Neck.
FOr the Crick in the Neck, you shall first chafe it with the Friction,
mentioned in Receipt CCXLIV, and then anoint and bath it with Soap and Vinegar
mixed together.

CCLIV. Of the falling of the Crest, Manginess in the Mane, or the shedding of
the Hair.
ALL these Diseases proceed from Poverty, Mislike, or over-riding; and the best
Cure for the falling of the Crest is Blood-letting, or good keeping, with good
store of meat, for strength and fatness will ever raise the Crest: But if the
Mane be Mangy, you shall anoint it with Butter and Brimstone: And if the hair
fall away, then take Southernwood and burn it to Ashes, then take the Ashes,
and mix them with common Oil, anoint the place therewith, and it will bring
hair presently; both smooth, thick, and fair.

CCLV. Of pain in the Withers.
AN Horses Withers are Subject to many Griefs and Swellings, which proceed from
cold humors, sometimes from bad Saddles, therefore if at any time you see any
Swellings about them, you shall take the Herb Hartstongue, and boil it with Oil
of Roses, and apply it very hot to the Sore, and it will assuage it, or else
break it and heal it.

CCLVI. Of Swaying the Back, or weakness in the Back.
THese two infirmities are very dangerous, and may be eased, but never
absolutely cured; therefore where you find them, Take Coleworts and boil them
in Oil, and mix them with a little Bean flower and chafe it into the Back, and
it will strengthen it.

CCLVII. Of the Itch in the Tail. or the general Scab or Manginess; or of the
Farcy.
FOr any of these Diseases, take fresh Grease and yellow Arsenick, mix them
together, and where the Manginess or Itch is, there rub it hard in, the Sore
being made raw before; But if it be for the Farcion, then with a knife slit all
the Knots, both hard and soft, and then rub in the Medicine; which done, tie up
the Horse so that he may not come to bite himself; after he has stood an hour
or two, take old piss and Salt boiled together, and with it wash away the
ointment, and then put him to meat: Do this two or three days together;
Provided always, that you first let the Horse Blood, and take good store from
him, and give him every Morning a strong Scouring, or a strong purge, both
which are showed before.

CCLVIII. Of Foundring in the Feet.
THere be two sorts of Foundring, a dry and a wet: The dry is incurable, the
wet is thus to be cured and helped; First, pare all the Soles of his Feet so
thin that you may see the quick, then let him blood at every Toe, and let him
bleed well, then stop the Vein with Tallow and Rosin, and having tackt on
hollow Shoes on his Feet, stop them with Bran, Tar, and Tallow, as boiling hot
as may be, and renew it once in two days for a week together, then Exercise
him much, and his Feet will come to their true use and nimbleness.

CCLIX. Of any Halting which comes by Strain or Stroke, either before or
behind, from the Shoulder or Hip down to the Hoof.
THere are many Infirmities which make an Horse halt, as pricking the Shoulder,
a wrench in the Nether-joints, splatting the Shoulder, Shoulder-pight, strains
in joints and such like: all which, since they happen by one accident, as
namely by the violence of some slip or strain, so they may be cured by one
Medicine, and it is thus. After you have found where the grief is, as you may
do by griping and pinching every several Member, and there where he most
complains, there is his most pain and grief; you shall take Vinegar,
Bole-Armoniack, the whites of Eggs, and Beanflower, and having beaten them into
a perfect Salve, lay them very hot to the sore place, and it will cure it.

CCLX. Of the Splent, Curb, bone bone-Spavin, or any Knob, or bony Excression,
or Ring-bone.
A Splent is a bony Excression under the Knee or the fore-Leg The Curb is the
like behind the hinder Hough. The Spavin is the like on the inside of the
hinder Hough; And the Ring-bone is the like on the Corner of the Hoof. And the
Cure is, first upon the top of the Excression make a slit with your Penknife,
the length of a Barly-corn or little more, and then with a fine Cornet raise
the skin from the bone, and having made it hollow the compass of the Excression
and no more, take a little Lint and dip it in the Oil of Origanum, and thrust
it into the hole, and cover the Knob and so let it abide till you see it rot,
and that Nature casts out both the Medicine and the Cure: As for the
Ringbone, you shall need to do no more but scarifie it, and anoint it with the
oil only.

CCLXI. Of the Mallander, Selander, Pains, Scratches, Mellet, Mules, Crown
Scabs, and such like.
FOr any of these you shall take Verdigrease, and soft Grease, and Grind them
together to an ointment, put it in the Box by it self; Then take Wax, Hogs
grease and Turpentine, of each alike, and being melted together, put this Salve
into another Box, then when you come to dress the sore, after you have taken
off the Scab and made it raw. you shall anoint it with the green Salve of
Verdigrease and fresh Grease, only for two or three days; it is a sharp Salve,
and will kill the Cankerous humor. Then when you see the Sore look fair, you
shall take two parts of the yellow Salve, and one part of the green Salve, and
mix them together, and anoint the Sore therewith till it be whole, making it
stronger or weaker, as you shall find occasion.

CCLXII. Of any Upper Attaint, or Nether-Attaint, or any hurt by Overreaching.
THese Attaints, are Strokes or Knots, by overreaching; either on the back
Sinew of the Fore-leg, on the Heels or nether-joynts, and may be healed safely
by the same former Medicine, which healed the Malander or Selender in the
former Receipt; Only for the overreaches, you shall before you apply the Salve,
lay the sore plain open without hollowness, and wash it with Beer and Salt, or
Vinegar and Salt.

CCLXIII. Of Wind-Gauls.
THese are little Blebs or small soft swellings on each side the Foot-lock.
procured by much travel on hard and Stony ways: The Cure is, to prick them and
let out the Jelly, and then dry the Sore with a Plaster of Pitch.

CCLXIV. Of interfering or Shackle-gauls, or any Gaulings.
INterfering, is hewing one Leg against another and striking of the skin; It
proceeds from weakness, and straightness of the Horses pace, and
Shackle-gauling is any gauling under the Footlock: The cure is to anoint them
with Turpentine and Verdigrease mixed together, or Turpentine alone if it
rankle not too much.

CCLXV. Of the Infirmities of Hoofs, as false Quarters, Loose Hoofs, and
Hoof-bound, Hoof-running, Hoof brittle, Hoof hurt, Hoof soft, Hoof hard, or
generally to preserve Hoofs.
THe Hoof is subject to many infirmities-As first, to half quarters, which
comes by pricking, and must be helped by good shooing, where the Shoe must
bear on every part of the Foot but upon the half quarters only. If the Hoof be
loose, anoint it with Burgundy Pitch, and it will knit it; if it be clean cut
off, then Burgundy pitch and Tallow molten together, will bring a new; if it be
bound or straightned, it must be well opened at the Heels, the Soal kept moist,
and the Cornet anointed with the fat of Bacon and Tar; if the srush of the Foot
run with stinking matter; it must be stopped with Soot, Turpentine, and
Bole-Armoniack mixed together, if it be brittle and broken, then anoint it with
Pitch and Linseed oil moulten to a soft Salve; If it be soft, then stop it with
Soap and the Ashes of a burnt Felt mixed together; if the Hoofs be hard, lay
hot burnt Cinders upon them, and then stop them with Tow and Tallow. And
generally for the preserving of all good Hoofs, anoint them daily with the
sward of Bacon.

CCLXVI. Of the Blood Spavin, or Hough bony, or any other unnatural Swelling;
from what cause soever it proceeds.
THese two are Pustules, or soft round Swellings; the first is of the inside of
the hinder Hough, and the other on the very huckle of the Hough, they are soft
and very sore: The Cure is first to bind up the Vein above, and let it blood
only from below, then having tied it fast with two Shoomakers ends on both
sides, then slit the Vein in two pieces, then take Linseed and bruise it in a
Mortar, mix it with Cow dung, and heat it in a Frying pan, and so apply it to
the swelling only, and if it break and run, then heal it with a plaster of
Pitch, and the Horse will never be troubled with a Spavin more. But if the
swelling come by strain or bruise, then take Pitch grease and melt it, anoint
the Sore therewith holding a hot Iron near it to sink in the Grease then fold a
Linen cloth about it, and it will assuage all Swellings whatsoever.

CCLXVII. Of Wounds in the Feet, as Gravelling, Pricking, Fig, Retrait, or
Cloying.
IF your Horse have any wound in his Foot, by what mischance soever, you shall
first search it, to see if it be clear of any Nails point, or other Splent to
annoy it, then wash it very well with White Wind and Salt, and after tent it
with the Ointment called Aegyptiacum, and then lay hot upon the tent, Flax or
Hards, with Turpentine oil and Wax mingled together, and anoint all the Hoof on
the top and Cornet, with Bole-Armoniack and Vinegar, do this twice in a day
till the sore be whole.

CCLXVIII. Hurts on the Cornet, as the Quitterbone or Matlong.
THe Quitterbone, is a hollow Ulcer on the top of the Cornet, and so is the
Matlong: And the Cure is, first to tent it with Verdigrease till you have eaten
out the Core, and made the wound clean, then you shall heal it up with the same
Salve that you heal the Scratches.

CCLXIX. To draw out a Stub or Thorn.
TAke the herb Ditany, and bruise it in a Mortar with black Soap, and lay it to
the Sore: and it will draw out the Splint, Iron or Thorn.

CCLXX. Of the Anbury, or Tetter.
THe Anbury is a bloody Wart on any part of the Horses body, and the tetter is
a Cankerous Ulcer like it. The Cure of both, is an hot Iron, to sear the one
plain to the Body, and to scarifie the other; then take the juice of Plantain
and mix it with Vinegar, Honey, and the powder of Allom, and with it anoint the
Sore till it be whole.

CCLXXI. Of the Gords or String-halt.
THis is an unnatural binding of the Sinews, which imperfection a Horse brought
into the world with him, and therefore it is certain it is incurable, and not
painful, but an Eyesore; yet the best way to keep it from worse inconvenience,
is to bath his Limbs in the Decoction of Coleworts.

CCLXXII. Of Spur-galling, and fretting the Skin and Hair.
FOr this there is nothing better than Piss and Salt, and to wash the Sore
therewith daily.

CCLXXIII. Of Sinews being cut.
IF the Horse Sinews be cut, take the leaves of wild Nep or Woodbine, and beat
them in a Mortar with May-Butter, apply it to the place and it will knit the
Sinews.

CCLXXIV. Of Knots in the Joints.
PAtch grease applied as is before showed for Swellings, will take away any hard
knot in the flesh, or upon the Sinews.

CCLXXV. Of Venomous Wounds, or bitings with a Mad Dog, Tushes of a Boar,
Serpents, or such like.
FOr any of these Mortal or venomous wounds, take Yarrow, Calamint, and the
Grains of Wheat, and make it into a Salve, and lay it to the Sore, and it will
heal it safely.

CCLXXVI. Of Lice or Nits.
THe filthiness of Vermin, is bred in a Horse through unnatural dislike and
poverty; The Cure is, take the juice of Beets and Staves-acre beaten together,
and with it anoint the Horses Body all over, and it will make him clean.

CCLXXVII. Of defending an Horse from Flies.
TAke the juice of Pellitory of Spain, and mixing it with Milk, anoint the
Horses bell therewith, and no Flies will trouble him.

CCLXXVIII. Of broken Bones, or Bones out of Joint.
AFter you have placed the bones in the true place, take the Root of Osmond and
beat it in a Mortar with the oil of Swallows, and anoint all the Member
therewith, then splent it, and roll it up, and in fifteen days the bones will
knit and be strong.

CCLXXIX. A most famous Receipt, to make an Horse that is lean, and full of
inward sickness, sound and fat in fourteen days.
TAke of Wheat Flour six pound, Anniseeds two ounces; Cummin-seeds six Drams,
Carthamus one Dram and a half, Fenygreek seeds one ounce two Drams, Brimstone
one ounce and a half, Sallet oil one pint, Honey one pound and a half,
White Wind a pottle: this must be made into a Past, the hard simples being
beaten into a Powder, and finely searced and kneaded together, and so made into
Balls as big as a man's fist, then every morning consume one of these Balls in
his cold water that he drinks Morning, and Evening, for fifteen days
together; and at first, if he be dainty to drink the water, yet care not, but
let him fast till he drink it, and after he begins to take it, he will drink it
with great greediness.

FINIS.
Books, Printed and Sold by Henry Twyford,
ANderson's Reports in 2 Vol. fol. Bendlows Reports fol. Bulstrods, and
Bridgmans Reports fol. Lord Cokes 12th. and 13th. Reports fol. Herns Pleader
fol. Huttons, Latches, and Lanes Reports fol. Ryleys Records of the Tower fol.
Shepards Grand Abridgm. fol. Shepards Assurances, Practical Counselor and Law
of Pleadings fol. Styles Reports, and Owens Reports fol. Townesends Tables fol.
Wingates Maxims of Law fol. Manley on Cowels Interpreter fol. Dukes Law of
Charitable uses. Astons Placita Latina Rediviva. Brownlows Declarations, and
Judicial Writs. Brownlows Reports, first and second part. Complete Clerk.
Gregory's Moote Book English. Hughes Grand Abridgment 3. Vol. Hughes of
Original Writs. Shepards Marrow of Law, and Touchstone. Brevia Selecta. Brooks
Reading on Limitations. Clerk of Assizes, and Clerk of the Peace. City Laws.
Cokes Copyholder. Complete Attorney and Solicitor. Sir John Davis of
Imposition. Wingates Body of Law with Summary. Hawks Grounds of Law. Plowdens
Abridgment. Book of Judgments in the Kings Bench. Kitchen of Courts English.
Lord Leigh of Wards and Liveries. Lamberts Duties of Constable. Shepards sure
Guide for Justices. Manleys Abridgment of Cokes 12th. and 13th. part. Wingates
Abridgment, and Body of Law. Manbys Continuation of Wingate. Practica Walliae.
Shepard of Corporations. Stones Reading on Bankrupts. Judges Resolution on the
Stat. of Bankrupts. Practice of the Exchequer. Vernons Consideration on the
Exchequer. Justice restored. Philips Principles of Law. Landlords Laws. Youngs
Vade Mecum of Justice. Arcana Clericalia. Herns Law of Conveyances, and Modern
Assurancer Gentleman's Jockey, and Cow Leech. History of Italy. Burtons
Antiquities of England. Minister of State first and second part. Howels
Londinopolis. History of Swedeland and Poland. Grotius Annals. Wingates Clerks
Tutor to Arethmatick. Chemical Galenist. Countess of Arundels Secrets. Sir John
Finnets Observations on Foreign Ambassadors. Life of St. Paul. Private
Devotion. Discontented Colonel. Plays. The Stepmother. Plays.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil near
the Royal Exchange.
THe admired Piece of Physiognomy, Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, etc. fitted for
Gent. By Richard Sanders. Fol. Price 12. s. The so well entertained Work, The
new World of English made Words, etc. By E. P. Gent. Fol. 10 s. Mar^ clausum,
or, the Right and Dominion, or Ownership of the British Seas, etc. Fol. pr. 10
s. Dr. Gells Remains, or his notes on the new Testament. in Fol. pr. 30 s.
Christian Religions Appeal to the Bar of common Reason, a very Learned piece
by J. Smith. of Colchester. Fol. pr. 12 s. The sphere of Mouilius with very
large and learned Notes, illustrated with Cuts, by E. Sherborn. Esquire Fol. pr. 30
s.
Quarto.
The Conveiancer's Light, or, The Complete Clerk, etc. 12 s. Don Juan Lamberto,
a Comical History of the late past times in Droll. 1 s. A Treatise of Taxes and
Contributions, very requisite for statesmen, etc. 1 s A new description of the
Country of Surinam. The Ingenious Satyr against Hypocrites. The Batchelors
Banquet, or fifteen degrees of Marriage.
Large Octavo,
Modern Fortifications, with Brass cuts by Sr Jonas Moore, pr. 2 s. 6 d. Latin
Primitives and Derivatives after their termination. by Jo Goad. Mr of
Marchanttaylors School 1 s. 6 d. A Physical and Anatomicall Treatise of the
Nature and office of the Pancreatick Juice through the Body of man* by J. P. M
D. pr. 2 s. The Practical Gauger; A plain method for Gauging allsort, of
Vessels by Jo Main. Arithmetic, made easy, etc. By Sr. Jonas Moor. Baker's
Arithmetic, etc. 2 s. 6 d. Fax novn Linguae Latinae, A new Torch to the Latin
Tongue, etc. 8 s. Abce darium Scholasticum, or the Grammar Scholars Abcedary,
etc. 1 s. 6 d. The Psalms of K. David Paraphrased, by M. Smith. 3. s. Culpepers
Last Legacy to his Wife, etc. 2 s. 6 d. Culpepers School of Physic. Culpepers
Semeiotica Uranica, or his Judgment upon Diseases, etc. 2 s. 6 d. The
accomplished Cook, the best in the Kingdom. 5 s. Wits Interpreter, with
Addition of these Courtly Games, viz. L'hombre, Piquer, Chess, Gleek, and
Cribbidge, etc. pr. 5 s. Loveday's Letters newly Reprinted. 2 s. 6 d. The
Complete Midwives practice enlarged. The History of the Turkish Wars, etc. 2 s.
A Store house to the Latin Tongue, etc. The Glories and Triumphs of his Majesty
Charles the Second, 2 s. A Plat form for purchasers, rules for Building 2 s. 6
d. An Historical Essay, endeavoring to show, that the Language of China is the
primitive Language; by J. Web Esquire. 2 s.
Small octavo and Twelves.
A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad times, by the Reverend Bp Hall.
etc. 1 s. The natural History of Nitre, by W. C. 1 s. The art of Simpling, etc.
by W. Coals. 1 s. The Queens closer opened, 2 s. 6 d. Juvenal and Persius,
Farnaby's Notes. Farnaby's Phrases. Dux grammaticus, per John Clark. The
fearful State of Francis Spira. 8 d. Adagia Scotica, Scotch Proverbs, etc. 6 d.
A Discourse of the Small Pox etc. by Dr. T. W. Cockers New Copy-Book, or
Englands Penman. A new and exact Map of the world, etc. A large and exact Map
with a true Description of the City of London, in cloth, etc. 12 s. Cleavelands
Poems Enlarged, etc. 2 s. 6 d. Dr. Bunworth on the French Disease. The Royal
Buckler, or Lectures for Traitors. An Epitome of Barclays Summum Bonum. The
Life of Dr. Thomas Fuller, etc. Danger of Apostatizing to the Romish. Religion.

