SAINTS Blessed for ever: OR, Gods People never forsaken

Asuring every true Believer, of their Blessed Estate, and Condition: very
profitable to read, and comfortable to every Believing Soul that truly fears
God.

Being a rich Portion of Gods love to his People; and worthy to be kept in
memory for ever.

Together with several persuasions to poor Sinners, to leave their sins, and
come to Christ by Repentance.

By Roger Hough.

Psalm. 37.25. I have been young, and now am old; yet have I not seen the
Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging bread.

London, Printed by E. Crowch, for T. Vere, at the sign of the Cock in St.
Johns-street. 1667.

Licensed, May the 4th. 1667.

RIch Treasures we in earthen-vessels find;
Often I have been considring in my mind,
God his own People never will forsake;
Eternally, them to him he will take.
Reverend Readers, this in mind recall,
His word shall stand, when other things shall fall;
Oh do not doubt, but daily make request
Unto the Thrown of Grace, with humblness;
Give God the glory which to him is due,
His Word and Promises, will daily comfort you.
Saints blessed for ever, etc.
Hebrews 13.5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content
with such things as ye have: For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee.


AMongst all other precious promises, God has made to his own poor people,
this is not the least, which is communicated by the Author of this Epistle to
the Hebrews; so that those whom ye Lord has chosen, for his own people, by
virtue of this Promise, may holdly say as in the following verse, The Lord is
my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. In this text of
Scripture we have several things considerable; as first, a double Exhortation,
branching it self into two Heads, first consisting of our Conversation, Let
your conversation be without covetousness; and secondly consisting of our
Contentment, and be content with such things as ye have: And then you have the
ground or reason of all, in this assured Promise of God, For he has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. For the first Exhortation against the
sin of Covetousness, ye have the evil of this sin laid out in ye words of our
blessed Apostle Paul to Timothy, Tim. 6.9, 10. But they that will be rich, fall
into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of
all evil, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith,
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Now secondly, for the second
thing here exhorted unto, which is Contentedness; you have the good of it laid
out in these words, as in 1 Timothy 6.6. Godlidess is great g^in with contentment.
And verse. 8. And having food and raiment, let us therewith be content. This
lesson our blessed Apostle had learned himself, and therefore from experience
teaches it to all that truly fear God, Phil. 4 11 Not (says he) that I speak
in respect of want, for I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be
content. The like we read of good Jacob, he being blessed by his father, and
sent to Padannar^m, there the Lord appeared to him in a vision at Bethel,
confirming and making good this very Promise unto him, amongst several others,
Genesis 28. ver. 15. Behold I will be with thee, and will keep thee in all places
whither thou go, and will bring thee again into this land, for I will not
leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of. This good
man notwithstanding, lays out this his Contentedness, in the 20 and 21 verses,
saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and
will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my
Fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. Now as touching this
assured Promise of God to his people, which is the very Ground and Life of all
our Performances (and Duties) and comfortable to the heart of every true
Believer, is written for our learning in these words. For he has said, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee. It represents it self unto us, in full
assurance that Gods people shall never be forsaken of God: or thus, God will
never leave nor forsake his people, though they may fall sadly under
afflictions, and Gods hand of correction may lie upon them, yet they shall
never be forsaken; though Zion may say, as in Isaiah 49.14. The Lord has
forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me; yet the Lord answers, verse. 15. Can
a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the
Son of her womb, yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee, says the
Lord. These promises of God are in several places of Scripture recorded, and
all to assure Gods people that they shall never be forsaken: God was with good
Jacob in his way to Padannaram, and also with Moses, by whom he wrought great
signs and wonders in the land of Egypt before Pharaoh, in the red Sea, and in
the wilderness; and these precious promises has ever attended Gods people in
their greatest adventures. It was made to good Joshua, Deuteronomy. 31.8. Joshua. 1.5.
As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, not forsake
thee; all which compared together holds forth to us ye truth of all, which is
this, That God will never forsake his people; God will be with them as well in
their poverty as prosperity, as well in their afflictions and trials, as in the
time of their flourishing estate and condition. God will be with them in all
times of persecution, God was with Israel in Egypt, with Joseph in prison, with
Moses at the red Sea, and in the Wilderness, with the Three Children in the
fiery Furnace, with Daniel in the Lions den, with Jeremiah in the dungeon, with
Peter, and John, and with Paul and Silas in prison: this Promise was renewed,
and made good by our blessed Savior himself, when he gave his Disciples their
Commission, Matt. 28.20. Lo (says he) I am with you to the end of the world.
Now seeing, beloved, such precious promises of God are of such concernment to
Gods people, I shall only, as I have opportunity and room in this small
volumn, First, show you, Who they are, that may be owned to be really the
people of God. Secondly, I shall give you some Grounds or Reasons, why Gods
people shall never be forsaken. Thirdly, This will aford several Cautions to
the people of God to labor and strive to make good their standing in the way
of an holy profession, whereby they may put on the whole Armor of God, and
walk by the examples of other precious Servants of the Lord. And in the last
place, A loving invitation to poor Sinners, inviting them to leave their sins,
and come to Christ by Repentance.

And First, who they are that may be owned to be the people of God, whereby
every discerning Soul may come to know his condition. Several Particulars I
might speak of in their discovery, but I shall only name these Three following;

First, They that are really the people of God, they have a discerning faculty
implanted in them by the holy Spirit of God, whereby they can discern in part,
and know the Will of God their Father, which gives them a full Assurance, that
they are the very flock of Christ. And first, they know the voice of Christ,
John 10.4. They know when Christ speaks unto them in the purity of the word,
without any mixture of humane invention or tradition brought in by the will of
man; and as they know the voice of Christ, so the voice of Strangers they will
not follow, every false way is a stranger to them, John. 10.5. And a stranger
they will not follow, but will flee from him, for they know the voice of
strangers. They have therefore a discerning faculty betwixt good and evil,
whereas the naturalman cannot discern the things of God, because they are
spiritually blinded, 1 Cor. 2.14, The naturalman receives not the things of
the spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, because they are
spiritually discerned. But a true believer he can discern and see through such
a glass, the Will of his heavenly Father.

Secondly, As they have a discerning faculty, so they have an assured
confidence in God; So that a gracious soul can say with cheerfulness as in
Micha 7.7. Therefore will I look up onto the Lord, I will wait for the God of
my Salvation, my God will hear me. A gracious Soul can look through all
difficulties and dangers in afflictions, and though it sees Gods hand lifted
up, yet it can say, as in Habak. 3.17, 18. Although the figtree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet will I rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my Salvation; the Lord is my strength, and he will
make my feet like Hindes-feet. Oh christians! its admirable for tongue to speak
or heart to conceive, ye assured confidence yt a gracious soul has in God,
that rests wholly upon ye promises of God, made over to them in Jesus Christ.
It was admirable in Abraham, when he went freely, at the command of God, to
offer his son Isaac, that was the only heir of promise, of whom it was said,
Genesis 21.12. In Isaac shall thy Seed be called; yet Abraham freely manifests
his faith. Accompting that God was able to raise him up even from the dead,
from whence he also received him as a figure, as says our Author to ye
Hebrews, chapter 11. v. 19. this assured confidence is a tried and precious faith,
which only appertains to true believers, 2 Pet. 1.1.

Thirdly, As they have an assured Confidence in God, so they have a Son-like
obedience to God. Those that are really the Lords people, they obey God as
their Father in all his commands, they will obey his word and his ordinances,
they know the voice of Christ as their shepherd, and therefore they will follow
ye Lamb whithersoever he goes; you may read the Laws of God imprinted in their
hearts by their outward walkings and godly conversation; they will be ashamed to
run into any manner of sin, either openly or privately, they are such as abhor
all manner of sin, and cannot endure to sin, 2 Cor. 3.2. Ye are our epistle
written in our hearts, known and read of all men. They bear ye badge and Name
of Christ along with them, they come freely in, their prayers they put up to ye
throne of grace, call God Father, as they are instructed in that blessed form
of prayer that our Lord and Savior taught his Disciples to say, Mat. 6.9. Luke
12.2. When you pray, say, Our Father, etc. which is the very marrow of all
prayers: And thus you see, beloved, That they that are really the Lords people,
they have, First a discerning faculty, whereby they can discern by the eye of
faith, the will of their heavenly father: and Secondly, they have an assured
Confidence in God: and Thirdly, they have a Son-like Obedience to God, and so
they own God as their Father; by which we may assuredly see God will not leave
nor forsake his own people, as our Savior says, Those that come unto me, I
will in no wise cast off.

Now there are several Grounds in ye Second place. Why God will not leave nor
farsake his people. The First is drawn from the Love of God: God has ever a
dear love to his own people; though love be a faculty in man, yet it is a
property in God, 1 John 4 8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is
love. verse. 9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, and
herein is love, not that we loved God but that he loved us first. The love of
God is from all Eternity, and to Eternity, it is the greatest Matter of
Antiquity in the world.

A Second Reason, Why God will never forsake his people, is drawn from the
Choice God has made of them, God has chosen them from Eternity, Deuteronomy. 7.7,8.
The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you because you were more in
number then any people, for you were the fewest of all people; but because the
Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn to your
fathers, etc. Our blessed Apostle so styles them in 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a
chosen Generation. Gods love to his people, begets his choice of them, they are
the chosen of God, and precious, his dearly beloved ones, in whom his soul
delights, Joh 15.16 Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. God has
chosen his people from the foundation of the world, and they are his Elect to
all eternity, for whom he loves once, he loves to the end; there is no change
in God, he varies not, he is one and the save yesterday and to day, and for
ever.

A Third Ground or Reason, Why God will never leave nor forsake his people, is
drawn from the Consideration of the price of their Redemption God has
purchased them at a high rate, as Gods love to his people, moves him to choose
them, so Gods choice of them moves him to redeem them, and so they become his
purchased inheritance, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. And ye are not your own, for ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your souls,
1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be ye not servants of men, 1 Pet.
1.18, 19. Forasmuch as ye know that you were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver nor gold, from your vain Conversation, received by tradition
from your fathers, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish and without spot. Therefore seeing here the unsearchable riches
of Gods love to his people, Oh! let us glorify God in our members, and double
our diligence in his service.

The Fourth Ground or Reason, Why Gods people shall never be forsaken, is drawn
from the great care God has over them. God has purchased them at a very high
rate; and that which a man buys dear, he will be very unwilling to cast away;
God therefore sets a continual guard over them, Psalm. 91, 11. to the end, He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, they
shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou dash thy foot against a stone,
etc. Gods care over his people is such, that they that will but truly rest upon
him, he will not suffer an hair of their heads to perish; as you may see Mat.
10.30. Acts 27.34. Beloved, God has ever been his peoples keeper, He that
keeps Israel, never slumbreth nor sleeps, Psalm. 121.4. Isa. 27.3. He ever
takes care of his own Inheritance.

The Fifth Ground, or Reason, Why God will never leave nor forsake his people,
is drawn from the Promises of God made over unto them: God has promised his
Presents to be with them to the end of the world, Mat. 28.20. God has promised
them deliverance from trouble, Job 5.19 He shall deliver thee in six troubles,
and in seven no evil shall touch thee: Gods promises to his people, are either
absolute or conditional, and those which are conditional, God looks that
believers should fulfill the conditions, and close with the promise; it is to
believers only that the promises are made, Acts 2.39. For the promise is to you
and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call.

The Sixth and Last Reason, Why God will never leave nor forsake his people, is
drawn from the high esteem God has of his people. He values them at a high
rate, they are his own peculiar treasure, Fxod. 19.5. Psalm. 35.4. For the Lord
has chosen Jacob to himself, and Israel his peculiar treasure. God esteems
them above all people of the earth, Deuteronomy. 10 15. They are his Jewels, Mal 3.17.
They are his precious ones, in whom he delights; And therefore God has a high
Esteem of them, they are his beautified ones, in whom he sees no deformity,
Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no spot in thee. The Lord
Jesus Christ sees a Beauty in them, and so he esteems them.

And thus you see it is plain, God will never leave nor forsake his people that
wait upon him, as it appears, First, In respect of his Love to them: Secondly,
In respect of his Choice of them. Thirdly, in respect of the price of their
redemption: Fourthly, In respect of his special care over them: Fifthly, In
respect of his Promises made over unto them: and Lastly, In respect of his
great Esteem of them.

Le^t us now therefore with all diligence set about to make our Calling and
Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Let us take our blessed Apostles Counsel laid out
for our instruction, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these Promises, dearly beloved, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness
in the fear of God. Oh Souls! let it be all your care and endeavor to honor
your Heavenly Father: Consider seriously, beloved, you can never do too much in
the Service of God, live up every day in new obedience to God.

God has given you a sure word of Promise, Oh! do not loyter in the Lords
Vineyard; has God Chosen you for his People, Oh! up and be doing the work of
the Lord: Consider seriously our God is a Holy God, and he cannot endure the
unfruitful works of darkness; let not any Afflictions you meet with in the Body
or Estate draw you from God upon any account, Satan is very full of policy, and
a most cunning Sophister, Wherefore that you may be the better enabled to
encounter with him, in the first place take unto you ye whole armor of God:
and Secondly, by the examples of other precious servants of the Lord, labor to
strengthen your graces, and build up your selves every day as objects to follow
such examples, First, take unto you the whole armor of God, which Armor is
recorded Ephesians 6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And indeed every piece of this Armor
is precious tried mettel, the which being clothed with, makes the Soul
beautiful in the sight of God, and will make you able to stand in the evil Day:
For if you but seriously Consider it, here is first Truth to you presented in
the Form of a Girdle; Truth is that that should be the very girdle of your
Loins, it is that that makes you like to your Heavenly Father, it imprints the
Image of Jesus Christ upon you, John 14.17. and 17.17. And Secondly, The breast
plate of righteousness is a most famous and rare piece of Armor, and turns
back all those bolts and fiery darts of Satan, from the heart of a true
Believer; this imprints in you the name of a precious Redeemer, who is called
the Lord our Righteousness.

Thirdly, There is another piece of this armor for the feet, having your feet
shod with a preparation of the Gospel of Peace, so that we must be active in
this our spiritual Warfare, with all our members, our feet must be made swift,
and prepared to run in all the ways of Gods Commandments, until we come to
this everlasting Prince of Peace.

In the Fourth place here is the great weapon of our Warfare, the Shield of
Faith, which we are Commanded above all others to take; it is that whereby we
are made able to quench all the fiery Darts of the wicked; as Faith is the most
rarest and excellentest above all other Graces, so its a weapon that will not
be turned back, as says the Author to the Hebrews, 11.1. Faith is the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.

Fifthly, Here is the Helmet of Salvation, which is a most rare piece of Armor
for a Believer to put on, and to close with Jesus Christ, who is the Salvation
of his People, Luke 2.30.

And Lastly, Here is the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, to
attend this great Weapon of your Warfare, the Shield of Faith, which is that
Weapon you should Continually gird upon your Thigh, alluding to that in the 45
Psalm, the 3 and 4 verses, Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most mighty; with
thy Glory and Majesty; and in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because of Truth
and meekness and Righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible
things. This Sword of the Spirit is a most prevalent Weapon, and Beloved, may
sometimes be alluded to the Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon, Judges 7.20. It
puts to flight all those Spiritual Midi^nites, and Enemies of our poor Souls.

So Beloved, you may see hereby, what a rare thing it is, to have on this whole
Armor of God: it Fortifies a Believer on every hand.

Secondly, By the Example of other precious Servants of the Lord, labor to
strengthen your graces, and nourish every Branch thereof: Every tender Plant of
Knowledge the Lord bestows upon you, nourish it, if you be sure it proceeds
from a right Principle; otherwise, if you perceive it is not according to the
Mind and Will of God, and you have no strength for the same in the Arm of
Faith, to smite with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, cast it
away; have nothing to do with such a Principle as is Erroneous and Corrupt.

First, Does God call you to Exercise your Faith? Look upon the Example of your
Father Abraham, who had many Trials upon that very account, and yet he
cheerfully, through Faith, under-went all, until it came to the very touch
stone of all Trials, which was the Offering up of his Son Isaac, of whom it was
said, That in Isaac shall thy Seed be called: and yet Abraham goes freely to
the Altar, accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead,
Heb. 11.17, 18, 19.

Secondly, Does God call you to Exercise your Hope? Consider that Faith and
Hope go both together, where the one is, the other cannot be wanting; For Faith
is both the Substance and Evidence of our Hope, Heb. 11.1. For what can we hope
for, except we have Faith to believe.

Thirdly, Does God call you to Exercise your Patience? Look back upon the
Example of good Job, who undergoes the hand of the Lord so cheerfully and
patiently, that he cries out at the last, Though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him, Job. 13.15. If you will but look back upon some of the Lords Servants
of old, you may learn by them your Duties; Learn with Abel, to get acceptance
with God: with Enoch, to walk with God: with Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness,
to get into Gods protection. Learn with Abraham, to act your Faith: with Jacob,
to wrestle with God: with Joseph, rather to submit to Prison, then to dishonor
God with a lustful Mistress. Learn with Moses Meekness, with David Repentance,
with Solomon Wisdom, with Job Patience, with Jeremiah Lamentation for the Sins
of the People; Learn of our blessed Savior, Jesus Christ, to take up your
Cross and follow him; seeing the goodness of God has so appointed it, that his
People shall never be forsaken. Oh! do not you fail in your performances;
Consider, God has not made his Choice of you in vain, (he has Loved you,
Chosen you, Redeemed you, taken Care over you, made out his Promises unto you,
and Esteems you above all others) therefore labor you every day to be Acting
in a way of holy Profession.

And now Beloved, to apply this Truth in a way of Invitation, is my whole
design at this time, though much might be said upon several accounts, yet the
main end of what I have more to say, is, To invite poor Sinners to come to
Christ by Repentance.

Sinners, you hear, God will never leave nor forsake his own people: they are
his own Inheritance, his peculiar Treasure, his beloved ones, in whom he
delights; And you will hear that dreadful Sentence passed against you at the
last, if you do not Repent, and come to Christ for Salvation, Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. Without Repentance, there is nothing of Comfort for you, but this
dreadful Sentence of Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity, Matthew. 7.23. Luke
13.3. I tell you nay, but except you repent, ye shall all likewise perish. As
the joy and comfort the people of God shall enjoy in heaven, is beyond the
reach of the eye of man to see, the ear to hear, the heart to conceive, and the
tongue of man to express: So the misery of the wicked in Hell, is beyond both
the eye to see, the ear to hear, the heart to conceive, and the tongue to
express. Oh Sinners! its indurable misery; it begins with you with a dreadful
Sentence, but it will never end, when Thousands of years are passed over, your
misery is never the less, your Torments still endure, and ye have never less
years to spend, your Torments will be as fresh as ever they were: Oh!
therefore, I pray you Sinner, come to Christ, leave of your Sins, and beg
earnestly for pardon and remission of your sins; the Lord has passed a
righteous Judgment against Sinners, you cannot lay the cause of your misery
upon another, Ezekiel 18.20. The Soul that sins shall die: the Son shall not
bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of
the Son, the Righneousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him: Nor you cannot lay the cause of
your misery upon God, Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live. Turn you, turn you from your evil ways: for, why will you die, O House
of Israel?

Oh Sinners! Why will you not come to Christ, methinks I hear a great Complaint
against you from the blessed word of God, John 5.40. And ye will not come to me
that you might have life. Oh Sinners! Consider there is no way to be saved, but
to come to Christ; the way to Heaven is by Faith in Jesus Christ, Acts 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy House. Now
that you may the better be encouraged to come to Christ, and to close with him,
Consider these few things following:

First, Christ invites poor Sinners to come, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye
that are weary and heavy laden, and you shall find rest for your Souls.
Sinners, be encouraged to close with Christ when ever he calls: defer not your
times: put it not off till to morrow: when God calls, then is your day: when
Christ invites, be you willing to close with him, for then is your acceptable
day of Deliverance, if you will but diligently obey. Be you therefore ready to
receive his offer, for then is the time of Love. Oh! poor Sinners, when ever
Christ knocks at the doors of your hearts, be you ready to receive him, and be
sure you open to him, lest he say at the great day of Judgment, Away from me,
ye workers of Iniquity; I called you at such a time and the very checks of your
Consciences told you that you were in a way of destruction; and if you had then
repented, and obeyed my voice, and opened unto me, I would have met you, and
have opened unto you the everlasting gate of Mercy; but now away, Depart from
me, I know you not.

Secondly, Consider Christ's Invitation is free, its upon free terms, Isaiah
55.1. Ho every one that thirsts, Come to the waters; and he that has no
Money: come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price. Come along poor Sinners, here is free Invitation for you from a
blessed Master, that will ever perform what he says, verse the 7th. Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. Do thou want Faith? beg earnestly of God for it; say,
Lord, I believe, help my unbelief: strive with all thy strength to obtain this
precious grace of Faith.

Thirdly. Consider poor Sinners, Jesus Christ has promised, That whosoever
comes unto him, he will in no wise cast out, Joh, 6.37. And you have it here
confirmed, That God will never leave nor forsake his people. Oh! therefore be
persuaded to come to Christ, and to close with him; and do not you think that
godliness is a solitary life, and dubious unto you; if you will but seriously
consider, there is more true joy in one hour in holy company, if they be such
as truly serve God, in all his ways and Commands, then all the World can
afford thee otherwise

Fourthly, Consider Sinners, as you come to Christ, and forsake your sins, you
come into the Verge of his Prayers, Christ prays for all them that are given
him of the Father, but he prays not for the world, Joh. 17.9. While you lie in
your sins, you are as dead men, you cannot come to be sharers with any of the
Lords Servants in our Saviors Prayers to his Father: Oh! therefore be
persuaded to come to Christ, and to close with him.

Lastly, Consider Sinners, what Jesus Christ has done to Redeem your souls
from Hell, if you will but come unto him, Isaiah 53 5. He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisment of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Jesus Christ has shed his
precious Blood to Redeem our Souls from misery: Oh Sinners! therefore be
persuaded to come to Christ, leave your former courses, destroy that Enemy of
your precious Souls, and close with this blessed Savior, and he will receive
you into his Favor, and so you will come to be of that blessed Number that
shall never be forsaken.

To Conclude, All at this time which I have to say unto you, I beseech you,
beloved, take along with you this excellent Exhortation of our blessed Apostle
Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21, 22, 23, 24. Prove all things; hold fast that which is
good: Abstain from all appearance of evil: And the very God of peace Sanctify
you wholly: and I pray God your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: Faithful is he that calls
you, who also will do it. For the which Coming and blessed Appearance, the
Lord, for his mercy sake, grant we may all be Prepared to receive the sweet
Bridgroom of our Souls unto all Eternity, for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

