THE EXERCISE OF PRAYER: OR, A Help to Devotion.

BEING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Happy Ascetick, OR Best Exercise.

Containing Prayers and Devotions, suitable to the respective EXERCISES With
Additional PRAYERS for several Occasions.

By ANTH. HORNICK D. D.

^ONDON Printed for Mark Pardon at the Black Raven, over against Bedford-house
in the Strand. 1685.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THe Bookseller being upon Printing a second Edition of the HAPPY ASCETICK, or
BEST EXERCISE, I thought it might not be amiss, in order to make those
Exercises more effectual, to add some Prayers, and Aspirations, whereby Souls
enamored with those pleasing Severities, might be enabled to arrive to a
greater facility in the practice of them. I intended at first to add them to
the Book, but the Devotions, swelling under my hand, I was upon second thoughts
prevailed with, to let them come forth in a Treatise by it self. Though the Age
we live in be full of dangerous Diseases, and Impiety be mounted up to a very
great height, yet in the midst of this crooked and perverse Generation, there
are persons, and those of the Church of England too, who seem ambitious to
emulate the Holiness of Martyrs, and the Sanctity of the Primitive Christians;
and as we have reason to bless God, who lets such Wheat thrive in the large
spot of ground that is overrun with Weeds, so it is but necessary, we should
upon all occasions, strengthen and help their Faith, who like Lot in Sodom, do
not only preserve their innocence, but by a secret Fire working in their
Hearts, rise to more than ordinary fervours. As in all other Sciences, there
are young beginners, as well as persons, who are arrived to perfection, so it
is in Religion; There are Children in Grace, as well as Young men and Fathers;
and as no man can be so weak, as to imagine, that I design these Helps for the
greater Proficients in goodness, so without my telling him, the Reader may
guess, that these Crutches are intended for the weaker Christians, who, if they
receive any benesit by them, I have my wish. To assist such, I was willing to
let these Devotions come abroad, not for the goodness of the composure, but to
put more Oil to those Lamps, which already shine before men, that they may go
on like the Sun unto a perfect day, and preserve their brightness, till the
coming of the Bridegroom, and be ready, against a cry is made at midnight;
Behold, the Bride groom comes, go ye out to meet him.

BOOKS Printed for, and sold by Mark Pardoe at the sign of the Black Raven over
against Bedford-house in the Strand.
THe Happy Ascetick, or the best Exercise; to which is added a Letter to a
Person of Quality concerning the holy Lives of the Primitive Christians, by
Anthony Horneck, D. D. in Octavo.

Delight and Judgment; or a Prospect of the great day of Judgment and its
Power, to damp and imbitter Sensual Delights, Sports, and Recreations. By
Anthony Horneck, D. D. in Octavo.

A Sermon preached before the King on the Fifth of November. By George Hooper,
D. D. in Quarto.

A Sormon preached before the Lord Mayor on the 30th of October. By George
Hooper, D. D. in Quarto.

Another Essay in Political Arithmetic, concerning the Growth of the City of
London, with the Measures, Periods, Causes, and Consequences there of 1682. By
Sir William Petty, Fellow of the Royal Society. In Octavo.

Observations upon the Dublin Bills of Mortality, and the State of that City.
By Sir William Petty, Fellow of the Royal Society, in Octavo.

Novels of Queen Elizabeth Queen of England, containing the History of Queen
Ann of Bullen, of Bassa Solomon and the Princes Eronima, in two Parts, in
Twelves.

Observations on Fevers und Febrifuges. Twelves.

The Plain man's way to Worship and Practice. In Twelves.

Becheri Minera Arienaria. In 4. -- de Nova Temporis. 4.

THE EXERCISE OF PRAYER.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 1. which is to Pray without ceasing.
O God Gracious and Merciful! who give power to the Weak, and strength to the
Feeble; who know the backwardness of my Heart, and the unwillingness of my
Soul to Spiritual Duties; who understandest all my Wants, and art acquainted
with all my Weaknesses, behold how loath my Soul is to have her conversation in
Heaven, and what excuses my Flesh makes to hinder my mind from frequent
addresses to thy Mercy-seat. I entreat thee to apply thy healing Hand to my
sickly Soul, and to fill it with Spiritual desires. Oh give me a praying
Spirit, and let my Soul follow hard after thee! Teach me to make a Spiritual
use of every thing, and instruct me to see the Creator in the Creature. Lord,
free my Spirit from the bondage of the Flesh, that it may mount up cheerfully
to thy Throne upon all occasions. Direct my Mind to look up in all my Actions,
and let me take notice of the Operations of thy Hand in all occurrences
whatsoever. Let thy good Spirit help my infirmities, and when I know not what
to say, my dearest Lord, suggest unto me how to fill my Mouth with Arguments.
Acquaint me with the art of Extracting good out of every thing. O that I had
that Spiritual temper, which might incline me to think of God, whenever I
behold the works of Creation and Providence! How sweet is it to walk with God!
O let no company be so pleasing to me as thine! Make me desirous to embrace all
opportunities to reflect on thy Perfections and Excellencies. Thou have both
commanded and promised spiritual Wisdom; O bestow upon me that excellent gift,
that I may know, how to glorify thee in this world, and arrive at last to that
glory which thou have promised to them that overcome, and continue faithful
unto death, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise 2. which is, Every Morning to resolve to tie
our selves that day to certain Rules of Living.
OThou who dwell in the Heavens, and yet humblest thy self to behold the
ways of the Children of men! Thou have been graciously pleased to reveal thy
Will to me, and given me Rules to walk by; Rules, which if a man follows, he
shall live for ever. How sweet are thy Testimonies! They enlighten the Eyes,
and give understanding to the Simple. How glorious is that Soul in thy sight,
that makes thy Will a Lanthorn to her Feet, and a Light unto her Paths! Lord in
these pleasant Paths I desire to walk; there is nothing like them. They end in
peace. I read of those who have found it so, they could not be mistaken. Thy
Spirit inflamed their Souls. They have ventured their lives to attain unto it.
O the Serenity! O the Calmness of mind! O the inward Joy, they found by walking
in the Paths of Righteousness! Why should not I take of this Tree of Life, as
well as they, and live! This, O Lord, I often think of, and see great
loveliness in all this, But my Will is weak, my Resolutions faint: When I
resolve, I meet with Waves and Billows, that dash my resolutions. O thou, whose
power is infinite, open thy Storehouse, and furnish me with Weapons to defend
my self against all assaults from the world, or the Devil! O strengthen these
feeble Knees: Hold up these weary Hands. I desire to follow thee; let thy
Spirit list me up, and cause me to run. Touch my Will with thy Scepter, that it
may bow to thy Commands. Manifest thy Power in my weakness; give me courage to
purpose, and to fulfill my purposes. When I would flinch in my resolutions, do
thou support me. When my Will would start back like a broken Bow, come in with
thy Salvation. Endow me with power from on high; through thee I shall do
valiantly: through thee I shall be able to overcome all difficulties. O leave
not my Soul in misery: Send from above and take me, draw me out of many Waters;
send out thine Arrows, and scatter my vain Imaginations. With thee I will run
through a Troop, by my God will I leap over Walls and Impediments. Quicken me,
O Lord, for thy Names sake, and for thy Righteousness sake bring my Soul out of
trouble. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God, thy Spirit is good, lead
me into the Land of uprightness, for thy mercies sake, for Christ's sake.

Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise 3. viz. Every day to spend half an hour, or
some such time, in thinking of good things.
O Thou whose Wisdom cannot by searching be found out! who have made me a
rational creature, and given me power to think of all thy wondrous Works. What
excellent Objects do thou set before me! Objects to delight, and edify my
Soul! O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes! O that my Soul might
ever dwell beside those still Waters! O teach me the art of Meditation. Give me
a large and apprehensive Mind. Awaken my slumbring Soul. Encourage it to fix
upon adequate objects. My Soul is a Spirit, O let it delight in things
agreeable to its nature. Since my Mind must be busy about something, let it be
employed in things that make for its everlasting Peace. Oh! how fickle are my
Thoughts! how inconstant my Contemplations! How soon, and how easily is my Mind
drawn away from spiritual things! To thee I flee, O hide me to save me. Let my
Treasure be in Heaven, that my Heart may be there also, O spiritualize my
Affections, that they may delight to be where thou art. Let spiritual Objects
become lovely, amiable, and charming in my eyes. Did I love them, I should
think of them: Were they dear and precious to me, how could I forbear
contemplating of them! O let their beauty appear to me. Take away the Veil from
my Face, which hinders me from seeing him that is altogether lovely. Incline my
heart to thy Testimonies. Anoint mine Eyes with Eye-falve, that I may see
greater loveliness in things that are not seen, than in those which are seen.
My Understanding is dark, O enlighten it. Clarify it with thy Beams. Let me
hate vain Thoughts; but thy Law let me love. O let me not grudge the time that
I spend in Meditation. Assure me, that this is Balsom to my Soul, and that by
these means the lines will fall to me in pleasant places, and I shall have a
goodly Heritage. The righteousness of thy Testimonies is everlasting, O give me
understanding and I shall live. There is Beauty, there is Satisfaction, there
is Life in spiritual Objects. O let me find them sweeter than honey unto my
taste. Discover those riches to me, that I may look upon them, and despise the
glittering Treasures of Egypt. These are deceitful things: These allure indeed,
but afford no lasting comfort. O give me a fight of that Wealth, which is not
liable to Corruption: I shall find it in the Mysteries of the Gospel. Thou have
said, the pure in Heart shall see God. O purify my Soul from fleshly Lusts
which war against it, that I may see, and discern what thou have laid up for
them that fear thee: and seeing it, may long after an eternal fruition of the
Light of thy Countenance, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 4. viz. To study deep Humility.
O Thou Lofty and Holy one, who inhabitest Eternity, and dwell in the high
and holy place, with him also that is of an humble spirit! Whether shall I go,
but to thee who have the words of eternal life! How shall I get this humble
Spirit, but by thy power and influence! Ah! how proud is my Heart! how loath am
I to submit to thy will! how loath to think ill of my self! how loath to bear
injuries! how loath to converse with thy poor members! How loath to be sensible
of my errors! How loath to acknowledge a fault! And yet all this while, I
believe that thou beholdest the proud afar off, and that nothing is more
abominable in thy sight! How apt am I to admire my self! How apt to harbor
high conceits of my endowments! How apt to hunt after the praise of men! And
what is all this but Wind? What is it but Smoke, and Air, and Vanity? How
suddenly do these things grow, and how suddenly do they die again! How sensual,
how carnal must that Soul be, that minds such things! How void of a sense of
greater beauties! how little affected, how little touched with the honor that
comes from God! How weak in Grace! how feeble in Religion, that has not
learned yet to leap over such Straws! This is my case, O Lord; I am that weak,
that empty Soul, and yet unwilling to confess that I am proud, and vain, and
lifted up: Pity me, O my God; make me sensible how far I am from the Kingdom of
God, till Humility brings me nearer. Crush whatever proud Thoughts and Desires
thou spyest in me. O put me in mind of my Duty, whenever any vain thoughts rise
in my Soul. Pull down in me all Imaginations that exalt themselves against
Christ Jesus. O let not my Heart be haughty, nor mine Eyes lofty; neither let
me exercise my self in things too high for me. Give me a sight of mine own
vileness. Let me not be cheated with false colors. Let thy greatness overaw my
Soul. Let the example of my Savior work upon me. How shall I be his Disciple,
and think of my self above what I ought to think. Let God arise, and let all my
vain Conceits of mine own worth be scattered. What am I but a handful of Dust!
What am I but a Beggar, and thy pensioner, and who lives upon thy charity! O
let these thoughts subdue my Soul. Make me as ambitious of an humble Spirit,
and lowly Mind, as others are of the greatness and admiration of the world.
Humility will make me great and honorable in thy sight. Let that honor
content me, let that privilege satisfy my Soul. O let a deep sense of my
guilt humble me; Then shall I with the Penitent Prodigal be welcome in my
Fathers house, and my Soul shall live, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 5. viz. To bridle our Tongues.
O God, by whom I am fearfully and wonderfully made, who have beset me behind
and before, and laid thine hand upon me, such knowledge is too wonderful for
me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it: How have I abused that Tongue thou
have given me to show forth thy praise! How long have I employed it about
things which do not profit! I am ashamed of it. O teach me to blush! O let me
see how I have perverted thy gifts, and misimproved my Talents! O let me value
thy Mercies better, and give me thy Grace to remember that I am not mine own.
Assure me that I am bought with a Price, to show forth the glory of him that
died for me. And can I show forth thy glory, if my tongue be not cautious of
offending thee? Can it look like glorifying thee, if that Member, which of all
the Organs of this mortal Frame, is most fitted for thy glory, fails in its
duty? The volubility, quickness, nimbleness, readiness, thou have planted here,
were all intended to trumpet forth thy glorious Attributes. O my God! I will
not hide thy Righteousness within my Heart, I will declare thy Faithfulness,
and thy Salvation. I will not conceal thy loving Kindness and thy Truth from
the great Congregation: Let me speak of thee with reverence and godly fear.
Give me discretion to know how, and when, and what to speak. Lord, give me
Motives and Arguments to speak as I ought to do. Let my Speech be always with
Grace seasoned with Salt, that I may know how to answer every man. Let no
corrupt Communication proceed out of my Mouth, but that which is good, to the
use of edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the hearers. Set a watch, O
Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my Lips. Let me keep my Mouth, as
it were with a Bridle, and teach me to punish my self for my great neglect with
gracious and savoury discourses. Let me delight to speak of thee, and make me
afraid of every idle word. Lord, rule my Tongue, and let even that member be
dedicated to thy service. In all my Speeches and Answers let me study Veracity,
Sobriety, and Modesty. Open thou my Lips, O Lord, and let my Tongue be filled
with thy praise all the day long, and in the night season let me not be silent.
Fill me with a profound sense of the great day of Account, when my Words will
be examined as well as my Actions. Season my Tongue with conscientiousness, and
let me not be rash with my Lips. Let my Heart smite me, when I am going to
speak things, which are not after thy Law. Let thy Statutes be my Songs in the
house of my pilgrimage, and let the Law of thy mouth be better unto me than
thousands of Gold and Silver.

Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise 6. viz. To watch against little Sins.
O Thou who art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity with the least
approbation! How have I been deceived! how have I been imposed upon by the
World and my treacherous Heart! How securely have I wallowed in lesser sins,
and made a mock of them. I see, Lord, what circumspection is necessary in a
Christian-life. I repent of making so light of things which have been
offensive, and contrary to thy Holiness. Fool that I was, to imagine that any
thing can be trivial and light which thou have forbid! Can any Order or Precept
proceed from thee, but what is the product of eternal deliberation? Can any
thing be needless which thou set'st thy Hand and Seal to? What low thoughts
must I have of thy Wisdom! What mean conceptions of thy Omniscience, if I
harbor such Imaginations! Dull blockish creature that I am, when every Law
thou make, and every Work thou do, and every Providence that comes to
pass, is done according to the eternal counsel of thy Will, built upon the
strongest Pillars of Reason, and is an effect of the brightest, clearest, and
most unbyassed Understanding, how can any thing be little and inconsiderable
that thou do command. But alas! These are but the pretenses of my Lusts!
they are loath to be deprived of their pleasures, and therefore suggest such
feeble Arguments. A little sin! what nonsense is there in that word! Why
should thou prohibit it? why should thou warn, entreat, and beseech me
not to do it, but that thou who know all things, know it to be
prejudicial to my Soul. It Is a sign I esteem, I prize thee not. Did I truly
look upon thee as the loveliest Being, and my only and greatest Benefactor, I
should be afraid of a disorderly thought. O let me never judge of sin any more
by the sickly fancies of carnal men, but by the holiness of thy Nature: And as
thou, my God, who have called me, art holy, so let me be holy in all manner of
Conversation. O let me not dally with sin any more, nor make sport with it
because the world calls it little, but let it be sufficient to me, that thou my
God dislikest it, and make me entirely conformable to thy Will. Give me, O thou
giver of every good thing, just apprehensions of my duty. Increase my love to
thy Name, and my hatred of sin will increase. O that I were more ravished with
thy beauty! how odious would every thing be to me that is injurious to thy
Glory! O the infinite obligations I have to love thee, and yet how cold is my
Heart! and because it is cold, I startle at nothing but the greater sins. O let
me remember that I am a Christian, and have vowed my self to thy service, and
let me serve thee in keeping even of the least of thy Commandments. Discover to
me the equity and reasonableness of every Precept, that I may plead no excuses,
no impediments, but break through all obstacles, to express my love. O let me
esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, and let me hate
every false way. Nothing can be lovely that thou forbiddest. Nothing can be
sound that thou accusest of rottenness. Nothing can be safe that thou warnest
me against! I have found the ways of sin false indeed; false as Hell. When I
have thought to step into the bed of pleasure, I have rushed into a Gulf of
misery. When I have hoped to fill my self with content and satisfaction, I have
run into Briars and Thorns, and filled my Heart with heaviness, and I find I
have been flattered into ruin. O let me dread the very appearance of evil, and
be thou my everlasting sweetness, my everlasting delight, my everlasting
comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 7. viz. To keep a strict guard over our Eyes.
O Thou whose Eyes are like flames of fire, and whose Feet like Brass glowing
in a Furnace, who art brighter than the Sun, and clearer than the Stars, whose
eyes run to and fro through the world to show thy self strong in the behalf of
those whose Heart is upright before thee: I have deserved that no eye should
pity me, because I have not used my sight with that Moderation, Modesty,
Decency, and Piety thou justly requirest of me. I have had Eyes, and have not
seen those things I should have taken notice of: it were just with thee to
strike me blind, and to deprive me of that mercy which I have so often turned
into wantonness! I have stared upon objects that have inflamed my Lusts,
irritated my Passions, and kindled Hell fire in my Breast. Ah! what impure,
what disorderly thoughts have I let in through these windows! Wonder, O my
Soul, that Vengeance has not pulled them out, or that darkness has not yet
seized on them. What discontent, what mistrust of thy Providence, what Pride,
what Envy, what Malice, what Revenge has crept into my Soul through these
Glasses! How ill a use have I made of the gift of God! How have I dishonored
my Creator with these eyes! How covetous, how vain, how sensual has my sight
of the riches and pleasures of the world made me! O look upon me, and have
mercy on me. Open thou mine eyes, that I may see wondrous things out of thy
Law. O let nothing be so pleasant to mine eyes as thy mavelous works. Teach
me to see thee in thy Providence, and in thy works of Grace and Nature. O let
me remember that wherever I am, I am before the eye of thy glory, and let
mine eyes be ever toward the Lord. If my right eye offend me, let me pull it
out. Give me courage to turn away mine eyes from beholding Vanity, when that
Vanity would make me enamoured with the world. Quicken the eyes of my mind,
that I may behold thy Power and Glory, as I have seen it in the Sanctuary. Show
me the danger of walking in the fight of mine Eyes, and guide me by thine Eye.
Destroy in me all lofty looks, and the Lust of the eye do thou remove far from
me. See O Lord, and consider my wants, and teach me to offer unto thee my
reasonable service. Let my outward as well as inward man be thy servant. O let
me see, and taste, how sweet and how gracious thou art. Thou have given me my
Eyesight, Cause me to see thy Salvation; and let me see that I walk
circumspectly, as wise men, and not as Fools, redeeming the time, because the
days are evil. Consider, and hear me. O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, lest I
sleep the sleep of death. Keep me as the apple of thine eye, hide me under the
shadow of thy Wings: Then shall I behold thy Face in righteousness, I shall be
satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness. O glorious sight, when I shall see
thee as thou art; how ravishing will that prospect be! How transporting that
Vision! O let me not miss of it! O let me not lose that charming spectacle! I
will look upon thee here. I will behold thee in the blessings I enjoy. I will
see thee in thy Mercies, and admire thee. I will look to my self, that I may
not err from thy Commandments. I will look for the new Heavens and the new
Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. I will look up, and please my self with
the thoughts of Mount Sion, which fades not away. I will look unto the Lord,
that I may be enlightened, and my face may not be ashamed, thorough Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 8. viz. To make good use of the Virtues and
Vices of our Neighbors.
MOst Merciful Father, Creator of Heaven and Earth, who have given me a Soul
apt to be led by Examples, and have set most excellent Patterns before me, that
I might follow their steps, incline my Heart, I beseech thee, to consider the
large provision thou have made for my better part, and let me not stand in mine
own light, and continue blind in the midst of so many shining and burning
lights. Arise, O Lord, and deliver me from the wicked, from the men which are
thy hand, O Lord, from the men of the world, who have their portion in this
Life, and whose Bellies thou fillest with thy hid Treasure. O let me see with
other eyes than carnal men do see. O raise my Mind, and carry it up to the holy
Mount, to the Mount of God, and from thence let me behold the portion of thy
Children, of those excellent souls, that despise the world, and labor for
honor and immortality. Discover to me the comforts and satisfactions they
enjoy in thy Bosom; and how thou make them drink of the Rivers of thy
pleasures. Let their Faith encourage me to believe in hope, against hope, that
as they are made perfect in love, so I may be perfect too, and may be one with
thee, even as thou and they are one. I cannot have a better example than thy
self, O make me partaker of thy divine Nature. Give me a holy ambition to be
like thee. Make me merciful, as my Father in Heaven is merciful. O let that
mind be in me, which was also in Christ Jesus. O Jesu attract my Soul with thy
beauty. Teach me to tread in thy steps. Let thy example be ever before me, and
wherever I am, let me do nothing unworthy of it. If I follow thee, I cannot
err: Thou art the way, the truth, and the life. Lord do thou appear very
amiable to my Soul, that this sight may constrain me to learn of thee.
Transcribe thy Graces on my Soul, and Life, that my Conversation may show that
I am thy Disciple indeed, resolved to live, and die, and rise with thee to
eternal Glory. Give me the Spirit of St. Paul: Give me the excellent temper of
those Saints, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness,
obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of the
Fire, out of weakness were made strong, and were tortured, not accepting
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. O deny me not the
same Spirit of Faith, that at last I may obtain the end of my Faith, the
salvation of my Soul, through Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise 9. viz. To put a charitable interpretation upon
what we see or hear.
O God, who art infinitely compassionate, and charitable Love it self, and
Goodness it self! Ah! how selfish is my Heart! To whom shall I complain, but to
thee, who alone can heal me! Thou have Balm, thou have Plasters for all
Sores, Medicines for all Diseases. Thy Storehouse is full of Blessings. How
uncharitable are my Thoughts sometimes! How censorious my Tongue! How apt am I
to think and speak ill of my Neighbor! How does my Blood boil with revengeful
desires, when either a real, or an imaginary injury is offered me! O thou God
of Peace, O Father of mercy! melt, melt this stubborn Heart; how loath is it to
yield to thy injunctions! I am encompassed with all the rays of Gods charity
imaginable. Thou bear with me, when I deserve punishment, thou dealest not
with me after my sins, neither rewardest me after mine iniquities. Even my best
Actions thou might justly except against; but thy Charity covers a multitude
of faults. How often do I provoke thee, and yet thou shootest not thine Arrows
at me. I transgress thy Laws, I affront thee, I am an unprofitable Servant, yet
thou pitiest me, and do not suffer thy displeasure to arise against me. In
the midst of my follies thou art kind, not that thou approvest of them, but
that thou would lead me to Repentance. O let me think of this, and let me
love my Neighbor with a pure heart fervently; spread thy Wings over me. Form
in me bowels of Mercy. Come Charity, thou lovely grace. Come into my Garden, my
Spouse, my Beloved! O thou celestial Husbandman, plant this wholesome Herb in
my barren ground. Pull up the Weeds that grow there. Banish from me all
sourness of Spirit: Let all bitterness and wrath die in me. Let all malice flee
away from my Soul. Rid me of that ill nature which lodges in me. Let gentleness
and meekness be the welcome guests in my Heart. Make me peaceable and
tractable, easy to be entreated, full of good works, ready to forgive. Let the
Charity of the Lord Jesus be my guide, and let me truly follow the Lamb
whethersoever he goes. O Jesu! Can I after thy Charity to my Soul, be unkind to
others! Can I be churlish, morose, and ill-natured, when I remember how thou
diedst for thy Enemies! I believe thou intercedest for me in Heaven! what
favorable constructions must I suppose are put upon my Actions in that
intercession! When Satan accuses me in the presence of God, and has but too
much reason for those Accusations, thou pleadest thy Merits, thy Wounds, and
thy Fathers Love. Where my infirmities will bear excuses, thou qualifiest them,
and suffer not the Enemy to have his will of me. O let thy great example be
ever before me, and when I would forget it, represent it in lively colors to
my Mind, that I may be thy Disciple indeed; and having lived in Love and
Charity here, may at last arrive in the Paradise of everlasting love.

Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise 10. viz. Conscientiously to discharge the
duties of our several Callings and Relations.
MOst glorious God! who have fitted thy holy and wholesome Laws to my Wants and
Necessities, and in commanding me, do consult my interest and advantage more
than thy profit and glory; How am I bound to praise and magnify thy bounty!
Thou have taught me how to live and behave my self in all conditions, and to
make me a Soldier completely armed, have chalked out to me the particular
steps, I am to tread. As these are part of the blessings of thy right hand, so
let my Soul admire them above those of thy left. Whatever Estate I am in,
whatever Relation, Calling, Station I stand in, give me Grace to adorn it with
a suitable Conversation. Teach me how to behave my self wisely in a perfect
way. O when will thou come unto me! O let me remember, that in the Calling thou
have placed me in, thou have called me to certain duties, of which thou will
take an account one day. O convince me that I am not called to idleness, but to
labor in thy Vineyard. When my carnal heart would baulk the work, thou have
set me, in the station I am in, let thy good Spirit crush my unwillingness, and
manifest his power in my weakness. I am backward to any thing that requires
pains and circumspection, but renew thou a right Spirit within me. Be thou
exalted Lord, above the Heavens, and thy glory above all the Earth. If thou will but appear in my Soul, every thing will yield, and every rebellious Lust
will bow to thy Majesty. Nothing can resist thy Omnipotence, and whatever
desire in me has been hitherto refractory and rebellious, will be frighted at
thy presence, and either retire, or become subject to thy power. O prepare
Mercy and Truth, which may preserve me, and my mouth shall sing of thy
Righteousness. O let me remember that every new relation brings a new
obligation upon me; and that if I regard not that obligation, I am unfaithful
to my God. In every condition, in every relation let me consider the duties
incumbent upon me, and make me zealous to discharge them. Let not the example
of others, whose Consciences are seared, tempt me to neglect them. O tell my
Soul, that it is better to have thy favor, than the applause of men; and teach
me to act according to that rule, that the peace of God may be upon me, as it
is upon the whole Israel of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise 11. viz. To resist all sorts of Temptations.
O Lord of Hosts! who is a strong Lord like unto thee, or to thy faithfulness
round about thee? Thou rulest the raging of the Sea, when the Waves thereof
arise, thou stillest them. Thou see what temptations I am encompassed with,
what Enemies surround me, and how I am beset with Dangers. Extend thy Mercy to
me, and send from above and take me. Deliver me from my strong Enemy, and from
them which hate me. Leave me not to the rage of Temptations, neither give me up
to the will of those that persecute my Soul. I will arise, O God, and fight the
good fight. Teach me what Temptations are, and give notice to my Soul when I am
in danger. I know, O Lord, all Places, Callings, and Employments bring
Temptations with them! How diligent, how watchful ought I to be, that I do not
get a fall, and that mine Enemy rejoice not over me. Yet I will not be afraid,
if thou art with me, I may defy all that are against my Soul to destroy it:
For thou Lord, wilt bless the righteous, and with thy favor thou will compass
him, as with a Shield. Up Lord! and pluck thy Hand out of thy Bosom: Enable me
to put on the whole Armor of God. Gird about me the Sword of the Spirit, and
with that let me recover the glory I have lost in Adam's Fall. O God, I will
cry day and night unto thee; give me Wisdom and Resolution to secure thy
Favor. I cannot secure it, except I hate those that hate thee, and am grieved
with those that rise up against thee. O Lord, mine own Flesh, and the World,
and Messengers from Hell, are confederate against thee. O teach my hands to
war, and my fingers to fight. My Rock, my Fortress, my Deliverer, my God, my
Strength, in whom I will trust, my Buckler, and the Horn of my Salvation, and
my high Tower, cover my head in the day of Battle. Let mine eye see my desire
on the temptations which annoy me. Hear my voice out of thy Temple, and let my
cry come before thee, even into thine Ears. Arm me with Arguments; suggest unto
me Reasons, whereby I may answer, and resist the evil motions which would
seduce my Soul. Give me power to climb thy holy Hill: When I faint, Lord
support me; when I grow weary, furnish me with fresh motives to hold on; when I
would go back, persuade me to press toward the mark; when I fall, let thy
Angels bear me up in their hands. O thou that have done great things for me,
mavelous things on this side Heaven, strengthen my Faith, that I may endure
temptation, and being tried, may receive the Crown of righteousness, which thou
have promised to them that love thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 12. viz. To stand in awe of God, when we are
alone, and no Creature sees us.
O Lord, thou have searched me, and known me; thou know my downsitting and
mine up-rising; thou understandest my thoughts afar off; thou compassest my
Path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. I beseech thee
overaw me with thy presence. O that thou were in all my thoughts! O how sweet,
how delightful, how glorious art thou! Could I always think of thee, how poor
would the World, and all things in it, seem in mine eyes! For truly thou art
fairer than the Children of men! and all the Excellencies and Perfections that
are found in the Creature, are most eminently concentred in thee; for thou
made them, thou maintainest them, thou preservest them, and thou art the
Spring, the Fountain, from which all those lesser Rivers flow. Thou art bright,
amiable, charming to a miracle; and in thee is all that Reason can wish, and
the Understanding can desire! And did I look upon thee more, I should be so
delighted with thy Beauty, that sin would be loathsome to me. I sin against
thee, because I lose the sight of thee. The eye of my understanding was given
me on purpose to look upon thee! O let me use it to that end! When I am loath to
look upon thee, Lord press thou into my thoughts, that I may not be able to
shake off thy presence. If I see thee, I shall not dare to offend thee: Who
would offend so dear a friend, if he look upon him? When any sin would
insinuate into my affections, O call to me, and say, Thy God is here, and that
charming Name will withold me from those crooked ways. I remember Lord, when my
flesh has sometimes prevailed with me to transgress thy known Laws, I have
been forced to banish thee from my mind, before I could act against thee. Hence
forward be thou ever with me. Let no base objects intervene betwixt my sight
and thy glorious self; or if they do, help me to look off, and to return to my
center. Make strong impressions of thy omniscience and omnipresence upon my
heart, that no sensual object, no pleasing Temptation, no Deceit, no Flattery,
may rob me of my integrity. At the brightness of thy presence, let all mine
Enemies vanish, and be thou my Conqueror, my Triumph, my Beauty, and my Glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 13 viz. To do all things to Gods glory.
O God, who is like unto thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders! Thy glory is the end of all created Beings. Thou art decked with Beauty
and Glory, glorious is thy Name, and to glorify thee is not only our duty,
but our glory and interest too. O let my heart be touched with a sense of thy
glory. O let me admire the glory of thy Kingdom. If thou would vouchsafe to
display thy glory in my benighted Soul, how should I despise this miserable
world! How should I scorn the lust of the Eye, and the lust of the Flesh, and
the pride of Life! I have talked of thy Glory, but O how little have I almed at
it in my actions! What base and sinister ends and designs have I had, even in
my Devotions and religious Services! O Father of mercy, purify my intentions,
rectify my designs; give me a right aim in all things. I am sent into the
world to advance thy Glory. O let it not be said that I sought mine own glory!
How great is thy goodness, that thou will employ so wretched a creature in
promoting thy Glory, who can live without me, and be happy and glorious
without me! O glorify my Soul, that I may glorify thee! In all the Blessings,
in all the Mercies I enjoy, let me give thee all the glory. What have I, that I
have not received? Why then should I glory as if I had not received it? O let
me study how I may do good in my Generation. Let the Spirit of Glory, and of
Christ, rest upon me! O Father of Glory, let me see what is the glory of thine
inheritance. Open thou my Lips, O Lord, and my Mouth shall show forth thy
Praise. Guide me by thy Counsel here, and hereafter receive me into glory. O
that this Heart of mine were more spirituallized. It is carnal, sensual, taken
with the gayeties of this life. It admires thee not. It does not esteem thee
above all Treasures, and therefore I do not seek thy Glory as I ought to do.
Therefore I evade the Obligation, and pretend, that I have no Parts, no
Abilities to advance thy Glory in this present world. O wretched Creature that
I am, Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! Lord speak the word,
and deliver me from my self. Assure me that the degrees of future Glory will be
proportioned to the degrees of my advancing thy Glory here. O let me abound in
good Works, and let doing good be my greatest delight, for as much, as I know,
my labor is not in vain in the Lord. It cannot be in vain. Thou have promised
it, and thou will do it. I believe, Lord, help mine Unbelief, thorough Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 14 viz. To stir up and exercise the Graces God
has given us.
O God, thou art a strong Rock, and a strong Habitation! How excellent is thy
loving kindness, therefore the Children of men shall put their trust under the
shadow of thy Wings! O my God, how have I contented my self with very low
degrees of Virtue! I have been afraid of doing too much for Heaven, and
satisfied my self too often with shadows of Goodness! Thou art not wanting to
us, if we are not wanting to our selves. Thou art ready to quicken us, ready to
enlighten us, ready to succor us in all our distresses and necessities. O thou
that art a strong Tower to all them that run unto thee. Take care of my
immortal Soul: if thou will charge thy self with her welfare, I shall be safe.
I have been very slothful hitherto. I have lost much time, many opportunities,
many advantages of a Spiritual life. I know I must grow on to a perfect man in
Christ Jesus. Thou do not allow me to stand still! Thou biddest me work like
a man that knows what an endless Glory means. O purify me from all sin. Lord
Jesu! give me the fervor of thy Spirit, that I may be filled with spiritual
Wisdom and Understanding; and for the glory set before me, may be content to
do, and suffer cheerfully, whatever in thy Wisdom thou shall think fit to
charge me with. Come Lord! make a Reformation in this poor, blind, distressed,
miserable Soul; my Faith is weak, my Hope is weak, my Love is weak, my Charity
is weak. One word of thy mouth would put vigor and life into me. The same Word
that made the Sun shine out in the first Creation, would make my Graces bright,
and that Sentence, Let there be Light, spoken to my Soul, would change the dark
Chaos into a Globe of light. O make goodness habitual in my Soul. O that it
might be an everlasting inhabitant in me! O that my Soul might become its
proper Seat, its Palace, its Tabernacle, from which it might never depart! Ah!
how inconstant is my Zeal! Hot I am to day, and cold to morrow. Sometime I seem
to lay force on the everlasting Kingdom; a little while after I fall in love
again with the world. O destroy this weed of inconstancy in my Garden. All this
comes from the weakness of my Virtues. Hence it is, that I am not the same
every where: And I that am bold in one place to stand up for thy glory, am a
Coward in another. Where is thy mighty Arm, O Lord! Where are thy Bowels! Fill
my languishing Soul with strength from above, and with wisdom from above, that
I may increase, and abound more and more in love. Perfect what thou have begun
in me. Let Meekness, and Humility, and all the graces of the Holy Ghost become
natural to me. O that they were incorporated with my temper! O that they were
so riveted into my Soul, that I might not be able to act contrary to them! O
that I might find as great a reluctance, when I am tempted to neglect them, as
formerly I found when thy Spirit commanded me to perform them! O how sweet a
frame do these Graces put the Soul into! O that I could say, that thus it is
with me! Sweet Jesu, be not tired with taking pains with this miserable Soul!
Thou have been prodigiously kind to me, O be not weary of being farther
gracious and favorable! O let me find by blessed experience, that I grow in
Grace, and that thy Commandments are no longer grievous to me, that every thing
in thy service becomes more easy, and that, what formerly was a burden to me,
is now pure pleasure and delight to my Soul. O my God, gild my Soul once more
with thy radiant Beams, and establish my heart unblamable in Holiness at the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise 15. viz. Every night before we go to bed to
call our selves to an account for the Actions of the day.
O God, who searchest the Heart and the Reins! How deceitful is my Heart! How
many are the ways that lead to destruction! How innumerable are the Wiles of
the Devil! yet by thy light they may all be discovered, and their danger
perceived, and their ill intent laid open. How small an Atome does the bright
light of the Sun make visible! Therefore that light which thou vouchsafest to
an humble mind must be supposed far more effectual to manifest all the
Stratagems of the powers of darkness. O my God, make me willing to see the
designs of my Spiritual Enemies against me, that I may resist them, oppose, and
overcome them. My Heart is a Field where many Tares are mixed with the
wholesome Wheat. If I search not, how shall those Tares be rooted up? If I
examine not, what can I expect, but that like the Field of the slothful, and
like the Vineyard of the man void of Understanding, it will be all grown over
with Thorns, and Nettles will cover the face thereof. Shall I say, a little
sleep, a little more slumber, till my Poverty come on like an armed man? O my
God, let my greatest care be, that thou and my Soul be friends. But how shall I
know thou art my Friend, except I examine my Soul, and see what tokens of thy
love I find there. O let me not be afraid to know my Thoughts, my Words, my
Actions, my Inclinations. If I know they are evil, I may reform them: If I find
they are good, I may rejoice in them. O teach me the art of searching my heart.
Let me not continue a stranger to my self. Let it be a pleasure to me to take
notice how I thrive in Grace. Let me know my danger. O keep me from wandering in
the dark. Let me see how I go astray, that I may get into the right way again.
Convince me of the easiness and pleasantness of this task. O let me not think
it a burden to my Soul. I have dwelt too long in the Suburbs of Religion, O
persuade me to enter into the City which has foundations. Let the reward that
is before me be a strong motive to me, to put on the whole Armor of God. O how
sweet will it be to me to see thy assistances, the incomes of thy Grace, the
influences of thy Spirit, my progress in goodness, the abatement of my sins,
the decay of my corruptions, and my nearer approach to Heaven. If I examine my
heart, all this will be made manifest to me; for thou will teach me the way of
life, and in thy light I shall see light, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise extraordinary 1. viz. To enter into solemn Vows
and Promises.
O Blessed Jesu! to whom I have so often promised Faithfulness, and Allegiance,
and Obedience! How justly may thou look upon me, betwixt pity and anger, as
thou did upon Peter when he had most shamefully denied thee! And O that thy
looks might have the same effect upon me, that they had upon thy Apostle, and I
might weep bitterly! For how light have I made of my most solemn Promises! How
have I sought to impose upon thee. O my God! How have I evaded the obligations
my resolutions have laid upon me, and sometimes downright broke those Promises!
Ah treacherous creature that I am! how can I expect thou should perform thy
Promises made to me, when I am so careless of observing and performing of mine
to thee! Thou art of infinite patience, therefore I am not yet destroyed. Hence
forward, when I promise thee, let thy Majesty, Greatness, Justice, and Holiness
prevail with me to break with thee no more. O let me not think because thou art
silent, and do not presently punish my perfidiousness, that thou art
altogether such a one as my self. O instruct me, that I may entertain greater
thoughts of thee! If I enter into a Vow at any time, assist me powerfully with
thy Spirit, that I may act according to the word that is gone out of my Lips.
As I make thee my Judge and Witness in my Vows, so let me remember that my
Witness is omniscient, and my Judge has Magazines of Vengeance at command. Let
me undergo any inconvenience rather than be false to my Engagements. O keep me
by thy Mighty Power, that my heart may be treacherous no more. O let me
remember what Mercies I expect at thy hands, and let me not forfeit my Right to
thy Favor. When I bind my Soul, let me think that nothing can untie it but
thy self. O preserve in my mind a just sense of my Duty, and of the necessity
of pleasing thee. Let me abhor every thought that would prompt me to violate
this Sacred Bond. O let me look upon it as a most holy thing, and let me dread
all profanation of it. As I design, O Lord, by these Vows to bring up my Will
to thy Will, so be thou entreated to second my designs, and to keep my Soul,
that I yield not to Temptations of perfidiousness, but may Triumph over my
Corruptions, and be more than a Conqueror thorough him that loved me, the Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory,
World without end.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise extraordinary 2. viz. To subdue the Body by
Fasting.
O Holy and most Merciful Savior, who have given us the best Religion, the
wholesomest Rules of living, the most equitable Precepts that were ever given
to the children of men; while I admire thy Mercy, I cannot but bewail mine own
Misery. While I wonder at thy goodness and tenderness to my Soul, I cannot but
deplore my backwardness to the stricter Duties of Christianity! How loath am I
to curb this Body! How loath to bring my Flesh in subjection! How apt am I to
flatter my self, that Heaven will come cheaper, than at the price of
Mortification! O when will these vain Imaginations leave me! When shall I get
the temper of thy dearest Servants! How slavishly do I serve thee! How apt am I
to make Bargains with thee, and to limit my obedience. I want that free, that
Princely Spirit, that fervent love, which may think nothing too good for
Heaven. Lord, show me the vanity of my over tenderness to this dying Body. I am
sensible, that when I feed it high, it teaches my Soul to rebel against thee! O
let me not be afraid of the Arguments it gives me to spare my self. These are
but pretenses, the design is to preserve its own ease and quiet in Sin, and
Vanity. Let me see through all these Cobwebs, and persuade me to keep under my
Body, lest I become a cast away: Let my Fasts have those good effects upon me,
which they have had upon thy Saints of old. Let my Lusts dye, my Corruptions
decay, my Vanities become odious to me. Let Holiness become sweet, the Light of
thy Countenance pleasant, and the Influences of thy Grace ravishing to my Soul.
Let my abstinence from Food work in me abstinence from evil. Let it prove a
means to make my Prayers fervent, my Devotion quick, my Mind clear, my
Affections lively, that I may at last enjoy the Festivals of Angels, and eat
and drink with my blessed Master at his Table, in his Kingdom; then shall I
fast from sin for ever; then shall I fast from all Temptations. Then shall I
hunger no more after the meat that perishes: Then shall I thirst no more after
the muddy Streams of sensual Satisfactions. Then my hunger shall be refined
into fruition, my thirst exalted into Enjoyments, such as Abana, and Pharpar
cannot give, and the Rivers of Damascus, and of Jordan too fall short of; then
I shall need no Provision for this Body. Then my Flesh will long no more after
forbidden fruit, then I shall feed on thy love for ever; that will be my Meat
and Drink, that will be better tome than all the Trees of a terrestrial
Paradise; that will nourish me more than Milk and Honey; that will give me a
more cheerful Countenance than the blood of the Grape; then I shall need to
take care no more about what I shall eat, or what I shall drink, or wherewithal
I shall be clothed. Righteousness will be my Garment then, and Holiness,
everlasting Holiness, my Robe of Glory.

Amen, Amen.
A Prayer, relating to Exercise extraordinary 3. viz. To use Watching, or
Abstinence from Sleep.
O God, incomprehensible and glorious, whose Providence watches over me day and
night, O Shepherd of Israel, who neither slumberest nor sleep, and whose
Eyes are always open for my good. What hard thoughts have I had of thy service!
How unwieldy have I been under thy stricter Precepts! How afraid have I been to
hurt my self! What pains have I taken for the World, and how irk some have thy
Precepts been to my Soul! O let it suffice that I have so long followed mine
own will, and for the future, let even thy severest Laws be my delight and
comfort. Thou have given me thine only Son to die for my sins, and can I after
this mercy, think much of denying my self in mine ease for thy service? O teach
me to use moderation in all things, and even in my sleep to express my
self-denial! I know, O Lord, that without the assistance of thy Spirit, my
Nature is slothful, and my Temper backward to such mortifications. To thee I
come therefore, with humble Desires, with fervent Affections, and with earnest
Entreaties, that thou would conquer the Flesh in me, and crush that Rebel by
thy power. Since I can use self-denial in sleep upon a Temporal account, O let
it not be said of me, that upon a Spiritual account I could not watch. O let my
actions show, that thou art dearer to me than the World, and that I love thee
better than Father or Mother, and my self too. When all I have is thine, how
shall I not part with something that is dear to me for thy sake! O let me not
lose my life while I seek to save it, but be confident that if I lose my life
for thy sake, I shall find it. Thou art the Resurrection and the Life, if I
sincerely believe in thee, though I were dead, yet shall I live. O let me live,
that I may praise thy Name, and whether I live or whether I die, let me live
and die in the Lord Jesus. Give me a sight of the Eternal watchfulness of
Angels. They sleep not. They are never oppressed with drowsiness. They sing
Eternally, and slumber not. That Is the Company, that is the glorious Society I
would fain be in. O happy day! O blessed time! when I shall watch in thy House
for ever! When I shall watch in the Quire, where nothing is known, nothing is
loved, nothing is delighted in, but God blessed for evermore. O my God, as the
Eyes of Servants look unto the Hand of their Master; and as the Eyes of a
Maiden look unto the Hand of her Mistress, so mine Eyes wait upon Thee, O
Lord, until thou have mercy upon me, and bring me into the Regions of eternal
Brightness, thorough Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A Prayer relating to Exercise extraordinary 4. viz. To apply our selves to
Self-Revenge.
O God to whom Vengeance belongs, show thy self. My sins are mine Enemies, my
Corruptions the Foes that persecute me, O show me thy Salvation. My sensual
Desires plead for tenderness, and because they would not be displeased, they
suggest Motives and Reasons why I should spare my self. They regard not what
becomes of my Soul hereafter; and so they can but enjoy present rest, they
think not of the Torments that will follow. But my Soul sees how the Scene will
change, when God shall come to Judgment. O my God, I am in danger! let me spare
no cost, no pains to be free from it. Where gentler means will not free me from
the Corruptions which do so easily beset me, O let me not be afraid of using
more violent remedies. O that I were but more concerned about the Life to come!
O that I had more lively aprehensions of it! O that I had that view of the
Terrors of the Lord, that my Soul might be convinced of the necessity of
taking the Kingdom of Heaven by violence! I am sensible of the hurt, my Lusts
and Passions have done me: Fill my Soul, O God, with a holy rage against them,
that I may drive them out by force, when softer Persuasions will do no good.
Had not I better endure some inconvenience here, than be forced at last to make
Tears my meat day and night to all Eternity! O persuade me to lose all rather
than the Joys set before me! Shall I see thy Saints, who had the clearest
apprehensions of thy Will, run, and sweat, and toil for a future Bliss, and
shall I imagine, that laziness will procure that Kingdom? O Lord leave me not.
Bid me rise, and strive to apprehend that for which I am also apprehended of
Christ Jesus. I fight under the Banner of the best of Princes, O let me so run
that I may obtain, and hear the voice of the Bridegroom, Enter into thy Masters
Joy. This will recompense all. If I arrive to this, I shall be no loser by thy
Service. I have followed the World too long, and have got nothing but vanity
and vexation of Spirit. It promised me much, but my Soul is empty still. If
once I ascend into that City, where all tears shall be wiped away, where I
shall not need the light of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, where God himself is
the everlasting Light: Whatever Troubles, whatever Miseries I went through
here, they will all be forgotten, they will all be swallowed up, they will all
be lost in that vast Ocean of Light and Glory. O make me weary of this
Wilderness. I have wandered too long in this desert. Heaven is my home. Let that
engross my Desires, my Hopes, my Expectations, my Joy, my Love, my Affections.
I am a stranger upon Earth, let me live like a stranger here. Draw me, draw me,
thou everlasting Magnet, that I may cling to thee, and neither Death, nor Life,
neither Prosperity, nor Adversity, neither the Smiles, nor the Frowns of the
World, may separate me from that Love which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Amen.
Additional Prayers FOR Every Day of the WEEK, Suited to the Exercise of
Meditating. Exercise Ordinary. 3.
A Prayer for Sunday-Morning, relating to the Meditation on Sunday. Exercise 3.
O God! thou most sweet, thou most lovely Object! How little do those glorified
Saints that enjoy thee in the other world, regard our little pleasures and
satisfactions here! O that my Soul were with those Spirits of men made perfect!
I see nothing in this valley of Tears that is worth desiring or breathing after.
The Beatitude to come, is that, I long for. What are the glories of this World,
to that glory, which e'erlong shall be revealed in us! The magnificence of
Triumphs, the pomp of Princes the curiosity of Palaces, the beauty of the Sun,
the brightness of the Moon, the glistering of the Stars, the variety of
Flowers, the fragrancy of Herbs, what are all these to the Joys and Glories at
thy right hand for evermore! One day in thy Courts above, is sweeter than a
thousand here. There I shall behold the perfection of thy Essence, the infinity
of thy Nature, the immensity of thy Grandeur, the eternity of thy Duration, the
greatness of thy Majesty, the stability of thy Throne, the vast extent of thy
Wisdom, the abyss of thy Judgments, the sweetness of thy Bounty, the
tenderness of thy Mercy, the severity of thy Justice, the latitude of thy
Power, the charms of thy Beauty, and the luster of thy Glory! O what a
ravishing sight will this be! And shall I be afraid of encountering with
Enemies, that would keep me from seeing these wonderful objects? These Enemies
are already conquered. The Lion of the Tribe of Judah has already weakn'd
their strength and power, which makes my Victory more easy; Therefore I will
not despair. O thou who have promised, that when the poor and needy want water,
thou the God of Israel wilt hear them. Hear me from thy holy Heaven, and
encourage my Soul to force her way through all difficulties. Give me lively
apprehensions of that state. For want of those lively apprehensions, I work
not, I move not, I press not forward, I act not like a person in good earnest,
my endeavors are dull, and my attempts feeble; O write that bliss upon my
mind, engrave it on my Soul; Let the beams of it warm my Spirit, that no labor
for Heaven may seem hard, no Commandment grievous, no exercise troublesome, no
industry tedious, no pains too great, no journey too long, that I may not
murmur, that I may not complain of difficulties, that I may not be weary, that
I may not faint in my mind; It is not only a glorious Garment, not only a
magnificent House, not only a stately Palace that is promised me, but Glory it
self, and Magnificence it self, and Splendour it self. What if I must curb my
Passions, and break through my sinful Inclinations? What if I must withdraw
mine affections from the Creature, and mortify my Body? What if I must submit
my will to thy will, and pardon the greatest injuries! What if I must get
habits of virtue, give Law to my Tongue, prescribe limits to my Thoughts, put a
restraint upon my foolish Desires in order to this Glory? is not the promised
Recompense encouragement enough? O my God! thou art my Shield and exceeding
great reward! and shall I be afraid to serve thee? Shall I tremble at the work
thou set me? will not thy Wages be infinitely beyond my Labor? How short
will be my Task, and how long my Rest! How few will be the days I am to work
in, and how durable my Repose! Shall I think Heaven too dear at the price thou
hold'st it at! O undeceive me, pull down the vain conceits I have harbored;
shine powerfully upon my Soul, that I may be insatiable in my desires after it,
and long to see thee, who art Light it self, and in thy Light may see light,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Sunday-Evening.
O Most happy, most blessed, and most glorious God! How can I reflect on the
rest of this day without summoning my thoughts to survey the nobler Rest,
whereof this present is but an Emblem! I have gone this day with the multitude
to the house of God, but what is this to the company, I shall ere long meet in
Heaven, if I imitate them in their severities here! Happy Society! where is no
Chaff among the Corn, no Tares among the Wheat, no Thistles among the Roses!
Where all are Children of God, all are Kings, all are Saints, all are full of
grace and glory, all are wise, all courteous, all affable, all adorned with
celestial qualities! If I take such pleasure in the conversation of a wise,
discreet, and prudent man here, what delight shall I take in the company of the
wisest, holiest, and most accomplished Souls, that want nothing, that have all
things, that abound in Knowledge, in Prudence, in Wisdom, and in Sanctity! How
do I admire men of great parts and abilities here! in what admiration then will
my Soul be, when it shall converse with persons decked with the light of Gods
Glory! who know all things without reading, understand the greatest Mysteries
without studying, comprehend the abstrusest things without labor; who forget
nothing, whose Memory never decays, whose Parts never fail, who know without
error, apprehend without doubting, understand with assurance, and perceive
with the greatest evidence imaginable; who can unfold all Riddles, resolve all
difficulties, answer to all Questions, and think and speak nothing but truth,
whose Minds know no darkness, whose Understandings are free from Clouds, whose
Knowledge is eternal! How can they but be happy, when the place where they for
ever live is so! How can they but know the deep things of God, when God is the
Glass in which they behold all Mysteries! O my God, make me in love with that
place, where I shall love thee perfectly, where my Soul shall be eternally
united to thee, where it cannot but love thee, cannot but embrace thee, and
cannot but be ravished with thee forever. If they which running in a Race,
strive for the mastery, are temperate in all things, shall not I be so? If they
mortify themselves to gain a corruptible Crown, shall not I do so much to gain
an incorruptible! What pains do ungodly sinners take to get to Hell, and shall
not I be at some cost and charge to get to Heaven! O Lord, let it never be said
of me, that I valued thy Heaven less, than other men do the Devils Kingdom!
Thou offerest me the honor to reign with thee for ever, and in order thereunto
requirest nothing of me, but to reign over my self on this side Heaven! Thou
bid'st me rule my Lusts, and shall I give them vent? Thou bid'st me curb my
vain Desires, and shall I cherish them in my Bosom? Thou bid'st me triumph over
my Flesh, and shall I set it on the Throne? Thou bid'st me subdue my worldly
inclinations, and shall I give them entertainment? How great are the Glories
thou intendest me! and shall I deprive my self of them out of love to Slavery
and Bondage? O give me courage to command my self! O let me not be afraid of
displeasing my self! My dearest Lord, teach me so to rule my outward and inward
man, that I may rule at last with my blessed Redeemer for ever, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Munday-Morning, relating to the Meditation prescribed Exercise 3.
for Monday.
GReat, All-seeing, and Almighty Judge of the World, before whom all Mankind
must e'erlong appear! Righteous art thou in all thy ways, and holy in all thy
works. If the righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall I a poor sinner
appear! I that have so long, so frequently neglected my Duty, delayed my
Repentance, undervalued thy Mercies, despised thy Patience, and abused the
riches of thy Grace and Favor! O Lord! how watchful should I be over my self,
if the terrors of the Great day of account stood before me in lively
Characters! O dreadful day! when I a poor wretch must stand before thy
Tribunal, and see my self surrounded with vast Legions of Angels, all expecting
to hear what my Sentence will be! This day I talk of: This day I have
frequently in my mouth, but O that my Soul were frighted more with the mention
and consideration of it! I should not then lead so easy and so soft a life; I
should then spend more time in Weeping and Praying. I should then be afraid of
defiling my Soul with the least spot of sin. Lord Jesu! Great Savior of the
world! look upon me, and let me feel thy power in my Soul, even such power to
represent this day to my mind in all its terrors and circumstances, that I may
make haste to enter into thy rest. The Judge is at the door, let me bring
presents to him that ought to be feared; and since no gift is so pleasing to
thee, as a heart entirely devoted to thy service, O persuade me, O help me, O
assist me to mind the one thing necessary, and to choose the better part, which
may never be taken away from me, for thy Name sake, for thy Mercies sake, for
thy Merits sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for Monday in the Evening.
OThou Omniscient, Omnipotent, and Omnipresent Being, who have appointed a day
wherein thou will judge the Secrets of men's Hearts, and all their Words, and
Actions, and Desires, by thy Gospel. I believe, this day will come, a day when
pure hearts will be esteemed more than eloquent Speeches, and a good Conscience
will to farther than Purses of Gold. Thou Lord give me frequent warnings of
the approaches of this day! My Conscience puts me in mind of it. The Sicknesses
and Calamities thou sendest upon me, tell me of it: My heart misgives me that I
am not safe, that my Soul is in danger, and that my eternal interest is not yet
secured. O my God, who art not tired with the Prayers of thy Servants, nor
displeased with the importunities of thy Children. I earnestly beg, it is the
desire of my Soul to be enlivened and awakened into a sense of this day, that
to day while I hear thy Voice I may not harden my Heart. I have delayed my
serious care of a future happiness too long, too long indeed! O that mine Eyes
were Fountains of tears to weep for this neglect! I am sensible I must not
trifle any longer. I must not defer a concern of that importance to another
day. O my God, let me admire thy patience, that I have lived unto this hour,
and accept of my Sacrifice, of the remainder of my days, which I humbly
consecrate to Faith and Love in Christ Jesus. O let this future Judgment swim
before mine eyes, when I speak, when I think, when I follow my lawful Calling,
when I am in company, when I am alone, when I walk, when I sit, when I stand,
and let me ever fear that Judge who has power to destroy both Soul and Body
into Hell, that both my Soul and Body may be preserved from damnation, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Tuesday-Morning, relating to the Meditation prescribed for
Tuesday, Exercise 3.
OLord! how wonderful are all thy Works, in wisdom have thou made them ill, the
Earth is full of thy riches! What a Monument am I of thy Mercy! How kind have
thou been to this miserable Creature! How am I bound to magnify thy goodness!
How excellent, how great, how vast, how large, how diffusive is it! not
confined to a day, not restrained to a place, not limited to an hour! From my
Cradle unto this moment I have seen, and tasted how sweet, and how gracious
thou art. Thou have carried me on thy Wings, as the Eagle does her young;
thorough the various stages of my life, what Miracles of Providence have mine
Eyes beheld! How has thy Providence been at work for me, while I have been
asleep, while I have been thinking, and contriving something else, even how to
derogate from thy honor and glory! Truly Lord! thy Mercy and Patience ought to
be my Song in the house of my Pilgrimage! This I have reason to boast of, to
speak of, to meditate of day and night; by that I subsist, by that I am
supported, fed, maintained, and preserved from the clutches of the Devil. O let
thy Mercy melt my Heart! O let Mercy prevail with me to give up my Heart to
thee. Let mercy and goodness force me to love thee! Give me that ingenuity,
that generous temper, that noble Spirit, that thy goodness may do more with me,
than Threatenings, and Hell, and everlasting Torments. Let thy Love and Charity,
and constant Murificence, oblige me to run in the way of thy Commandments; Let
these be greater motives with me to do thy Will, than all the terrors of the
burning Lake. O let thy Love be of that force in my Soul, that I may not be
able to resist its motions, but by the strength of that, may hope, believe,
endure, deny my self, love, and obey thee to the end of my days, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Tudsday-Evening.
GReat Governor and Disposer of the world, who have promised to them that love
thee, so to order all things, that they shall all conspire to their good, I am
sensible of the good thou have intended, and do intend me, by the various
Dispensations, mine eyes have seen. The various Spiritual and Temporal
Blessings that have been conferred upon me, what have they been, but motives to
be enamou'rd with the best of Beings. Thou know, if I depart from thee, or
love any thing better than thee, I run away from mine own happiness, and go to
undo my self; therefore so many various Tokens and Expressions of thy Love are
sent to me to unite my Heart to thee, to preserve me in thy Fear, and to uphold
my goings in thy Paths. O wise, O gracious, O bountiful Master, kinder to me
than I am, or have been to my self! Let me find the good thou designest for me
in thy numberless Blessings, even the good of my Soul, let that grow stronger
under thy Favors, warmer in thy Sunshine, more fervent under these Beams, more
flaming with love under these enforcives. The very afflictions, thou sendest
upon me are intended for my good. I have found it, I have seen it, I have known
it by experience, I have learned Repentance, Humility, Submission, fear of
sinning by Afflictions, which I should never have learned by Prosperity; when I
have thought, I had great wrong done me by the contempt, reproach, trouble,
misery others have thrown upon me, thou have let me see, that this was to make
me reflect on the affronts, and indignities, I have put upon thee my best and
greatest friend. O let me never mistrust thy Providence. Whatever befalls me,
let me believe I shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living,
and let me not be disappointed of my hope, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Wednesday-Morning, relating to the Meditation prescribed Exercise
3 for Wednesday.
O Thou, in whose hand is the power of Life and Death, who art immortal,
invisible, Blessed for evermore! Before the Mountains were brought forth, or
ever the Earth, and the World were made, thou art God, from Everlasting to
Everlasting thou art he. I am a frail, dying creature; and though I carry an
immortal Soul about me, yet the Vessel, in which that glorious guest abides,
will soon grow leaky and decay, and that must turn to dust, and how soon, I
know not; I admire thy wisdom in concealing the Day and Hour of my Death from
me; I am sensible, it is done to hasten my Repentance, to keep me from adding
sin unto sin, to restrain me from the Vanities of this world, to make me think
of a better, and to secure that happy Life which shall be after Death! And O
that my death might be ever before me! How great are the things that depend
upon it! Two great Eternities, whereof one of them, will certainly fall to my
share. O let my death be my daily Meditation, that I may prevent my everlasting
death! What a miserable creature should I be, if my Soul should leave this
Body, to go into a more dismal Prison, from whence there is no returning! O
make me wise, O let me understand what preparation is necessary for that hour;
teach me to undervalue the World, and to mind the things which are above, that
when I come to die, I may die with joy, and cheerfully resign my Soul into the
hands of my Creator. Let Lust, and Pride, and Envy, and Anger, die in me,
before I die, that they may not endanger my Soul after death. Let me converse
with Death more, that I may die to sin more, and live more to him that died for
me. Let the thoughts of death mortify in me whatever is offensive to thy
Holiness. In all my actions let me remember my latter end, that my death may be
my gain, and my departure out of the world an entrance into a better, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Wednesday Evening.
O My God, to whom belong the issues of Life and Death! naked came I from my
mothers Womb, naked shall I return thither. What is my life but a Vapor, which
appears for a while, and then vanishes away! O Lord! thou have made this life
transitory, dangerous, short, full of misery, subject to vanity, and as it were
a span long! and all to make me desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ;
yet how dreadful is death to me! How do I tremble at the thoughts of it! What
should make me so deeply enamored with this Life? At the best it is a Warfare;
within are Tumults, without are Fightings; I am in a continual state of War
here with Covetousness, with Passion, with Pride, with Ambition, with carnal
Lusts, with Allurements of the world, with suggestions of the Devil; when one
sin is beaten away, another rises; when I think I have mortified one
Corruption, another starts up; The Discontents and Vexations, the Troubles, and
the Disappointments I meet withal are innumerable; and can I delight to dwell
in such a Valley of Tears, surrounded with so many Snares, encompassed with so
many Dangers? Should not this make me desirous to be gone? O my God, make me
willing to leave this world! Take away from me the fear of death. Why should I
fear, when my Great Master has overcome this King of Terrors? I will follow
my Redeemer, I will conform to his Example, I will tread in his steps; this is
my resolution, this the firm purpose of my Soul! And why should I doubt of his
assisting me! Why should not I be confident, that my death will be a passage
from Mortality to Immortality, from Corruption to Incorruption, from Trouble
and Misery, to Rest and Tranquillity? Death is the way to the Kingdom of
Heaven. I cannot inherit it, except I die. Do I long for that Kingdom, and
shall I be afraid of the way that leads to it! I must die! O sweet Jesu! let me
die contentedly. Let Death be my choice. Let me embrace it before this
miserable life, that after death I may live with thee for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Thursday-Morning, relating to the Meditation prescribed for
Thursday, Exercise 3.
O God, whose Judgments are unsearchable, and thy ways past finding out! Who
art just as well merciful, and have ordained a Dungeon for Rebels, as well as a
Paradise for the Innocent! Horror is ready to overwhelm me when I reflect on
the eternal miseries of the Damned! when I think on the unquenchable fire, and
on the Worm that dies not, how should I tremble at the sins that lead men to
those torments! As eye has not seen, and ear has not heard, and the heart of
man cannot conceive the joys of Heaven, so I must judge of these future
miseries too. O dreadful day, when God shall take vengeance of his Enemies!
when not only all the Pain and Anguish that mankind endures here, shall there
be poured out on sinners, but far greater too. How unable am I to endure here
the aching of a Tooth, the torments of the Gout, the misery of the Stone, the
fire of a Fever, the raging of the Cholick, the exquisite pain of the
Strangury! O then! what must those miseries be, which know no respit, no
interval, no rest, no quiet, no ease, no abatement! Where Vengeance will come
with a Deluge, and not only the pain of a single Disease will be inflicted,
but all pains together will meet in the miserable Sufferer! Where all things
will combine to make him wretched, and all his former pleasures turn into Gall
and Wormwood! And yet how regardless of these miseries does Mankind live! How
little are they frighted with this Fire! How little are they disturbed with
this approaching Woe! O my gracious Lord! suffer me not to fall asleep with the
foolish Virgins, while the day does last; while I have time to work, while I am
on this side Eternity, let me dread these terrors, and the causes of it.
Whenever I am tempted to offend thee, O let these Torments check mine
inordinate desires! O let me consider how short the pleasure is, and how long
the bitterness it ends in! Surely thou will let the disobedient know one day
how odious sin is in thy sight, and how dangerous it was to abuse thy patience!
O give my Soul no rest till I firmly believe all this, and believing it, may
escape the wrath to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Thursday-Evening.
GReat God, whose excellency is over Israel, whose strength is in the Clouds,
who art terrible out of thy holy places, who have a mighty Voice, a Voice that
will one day shake the world, and summon all Mankind to come out of their
Graves, and to appear before thy Judgment seat! What confusion will the wicked
and careless world be in, when thou shall with indignation send them away into
the fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels! where they must be for ever
deprived of thy Favor, and want thy gracious Influences; where their fancy
will be eternally affrighted with hideous and monstrous shapes, where their
Passions will be in a perpetual uproar, where the remembrance of their former
Mercies will continually sting them, where their Reason will be their
Tormentor, their Conscience their Executioner, and yet unable to make an end of
them, where their Souls will be everlastingly torn with grief and discontent,
where God will be the object of their Hatred, and their minds will not be able
to entertain one kind thought of their Judge; where their Souls will be like
the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, and eternal darkness and gloominess make
their estate most uncomfortable; where no creature pities them, and no man, no
Angel, no Devil affords them any consolation! O God! can I love my self and not
endeavor to prevent this miserable condition? O call to me, bid me think of
it, convince me of it. Cure my blindness. Let Hell be the greatest object of my
fear. Let me not fear Poverty, Contempt, Sickness, Exile, or the unkindness of
men, so much, as this horrible Tempest. O let me not grow careless of it,
because I see it not, and I have not as yet felt it. Let me therefore dread it,
that I may never feel it. Let not the world drown my thoughts of it. Let not my
Lusts put it out of my mind. Let not the Devil persuade me that I am in no
danger. I am in danger, O let me see it, and run away. Lord! here cut, burn,
torture, and afflict me, so thou will but make me happy for ever. O let the
King of Heaven hear me when I call, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Friday-Morning, relating to the Meditation prescribed for Friday,
Exercise 3.
GReat Savior of the world, who wast wounded for my Transgressions, and
bruised for my sins! Thou art that innocent, and immaculate Lamb, which for
sinners, Enemies, and condemned creatures, gave thy back to the Smiter, and
sufferedst thy self to be beaten, crowned with Thorns, mocked, derided, and
inhumanely abused! A love fitter to be admired in silence, than praised with
imperfect expressions! How freely did thou part with thy blood to save my
life, and to procure my safety! Never was Blood spilt upon such an account; or
if there were, never was such precious Blood spilt as thine was, blood which
drives away Devils, invites Angels, cleanses Souls, purifies the Tabernacle,
washes the whole world, and opens the Gate of Heaven! Who can be so irreligiour
as not to be pricked at the heart with the thoughts of thy Passion? Who can be
so arrogant, or proud, as not to be humbled with the sight? who so choleric,
as not to be melted into meekness with the contemplation? Who so luxurious, as
not to be tempted to self-denial with this spectacle! O let thy Cross have that
effect upon me, that I may crucify my Flesh with all its Lusts and Passions.
Let thy Charity to thine Enemies prevail with me, to do good to them that hate
me! Let thy Patience under Reproaches oblige me to be silent under Calumnies.
Let thy love to my Soul wound my Heart, that I may long for thee, breathe after
thee, as my greatest comfort, think of nothing so much as of thee, value
nothing so much as thee, delight in nothing so much as in thee, for thou have
done for me beyond expectation, beyond imagination, more than Father and Mother
ever did, more than my dearest Friends ever did, more than mortal man can do. O
chain my heart to thine, and let nothing separate me from thy love, but be thou
mine, and let me be thine, and dwell with thee for ever.

Amen.
A Prayer for Friday-Evening.
OJesu! who have led Captivity Captive, spoiled Principalities and Powers, made
a show of them openly, and triumphed over them! How powerful was thy Death! How
victorious thy Cross! How potent were thy Agonies! How effectual thy
Sufferings! Thy Cross is my Conquest. Thy Gibbet is my Triumph. At that Devils
tremble, and they that are not afraid of splendid Palaces, are afraid of the
Tree on which thy sacred Body was stretched out. How shall Sin reign any longer
in my body, after such Compassion! Shall not I blush after such Mercy to offend
that Friend, who died for me? Shall I reward evil for good, or dare to act
against thee any more, who have conquered my greatest Enemies for me! They
would have swallowed me up quick, when they were so wrathfully displeased at
me, but thou came to my rescue, and would not let me perish by their fury.
I can plead no more that Sin and the Devil, and the World are not conquerable,
for thou have made them so. They have lost their force and power, and a poor
Christian can make even Devils tremble. O let the world be for ever crucified
to me, and me unto the world. Let me not be afraid of Affliction, when my Lord
and Master has endured so much for me. I hope to share in the glories of thy
Crown, O let me not be ashamed to bear thy Cross. O blessed Jesu! who art a
Guide to the Blind, a Way to the erring Soul, a Staff to the Lame, a Comforter
to the Poor, a Harbor to the tossed with Tempests, a Counselor to the
Perplexed, Wisdom to the Foolish, the glory of Martyrs, the joy of Angels, the
Foundation of the Church, the Physician of the Sick, Meat to the Hungry, Drink
to the Thirsty, Clothes to the Naked, be thou all this to me, and let thy Cross
supply all my wants, and in this let me glory and rejoice day and night, that
being in some measure crucified with thee here, I may be glorified with thee
hereafter.

Amen.
A Prayer for Saturday-Morning, suited to the Meditation prescribed Exercise 3.
for Saturday.
OGod, who art Purity and Holiness it self! How despicable, how odious, how
contemptible have I made my self in thy sight by departing from thy holy
Commandments delivered unto me! How like an Adversary! how like an Enemy of the
Cross have I lived! How may I stand amazed at thy patience, that I am yet on
this side Hell! What ingratitude have I been guilty of, to thee the best of
Masters, and the kindest Father, who have been tender of me to a Miracle! How
can I reflect upon my unthankfulness without blushing! O that I might not be
able to remember any of my sins without horror! How have I undervalued thy
wisdom by thinking my self wiser than my God, and by approving that, which thy
wisdom has condemned, as folly and bruitishness! What fruit had I then in
those things whereof I am now ashamed. What warnings have thou given me, not to
venture on those dangerous baits, and yet I have set light by them! I have been
loath to believe those, who poisoned by this Viper, have cried out, that they
have been cheated and murdered! I would not believe, till I found death in the
pot, and by woeful experience saw, that all the fair promises of sin, are mere
Delusions. Lord discover to me my secret errors, and the sins I have been loath
to know, convince me of their odiousness and fearful consequence! Teach me to
remove my foot far from them, and let me not come near the door of their house.
Instead of excusing of them, give me grace to confess, and fight against them.
Let not the present satisfactions tempt me to run into that fire, and anguish,
they end in. Though the World lies in wickedness, yet let the familiarity and
common practices of men be no temptation to me. Let me ever look up to that
Great, and Glorious God, who interdicts it, and count my self happier in thy
favor, than in all the Solaces and Flatteries of evil men. Anoint me with the
oil of gladness, and let me rejoice in nothing so much as in doing thy will,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for Saturday-Evening.
O Thou, at whose presence Devils tremble, and Sinners are afraid! How blind
has sin made me! How has it darkened my Understanding, and clouded all my
Faculties! How has it deprived me of spiritual strength, and thrust me into
the very Jaws of the roaring Lion! What power have I given to my spiritual
Enemies by offending thee, and how have I armed those Foes against mine own
Soul! How like an Atheist have I lived, while I have been careless of thy
Omniscience and Omnipresence! How basely have I preferred mine own will, and
the favor of men, before thy Precepts, and the light of thy Countenance! O the
many idle, foolish, silly, lascivious, ridiculous, censorious Words, Speeches,
Discourses, and Answers, that I have been guilty of! How little regard have I
had to thy Day, thy Name, thy Word, thy Ordinances, to the duty of Prayer, and
to the Ministry! How inattentive in hearing thy Word, how cold in Prayers, how
negligent in the duties of my respective Relations have I been! What
pettishness, peevishness, impatience, touchiness! What envy, hatred, passion,
secret grudges have I harbored in my Bosom! What impure, covetous, unclean,
disorderly thoughts and desires have I suffered to lodge in my Breast! What a
stranger have I been to that veracity, meekness, patience, humility, charity,
tenderness, compassion, steddiness in holiness, and readiness to every good
word, and work, which thou have peremptorily commanded! How have I rendered
railing for railing, mistrusted thy Providence, allowed my self in
discontentedness, and been a Coward in thy service! O my God! I renounce all
these swarms of sin, and beg thy Illumination, Assistance, Power, Grace, and
Influence against them! Come Lord! Come into this Soul of mine, and erect thy
Throne in my Breast! Whenever I am tempted for the future, let me say, I am a
Christian, I am not mine own, I am bought with a price, and I cannot yield! O
make me stand in awe of mine own Conscience, and give me Rivers of Tears to
deplore what is past! O my God! I desire to walk in the light, even as thou art
in the light, that I may have fellowship with thy Saints, and the blood of
Jesus Christ may wash me from all sins. O quicken me, O strengthen me, O leave
me not; in thee do I trust, let me never be confounded for Christ's sake, to
whom with thee, and the eternal Spirit, be all Honor and Glory for ever.

Amen.
Advertisement.
1. THough the Lords Prayer be not mentioned in the foregoing Supplications,
yet a Christian that makes use of these Devotions, may, and ought
conscienciously to add it.

2. As besides our own spiritual Wants, we are to recommend to God the
necessities of others, so the following Ejaculations, may be added to the
foregoing Prayers.

For the whole Race of Mankind.
ARise O Lord, let thy Light shine, and let thy Glory rise upon Heathens, Jews,
Mahometans, and others, who have not known thee, and upon all the Families that
do not call upon thy Name. Remove the darkness that covers the Earth, and the
gross darkness under which whole Nations lie. Let all men see the light of thy
Gospel, and flow to it, that their hearts may fear, and be enlarged, and
glorify the House of thy Glory.

For the Universal Church of Christ.
HAve mercy, Lord, on thy Church dispersed all the world over. Let violence be
heard in her no more, nor wasting and destruction within her borders. Let her
Walls be called Salvation, and her Gates Praise. Let her Priests be clothed
with righteousness, and let her Saints rejoice and sing. Let her righteousness
go forth as brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns.

For the King.
GIve the King thy Judgments, O God, and let him judge thy People with
Righteousness. Be thou his Goodness, his Fortress, his high Tower, and his
Deliverer, his Shield, in whom he may trust, and subdue his people under him;
send thy hand from above, and rid him, deliver him out of great Waters, from
the hand of strange Children, whose mouth speaks Vanity, and their right hand
is a right hand of Falsehood. Let him rule in the fear of God, and let his
glory be as the light of the Morning, when the Sun rises, even as a Morning
without Clouds.

For the Royal Family.
LEt their glory, O Lord, be great in thy Salvation, Honor and Majesty do thou
lay upon them. Be thou entreated to make them blessed for ever, and exceeding
glad with thy countenance. Let their goodness be answerable to their greatness,
and make them shining and burning lights, that others may see their good works,
and praise their Father which is in Heaven.

For the Bishops and Clergy.
ENable thy Ministers, O Lord, to hold Faith and a good Conscience; Make them
great examples of the Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Purity. Let them meditate upon these things, give themselves wholly
to them, that their profiting may appear to all. Let them take heed unto
themselves, and unto their Doctrine, and continue in it, that they may both
save themselves and them that hear them.

For the People of the Land.
O Lord, make the people willing in the day of thy power, willing to fear God,
to honor the King, and to love one another with a pure heart fervently. O that
there were such a heart in them, that they might love thee, and fear thee, and
keep all thy Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with
their Children for ever. Pardon their crying sins, and persuade them to do
justly, to show mercy, and to walk humbly with their God.

For persons distressed in Body or Mind.
O Lord, bind up the brokenhearted, proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the
opening of the Prison to them that are bound: Proclaim the acceptable year of
the Lord to the miserable, and the day of peace to comfort all that mourn. Give
unto them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, the Garment of Praise
for the Spirit of Heaviness. For their Shame let them have double, and for
Confusion, let them rejoice in their Portion, and let everlasting Joy be upon
their heads.

For Relations.
LOrd, be thou a Father, a Husband, a Friend, a Master, a Ruler, and a
Protector to them all. Make them thy Friends, thy Children, thy Favorites,
love them freely, receive them graciously, let their Souls be bound up in the
bundle of life with thee, keep them as the Apple of thine eye, and when thou
make up thy Jewels, remember them, and spare them as a man would spare his
own Son that serves him.

For Benefactors.
LOrd, do good to them that have done good to me. Bless them with a true
Repentance, Here the Benefactors Names may be mentioned.
with pardon of all their sins, with a mighty sense of God, with a holy
fruitfulness in all good works, with a meek and humble Spirit, with peace of
Conscience, with joy in the Holy Ghost, with eminency of Virtue, and for the
kindnesses they have shown to me, and mine, reward them sevenfold with mercy
into their Bosoms.

For Enemies.
LOrd bless them that curse me, do good to them that hate me, be merciful to
them that either have wronged me, or would despitefully use me, and transform
them by the renewing of their mind, that they may prove what is the holy and
acceptable and perfect will of God.

Advertisement. 3.
I Thought to have made an end here, but for some reasons was prevailed withal
to add these following Prayers.

For a Sick person.
O Thou, who deliverest the Poor when he cries, the Needy also, and him that
has no helper, look upon this thy weak Servant, from the habitation of thy
Holiness, and be a Physician to his outward and inward man. At once heal his
Soul and Body. Speak the word, and thy Servant shall be whole. Bless him with a
sound Repentance, and make this affliction an effectual means to produce in him
the peaceable fruits of Righteousness, of Faith, and Love, and Charity. Hear
his Prayers, regard his Groans, give him ease under his burden, restore his
Soul, and make him thankful for thy Mercy, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A short Thanksgiving after Recovery.
I Thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have been
pleased to spare this thy unworthy Servant. Fill me with a mighty sense of thy
Goodness. O let this Mercy never never be forgotten. Let me see thy hand in
this providence, and admire the great Giver of this Blessing. Be thou hereafter
in all my thoughts. Increase my desires after thee, my fear of offending thee,
my care to please thee, my love to thy ways, my zeal to thy Glory, and fit me
for thy everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for a Woman with Child.
O Thou, who set the Poor on high from affliction, and make him Families
like a Flock. Take pity of me, O thou that hear Prayers, be with with me in
the hour of trouble, when Fear and Anguish come upon me. Forget my sins, and
strengthen me with thy Grace. Bless the Fruit of my Body, and sanctify it
early. As the Mountains are round about Jerusalem, so let the Lord be round
about me from henceforth, even for ever, and though I sow in Tears, yet let me
reap in Joy. Be thou my Fortress and Deliverer, and in the great danger watch
over me for good and not for evil, and enable me to tell my Friends what the
Lord has done for my Soul through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after safe deliverance.
O God! How am I bound to praise thy great and glorious Name, who have not
forsaken me when my Soul was in trouble. Out of the depth have I cried unto
thee, and thou have heard my voice, and my supplication. For this shall every
one that is godly pray unto thee in a time, when thou may be found. O Lord my
God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me. Thou have brought up my Soul
from the Grave, thou have kept me alive, that I should not go down to the Pit.
Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing, thou have put off my
Sackcloth, and girded me with gladness, to the end that my glory may sing
praises to thee and not be silent. O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee,
and delight my self in the Lord for ever, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for one that intends a Single Life.
O Most gracious God, who give power to the weak, and strength to the feeble,
thou know my purposes, and see my desires, and art acquainted with my
design of being married to none but thee. O blessed Bridegroom of my Soul, give
me chaste desires, power to resist Temptations, strength to subdue the motions
of the Flesh. Dwell in me by thy Spirit. Teach me to love thee passionately.
Let no other object engross my Affections. Give me a spiritual Appetite. Keep
me unspotted in this sinful world. Be thou my All, my Riches, my Pleasure, my
Delight, my Crown, my Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for one that is entering into a Married state.
O God, who have made Marriage an honorable thing, and promised to bless those
that marry in the Lord! In thy name I am entering into another state of life. Be
merciful unto me, O Lord, rejoice the Soul of thy Servant, for unto thee O Lord
do I lift up my Soul. Direct me in all my actions. Counsel me in what I am to
do. Incline my heart to fear thy Name. Enrich her, that is to be my Yoak-fellow
with the choicest of thy favors. Give us both hearts to rely and depend upon
thee. Let Us look up to thee, in all our concerns. Make our mutual love sincere,
and constant, and let us encourage one another to godliness. Make us helpful one
to another, and in our lawful endeavors, and enterprises let us see thy
bountiful hand. Make us both pleased with what thou shall think fit to send
upon us, and contented in all conditions, and with united force let us press
toward the mark of eternal glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer before a Journey.
O Thou who wast a Pillar of Cloud to thy People of old in the day, and a
Pillar of Fire by night, watch over me in this Journey day and night. Be thou
my Guide, my Star, my Light, my Director, and bring me safe to the place I
intend for. Preserve me from all evil. Protect me from all dangers, let thine
Angel be my Guardian, and under the shadow of thy Wings let my refuge be, that
I may observe thy Statutes, and keep thy Laws, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving after a safe return.
BLessed God, whose works are honorable, and glorious, and who have made thy
wonderful works to be remembered, give me leave to admire, and to praise thy
Providence, which has covered me with its Feathers, and been my Shield and
Buckler, which has kept me from the terror by night, and from the destruction
that wastes at noon day. I cheerfully offer here unto thee the Sacrifice of
righteousness, and as I see the loving kindness of the Lord, so enable me for
the future to live in a thankful remembrance of thy goodness, and let this and
all thy other gracious Providence prevail with me to walk before thee with a
perfect and upright heart, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer for one, that is going to Sea.
O Thou, who stillest the raging of the Sea, so that the Waves thereof are
still. Thy Way is in the Sea, and thy Path in the great Waters, and thy
Footsteps are not known. O God! I am like to see thy Works and Wonders in the
deep. Be with me I beseech thee in my going out, and in my coming in. Spread
thy wings over me, and let me find by blessed experience, that they who trust
in thee shall never be confounded. Prosper my Voyage, and give success to my
endeavors. Let not the Deep swallow me up, neither let the Floods drown me.
Shine upon me day and night, and with thy love cherish my fainting Spirits. Let
no evil examples have dominion over me. Let thy fear be upon my Soul, at all
times, and let nothing tempt me to depart from my integrity. Let my Soul learn
by thy Providence to keep close to thy Word, and let that be my Comfort in all
my Afflictions, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Thanksgiving when one is returned safely.
O God, thou art the God, that do Wonders, thou have declared thy strength
among the People, Thou have with thine arm redeemed thy People, the Sons of
Jacob and Joseph. I will praise thee, for thy goodness, and for thy wonderful
Works to the Children of men. I will exalt thee in the Congregation of the
People, and praise thee in the Assembly of the Elders. I cried unto the Lord in
my trouble, and thou broughtest me out of my distresses. Thou has delivered me
from the great Waters, and my Life has been precious in thy sight. Recreate my
Soul with the thoughts of thy mercy, and while I am sailing through the
boisterous Sea of this World, let thy Word be a Lanthorn to my Feet, and a
Light to my Paths, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A short Prayer before Divine Service or Sermon.
O God, I am come into the house, where thy Honor dwells. Overaw me with a
sense of thy Presence, that I may pray with understanding, and like a person
concerned about the blessings, I shall pray for. Fix my Thoughts and Affections
on thy sweet self, and teach me to make intercessions with groans, which cannot
be uttered. Let thy Word be sweet to me, and give me a tractable Spirit, that
may cheerfully, and willingly submit to the Yoke of the Lord Jesus. Assist me
in all my Duties and Devotions, and let thy good Spirit direct and order them
to thy Glory. Make my Soul a gainer by these spiritual Exercises, and let all
the Congregation feel the power of thy influences, that with one heart, and one
voice, we may glorify God in the day of Visitation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Amen.
A Prayer after Divine Service and Sermon.
O Thou, who live for ever and ever, I have prayed, I have heard thy Word, I
have joined with thy People in their Supplications and Prayers. If thou Lord
should mark Iniquities, who shall stand? Pardon, I beseech thee, the
iniquities of my holy things, and what imperfections thou have seen in my
Devotions, cover them with the unspotted righteousness of Christ Jesus, and
cleanse them with his Blood. Cast me not away from thy presence, neither take
thy holy Spirit from me. Accept of my imperfect Services, and make me more
circumspect in all my ways. Let thy Word be written in my heart, and let
neither the cares, nor riches, nor pleasures of the world steal it away. O give
me thy Grace to walk according to this rule, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A Morning-Prayer for a Family.
O God, great and glorious! the Day is thine, and the Night is thine, thou have
made Summer and Winter, thou have made the outgoings of the Morning and Evening
to rejoice. How great is thy loving kindness! therefore the Children of men
shall put their trust under the shadow of thy Wings. We praise thee O God, we
acknowledge thee to be the Lord. Thou art the great preserver of men. Thou have
protected us the night past, and through thy mercy we have escaped innumerable
dangers; thou have been our refuge, our hiding place, our fortress, and our
deliverer. One Generation shall praise thy Works unto another, and declare thy
mighty acts. We see thy goodness again in the land of the living. Thou have
spread thy Wings over us, thou have covered us with thy Feathers. Thou know
our frame, and remembrest we are dust. Thou know how unable we are to keep
our selves, and therefore have taken care of us, and unto this moment thy
favors and loving kindnesses rest upon our Souls and Bodies. O that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare his wonderful works to the
Children of men! We cannot but remember, how like a Father thou have pitied us
all our days. We have always found thy help in the time of trouble. How
precious are thy thoughts, which are to us ward; they cannot be reckoned up in
order unto thee. If we would declare and speak of them, they are more than can
be numbered. What Sacrifices of thanksgiving are we bound to offer unto thee for
thy love to our Souls in Christ Jesus, for the assistances of thy Holy Spirit,
for thy Word, and Ordinances, and for all the encouragements we have to lay
hold on eternal life! O make us sensible of thy goodness! Let us see how sweet,
and how gracious thou art, and let this sight work in us a perfect hatred of
sin, and a fervent love to the ways of holiness. Discover to us the errors of
our ways. Reveal to us our secret corruptions. Let not only greater, but even
all lesser sins become odious and loathsome to our Souls. Establish us with thy
grace, uphold us with thy free Spirit. Leave us not to our selves, rule us by
thy power, direct us by thy wisdom. Enable us to do thy will. Encourage us to
cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and whatever
things are praiseworthy, let us not only think of them, but practice them.
Give us earnest desires to imitate the best of mankind. Let Us delight greatly
in thy Commandments. Lord! open the eyes of our Understandings, that we may
look more earnestly upon the spiritual riches thou have vouchsafed unto us, and
may be enamored with them, and despise the vanities of the world, and set our
affections upon the things which are above, and may at last obtain the end of
our Faith, even the salvation of our Souls. Be with us this following day. Make
us watchful over our senses. Work in us a detestation of all filthy discourses,
and of all the ill we see in the world. Teach us how to live in thy fear, and
whatever sin we are tempted to, let us tremble at it, and say, how can we commit
this wickedness, and sin against our God! Let thy holy Angels keep us in all
our ways. Order our steps according to thy Word. Direct and guide our thoughts,
and words, and actions. Bless all our lawful endeavors. Cross and disappoint
us, in that which is offensive to thy holiness. Prosper that which is expedient
for us. Give us courage, and wisdom, discretion, and resolution in our
behavior toward God and men, and let us use the world, as if we used it not.
Keep our thoughts fixed upon a better life, that whenever thou shall call us
away from hence, we may be ready and willing to obey thy Summons, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Here the Prayers for the King, Royal Family, Church, etc. may be added.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
MOst holy, and ever-glorious God! how excellent is thy Name in all the World!
Thou art to be seen in all thy works, and we have seen thee, the day past, in
thy various Mercies and gracious Providence, for which we do here render our
most humble and hearty thanks. O God! who is like unto thee? For though thou
dwell on high, yet thou humblest thy self to behold the ways of the Children
of men! What are we, that thou should take notice of us! or what is our
frame, that thou should have such respect unto us! We see thy condescension,
and admire it. We see thy loving kindnesses, and praise thy Name. Thy Mercy
reaches unto the Heavens, thy Faithfulness unto the Clouds. Thou give unto
us all that our Hearts, and Faith, and Reason can desire! What a glorious gift
is the Son of thy bosom! what rich Presents are thy Promises! how industrious
is thy Providence, to engage our hearts to love thee! yet how backward are we
to this duty! How loath to raise our Souls above the world! How unwilling to
take thee for our greatest treasure! We say, and speak glorious things of thee
now and then, but we feel them not. O touch our hearts, and warm them with the
fire of the Sanctuary, and let us know no other thing, than to love thee with
all our hearts, and with all our Souls. Be thou the pleasing object of our
Souls, and let us be displeased with nothing but what displeases thee. Teach us
to neglect our own will, that we may the better comply with thine, and let us
walk by this golden Rule, to speak little, to think little, and to do much.
Thou have done great things for us, denied thy self in thy glory, majesty, and
splendour to do us good, let us therefore scruple nothing that thou command;
and give us strength to do what thou command, and then command what thou
please. Enable us to act, and speak, and live, as in thy presence, wherever
we are, and whatever we are doing, and let us so live in the world as not to be
of the world. Let no condition thou shall call us out unto, be uneasy or
unpleasant to us, and whenever thou shall think fit to correct us, let us look
upon the providence, as intended for our good. Whenever we are exercised by
Temptations, let us not grow impatient, but rest in an humble and cheerful
resignation to thy Will. Fit us for the hour of our death, and let us not delay
our seriousness to a sick bed. Let Us readily obey thy present call, and take
heed of procrastinations. Let the great things that depend upon our death, be
much in our thoughts, and let us not put the evil day far from us. Encourage us
so to so journ here, that at our journeys end, we may be received into
everlasting habitations. Take us all into thy protection this following night.
O thou great Shepherd of Israel, who neither slumberest nor sleep, spread
thy wings over us, and we shall be safe. Fit us for the duties of the following
day. Teach us to commune with our hearts upon our beds, and to meditate of thy
wondrous works. Let our rest be comfortable to the refreshing of our bodies,
and that we may be the better able to discharge our duties the following day.
Let our everlasting rest be never out of our minds, and from the sweetness of
our rest on our Beds, let us take occasion to consider, how much sweeter our
eternal rest will be in thy bosom. Banish from our minds all foolish and vain
imaginations, and let us ever think our selves most happy when we do most
converse with thee, who art most blessed for ever. Visit us with the favor
thou bear unto thine own people; and give us all such resolutions to serve
thee, that we may never be faint or weary in thy service, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
A Grace before meat.
O Lord, thy bountiful hand has provided these thy good Creatures for me [us].
Let me use them with Moderation, Temperance, and Sobriety, to the glory of thy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or: LOrd, let me see thee the great Creator in these thy Creatures, and as
thou do intend them for my nourishment, so let my Soul be encouraged by these
Mercies to abound more and more in Goodness and Virtue, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
A Grace after meat.
O Lord, who art the great Preserver of men, and who have fed me at this time
with thy Blessings, receive my humble Praises for these thy Mercies, and engage
me to walk before thee in Righteousness and true Holiness, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Or: HOw excellent O Lord, is thy loving Kindness, I have seen and tasted again
how sweet and gracious the Lord is. Make my will perfectly conformable to thy
Will, and let these and all thy other Mercies prove Motives to me to love thee
unto the end, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A Prayer relating to Exercise 1. which is to pray without ceasing. Page 1 A
Prayer relating to Exercise 2. which is every Morning to resolve to tie our
selves that day to certain Rules of Living. 5 A Prayer relating to Exercise 3.
viz. Every day to spend half an hour or some such time, in thinking of good
things. 10 A Prayer relating to Exercise 4. viz. To study deep Humility. 16 A
Prayer relating to Exercise 5. viz. To bridle our Tongues. 21 A Prayer relating
to Exercise 6. viz. To watch against little sins. 26 A Prayer relating to
Exercise 7. viz. To keep a strict guard over our Eyes. 33 A Prayer relating to
Exercise 8. viz. To make use of the Virtues and Vices of our Neighbors. 40 A
Prayer relating to Exercise 9. viz. To put a charitable interpretation upon
what we see or hear. 45 A Prayer relating to Exercise 10. viz. Conscientiously
to discharge the duties of our several Callings and Relations. 51 A Prayer
relating to Exercise 11. viz. To resist all sorts of Temptations. 56 A Prayer
relating to Exercise 12. viz. To stand in awe of God, when we are alone and no
creature sees us. 62 A Prayer relating to Exercise 13. viz. To do all things to
Gods Glory. 67 A Prayer relating to Exercise 14. viz. To stir up and exercise
the Graces God has given us. 73 A Prayer relating to Exercise 15. viz. Every
night before we go to bed to call our selves to an account for the actions of
the day. 80 A Prayer relating to Exercise Extraordinary 1. viz. To enter into
solemn vows and promises. 85 A Prayer relating to Exercise Extraordinary 2.
viz. To subdue the body by fasting. 91 A Prayer relating to Exercise
Extraordinary 3. viz. To use watching, or abstinence from sleep. 97 A Prayer
relating to Exercise Extraordinary 4. viz. To apply our selves to Self-revenge.
103 A Prayer for Sunday Morning. 109 A Prayer for Sunday Evening. 117 A Prayer
for Monday Morning. 124 A Prayer for Monday Evening. 128 A Prayer for Tuesday
Morning. 132 A Prayer for Tuesday Evening. 136 A Prayer for Wednesday Morning.
140 A Prayer for Wednesday Evening. 144 A Prayer for Thursday Morning. 149 A
Prayer for Thursday Evening. 154 A Prayer for Friday Morning. 159 A Prayer for
Friday Evening. 163 A Prayer for Saturday Morning. 167 A Prayer for Saturday
Evening. 172 A Prayer for the whole Race of Mankind. 178 A Prayer for the
universal Church of Christ. 180 A Prayer for the King. 181 A Prayer for the
Royal Family. 183 A Prayer for the Bishops and Clergy. 184 A Prayer for the
People of the Land. 185 A Prayer for persons distressed in body or mind. 187 A
Prayer for Relations. 189 A Prayer for Benefactors. 190 A Prayer for Enemies.
192 A Prayer for a Sick person. 193 A Thanksgiving after Recovery. 195 A Prayer
for a Woman with Child. 197 A Thanksgiving after safe Deliverance. 199 A Prayer
for one that intends a single Life. 201 A Prayer for one that is entering into a
Married state. 203 A Prayer before a Journey. 205 A Thanksgiving after a safe
Return. 207 A Prayer for one that is going to Sea. 209 A Thanksgiving when one
is returned safely. 211 A short Prayer before Divine Service or Sermon. 213 A
Prayer after Divine Service and Sermon. 215 A Morning-Prayer for a Family. 217
An Evening-Prayer for a Family. 224. A Grace before Meat. 231 A Grace after
Meat. 233.
FINIS.

