AN ACCOUNT OF A WHALE Seventy four Foot long, Taken at Sutton, near Wisbich,
on Tuesday March 14th. 1692/3
An Abstract of a Letter from Sutton near Wisbich, of a Whale taken there 74
foot long, whose Mouth opens 15 Foot, with some Quaeries about it. This Whale
14 Foot longer than that taken by Sir Anthony Dean, 1658. A Whale judged to
weigh 100 Tuns. A Temple whose Rafters and Beams were of Whale bone. A Whales
Rib of such an Arch, that a Man on a Camel did ride under it. A Whale taken in
Kent 22 Yards long, with his Description, and of others. Eight sorts of Whales
with their Description. A Whale 30 Else long* Whales cry when they Engender,
and bring forth their young alive.

TWo Friends of mine did me the favor to show me their Letters received last
Monday from Sutton near Wisbich, in Lincolnshire, from William Hide, Esquire where
he gives an account, That on Tuesday, March 14. 1692/3 was taken in his
Lordship, called Sutton* Wash, a Whale 74 foot long, whose Mouth opened 15 Foot
wide, capable to receive a Coach and Six Horses. He sent some Stuff taken out
from the bottom of the great Whalebone*Finns in his Mouth, which I tried, and
it will yield no Oil, and is not Sperma Caeti. He desires to know where the
Sperma Caeti lies, in what places the Whalebone grows, and whither any part be
Whalebone, other than the Finn; and whether any thing can be made of him beside
the Blubber, Whalebone, and Sperma Caeti; and whether the Brains be not Sperma
Caeti. An Answer to which I give as follows:

This Whale is a very large one, according to the best of my remembrance,
fourteen Foot longer than that taken by Sir Anthony Dean, in 1658 one of the
Ribs whereof I believe is in the Courtyard at St. James's; for I think Sir
Anthony Dean told me that Whale was but Sixty Foot long. I find in Purchas's,
Pilgrims, Vol. 1, page 420. mention of a Whale the Seamen judged to be One
Hundred Tune in weight.

In Vol. 2. page 772. he speaks of a Temple whose Rafters and Beams were of
Whalebone; and the Relator was shown a Whales Rib of so great a size, that
lying on the Ground, with the Unequal or howing side upward, in manner of an
Arch, it resembled a Gate, the hollow or inward part whereof aloft they could
not touch with their Heads, as they rode upon their Camels backs. This Rib the
Native said had lain there an hundred Years.

In Vol. 3. page 737. there is a Whale described, taken in the Isle of Thanet
in Kent, July. the 9th. 1574. shooting himself on Shore, beside Rammesgate,
about six at Night, and died about six next Morning, before which time he
Roared, and was heard more than a mile on the Land. The length was Twenty Two
yards; the neither Jaw Seventy Two Foot in the opening. One of his Eyes (which,
in the Greenland VVhale is not much greater than that of an Ox) was more than
six Horses in a Cart could draw. A Man stood upright in the place whence the
Eye was taken. The thickness from his back whereon he lay, to his Belly was 14
Foot; his Tail of the same breadth: Three Men stood upright in his Mouth:
Betwixt his Eyes 12 Foot: Some of the Ribs 16 Foot long: The Tongue 15 Foot
long: His Liver two Cartloads; Into his Nostrils any Man might have crept: The
Oil of his Head, Sperma Caeti, ande.

In the same Vol. p. 470. is the Description of several sorts and mnaner of
killing them; an Epitome whereof take as follows.

The Whale is a Fish about 65 Foot long, and 35 Foot thick, his Head a Third of
his Body's Quantity, his Mouth containing a very great Tongue, and all his
Finns.

These Finns are rooted in his upper Chap, and spread over his Tongue on both
sides his Mouth, being 250 on each side. The longest Finns are placed in the
midst of his Mouth, and the rest shorten by degrees backward and forward, from
ten or eleven Foot long to four Inches in length: His Eye as big as an Oxes,
and the former great Eye mentioned in the Margin: His Body almost round
forward, growing still narrower toward his Tail from his Body: His Tail is
above twenty Foot broad, of a tough solid Substance, as are his two swimming
Finns, and they grow forward.

He comes often above Water, spouting eight or nine times before his return;
whereby he may be seen two or three Leagues off. Then they make to him, catch
him, kill him, and order him for a Market, as may there be seen at large.

There are described eight sorts of Whales: The Grand Bay, which is black, with
a smooth Skin, and white underneath the Chaps. The best for Oil and Finns (the
older the better.] This sort yields above 100 Hogsheads of Oil, and 500 Finns.

2. The Sarda, of the same color, but less, yielding lesser Finns, and about
70 or 80 Hogsheads of Oil. This has naturally growing on his Back white things
like Barnacles.

3. The Trumpa, as long as the first, but thicker forwards, of color more
Gray, having but one Spout in his Head, and the rest have all two. He has
Teeth as thick as a Man's Wrist, a Span long, but no Finns: His Head is bigger
than the two former, and in proportion far bigger than his Body. In his Head is
the Sperma caeti, which lies in a hole like a Well; he yields about forty
Hogsheads of Oil, beside the Sperma caeti.

4. The Otta Sotta, of the same color with the Trumpa, having white Finns in
his Mouth, but not above half Yard long, thicker than the Trumpa, but shorter:
He yields the best Oil, but not above thirty Hogsheads.

5. The Gibarta, black like the two first, having a Finn standing on the top of
his Back half Yard long: He is as big as the first: His Finns little or nothing
worth, being not above half a Yard long: He yields about twelve Hogsheads of
Oil from his Back, but his Belly yields none.

6. The Sedena, being of a whitely color, and bigger than any of the former:
The Finns not above one Foot long, and yields little or no Oil.

7. The Sedena Negro, black, with a Bump on his Back, he yields neither Oil,
Finns, nor Teeth, and yet is of great bigness.

8. The Sewria, as white as Snow, of the bigness of a Wherry: yields but one or
two Hogsheads of Oil, nor any Finns, and is good Meat.

In the said Third Vol. p. 649. is mention of a Whale thirty Else long, and his
height more than a warlike Pike.

In another place, it is said the Whales cry in Engendring; and I am told they
give suck, and are Viviparous (bringers forth alive.)

The Whalebone, or Finn grows no where but in the Mouth, and I am told the use
of it to the Whale is as a Wear, which he can lay close and widen, that Fish
may get in, but then letting them loose, they lie together, and let no Fish go
back, and so gets his living.

The Flesh of him will be excellent Manure for Land, and his Ribs, other Bones,
swimming Finns, and Tail, will be Curiosities for after Ages; and if a Present
were made to the Royal Society, I believe 'twould be very acceptable.

The great Eye is not much stranger than the Fish; but I give the Account
faithfully, believe as you please. I am told there are many more sorts of
Whales.

If this finds a kind Acceptance, Accounts of other strange things may
hereafter be given by

JOHN HOUGHTON, F. R. S.
St. Batholomew Lane, London, March 22.1692/3.
The Collection for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade comes out every Friday,
and may be had now at One Penny each.

London Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, 1693.


