HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

The Horrid CONSPIRACY Of such IMPENITENT TRAITORS As intended A New Rebellion
In the Kingdom of Ireland.

WITH A LIST of the PRISONERS, AND The Particular Manner of Seizing
Dublin-Castle BY LVDLOW, And His ACCOMPLICES.

Verbatim out of the Expresses sent to His MAJESTY from the Duke of ORMOND.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Speed at the Rainbow near the Inner Temple-Gate in
Fleetstreet. 1663.

The HORRID CONSPIRACY OF Such Impenitent Traitors as intended A NEW REBELLION
in the Kingdom of IRELAND.
THough God Almighty has been pleased by his unexpressible mercy to restore
His Sacred MAJESTY to his Crown and Dignity, and thereby his good Subjects of
his three Kingdoms; Yet after so long and various Rebellions it cannot seem
strange if some wicked and desperate Principles still lurk in those who before
were swollen to such a prodigious height by Rapine and Blood. And though the
unparalled Clemency of our gracious Sovereign were sufficient (one would
think) to make them remember nothing but their Pardon; yet these ungrateful
Wretches have broke afresh into the Act of Indemnity, plotting most wickedly
the Ruin and Destruction of all that love the Peace and Government of the
three Nations: And in order thereunto, contrived first to seize upon the Royal
Castle of Dublin, and then to cut off that Excellent Personage James Duke of
Ormond, His Majesty's Lieutenant of the Realm of Ireland; both which they
plotted to put in execution the 21 of this last month of May. But God (who is
better pleased with his own Mercies) would not prosper such ungrateful
Traitors, but brought it to light; so as many of the Conspirators are now
apprehended, and the rest so pursued as no doubt they shall not long escape.
But (which is most remarkable) that all the world may see what impudent and
groundless Traitors these are, they had drawn a Declaration (to be forthwith
published) wherein they only repeat the self-same Excuses which Themselves and
their Predecessors used for the first Rebellion; pretending (forsooth) their
former Oaths and Covenants, (which God knows bind them only to Repentance
that ever they took them:) That His Majesty is seduced by evil Counselors,
(because He will not consent to His own and His Peoples Destruction:) That
their intent to take Arms was for their just Defense; (which has been the
Pretense of all Rebels since the world began:) That they will stand for a
Religion according to the tenure of the Solemn League and Covenant; (which
those very Traitors, who are all Independents, fought against) And bring all
things to that state it was in the year 1659. (which was the most wild and
desperate condition, when we had Four Governments in one year.) And all this
they call The Repairing of the Breaches.

The manner of putting this horrid Villainy in execution, take in the very words
of the Express it self.

WHen 120 Horse, and as many Foot are had, 80 of the Foot are to be put into
the Backside, and House, being most lodged there one night, after a Scout
being in, tells all is clear within; then six of them being upon occasions with
Petitions in their hands, or the like, within the Castle waiting; as soon as
the six men come into the Castle, they send a Messenger to the 80. to tell
them; who immediately return them him again, as soon as they are ready: and at
his heels comes a Basket of Bread, and other Provisions; and after it three or
four men, who interpose between the Basket and the 80 Foot, lest any seeing the
Party, should run before, and Alarm the Guard. As soon as the six men within
see the aforesaid Messenger return, as aforesaid from the eighty, they (though
scatteringly) make toward the back-gate that goes into Sheep-street, to go
forth; where, in the shutting of the Gate (for by that time the Basket will be
let down, and the eighty men will appear) there will some strife arise between
the Guard at the door and the Basket-men; the which the six men within will
decide, by taking the Baskets part, and so let the eighty in, wh^ being
divided, thirty to the Guard at the door, thirty for the Guard in the great
gate, ten for the Gate they enter at, and ten to the Stable-yard Gate, to force
it open to receive in a select party of Horse; twenty men are to go to Jones
his Chamber, and to secure him and the Ladies. All these are to have their
several Leaders to each Party, of the most resolute and stoutest of the Party,
and each to stand to his Business. The Horse are to be disposed of as
follows: thirty over the Water, thirty against the Stable-yard-Gate, thirty
without Newgate, twenty in Wine-Tavern-street: There must be attending upon
the aforesaid Foot eight Messengers, which must each couple be assigned their
party of Horse to go to: and as soon as the Foot are ready for the attempt of
the Castle, they immediately send to each party of Horse one Messenger; the
other four stay for further Orders. At the coming of the first Messengers, he
that has the charge of each party of Horse sends in four or five Horse within
each Gate, and immediately mounts his men, unto whom he gives, if they want,
(which few, if any, will then) a Pistol, with Ammunition. Then by that time the
News comes that the Castle is taken (which the four Messengers left are to
convey with all speed to their several Charges) all the Horse are marched into
the City, without any stir or confusion, and shut the gates after them,
leaving without at each Gate two Scouts to checque the Alarm of any jealous
head, and to give account how things are without. At Ormond-Gate there must be
left three or four men, to shut it; seven or eight at Pole-gate, and
Nicholas-gate, to shut them; and so at each Gate: then each Party having their
Ward assigned them, they scowre the Streets of the City, and disperse
gatherings of the Soldiery, if any be endeavored, and cry, A free Parliament,
and an English Interest. As Soon as ever the City is put into any Order, (for
by that time it is supposed that the Reputation of the Castle, and the
undertaking of the English Interest, will gain followers enough) they must
issue into the Suburbs, and scowre those Streets, being then assisted by most
of the Forces that attempted the Castle; and so proceed, and according as they
find opportunity, require men. There must be left about twenty men near the
Main-Guard under the Tholshal, to help the twenty Horse in Wine-Tavern-street,
to secure it; which Guard at that time a day are but a few.

Upon the Discovery of this Horrid Design, the Lord Lieutenant and Council in
Ireland immediately set forth this following Declaration.

BY The Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS certain wicked persons of Fanatic and Disloyal principles,
disaffected to His Majesty's Just and Gracious Government, and to the Peace and
Settlement of this Kingdom, have lately most Traitorously and Disloyally
conspired to raise Rebellious Disturbances in this Realm, and particularly had
designed on the 21 day of this present May to surprise and take His Majesty's
Castle of Dublin, His principal Fort in this His Kingdom, and to seize on the
Person of Us the Lord Lieutenant, in order to their carrying on their
mischievous Contrivances, for renewing Bloody Confusions thorowout this
Kingddm, from which Evils this Realm and all His Majesty's Subje^ts therein
have been but newly redeemed, and that by the blessing of God and His Majesty's
happy Restoration to His Rightful Crowns and Kingdoms: And as We look upon
those Odious Conspiracies as the mischievous Contrivances of some Fanatic and
Disloyal persons of Desperate Fortunes, as well as of desperate and destructive
Principles, who endeavor to amend their own conditions by the ruin of others,
or to set up some thing (if they knew what) suitable to the Frenzy of their
own Humors and Imaginations, though at the charge and hazard of others, and at
the price of other men's blood whom they labor to sedure; so now their horrid
Conspiracy being by the Blessing of God discovered and disappointed, and some
of the Conspirators apprehended and committed to Prison, We therefore have
thought fit hereby to make it publicly known, for the comfort and quieting the
minds of all His Majesty's good and loyal Subjects in all parts of the
Kingdom; and do pray and require the Presidents of the several Provinces of
Munster and Connaght, as We also require all and every the Mayors and chief
Officers of all Cities and Corporate Towns, and all and every the Justices of
the Peace of all and every the Counties in this Kingdom, to cause diligent
search and inquiry to be made for, and to cause to be apprehended and committed
to Prison all persons within their respective limits whom they shall find to
have had any hand in the said Conspiracy, and to give to Us the Lord
Lieutenant a speedy account of their Proceedings herein, and Advertisements
from time to time of all Occurrences falling within their knowledge or
observation, which may any way tend to the Disturbance of that happy Peace and
Quietness which by the Blessing of God upon His Majesty's gracious Government
this Kingdom and His good Subjects therein have hitherto comfortably enjoyed.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 21th Day of May, 1663. God save
the King. Jo. Armachanus, Mau. Eustace, Canc. Ja. Dublin. Ossory, Kildare,
Mount-Alexander, Anglesey, Massareene, Hen. Midensis, Joh. Clogher. W.
Caulfield, Fran. Angier, R. Coote, Santry, Hen. Tichborne, Ja. Donelan, Jo.
Bysse, T. Temple, Paul Davis, Ja. Ware, Rob. Meredith, Theo. Jones, Tho. Pigot.


And within two days afterward, the foregoing Declaration was seconded by
another; which is this that follws.

By The Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL.
ORMONDE.

WHEREAS We have by the Blessing of God discovered and disappointed a
Traitorous Conspiracy for surprising and taking His Majesty's Castle of Dublin,
(His Majesty's principal Fort in this His Kingdom) which the said Conspirators
had designed to do on the 21 day of this present Month of May; And whereas
diverse of the Conspirators are apprehended and committed to Prison, where they
still remain; And whereas diverse others of the said Conspirators (being
conscious to themselves of their own Guilts) have found means to escape, and
are not as yet apprehended, namely, Thomas Blood, late of Sarny near Dunboine
in the County of Mead, Colonel Daniel Abbot, Major Abel Warren, Andrew Mac
Cormock a pretended Minister, lately of Magherawly in the County of Down,
Robert Chambers, a pretended Minister, Colonel Gilbert Carr, commonly called
Gibby Carr, John Chamberlin late of Dublin Brewer, John Fooke late of Atherdee
in the County of Lowth Esquire, Lieutenant John Ruxton late of the same,
Lieutenant De la Rock, Major Henry Jones late of Stelorgan in the County of
Dublin, Major Alexander Staples late of Londonderry, Lieutenant Colonel William
Moore, who was lately Disbanded, and had been formerly Garisoned at Gallway,
and afterward at Athlone. We therefore do by this Proclamation in His
Majesty's Name strictly charge and command all and every the said forenamed
Persons, that within eight and forty hours after the publishing of this
Proclamation, within the County where such Person or Persons shall then be, he
and they do render his and their persons to Us, the Lord Lieutenant, or to one
of His Majesty's Privy Council in this Kingdom, or to one of His Majesty's
Justices of Peace next adjoining to the place or places where such person or
persons now are, or then shall be: wherein if they or any of them shall fail,
We do hereby Declare and publish them and every of them so failing, to be
Rebels and Traitors against His Majesty, His Crown and Dignity, and to be
accordingly prosecuted by all His Majesty's good Subjects. And we do hereby
publish and declare, That all and every person and persons that shall relieve
or conceal any of the said forenamed persons at any time after the publishing
of this Proclamation as aforesaid, that they also shall be proceeded against as
Relievers and Abattors of Rebels and Traitors. And we require all his Majesty's
Officers and Loving Subjects to endeavor the Apprehension of all and every the
said forenamed persons. And we do hereby declare, That any person or persons
that shall apprehend the said Thomas Blood, Major Abel Warren, Andrew Mac
Cormock, Robert Chambers, Colonel Gilbert Carr, commonly called Gibby Carr, or
any of them, and bring him or them, or cause him or them to be brought to the
High Sheriff of the County wherein he or they shall be apprehended, at, by or
before the 24th day of June next, shall have as a reward for the said Service,
the sum of One hundred pounds for every of the said last named persons, so to
be apprehended and brought in as aforesaid by or before the said 24th day of
June next.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 23th of May, 1663. God save the
King. Mau. Eustace, Canc. Drogheda, Mount-Alexander, Anglesey, Massereene,
Dungannon, VV. Caulfield, R. Coote, Santry, Hen. Tichborne, Ia. Donelan, Io.
Bysse, I. Temple, Paul Davis, Tho. Pigot.


BY this time it is too plain that the Loyal Parliaments of England, Scotland
and Ireland, had too much reason to order a Renunciation of the Solemn League
and Covenant; when those very Rebels which abhor and despise it (as if they
were honest men) do to this hour make it the bottom for a new Rebellion: who
are so weary of their own happiness, that they would not live under a Prince
whom they can only fault, that he is too good to be their King.

A LIST of the PRISONERS committed the 22 of May 1663.
THomas Scot, formerly a Colonel under Harry Cromwell, and continued in the Army
till the Kings Restoration; and son to the Regicide. Col. Edward Warren, a
Colonel under Harry Cromwell, and so continued till Harry Cromwell's leaving
Ireland. Theophilus Sandford, a Capt. of Horse in Harry Cromwell's time, and so
continued till his Majesty's Restoration. John Chambers, formerly a Capt. of
Horse in his Maties service, and afterward served as a Trooper under Cromwell.
Alexander Jephson, a Phanatick Justice of Peace, and Portriff of Trim; formerly
of the Army under Cromwell. Philip Alden, an expert Attorney. Richard Thompson,
formerly a Lieutenant of Horse to Ottoway, and is now Deputy-Provost-Marsoal of
Lei^ster. John Fouke, son to Col. John Fouke, formerly Governor of Drogheda
under Cromwell. Edward Baines, a Fanatic Preacher, formerly Harry Cromwell's
Chaplain. William Lackey, a Presbyterian Preacher, and a Schoolmaster. Thomas
Boyd, a Merchant of Dublin. James Tanner, formerly a Clerk to Dr Gorge when he
was Secretary to Harry Cromwell. Andrew Sturges, an Innkeeper where the
Conspirators usually met. William Dod, a Clerk in the Discriminators Office.
Stephen Radford, an ordinary Towns-man, and a professed Fencer. Abraham
Langton, an ordinary Citizen of Dublin. William Bailey, a Towns-man. Robert
Davies, a Trooper formerly. John Biddel, a Trooper formerly. John Smullen, a
Trooper formerly. Thomas Ball, a Towns-man, and formerly a Trooper. John
Griffin, a Trooper formerly. William Bradford. Samuel Fann, alias Far. Taken
since.
Major Henry Jones. Richard Price.

Postscript.
THere is a daily expectation of some farther Intelligence, which shall be made
public with the first opportunity: till then, the Reader must be satisfied
with what has been already related, it being an exact Narrative as it was
represented to His Majesty Himself. If you meet with any other Accounts of the
Irish Affairs, they must be imperfect and counterfeit, and not as this is,



Printed and Published by Authority.

FINIS.

