A fuller Relation of a great VICTORY OBTAINED Against the Welsh Forces, by
Col: Tho: Horton, one of the Lord General Fairfax's Colonels; where was taken
Three thousand Prisoners, all their Foot-Arms and Ammunition, Major General
Stradling, many Colors, and many Officers and Soldiers.
As it was sent in a Letter by Col: Tho: Horton, and read in the Honorable
House of Commons.
SIR,
AFter many tedious, hungry and wet marches over the steep and craggy
Mountains, it pleased God that we were engaged with the Enemy (who accounted
themselves near Eight thousand Horse and Foot) upon Monday morning the Eighth
of this instant, betwixt St. Fagans and Peterstown; where after a sharp dispute
for near two hours, it pleased the Lord mightily to appear for us, in giving
the Enemy a Total Rout; The particulars thereof, I shall within a short time at
large present you with. There are many slain of the Enemy upon the place; and
in the pursuit for Seven miles, we cannot yet hear of one of our Officers
slain, and but few of the Soldiers, but we lost many Horses. I guess the
Prisoners which are taken to be Three thousand; we have taken all their
Foot-Arms, and Ammunition, which is good store: Major General Stradling is
taken, with many Officers and Gentlemen, and many Colors. It pleased God
wonderfully to strengthen and raise up the Spirits of our Officers and
Soldiers: Our word was, God is our Strength; and truly we found him so to be,
and desire the sole Glory may be given to him, and our selves looked upon as
weak Instruments in his hand; and amongst whom, as I am, so I desire to be
accounted, who am,

In the Field, May 8 1648. Sir, Your most humble and faithful Servant, Tho:
Horton.
I have sent Major Bethel and Captain Mercer to give the Honorable Houses a
more full account of this days mercy.



11. May, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
May 11. 1648.


