AN INTRODUCTION TO THE TEVTONICK PHILOSOPHY. Being A Determination concerning
the Original of the Soul: vi^ Whether it be immediately created GOD, and
infused into the Body; or transmitted from the Parent.

By C. HOTHAM, one of the Fellows of Peter-House.

At the close of the Dispute held in the public Schools of the University of
Cambridge, at the Commencement, March 3. 1646.

Englished by D.F.

LONDON: Printed by T.M. and A.C. for Nath. Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill.
1650.

To the Author.
SIR,
TRanslations are things very difficult, especially where the Notion is
uncouth: Yet has this been my chief inducement to adventure upon this assay;
my aim being to make the Notion familiar, by a transplanting into our Native
soil. One thing I am happy in, that I have but one Judge, your self; unto
whose sense if I have arrived, I have done well, and disvalue the censure of
the Critical world, as incompetent. But be the Author once dead, it is less
dangerous to put to sea in an egge-shel, then Translate under the control and
subjection of the various stormy censures of each peevish fancy, when the
decisive Pole Star is hid.

In the uncasing your sense from the Latin skin, I know you will think I have
torn flesh and all away. But I must therein be pardoned, because some
Expressions and Elegancies in it are so peevish, that they walk dull, heavy,
and without grace, when stripped of their native attire, except honored with a
costly circumscription; in making of which according to my usual botchery, I
have sometimes hid from your view their most comely parts. For in truth in is
very hard to write good English; and few have attained its height in this last
^rie of Books, but Mr. M^lton.

As to the matter and Author of the Teutonick Philosophy, which you here
abbreviate, though you know I always affected it and him, yet durst never
sail into the Ocean of his vast Conceits with my little Scull; me thought the
reading of him was like the standing upon a precipice, or by a Canon shot off,
the waft of them lickt up all my brains.

I confess, your Introduction has made me something more steady, and his
Notions more familiar; and I have found some inkling of them in Scripture, so
have shaken hands with less suspicion.

But may nothing ever appear more glorious to any man, or fuller of light, then
the sweet, humble, contemned life of our Savior! Its true, the sacred Writ is
not plentiful in delivering the natural frame and principles of the Soul,
though the value of it is sufficiently laid open by the price paid for its
redemption, and the Messenger sent to seek it: So that drop of knowledge may
perhaps be reserved to make up the full sea promised these last times. In my
opinion, whoever reads this Scheme of the Worlds creation, and birth of the
Soul, may make excellent use of it, reviewing his noble descent from those
eternal Essences, and shame to bemire himself in that swine-like refreshment
of wallowing in cold dirty mire.

Our noble Genealogy should mind us of our Fathers house, make us weary of the
tutelage under hairy Faunes and cloven-footed Satyrs, the rulers and
instructers of our dissolute youth, and riper years (though clothed by
Archimago in Angelick garment) whose spell I hope is near an end, and put on
thoughts of escape out of this beastial slavery, into the Kingdom prepared for
us.

As for this little Determination, methinks I see the fate of it, that it will
be thought a fitter Preface to Ovid's Metamorphoses, then an Introduction to
any thing that is serious: so rude and barbarous is the esteem of vulgar men,
of any thing beyond their capacity.

Give me leave to set forth this one Paradoxe: That the nearer any book or
Notion approaches the Truth, the easiler and with more applause it may be
contradicted, because that in all contest the Vulgar being Judge, (by vulgar I
mean the wiseones of the world) the appeal is either to Reason, or Sense, which
are but the rulers and guides of the night, dim lights, set up far distant from
Truths stately mansion, to lead poor groping souls in this worlds affairs. The
bringing of Truth to their test, is like gold to a candlelight, in which all
the impostures that can be named may be hid, maugre its discovery. No, it is a
due temper of the Soul that must give light to such disquisitions; which only
harbors, acknowledges, judges, and receives that spriteful vivacious
essence of Truth. When the law of God has rubbed off all the scales of the
Serpent from our eyes, then shall we see and judge. He that does my words,
(says our Savior) shall know whether I speak of the truth.

Cease shining, O ye Sun and Moon, and thou Eternal Archetype of all light!
Vain mortal men have with the steel and flint of a Major and Minor Proposition
struck out a fire and light directive of you all: This dark lanthorn of a
Syllogistical deduction, is made paramount to all; all else dim tapers, that
are not moved in its Ecliptic.

This seems harsh; but yet if well observed, is a Gangrene spread through all
Christian religion. I will not say it, but it may be it is true, that the rigid
addiction to this foundation has nicknam'd many holy truths, and men, that
believe God yet to be alive and speak, and that he has not forsaken his
Scepter, devolved all the rule of Orphan mankind to this dangerous vertible
principle.

But may that State ever prosper, whose wise hands mould a generous freedom
productive of noble conceits, dressing a fit Stage for our Saviors second
coming; who, should he come as formerly in submission to man's power, would be
found in the inquisition or under the lash of some dire Decree; so
all-comprehensive and omniscient is every present age of all truth, dividing it
from falsehood to a hair in their grave Councels; with penalty of huc usque and
non ultra.

But to return to my Paradox: Elisha's servant having no other comfort then
what humane reason afforded, bemoans his masters certain ruin by the hand of
the Assyrians; The Prophet opens his eyes, he sees help enough: certainly this
was no conjuring trick, nor prophetic vision, but what was real, though the
servant saw it not before.

But had now some great Philosopher and master of reason, been standing by, and
a dispute instituted betwixt him and the Prophet, concerning the Host and the
Chariots, the Townsemen of Dothan being Judges, had it not been easy to have
made the Prophet seem a fool, and the people believe his eyes chim'd? He might
have asked where the Host was; and when the Prophet had designed the place, the
Philosopher taking with him a competent number of the bystanders, might have
gone and stood in the same place, and sung his triumphal song: Non dantur duo
corpora in eodem loco, nec penetratio dimensionum; ergo deceptus es: with many
such fine devices; and have tript up the poor Prophets credit, with acclamation
of the people. And such is and will be the fate of all deep Discoveries, and
high Representations, brought before that ignorant Tribunal of Sense and Vulgar
reason.

But I am out of my way: Be the Author what he will, or his success; or yours
the Proposer: seeing my ignorance has set me far out of the reach of such high
things, I shall content my self with an usual effect of admiraton, silence;
rather then approve, or disapprove: And wish the world would make use of that
excellent rule of Saint. Austin, Vt tamdiu versemur in diligenti consideratione
quod legitur, usque dum ad regnum charitatis interpretatio perducatur. However,
may Gods blessing water the desires of every heart that is zealous for good,
and the advancement of Gods kingdom in individuis. For fruitless are the
hopes, and the labor vain of all that will build living houses of dead stones:
but give the stones once life, and they will creep into a building: Sympathy
and union are the convertible effects of life. Therefore let all wise men stand
still at Perez-Vzzah, and consider.

Sir, I have now in some measure satisfied the engagement laid upon me, with
many others, in your unlocking the door to these Mysteries, by setting it yet
wider open for all Englishmen that please to enter and satisfy their
curiosity: If you accept my pains, I am reingaged, and must remain

Yours obliged, Vnus ex multis.

To the Right Worthy, the Vice Chancellor, and the Honorable University of
Cambridge.
Be health and happiness.
THat I have made bold to take up again, and revive with your honorable
Patronage this small work, by this time well nigh dead and buried, exposing it
to public view; we hope, will by you be esteemed neither unbeseeming your
honor, nor beneath our duty.

Your noble favor and patience, whose sweet company carried me on with pleasure
through the burdens of that office you were once pleased to honor me with, and
which cheared the delivery of these rugged Notions, sets me in the debt of
infinite obligations; which till I can discharge, be pleased to accept this
scroll of paper as a Bond.

And truly, while I was thus meditateing thankfulness; the report, that these
essays, and my self were by some adjudged both heretical, added vigor to my
first resolution; seeing I must needs esteem their opinion, only a defect of
memory and advertency, whom that I might fully satisfy with all well-meaning
men, I have set Pen to Paper, and published them in the same dress my memory
did then suggest them to my tongue.

Now, of the matter let the learned judge: For what concerns my self, I
wonder those good men did not perceive, First, That I set before them another
Philosophy, not mine own; Secondly, That my self likewise stood aloof from
peremptory assent to some of those things that were delivered; Thirdly,
wellknowing in what uneven way I traveled, nor sufficiently confiding in the
support of mine own judgment, I begged, and I hope obtained pardon of all
mine errors; which lest I should fail of in the publication, I have adjoined
the Epilogue then used, which I doubt not but will be successful to both.

And certainly if pardon belong to any, it is to the silent, solemn Sceptick,
whose opinions are not brought forth as the only heires-male to all humane
assent, invading the worlds freedom with fire, faggot, and thunder.

And may I be in the bed-route of those Seekers, that distrusting the known and
experienced deceits of their own reason, walk unfetterr'd in the quest of
truth, with an easy suspicious gate, not hunting those poor souls with Dog
and Spear, whose dim sight has led them into desert and unbeaten paths.

Certainly, more souls have crept to the throne of Wisdom; with the thin-spun
clew of Right-opinion, then ere have drawn her down with the stiff cart-rope
of irresragable Syllogismes.

This supposed certain science of what is good and right, believe me, (O you
noble Athenians) is the true ignis fatuus, whose small glimmering expires in
palpable darkness.

Would you sail in the Philosophers Ocean; know that two Islands there are of
exceeding danger, yet built upon and inhabited, and defended, as part of the
main continent of Truth: The first is called, I believe as the Church
believes. Happy men, whom so easy labor has set on the shore of wisdom!
And happy that narrow point, that has devoured so large a circumference! The
other is called, Whatsoever the Church believes, that will not I believe. And
here they think they are safe: These, if all the old Heresies were translated
into the Churches Canon; they would leave them, and embrace our relinquish' t
faith, crying it up as their great Diana.

Both these rocks I have always studiously avoided: The Decrees of the Church,
that is, (if I may speak freely) the prevailing part of the present Age, were
never my Hercules his pillars, that I thought it unlawful to look beyond them.
I have often read and smiled, and smiled and read Mirandula, Gassendus, and
other famous wits of the latter Age, delivering their choice notions
diametrically opposite to the decrees of that Age, with this civil complement,
Of submission to the Church of Rome, (which it seems) disproves not a reputed
Heresy, so she wait upon her in the garb of an handmaid.

Notwithstanding, though I do not adore the unanimous consent of good and
pious men; yet I receive it with much reverence, especially in a sacred matters
it is neither my fetter, nor my scandal.

I profess, I am not of those that think the mysteries of Religion may be
rudely unraveled, or its public Professors bespattered with every Parrots
tongue; for mine own particular, the studies of the divinest Philosophy have
sucked me in from my childe-hood; and for such an one, I never esteemed it
unlawful, or disapproved by any sober man, modestly to to dispute, and
discuss even the highest matters, especially in a learned Auditory.

As for these notions with which you are presented, you have them not from me
as Sibilline Oracles, such as I either know or fully believe to be true, nor
perhaps ever shall, till convinced with the same light that illuminated the
Divine Author: however let them sit among Probables, till He come that shall
come.

I deny not but that much may be objected against them, and that not easily
answered; but 'twill befit him that undertakes this task, likewise to set
forth another scheme of the infinite Eternity, and delineation of the Universe,
in which is no contradictory inconsonancy, and neerlier agreeing with the
ancientest Philosophy and sacred Scripture.

I speak plainly what I at this present think.

Whatsoever the Thrice-great Hermes delivered as Oracles from his Prophetical
Tripos, or Pythagoras spoke by authority, or Socrates debated, or Aristotle
affirmed; yea, whatever divine Plato prophesied, or Plotinus proved; this, and
all this, or a far higher and profounder Philosophy is (I think) contained in
the Teutonicks writings. And if there be any friendly medium which can possibly
reconcile those ancient differences between the Nobler Wisdom which has fixed
her Palace in Holy writ, and her stubborn handmaid, Natural Reason; this
happy marriage of the Spirit and the Soul, this wonderful concent of discords
in one harmony, we owe in great measure to Teutonicus his skill.

Only let not the non or misunderstanding even of the most rational Reader
(if not a little sublimed above the sphere of common reason) be imputed as a
fault to this elevated Philosopher, no more then 'twas to the divine Plotine,
whose highest notions many even of his own School, after much study, were not
able to reach.

And with this proviso, I doubt not but the height of what I here promise, will
be abundantly performed by the Authors Book of the Three Principles, which as I
am informed is now at School, and will in few months be taught our language.
This Book was published Ann. 1648.
In the mean time may your noble favor accept my poor pains in taking off the
dark style of the Authors magic language from these abstruse Notions, attiring
them in a garb as suitable to the common eye, as their strange proportion would
be are.

And you the renowned Youth of both the Schools, the darlings of your times,
whose learning, modesty, and piety, miraculously unproportioned to your Age,
will be an ensample to future generations; it was for your cause chiefly, that
for one night or two, I bade sweet sleep and ease adieu (both at other times
very acceptable) that under the protection of the silent Moon, I might lead you
into the inmost recesses of the more sacred Philosophy: To you my dearest
fellow-students (your high merit challenging no less) is this Enchiridion
principally dedicated.

Had I found your minds and manners disingenuous, and uncivil, I had sufficient
provision of Entelechia's and Haecceities proportionable to such rustic
dispositions; but the sweet unspotted humane Genius which I have experienced to
be in you, made me, as for my choicest Friends, broach this my best vessel of
Divine Nectar; which

Enjoy, and Farewell.
The Questions then propounded by the several Disputants, were these.

The Soul brings no Species with it into the Body.

The Worlds Creation may be known by the light of Nature.

The Will disobeying an erroneous Understanding, sins.

The last Question was by one of the PROCTORS then Respondent, thus freely
stated.

The two Opinions; the first affirming the Souls traduction from the Parent;
the later, That it is created by GOD out of nothing; are either of them probable.

The MODERATOR, having given the Disputants their Quietus est, determined as
follows.

To his most entire and highly ^steem'd Friend: The Authors answer, concerning
the obscurity of the Teutonick Phliosophy.
MYy candid More! surcease thy sou^^ affright:
Shades here are none, but that Majestic light
Veil of high mysteries, Heavens canopy,
Which Gods pure Visage hides from mortal e^^^
Thus Sol enthroned on high, with threatni^^ flames,
The Heaven-outfacing man's presumption tam^^
But Gods bright Image in his works we view:
And Phoebus face the crystal waters show;
And this my watery Mirror shall convay
To weaker eyes the great Teutonicks ray.
But to thy distant Vortex, richly decked
With beams of thine own radiant Intellect,
Our Phoebus disappears, and fame will say,
He Is some yet unseen Star in the Milky way.
ERRATA.
Preface. page 2. for honored, read humored. ^^stle page 5. read disapproves.
page 7. dele this (...).

In the Determination, Page 12. read, and that it jointly signifies the (...).
page 40. read calls. page 67. read fragrant. ^oft, hand.

To his worthily honored and dear friend Master Charles Hotham, upon the
obscurenesse of the Teutonick Philosophy described by him.
IKen no Teutonick, good Charles! Then vent
Thy self, and thine own Ingenie depeint.
Write Hothamick, and thine own sense explain;
So shall thy learned page with force detain
My ravished mind. For what-so Piety,
Deep-brooding Silence, Alternations sly
Of changing thoughts: What-so inspired Love,
That with his golden wings does gently move,
Thy heart-blood fanning to an heavenly flame:
What any, or all these together claim,
Will be the due of those adorned Lines
Wherein thine own Souls image clearly shines.
But now through unknown paths and darksome places
Thou lead'st us, with wrinch'd feet, and limping paces:
In mids of those broke-windings, Cold invades
My stonisht mind, and Horror in the shades.
Yet while I look upon thy Candor bright,
To sudden day straight turns this hideous night
While I thy Morals and well-meaning Will
Consider, in this night I fear no ill:
Yea more, well weighing thy far-searching wit then suspect some good lies hid
in it.
H. More.

NO Knowledge in the world has more attendant difficulties, then that of our
selves; Those sly spiritual Essences being too subtle for the Senses anatomy.
Hence is it, that both Philosophers and Divines, in their dark contests, have
as yet filled the world only with doubts concerning the Original of the humane
and immortal Soul, and its conjunction with the mortal Body.

The variety of dissenting opinions (to speak in a Physical sense) comes little
short of infinitude* Nor is there scarce that considerable part of Natures
large circumference to be ramed, which has not been thought a worthy material,
by some tume-sick brain, to be carved out into a Soul.

But I will not trouble you with a Relation of the many several guesses of
doting Antiquity; some of which, to our present Age, will seem to be dreams and
fancies risen from the gross vapors of over-fed bodies.

The more select are these five, which I shall set down in order.

The first is attributed to the ancient Physician Galen, (with whom I believe
the Sadduces agree) who (it seems aiming to bring soul as well as body within
the dominion of his Profession) affirms that the soul, as of men, so of bruit
beasts, is a mere due temper or active spirit arising from the commixture of
Elements and Humors, and mortal, with their dissolution.

The second is, of certain ancient Arabians, and of our modern Cardane; which
is, That all Particular souls are but the emanation of the Universal soul of
the world; or rather, that there are no particular souls at all, but that the
Universal Spirit necessarily enacts all matter duly prepared for life; which it
can no more substract from it, then the Sun can bridle its beams, or divert
its light from rendering a perspicuous body translucid.

These two opinions are maintained either by Epicures, or as the Apostle calls
them, men without God in the world; the folly of which, not only our Religion,
but the joint-consent of the wiser Heathens has rejected.

The third is that of the Platonicks, who affirm the Earth on which we now
live, not to be our native soil; and the Bodies which we wear, to be fetters
of our slavery, ensigns and badges of our transgression, to which our souls
are confined for offenses committed of old against their Creator: That being
all of them created by God in an equal and immaculate estate, of rare
perfection, the fountain and firmament of which being coaduntion with the will
of God, they fell to their own will, and by that means were cast out from the
presence of God, and confined to this world; in which, if under the dire
School-mistresse of miseries, inconstancies, mischances, mortalities, they
learned to reseek that Eternal Immovable, they are by the mercy of God
reassumed into their own Country, being unchained from the gally of the Body.

This opinion is maintained by Hermes, Plato, Iamblichus, Plotinus, and by the
whole School of the mystical Philosophy, and as I guess, believed by most of
the ancient and late Jews, and in our Christian Schools by the famous Origin.

Notwithstanding, some of that way do in this differ from the generality, That
they suppose all the legion of souls were not partakers in the transgression,
but are some in every Age sent down into undefiled bodies by divine
dispensation, as guardians, instructers, and promoters of the captived souls
into their ancient inheritance and lost freedom. But that those souls whom
the hard apprentiship and servitude under things mortal, finite, empty, dark,
could not stir to a desire and preparation to things eternal, immense, and
infinite; those are either winnowed over again in humane bodies, or descend
into irrationality, and are clothed with bodies suitable to their grovelling
minds, and after fall down into plants, till at last they vanish into their
first nothing.

But surely this opinion, notwithstanding its glorious deduction, and that it
has spirit and light in it beseeming those Heroic wits that brought it forth;
yet to us Christians that have freed our understandings by a voluntary
captivity to Sacred Writ, which delivers to us man's first creation, his fall,
and the contagion on his whole progeny; Add also the bodies resurrection, its
union again with the soul, and everlasting punishment in hellfire for the
wicked: These, I say, being considered to be in an exact opposition, we will
without further examination bury it with honor, as the best and noblest Essay
natural man has attained unto.

The fourth is maintained by the greatest part of the Divines in Christendom,
and is, That the soul of man, immediately upon the completing of all the
parts of the body, at least those of absolute use, is created of nothing, and
in the instant of creation infused into the body.

The fifth, seems to be the opinion of the learned Respondent, yet without any
impetuous disapprobation of the former; with whom many famons Wits of this Age
do concur, nor does it want some approbation from reputed Antiquity. And thus
they deliver it: That the humane soul of the Infant has its original from the
Parents seed.

Now which of these be trucst, no demonstrable Reason has yet decided. At this
present time with the favor of the Noble Auditors, we shall cast anchor upon
neither, but in a free discussion sound each its bottom.

The grounds they build upon are taken either from the sacred Scriptures, or
principles of Philosophy: the latter I shall omit, as having clearly been
discussed by the acuteness and judgment of the late Disputants; and for the
authorities taken from Sacred writ, I shall weigh them in the balance of these
two small Conclusions.

First, that nothing is either so peremptorily or plainly delivered in Sacred
writ, in determination of either opinion, that it excludes the question from
all further debate, or renders the favorers of either opinion Heretical or
unbelieving.

Secondly, that all the places of Scripture ingenuously compared together, give
more strong evidence and authority to the maintainers of the Souls derivation
from the loins of the Parent, then to those that affirm that God is
immediately assistant to the production of every Individual.

These two conclusions I shall jointly prosecute.

Object. 1.] That then which meets us in the first place, viz. That in the
beginning of the Worlds creation, we find the Earth and Water made the first
Mother and Nurse of all inferior living souls, by the commanding word of the
Almighty; but God himself declared the Father of man's soul, in giving him life
by the divine efflux of his breath.

Ans. 1.] This, if urged for the first fountain of man's soul, has some weight
in it; but no deductive evidence to exempt the humane offspring from
self-multiplication or seed in it self, with which God endued all kinds of
life besides; nay, rather it is from the Epilogue of the Creation otherwise
evident, [Increase and multiply] under which command Adam and his Consort were
expressly included; and in the process of the story, it is declared, Adam did
fulfill that command, and begot a Son in his own Image; and afterward seventie
Souls are said to have issued out of Jacobs loins.

But I am not ignorant, that the word Soul in Scripture, is of very ambiguous
interpretation; nor is always significant of that superior part, of which the
question is stated: but is sometimes used for flesh and body, as in the 21. of
Leviticus, [He shall not come at a dead soul,] (so runs the Original
expression) yet most generally it denotes the Soul and its affections, or the
entire person made up of the soul and body jointly: but that in this place it
only signifies the Soul, I am hence convinced.

In the comparison and prelation of Christ's Priesthood before the Levitical,
the Apostles proofs are thus; that Levi in Abraham's loins paid tithes to
Melchisedeck. If here the soul of Levi be not jointly meant, the argument
destroys it self: for the body likewise of Christ was in Abraham's loins, and
paid tithes to Melchisedeck, whereby the pre-eminence would cease; and as for
conviction from the argument, the two Priesthoods remain still in equal honor.

But I return whence I straied. God in the beginning, is supposed by an
immediate presence to have applied himself not only to the framing of man's
soul, but the kneading of his body too: but since that time, it is confessed,
he has delivered the work of the body to mediate instruments. How invalid
therefore is that argument of Gods immediate assistance to the framing of the
original piece, to evince so close an assisting to the production of al
successive souls?

The Earth likewise in the beginning brought forth every Beast and Plant; the
Water, Fish, and Fowl: but now both Earth and water have ceased teeming, and
the whole Creation moves into infinite particulars, by the inexhaustible force
of multiplication infused into the Earth's and Waters first fry, by God
Almighty. Be it therefore far from us, to think that the manner and
circumst^nces of the first Creation should be the perpetual mode of all future
production of souls; affixing sterility, that curse of Gods creatures, to the
divine offspring; and not rather think that the divine issue of Gods mouth was
as full of radiant life, and as thoroughly furnished with possibilities of
propagation into thousands of thousands in its own kind, as that child of the
drossie Earth, the Brutall spirit, is fruitful in his kind:

But they say, that by many places of Scripture it is evident that God yet
attends the noble work of creation of Souls; as in that place, [The Souls
would fail before me, that I have made:] and that other; [Who forms the
spirit of man in him] with that of Eliphaz, [The breath of the Almighty
enlivened me.]

To these the maintainers of Traduction answer with much ease and satisfaction;
That all these places argue no other then the fatherly care and providence of
Gods intent over man, as our Savior expresses it, more then Sparrows: his more
careful presidence over the nativities and production of men then beasts; and
this not over their soul only, for which those places are urged, but over their
bodies also; as in the 33. Psalm, (if the infusiats will grant us but an equal
latitude with them of interpreting) [framing severally one by one the hearts of
them,] the like of which expression is not through out concerning the Soul: and
that of Job, [Thou have powered me out like Milk, and crudled me like Cheese.
Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones and
sinewes] Now if the mention of Gods immediate workmanship of each particular
body, has no force of argument to affirm that they have no relation of a
plenary Sonship to the natural visible Parent; neither do all those other of
the Soul.

Ob. 3. and 4.] But there remain Scriptur^s of more and greater force, in which
God is set forth as the author and maker of the Soul, in a peculiar and
distinct manner from the body, where he is called [the Father of spirits] and
in Ecclesiastes, where the body is said to [return to the Earth from whence it
came, and the spirit to God that gave it.]

Ans. ad 3.] For the first Scripture, if no Gospel had been, nor our Saviors
dispute with Nicodemus recorded by Holy writ, wherein that deep point of
Regeneration is opened, and the relation of our soul's sonship to God, that
Scripture had had some difficulty in it: but our second birth is there clearly
intended, in which sense God is frequenlty called our Father, we his Sons, a
new creature, born not of flesh and blood, or by man's carnal affection, but by
the will of God: and me thinks, that from these very Scriptures we may elicite
no contemptible deduction in favor of the Souls process from the visible
Parent; arguing, That the subject of generation and regeneration being the
same, it is true Logic, if we say, Because regenerate, therefore first
generated.

The other place of Ecclesiastes I confess is something more stringent, and all
the knots not easily loosed by the Propounders of it: For if the soul be there
understood, the souls of wicked men shall go thither whence all Scripture has
debarred them. But it will be said (without violence to Scripture) that all
souls return to God, seated in his several thrones of judgment and mercy; to
Gods love, or wrath; yet both to God.

Ans. ad 4.] What the return of the soul to God is, with the manner of it, I
shall at this present make no curious disquisition: But as to the purpose why
this place is urged, I propose this more genuine interpretation. [The spirit
shall return to him that gave it] (that is) to the first Author of that divine
particle of breath inspired to our first Father. And that this place relates to
the first original of man's soul, and not all succeeding, that place in Zachary
makes it very evident, where the efformation of the humane spirit is joined
with the coagulation of the earth, and expansion of the heavens. [Thus says
the Lord which stretches forth the heavens, and lays the foundation of the
earth, and forms the spirit of man within him.]

And in this very sense we are frequently called in Holy Writ dust and ashes;
and yet from Adam until this time, flesh has begot flesh.

Therefore the application must necessarily be, either to the ultimate term of
resolution, or first matter of our bodies existence.

There remains one place of Scripture, which is the sword and spear of those
that defend the continued creation of souls: and it is in the 21. of Exodus v.
22. the Septuagint render the place thus: [If a man smite a woman, and the
fruit come from her unfashioned, the smiter shall only undergo such a mulct
as the woman's husband shall set down: but if it come from her formed, soul
shall be required for soul.

Hence (say they) it is evident, that the soul comes not into the body, till it
have form and fashion befitting such a guest, and therefore not transmitted
from the Parent, but first created, and then infused.

But certainly that argument bears neither weapon of offense nor defense: For
be the soul either Gods immediate offspring, or issue of an inferior agent;
maintain but no actual existence before the completion of at least the vital
parts, the crime of murder arises equally from both opinions.

Some, to fill up the number, are pleased further to argue, Gods being yet
busied in the creation of souls; from those words of Christ related by St.
John; [My Father works hitherto, and I work.] But to this I must needs
answer, That these men, certainly, (except they take for granted, that God sat
idle till he roused himself up to the creation of the world) intend only by
this reasoning to make the Reader sport: yet if any will morosely exact another
answer, take this further reply, extremely well proportioned to the rudeness
of the Argument.

God does as yet operate by his cooperating concourse with the creatures,
according to their several natures.

Thus far have Authorities of Holy Writ been examined: one Argument remains
thought unexplicable, drawn jointly from Philosophy and Divinity, by the
Patrons of the Souls infusion: And this it is.

Obj. 6.] If the soul be a natural proceed, then either from the paternal or
maternal seed, or both jointly. The mothers solely all reject: If only the
fathers, it had been as good man had been alone: If both, then is the soul a
compound, divisible, mortal: besides, if either both, or the paternal solely,
from whence shall Christ's soul be derived, who had no mortal father; And then
by what rules of the Traduciaries Philosophy shall we call Christ true man?

But let us retort this argument, and so we shall soon find that it has more
noise then force: change but the term of Body for Soul, and I shall point the
argument, as sharp for our own purpose.

The body of man is either of paternal or maternal seed, or of both: none
entitles the Mother solely; if only the Father, or or both, whence was Christ's
body, who had no humane Father; or, how is he truly man? So the infusiasts must
either leave this argument, or let the Body also partake in their high
privilege of immediate creation.

But as to those things which concern the Person of Christ, the Scripture
poseth mankind with an explanation of his generation: His Birth, Life and
Death, being a successive miracle, A God born, a man not begotten, a
Virgin Mother, the God of Life himself suffering death. These are horrid
specter to humane reason, and silences that god of mankind, amongst the rest
of the Heathen Oracles.

All which considered, though they are a sufficient confutation of the last
recited argument, and exempt his birth from the Laws of inferior creatures:
yet to make the business more perspicuous, I shall propose these three things.

First, Though we determine that all Souls have a natural production; yet we
may, without any inconsistence, exempt the first and second Adam: nor let any
man wonder, that we here slip the cover from Prince Arthur's Shield; since
Gigantick instances are introduced, to overruled the ordinary measures and
proportions of the propagation of mankind.

Secondly, We affirm, that if Souls be proceeds from visible agents, no valid
objection hinders us from determining the original solely from the Fathers
seed; yet with this concession, that the concourse of the woman is of absolute
necessity to elicite from man the vital ferment, and to substantiate it into
visible existence; which otherwise would participate of the lot of the three
miscarrying handfuls of seed, mentioned by our Savior, that brought no fruit
to perfection: Adding further, That the mother is not much more assistant to
the production of living Souls, then the great Beldame Tellus (Mid-wit't by the
Horns of Aries) is to her numerous progeny of Vegetatives.

Thirdly, For those Bug-bears of Divisibility and Mortality, that would haunt
the poor Soul, if the father and mother were joint Parents of it; that causes
to sound reason no matter of fear, so long as we free them from the power of
any natural agent to reduce that possibility into act, submitting it only to
the benign strength of Gods omnipotency.

Thus far in favor of Traduction is sufficient: One word concerning Creation
of the Soul: for, when, what a Soul is, and what Creation is, is well
understood, The night is past, and the day will appear.

It Is therefore carefully to be observed, that in every creature partaking of
that which we properly call Intellect, whether Man or Angel, there are three
essential parts; Spirit, Soul and Body; the distinction of which might
evidently be made appear, by reason and sacred Philosophy, if we were not
pin-folded within set limits of time.

By the Spirit, here, I understand not that common tie of the Body and the
Soul; but the supreme region of man, or that divine principle, by the mediation
of which we have fellowship with God: nor by the Body, that unprofitable
carcass, but a concrete notion of the gross spirits of sense and vegetation.
And by the Soul, (if we we may speak as things are) I understand that middle
Essence, placed betwixt that heavenly, and that brutal spirit: but in this
present controversy, the word Soul comprehends a Hotch-potch of all these;
and all that is purely opposed to the Body, is in this controversy caled Soul.

As for the notion of Creation, that which the Schoolmen and their followers
obtrude upon us, [ viz. that it is a framing of something out of nothing] wants
both truth and reason to support it; for the word (...) in the original tongue
and holy writ, from whence the word Creation was first taken up, has no such
signification; but perpetually eternal; to wit, God, and the great deep; that
is to say, an infinite immeasurable space, in every imaginable point whereof
dwelt the whole Deity.

Secondly, This Deep, or more truly called space-infinite, in all dimensions,
is not purely nothing; seeing two points diverse from each other, might in it be
assigned, in which God was able to create so many worlds; and a line extended
from the one to the other would a be measure of the distance of one from the
other: and although this space be not quantity particularly determinate; yet
seeing that of two lines drawn in it, that is to be said the longer, that takes
up more parts of this Deep: from hence it may challenge all the denominations
of quantity and dimension.

Thirdly, Although that this bottomless Immensurable partake (next under God)
most highly of the reality of being, yet is it not God himself, because its
divisibility and several other properties are diametrically opposite to the
many attributes of the perfect Divine life and essence; And therefore in an apt
signification it may be termed the Body of the Deity, or more fitly, the
eternal habitation of the Godhead.

Fourthly, To this Deep or Abyss may be attributed all what the Philosophers
ascribe to their Materia Prima, to wit, that it is neither quid, quantum, nor
quale; to wit, none of these in a definite essence or tircumscrib'd figure or
shape, but interminately all. The meaning of which is, That the narrow speech
and expressions of mankind, with which they measure out and circumscribe their
finite essences, applied to this Infinite, are too narrow, nay contradictory in
the enunciation of it, and extend only to declaration of a negative glimpse of
its unimaginable vastness. Yet four properties are especially assigned to
this Abyss.

1. Desire and inclination to corporeity, or a force contracting, crudling and
constringing. 2. Contrary to this, a force impetuously resisting coagulation.
3. From the joint strife of these, arises a spirit of anguish, gnawing the
bowels of the first matter. 4. A great burning or pitchy dark fire.


Of all these properties of the eternal Abyss, I can with ease make a visible
resemblance, in the conflict of Metals, with Waters corrosive, especially in
the dissolution of Iron with the oil of Vitriol, or in the coagulation of the
oil of Vitriol by Iron; for the work is one and the same.

Here, upon the instant of the infusion of the oil, the coagulative spirit of
Mars and Venus, begins to work to a sweet embracement of each other, and
marriage into one body; but almost in the very same moment, arises another
furious force impatient of this union and incorporation, ejecting both water
and oil with sudden violence over the brim of the highest Cucurbit; and from
this conflict of the constrictive power with the contrary spirit, a third force
arises, which grates those hard filings of Iron into a soft and tender
Crystal; and fourthly, follows that dark fire without chearing light, yet
sensible by the adventurous hand of him that dares touch the glass.

Whosoever shall curiously behold this combat, may well perceive the hideous
storms of the vast Ocean, depainted to the most exact possibility of so small
an Epitome, and smelling those rancid fumes dispersed throughout the room
(such as are said in the Apocalypse to ascend from the bottomless pit) belcht
out from this whirpoole, I believe he shall need no further illustration of the
Poets Tartarus, or the Christians Hell; having with some difficulty escaped
stifling, with overlooking this so welllimb'd a Breviate. And to declare my
thoughts plainly, I account that part of this great Abyss from whence God
shall retire himself within his own Center, to be truly Hell; but do not
believe, that before the fall of Lucifer it did break forth into its hellish
actuality, but was so becalmed by the benign effluence of the all-present
Deity, that it greatly furthered the manifestation of the eternal Godhead.

Fifthly; Out of the friendly wrestling of the beams flowing from the Center of
the Deity, and the properties of the eternal Immense or Abyss, there arises
(let the Reader understand that our expressions designative of a time, must be
understood from all eternity) a majestatick light filling all this infinite
space; A slight resemblance of which we may perceive in our fire; which when it
has digested the darkness of its nourishment, triumphs in a radiant flame,
having wrought through the clung prison of dark matter.

This light, or at least its vital and chearing rays breathing a sweet gale
through the circuit of the infinite Abyss, the holy Scripture, especially the
Apocryphal book of Solomon called by the name of Wisdom.

Sixthly; Hence it may truly be affirmed, that there was from all eternity, is,
and shall be a divine World, whose omnipresent Center is the Eternal Unity,
whose body and soul is the Abyss, and its spirit is the divine Wisdom it
self, born of God the everlasting Father, and of its mother the Abyss; by
which name I understand not any of the Divine Attributes, but a certain Essence
on all parts eternal, living, intelligent, inferior only in dignity to the
eternal Unity, from whence this divine world has all its ornament and variety,
and in which as in a glass God has from all eternity had a lively and most
delightful prospect of his own lovely visage, and incomprehensible beauty.

And now I desire the Auditors would attend whither all these notions carry
them. We have hitherto explained the first two Principles only: by the first, I
understand the eternal Abyss; by the second, the Wisdom, such as we have
clearly described.

From these two principles it pleased the highest Creator, after infinite
revolutions of Eternity, to create another world, to wit, the Angelical,
distinguished into three Regions, like a nest of spheres, whose inhabitants
were Angels, severed into three Hierarchies. The middle, and fullest of Light
which is now our World, was the habitation of Lucifer and his Angels; whose
Souls and Bodies, as likewise of all other Angels, were from the Abyss; their
Spirit, from the fruitful womb of the Eternal Wisdom.

This Lucifer, beautifullest of all the rest, and who resembled (after whose
Image, its like, he was made) the Son of God, with his Legions: contemning the
Milk of Gods divine Breast, which was ordained to be the food and support of
his spirit; by an enormous appetite looked downward, for the sustenance of his
life, to the menstruous efflux of the Nurse and Mother of his two inferior
Principles, whereby his mind and will was choked, and his Angelick wings
lim'd in unproportionable mire. By this means, the Spirit of Wisdom, whose
sweet rays before had tempered the bitter corrosions of the four properties
of the Matrix, being stifled and extinct, the sore-recited properties of the
Abyss budded forth and flourished in their natural vigor, by whose dark and
filthy fumes those proud Spirits being intoxicated, fell then, and still fall,
(being in a bottomless) into this following irrecoverable condition.

First, A desire to appropriate the beauty of all the other Hierarchies; yea,
of the whole Deity to themselves. This arieth from the contractive and
coagulative power of the Abyss.

Secondly, To aspire beyond the limits of the whole Creation; and to erect
themselves a Throne in the Highest, whereby they might subject God and all
their fellow creatures to a footstool of their feet.

This desire began from the second Property, which violently resists
Coagulation or Confinement, and whose motions are always from the Center to
the Circumference; for they scorned to be pin-folded within the created
Spheres, but would make themselves in all points equal to the immense and
infinite Creator.

Thirdly, When this violent rising received a check by the limits wherein God
had set all created Being; there arose from the aforenam'd Properties, a spirit
of anguish and envy, gnawing it self.

Fourthly, and lastly, broke forth that smoldering heat of dark fire; whose
proud force filled all their Region with flames and smoke, and sulphurous
tempest.

And here you may see the first original of sin, and Hellfire; especially
those four Bases, or corner-stones upon which it is founded; Covetousnes,
Pride, Envy, and Wrath; For from these apostate Souls the spirit had retired to
its mansion. God had withdrawn drawn himself to his own Center; the Wisdoms
sweet light becalmed the raging Deep, or properties of the Abyss, no more: and
what now remains, but that these unhappy branches fallen from that communion
with the Divine stock, continue in their own sphere, the eternal fuel of the
fire themselves have kindled.

And now at last, not without much toil under the difficulty of expressing
these unheard of Notions, we are arrived at a known Land, described ofold by
the Poets, to wit, the Chaos; the ancientest term from whence they deduce all
their story: really, no figment, but a true adumbration of the topsie-turvie
Regiment of Rebellious Lucifer in this mundane space, before this new Creation.
And we may well suppose, that by the strength of this venom, (the fell force of
which we feel in our selves) the other Hierarchies had soon been infected, had
not Gods seasonable right arm checked this magic vapor.

For the Eternal Father, unwilling that so large a space, destined above the
rest for a seat of glory, should eternally be bereft of his good influence; and
himself frustrate of his bountiful purpose to communicate happiness to so
many creatures on this stage, applied himself by his powerful word to appease
these tumults, (that is) created this sensible World out of that disordered
heap.

And first of all, He digested those particles or atoms of crass matter
(congealed by the constringing force of the Abyss) into one body, or (if we
may speak with the Copernicans) into several opake spheres, separating them
from the fluid matter: and this is called in Scripture, the Creation of Heaven
and Earth. Then proceeding, he gathered the darkness which was dispersed
through the whole Luciferian region, together with its Author, into a narrow
compass, framing thereof a stiff dungeon for a receptacle of their
all-comprehending Pride. And this in Scripture is called the Creation of Light,
and the work of the first day. And this was the first victory over Lucifer.

It would take up too much time to recite all the degrees of conquest: but it
is most clear by the series of divine story, that the holy Spirit of God
desisted not from his conflict with this Chaos, before it had perfected an
absolute victory, and overcome all the enflamed dark matter, captivating it to
some peculiar use subservient to the necessities or ornament of this world, the
temple and habitation of mankind.

And it is worthy our observation, that God, after the perfection of every
days work, did with the whole Quire of Angels sing a triumphant song over the
spoils of repulsed Hell; of which himself bears witness in the book of Job.
And it is probable that the Seventh day being the utter subduing of the
Luciferian tyranny, rendered that day a day of songs and jubilation to all
created beings. And although what I am about to say, will be received with
derision; yet I shall utter my thoughts with freedom, to wit, That the 148.
Psalm, and the 104. were in the seventh day, that great day of triumph, (and
perhaps in all succeeding Sabbaths) carol'd out by the Angels, and afterward
dictated to the holy Prophets, that Gods will might be done on earth, as it is
in heaven. But if the naming of Israel, and other expressions of the like
nature in these Psalms, should be to any man an occasion of the disrelish of
this opinion; Let that man know, that there was an Israel in Heaven, before
Jacob was borne; and a Tabernacle, from whence Moses-his was copied out: And
who-so reads the Song of the Angels at our Savior Christ's birth, and compares
it with David's Psalms, he will judge them both composed for one Quire, and sent
down from thence to be learnt by those holy souls which shall be thought worthy
to assist that Music.

But this is but a Notion en passant: I return to the matter in hand You had
before a delineation of the two first Principles: and now out of what has been
last delivered, you may frame to your selves a definition of the third
Principle.

For under that name I comprehend the Spirit, and Body, yea the whole Compages
of this our late created sensible world. And now as I conceive, it sufficiently
appears, that Creation was not out of nothing; and you likewise understand
what I mean by the Three Principles; the first and second of which, namely the
Abyss, and the Wisdom, are on all parts eternal, and all things proceeding
from them are finally eternal and immortal; but what proceeds or is created out
of the third Principle, is as it self, frail and mortal

That I may therefore touch the matter at last, at which all these Notions are
levelled.

After the region of Lucifer was again made habitable, and he relegated into
sublunary darkness; it seemed good to the Creator to create in his place
another Hierarch, who with his numerous progeny might people this Region, the
dominion and possession whereof, the former by his transgression had forfeited.
And that was Adam; who though in reference to the predominant part of his
composition, he he called Earth of Earth, yet it is very probable that every
one of the Elements yielded of its finest parts, to the composure of so goodly
a Fabric.

But whether in the beginning, his body were so gross and dark, such as we now
wear, or rather such as we hope for in the Resurrection, I am not yet
satisfied with my self.

But concerning these mysteries, with the sleep of Adam, and formation of Eve,
they concern not the matter in hand.

Into this body of Adam, perfect in all parts, God breathed the breath of life;
by which breath, if we ingenuously compare Scriptures, we must necessarily
understand the threefold life issuing from the three forementioned Principles;
to wit, The life of the Spirit, from the Wisdom; the life of the Soul, from
the Abyss; the life of the Body, from the Mundane spirit: by the mediation of
all which, he is enabled to communicate with all the three Worlds. And although
the life of the Spirit did (according to Gods just commination) fall asleep in
Adam; yea so deep asleep, that (he being in truth dead as to that spirit, and
it as to him) it is in Scripture called death; yet did it not utterly perish,
but is together with the body and souls conveyed from our first parents into
their posterity; asleep still, except it be revived and reenlivened in that
great mysterious work of the Regeneration, after the consumation of which we
are able by its ministry to search the hidden things of the Deity. For as being
carried in the chariot of the Worlds spirit with the five attendant Senses, we
view all its frame, and know its motions: so by our Soul we have a prospect
into the eternal Abyss; and by the Spirit, into the magic glass of the
Wisdom and depth of the Deity: and herein is our dignity above the brute
beasts, whose composition participates only of the last principle; we, besides
that, of the first and second.

But if any man wonder that three such noble and spiritual Essences should
crowd themselves up into so mean and contemptible a vehicle, and not press into
freedom; let that man likewise consider and begin first to wonder, that such a
spiritual and vivacious essence as the Soul is by all supposed to be, should be
cooped in so pervious a cask as the Body is; and know, that that full-grown
bulk is as unproportionable to her greatness, as this contemptible Epitome. And
let this be a further answer: That the Spirit which outstretched the branches
of the mustard-tree that our Savior speaks of, in which the fowls of the air
made their nests, sat with as much elbow-room in that smallest of seeds from
whence that greatest sprung.

Further more they affirm, that this threefold life is not yet actually and
visibly existent, no more then the body, such as it appears afterward in all
its dimensions; but that therein are three roots of substances lodged, which in
process of time bud forth together with the Body into a th^e fold life: where
if any dark impervious matter hinder their joint progress, each retires to its
mother-Ocean from whence it issued.

These things premised, and well weighed, it will not be difficult to determine
either of the Creation or Traduction of Souls; when the term and manner of
both, well understood, differ in no real concernment. For seeing we have proved
that Creation neither is, nor ever was from nothing; I understand not why we
may not affirm, that both Body and Soul were and are created by God, but of
matter derived from the Parents: But the Soul, not of that visible and
sensible, which the obtuse beams of our Senses can penetrate, but such as
disappears from all material anatomy. Yet if any man shall think that these
opinions in this are still at odds, in that an immediate creation and infusion
of the soul is maintained by the one; The other builds it by the same hand, but
mediately and of secondary materials:

This difference too will be easily reconciled: for we affirm (and doubt not to
an unbiased judgment to prove it) that both our bodies and souls do yet as
immediately proceed from God as that of our first father Adam. A great
illustration of the matter in hand, is that vision of Ezekiel, of the dry bones
timbred into bodies, and inspired with life. It is in the 37. Chapter of
Ezekiel, from the first to the eleventh verse.

1. The hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the
Lord, and set me down in the midst of the valley, which was fill of bones. 2.
And caused me to pass by them ro^nd about, end behold there were very many in
the open valley, and lo they were very dry. 3. And he said unto me, Son of man,
can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord God thou know. 4. Again he said
unto me, Prophecy upon these dry bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones
hear the word of the Lord. 5. Thus says the Lord God unto these bones, behold
I will cause breath to enter into you, and you shall live. 6. And I will lay
sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin,
and pull breath in you, and ye shall live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.
7. So I prophesied as I was commanded; and as I prophesied, there was a noise,
and behold a shaking, and the bones came together bone to his bone. 8. And when
I beheld, lo the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered
them above, but there was no breath in them. 9. Then said he unto me, Prophecy
unto the wind, prophecy son of man, and say to the wind, Thus says the Lord
God, come from the four winds, o breath, and breath upon these slain that they
may live. 10. So I prophe ied as he commanded me, and the breath came into
them, and they lived and stood upon their feet an exceeding great Army.
In this Vision is shadowed forth (though the primary scope was a thing
different from both) not only the Resurrection, but the Creation also; though
I conceive that the life of the Third Principle only activated these bones,
which (the Vision ended) returned to its fountain: and as God out of them did
create living men, and breathed into them the breath of life by the
ministration of the wind, and not his own mouth; so in the relation of the
first forming of Adam, the Scripture puts Gods actions in the garment and
posture of humane, descending to our mean capacities, expressing Gods actions
like ours: Not that it is to be imagined he stood over like a man tempering his
clay, or kneading a piece of dough; into which being shaped into a humane
figure, he should in a posture ridiculous for us to fancy, breathe life into
his nostrils; but it is rather probable, that as man by the mediation of the
Microcosmick spirit inhabiting the seed cast into the womb generates his like;
so (God in like manner ordaining it) the Earth impregnated by the spirit of
this world lodged in the vehicle of the Elements and influences of the Stars,
brought forth a quintessence, which, nourished in the womb of some dark cave,
grew in few hours to the perfect dimensions of a body: then, a spirit or wind
blown from the lungs of the threefold World, animated its completed members,
whereby at last the man broke through the dark entrails of the Earth, as a
chicken its shel, or an infant the womb of its mother.

And I doubt not at all, but that if some young Scripling, unbiased by any
form or principle, had been an eyewitness of Adam's birth, he would have
deemed him a mere son of the Earth, as not being able to reach that invisible
Principle, that moves the gross matter, and is the original of life.

Since then, to affirm Adam to be created by God and inspired by him, and
withal to be framed out of the dust and animated by the wind, are no
repugnancies; and what seems to us, or is recorded to be done by the mediation
of visible Agents, is but Gods inward power disguised in a cloud:

We conclude, That the Soul's Traduction from the Parents, and its Creation by
God; are not only either of them probable, but both true.

Notwithstanding. If we will speak in the dialect of Angels (which the
Scripture often uses) we affirm they are created of GOD: If with the tongues
of men, They are an offspring of their Fathers loins.

ANd now at last (most worthy VICE CHANCELLOR, with the rest of this grave
Assembly, and hopeful Youth) having sailed over this sturdy sea of Disputation,
touching by the way at several shores of the Intellectual world, and
discovering many unknown Regions of the Soul; our ship is at last entered its
wished haven, torn and weather-beaten, yet safemoor'd upon the Jetty of your
favor.

And if as yet your benumbed thighs are not crampt in your uneaseful seat; If
sleep, the harbinger of the approaching evening, have not set his leaden paw
upon your eyelids: We must be thankful to your vivid patience, that has with
so much spirit attended our droning words.

These heavenly Dainties that have been by your Servants in this days Exercise
presented unto you, according to our mean poverty, in a Wooden Dish; be
pleased to pardon, and guild with your divine acceptance.

One thing only remains to be further desired: That these pregnant Young Men
(who have to day adorned this Philosophic Scene with the flagrant flowers of
their Wits) together with those graver men, who have done far above the reach
of my praise, may have their deserved applause and thanks distributed by your
hands; My self, in the sense of my failings, kneeling under the same for my
pardon; that if any error which may have overslipt my h^^dlesse tongue, have
displeased you, you may be appeased by this submission.

So shall the gentle gale of your clemency transmit a new Soul into my
overwearied and fainting Spirits.

This shall be my second birthday; and the native characters of your favor, no
stupifying streams of oblivion shall be able to blot out,

And lastly, 'twill appear more clear then by natures noon-day-light, That all
this Days performance has received its life and acceptance, not from the
poverty of our merit, but from the royal Mine of your Candor.

These things if (which I doubt not) I shall be so happy as to obtain, then I
who was the first that bid you welcome to this place, shall with the same
cheirfulnesse bid this Honorable Assembly the last Farewell.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

November. 20. 1649. J. Downame.


