A Proposal for IMPROVEMENT of HUSBANDRY and TRADE.
I Have formerly for the good of my Country, made Enquiries, and published two
Volumes of a Collection of Letters for Improvement of Husbandry and Trade,
which I hope have been useful, and no way unacceptable to the Curious.

My private Occasions then called me from that Work, which I have been very
often solicited to revive, and am willing enough to undertake the trouble
thereof, in a much higher degree than ever, provided I may have the Assistance
and Encouragement hereafter proposed.

The Matters intended to be insisted upon being very various, and not the Work
of one or few hands, will oblige me to lay out for as large a Correspondence as
may be procured; and it is hoped I may obtain, every Week, one Letter at least
out of each County of the Kingdom; to which purpose, all Lovers of this Work
are invited.

It is likewise intended,

To stop the Mouth of the Tenant that causlesly complains, and to open the Eyes
and Heart of the over-hard Landlord, when the Tenant justly does so.

To inform the Corn-Merchant, Meal-man, Baker, Brewer, Feeders of Cattle, etc.
when it is best to buy; and the Farmer or Maultster when best to sell.

To teach a Rule of selling Beasts in one County, according to the Prizes of
Hay in all the rest.

To inform, not only those that live in Port, but such who live at distance,
the best time of laying in their Coals.

To do the like for Hop-Merchants, Soap-Boylers, Tallow-Chandlers,
Wool-Merchants, and their Customers.

I say for these, and such like Purposes, it is intended weekly to give an
Account from most of the principal Places of the Kingdom, of the Prizes of
Wheat, Rye, Malt, Oats, Pease, Hay, Coals, Hops, Tallow, and Wool.

It is further designed, for Encouragement of those at distance to turn
Merchants, and to inform them how their Stock goes, that they may thereby see
when best to buy or sell: To give weekly from hence an Account of the Value of
the Actions of the East India, Guinea, Hudsons Bay, Linen, and Paper-Companies.

And farther for the benefit of Physicians, Apothecaries, and others that are
desirous to know the state of Health at London; as also for the Political
Arithmeticians that desire to know the Increase and Decrease of Places; It Is
still designed to give weekly an account of the several Parts of the Bills of
Mortality of London.

And also for the benefit of all who are concerned in Shipping, either by their
Estates or Friends, or are willing to know the Number of Ships trading to and
from London; it is designed to give an account Weekly of the Shipping into and
out of the Port of London, with the Place whither bound and from whence.

And besides these,

There shall be for their Entertainment, one or more Accounts or Discourses
upon some of the following Heads, being of undoubted Utility and public
Advantage; such as are,

A full Catalogue of all sorts of Earths that may be procured, to anatomize and
distinguish them into their Classes, and to discover what is the proper Product
of each; what the best sort of Compost or Manure for each, and how to be
cultivated; as also the Arts of Dreining and Flooding Lands, and such like.

Ample and exact Histories of Trades, as Maulting, Brewing, Baking, Tanning,
Dying, Potting, Glass-making, and many others.

An account of Goods imported and exported from the Custom-House of London, to
draw the particulars into gross Sums, in order to examine the Expense and
foreign Vent of each Commodity.

The Description and Structure of all Instruments for Husbandry and of
Carriages, with the Deficiencies of the same, and Proposals for their
Amendment; together with the Arts of Conserving and Amending the Roads or
Highways.

The Arts of Fishing, Fowling, Hunting, and Destroying of Vermin.

An Account of the Rivers of England, of their Fountains, Bridges, Tides and
Exits, how far they are Navigable, and with what Vessels.

An exact Comparison of all sorts of Weights and Measures used at this time in
all parts of the World.

The comparative Strength and Weight of Woods, Cordage, Metals, and other
Materials in order to Building and Stowage.

Experiments on the Vegetation of Plants, to examine what Mixtures do promote
or hinder it.

Epitomes of Books of Husbandry and Trade, and Collections of what else is to
be met withal useful for the Advancement of Husbandry.

As good an Account as may be had of the Trade, Strength and Policy of other
Nations.

In short, all useful things fit for the Understanding of a plain Man.

And in Consideration of the Charge and Pains requisite to so great and
difficult an Undertaking, all those that are willing to encourage the same, are
desired to send me a Guinea before the first Quarter, and Ten Shillings before
each Quarter afterward, for which, they (paying the Postage) shall weekly
receive from me a Letter, wherein they shall have certain and constant Advice,
as abovesaid.

And all the aforesaid Collections (a part of which only can be imagined to
come within the compass of a Letter) shall be entered into Books, under their
proper Heads, where every thing may be seen in as short a compass as the Nature
of it will bear, by such whose Interest or Curiosity shall encourage to come
unto me, at my House in S. Bartholomew Lane behind the Royal Exchange in
London, where they shall find as much Diligence and Faithfulness as they can
reasonably desire.

I presume none will question it to be my Interest to make it tempting; and I
leave it to consideration, that this will be of public Benefit, and that I am
to every one that desires it, his Servant, to make these Collections for 40 s.
per ann. However, I desire none to be at Charge unless they be cheerfully
willing; only if they like the Design, that they will recommend it, and if they
have any Knowledge, Books, or Papers tending this way, they will either lend or
give them.

The next Letter after Quarter Day, and so for four times, shall mention that
the Quarter is out, and whoever shall not send his Money by that time, I shall
conclude he desires to have the Letters no longer; and if any shall think the
Charge too great, several may club, making it as easy as they will, and have
it sent to any public place of their meeting.

I first intend to settle my Correspondents, and to begin my Letters at
Lady Day next.

John Houghton, Fellow of the Royal Society.

November 11. 1691.

These are to testify our Knowledge of the approved Abilities and Industry of
Mr. JOHN HOUGHTON Citizen of London and Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY there, in
the Discovery and Collection of Matters worthy Observation, and more
particularly such as relate to the Improvement of husbandry and Trade. Toward
his furtherance wherein, and in his laudable Inclination already experienced,
and now further designed, to the communicating the Effects thereof to the
Public; We do hereby most willingly give him this Testimony of our Knowledge
and Esteem, in order to the recommending him to the Notice, Assistance, and
Encouragement of all Gentlemen and others, desirous of promoting the Endeavors
of a Person so qualified and disposed to the service of his Country.

Robt Southwell. Thomas Meres. John Hoskins. Peter Pett. Anth. Deane. John
Evelin. Tho. Henshaw. Abraham Hill. Samuel Pepys. John Creed. Thomas Gale. John
Scott. Robert Plot. Daniel Coxe. Nehem. Grew. Edward Tyson. Frederick Slare.
Robert Pit. Hans Sloane. H. Chamberlen. William Hewer. Henry Whistler. Alex.
Pitfield. Richard Waller. Edw. Haynes. Tho. Langham. Franc. Lodwick. Edm.
Halley.
If this be carefully preserved, 'twill witness against the Proposer, if he
keeps not his Promise.


