Sighs from Hell: OR, THE Groans of the Damned. ^livered in a Sermon from the
Parable of Dives and Lazarus.

^erein is plainly set forth the miserable state of those that like Dives have
their good things in this Life, but after this Life is ^nded go down to Hell,
and there being in ^orment cry for a drop of Water to cool ^eir Tongue. Being
Preached, and now ^ade public on purpose to awaken the ^rnal besotted Sinners
of England. (...) a word of comfort to all the poor afflict^ People of God, who
in this Life time re^eives evil things, but in the world to come ^oys
unspeakable, and life everlasting.

By R. Hough, Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm 9.17, 18. (...)Wicked shall turn into Hell, and all Nations that ^rget
God.

(...) the poor shall not be always forgotten, the hope (...) the afflicted
shall not perish for ever.

LONDON. ^inted for Charles Passinger, at the seven Stars on London Bridge.

Sighs from Hell: OR, THE Groans of a damned Soul.
Luke 16. Chap. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 Verses.

There was a certain Rich man, which was clothed in Purples and fine Linen,
and fared sumptuously every day.

And there was a certain Beggar named Lazarus; which was laid at his Gate, full
of sores.

And desired to be fed with the Crumbs which fell from the Rich man's Table:
moreover the Dogs came and licked his Sores.

And it came to Pass that the Beggar dyed, and was carried by Angels into
Abraham's bosom: the Rich man also died and was buried:

And in Hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, and sees Abraham a far
off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

And he cried, and said; Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that
he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am
tormented in this flame.

I Shall at this time speak only to the 23, and 24 Verses of this Chapter, viz.

And in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham a far
off, and Lazarus in his bosom.

And he cried, and said, Father Abraham have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water to cool my tongue; for I am
tormented in this flame.

The former Verse speaks of the Departure of the ungodly out of this life,
together with the glorious conduct that the godly have into the Kingdom of
Heaven; in this verse, our blessed Lord does show what shall befall the
Reprobate after this life is ended, and in Hell he lift up his eyes, from which
words may be observed these things.

First, That there is an Hell for Souls to be tormented in when this life is
ended; for after this Rich-man was dead and buried, In Hell he lift up his eyes.

Secondly, That all that are ungodly and live and die in their sins, so soon as
there they die, they go into Hell: He died, and was buried, and in Hell he lift
up his eyes.

Thirdly, That there be some that are so fast asleep and secure in their sins,
that they know not where they are, till they come into Hell: which may be
gathered from these words, In Hell he lift up his eyes, before he was fast
asleep.

Secondly, That all the ungodly that live and die in their sins, so soon as
ever they depart this life, do descend into hell. This appeared plainly in the
words of this Parable: where Christ says, the Rich man died and was buried:
and in Hell he lift up his eyes. As the Tree falls so it lies, whether it be to
Heaven or Hell, Eccles. 11.3. And as Christ said to the Thief on the Cross;
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, even so the Devil in like manner
may say unto the Souls of wicked Men and Women: To morrow shall thou be with me
in Hell.

O behold and see all you impenitent Sinners, what a miserable condition you
will be in, if you dye in your sins.

Oh Friends, if you were but your selves, you would have a care of your souls.
O what will it profit thy soul to have pleasure in this life, and torments in
Hell, Mark 8.36, O then do not neglect our Lord Jesus Christ, lest thou drop
down into Hell, Heb. 2.3. Consider, would it not wound thee to thine heart, to
come upon thy deathbed, and instead of having the comfort of a well spent
life, and the mercyes of the Lord Jesus Christ; to have nothing but the sight
of an ill-spent life, and thy sins staring thee in the face: thy Conscience
like Thunder chafes against thee: the thoughts of God terrifying of thee: Death
with his merciless paw seizing upon thee: the Devil standing ready to carry
away thy soul: and Hell enlarging her self, and ready to swallow thee up: and
Eternity of Misery and Torments attending upon thee, from which there is no
release, Rev. 6.8, And I looked and behold a Pale Horse, and his name that sat
thereon was Death, and Hell followed him, O miserable Comforters, Oh Dreadful
Society, here comes Death and Hell unto thee; it is near thee, so it will come.

Blessed are those that through Faith in jesus Christ do escape the
Soul-Murthering Companions.

Thirdly, That some are so fast asleep in their sins, that they scarce know
where they ^re until they come to Hell.

And this is too much known, to woeful and daily experience: sometimes when we
go to visit them that are sick in Towns and Places where we live; Oh how
senseless are they; how seared is their Conscience, they are not sensible of
Heaven or Hell, of Sin or a Savior; speak to them of their Souls, and you
shall find them as ignorant as if they had no souls to regard.

But sirs, you may observe, that the time of the ungodly men's smarting for
their sins, will be in the torments of Hell: and now I am put to a stand, when
I consider the torments of Hell, into which the Damned do fall: O unspeakable
and endless torments; and that thy soul might be made to flee from these
intolerable Torments, I shall show you briefly what these torments of Hell
are, by the names of it.

Secondly, by the sad estate thou will be in it thou come there.

First, It Is called a never dying worm, Mark 9.

It is called an Oven, fire hot, Mal. 4.11. It is called a Furnace, a fiery
Furnace* Mat. 18.

It is called the bottomless Pit, the unquenchable fire, fire and Brimstone,
Hellfire, the Lake of fire, everlasting fire, a stream of fire, Rev. 21.

First, one part of thy torments will be this, thou shall have a full sight of
thy ill-spent life, from first to last; thou here forget'st thy fins, but there
thou shall be made to remember how thou did sin against God; in such a place,
and at such a time, and with such a one: and this will be a Hell unto thee,
Psalm. 50.21. God will set them in order before thine eyes.

Secondly, Thou shall have the guilt of them all lie heavy on thy soul; here
men can sometimes think of their sins with delight, but there the thinking of
them will be unspeakable torments.

Thirdly, thou shall have brought into thy remembrance the slighting of the
Gospel of Christ, here thou shall consider how willing Christ was to come into
the World to save sinners, and for how small a trifle thou did reject him,
Isa. 28.16. This will be a torment to thee, when thou considerest what gracious
proffers and sweet invitations thou have had, and that thou rejected them, and
preferred thy sins before thy Savior. Oh the consideration of this, I say,
will be a torment unto thee.

Fourthly, Another part of thy Torment will be this; thou shall see thy
Friends, thy acquaintance, thy Neighbors; nay, it may be thy Father and
Mother; thy Wife, thy Husband, thy Children, thy Brother, thy Sister, with
others in the Kingdom of Heaven, and thy self thr^st out, Luke 13.18. There
shall be weeping and wailing, etc. When you shall see Abraham (thy Father) and
Isaac and Jacob, (together with your Brothers) the Prophets, in the Kingdom of
Heaven, and your selves thrust out. O worderful Torment.

Fifthly, Thou shall have none but a company of damned Souls, with an
innumerable company of Devils, to keep Company with thee; whilst thou art in
this World the very thoughts of the Devil appearing to thee makes thy flesh to
tremble, and thy hair ready to stand upright on thy head; but what will thou do
when thou shall have the real society of all the Devils in Hell howling and
roaring and screetching in such a hidious manner that thou will be at thy wits
ends and be ready to rum stark mad again for anguish and torments to torment
thee to purpose, the mighty God of Heaven will lay as great wrath and vengeance
upon thee as ever be can by the might of his glorious power; thou shall have
his wrath not by drops, but by whole showers shall it come thundering upon thy
body and soul so fast that thou shall be tormented out of measure, 2 These. 1.9
speaking of the Wicked; Who shall be punished With Everlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his Power.

Again, This thou shall have without any intermission; thou shall not have any
ease, for their worm never dies but always gnaws, and their Fire is never
quenched; and in this condition you must be for ever, and that is as sad as all
the rest, for if a Man were to have his sine laid to his charge, and ^s much
wrath as the great God of Heaven (...) inflict upon him, I say, if it were but
^or a time, even but for ten thousand years and (...) end, there would be
ground of comfort, and ^ope of deliverance; but here is the Misery, this is thy
place for ever: when thou have been there as many thousand years as there are
Stars in the Firmament, or drops in the Sea, or Sand on the Sea shore; yet thou
art never the nearer at an end: Oh this Word ever, how will it Torment thy
cursed Soul.

Friends, I have given you a very touch of the torments of Hell, I am not able
to utter what my mind conceives of the Torment of Hell, yet this let me say to
thee Accept of Gods mercy through our Lord Jesus Christ, lest thou feel that
with thy Conscience, which I cannot express with my tongue, and say, I am
tormented in this flame.

And see Abraham a far off and Lazarus in his bosom.

When the damned are in this pitiful state, surrounded with fears, with
terrors, with torments, and vengeance, one thing they shall have, which is
this, they shall see the happy and blessed face of Gods Children, this shall
most wonderfully aggravate their torments.

2. Observation, that those that dye (...) their sins are far from going to
Heav^^ He sees Abraham a far off, and Lazarus* ^word his bosom, verse 24. and
he cried, and sa^^ Father Abraham have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus that he
may dip the tip of his finger in water to cool my tongue, for I am tormented in
this flame; from these words, And he cried, We may observe first, what a change
the ungodly will have when they come into Hell, he cried; it is like he was
laughing, jesting, jearing, drinking, mocking, swearing, cursing, persecuting
of the godly in his posterity, among his filthy Companions, but now the case is
altered, now he is in another frame, he cried, The Laughter of the Wicked will
not last always, but will be sure to end in a cry, the Triumphing of the
ungodly is short Job 20.5.

Oh what an alteration will there be among the ungodly when they go out of this
world; it may be a week or two before their departure, they were stou^ and
surly, drinking themselves drunk, slighting Gods People, mocking at godliness,
delighting in sin, following the world, f^ring deliciously, keeping company
with the bravest, but now they are dropped into Hell, and they cry: A little
while ago they were a painting their fa^^^ feeding their lusts, following
Whores, ^^bing their Neighbors, telling of Lies, ^llowing of Plays and sports,
to pass away ^^eir time, now they know not how to spend ^^^ir time, but when
they depart into another ^ace and begin to lift up their eyes in Hell, ^^d
begin to consider their miserable and ir^^overable condition, they will cry. O
what condition will thou fall into, Oh Sinner! when thou do depart this
world, if thou ^epart unconverted, and not born again, thou ^adst been better
have been smothered ^^e first hour thou wast born, thou had been ^etter thou
had been plucked one Limb from another: thou had been better have been made
a Dog, a Toad, a Serpent; nay any other thing in the visible world then to dye
unconverted, and this thou will find to be true, when in Hell thou do lift up
thine e^es, and do cry. I will give the reason why the wicked persons will
cry when they come to Hell.

First, They will cry to think that they should be cut off from the Land of the
Living, never more to have any footing therein.

Secondly, They will cry to think that (...) Gospel of Christ should be so
often offe^^ them, and yet they not profited any thi^^ by it.

Thirdly, They will cry to think that the^ are past all recovery.

Fourthly, They will cry to think that they should be so foolish as to follow
their own pleasures, when others were following of Christ, Luke 13.28.

Fifthly, They will cry when they consider that they must be separated from God
Christ and the Kingdom of Heaven, and that for ever.

Sixthly, They will cry to think that Lazarus whom once they flighted, must be
of them that must sit down with Christ when he shall come to pass a Sentence of
condemnation on their Souls for ever and ever, 1 Cor. 6.23.

Seventhly, They will cry to think that when judgment is over, and others are
taken Into the everlasting Kingdom of glory; then they must depart back again
into that Dungeon of darkness, where they shall be tormented so long as
Eternity lasts, without the least intermission or ease.

Consider this, O thou Wanton, Proud, Swearing, Lying, ungodly wretch, whether
this be to be slighted and made a mock at; and again tell me now if it be not
better to leave sin and to close with Jesus Christ; not withstanding all the
reproach thou shall meet with for so doing, then to live a little while in this
world in pleasures, and feeding thy Lusts, in neglecting the welfare of thy
Soul, and refusing to be justified by Jesus, and in a moment drop down to Hell.
O consider I say betimes, and do not put off the tenders of the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, lest you lift up your eyes in Hell, and cry for anguish of
Spirit.

And he cried, and said, Father Abraham have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus,
that he may dip the tip of his finger in water to cool my tongue. This shows
that mercy would be very welcome to souls that are in torments: now Dives is in
Hell, now his soul is frying in flames, now he is under the wrath of God: Oh
now he cries, have mercy on me, oh send Lazarus with one drop of Water to cool
my tongue: He that before would not accept of mercy: now is willing to accept
of the least mercy; now says the tormented Soul, I would be glad of the least
comfort, though it be but one drop of cold water: O that these things did take
place in your hearts, how would it make you to seek after Rest for your Souls,
before it be too late, before the Sun of the Gospel be set upon you. But
further.

For I am tormented in this flame.

The reason why the poor world do not so earnestly desire mercy, is because
they do not seriously consider the Torments that they must certainly fall into,
if they dye out of Christ; for did but poor souls consider what wrath shall
fall upon them for their sins committed against God, how willing would they be
to close with Christ?

But why is it said, let him dip the tip of his finger, and cool my Tongue;
because that as the several members have their shares in sin, and the pleasures
thereof; so the several members of the body shall at that time be punished for
the same, therefore our Savior says, Fear him that is able to destroy body
and soul in Hell, Luke 12.4. Mark, here is not only one member, but all the
body, the hands, feet, eyes, ears, and tongue, all must take part in this
torment. O then the curser, S^^eare^, the Liar, will cry, Oh one drop of water
(...) cool my tongue, with which I have (...) dishonored my Creator; verse 25.
but Abraham said, Son remember thou in thy life^ ^me had, thy good things,
and likewise La^^^us evil things; now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

In the verse before, he have the desire o^ ^^nest of the damned for one drop
of (...) would think it were a very (...) it is not allowed them; for ob^^^ o^
(...); Son remember, etc. By which ^^^ears, that the damned shall not have any
(...) ease, but are the more formenred and that is (...) calling to mind their
former ill-spent life; when they remember what good things they had, and how
many mercies they ^^^yed and that they did make no better use of them. This, I
^ay, will be a torment to ^^em: then thou shall remember how thou neglected ^i
Christ and thy Soul, and preferred^t thy base Lust and sinful Pleasures before
eternal happiness; the remembrance of this will make th^^ cry for anguish of
Spirit, but thy crying will ^^ail thee nothing, (...) 6.2. This is not the
acceptable time, this (...) a time to answer the desires of the damned
Reprobates. If thou had cried ou^ in good earnest while grace was offered,
much might have been, but then thou were careless and did turn the
forbearance and goodness of God into Wantonness; th^^ were told; That those
that would not he^^ the Lord when he did call, should not be heard (if they
turned away from him) when they did call, Prove. 1.24, to 28. ^ow therefore
instead of expecting the least drop of mercy and favor, call into mind how
th^^ did spend those days which God did permit thee to live; I say, Remember
that in thy life time thou did behave thy self rebelliously against the Lord,
the thoughts of which will be to thy everlasting astonishment and confusion.

From these words, which say, Remember thou in thy lifetime had thy good
things; there are these things that are to be taken notice of.

First, That they which put off Repentance, and living in their sins, lose
their immortal souls, shall instead of having the least measure of comfort;
when they come to Hell have always their ill-spent life fresh in their
remembrance: think upon this, O thou impenitent sinner; while you are here you
can sin and forget it, but when you come to Hell thou shall remember them all,
all the ^icked practices that you wrought in the World will then appear, Son
Remember ^aith he.

First, how you were born in sin, and brought up in the same.

Secondly, Remember, that thou had many a time the Gospel preached to thee
for taking away of the same.

Thirdly, Remember that out of love to thy Sins thou did turn thy back on the
renders of the same Gospel, of good Lidings and Peace.

Fourthly, Remember how near thou wast to turning to God at such a time, and at
such a time; only thou wast willing to give way to thy lusts, when they
wrought to drunkenness.

Fifthly, Thou shall remember how thou did dissemble at such a time, lie at
such a time, mock and scoff, and persecute the blessed People of God at such a
time; thou shall be made to remember this to thy eternal torment.

Sixthly, and Lastly, Thou shall reme^ that whi^^ others were met together
(...) fear of the Lord to seek him, thou wast (...) with a company of vain
Companions to Sin against him; while the Saints were Praying, thou were a
Cursing. O the Remembrance of this will be terrible to thee; then thou will
find that Scripture to be a truth* Deuteronomy. ^8.65, 66, 67. The Lord shall give
thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind, and thy
life shall, hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, etc.

^ay, thou, wilt find worse things to thy woe then this Scripture does
manifest, for indeed (...) no tongue able to express the Hor^^^ (...), Terror,
and Eternal misery (...) poor s^^ls shall undergo without the (...) mitigation
of ease; and the (...) part of this misery comes from the remembering what good
things they had in their (...) the great God instead of giving the (...) ease,
will even aggravate their torments: First, by slighting the^^ miseries and by
telling them what they m^^ think (...) Remember, says he, O ye lost ^ouls that
you had your Joy in your lifetime, your peace, your comfort, your de^^^^ Ease,
Wealth, Health, your Heaven, (...) ^^ppiness, your portion was in this life^^me.

O miserable state thou will then be in, a ^ad condition indeed, when thou
shall fee that ^^ll thy comforts are past, and that for ever, ^alm 17.14. The
wickeds good things will ^^^tly have an end: and therefore it may well (...)
^ompa^ed to the crackling of Thorns un^^^ a pot, which makes a biaze for a
sudden, (...) little hear for a while, but instead of a com^^table hear, you
will find nothing but a ^^w dead a shes: it is true, while the ungodly ^e here
on this side Hell, they think nothing ^he compared to Riches, Honor, and
Plea^^re, which makes them cry out, Who will show us any good? Psalm 4.6.

Friends, Consider how it will grieve you and torment you, when you shall see
that you ^^^st Heaven for your short Pleasure here in (...) life time.

These words do not only hold forth the mi^^^^ of the wicked in this life, but
also great ^^solation to the Saints, where he says, ^^d Lazarus evil things,
the Saints of God ^^ve their evil, things in this If (...) (...), obsering
(...) be life of the (...) are in th^^ worl^ (...) with many (...) or
afflictions (...) Many are the afflictions (...) the ^^^hteous, but God will
deliver them o^^ of them all.

should enlarge upon this part of ^^^e (...) viz (...) show you ^ow many (...)
company the Saints of God in (...) the blessed and (...) to ^^^me; (...)
^^^nity: the lord (...) you to (...) one (...) has (...) delive^^^ to his
glo^^^ and then you shall ^^^er come to partake of these (...) of which you
have heard.

FINIS
Books Printed for, and sold by, Charles (...) ^^nger, at the sign of the seven
Stars London Bridge, in the new Buldings.
A Dialogue between Life and Death. The wise Merchant, or the Pearless Pearl: A
Treatise Exhorting all Christians to seek her true spiritual Wisdom. The School
of Grace. These four are 3 d a piece. Man's Last End, by Mr. Janeway. Mr.
Richard Baxter's Alaram. Christ in the Clouds, coming to Judgment; by Mr.
Wadsworth. The Worlds loss, and Righteous man's gain: being a Funeral Sermon for
M. Wadsworth. Mr. Venning's Christians temptations and ^ryals. Tormenting
Tophet, or a terrible descrip^ion of Hell, able to break the hardest heart.
These six last are but 2 d a piece.
FINIS.

