THE PETITION AND ARGUMENT OF Mr. Hotham, Fellow of Peter-Hous^ in Cambridge,
before the Committee for Reformation of the Universities, April 10. 1651.
Against the Masters Negative Voice of that College, and for a remedy t^ be
granted the College against the usurpations of Doctor Seaman the present
Master, agreeable to what was granted by Parliament to the City of London, An.
Dom. 1648. for the better enabling them, in case of need, to act as a free
Body, without their chief Officers concurrence.

Published for satisfaction to such of the University as may possibly be
desirous of a true knowledge of that days proceedings.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black-spred-Eagle
at the West End of Paul's. 1651.

To the Honorable, the Committee for Reformation of the Universities.
Right Worthy Senators,
THough by reason of a subrustick pudor and love of ease (the two Cardinal
vices of my Constitution) I have been always averse from action, never but by
strong enforcement of duty appearing in public view. And though I was never
so well pleased with ought I could ever yet say or do, as to think it worth a
rehearsal, much less of publication, especially in these Pamphleting times,
wherein the glut of Books has rendered all men's Palats nauseous of what is not
in its kind excellent and extraordinary: Yet have I been lately by a strong
desire of removing those pressures our College has long groaned under, rouzed
up out of my dearling rest, and native shamefastness, to appear a petitioner
before you in some causes of our common concernment; in all which, though
wearyed with the discouragement of continual frustrations (which put both all
those engaged with me, and others that would have otherwise appeared, into a
resolution of no more addresses) yet could not I sit still as despairing, till
I had made this one assay more, and delivered my self of this last parturience.

This masculine birth was no sooner expos^^ to the light in your presence, but
it was, as you may well remember, by Doctor Seaman, whose prerogative it was
born to oppose, endeavored to be stifled with a deluge of vulgar slanders,
viz. Malignity to his person, ambitious desire of private promotion, enmity to
the established Laws and Government of the University, from all which the
Petition was I think before your selves sufficiently asserted; but those light
aspersions being easilyer born away on the wings of common Fame, then that
weight of reason I laid before you for its vindication, I held it convenient to
send after them this particular memorial of that days proceedings, that so
his Calumnies, and this Narrative being both heard speak together, the
University, which I know never yet esteemed me an enemy to its Government, may
be the better enabled to give a true judgment.

But above all, being convinced by some present at that debate, that what I
then delivered before you, if published, might possibly prove both a
serviceable light and incentive to some generous spirits, to the contribution
of their endeavors to that good reformation by you rosolved upon, I could not,
(being a most devoted servant to that public end) but give way to their
Counsels, though putting my slow Pen to the great penance of extorting from my
weak memory, and transcribing into a form fit for the Press, that rude draught
of materials, I had prepared for this work, together with an intersertion here
and there of some few pertinencies in that tumultuary dispute, either omitted
or forgotten.

I must confess I expected, that having the state of the Controversy, and
great need then was of determining it, so clearly laid open before you. 1. In
Doctor Seamans great unwillingness so much as to answer whether he laid claim
to a negative voice. 2. In his open discovery, when more pressly urged to it,
of his avowance and claim to it. 3. In a full and satisfactory answer to all
those Pleas he could produce in justification of this claim; That a Declaration
of your senses against his negative voice, with some certain provision against
the use of it for the future, would have been the narrowest result of that
days consultation.


And I further hoped that some Gentlemen of worth would so far have espoused a
Common wealth quarrel, as that, if the abolition of the Masters supremacy in
calling of meetings, and proposing of questions at his own pleasure were not in
the Committees power, the matter being of a high and public concernment,
should have been speedily reported to the house to provide a remedy.

But I will not make any foolish expectation of mine, a rule whereby to judge
of the resolutions of wis^r men.

That Order you were pleased to make that day, of having a view taken of the
Statutes of the whole University, and every particular College, was a noble
and a generous Resolve; and to suffer your selves, from the representation of a
particular places grievances to be awakened into a positive activity toward an
universal reformation, was a thing becoming men of enlarged spirits, and that
Archipoimenall power you are entrusted with. And in that subsequent Order of
those Gentlemen of the Sub Committee, Dated April 25. I cannot but with all due
reverence applaud their wise admittance of an intermixture of the experience of
men best knowing in College affairs with their own particular wisdoms in this
Reformation: you gaining by this means a threefold advantage.

First, The due praise of your Honorable Condescent in not asserting us to our
lost freedoms by an absolute power, till there first appear in our selves a
dislike of our former Metamorphosis, and willingness to be restored.

Secondly, A true knowledge of the condition and temper of the University in
the Genius of its particular members, and how it stands affected to the
principles of freedom.

And thirdly, Many considerable discoveries, which your selves out of the bare
Theory could never have made, of great subserviency to the clearing of your
understandings, not only in this point of freedom, but in all the other parts
of your intended Reformation.

Yet give me leave in my rough Northern Dialect to present before you some
grand obstructions, which as to our College (for I desire not to intermeddle
further) may possibly hinder such due concurrence as might justly be expected.

The first is the Master of the Colleges residing at London, who though at
that distance from his Charge, he ought to be looked at as a non significant
Cipher, yet has he thereby opportunity, by his great interest and acquaintance
with many of your members, to cast the prejudices of a private and partial
information against whatsoever we shall present, especially if intrenching upon
his prerogative.

Secondly, Though himself should sit still and say nothing, yet his known Agent
that grave Seigniour, who stands always at your elbow, and has been permitted
more then once to intermeddle in our College affairs, even in the time of your
private debates, when we of the College, who are most concerned were commanded
to withdraw, and who, by the knowledge of your minds he thereupon pretends to,
has sometimes attempted to deprave your Orders from your sense, recorded by
your public Officer. This man still continuing in trust and respect with you,
and I believe often intruding his alley into the penning of your Orders (...)
cannot but administer us great ground of jealousy, that our best endeavors
are in danger to prove abortive.

I speak not this without good ground, for when we had once at the beginning of
these troubles a Petition to present to you; a prudent man of our Society,
whose judgment we knew concurred with us, did refuse to appear above-board
upon this very ground: Our Petition he said was very just, and agreeable both
to Reason, and the College Statute, but the Tribe of Adoniram would be too
strong for us.

A Gentleman being once to travel into France, took with him a raw
Countrey-fellow to wait upon him; the Gentleman being arrived at Paris, and
some days after, going to see the Court, his man was very inquisitive of him
to know which was the King: but being shown him, would not believe it was he,
and gave this for his reason, That sure the French were not such fools, when
they had among them as he knew well, a grave, able, and learned Counselor to
make choice of (he meant a tall grim Switzer, with a great head, and a long
beard, which he had observed waiting at the Kings Gate) to reject this wise
man, and make choice of a young youth of not thirty year old to be their King.

All the application I make of it is but this one sober aviso, that you beware
of too much depretiating your selves, and your authority; The being but thought
to Philippise, was once a great dishonor to the famous Oracle.

This reverend Switzer is I assure you looked at as a great man, is adored by
many, and few I think appear before you but sacrifice to him, at least ne
noceat, and the old Proverb of our Chronicle begins to be again remembered;

He that will England win,
With Scotland must first begin.
I know not whether this plain language may displease some, but I hope some
indulgence will be granted to a poor Northern man, who has not yet learned to
speak smooth English. And besides, it is more agreeable both to the rules of
honesty and your interest, that these things should be declared to you, then
whispered of you. But I forget my self.

That this man's finger (though your selves I am confident are not aware of it)
has not been wanting to the penning of this Order, I do a little suspect.
Because first, Only those members of Colleges entrusted with the Government
for the time being (which I think in most Colleges are only the Master and two
Deans, and a Lecturer or two) are here called in to give their advice.
Secondly, That masculine expression in your first Resolve of reducing the
Statutes to such a state as may render them most conducing to the advancement
of the interest of a Common wealth, being in this latter Order left out, and
instead thereof, they only commanded to consider what Statutes, etc. are
prejudicial to the present Government: whereupon most men declining your
intended sense (of which your first Resolve is the best Expositor) will
probably confine their understandings solely to the Consideration of the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, or something of that nature, as fit to be
abolished.

Thirdly, In our College, though the Master and Deans, with the Lecturer (and
Bursar in some cases) are solely entrusted with the executive part of the
governing power, yet is every member of the society by our Statute, equally
entrusted with the Legislative.

Now there are lately five Fellows put in by Order of this Committee, who
though none of them have yet attained the degree of Master of Arts, and so are
not yet men in an University account, yet must they (being by your special
Orders made complete Fellows a year before their time) though utterly ignorant
of our Statutes, unexperienced in College affairs, and besides, all but one of
them, by their several relations to the Master, most devoted to his interest,
have equal Votes in this grand Transaction with us of ancientest standing and
experience, which must needs produce vast obstructions, and perhaps returns of
contradictory opinions before your Tribunal. And these young lads opinions,
being in the most material points, sure to have the Masters, either private or
public abettance, according to whose private instructions they will assuredly
act, it is not uneasy to judge by former successes what is like to be the event
in this.

Fourthly, It being unlikely that you will find in other Colleges, a number
considerable to the major part to declare for any considerable mutation, where
no oppressive miscarriage of their chief Officer has awakened them into a
distaste of their present absolute Monarchy; its improbable our College lying
under such discouragements will adventure to be singular.

Fifthly, That whch is likely to prove the main obstruction of all, is men's
jealousies of those hazards they may incur by a fruitless Declaration of their
senses in points tending to the advancement of a Commonwealth interest,
yourselves having not yet declared your own senses in favor of the cause of
Liberty, which makes some fear, that their profession of some free principles
may (though undoubtedly far from your honorable intentions) prove in the event,
but an assembling themselves though honest men, to the fate of Baals Priests, I
mean the rage of that Samaritan, whose corrupt interest they oppose.

But if your selves upon whose countenances all men will look as the magnetic
Pole-stars of their motion, would but show your selves so far propitious to the
cause of Liberty, as to pass but by way of earnest, a previous Declaration of
your senses against the prerogative of Peter's Chair, whose root lies already
bare and disfastned by reasons, axes and mattocks, and wants but one stroke of
your authority to lay it level with the ground; this would indeed give some
encouragement to our fainting resolutions.

But if the redress of our grievance must be deferred till a perfect new model
of all those Statutes have waded through that infinitude of almost insuperable
obstructions it will meet with: I cannot but look at our Cause as near
desperate, or at least shall of poor Peter-house take up my Proverb, and say
Dum consulitur Romae, capitur Saguntum; while help from our friends of the
Roman Republic is delaied, our Liberties are left as a prey; and those that
appeared for it, as ascorn to the insulting enemy, who now having obtained his
will in your ejection of one elected by the President and Fellows; of which you
have an account annexed to the latter end of this Relation, and his own Sizer a
Londoner put by you into that Fellowship, though designed by our Founder for a
Northren man; and having lastly got this desired advantage of having this great
controversy left in statu quo, and drowned in that unfathomable Ocean of the
universal view, and Reformation of the great body of our College and
University Statutes (like that soldier, who being told he must answer for
some yards of cloth he had snatched out of a Merchants shop, at the day of
Judgment, merrily retorted; that might he have so long a day given him, he
would take the whole piece) puts the evil day afar off; and as I hear
impotently boasts himself your only Favorite, and the Society as a despised
handful, not otherwise looked at then as a heap of dead stones, except when it
shall please himself to animate us into a Fabric.

This I can attribute to nothing so much as those his Punick Ambusca^ds where
with he has hitherto prevailed against our more apert Roman Militia; I mean
those secret whisperings instilled, I fear into their ears, whom he has free
access to, of his being the author of all their essences in Peter-house, who
now lift up their heels against him, of a Faction, and I know not what plot, to
make way for building up another man's promotion out of his ruins; which
groundless* scandals, lying perhaps as a prepossession in many men's belief,
cannot but prove a heavy obstruction in their way who have done, or shall
further appear his adversaries.

But I hope you will in time consider how usual a stratagem it has always
been of tyrants, to defile those that appeared for Reformation with such like
slanders.

And when Truths Story comes to be told in to your other ear, which I hope is
reserved empty for us the Fellows; these daughters of Falsehood will hide their
faces, and vanish into nothing. I could my self with a little more of your
patience rectify your judgments of those prejudices, were I sure there were
need of it.

But I have detained you too long.

Be pleased to accept of these Remonstrances, which, lest the Publication might
be misinterpreted an appeal to others; I crave the boldness to Dedicate in all
humility to your selves, not doubting, but that that candid and favorable
attention of yours, which honored their first privater birth, will not deny its
propitious influence upon this their more public production.

And that you will every way approve your selves answerably to that honorable
Style you bear, The Committee for Reformation, is the confidence, And will
always be the Prayer of

Your meanest Servant, Chapter Hotham.

To my most dear and ever honored friends, the Fellows of Peter-house in
Cambridge.
Gentlemen of our ancient Society,
WHen I cast my eye upon your experienced great worth, and the unparalled
happiness I have long enjoyed in my converses with you, I cannot but wish my
self able to erect some lasting monument, whereon to engrave my deep sense of
both to perpetuity.

But my short power sinking so infinitely beneath my own desire, and your
desert, I am enforced rather then be altogether unfruitful, to present you
with this barren Essay of my endeavors for our common freedom: which coming
now to see the public light, is (next to our general Protectors, to whose
Honorable inspection over us, we must needs say, we owe our preservation)
devoted to your service and acceptance.

I know you will a little wonder at this opener appearance of this Petition and
Argument, which I think you never looked I would have been so adventurous as to
have suffered to see so much light as it did in your view before the Committee.

For, to appear against the interest of a man so generally befriended, by some
upon point of ancient acquaintance, and opinion of his holiness; by others upon
his high merit in the secession from his former principles and party he was a
head of, to an absolute compliance with the strongest sword, even to a
preaching up the present powers Authority, out of the very same Texts and
Principles which were formerly made use of by the Regal-Parasites, to establish
that blind obedience we all declared and fought against; for a mere servant of
principles to contend against a server of times, such a good loyal subject,
and perfect tool of State, that has like the complying Knight of old, confessed
even Boots and Spurs and all, and resolved all his former stiff principles
into that one of a supple, servile obedience to the strongest sword, was, I
know both you and all men else will say, a desperate attempt, and more smeling
of juvenile heat, then a sedate wisdom.

I confess, if my love of Justice, and honorable esteem of our Judges
integrity had not been much stronger then any humane hopes of success, I had
never employed my endeavors upon so improbable an adventure.

But you know my professed principle has always been, that a true Christians
motions should be guided by that one single internal principle of
righteousness, that where duty calls to action, there our work is simply to
contribute an endeavor, leaving successes to him that is Lord of all: That
that man is not worthy the name of a Christian, nor fit to be an instrument of
any remarkable good, that will not prodigally adventure the loss of his repute,
as well as labor in miscarriages, for the possible accomplishment of a
righteous end.

Whereupon some of you may possibly remember, that when we were upon that first
attempt of petitioning the Committee against the Masters man, being made Fellow
of our College, and the intrusion of young Lads into the Colledge-government,
though I both owned and cordially joined with you in those (I think) just
requests, yet I always said we were thus far comparatively unjust, in that we
unbecomingly spent our pains in hewing at a few excrementitious branches, and
did not rather lay the Ax to the root of the tree, viz. the Master himself, and
his usurped prerogative, who by denying us our right of elections, had been the
true original of all those mischiefs.

For as for those youngsters, they having no trust upon them to the contrary,
if they did a little over* eagerly seek their own promotion, it was but a
private error, a sin of their age, rather then judgment.

But for Doctor Seaman, a Patriarchiall pretender to Religion, and entrusted
with the Patronage of the College rights, to betray them and us to his own
corrupt design of new modelling the College, and molding up a party devoted to
his own ends, was in him an unpardonable transgression, and in us especially,
who had appeared against lesser offenders, not altogether excusable to suffer
it without endeavoring a remedy.

Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbas.

But you perhaps not thinking fit to engage against an interest apparently too
strong for us, or desisting upon other reasons best known to your wisdoms, I
thought fit however to acquit my self from the blame of my own Conscience by my
single engagement against that destructive prerogative, which I was the rather
willing to do upon my own single adventure, because if I prevailed, the
Community would be a gainer; if not, the loss of labor, and the disrepute was
only my own.

Besides, I was sure you were all thoroughly persuaded of my souls candor in the
attempt, and that none of those by-respects our Malignant and ungodly Master
charged me with, but only the public good was my sole and sincere aim, both in
this and other transactions, wherein I have appeared cross to his designs. And
so whatever error I might commit in the management of this affair, I promised
my self from you, whose censure I only valued, an easy pardon.

Yet in all this prosecution of our cause of liberty, you see I have hitherto
acted with such tenderness to him I opposed, as to aim only at the removal of
his hurtful prerogative, not his person: but seeing he has to his former
miscarriages added this Capital transgression, of seeking to cast a public
disgrace upon the President and whole Society, whose honor and immunities he
was bound to defend, I hope it will not be thought injustice if that personal
charge against him (which if produced before, would have come in only as a
needless supernumerary motive to the enforcement of my Petition) being reserved
as yet entire, be in its due time, when some formalities yet wanting shall be
ready, produced against him to his amotion.

And if it should ever be our good hap to discharge our selves of so
unnecessary a burden, I see for my own part no reason why the Kingly Office in
Peter-House may not well be abolished, and he who shall a^ President be elected
yearly to supply the place, content himself for his pains with the stipend
allowed by the Founder, and so the State become exonerated of the charge of
that augmentation.

Nor do I see why we should distrust that Government in our Corporation, of
which all the Corporations throughout the whole Nation have such ample
experience, especially we having found by a more then six years experience of
our own, that all the good ends of Government have been attained with us by a
President and Fellows in the Masters absence, much better then in his presence.

Yet I speak not this at all in relation to other Colleges, whose Constitution
may be different from ours, and who have perhaps found great benefit redounding
to their Communities from their several Masters vigilance and faithfulness to
the common interest.

But I hope the Master of our College will be so wise in his generation, as to
cut off the Clue from these remote designs, by making use of that old Statute,
de promotis, together with that present interest he has in many members of the
honorable Committee, to rid me first out of his way, a thing most of you know
he has often threatened me with, but could never yet by such means get me to bate
him one Ace of my open opposition to his designs, where my judgment engaged me
to it.

I know moreover what obstructions he is able to lay in my way (without once
being seen in it himself) whenever I shall come to lay claim to my Lancashire
inheritance, but it is my resolution, God willing, to go on as justice shall
call, straight forward, without looking aside either to the right hand, or to
the left.

Nor shall the hazard either of my fellowship, or five or six hundred pounds a
year to boot, deter me from doing ought wherein I may advance a public good,
with respect to that worthy Society, to whom I shall, while I enjoy life,
endeavor to approve my self.

A most affectionate and faithful Servant, Chapter Hotham.

Vicesimo Octavo Februarii. 1648. An Act of the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled, for removing Obstructions in the proceedings of the
Common Counsel of the City of London.
THe Commons of England in Parliament assembled, do enact and ordain, and be it
enacted and ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that in all times to come, the
Lord Mayor of the said City of London, so often, and at such time as any ten or
more of the Common Counsel men do by writing under their hands, request or
desire him thereunto, shall summon, assemble, and hold a Common Counsel. And if
at any time, being so required or desired, he shall sail therein, then the ten
persons, or more, making such request or desire, shall have power, and are
hereby authorized by writing under their hand to summon, or cause to be
summoned to the said Council, the members belonging thereunto, in as ample
manner as the Lord Mayor himself usually has done. And that the members
appearing upon the same summons, being of the number of forty, or more, shall
become a Common Counsel. And that each Officer, whose duty it shall be to warn
in, and summon the members of the said Council, shall perform the same from
time to time, upon the Warrant or Command of ten persons or more so, so
authorized as aforesaid. And it is further enacted and ordained by Authority
aforesaid, that in every Common Counsel hereafter to be assembled, the Lord
Mayor of the said City for the time being, or in his absence such Locum tenens
as he shall appoint, and in default thereof, the eldest Alderman present, if
any be, and for want of such Alderman, or in case of his neglect, or refusal
therein, then any other person, member of the said Council, whom the Commons
present in the said Council shall choose, shall be from time to time President
or Chairman of the said Council, and shall cause and suffer all things offered
to, or proposed in the said Council, to be fairly and orderly debated, put to
the Question, Voted and determined in and by the same Council, as the mayor
part of the members present in the said Council shall desire, or think fit: and
in every Vote which shall pass, and in the other proceedings of the said
Council, neither the Lord Mayor nor Aldermen, joint or separate, shall have any
negative or distinct Voice or Vote, otherwise then with and among, and as part
of the rest of the members of the said Council; and in the same manner as the
other members have: And that the absence and withdrawing of the Lord Mayor or
Aldermen from the said Council, shall not stop or prejudice the proceedings of
the said Council. And that every Common Counsel which shall be held in the City
of London shall sit and continue so long as the mayor part of the Council shall
think fit, and shall not be dissolved or adiourned, but by, and according to
the order or consent of the mayor part of the same Council. And that all the
Votes and Acts of the said Common Counsel, which was held 13. Januarii last,
after the departure of the Lord Mayor from the same Counsel. And also all Votes
and Act^ of every Common Counsel hereafter to be held, shall be from time to
time duly Registered as the Votes and Acts of the said Council have used to be
done in time past. And be it further enacted and ordained by the authority
aforesaid, that every Officer which shall sit in the said Council, shall be
from time to time chosen by the said Council, and shall have such reasonable
allowance or salary for his pains and service therein, as the Council shall
think fit. And that every such Officer shall attend the said Common Counsel:
And that all Acts and Records, and Register-Books belonging to the said City,
shall be extant to be perused and searched into by every Citizen of the said
City, in the presence of the Officer who shall have the charge of keeping
thereof, who is hereby required to attend for the same purpose.

Hen. Scobel Cler. Parliament.

Errata.
Preface to the Committee, page 1. line ult. read resolved. p. 2. l. 16. r. And
I further, etc. p. 3. l. 23. r alloy. Book. p. 3. l. 26. r. some time. l 33. r.
inconveniences. l. 34. r. Master. p. 5. l. 16. r. pausing. p. 8. l. 3. r.
particulars. p. 11. l. 3. r. the only sound. etc. p. 12. l. 2. r. liking. and
l. 15. r. be so understood. p. 13. l. 23. r. or Proctors. p. 14. l. 25. r. in
aliquo. p. 19. l. 26. r. an equivocal brood out of corrupt manners. p. 21. l.
2. r. arduis. and l. 6. dele now. p. 22. l. 4. dele. when. l. 11 r. system'd
up, etc. p. 23. l. 5. r. Societies. p. 24. l. 10. r. conjunctim. p. 25. l. 2.
r. so much. p. 27. l. 3. r. obstinacy.

To the Honorable, the Committee for Reformation of the UNIVERSITIES. The
Humble Petition of Charles Hotham, Fellow of Peter-House in Cambridge.
Shows,
THat whereas in all Societies of men incorporate, great evils do usually arise
from the too exorbitant power of their chief Officer, not annually elected to
his Trust; the sad experience whereof our College has of late felt, the
Master assuming to himself, or his President (if present) the sole power of
Convocating and dissolving of public Meetings, and proposing of Questions at
his own pleasure; and sometimes refusing to act according to the determination
of the major part; and all this only for want of our Founders sufficiently
expressing his mind in a Statute of our College; wherein he Wills, that the
Master should in the Arduous affairs of the College, consult with the Fellows
in Common, and stand to the determination of the Major and sounder part, but
has through the uncertainty of the last expression, left a gap open to the
exercise of an Arbitrary power; and besides, constituted no penalty to the
Master at any time, upon sinister ends, refusing to do his duty in that kind,
nor provides the College of any way for calling of Meetings, or making of Acts
in form valid, without his, or his Presidents concurrence.

And seeing the Parliament has always adjudged this unlimitted power in the
supreme Officer of the Nation, of a dangerous and destructive nature to the
Weal Public, and has further proceeded so far, as to restrain the same in the
City of London, where yet the danger is not so great, as in our smaller
Corporation, their chief Officer being annually changeable, and new elected to
his Trust: but ours, one and the same during the whole term of his life.

May it therefore please this Honorable Committee, for prevention of future
mischiefs, and for Caution that this root of Corruption left in one of the
ancientest Fountains of youths education do not spread out its pernicious
branches to gangrene the whole Nation, To Ordain, That from henceforth the
Master shall not assume to himself, or his President, such an exorbitant power,
but that he or his President, or the Senior Fellow of those present at home,
shall at any time, upon the desire of two of the seven Senior Fellows, left
with him in writing under their hands, call a meeting at some seasonable time,
within 48. hours after their desire so signified; and shall at that, and all
other meetings propose to the Society such questions as the Major part shall
think fit, and not dissolve any meeting without consent of the major part; And
lastly, shall not assume to himself any Negative or distinct voice, otherwise
then as one member of the Assembly, and in the same manner as other members
have, but shall according to the duty of his place, duly and without delay put
in execution the determination of the said Major part, and all this to be
established under a sufficient penalty; the want of which is the greatest
encouragement to mortal men to offend: And that in case the Master or his
President, or Senior Fellow then present, shall refuse upon such desire of two
of the Seniors, as abovesaid, to call a meeting, then they themselves to be
authorized to call a meeting; and such of the Fellows as shall meet upon their
summons, if there be above seven then at home, to be empowered to choose a
President for that time, and to be a College Assembly to all intents and
purposes; And what shall pass in such Assembly so Convocated by the Senior
Fellow of those present at home, or the two Seniors abovesaid, to be reputed
an Act of the College, as valid as if the same meeting had been convocated by
the Master or his President: And because great inconvenience may often ensue by
the Master and his President, being both absent together, our Statutes having
in such case provided the College of no Governor in chief. Your Petitioner
does further pray. That it may be ordained,

That in case the Master and his President, shall be both absent, That then the
Senior-Fellow of those present at home, may, till the Masters, or his
Presidents return, be empowered as President, to all intents and purposes, as if
he were by the Master nominated, and appointed to that Office.

And your Petitioner, with the whole College, delivered from the oppressions
and usurpations of an Arbitrary power, by the wisdom and justice of this
Honorable Committee, Shall ever pray, etc.

This Petition was first presented and read before the Committee March 27. at
which time Doctor Seaman urged that this controversy would concern the whole
University, and therefore was unfit to be singled out alone, but rather should
fall in with the consideration of the whole bulk of the College and University
Statutes now under consideration of the Committee of Visitors at Cambridge; but
the Committee then looking at this as a dilatory subterfuge accepted of the
Petition, assigned a day for taking it into further consideration, granting me
summons for such of the Society as I desired for Witnesses in case of need. The
Master having the like liberty to nominate whom he pleased, but pitched upon
none. This was the Order.

March 29. 1651. At the Committee for Reformation of the Universities.
ORdered, that the Petition of M. Charles Hotham Fellow of Peter-House in the
University of Cambridge, this day presented to this Committee, be taken into
consideration on this day fortnight, and that Dr. Francius, M. Clerk, M. Brock,
and M. Sams senior, Fellows of the said House, do in person attend this
Committee, to inform this Committee of what they know concerning the matter of
the said Petition, and that in the mean time the Master and Fellows of the
said House have a copy of the said Petition if they think sit.

James Chaloner.

On the day appointed, being April 10. being desirous to have the cause heard
at as full a Committee as might be, I attended sometime in the Hall with this
following Petition for a revivall of the business.

To the honorable Committee for Reformation of the Universities, The humble
Petition of Charles Hotham Fellow of Peter-House,
Shows,
THat whereas your Petitioner on the 27. of March last past having represented
to this honorable Committee the great inonveniencies redounding to that
College, of which he is a member, from the too exorbitant power exercised by
the Mr of the said College, for want of our Founders sufficient declaration of
his mind in a Statute, wherein he wills that the Master shall in arduis
Collegii, consult the Fellows in common, and stand to the judgment of the major
and sounder part: For the more full and certain execution of which Statutes,
your Petitioner did humbly pray, That such remedies as were in that Petition
specified, might be ordained by the wisdom of this Honorable Committee.

Upon which desire of your Petitioner, it was then ordered, that the said
Petition should be taken into consideration on that day fornight, and that Dr.
Fransticus, Mr. Clerk, Mr. Brock, and Mr. Sams, Fellows of the said College,
should be required to attend here in person, to inform this Honorable
Committee what should be thought requisite concerning the matter of the said
Petition.

Now therefore your Petitioner does humbly pray, that this being the day
appointed for the said hearing (and the Fellows of the College which were
summoned being here in person, ready to attend the pleasure of this Honorable
Committee) that the said Petition may be again read, and your Petitioner may be
heard to make good his Petition, by such proofs of reason, or witness, as the
nature of the thing shall require; and your Petitioner, as in duty bound, shall
in all humility await such sentence, as shall upon full hearing of all parties
concerned be awarded by the wisdom and justice of this Honorable Committee.

And shall ever pray, etc.

But this short Petition proved useless; for my former large Petition was
resumed without any motion of mine, and much sooner then my expectation.

But after the first clause of the Petition was scarce read, Doctor Seaman
interposed a motion, that the further reading of it might be suspended, till a
private business, which he said was the true original of all these commotions,
were first heard. So the Petition was at his motion laid aside, and the private
business first brought upon the stage: the issue of which, falling out
strangely to his content, the Committee was made believe this was the substance
of the whole controversy, there needed now no farther hearing of the public
Petition.

Now as for that private business, seeing he has christened it with the name
of public, I have at the latter end of this Narrative made it public for his
sake.

But nothing discouraged with this unexpected event of that dispute, I went in
again to the Committee, informed a noble Gentleman there present, I had a
Petition there of great concernment, which I desired might be read, and my self
heard speak to it. So at his motion the Petition was resumed.

After 'twas read, Dr. Seaman, I think, first spoke something to it; but to
what effect, I have utterly forgotten, and shall be glad to be remembered of it
by himself.

When he had done speaking, I moved the Committee that for laying a clear
foundation, whereupon to ground the debate, he might be asked the question,
Whether he laid claim to a negative voice, or not.

His answer was, first, that he did not desire to answer to any question, till
commanded to it by the Committee; but pawsing a while, and perceiving by a
general silence of all the members, that a more full answer was expected, He
still subtly declining an answer to the question, tells them we had many
sorts of Colledge-meetings; that the Master was sometimes to consult with the
Deans only, sometimes with 5 or 6 of the Seniors; but in the arduous affairs
of the College, he was to consult with the Fellows in common, and to stand to
the judgment of the major part. This now seemed, at first view, a clear
acknowledgment of his being bound up in the major part, in meetings of the
whole Society present.

And any man, not acquainted with his methods, would have thought the
controversy had been at an end, and that the Doctor was scandal'd in my so
much as intimating that he had laid claim to a negative voice.

But as 'twill appear he meant nothing less For first, though he acknowledged
himself bound in arduis to consult the Fellows in common, yet nothing appeared,
but that he still reserved the judgment of that arduity as a prerogative within
his own breast; so that the Society for meetings, though never so much needed,
must depend upon his royal pleasure, which was one of the chief grievances,
against which a remedy was petitioned for.

Secondly, notwithstanding his seeming acknowledgment of being tied by the
major part; yet being further urged to declare whether he did not from that
additional expression in our Statute of the sounder part, challenge to himself
a decisive judgment which was the sounder part, so as that he might judge the
lesser part the sounder, and be thereupon absolved from standing to the
judgment of the major part, he could then keep himself in the darkness no
longer, but produced two Statutes for his negative voice. The one, extending
only to the proof of his negative voice over the two Deans, was an
interpretation made a hundred and fifty years, or more, after the first
compiling of our Statutes. In these words, Item si aliquid ex Statuto sit
determinandum per Magistrum, and Decanos concernens eorum officia, si Magister
Collegii, and unus Decanorum aliquid decreverint, stabit pro rato, and si duo
Decani decreverint, and Magister Collegii non concesserit, pro nullo habeatur.

But this proved not at all a negative voice over the major part of the Fellows
assembled in a meeting.

The other (being the main pillar of his cause) was the University Statute,
which he read to the Committee in these words.

In omnibus and singulis electionibus tam Sociorum, Discipulorum, Schola^ium,
Officiariorum, Lectorum, reliquorumque membrorum cujusque Collegii, quam in
omnibus and singulis locationibus, and concessionibus quibuscunque, necessario
requirendus est Magistri sive Praepositi illius Collegii assensus and
consensus. Et quod been licebit Magistris sive Praepositis Collegiorum, in suis
Collegiis, si quando illis necessarium videbitur, omnes illas poenas exercere
in delinquentes, qua^ aliquis Officiariorum illius Collegii per Statuta ejusdem
Collegii imponere possit.

These Statutes he said (but proved it not) were confirmed by Act of
Parliament: To which 'twas answered, That it is true, the University Charters
were confirmed by Act of Parliament, but as I believed, not the Statutes; no
further confirmation that I know of appearing, more then by the same
Commissioners, who reviewed our Colledg-Statutes; which as far as I knew, there
was as good ground to believe were confirmed by Parliament, as those of the
University.

He further added, that that which I charged as a fault upon him, viz. the
relying upon his own wisdom, I was chiefly guilty of it my self, in preferring
a Petition of my own head, without first asking the advice and consent of the
Fellows, who did not appear any way to own it: to all which allegations of his,
my answer, directed to the Chairman of the Committee, was as follows.

SIR,
I acknowledge it may to this grave Assembly seem strange, and perhaps something
smelling of presumption, that in a business wherein the good of the whole
College is pretended to, one man only should appear to own it, and he neither
the first nor second Senior of the College, nor yet publicly employed by the
Society for the making of such attempt: But I hope if the high consequence of
the matter presented, and greatness of the person, or rather interest to be
opposed, and how unwilling men of prudent and suffering spirits have always
been to engage themselves in high contests, and how loath modest men are to ask
that which they think may probably be denied them, be well considered, this
wonder will soon cease. And to take away the imputation of presumption, I have
only this to say, that had I known of any man that would have taken upon him
this task, I should most willingly, according to that man's directions, either
have sitten still, or seconded him in the meanest of services tending to the
advancement of this cause. But I knew of none, and besides, had, above the rest
of the Society, these special engagements obliging me to this endeavor.

1. First at the time of my presenting the Petition, I was one of the Deans of
the College, an Officer entrusted by the Founder, not only as an assistant to
the Master in the Colledge-Government, but likewise as one of the Ephori of
Sparta, a Supervisor and Censor of his actions in some cases, to admonish him,
if need were, and in case of his obstinate standing out against admonitions, to
complain of him to a Superior Justice.

Secondly, our Colledge-statute requires every member of the College, even
after his departure, (much more during his abode) that in way of a grateful
acknowledgment of that much good he has received there, he should endeavor
the preservation of the Colledge-rights to the utmost of his power.

Now there having been one of my own name, and Family, the third, or fourth
successor to the Bishop of Ely that founded the College, a great Benefactor
to it (though the particulas wherein, appear not) and my self coming now in a
more peculiar manner, and by a strange cast of providence, to partake of the
good fruits of his bounty; I held it a double obligation upon me to a
performance of this clause of our Statute, by endeavoring somewhat which
posterity might reap the benefit of; which being at present not in a capacity
to do, by gift of Lands, or any considerable sum of Money, all I had left
within my power, was ^^^ly to appear here as the Colleges servant, in the
vindication of our common-liberties, then which, ingenuous spirits know not a
more precious treasure upon Earth.

Thirdly, It Is a thing well known to all I have ever converst with, that I have
ever since the first beginning of these civil wars, and that in the most
hazardous times, when the generality even of the Parliaments party stood
inclinable to a defection, been to my poor ability, and in my narrow sphere, a
zealous assertor of the Nations liberty, against the prerogative of the supreme
Officer of State, then in War against us: And therefore, if upon the same
principle I now show my self more then ordinarily forward in asserting the
liberties of our particular Commonwealth, against a parallel tyranny; I hope
my boldness will find the easier pardon.

This I have been necessitated to premise, in answer to those evil surmises
which you hear have been raised, and objected, as of great consequence against
the title of the Petition, and more might be added; but seeing this Committee
has been so just and honorable, as waving all respect of persons, to take the
matter it self into your grave considerations, I shall now wholly apply my self
to the matter in hand.

The Petition is large, but may, in sum, be reduced to these two heads.

First, a Preamble consisting of a Concatenation of diverse motives for
enforcement of the Petition.

Secondly, The Prayer of the Petition it self.

The Motives are many, and of great weight.

You have in them,

First, a general Proposition of those great mischiefs which the common
experience of all ages, places, and Nations, teaches us do arise from the chief
Officer of any Corporations being entrusted with a power distinct from, and
superior to that of the community. It Is both the true characteristicall badge
of slavery, and the chief fomenter of jealousies and contentions: For
wheresoever it is so, there is always a particular interest of the governing
power set up distinct from, and most what contrary to, that of the public,
then which nothing can be more destructive to the welfare of any Community: the
truth of which Maxim we have had a feeling proof in the sad series of those
evils which have lately sprung up in this Nation from the claim and exercise
of this power by the chief Officer of Englands great Corporation: 'Twas that
which had like first to have plunged us into the depth of slavery, and did
afterward engage us in a bloody war, the justice of which war can never be
solidly maintained by the asserters of a Negative Voice. For my own part, this
was to me the great convincing argument of the Scots apostasy from their first
principles, and from the cause they were with using aged in, when I saw them in
their Manifesto plead so openly for the upholding of this great branch, or
rather stock, and bulk it self of the royal Prerogative.

2. You have for confirmation of this truth the judgment of the whole
Representative of England, and those that have most cordially appeared with
them in this cause, especially of the now governing power, which has always
declared this power in the King of a most dangerous and destructive nature to
the weal public, and inconsistent with the Nations freedom: And the Army in
particular, when we were not yet attained to that wise and generous resolution
of removing the Kingly Office as well as his Person, did in their grand
Remonstrance propound it as a necessary caution for the securement of our
Liberties, that whosoever should, upon the removal of the late King, be
admitted, though but by election, to succeed him, should before his admission
disavow all claim to a Negative Voice.

3. You have presented to your view a more particular declaration of this
present Parliaments judgment in this point, in reference to a particular
Corporation: Those evils which the whole Nation had formerly groaned under,
there was a critical time when the City of London felt the same pangs of the
same disease arising from the same fountain of corruption: the chief governor
of that city exercising that power in his own Corporation, which himself with
others had declared and fought against in the supreme Officer of the Nation;
whereupon this Parliament was pleased to remove that prerogative, and provide
them this very way now petitioned for, of acting as a free Body in case of
need, without the chief Officers concurrence.

4. The fourth motive humbly propounded to your consideration is the great
mischiefs which have redounded to our small Corporation from the exercise of
this arbitrary power by our chief Officer: But of this theme, because it is very
large, and will need much interlacing of proofs and examination of Witnesses, I
shall treat, if need be, in the last place.

5. The fifth, and that the most generally convincing motive of all, is from
our local Statute which I read to you, when I was here last before this
Committee, which runs in these words.

Quia quod a pluribus quaeritur, facilius invenitur, et consulendo dicit
Sapiens, Omnia cum consilio fac, and minime poenitebit: statuimus injungendo,
ne cum ardua domus emerserint negotia, Magister capitose suae prudentiae
imitatur, sed omnes Scholares convocet, and emersa ^egotia exponat eisdem, and
super illis quaerat consilium singulorum, nedum seniorum, sed juvenum, cum
donet juniori Deus aliquoties quod non seniori: sed si in unam conveniant
sententiam, been quidem sin autem, numero stetur majori, etiam and saniori.

Here you see our Lawgiver expressly declares his will, that the Master shall
not prefer his private wisdom before the wisdom of the whole or major part of
the Society: and brands such proceedings of his with an imputation of
headiness and rashness: Only supposing the conscience of that Oath which the
Master was to take at his admission would be a sufficient tie to a strict
performance of his will, thought it needless to establish his law by any
penalty, or to point us out a way of acting without him, which is the defect we
now desire a supply of.

In those times, when a pla^n, honest, and conscientious simplicity bore sway
in men's hearts, and wickedness was not so ingenious as it has since proved in
our times, a few rules sufficed to preserve righteousness and peace amongst
men: The Laws were then (as the Mosaical Law) like those wide-window'd Nets our
national Statutes prescribe for hindering the destruction of the young fry of
fish: but afterward the corruption of man's nature spinning out it self to such
a subtilty as to find easy Evasion through those spacious grates, 'twas found
necessary in every age to make an intertexture of new threads, and cross bars
for the intangling of those subtiller Offenders: Now therefore this which is
propounded unto you being of this nature, not purely a new Law, but only a new
way laid down (agreeable to what the wisdom of Parliament had prescribed in a
parallel case) for the more sure and effectual execution of the old established
Law of our Founder, ought in reason to find the easier admittance.

Only there is one Objection or two of some weight which I, must crave the
patience of this honorable Assembly, to give me leave to discuss, for the
fuller clearing of all doubts, which may perplex the question.

The first is, that our Founder where he says the Master must numero stare
majori, adds [etiam and saniori,] whence some may perhaps infer, that it is left
to the Master to judge which is the sounder part, and so if he relinquish the
major part, and follow their advice whom he judges the sounder part, he
transgresses not. But that this was an exposition far from our Lawgivers
intention, I shall demonstrate by these Reasons.

First, It Is apparent the Founder intended this Statute mainly as a provision
against the Masters self-wisdom, upon which he says, he shall not rely. Now
therefore if the Master refuse the major, and adhere to the minor part, only
because in his judgment the sounder, he does in effect rely upon his own
prudence, which is the thing our Founder forbids.

Secondly, If the judgment of the sounder part be left to the Master, the word
majori may as often as he pleases be made a mere non-significant Cipher. If the
Master propound a business to the whole number of Fellows, which is fourteen,
and can get but two or three (then which nothing is more easy) to side with
him, he may call those few men the onl syound men of the Society, all the other
eleven or twelve shall be esteemed as factions or frantic, because of their
advice not suiting with his ends; and so that obscure word [sani^ri] shall,
like one of Pharaohs lean Kine, swallow up the word majori, though fairer and
better likin^, into its insatiable stomach. So shall the Master contrary to the
Founders will be made by his own estimate the Solus sapiens, and supreme Lord.
The fellows, they are flattered with a specious show of liberty and
co-partnership in the Government, but are indeed like mere Schoolboys (such
would the King have made the whole Parliament) called together to a posing, not
voycing, in which they must either comply with the Masters will, or have their
advice rejected with scorn, and themselves dismissed with infamy, as
crackbrain'd and unsound men.

Therefore this being an interpretation so full of contradiction and
inconsistency both to the general current of this Statute, and particular,
contexture of the sentence it self, the word saniori cannot be understood, but
is either a mere word of formality, or to say the most, was added only as a
Proviso, where 'twas impossible to determine which was the major part, as where
the number of Fellows on both sides was equally divided, that there the Master
might incline to that part which he should judge the sounder.

But that by the word saniori is not meant at all a reference to the Masters
judgment, but that 'twas rather a mere word of form affected by the solemn
gravity of those times, will appear several ways, As,

First, From our eighteenth Statute, where our Founder, treatting of license to
be given to two of our Fellows to travel, shuffles the Master and Fellows all
into one pack, and says that they (the Master and Fellows, or the major and
sounder part of them, shall have power to give this license. His words are
these, Nos principatitor hoc attente, dictis Magistre, and Scholuribus
potostatem and licentiam impartimur: quod ipsi vel saltem major pars, and
sanior corundem, si hoc Domini and Scholaribus expedire viderint, unum vol duos
Scholares domus hoc p^t^ntes, si ad hoc suo judicio fuerint habiles licentiare
valiant.

Here you see the Master is clearly levelled as one man with the rest of the
Society: The expression runs not, as in some Statutes, Magister and mayor ac
sanior pars Scholarium, but mayor and sanior pars Magistri and Scholarium, the
greater and sounder part of the Master and Fellows put together: so the Master
being here made a party in the Scrutiny, is incapable of being a Judge in the
same: and therefore in all probability the word saniori is, as I said, put in
by the Founder only as a word of course, a mere synonima, an expression
affected by the gravity of those times in which he lived.

And further, that this is no bare conjecture of mine, but rather a truth
evidenced with us by experience of all times, the first of all the University
Statutes entitled De modo statuendi, which I have here copied out of the
Proctors book, will make it very evident.

That De modo statuendi runs thus:

Authoritate totius Vniversitatis Cantabrigiensis tam Regentium quam non
Regentium, ordinatum est, quod in statuendis rebus and negotiis utilitatem
communem dictae Vniversitatis concernentibus solum illud pro Statuto habeatur,
quod de consensu maioris and sanioris partis dictorum Regentium, and de
consensu non Regentium fuerit decretum per Statutum.

And I have here ready to produce, if need be, a sufficient number of
presidents showing the observation of this Statute in several sanctions from
time to time, all which bear the style of the major and sounder part of Regents
and Non-Regents: yet the constant tenor of our University proceedings
witnesses that the major and sounder part were never looked at as two distinct
notions, and left to the Vicechancellors and Proctors discretion to determine
of; but that the major part was always (and as I can prove by another Statute
ought to be) adjudged the sounder, and whatsoever was decreed by the major
number of voices, past always for an act of the University without exception.
And for the truth of this assertion, I appeal not only to those of our Society,
men of great standing, here present, but to all that ever have long resided as
Masters of Art in the University: yea and to Doctor Seaman himself, if he has
seen so many Congregations as to make him a competent witness in this matter.

So the advantage of that expression for the assumption of a negative voice
being now I hope cleary removed, I shall procced to the last objection urged,
and chiefly relied upon by the Master, which is, that the University Statute
allows all Masters of Colleges a negative voice.

The Statute for your memories sake I shall again rehearse.

In omnibus and singulis electionibus tam Sociorum, Discipulorum, Scholarium,
Officiariorum, Lectorum, reliquorumque membrorum cuiusque Collegii, quam in
omuibus and singulis locationibus, and concessionibus quibuscunque necessarso
requirendus est Magistri five Praepositi illius Collegii assensus and
consensus.

This is as much of the Statute as concerns the question in hand.

This Statute will, I know, to all that read it at first sight seem an Argument
invincible.

But I shall notwithstanding orave leave to say somewhat in answer to it, not
doubting but before I have done I shall make it appear as contemptible, as now
it seems formidable. As,

1. First, That every College being a distinct Corporation by it self, and Laws
prescribed for its Government by him that founded or endowed it, it may well be
questioned whether those Laws of any of them can be taken away or superseded by
any general Statute of the University. And this I do the rather question,
because the University has in former Statutes shown it self very tender of the
infringement of the particular Statutes of Customs of private Colleges; as
appears by the last clause of a Statute de expulsis in ali a Collegium non
recipiendis, which Statute though in it self most rational, and fit to have a
binding power over all, yet did not the University think fit to pass it without
this additional Salvo, Neque intendimus per praesens Statutum, Statutis,
Constitutionibus, Compositionibus caterisque Colligiorum, in aliud derogdre:
Nor is it our meaning by this present Statute to derogate ought from the
Statutes, Constitutions, and other Compositions of particular Colleges.

Besides, it has formerly been the declared Opinion of some of the wisest of
our University, that the Vice Chancellor, who is our chief Officer in the
Government of the University, cannot exercise his Jurisdiction within the walls
of a private College.

Now it seems irrational to think that the University Statutes should claim a
Power paramount to the local Statutes of those places, where yet the chief
Officer entrusted with the execution of those Laws that lay claim to this
supremacy, can find no entrance.

2. Our College Statute is of a far ancienter standing then this University
Statute; and therefore though this of the University seems to thwart it, yet
being made without any clause of a non obstante, the College Statute lies
unrepealed, and therefore in full force, especially our College Statutes being
revised and confirmed at the same time with the University Statutes, and by the
same Visitors, as I shall, if it be thought needful, make it appear.

3. This Statute is none of our ancient Statutes of the University, but one of
very late standing, no ancienter then the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
for in all our Statutes till that time (as I am well able to say, having lately
searched the Proctors book to that purpose) there appears no footstep of it;
nay not in the first new model of our Statutes which, was made primo
Elizabethae. For our Reformers being then but newly come out of the furnace of
the Marian persecution, were not yet mounted to that height of ambition: but
about ten years after growing warmer and fatter in their great preferments, the
Heads of Colleges did its likely upon plea, that our University-statutes were
not enough refined from Popery, and that new Diseases stood in need of new
Remedies, got a revivall of the commission granted formerly primo Elizabethae
for another new modelling of them, in which though for pomps sake the
Commissioners appointed for that work were some of them, as Cecil, Cook, and
Haddon of the Queens privy Council; yet the rest of them being Doctors of Law,
Physic, and Divinity, and two of them Divinity Professors of the University,
no man that is not blind, and knows not how little leisure those greater
Statesmen had to labyrinth their brains with all the tedious anfractus of that
Theory, but will say that the main Engines, and the very both prima and secunda
mobilia in this last new Model were the Heads of Colleges alone; and they
having now gotten this ample power into their own hands, did, together with the
public Reformation, cunningly interweave their own private advancement; and in
purging us of Popery, did, like those Medicamenta maledicta, emunge the body of
the University of some of their most essential and fundamental privileges;

As for example.

The choice of a Vice Chancellor, which was before in the whole body of
Regents, they got in this Reformation a Monopoly of it to themselves, so as the
body of the University has only left them a bare superficies of election, but
the substance they got into their own hands; for by this new Reformation, they
got themselves the nomination of two, one of which the University is
necessitated to elect, and if they doubted of him, whom they desired to have
elected, 'twas but nominating some one distasted or contemned man for a stale,
and then they were sure to carry it for such one of those two nominated, as
they should think fittest.

2. Another great privilege, whereof they deprived the Body of the University,
was the interpretation of Statutes, which before except in a few cases, was as
well as the making of Statutes in the body of the University; but in this new
Model, the heads got a Monopoly of it intitely to themselves.

And if I mistake not that strange Statute of the Caput Senatus, consisting of
the Vice Chancellor, and five others chosen by the heads of Colleges, and the
two Scrutators out of fifteen persons nominated by the Vice Chancellor, and
Proctors, and all this without the least advice or privity of either of the two
Houses, and these five men entrusted, every one with more then a Negative voice
(for nothing, be it never so just or necessary to the common good, or of
particular persons, can be so much as propounded to the Houses, till every
single man of these has given his positive consent) is of the same date. If
but one of these deny, though giving no reason, the concurring voices of the
Vice Chancellor, and the other four are of no force, the motion is stiffed in
the very cradle, a thing of not care practice among us; Now this Stature, if
considered in its full latitude, will, I think, be found of no longer standing
then that new model. Something there was of a like nature before, but if
compared with this, will be found vastly different; For that had for its object
only tempus and formam, but this, Concessions of all natures: in that the
negative was in three, here in any one.

And lastly, to fill up the measure of their iniquity, they did likewise as
much as in them lay, defraud those Societies, where the Founders had inricht
them with that unvaluable treasure, of their precious liberties; and with their
spoils, sacrificed to their own ambition, made every Master of a College and
absolute Monarch, and the Societies their Vassals.

Thus miserably were the poor Fellows of Colleges deluded and oppressed; but
to complain was no boot.

These men's potency at Court was such, and such was the reverend esteem had of
them there, that to have spoken ought in derogation of them, or their
proceedings, would have been deemed blasphemy, but especialy for one of no
higher condition, then a Fellow of a College to have appeared in public in
his Russet-Coat against these grand silken Rabbis, had been to have exposed
himself only to laughter or ruin.

But the Court-prerogative, the root of all these oppressions being now dig'd
up, these excrementitious branches will, I hope, be thought fit to be removed
with it: besides nature teaches us, than each evil is best cured by its
contrary: therefore it having been laid open clearly before you, how the
Monarchs connivence at the fraud and corruption of its Representatives was the
cause of this distempered mutation. We hope for cure from the vigilant
sincerity of our true Republical-Magistrates, by the anulment, if need be, of
that Statute, and restoration of each College to at least that ancient
wholesome Crasis of Liberty it was created in by its first Founder.

I speak not this to cast any the least prejudice upon that good work of
Reformation in Religion, for which I cannot but say the Nation owes much thanks
to the endeavors of all those Reverend Divines, that were so happy instruments
in it. But we see the experience of that proverbial sentence, Nullum magnum
ingenium sine mixtura insaniae. The best of men are but men. This whole World,
and the heart of every man in it, is naught else but a Champaigne, where good
and evil, light and darkness, contend for victory; and so where God has his
Church, the Devil will erect his Chapel as a Fort to lay battery against it.
So in all Reformations the greatest instruments in it will always (if they be
not by themselves, or others narrowly looked to) carry on some design of their
own private, an attendant at least, if not corrivall to that of the public.
Besides we know how the people of God, who immediately upon their deliverance
from Pharaoh, and the Red Sea, did nothing, but in humility of heart, worship
and sing praises to God their Deliverer, were observed afterward upon a little
prosperity to have forgotten God; to have waxen fat and kicked. And of our
Reformers, about that Decade, it may justly be questioned. Whether thein zeal
in preserving the Reformation begun, were more to be commended, or their
ambition in obstructing its further progress and perfection to be condemned.

But above all I desire to be understood, not to intend any the least
reflection of blame upon those reverend Gentlemen and Ministers, the present
Heads of Colleges in our University, for as they had no hand in procuring of
those encroachments, so neither that I know of, have they ever made ill use of
that power which their Predecessors ambition had purchased to their hands: For
though they have, by the last Statute I told you of, the full power of
interpretation of Statutes within themselves, and there was a time, when they
might have used it with applause, in that excellent interpretation of our
University Oaths, whereby men's consciences, endangered to perjury upon every
penal statute, were much eased, yet to my best remembrance, they did not assume
to themselves, but yielded to the whole body of the University the honor of
alleviating this grievance.

Nay this I must needs say, to the honor of all those Heads of other
Colleges, except our own, that I conceive it is nothing but their honest and
prudent carriage in their several charges, which is the cause that none of the
University (none having the like particular cause of complaint) appear as yet
in this cause to desire those provisions against Tyranny, petitioned for in our
College, For it is not evils in posse, though of the nearest probability, but
those in esse that stir up the generality of men to the invention of remedies.
In other Colleges where the Masters have by statute or custom a negative
voice, yet they have chosen rather to wave sometimes their own, not interest
only, but judgment too, then make use of it, and in the very propositions of
questions to be swayed by the public reason of their Societies.

And if our Head had behaved himself with the like candor and moderation in his
trust you had not I think been troubled with these tedious disputes at this
day: but our Head though, as you have heard, denied a negative voice by our
Lawgiver, will yet usurp it, propounding only what he pleases himself, and
after the vote past, following his own, not the common prudence of the Society,
as shall be amply proved (if need be) in its proper place. Besides, we having
in the general course of this man's Government, observed nothing of a public
Spirit, aiming at the common good, but rather a constant tenor of close
dissimulation and greedy intentiveness upon all advantages of not only holding
fast in every punctillo, but advancing still further, the grand interest of his
power and profit; and that as far as humane wit could guess of man's heart by
its fruits, the two great poles of his whole revolution were dominion and
covetousness (of which upon many sinister dealings of his, there is not three
men of all our Society that have been the constant observers of his
College-tranfactions this seven years but have at one time or other expressed
their deep resentment) this is that has occasioned this extraordinary petition
for a just restraint of this exorbitancy of an assumed power within those
bounds our Lawgivers wisdom had prescribed to it, with some concurrent helps
for the surer execution of his declared will: " Ex malis moribus ortae sunt
bonae leges. It Is the greatest glory of good magistrates, that they can, in
imitation of him whose image they bear, bring forth good out of evil, light out
of darkness; and like the Sun in the Firmament, produce good Laws out of an
equivocal brood of corrupt manners.

These things I thought it convenient by way of diversion to suggest, not that
the cause stands in need of it, but only to open your eyes, that you might see
how this Antichristian mystery of the negative voice began its working betimes,
even near the Apostolic days of Reformation.

For to the very letter of the Statute as it stands, I am not without a very
satisfactory answer.

For it says not positively, that all Concessions, Elections, etc. shall be
Null which want the Prefects consent; but that in all Elections, Concessions,
etc. the Prefects consent is necessarily to be required. Now we know that that
word is of the same nature with Postulo in Latin, and so implies rather that
the Prefects consent is to be required of him de jure, as a right, then begged
as an act of grace, as if the Societies consent without his Le Roy le veult
were of no force.

And this answer in these times wherein all Statutes ought to be interpreted in
favor of liberty, as they were formerly in favor of Prerogative, might alone
suffice. But I shall add another of more convincing evidence; Which is this.

That granting the intent of this Statute was to make the Masters consent a
necessary ingredient to the composition of each Election or Concession, etc.
yet it absolves them not from that obliging power which lies upon them by any
of their local Statutes to consent to what is advised by the major part of
their Societies, but that by refusal of such consent they incur the guilt of
perjury and breach of trust or such other penalty as their Founders providence
has allotted for the establishment of that Law; and therefore this obligation
to consent remaining still in full force, supposes in the major part the
Prefects consent legally involved and included.

As to compare the greater with our smaller controversies, the Kings consent
was always supposed to be legally included in the major vote even of the most
petit Tribunal much more of the grand Judicatory of the whole Nation, though
never so much personally dissenting: which principle has been always esteemed
one of the main pillars of our cause upon which alone we might lay the whole
stress of not only the justice and lawfulness but even legality of our war.
But this man who no doubt has more then once with our once-Brethren of
Scotland voted the King a man of blood, and guilty of all the bloodshed of this
war, for endeavoring but to assert this power to himself (though far more
favored by the the standing Laws of the Kingdom at that time, then with us by
our Statute) yet has not scrupled to do the same thing himself, both in his
particular practice in the College, and by his appearance here with all his
interest and wit to maintain this prerogative.

But to return to the point.

This point having been fully cleared up to you out of our local Statute, that
our Master is bound to consent to the vote of the major part, that expression
of the University-Statute will now I hope create no prejudice.

And this answer may likewise satisfy another argument for the negative voice,
which may possibly be drawn from our Statute of Elections, which requires
Consensum Magistri, and major is part is sociorum, and some others running in
the same strain. For the true sense of that Statute de ardius being now fully
cleared, makes it apparent, that in the consent of the major part of the
Society, the Masters consent always is or ought to be included.

And now having I hope removed all doubts and objections, I shall now desire
leave to speak a word to my sixth motive for granting my Petition, viz. the
danger lest this root of corruption left among us, should hence spread it self
again to infect the whole Nation. This I confess may seem at first sight but a
mere flourish of Rhetoric, or far-fetcht strain of melancholy; but I shall
make it appear, there is much of reality in the assertion.

It Is an humor you all know the most of mankind are much incident, to, to
labor the promotion and propagation of the forms, opinions, and customs of
those places where they live, especially where they have been trained up in
their younger years; and therefore it was the policy of the contrivers of our
former Government (as knowing that that Government could never be durable which
had not its image stamped upon the peoples affections) to set up the image of
that universal Government of the State in every petty combination of men. Hence
as a reflected image of the then-present Government by King and Council, King
and Lords, or King and Parliament, was set up that Government of Corporations
by Mayor and Aldermen, Dean and Chapter, Master and Fellows; and in
Corporations, Masters and Wardens of particular Companies; all which were
nothing but the general frame of the State-Government contracted as to the
matter only into a narrower compass; and this was that that fixed the love of
Monarchy so fast in the affections of most Corporations, that had it not been
that the King had displeased some of the greatest of them by hard impositions
upon them in way of their Trade, and withal let loose his Bishops to exercise
their tyranny in trampling upon the faces of their reverenced Ministers, they
had never been brought off to draw sword against their Prototype; and after
they had done it, its observable how prone the great ones among them were often
to defection, and how zealous in showing their distaste at the removal of that
great Idol; of all which the King was very sagaciously sensible in the
beginning of these wars, when in a proposal of his to part with the Militia
upon some provisoes, yet would by no means consent to take the Militia's of
Corporations out of their own hands: yet were not the Chiefs of those
Corporations such perfect images of Monarchy, as ours, either for power, or
durance; those were indeed but shadows of it; but ours, in regard of their
continuance in trust during the term of their lives, were its living images,
wanting nothing but an establishment of it in their posterity, which yet they
bid fair for too, when in that new Elizabeth-Reformation wherein they did in a
positive inhibition of Fellows from Marriage handsomely imply a leave indulged
to themselves.

But it may be some will look at this Argument as a great Mallet lifted up to
kill a Fly: Our Corporations you will say are small, and inconsiderable, a mere
Synedrion of young Youths, or handfulls of poor contemplative men systeem'd up
for Orders sake into the form of a Corporation; what good or ill can redound
from these to the whole Nation?

But I shall easily make this appear to be a misprision, and that there will be
more and greater danger from neglect to remedy this evil in our smaller bodies,
then from the most populous City of the whole Nation.

For our Corporations, though but small in bulk, are like those grains of
Mustard Seed our Savior speaks of, of a vast, comprehensive, and multiplying
capacity. The members of those great Corporations are men it is true of abler
purses, and stronger bodies for the present State-service; but their abilities
are confined all within the narrow bounds of their own territory; but ours are
Seminaries of able wits which are sent to us from all parts of the Nation, in
the very nick of their first emersion from the slavery of the Ferula into a
state of liberty, at the first putting on of their considering caps, they being
as yet abrase tabula, smooth tables, prepared to receive of us those tinctures
of good or bad principles; with which impressions stamped upon them, they
afterward spread themselves into every corner and quarter, to leaven the whole
Nation. No man educated among us, but goes away instructed for some public
trust but is in capacity, to be an Abraham, a Father of many Nations.

Therefore it concerns you very-deeply, who desire not by arms only, but by
principles, to root up Regality, and mold the Nation into a true
Commonwealth-frame, to pull down (by taking away its destructive power) this
image of it in those Fountains of Youths education, lest the youth of the
Nation coming in their souls choicest pregnancy to drink of our waters,
enamored of that idol, conceive and bring forth its Antitype, as heir male to
their strongest affections and endeavors, to be promoted again to its lost
inheritance, when time and opportunity shall serve.

And for the same reason does it deeply concern you to take special care of the
Society of Colleges, and not give away Fellowships, being you see places,
though of small profit yet of high trust to every beggar that comes to you with
a formal Certificate, much less to confer these high trusts upon Samaritans and
mere slavish compliers, but especially to tender their precious liberties as
the apple of your eye, to which nothing can be more inconsistent, then a
negative voice placed in any one man; for let any of the Society approve
himself never so active and industrious in promoting the College good, and
with his utmost pains and skill train up his Pupils to the most eminent
proficiency in piety and learning, yet if he will not flatter, and fawn, crowch
and cringe, and comply with this one great Monarch, even to a betraying of the
common Freedom to his corrupt ends of pride or covetousness, he lives an
unserviceable man, and all those educated under his charge are put into an
impossibility of ever attaining that preferment their deserts shall make them
capable of. Though the whole community, or far greater part, judge them worthy
of it, one man's non placet shall blast all: and how great a temptation this
will be even to some not dis-ingenuous men (being not willing to expose those
under their trust to contempt and beggary) to worship the Image of that great
beast, I leave to your wisdoms to judge; as likewise, whether such an
impression of slavery fixed upon the spirits of Fellows of Colleges be not like
to impress its counterfeit upon those educated under their trust, and by their
means upon the greatest part of the Nation.

Another motive give me leave to present you with, which though omitted in my
Petition is of great consequence, being drawn from the principles of universal
reason, which will say that every particular man's interest of the Society being
every way equal to that of the Master, nay in some respects far greater, (for
the Master is but one single person; but every Fellow having pupils under his
charge, is a kind of Corporation by himself) it is a thing contrary to common
sense that his one voice should be laid in the balance to oversway the major
part of the Society.

There was once a custom in some Corporations (of which our selves have yet in
our College some shadows left) that not the Warden or Master only but every
single man of the Society had a negative voice, which upon this very ground, as
contrary to the common Law of the Land, i.e. to common Reason, was taken away
by an Act of Parliament, 33. H. 8. only I conceive in tenderness to the
Prerogatives of Monarchy, much favored throughout the whole body of our Laws,
the Statute was so penned, that the Mayor, Master or Warden had his Negative
left him; but now we have no Monarchy, whose privileges we ought to be tender
of, and there is every way the same reason, nay far more, for devesting the
single Warden of his Negative, then for taking it away from so many members
conjunctive, as may amount to near the half of the Society.

One word more I desire to add as an inforcement of my Petition, that of all
Masters of Colleges in the Town, there is least reason the Master of our
College should claim to himself this grand Prerogative of a Negative voice;
for the whole burden of the Colledge-government has for all these seven years
laid wholly upon the shoulders of the President and Fellows.

The Master has held his place now for about seven years, yet he has never
once that I know of resided among us for six weeks, nay not one month, seldom
above a fortnight together at one time; has seldom or never visited us, but
either when he was necessitated to it, either to supply his course in the
University-Church, or to audit our Accounts, and receive his money: All his
short visits put together for this whole seven years, will not mount to one
years continuance.

For which prodigious absence of his from his charge, all he can say is only
his being Beneficed in London, or an Assembly-man, or that he has been
employed in Colledge-affairs.

Now for Colledge-affairs, in those we have, it is true, made some small use of
his being at London, but never impow'red him to reside at London for that
purpose; nor was there need; for nothing was ever done by him, which a common
Solliciter for a small fee would not have performed as well, or better,
especially being sufficiently furnished with his instructions or Letters to
Council at Law, or such great men as were to have addresses made to them in
cases of need.

And for his Benefice and Assembly-man-ship, there is no reason either of them
should be a protection to save him from an Arrest for that debt of Residence he
owes the College, from whence he has had so considerable subsistence; for one
of them being a place (by common fame) of one, if not two hundred pounds a
year, the other of four shillings a day, it seems not very reasonable, that one
so against Pluralities, should enjoy the revenue of all three places, and bear
the burden but of two. For he has all this time of his discontinuance laid in
a manner the whole burden of his Colledge-Office upon the Presidents back, not
allowing him for his pains so much as one penny.

Besides, it may be answered that all the other Masters of Colleges, who yet
were many of them Assembly-men as well as he, have been far more constant
continuers at their respective charges, and have some of them as I think
relinquish't considerable Benefices they were possessed of otherwhere, that they
might the more solely attend their charges at Cambridge: And I Am sure ours has
not wanted all the encouragement we could give him to enable him to it, having
out of our common poverty connived ever since our coming to the College at his
taking a double portion of our Dividend though neither allowed him by our
Statute nor any constant President beyond the second year of Doctor Cosens his
time.

Now that this man who is apparently of no use to the College, whose servant
he should be by the constitution, but resides at London afar off, making use of
the College only as a prey, and his title only as a hook to draw power and
profit to himself, knowing little but by hearsay of the sufficiency or
insufficiency, good or ill behavior of each member of the College should be
thought fit to have a power superior to the Society, who to their great charge
reside upon the place, and bear the whole burden, it is a thing beyond the
comprehension of a vulgar understanding.

I have now done with all my motives.

As to the Prayer of the Petition: having so amply expressed my mind in it. I
need not add much by way of Exposition or Apology.

Only this: It Is not, as some may perhaps suggest, a fancy or new Model of my
own brain, but it is a Model approved of in a parallel case by the reason of the
whole Nations Representative. It concerns every member of this honorable
Assembly more then my self to make it good; for it is nothing else from point to
point, but a Series of such particulars as the wisdom of the whole Parliament
judged necessary for the circumstantiating that freedom which the City of
London were debarred of thorough the like want of provision in their Law:
change bu^ the name of London for Peter-house, ten of their numerous
Common Counsel for two of our seven Seniors, and their [at any time] for our
within 48 hours, and this draught will prove wholly the same with that Act of
Parliament.

Nor could less have been well desired for taking away that hurtful Prerogative
I dispute against, which is not the bare name of a negative voice, but the
substance, viz. that supremacy of power, which our chief Officer claims above
the whole or major part of the Community, which is of a Complex nature, and
consists of these three powers, viz. Of calling of meetings. 2. Of proposing of
questions. 3. Of acting the results of those meetings.
Any one of which three powers remaining in the chief Officer, makes him as
absolute as if invested with all three; and therefore the Parliament saw well
in the City of Londons case, that for the removal of that great evil, an
establishment of all these particulars was of absolute necessity.

For to return to our former parallel, grant but to our once-chief Officer of
State the sole power of calling Parliaments, and binding them up to those
questions only which he shall think fit to propose, he will not much desire or
stand in need of a negative voice, seeing he is able by either of those two
former powers, to crush in the egg any motion which he suspects may in the
least infringe his prerogative, or other corruptions.

So in our lesser Commonwealth, though you should grant or declare in general
terms that the Master shall have no negative voice, and leave him but this
power (for want of provision to the contrary) that by delay of meetings when
most necessary, or by making himself judge of that necessity, or in those
meetings by refusing such questions as he likes not, he can keep us from ever
coming to a voicing, or if after voicing he may refuse or delay to act our
determinations, and yet neither he liable to a sufficient penalty for any of
those refusals, nor we through the defect in our Statute enabled to meet,
debate, or act any thing without him, he is an absolute Monarch, and has a most
firm possession of a negative in reality, however denied him in words. And for
this reason it was that I have been so bold in the prayer of my petitions to be
so punctually particular.

Now if any man object that these things granted would be a cause of much
tumult, and factious disorders in our College: I answer; The experience of the
same in the City of London shows the quite contrary, where it is apparent
nothing but the sweetest streams of unity, freedom and peace have issued out of
this fountain: For it lies only as a dormant proviso, like the major
excommunicatio of the Presbytery, in terrorem, never like to be put into Act,
except in cases of unheard of obstinancie. Whereas on the contrary the want of
this provision has been the original of all our divisions: nothing being the
more natural fountain of contention amongst men or bodies politic, then the
want of certain bounds assigned to each man or bodies propriety; which made
the wise Lawgiver Moses to denounce such a fearful curse upon the remover of
Landmarks, and religious Numa to place Terminus the God of boundaries among
his principal deities, and to erect him him a Temple, as I remember, next
adjoining to that of Concord.

As for the last clause, which concerns Masters and Presidents absence, it is
not only almost the same with that in the Act for London, but was moreover a
proviso fitted more especially to the present constitution of our College,
which has often: stood in great need of it, as I could instance in cases of
Considerable consequence.

And besides that the making of some such provision is a thing most agreeable
to our founders will, who says expressly that the College should not defensore,
and rectore carere, the thing I aimed at in this proposal was the Presidents
ease and the Colleges convenience: for as I told you before, the Master being
almost a constant non-resident, and having power by Statute to make President
whom he pleases (which president is charged with the whole burden of his
office) it will often happen that this President must either necessarily infer
much prejudice in some affairs of his own requiring his presence otherwhere, or
the College suffer much detriment for want of power to act as a living body in
cases of emergent need. For that our Colledge-debates should be packeted up to
London to a man sitting there in his regalia, and looking at us afar often, or
that the life of our assemblies should be derived from the spirit sent from
London in a cloth-bag, is a thing disagreeable to common equity, and a flat
contradiction to our Founders declared will.

All I have to say further, is, that in this draught of my Petition, however
displeasing to our Reverend Master, I have had no ayms at his prejudice further
then was of absolute necessity to state our freedoms and vindicate them from
his unjust usurpations. If I have herein prejudiced any, it is rather the
Society, by allowing the Master so much as an affirmative voice, which some of
us are of opinion that by our Statutes, if well understood, he cannot lay claim
to. But being desirous in this matter to walk in an indifferent way, giving
each their reasonable due, and to follow close not mine own, but rather the
public wisdom of the Parliament for my pattern; I doubt not of finding from
them an easy pardon of my error.

I have now done with the Petition.

There was one motive for its enforcement referred to the last place, which was
by showing how the Master of our College for want of these provisions here
petitioned for, had debarred us of our manifest rights of treating in a
Colledge-way about some affairs nearly concerning the common good, and of
having our Resolves put into due execution: And how both particular members,
and the whole College had suffered much prejudice by those his usurpations,
which because I thought, he might possibly deny, 'twas for this cause chiefly,
that I troubled these Gentlemen of our Society to make their appearance before
you. These being they, who (except our President, and one of our Deans left at
home for the necessary affairs of our College) make up the whole number of
those now resident, who having been present at all our former and later
transactions, are best able to bear witness to those particulars I shall
instance in.

Yet because I have I think already both overwearied your patience, and laid
before you reasons enough of far greater consequence for the enforcement of my
Petition, my desire is that there may rather be a perpetual Amnesty of all our
forepast grievances, and that our liberties may be so settled for the future, as
each part knowing their due bounds, a true Christian amity may be preserved
among us, and this honorable Committee freed from further trouble. And
therefore except this honorable Assembly, or our reverend Master for the
Vindication of his own repute, shall impose that task upon me, I shall wave
this Argument, and leave it to your wisdom to judge what has been already
spoken.

Only to his Argument for the negative voice in such particular cases wherein
he is appointed to consult with the Deans only, I can only say, that 'twas
not the prime Statute, but an interpretation of Statute made many years after
by a single Bishop of Ely, which endowed the Master with this Prerogative. And
it being besides against the principles of Common freedom that an Officer
constituted for term of life should have this vast pre-eminence of two of the
greatest Colledge-Officers annually Elected to their trusts I shall in this
following Petition which I here present you with as an appendix to my former,
crave the assistance of your authority for the solution of this knot.

To the Honorable the Committee for the Reformation of the UNIVERSITIES. The
humble Petition of Charles Hotham Fellow of Peter-House,
Shows,
THat whereas by our Colledge-Statutes there are about twenty particular cases
in which the judgment belongs not to the whole Society, but either to the
Master and 5 or 6. Seniors, or to the Master and Deans alone, and that in all
cases wherein the Master and Deans are solely trusted, being many of them cases
of great concernment, the Master had by an interpretation made by a Bishop, of
Ely betwixt one and two hundred years after the foundation, a Negative voice
conferred upon him, which however agreeable to the policy of those times, is
contrary to the principles and grounds of our present Reformation, and
establishment of this Nation in form of a Commonwealth, and much prejudicial to
the good and welfare of the whole College

Your Petitioner does further pray that the Negative voice of one man in all
our Assemblies may be taken away root and branch, and that in all Elections and
consultations whatsoever of the Master with the Fellows, Seniors, Deans,
Rursars, or any other, the determination of the major part of those who have
voices in that Election or consultation, may be acquiesced in, as the Act of
that Assembly.

And your Petitioner, with the whole College, shall ever pray, etc.
This last clause and Petition concerning the Master and Deans were, though
here inserted, yet forgotten to be delivered to the Committee.

My Argument ended, the Master made a long reply, the punctual repetition of
which I must leave to his own memory and pen. It touched nothing upon any
material point of my Argument, But was rather a descant upon my Petition, with
some recriminations consisting to my best remembrance of these heads.

That he had assumed no power that was not his own by Statute: as was the
calling of meetings, etc.

That he had never shown any aversness from meetings, nor ever dissolved any,
but when the time itself dissolved them.

That 'its true he had propounded questions according to his own sense, but
offered to others the same liberty of propounding questions in theirs.

That we must distinguish between the Major part of the whole Society, and the
Major part of those present, which sometimes being but few in number, were not
fit to make Acts obligatory to the whole College.

That the Fellows were the only men averse from Meetings, whom he could not
easily get together, but when there was some Lease to be let, etc.

That the party Complainant was himself, though Deane, absent from the last
anniversary meeting appointed for reading the Statutes.

That in the clause inserted in his Petition concerning the Senior Fellow's
being President, he aimed at his own promotion, being the next Senior himself,
and so desirous of this power that in his or the Presidents absence he might
assemble the Fellows about the making of new Models of Government.

This was to my best memory the sum of his reply. To which it might easily have
been answered.

That this suggestion of my seeking the Presidentship for my self, was a most
groundless scandal, It never having happened all this seven years above twice
that I know of, that my self was the Senior Fellow resident, which lasted but
for a few days neither.

Besides, the Office being a vast burden, and nothing in it desirable to such
eye of ambition or covetousness as he (measuring others by himself) supposed in
me, nor my self in any probability of intermedling with that Office, being
(contrary to his allegation) neither the first nor second Senior of the
College, both which, with the Master, must be all three absent, before I could
be in capacity to act, and that for some longer time then ever yet had been,
else no danger of attempting, much less of perfecting any new Model, especially
there being but two times a year, wherein the College is enabled to make new,
or interpret old Statutes.

For my absence. That 'twas not about any private pleasure or business of mine
own, but was solely to seek a removal, and hinder the further progress of those
evils brought upon the College by his fraud and breach of trust, and those
large opportunities he has had of acting those treacheries by his own constant
residence at London, and his Proctor with the reverend Beard standing always at
the Committees elbows, and being admitted (when all others are with drawn) to
their private debates, and to speak in some cases when those most concerned
cannot come in to answer, in which though by reason of those vast disadvantages
I have been unsuccessful, yet I esteemed both my expense of time and pains, and
the double my Colledge-revenue well employed in the endeavor.

That his distinction of the major part of the whole Society, and those
present, was a piece of empty Sophistry, himself well knowing, there was never
yet since our first coming to the College (which is now almost seven years) a
full meeting of the whole number of Master and Fellows together, nor can there
well be, by reason of sickness, business, or travel allowed of by Statute,
perpetually occasioning some two or three men's absence; so that if he may be
allowed this salvo for his Negative, he will never want one who shall be absent
for his sake.

Besides, he always esteemed the major part of those present, though not the
whole, valid Society enough to bind the College where himself was present and
consenting; an evident sign, it is his own only consent, not the number of
those absent or present he chiefly values.

That his accusation of the Fellows as slack in coming to meetings, except in
cases of Leases, etc. was a groundless scandal, of which fault himself was
only guilty, having at those great semestrian meetings appointed for reading,
and considering Statutes, been but twice, or at most, thrice present, during
all the time of his Mastership, and particularly in the last great meeting, to
which he summoned all the Fellows, he staid not the reading out of one third
part of the Statutes; nor indeed could ever be got from London to any
Colledge-meeting, but when his quarterly course in preaching, or auditing the
Accounts (being always suspicious of the denial of his double Dividend at
those times) enforced his presence.

That he has been sometimes, when there was great cause of meeting, near a
fourtnight together, not calling any meeting till just a day or two at most
before his departure, whereby himself was eased, and the President wholly
charged with the cares of such businesses as should have been then dispatched by
himself.

That in meeting it has been observably his custom when he had a mind to
dispatch a business indeed, to sit him down, and call us formally to the table,
and to cut out his work for the debate with all dexterity and expedition.

But when a business was to come on which he liked not, then to let us alone by
the fire, or to leave his Chair, and us, to dispute at random, otherwhile to
spin out the time with us in discourses of lesser affairs; or if pressed to come
home to the main business, then to fall a shuffling, and cutting, and winding
us from the point by some nonsignificant, or dividing questions, of which
Artifices he has often shown himself a well-skill'd Architect.

And for propounding of questions, his duty is, after the laying open before us
the businesses he has to acquaint us with, not to lean upon his own prudence
in proposing to us like School-boyes such questions as himself only shall think
fit, but to be in that main point of the scrutiny ruled by the advice of the
whole or major part of the Society.

And therefore what be acknowledges, viz. that he did take upon him in the
first place to propound questions of his own sense, was a great usurpation; but
that he gave others the like liberty, is an Apology nothing to the purpose;
for our Statute appropriating it to the Masters Office, to ask the Fellows
advice, if any other do it but he, it renders the whole vote of the Society a
mere nullity: Now it is true, the Master once at a meeting, when one excepted
against some litigious questions of his propounding against the sense of the
Society, promised he would afterward propound those questions he had named, in
terminis, but when it came to the point, told the party, he might now propound
those questions himself, if he pleased, (which he knew well had been been a
thing illegal and void) but refused utterly in pursuance of his promise and
duty to propound them himself.

These things I know will to a superficial view seem but inconsiderable
brangles; but to men of piercing judgments, and well versed in Parliamentary
debates, that see daily what a King the Speaker would be, if solely entrusted
with this Prerogative above the Parliament; and how great a weight of business
is often turned upon the binge of one small punctillo, in the stating of a
question; these things cannot but appear of high concernment.

Yet I had very many materials of a much higher nature to charge him with,
which being provoked by his challenge, I was then as I told the Committee,
ready to produce, having for witnesses most of the senior Fellows then present
before them to make them good. But as I was just entering upon that task, a
worthy member of the Committee propounded it as a question to be first debated
by themselves, whether they should single out the point of Statute to be
determined, as they should see just upon weighing the Arguments of both parties
laid before them in theory, or take in with it the consideration of the
practick, consisting of personal charge. Another Gentleman seconding him,
propounded likewise as fit to be considered, whether they would admit of
recriminations, which are like to be endless (each party still deeming himself
obliged to reply and answer at large to each others, though non-pertinent
objections) or rather as the first Gentleman propounded, would fall singly upon
the point of Theory. This motion the whole Assembly seemed to assent to; so
according to the custom of the Committee we were commanded to withdraw, and
the doors shut. The product of the private debate was this.

April 10. 1651. At the Committee for Reformation of the Universities.
Resolved,

That a view be taken of the several Statutes of the Universities, and the
Colleges and Halls therein respectively, to the end that they may be reduced
to such a State as may render them most conducing to the advancement of true
piety, and the interest of a Commonwealth.

Resolved,

That Mr. Rous, Mr. Martin, Mr. Moyle, Sir Hen. Mildmay, Mr. Oldsworth, Mr:
Thomas Chaloner, Mr. James Chaloner, Mr. Palmer, Mr. R. Darley, Mr. Love, Mr.
Nevill, be a Sub-Committee for this purpose, and that any three or more of them
do meet and consider thereof, and make Report to this Committee from time to
time concerning the same, as there shall be cause: and the care of this
business is especially referred to Mr. Oldsworth.

In pursuance of which resolve, some of those Gentlemen Members of this
Sub-Committee have since met, and past this following Order.

April 25. 1651. At the Sub-Committee for viewing the Statutes of the
Universities.
THe Parliament having resolved a through Reformation of the Universities, and
the Committee appointed for that purpose in Order thereunto having taken the
same into consideration, do hereby desire and require the respective Heads of
Colleges, and those Fellows that are interested in the Government thereof for
the time being, to send up to this Committee true transcripts of the Statutes
of the said Colleges, examined and attested under their hands respectively;
and they do specially recommend it to the care of the said Heads, Governors,
and Officers, to consider what Statutes or any parties thereof are prejudicial
to Religion, Learning, good Manners, or the present Government; and further,
whether there be any defects in the same, and to propose their opinions
concerning the supplying of the said defects; and that they give an account of
the receipt hereof forthwith, and of their further proceedings concerning the
same with all convenient speed.

James Chaloner, F. Rous, M. Oldsworth.


The private business upon which at Doctor Seaman's Motion the grand Petition
was at first laid aside, though indeed it nothing concerned it, yet is a story
worth the reading, and therefore take it as follows.
WE had a Fellowship in our College kept vacant for many years, as the Master
pretended for the College necessities, but as the Fellows well know, for the
defrayment of his double Dividend; this Fellowship one Sr. Conyers Scholar of
our College observing the Committee had before in a parallel case, taken the
disposal of such dormant vacancies into their own hands, petitioned to have
conferred upon upon him; whereupon the Committee ordered the Master and Seniors,
or any two of them, to certify the true state of the case; which Order being
read at a public meeting, the Master was very urgent with the Society to
certify it as kept void for the Colledge-necessities; which the Fellows as not
agreeable to truth, generally refused to do: so the Master (and one of the
Society concurring with him so far) made only this general return, that it had
ever since our coming to the College been kept vacant, but for just reasons.
But the Master alone makes another return, specifying some particular reasons,
as namely a debt of above one hundred pounds owing to him by the College. Upon
which Allegations he made a large descant before the Committee; which ended,

I put in some exceptions in writing, detecting somewhat of his fraudulent
dealing with the College, and further added some inlargements as I remember to
this effect.

1. That the Fellowship had not been kept vacant by any public vote, nor for
those reasons he produced.

2. As to the debt, that once in a meeting, knowing our stock behind-hand, and
we in an incapacity of disbursing money, he pressed hard upon us for this debt,
and took the advantage to say, that if we did not presently pay, or clear him
of it, he would be at liberty, if he pleased, to dispose of the Lands as
himself should think good. And being answered, that the present Revenue of the
Land would near amount to the payment of moderate Interest for his money, and
that for his security he should have the Colledge-Seal, upon which one of the
Society had formerly lent the College a hundred pounds; he slighted all, and
nothing would content him, but either the money presently, or some of our
particular Bonds, or the Land to be at his own dispose. So we being in this
strait, my self, to give some breathing-time to the business, presently offered
upon that very security, viz. the Colledge-Seal, which the Master had so
unbecomingly slighted, to lend the College fifty pounds for some months, till
we might think of some better way; and another, (I think 'twas Mr. Quarles)
seconding me, offered the loan of forty pounds; which ninety pounds, together
with another income then mentioned, would make up the whole debt. But the
Master seeing his pretense of seizing the Land to himself thus defeated,
neither accepted our offer, nor spoke more of the business at that time.

And further, that this debt he now mentions as a plea for keeping void this
Fellowship, was a mere pretense made use of for by-ends, might hence appear.
That he had formerly in a Colledg-meeting twitted us again with this debt as a
plea for keeping void another Fellowship against our common Consent, yet gave
way to his own man to defeat the College of that Fellowship, not once appearing
(though acquainted with his man's intentions) by Petition or otherwise in behalf
of the College right, which to have done was both the duty of his place, and
his solemn promise before the Society, as many can See two Letters annexed to
the later end of this Book.
witness.

3ly. That the Bishop of Ely himself, in whose power the Committee was to act
as to this case, could not by our statute give way to the keeping vacant any
Fellowship without the desire and Counsel of the Master and major part of the
Fellows; but here there appeared no desire of so much as one of the Fellows
to have it kept longer vacant. But the Master did it alone of his own head,
contrary to the sense of the major part of the Society, and contrary to our
express statute, which says the Master should not headily rely upon his own
wisdom, but stand to the discretion of the major part.

To these things the Master having replied what he thought fit, we were
commanded to withdraw, and the Committee being, it seems, sensible that the
Fellowship being void by death was not theirs, but the Colleges right to
dispose of, made this following Order.

March the 27th. 1651. At the Comittee for Reformation of the Universities.
Upon Reading the Petition of Mr. Tobias Conyers Bachelor of Arts and Scholar
of Peter house in the University of Cambridge, together with the testimonials
of him hereunto annexed, and likewise the return of the Master, and one of the
Fellows of the said College, concerning the vacancy of Mr. Hanscombs
Fellowship, and upon hearing Doctor Seaman and Mr. Hotham before the Committee;
It is Ordered upon debate of the matter, that the Master, or President and
Fellows of the said College, do forthwith proceed to election of a godly and
learned Person into the place of the said Mr. Hanscomb, and that they give an
account thereof to this Committee on this day fortnight.

James Chaloner.

The College having received this Order, proceeded according to their usual
form within eight days, unto an election. The result of which was the election
of Sr. Conyers into the said vacancy; to which election the President, and all
the Fellows were consenting excepting only three juniors brought in lately by
the Masters interest at London, and who indeed according to our College
statutes being in their state of minority, and not out of their year of
probation, should have had no voices in the election; yet these three not
agreeing, neither, in any one man for a competitor.

The reasons moving the Society to the election of Sr Conyers, were these.

First he was one in a special manner designed out to us for that preferment
by our College statute both in regard of poverty, a thing generally favored in all statutes, and likewise in regard of his Country, our statute allowing two
Fellowships for each County, and but one of them supplied with men of his
qualification, and this Fellowship belonging to the Northern division, which we
were bound in the first place to see supplied.

2ly. Our statute commands us to choose the ablest man we know of or can find
out. Now Sr. Conyers was known to be one of the greatest eminency for learning
and parts in our whole College, insomuch, that though we had a general order
made some years ago for examination of such as should stand for Fellowships,
yet was it unanimously agreed even by those that dissented from the election,
that they were all so well satisfied of his learning and sufficiency, as that
the former order for examination might well be suspended for that time, except
some man should declare to the President his intent to stand as a Competitor
against him, in which case there should be an examination; but no man
adventured upon the trial.

3ly. He was well known to us for the general course of his life to be one of
a pious and virtuous conversation; Excepting only that once growing a little
elated by a sudden promotion, and falling acquainted with a malignant, he began
to be a little seduced, in which time, (which was about two years ago,) 'twas
his ill hap to be in the company of some Rakells of another College, who drank
the Kings health, and he with them: But for this fault with some concurring
circumstances, he did then receive most severe punishment every way answerable,
if not greater then the offense. And for the malignant distemper, that held him
not above two months; he was by his tutors and fathers Counsels soon reclaimed
from it: and as his life had been before this one unhappy misdemeanor, so was
it all the time of his abode in the College after, which was for above a year,
exemplarily pious and virtuous. And he had both to his Tutor, and to some
honest Scholars of his acquaintance given that full evidence of his change of
mind both in reference to piety, and good affection to the State (which he had
likewise evidenced by that ordinary way of taking the Engagement) that there
could not be now left any scruple in any rational man's breast concerning either
his piety or good affection to the Common wealth. Besides all this, he had a
most ample testimony both of his piety and good affection to the State, such as
is not ordinarily given to any man, from some godly and well affected Gentlemen
and Ministers in Norfolk, where he had lived the last year of his
discontinuance from the College.

Some buzzings there were of some Heterodoxe opinions which he was said to
hold, but neither did the Master, nor any one of the Society, even of those
that dessented from the election, lay any thing publicly to his charge, and
the utmost that any of us could hear, so much as by rumor, was only of some
innocuous, though unwary expressions uttered once at a hudling dispute in the
Schools, and at an after-supper discourse at one of the Sophisters feasts; at
which times all men know how ordinary it is, and how inoffensive to maintain by
way of dispute the greatest Paradoxes.

4ly. The order for election being made upon his petition, and sent down to us,
with our own and the Norfolk testimonial annexed, we looked at him as one
recommended to us by the Committee, as the godly and learned person intended
(though in tenderness to the liberty of our election, not nominated) by their
order. This election thus made, upon those solid reasons, with a full account
of all our proceedings in it, we did according to order make a return of to the
Committee, not for confirmation, for the election (which, being every way full
and legal, needed it not) but only to show, that in obedience to their order,
the Fellowship was forthwith supplied by election.

The form of our return to the Committee containing the whole proceedings of
our election, was as follows: To the honorable Committee for Reformation of
the Universities.
Whereas there has been sent to the College an order from this honorable
Commitee dated March 27. 1651. requiring the Master or President and Fellows
of Peterhouse in Cambridge forthwith to proceed to election of a godly and
learned person into the place of Mr. Hanscomb, and to give this honorable
Committee an account thereof on this day, these are humbly to certify, that in
obedience to the said order, Tobias Conyers Bachelor of Arts, and Scholar of
the house of our College, being one generally well approved of amongst us for
his piety, learning and good affection to the Commonwealth, was in a full
meeting of the President and Fellows elected and admitted into the said
Fellowship, according to the statute and custom of our College, April 5.
1651. as by these following copies of the order, and our proceedings thereupon
will more fully appear.

March the 27. 1651. At the Committee for Reformation of the Universities.
UPon reading the Petition of Mr Tobias Conyers Bachelor of Arts and Scholar of
Peterhouse in the University of Cambridg, together with the Testimonialls of
him hereunto annexed, and likewise the return of the Master, and one of the
Fellows of the said College, concerning the vacancy of Mr. Hanscombs
Fellowship, and upon hearing Doctor Seaman and Mr. Hotham before this
Committee, It is ordered upon debate of the matter, that the Master or
President and Fellows of the said College do forthwith proceed to election of
a godly and learned person into the place of the said Mr. Hanscomb, and that
they give an account hereof to this Committee on this day fortnight.

James Chaloner.

March 29. 1651.
Agreed by the President and Fellows then present, that in obedience to the
order from the Committee for Reformation of the Universities dated March 27.
1651, this day be the first day of monition according to the statute about
election.

According to which agreement the first monition for an election was published
the day and year above written by me Robert Quarles President. Robert Quarles
President. James Clarke Dec. sen. dep. Edward Sam's Dec. jun.


April. 3. 1651.
Agreed by the President and Fellows then present, unanimously, that forasmuch
as they are all well satisfied concerning the learning and sufficiency of Sir
Conyers, there is no need of public examination of him in reference to the
election, and that therefore it be at this time omitted; yet with this proviso,
that if notice be given to the President of any that will stand in competition
with him, there shall be a public examination of all the candidates upon
Friday and Saturday, according to a former order of the Socety, dated July 15.
1646. that so the most worthy persons may be elected.

Robert Quarles President. James Clarke Dec. sen. Charles Mildmay Dec. jun.


April 5. 1651.
The second monition in reference to an election into the place of Mr.
Hanscomb, was published in full meeting according to the statute and custom of
our Coledge by me

Robert Quarles President. Presentibus Sociis John Francius. Charles Hotham
James Clarke Francis Brock Edward Sam's Charles Mildmay James Goodall Thomas
Church Ralph Heywood William Sam's.

The election presently followed according to the schedule hereunto annexed
pagina sequenti.

This is a true extract out of the College Diary, which with the following
Schedule is a full account of our whole proceedings concerning the aforesaid
election. Ita testamur To. Quarles Pres. Ja. Clarke sen. Dec. Chapter Mildmay Dec.
jun.


Aprilis 5, Anno Dom. 1651. Conventus Praesidis and Sociorum Collegii Sti Petri
Cantabr. pro Electione novi Socii in locum Magistri Hanscomb nunc vacantem,
octiduo post primam monitionem interposito.
EGo Johannes Francius eligo Tobiam Conyers Eboracensem, in Artibus
Baccalaureum, in locum Magistri Hanscomb supradictum; sed in annum probationis
tantum.

Ego Carolus Hotham eligo Tobiam Conyers Eboracensem in Artibus Baccalaureum,
in locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Jacobus Clarke eligo Tobiam Conyers Eboracensem in Artibus Baccalaureum,
in locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Franciscus Brock eligo Tobiam Conyers Eboracensem in Artibus Baccalaureum
in locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Edwardus Sam's eligo Tobiam Conyers Eboracensem in Artibus Baccalaureum in
locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Carolus Mildmay eligo Tobiam Conyers Eboracensem in Artibus Baccalaureum
in locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Jacobus Goodall eligo Johannem Quarles Norfolciensem in Artibus
Baccalaureum in locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Thomas Church eligo Gulielmum Stavely Leicestriensem in Artibus
Baccalaureum in locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Radulphus Heywood eligo Gulielmum Stavely Leicestriensem in Artibus
Baccalaureum in locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Gulielmus Sam's eligo Tobiam Conyers Eboracensem in Artibus Baccalaureum
in locum supradictum; idque in annum probationis tantum.

Ego Robertus Quarles Praeses hujus Collegii, eligo, and electum a majori part
Sociorum pronuncio Tobiam Conyers Eboracensem in Artibus Baccalaureum in locum
Matthaei Hanscomb supradictum, in annum probationis tantum.

Formula admissionis eodem die post lectionem statutorum and juramenti
praestationem.

Authoritate mihi commissa, Ego Robertus Quarles Praeses hujus Collegii,
Admitto te Tobiam Conyers in Socium hujus Collegii, ex antiqua fundatione, ad
annum probationis and convictum.

Robert Quarles Praeses Collegii.
Vera Copia, and concordat cum Originali.

Ita testamur, Robertus Quarles Praeses. Ja. Clarke sen. Dec. Cha. Mildmay Dec.
jun.






But the Master, who would neither according to his duty come down to be
present at the Election, nor so far own the College, whose Rights he is by the
fundamental Statute to be a Patron of, as to acquaint us with any exceptions
he had against the person in view: (only as we hear, he sent some private
Letters to the President (without any communication to the Society, that Sir
Conyers might not be elected; together with some other private instructions to
a creature or two of his own) like an enemy, rather then Master of the College,
comes to accuse the person elected, bringing with him one of his own creatures,
who being present at the Election, would not before the Society produce any
exception against Sir Conyers, but it seems, according to the Masters
instructions, reserved them to be produced as a scandal to the College (who
were the Electors) before the Committee.

The Masters exceptions were much to the same effect with those before
mentioned.

First, that he had been a malignant, and had drunk the Kings health upon his
knees, and for these misdemeanors had been publicly corrected, and was sent
away into the Country by his Tutor as incorrigible.

2. That he had been guilty of heresy and blasphemy, and upon that Account was
refused at St. John's College, where he once stood for a Fellowship.

In answer to which, I being his Tutor, made before the Committee this summary
relation of his life.

That he being recomended to me by his father, a godly Minister in Yorkshire,
and one who had suffered much for the Parliament, I took him at his first
admission into the College about the age of sixteen years to be my poor
scholar, in which service he demeaning himself with all faithfulness and
diligence, and showing himself in the quick apprehension of what ever was
laid before him, one of extraordinary parts and industry, that his further
proficiency might not be hindered by those necessary diversions of service, I
desired to promote him to the degree of a Pensioner; in which way he being not
able to maintain himself without some concurrent helps, I was a suter to the
Master to confer upon him the Chapel Clerks place then vacant. The Master, as
I was told by a third person, who made the motion to him, was willing to it, if
I would have truck'd with him; i. e. if I would have received one of his
recommendation to be my poor Scholar in his place; but I being otherwise
engaged, could not do it, and so could not obtain the Masters consent; yet was
dismissed with this intimation of hopes, That there would be ere long more
vacancies of these places, which fell out accordingly; but he whom I had spoke
for was never the nearer; for still one or other was promoted before him. Which
observing, I took my opportunity, upon a vacancy that happened, to represent the
case to the President and Deans, who convinced of the poor lads deservings,
elected him without the Masters concurrence. This the Master resented so
deeply, as at his return he did (as I have been certainly informed) call the
President (a man of more standing and worth then himself) by such a foul name,
as I am ashamed to mention. And in passion would, had not I withstood him,
under pretense of translation, have thrust this poor youth out of his place of
eight or nine pounds a year, into a poor place of three or four pounds a year;
and has ever since that time born him an implacable malice.

The poor youth being something elated with this sudden promotion, began a
little to lay himself open to temptation, and as was before related, through
the seducement of a malignant, whom he fell acquainted with, was something
infected, and by chance a Rakell of Pembroke-Hall coming into our Butteries,
and beginning the Kings health, 'twas his unhappiness (as of some other simple
lads there present, who were no malignants) to pledge it, yet not upon his
knees, as was alleged: hearing of this, I sent for him, and finding the
original of this distemper to proceed from a chamber-fellow with whom without
my privity he had associated himself, I commanded him back to his former
chamber, but he refusing, that the example of his misdemeanor and disobedience
might not further infect the College by his impunity, I corrected him publicly
before two or three of the scholars in my chamber; and because I conceived a
fathers admonitions might be most powerful with him, I sent him down to the
Country with letters to his father, informing him how the case stood, that if a
real reformation should appear in him, he should be welcome to me again; if
not, that he must dispose of him some other where, for I would own none such as
he was in that present condition: so after some reasonable stay in the Country,
his father returned him up to me again, as a reformed man, of which he gave
good evidence by a whole years pious and religious conversation. And besides,
better to satisfy my self, I enquired concerning him of some honest and
religious lads, whom I durst trust, who professed to me, that he had diverse
times in their hearing testified his great sorrow for his former miscarriages;
and that to them he then appeared, as much as could be, of a truly pious
disposition. Hereupon the youth having taken his degree of Bachelor of Arts, I
began to look out for some preferment for him, and knowing the Masters malice
to him was such as 'twas impossible without higher contests then I was willing
to engage in, to prefer him in our own College, and hearing of a way open in
St. John's College, I made a suit to some of that College in his behalf,
acquainting them fully with the worst of this which the Master now objects, and
received from them good encouragement.

But the day before their sitting I received a note from one of the Fellows
there, of a report they had heard of some Arminian tenent which he had
maintained in the Schools, whereupon I sent for Sr. Conyers, and charged him
with it; chid him for that he had, contrary to my counsels, troubled his head
in his unriper years with the study of the contentious part of Divinity, yet
withal charged him with all severity that whatsoever opinion though never so
heterodox, he was possessed of in his judgment, he should not deny it for any
wordly preferment; but if those things which he was said to have disputed for
in the schools were not his judgment, he should then expose himself to
examination to clear himself of those aspersions: his answer to me was, that he
had not maintained any thing that way as his judgment, and that he doubted not
of giving satisfaction in any reasonable way that could be expected: Whereupon
I writ to St. John's College, that I wondered any thing uttered by way of dispute
in those tumultuary velitations, should be esteemed an argument of a man's
judgment, and that Sir Conyers was ready to give satisfaction to ought could
be alleged against him: But I was answered, that the time of election being
now come, the suspicion that was conceived of him could not be removed in such
an instant, and that therefore it was better to forbear sitting, which counsel
of his was accordingly followed.

So the poor young man destitute of maintinance, was not able to continue
longer in the College, but retired to a poor employment into Norfolk, where he
has lived near the space of a whole year; during which time, what his
behavior has been, and what opinion the religious and well affected of that
place have of him, this testimony of men well known to some members of this
Committee, which I desire may be rehearsed before you, will make it appear.

Norff.
These are to certify all whom it may concern, that Mr Tobias Conyers now
resident in Hapton, has, during his abode here, been blameless in his life and
conversation, useful in teaching of children, and painful and industrious in
his calling and studies: And that from time to time he has showed good
affections to the present Government, and setlement of the Common wealth; and
has been desirous after the best things, and expressed much longing after
communion with God in holy duties, and ordinances; and has labored to promote
the cause of God to the utmost of his power, as he has had opportunity;
declaring much love to the truth, preferring the society of the godly, and
turning from such as are otherwise minded: All which things, we whose names are
underwritten do very freely and heartily testify this 11th of February 1650.

John Reymes. Edward Wail Pastor of the Church at Hapton. Nathaneel Brewster
Minister of Neatshead Michael Whitefoot.


So you see the man was no original malignant, nor was he ever any drunkard, or
otherwise scandalous person, but only for a short time seduced, and quickly
cured of his distemper: as for a scandal which 'twas his unhappiness to fall
into, he received then condign punishment, and therefore ought not to be
punished again for the same, especially his life both before and after being
exemplarily virtuous; and besides, having voluntarily upon the first coming out
of the Act of Parliament for that purpose subscribed the engagement, which in
other cases has been adjudged alone sufficient to qualify a man for keeping
his old, or acquiring new preferment.

As for Blasphemy, it is by the Master only alleged, not proved; nor do I
belleve he was ever guilty of it in the least. But with Episcopal spirits
every petty difference in opinion is a capital crime: and not to say Amen
(though without understanding) to each article of their voluminous Creed, is
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. They not considering, that the passage of
religious spirits is, as through many tribulations into the Kingdom of God, so
through many errors into the true knowledge of God.

Besides, it might have been considered, that his election was only as
Probationer, during which time, being a whole year, he was to stand upon his
good behavior, and if in all that time he gave just cause of offense, was by
our statute to be denied admittance into perpetuity of his possession. And
therefore the danger of him, if there were any, was not considerable. But that
we have one in our College put in by this Committee, who since the date of this
misdemeanor was so malignant, as publicly, in the face of all the College
assembled together, to parallel the Parliament for their proceedings with the
King, etc. with the Powder treason of the Jesuits and Papists, contrived and
carried on under pretense of Religion. Now this man being made Fellow by this
Committee, we did not in regard he was otherwise a man of good desert, oppose
our selves against his admittance, only in regard of his late disaffection,
petitioned this Commitee, that he might according to our statute stand upon his
good behavior for one year before a final settlement in his place: But in
this case, the Master neither regarding the obligation upon him by our statute,
nor by his engagement to be true and faithful to the Common wealth of England,
would either petition himself, nor join with us in that petition: whence it is
apparent, that the great object of his distaste here was not the malignancy,
but only the person, now clear enough from that disease.

Lastly, though I will not take upon me to enquire into the hidden mysteries of
a superior power, yet this I shall say, that that power which can eject a man
out of his legal possession for a misdemeanor of a date of near two years
old, committed and punished in the days of his minority, long before his
entrance into that possession, must sure be very transcendent, and above that
of any, either common Law or Chancery, that I have heard of.

The Committee having heard what they thought fit on both sides, we were
commanded according to custom to withdraw, and the doors to be shut.

What was said pro, or con at the private debate, the man with the great beard
only knows. But the result was as follows.

April. 10. 1651. At the Committee for Reformation of the Universities.
FOrasmuch as it appears to this Committee, that Tobias Conyers elected by the
Fellows of Peterhouse into the Fellowship of Master Hanscomb, has been guilty
of scandal, and malignancy, therefore this Committee adjudg him unfit for this
Fellowship.

Resolved,

That this Committee will choose a Fellow into the place of Mr. Conyers this day
fortnight.

One who was the Masters Sizar, and who, for ought that yet appears, never
subscribed the engagement, is now put into this Fellowship.

These things I have been enforced to publish for vindication of the Colleges
repute from those scandals endeavuor'd to be thrown upon it by our unworthy
Master; in which (being little more then a bare historical narrative of the
proceedings) I do not in the least take upon me to judge of the honorable
Committees severity in this their censure upon Sir Conyers, only to make it
appear, that the President and Fellows in their choice of him did nothing but
what was agreeable to their trust, both as members of the College and
Commonwealth.

A Letter from our President to one of the Society in London, upon occasion of
the Masters man being made Fellow of our College.
Sir,
I Marvel Master Becher neglected his place in this fashion, he did. For my
part, I desired him much to the contrary. Sir Church is admitted into it; after
seven days (prefixed by the Fellows) were expired. Sr. Heywood the under
buttler did bring yesterday morning an other order for Mr. Majors place; which
we do much wonder at, seeing Dr. Seaman at his last being at Cambridg, did both
give several statutable reasons why this place ought to be kept void: as also
did promise to do his best endeavors that it might be also. Being then, that
D. Seaman and the major part of our Society are now at London, I thought good
to make a stop of Sr Heywoods admission for seven days, till we hear what your
mind is. I do not know where Mr. Hotham, Mr. Clarke, and Mr. Brock have their
lodgings at London, otherwise I had written to them also. I have acquainted Dr.
Seaman to the selfsame purpose yesterday, being Tuesday, and the 24. of
December, at the receipt of that Order. I sent my letter unto him with one
Green a Cambridg letter Carrier, and delivered the letter my self unto him,
upon Tuesday last before he went. I pray present my best respects to your
brother Doctor, and our Society now at London. With the wishes of a happy new
year I rest; desiring to here of you this week.

Sr. I am yours, etc. I. H.
Cambridg, in haste, January 25. 1650.

A Letter from one of our Society upon the same occasion, to another of our
Fellows then in London.
Sir,
SInce your departure, there is another Mandamus come to supply Mr. Majors
Fellowship, Sr. Heywood has got it and expects his admission daily; but Dr.
Francius has sent to the Master to know his resolution, as also the minds of
the Fellows which are in London, determining to defer his admission til he has
received your answers, or be ascertained whether you will vindicate the College
from such a manifest violation, and intrusion, or not. Sr, there are a
considerable part of our Society now in London, it much concerns you to act
your utmost, to deliver your self and the College from so great a detriment:
You may press the Master with those protestations which he made the last time
he was with us, whether they are not incompatible with Sr. Heywoods Mandate, or
whether his vow which openly he expressed, to keep void that Fellowship, be
consonant with the obtaining an instrument to put in his own man. Sr, you know
the manner of his proceedings better then I can inform you, only I thought it
necessary to give you notice of it, lest the seven days should be expired
before you were acquainted with it. I have nothing else but my service to
present unto yourself, Mr. Hotham, and all the Society with you, and to
subscribe my self.

Yours, etc. C. M.
December. ^1. -- 50.

FINIS.

