THE Complete Miner: OR A COLLECTION OF THE LAWS, LIBERTIES, Ancient Customs,
Rules, Orders, Articles and Privileges of the several Mines and Miners in the
Counties of Derby, Gloucester and Somerset: together with the Art of Dialling,
and levelling Groves, and with an Explication of the Terms of Art used in this
Book.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1688.

TO ALL MINERS AND Maintainers of Mines within the Wapentake of Wirksworth, or
elsewhere: The Author wishes Happiness and Prosperity in LEAD-MINES.
HOnest Countrymen, knowing there is nothing extant amongst you concerning
your Liberties, Laws and Customs, save only some few Written Copies, which
thousands of Miners and maintainers of Mines have not; nor if they had, would
be much the better, by reason few can read them: Therefore, that every one that
can but read might know the Customs of the Mines, was the cause I published this
Book, which will much profit, and be a ready help to all that is concerned in
mineral Affairs; in regard you have here in a Vade Mecum, or pocket Companion,
not only the Liberties, Laws and Customs of the Mines, which all miners and
maintainers ought to know* but you have also such other things, as are, or may
be necessary to be known to such persons, as are, or may be concerned in Trials
upon Juries, or twenty four men; Bonum quo comunius, eo melius.

I shall not stand to make Apology for the Book, well knowing Momo enim judice
tertare frustra; and doubtless this may fall into the hands of such Critics,
who Zoilus and Momus-like, will be ready to speak ill of what is another, but
ever fancying and affecting their own; which sort of self-conceited Opinionists
I do not think, neither desire to please; But if such rash and hasty Censurers
might be premonisht, it is requisite they sometimes admit their judgments the
possibility of erring. To conclude, it is thee, honest miner, for whom I
published this, referring those that are curious to our Phylosophia Subterranea,
which perhaps may be published e're long: However, in the interim, I offer, and
not urge, this to their uses, whose occasions shall require it, and rest a
Friend to any ingeniously affected.

From my Lodging in Warwick Lane, near the College of Physicians, London.
THOMAS HOUGHTON.
November. 12. 1680.
Ad Amicum suum valde Ingenium, Thomam Houghton.
Perdoctae sobles salve cordata Minervae,
Scrutatur Terrae; Carmine lectus eris:
Tu Mineralia Vincis, Tu doctaque Mathesi
Et, Caeli, terrae viscera summa petis. Hinetua fama volat, quoque spargitur
undique nomen,
Quaque capessisti vadere perge via.
Nunc RARA AVIS adi, refera multumque revolve Magna sub exiguo Corpore Gaza
latet.
Robertus Webster.

To his loving Friend THOMAS HOVGHTON.
Up Muse, besmear the Authors, head with Thus,
Give Him's right Name, Miners Mercurius.
Who Comet-like, all others does outshine,
Within the Sphere or Circuit of the Mine;
Let Miners honor, and their Guide Thee make,
For why? it is Thee must be their Burning-Drake:
Therefore, great Meteor, let thy light immense,
Direct all Miners with its Influence; Give's Phylosophia, which will stupifie
Our Academicks, and doubtless thereby
Thee (RARA AVIS IN TERRIS) they will know
TO be the true Nigro similliam Cygno.
John Howard,
next door to the Half Moon in Black-Fryars.
At the Great Court Barmoot for the Lead-Mines, held at Wirksworth, for the
Soak and Wapentake of Wirks-worth in the County of Der by, the 10th. of
October, in the year of our Lord 1665.
The Inquisition of the great late Inquest,
taken upon the Oaths of, To. Haywood. To. Sage. Rich. Huxton. Antho. Cotteril.
Edw. Weatcroft. John Swallow. Antho. Gell. John Creswel. John Topliss. George
Wittacre. Anthony Low. James Holehouse. To. Tipping. Mat. Latham. Hen Coats.
John Briddon Edw. Bradshal Tho. Daken. Pet. Rawling Fran. Worthy. Edw. Rooper.
John Twigg. Ralph Huge. John Roose.


ARTICLE I.
WE say upon our Oaths, That by the ancient Custom of the Mines within the Soak
and Wapentake of Wirksworth: The Miners and Merchants at first chose themselves
an Officer, called a Bar-master, to be an indifferent person betwixt the Lord
of the Field, or Farmer, and the Miners, and betwixt the Miners and Merchants;
which Bar-master, upon finding any new Rake or Vein, did (upon notice given by
the Miner, deliver to the first finder two Meers of Ground in the same Vein;
each Mere in a Rake or Pipe-work containing 29 yards in length, and in a
flat-work 14 yards square; The which two Meers of Ground the Miner is to have,
one for his diligence in finding the Vein, and the other for mineral Right;
paying the Bar-Master or his Deputy one Dish of his first Ore therein gotten;
and then the Bar-master, or his Deputy, is to deliver to the Lord of the Field
or Farmer, one Mere of Ground in a new Vein, at either end of the aforesaid two
Meers half a Mere of Ground; and then every one in such Rake or Vein, one Mere,
or more, according to their taking.

ART. II.
We say if any Miner, or any other person set on an old Work, then the
Bar-master or his Deputy is but to deliver him one Mere of ground, on either
side his Shaft half a Mere of Ground; for which of mineral Right he is to pay
one Dish of his first Ore therein gotten; and the Lord of the Field, or Farmer,
is to have no half Mere in an old Work; but every one is to be served according
to his taking.

ART. III.
We say that no one ought to set on an old Work, or ancient Possession, without
the Bar-master or his Deputy, and one or more of the Grand Jury, or twenty four
of the Mine.

ART. IV.
We say, according to the custom of the Mines within the Wapentake of
Wirksworth, That Grooves, Shafts or Meers of Ground, kept in lawful possession,
are an Estate of Inheritance, and descend to the Heirs and Assigns of the
Owners; and Wives to have Dowry in them.

ART. V.
We say, If any man (to the knowledge of the Bar-master or his Deputy) be
lawfully possessed of a Mere or Meers of ground, and does not willingly desert
the same, but his Stows are gone by some sudden accident, or indirect means, it
shall not be lawful for any other person to take or possess such Mere or Meers
of ground, till the Bar-master or his Deputy set him thereon; and the
Bar-master or his Deputy, before he set gry man on such Mere or Meers of
ground, shall first take with him one or more of the Grand Jury, or four and
twenty of the Mine; and go to the place where the Possession, or Possessions,
or Stows stood, for such Mere or Meers of ground, and then make open
publication in the mineral time of the day, That the party or parties whose
Stows stood for such Mere or Meers of ground, are gone, or taken away as
aforesaid, that he or they shall (within four days after such publication)
come, and make good his or their Possessions for such Mere or Meers of ground;
But if the party fail to make good his or their Possession within four days
after, then the Bar-master or his Deputy, and the Grand-jury-man, that was at
such publication, may set on any other man on such Meers of ground, to work
according to custom.

ART. VI.
We say, that the Bar-master nor his Deputy, ought to lay forth nor measure any
man's ground, till Ore be gotten in the same ground to free it withal; and
when the ground is freed, it ought to be measured and laid forth, and
Meer-Stakes set the same day.

ART. VII.
We say, that every one ought to keep his ground in good and lawful Possession,
with Stows and Timber in men's sight; and that Crosses and Holes, without Stows
and Timber, can keep Possession but three days.

ART. VIII.
We say, that all men ought to work their ground truly, and chase their Stool
to their grounds end; and so each one from Mere to Mere, according to the
custom, unless they be justly hindered by Water, or for want of Wind; and in
such cases diligence ought to be used, to gain Wind, and to get out the Water.

ART. IX.
We say, that the Bar-master, or his Deputy, ought to walk the Mine once a week
at least, and where he sees a Mere of ground, which to his knowledge is
lawfully possessed, to stand unwrought three weeks together, and might be
wrought, not being hindered by Water, or for want of Wind, then he ought, if he
can conveniently, to give notice to the parties, that neglect to work according
to custom; Then he shall nick the Spindle, each week a nick, for three weeks
together; and if it be not wrought within that time, nor borrowed of the
Bar-master or his Deputy, then within two days after the last day of the said
three weeks, the Bar-master or his Deputy may lawfully set on another man on
such Mere or Meers of ground, to work according to custom; and if the
Bar-master neglect to do his duty herein, he shall forfeit five shillings to
the Lord of the Field, or Farmer.

ART. X.
We say, that if two several parties or more set Possessions for one and the
same thing, claiming for one and the same Mere of ground: Thereupon the party
grieved shall complain to the Bar-master, or his Deputy, who shall forthwith
bring with him four or more of the Grand Jury, or four and twenty, to view the
Possessions, and inform themselves the best way they can, who has the most
ancient and lawful Possession for that Mere of ground, and shall settle the
same, casting off the other, and cut out the Spindle of such Stows as they so
cast off; And if the party whose Possessions they so cast off, think he has
wrong thereby, and think he has a good Title to such Mere or Meers of ground,
he may put a new Spindle into his Stows; and any time within fourteen days
after such casting off, set them on again; thereupon giving the Barmaster or
his Deputy four pence, to arrest such Mere or Meers of ground, and so try his
Title: But if he set on his Stows, and do not arrest within fourteen days
after, as aforesaid, he shall incur a fine of forty shillings upon his head
for every such Offense; and the Bar-master or his Deputy ought forthwith to
burn his Stows, in the mineral time of the day; And then if he sets not on
another pair of Stows, and also arrest the next day after, his Title to such
Mere or Meers of ground shall be deemed unlawful, and to have no plea for the
same in Barmoot-Court.

ART. XI.
We say, that the Lord of the Field, or Farmer, shall at all times hereafter
provide and keep, betwixt Merchant, Buyer and Seller, a just and right Measure
or Dish, according to the ancient Gage, and such a number of them, as shall at
all times of the year conveniently measure all such Lead-Ore as is got in the
Wappentake of Wirksworth; and such Dishes ought to be seized every quarter of a
year, by the Brazen-Dish, in the presence of four or more of the Grand Jury, or
twenty four; and for a pain every time failing herein, to forfeit 3 s. 4 d.

ART. XII.
We say, that by the said Dish or Measure, the Lord of the Field, or Farmer, is
to take his Lot, which is the 13th. Dish or Measure, as it is justly and
customarily paid; But we say, that smytham nor forested Ore has not (within
the memory of man) paid, nor ought to pay any duties, or part, but Cope only.

ART. XIII.
We say, that for the payment of the said Lot, Miners within the Wappentake of
Wirksworth, ought to have liberty to work the ground within the Wapentake, and
to have Timber also in the King's Wastes to work their ground withal, and egress
and regress from the Highways to their Grooves and Mines.

ART. XIV.
We say, that the Bar-master, or his Deputy, ought to lay forth the Miners the
next way to the Highway, for going and coming to and from their work, and also
for carrying to and from their work, the running Water to wash their Ore withal.

ART. XV.
We say, (by the custom of the Mine) that all Miners and their Servants may
wash their Ore with Fat and Sieve upon their Works, so that they keep their
Fats close covered, and empty their Sludge into some convenient place, within
their length or quarter Cord, as the Bar-master, or his Deputy, shall appoint,
so that the Cattle of the owners or occupiers of the Land where such washing
is, may have no harm.

ART. XVI.
We say, (by the custom of the Mine within the Wapentake of Wirksworth) it is
lawful for all the Liege-people of this Nation to dig, delve, subvert, mine and
turn up all manner of Grounds, Lands, Meadows, Closes, Pastures, Moors, or
Marshes for Lead-Ore, within the said Wapentake, of whose Inheritance soever it
is, Dwelling-houses, Highways, Orchards, or Gardens excepted; But if any
arable grounds Lands, or Meadows be dug, delved, subverted, or mined, and
not wrought lawfully according to the custom of the Mine, then it may and shall
be lawful for the Inheritors of the ground so dug, subverted, and mined, the
same to fill up, at their will and pleasure.

ART. XVII.
We say, that no person or persons ought to keep any counterfeit Dish or
Measure in their Houses, Coes, or any other place, to measure Ore withal, but
every one ought to buy and sell by the Bar-master's lawful Dish, and no other
to be used or had; and every Buyer offending herein, shall forfeit for every
such Offense forty shillings to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer; and the
Sellers thereof shall forfeit their Ore, if it be taken at such time.

ART. XVIII.
We say, that if any poor Miner, or any other poor Person, have Ore (under a
Load) to measure, and the Bar-master or his Deputy have notice thereof, and do
not (upon warning and request) come to measure the same, then every such person
may lawfully take two of his Neighbors, and deliver his Ore to whom he will,
so that the customary Duties be paid.

ART. XIX.
We say, that the Bar-master, or his Deputy, shall see that measure be
indifferently made betwixt the Buyer and Seller; and the Buyer not to touch the
Dish, or to put in his hand to make measure, on pain to forfeit ten shillings.

ART. XX.
We say, that after the Ore is so measured, the Merchant, Buyer, or Miner, that
carries away the Ore, does pay to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer, Cope, being
six pence for every Load of Ore, nine Dishes to the Load; for the which Cope,
the Miners or Merchants have liberty to carry away the Ore, and sell and
dispose of it to whom they please, to their best advantage, without the
disturbance of any man.

ART. XXI.
We say, that if any person, or persons, will make any Claim or Title to any
Grooves, or Meers of ground, Rake, Vein, or Ore, he ought to arrest the same,
according to the custom of the Mine, and the Defendant ought to be bound in a
Bond (with sufficient Sureties for him to the Pliantiff) to answer at the next
Barmoot-Court, to such Actions as shall be brought against him, by the
Plaintiff, upon the said Arrestment; and after to yield so much Ore, or the
value thereof to the Plaintiff, if the Defendant be cast, by the Verdict of 12
men; as shall be gotten at such Grooves or Meers of ground, from the time of
such Arrest, till such Trial at the Barmoot-Court.

ART. XXII.
We say, that after any Arrest made, the Bar-master, or his Deputy, upon
request made, ought to appoint a Court-Barmoot within ten days, or as soon as
he can conveniently; And if the Plaintiff do not pursue his suit upon the
Arrest, he shall then lose six shillings eight pence to the Steward; and a
Nonsuit shall pass against him: And we say, that a Nonsuit is to be of the
same effect and validity with a Verdict; and every way to signisie as much; and
if the Defendant fail to make his defense, a Verdict shall pass against him for
his Default.

ART. XXIII.
We say, whosoever shall be condemned and cast by a Verdict of 12 men; or
otherwise, if a Jury be summoned, and upon calling appear, if the Plaintiff
will not go on, and follow his Suit, he shall pay four shillings for 12 men's
Dinners: And Pawns shall be put in on both parts, into the Bar-master, or his
Deputies hands, at the time of the Arrest, or within three days following.

ART. XXIV.
We say, that the Defendant ought to have six days time at least, before any
Court, to prepare himself for his Defense; and what Arrests are made within six
days next before the Court, the Defendant may, if he please, refuse to answer,
and not suffer any loss thereby; and such arrests made within six days, to be
void, unless both parties be willing to go on to Trial.

ART. XXV.
We say, that the Bar-master, or Steward, ought yearly to keep two great
Barmoot-Courts on the Mine, one about Easter, and the other about Michaelmas,
within fourteen days before or after the said times; and every three weeks a
Court, if need be yearly; If either Plaintiff or Defendant request a Court, he
is to keep one within ten days after such request, or forfeit ten shillings.

ART. XXVI.
We say, if any Groove, Shaft, or Mere of ground be arrested, all the Ore got
or measured at such Groove, Shaft, or Mere of ground, from the arrest to the
trial, is liable to the Arrest; And if the Verdict be found for the Plaintiff,
then the Defendant shall pay to him so much Ore, or the value thereof, as shall
appear by Evidence was gotten, or measured at such Groove, Shaft, or Mere of
ground, from the time of the Arrest, till the Trial: And when the Bar-master,
or his Deputy, makes such Arrest, he ought to take good security for the Ore
that is to be measured there, or carried away to any other place.

ART. XXVII.
We say, that honest and able men ought to be summoned for Jurors, out of every
Division within the Wapentake; and to be summoned as near the Court-day as may
be; and of every Division some to serve, unless some just cause be showed to
the contrary.

ART. XXVIII.
We say, that able fit man, if they be not Miners, if they have parts, and be
maintainers of Mines, and known by the Bar-master, or his Deputy, to understand
well the custom of the Mine; they ought to serve for Jurors, especially in
difficult and weighty matters and causes.

ART. XXIX.
We say, that one Verdict for wages due to Workmen, shall fully conclude and
determine. And for the Title that arises by contract, as by Gift, Sale, or
Exchange, (or the like) and also for right of Possession, for Shafts or Meers
of ground; two of the first Verdicts for one party, shall fully conclude the
Title.

ART. XXX.
We say, that when a Verdict is gone for either party, if he which has lost
will have another Trial for the Title, he ought to arrest within fourteen days
next after the Court, when the Verdict went against him; or else that Verdict
shall determine, and fully exclude him from any further Claim; unless that
longer time for workmanship be absolutely necessary to discover the truth: If
so, then the party grieved may within fourteen days cause four or more of the
Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, to view the work in question; and what time they
think fit for workmanship to discover the truth; that they may allow, giving
such their doings (under their hands) in writing to the Bar-master or his
Deputy of that Division: And if it proves the allowed time be too short, then
the grieved party may again procure four or more of the Grand Jury, or Twenty
Four, to view the work a second time; and if they then find that workmanship
has been duly made, and yet more time is requisite, they may give longer time
again, in manner as aforesaid: And then if the party grieved arrest not within
ten days after that time is eepired, that Verdict that went against him shall
fully conclude and determine the Title.

ART. XXXI.
We say that no person ought to sue for Mineral Debt, Ore, Grooves, Trespasses
in Grooves, or grounds in variance, but only in the Barmoot-Court; and if any
do the contrary, they shall lose their Debt and Ore for which they are in
controversy, [and shall pay the Charges in Law, and lose all their Grooves, or
Meers of ground, and parts thereof to the party grieved, till upon just
account, he have satisfaction for all his Charges and Expenses in and about
such Suits] to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer; Also such as sue out of the
Barmoot-Court, as aforesaid, ought to have no Benefit, nor Plea in
Barmoot-Court.

ART. XXXII.
We say, no Officer ought, for Trespass or Debt, to execute or serve any Writ,
Warrant, or Precept upon any Miner, being at his work on the Mine, nor when the
Miners come or go to the Barmoot-Court, but the Bar-master or his Deputy only.

ART. XXXIII.
We say, if two several parties, or more, be Groove-fellows, or Part-owners to
one Groove, or Mere of ground, and one or more of the Part-owners will not keep
company, nor pay his or their proportional part or parts of all such
Workmanship, and other Charges and Expenses as are necessary and conducing to
such Groove or Grooves, Mere or Meers of ground: Thereupon the party grieved
shall complain to the Bar-master, or his Deputy, who shall take with him two or
more of the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, and speak to the party or parties who
neglect or refuse to pay Charges, and keep Company as aforesaid, and give him
or them warning to come in within ten days to pay Charges and keep Company with
their Part-owners; and if (after warning given) the party or parties refuse to
pay Charges, or to come in and keep Company as aforesaid, then the Barmaster,
or his Deputy, and the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, at their meeting next
following (unless some just cause be showed to the contrary) may order the
party or parties, that have refused and neglected to pay Charges, and keep
company, that he or they shall come and pay Charges, and keep Company with his
or their Part-owners: And such Order of the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four is to be
binding, as though it was at Barmoot-Court.

ART. XXXIV.
We say, that when a Mere or Meers of ground are wrought under water, and by
reason thereof has stood many years unwrought, and the Owner or Owners of such
Mere or Meers of Ground do not use some effectual means to get forth the water,
to recover the same; and that the same might be wrought by the means of a
Sough, or Engine, and that for the public good, but is yet neglected:
Thereupon any person or persons, who are minded to disburse and lay forth
money, to recover such Works from water, may, at a great Barmoot-Court held at
Wirksworth, declare such their Intentions, in writing, to the Grand Jury, or
Twenty Four, and they shall take the same into serious consideration; and if
they know such works to have stood long, by reason of water, and no effectual
means used to win the same; and that the person or persons who desire to
undertake to win the same by Soughs, or otherwise, to be able men, and like to
perfect such a work: Thereupon the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four shall appoint a
day (a month after at least) for themselves, and the party that undertakes, and
all the Owners of such works, to meet at the place where such works are, and
this time of meeting shall be published by the Crier in the great Barmoot-Court,
that all men may take notice thereof. At such meeting the undertakers shall
give the Grand Jury, or Twenty four, to understand by what means they intend to
lay dry all such works, and to get out the water, for recovering the same; and
if the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, thereupon conceive the way and means they
propose is like, and effectual to recover such works from water, so that the
public may have advantage thereby, the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, shall
acquaint the Owners of such works with the Intentions of the undertakers,
concerning the recovery of such works from water, and the way and means they
propose for the doing of it. And any of the Owners of such works (if they
please) may join with the undertakers, paying their proportionable parts of the
Charge of such Soughs or Engines as shall be made to recover the same,
according to their parts, and enjoy the benefit thereof. And such of the Owners
of such works, as shall not (by themselves, or others by their authority)
appear at such meeting; or then neglect or refuse to join, and pay their
proportionable part or parts of charges of such Soughs or Engines as shall be
made and used for the recovery of such works from water, as aforesaid:
Thereupon the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, and Bar-master, or his Deputy, shall
have power to disposess such Owner or Owners from their part or parts, and to
assign and deliver possession of such part or parts to the undertakers thereof,
as aforesaid; withal, ordering, That the undertakers of such works shall give
to the Owners, that refuse and neglect, as aforesaid, such reasonable
satisfaction as the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, shall then think fit. And if it
happen, in the carrying on of the business for the recovery of such
Waterworks, that any difference arise betwixt the Undertakers and the Owners
of such works, or any of them, so that the work is obstructed thereby; then the
Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, being called together, shall have power to regulate
all such difference, whereby the work may be effectually accomplished for
public good.

ART. XXXV.
We say, that when any man is possessed of a Groove or Mere of ground, and has
found the Vein, and works therein, he ought to suffer his Neighbor, who is the
next Taker, and show him the best light and direction he can, which way, and
upon what point the Vein goes: But in case any man be so refractory as to deny
his Neighbor such a courtesy, then he may procure three or more of the
Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, to be summoned, and the Bar-master, or his Deputy,
may put them into his Groove who has the Vein in Work, where they may (by
using of a Dial, or some other Skill) show him that is the next Taker, which
way, and upon what point the Vein goes, so that he may know thereby where to
fink his Shaft to find the Vein; that the Field may be set forwards for the
public good; provided always, that such of the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, as
go into the Groove aforesaid, shall not do any other act or thing, or make any
other discovery of such Groove, save only to see which way, and upon what point
the Vein goes.

ART. XXXVI.
We say, that where any man is lawfully possessed of a Mere of ground, for any
Rake or Vein, and works the same truly according to the custom of the Mine; if
any other man shall set Possessions, at, or near his Fore-field; pretending for
a Cross-vein, or some other thing; and by workmanship shall be ^^ongly
suspected to work in the same Vein for which there is another in possession,
and truly works the same; thereupon the party grieved may procure the
Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, to be summoned to appear at the place in question;
They, or so many of them as appear, (being above twelve) shall view the whole
work; and if thereupon they find, by their best skill, the Thing in all
probability, to be one and the same; and yet for want of workmanship cannot
then plainly appear, then such of the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, as appear and
view, as aforesaid, shall give such their Opinions under their hands in
writing; withal, ordering who they conceit works wrongfully, forthwith to give
the party grieved good security for all the Ore got at the work in question,
till time and workmanship make the Truth appear; But if the party who is to
give security, refuse to give such security, then such of the Grand Jury, or
Twenty Four, as appear and view, as aforesaid, shall (by their Order under
their hands) appoint the Bar-master, or his Deputy, to seize and sequester all
the Ore got at the work in question, till workmanship do make the Truth appear,
to whom the Vein belongs; and when either party does conceit that workmanship
enough is made in it to make the Truth appear, then either of them may procure
the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, to be summoned again; and such of them as
appear, being above twelve, shall view the work in question; if then, by
workmanship, it may appear to whom the Ore and Vein belongs, they may order it
the same party to whom they conceive it due; and if either party think he has
wrong thereby, he may arrest, and have his Trial for his Right or Title.

ART. XXXVII.
We say, that no person shall come to any workman that works his ground truly,
upon any color or pretense to claim his ground, to hinder his Work, or to stop
the Field; but the first Workman shall only work, and the Claimer arrest, and
take the Law, and the Bar-master shall do him Law truly.

ART. XXXVIII.
We say, if any Vein or Rake go cross through another Rake or Vein, he that
comes to the Pee first shall have it, and may work therein, so far as he can
reach with a Pick, or Hack, having a helve three quarters of a yard long, so
that he stand wholly within his own cheeks, when he works such a Pee.

ART. XXXIX.
We say, that when two Veins go together, parted with a Rither, that it is
scarce discernable whether it be two Veins, or but one; in this case, so long
as the Rither may be taken down by firing on the one side, it is to be taken
and reputed but for one Vein; but in case the Rither be so thick that it cannot
be taken by firing on the one side, and the Veins go so asunder, for half a
Mere in length, then they are serviceable to the Miner, as two distinct Veins.

ART. XL.
We say, that any Miner, in an open Rake, may kindle and light his Fire, after
four of the clock in the afternoon; giving his Neighbor lawful warning thereof.

ART. XLI.
We say, if any Mines, or other person, do under-beat his Neighbors Mere, and
work out of his own Length into anothes man's Ground, the party so grieved may
procure two or more of the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, to view such a Trespass,
and order the party that has done the wrong, to give the party grieved full as
much Ore as the value thereof, as they conceive is gotten wrongfully, without
allowing any charge for getting the same; and the party offending herein shall
forfeit for every such Offense five shillings four pence; which fine the
Bar-master, or his Steward shall have.

ART. XLII.
We say, that if any Miner, or other person, does work, and keep lawful
possession of any Groove, Shaft, or Mere of ground, according to the custom of
the Mine; If any person or persons (by day or night) cast in, or fill up such
Shaft, Groove, or Mere of ground, however they shall be wrought; every such
person offending herein shall forfeit for every such offense ten pounds, the
one half to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer, and the other half to the
Bar-master, or Steward; and shall pay the party so much as will make good the
work again.

ART. XLIII.
We say, that if any person or persons shall at any time go to any Gentleman,
or other person, and give, sell, or exchange any part or parts of a Groove, or
Mere of ground in variance, for maintenance; every person so offending shall
thereby lose his Groove, or Mere of ground, or part thereof in variance; and
the Taker or Buyer shall forfeit ten pounds to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer.

ART. XLIV.
We say, that if it happen that any Miner, be killed, or slain, or damped upon
the Mine, within any Groove, neither Escheater, Coroner, or any other Officer
ought to meddle therewith, but the Bar-master, or his Deputy.

ART. XLV.
We say, that no person ought to bring any unlawful Weapon to the Mine; and for
every time so doing, to forfeit 3 s. 4 d. to the Steward, or Bar-master: And if
any make an Assault or Fray on the Mine; every such person ought to forfeit for
every such offense 40 s. and for every Bloodshed against the Peace, 5 s. the
one half to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer, and the other half to the
Bar-master, or Steward.

ART. XLVI.
We say, that every man that has a Wash-trough, ought to have seven foorts
about the same; and if any person dig, delve, or shovle in the said Trough
within the said space, he shall forfeit for every such Offense 12 d. to the
Steward: Also we say, that no person ought to dig, delve, or shovle near any
man's Bing-place, upon pain to forfeit 12 d. for every such Offense.

ART. XLVII.
We say, that no person or persons ought to cave upon any man's ground except
the Owner be present on the ground, on pain to forfeit the Ore they get to the
Owners of such ground, if they be taken: And also six pence to the Lord of the
Field, or Farmer, so often as they shall be taken therewith. Also, no Purchaser
ought to stop him, or any Miner, from any Wash-trough, at any time, on pain to
forfeit for every such Offense, 12 d. to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer. Also
no Caver ought to purchase in any man's ground, before eight of the clock in
the morning, nor after four in the afternoon, on pain to forfeit for every such
Offense, 12 d. to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer.

ART. XLVIII.
We say, that if any person or persons felloniously take away any Ore or other
Materials from any Groove, Shaft, or Mere of ground, Houses, Coes, or smilting
Houses, or elsewhere, if it be under the value of 13 d. half penny; the
Bar-master, or his Deputy, shall punish the Offender in the Stocks, or
otherwise, as is fit for such Offenders to be punished: But if the Ore or other
Materials be above 13 d. half penny, we say it is Felony.

ART. XLIX.
We say, that every Bar-master, or his Deputy, ought to have a pair of Stocks,
at some convenient place within his Division; the same to be built at the
charges of the Lord of the Field, or Farmer; by the benefit arising out of the
Fines; and such persons as swear, curse, or commit any other Misdemeanors on
the Mine, fit to be punished in the Stocks; the Bar-master, or his Deputy,
shall punish such Offenders, any time under the space of twelve hours, as the
Offense shall require.

ART. L.
We say, that no Miner ought to be fined or amerced by the Steward of the
Barmoot-Court for his not appearing there, unless he have lawful warning; But
if lawful warning and summons be given, and the Miner fail to come and appear,
according to custom; the first time is 2 d. and so at every Court (if occasion
ensue) is double the same, till it come to 5 s. 4 d. whereof 5 s. is due to the
Lord of the Field, or Farmer, and 4 d. to the Steward: And in case twenty four
Miners be summoned on a Jury, for a Trial betwixt party and party, to appear at
the Barmoot-Court; if there appear not 12 of them, whereby to have a full Jury,
then all such as fail in appearing herein, shall be fined, as the Bar-master,
or Steward, pleases, in any sum not exceeding 10 s. provided always, the have
lawful summons, and be able of Body to come.

ART. LI.
We say, that if any Groove, Shaft, or Mere of ground be in controversy, and
the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, be called to view that Shaft or Mere of ground,
or to do or perform any other duty concerning the same, and thereupon make an
Order, and give their opinions under their hands in writing, concerning such
Groove, Shaft, or Meers of ground in controversy: then such Order, or Opinion,
as the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, or part of them make, being above four, may
and ought to be produced in the Barmoot Court at the Trial, and there openly
read, and showed to the Jury, that they may take notice thereof as they think
fit.

ART. LII.
We say, that if the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, for the Mine, or part of them,
be (by the Bar-master, or his Deputy) called to view any Work within ground; or
to do, or perform any other Office, or Duty, concerning these, or any other
Articles, for the custom of the Mine; if any person or persons resist, or
hinder them therein, every one so offending shall forfeit for very such Offense
5 l. the one half to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer, and the other half to
the Bar-master, or Steward; And if any resist the Bar-master, or his Deputy, he
may, if need be, call any Miners to assist him, and the Grand Jury, or Twenty
Four, or part of them; And if any Miner neglect or refuse herein, he shall
forfeit for every such 5 s. to the Lord of the Field, or Farmer.

ART. LIII.
We say, that the Bar-master, or his Deputy, or the Steward, ought to levy and
collect all Fines and Forfeitures, due by custom of the Mine; and where any
person has not Ore to discharge the same, nor is not otherways able, or
willing to pay such Fines and Forfeitures; then the Bar-master, or his Deputy,
shall (for every such Offense) punish every such person in the Stocks, to sit
there twelve hours pining, with a paper on his Back, showing for what Offense
he sits there; But in case the Bar-master, or his Deputy, or the Steward, do
not henceforth levy and collect all Fines and Forfeitures, due by the custom of
the Mine, nor punish such Offenders in the Stocks, as are fit to be punished;
they shall forfeit for every such neglect 5 s. to the Lord of the Field, or
Farmer.

ART. LIVE.
We say, if any Miner or Miners, or any other person or persons, be possessed
of a Mere or Meers of ground, or part or parts thereof, and work it truly,
according to the custom of the Mine; if there be any person or persons that
shall or will make Claim or Title to the same, or any part thereof; that he or
they shall come and make their Claims (either by themselves, or by some Agent
employed by them) before the Bar-master, or his Deputy; and within six months
after the same shall be in workmanship; and if denied of what he or they shall
claim, he or they must arrest within fourteen days after the said claim and
denial, or else his or their Title shall be deemed unlawful, and to have no
plea for it in the Barmoot-Court.

ART. LV.
We say, whereas we find by daily experience, that great abuses, and many
inconveniences do arise, by persons taking part on both sides, and only
putting in their Pawns, and will neither maintain with Plaintiff nor Defendant
of their necessary Charges; and they so refusing to pay, poor men are many
times utterly undone and overthrown. Whereupon we order and agree, (that where
a^y controversy shall happen about any Groove or Grooves, Mere or Meers of
ground in question) where such suit arises, if any person or persons claim any
particular part or parts of a Mere of ground in question, where such suits
arises; if any person or persons make claim on both sides, and would only
defend his or their part or parts, by putting in his or their part or parts of
Pawns on both sides. We say, that it shall not be sufficient for any person or
persons to defend his or their part or parts by such means only; but he or they
must either take to the Plaintiff or Defendant, to defend his or their part or
parts, according to the custom of the Mine; that is to say, he shall pay his or
their part or parts of Charges, as shall be needful to make the Truth appear,
in trying of the Cause or Causes, as well as putting in their part or parts of
the 4 s. 6 d. for the Pawn or Pawns; and Charges being lawfully demanded of
such, before the Bar-master of the Liberty, and one or more of the Grand Jury,
or Twenty Four; if the party or parties of whom expenses in such Suits and
Trials is demanded, as aforesaid, do not pay the same charge within four days
after it is lawfully demanded; then such party or parties, refusing or
neglecting to pay the same after such demands, shall forfeit his or their part
or parts to the parties grieved, to be equally divided amongst them, according
to their proportionable parts.

ART. LVI.
We do order and say, that if any person that works for wages at any Groove or
Grooves, Shaft or Shafts, Mere or Meers of ground, within the said Soak and
Wapentake, and shall have his or their wages wrongfully detained or withheld
from him or them, by the Owner or Owners Servant, or Agents, at any of the said
Grooves, Shaft or Shafts, Mere or Meers of ground; that then, if such person or
persons, from whom such wages shall be due, or from his or their Servants or
Agents employed to manage their Mines, do not well and truly pay such wages as
shall be due to any Workman or Servant, within ten days after an account given,
and demand made of such person or persons Servant or Agents; that then in such
case, the Workman or Servant who shall be behind in arrear, and unpaid, as
aforesaid, may arrest, where such work was done, or elsewhere, within the said
Soak and Wapentake, his or their part or parts of Ore, or other Materials,
where such person or persons Servant or Agent (does not pay as aforesaid) are
concerned, or have any part or parts thereof, and so bring it to Trial at the
next Barmoot-Court And if such person or persons, Servants or Agents, Defendant
or Defendants shall be cast, and condemned by the Verdict of 12 men; then such
Defendant or Defendants shall pay all such wages forthwith, which shall be
given in damage, and 10 s. over and besides, for and toward the Costs of such
Workmen or Servants, Plaintiff or Plaintifs, in the recovery of such just
wages, if their Ore be sufficient under arrest to defray the said charge; but
if not, and such Defendant or Defendants refuse and neglect still to pay such
wages and charges, as aforesaid; then the Bar-master of the Liberty where the
said Defendants have any Grooves, shall have power to levy the same by Distress
and Sale of the Defendant or Defendants Ore, or Mineral Materials, if any; or
otherwise, he shall deliver all his or their Grooves, or parts thereof, to the
Plaintiff, to work until the Cost and Damages be fully paid, with all Charges
in working the same: And the Bar-master shall not neglect this present Article,
on pain to forfeit (to the King, or his Farmer) 5 s. 4 d. and to the party
grieved, 5 s. And if the Defendant or Defendants shall contemn or disobey this
Article, or hinder the Bar-master in the discharge of his Duty, that then every
such Offender shall forfeit for every such Offense 20 s. to the Kings Majesty,
or to his Farmer.

ART. LVII.
Also we order and say, that from henceforth, when any person or persons shall
complain at any great Barmoot-Court, for want of Company and Charges, that such
Complainants shall have a just Bill of Charges (if such can be had,) annexed to
the Bill of Complaint, which the Twenty Four shall have power to determine: Or,
at least, he or they shall declare upon his or their Oaths, to the Grand Jury,
or Twenty Four, the gross sum or sums of Money, at such Groove or Grooves where
such Part-owners are complained against, for want of Company, and Charges, as
the said Part-owners shall be behind and in arrear; which sum or sums shall be
set down in the Order or Verdict of the Grand jury, or Twenty Four; And if such
Sum or Sums be not paid into the respective Bar-master's hands (for the use of
the said Complainants.) within ten days after warning given them; then the
Bar-master may and shall deliver Possession, according to the said Order: But
if the person or persons complained against, or their Agents, be not resident
within the Soak and Wapentake of Wirksworth; or if upon diligent enquiry made
by the Bar-master, within twenty days after the said Order to him delivered,
that such person or persons cannot be found to be resident, nor his Agents, as
aforesaid; that then (in such case, the Bar-master may take with him one or
more of the Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, and go to the Groove or Grooves, Mere
or Meers of ground, where such Company and Charges are wanting; and there in
the Mineral time of the day, openly declare, That such person or persons shall
come in, and keep company, and pay such charges, as is contained in the said
Order, within ten days after, or lose his or their part or parts. And if such
charges be not paid according to the said Order, then the Bar-master, or his
Deputy, may, and shall deliver possession, according to the said Order, to the
said Complainants: And the Bar-master shall not neglect his duty herein, on
pain to forfeit 10 s. to the King or his Farmer.

ART. LVIII.
We say, that no person or persons shall let, hinder, or deny the Bar-master
and Twenty Four, or any of them, by firing, or any other ways or means
whatsoever, from going into any of their Grooves, Shaft or Shafts, Mere or
Meers of ground, to view and see whether any wrong or trespass be committed
between party or party: Nor for plumming and dialing in any of their Grooves,
Shafts, or Meers of ground, for the end, and setting straight of matters in
controversy, on pain of every one so offending to forfeit for every such
offense, 40 s. of good and lawful English money, whereof, 20 to the Kings
Majesty, or his Farmer, and the other 20 to the party wronged or grieved;
provided always, that the Bar-master and Twenty Four, or any two or more of
them, come at lawful and convenient times of the day.

ART. LIX.
The Grand Jury or Twenty Four for the Body of the Mine, do order and say, that
from henceforth, every Miner and Maintainer of Mines, within the Soak and
Wapentake of Wirksworth, shall prefer their Bills of Complaint at every Great
Barmoot-Court, against their part-owner or part-owners, Groove fellow or
Groove-fellows, in open Court, during the time of the Stewards sitting, and not
after any adjournment; to the end that every person concerned, or against whom
any Bill is preferred, may have legal Proceedings, in open Court, according to
the Custom of the Mine.

The End of the First Book.
THE Second BOOK.
The Form of a Bill of Complaint, put up at the Great Barmoot-Court.
At the Great Barmoot-Court held at Wirksworth, April 12. 1681.
JOhn Woodhave, and his Groove-Fellows, complain themselves to this Court,
against William Holdfast and Robert Non-pay, or any one that claims under them,
or either of them, for not coming in and keeping company with them at the Old
man's Groove, on the Cole-Hills, in the pens Rake, being within the Liberty of
Wirksworth, and Jurisdiction of this Court; and for not paying the sum of 4 l.
which is due for them to pay; being 40 s. apiece for either of their eight
parts to pay; And therefore prays relief.

The Form of a Cross-bill, at the same Court.
At the Great Barmoot-Court held at Wirksworth, for the Soak and Wapentake of
Wirksworth, Ap. 12. 1681.
Whereas John Woodhave, and his Groove-Fellows, have complained themselves to
this Court, against William Holdfast, and Robert Non-pay, or any that claims
under them, or either of them, for not coming in and keeping company with them
at the Old man's Groove on the Cole-Hills, being within the Liberty of
Wirksworth, and Jurisdiction of this Court, and for not paying the sum of 4 l.
which they say is due for them to pay, being 40 s. apiece for either of our
eight parts; We the aforesaid William Holdfast, and Robert Nonpay, do hereby
declare to prove the payment of the aforesaid 4 l. being 40 s. for either of
our eight parts; And therefore pray to be dismissed.

At the Great Barmoot-Court held at Wirksworth, Apr. 12. 1681.
The Names of the Jurors, and their Verdict upon the aforesaid Bill. John Hill.
Anthony Wood. William Ward. William Stone. Henry Stafford. Adam Bell. Clement
Clough. Thomas Twigg. Robert Stand. William Winkat. Henry Neerheed. Jose.
Knowsnot. Robert Letslip. William Castby. Adam Smoker. Thomas Sheppard. Anthony
Long. Richard Short. Gervis Standby. John Hanger. Abraham Woodwit. Samuel
Wagstaffe. Elias Pool. Martin Spenser.


We the said Jurors, being elected, sworn and charged, do (upon our Oaths)
order and say, That William Holdfast, and Robert Non-pay, or any one that
claims under them, or either of them, shall come in and keep company with John
Woodhave, and his Groove-Fellows; and shall pay the sum of 4 l. being 40 s.
apiece for either of their eight parts to pay, which they are behind and in
arrear, at the Old man's Groove, on the Cole-Hills, being within the Liberty of
Wirksworth and Jurisdiction of this Court, within ten days after lawful warning
given, or publication made, according to the Article, or lose their parts.

Then you must return the Cross-Bill Ignoramus.

The Form of a Bill at the small Court Barmoot, for trial of Titles.
At the small Court Barmoot held at -- the 13th. day of Apr. 1681.
Edward Wood, and his Groove-Fellows, complain themselves to this Court,
against James Wild, and his Groove-Fellows, for unjustly entering into, and
detaining from the complainants one Founder mere of ground in a Cross-rake,
discovered out of the great White Rake, within the Liberty of Crumford and
Jurisdiction of this Court (on Crumford-Moor) and also one First-Taker-Meer of
ground Eastward, or a Possession for a First-Taker-Meer; and for getting
therein, and carrying away, One thousand Loads of the Plaintiffs Lead-Ore, and
converting it to the Defendants own use, to the Plaintiffs Damage of a Thousand
and fifty Pounds; And thereupon they bring their suit, and crave relief.

The Defendants appear, and plead the 6 months Article in Bar.
Jurors Names. E. D. A. B. F. T. E. W. R. C. A. T. A. H. J. H. T. R. H. C. T.
P. W. F.

Verdict. We the said Jurors, being elected, sworn and charged to say the Truth
in the premises, upon our Oaths say, That the Defendants are not guilty of
entering into and detaining from the Complainants, one Founder-meer of ground in
a Cross-Rake, discovered out of the great white Rake, within the Liberty of
Crumford, and Jurisdiction of this Court; (on Crumford Moor) nor for entering
into one First-taker-meer Eastward, as in the Bill is set forth. Therefore
(according to several Customs and Articles used within the said Soak and
Wapentake) upon our Oaths do further say, That the Complainants shall pay 4 s.
for 12 men's Dinners, etc.

The Form of a Bill put to the Twenty Four, when called to view a Mine in
question.
William Fainwood, and John Haveall, and their Grove-fellows, to the
Grand Jury, or Twenty Four, for the Soak and Wapentake of Wirksworth; being
called to the Gang-Rake, on Middletown moor, within the Liberty of Middletown
aforesaid, the 16th. of April, 1681.
You are desired to go down at the Hedge-shaft, and so through the Drift, and
down the Turn, and then through the Drift at the Turn-foot, and so through the
King's half Mere, then through the hole at the Rither point into Bates work,
and so up his Turn and Shaft to the Day, and to give your opinions, whether it
be not all one and the same Vein.

Then as many as judge it to be one and the same Vein, write their opinions, if
they exceed 12.

Some Examples of Dialling.
HAving provided your self of a Dial in a square Box, or a long square Box,
which is better; and also of a 2 foot Rule; and a String or Cord with a Plummet
at the end: Suppose you be desired, or (to try your own skill) would know the
exact depth of a Hading Shaft and Turn, and how far they are driven in that
Mere of ground to an inch. First cause some one to go down the Shaft, then let
your Cord or String down after him as far as you can, till it touch somewhere
on the side, observing the most convenient place at the Stows, where the String
will go down deepest and not touch the sides, and where the Plummet touches the
side, bid him make a mark at the end thereof; Then the String hanging there,
apply the side of your Dial thereto, as near crossing the Rake as you can judge
by the hading below, and observe what point the Needle stands on, which here
you may suppose to be 52. and this point you must keep for your square; then
pull up the String, and measure it, and set the length thereof down in Rules
and Inches, under the word Depth, as you may see in the Example following,
which you may suppose here to be 24 Rules, and Inches 00; which when you have
set down, and the point 52 directly over against it; then go down to the place
where he made the mark in the Shaft, and because your Shaft hades, put one end
of your Rule to the place where he made the mark, and lay the Rule cross into
the Shaft; then apply your Dial to the edge of the Rule, and wave the Dial and
Rule up and down together till you see the Needle stand upon 52, your square
point; then from the most convenient place of your Rule, (whether it be at the
end, or in the middle, where the Cord will go down the deepest and not touch
the sides) there hold the Cord, and where it touches the side at the end below,
there bid him make a mark; then (observing what Inches it lies against at the
Rule, as here at 22.) pull up the Cord, and measure the length thereof, from
the Rule to the mark below; not forgetting to hold your finger fast upon the
Cord, which you may suppose to be 16 Rules; which (because you are plumming)
must be set down under Depth; Then, having set down your point 52, and the 22
Inches in their respective places, as in the Example following appears, go down
to the place where he made the last mark; and putting one end of your Rule
thereto, lay the other into the Shaft, and apply your Dial to the edge of the
Rule, and wave them up and down together as you did before, till you see the
Needle stand upon 52, the Rule and Dial lying close together, let down your
Cord as far as you can, till the Plummet touch the side below, holding the
string at the middle or end of the Rule, or where you see it will go down
deepest, and not hang on the sides; then bid him make a mark below, where the
Plummet touches the side; which done; pull up the Cord, and measure the length,
first observing at what Inches of the Rule you held it; and so set down your
Depth, Point and Length in their right places, which here you may suppose to be
26 Rules and 14 Inches, point 52, and the cross Length taken thereon, 1 Rule
and 2 Inches: Then go down to the mark he last made, and putting one end of the
Rule therein, lay the other cross, as before, and apply the side of the Dial to
the edge of the Rule, and wave them up and down till the Needle stands on 52;
then let down the string to the Shaft foot, and bid him make a mark below,
observing that the string touches no where on the sides, betwixt you and the
mark he makes at the Shaft foot; so observing what Inch the string lies against
at the Rule, pull it up and measure it, how many Rules it is, which you may
suppose here to be 28 Rules and 22 Inches, which set down, and the point 52,
and also the number of Inches where the string lies upon the Rule, which here
is 18 Inches; And so you have finished the Shaft: Then, going down to the Shaft
foot, hold the Dial where the mark was made, and set the Needle upon 52; and if
there be any occasion to take a short cross length, whereby to give you better
liberty to take a long length in the drift; then take the short length, the
Needy standing upon 52, apply the string parallel to the side of the Dial; and
having made a mark at the end of the short length, measure how many Rules and
Inches it is, (and set it down) which you may suppose here 1 Rule and 10
Inches: then set down the point directly against it, by which you took that
length as 52; which done, give him that is with you, the end of the string, and
let him go back into the Drift as far as he can, till the string begins to
touch somwhere on the side in the middle, and then holding one end of the
string in the mark you made, when you took the short length; observe that the
string touches no where betwixt him and you; then apply the side of your Dial
to the string, taking notice that the Dial and string lie straight one with
another, and so take the point the Needle stands on, which here you may suppose
to be 36; then let him that is at the other end, either make a mark on the
side, or drop a stone to the sole of the Drift, as you find occasion; which
done, draw the string back, and measure it, and set the length thereof down in
Rules and Inches, which you may here suppose to be 22 Rules and 8 Inches, and
over against it the point 36: Then go to the place where he dropped the stone, or
made the mark, and laying the Rule or String cross, one end being in the mark,
take a short length [as you find occasion] setting the Needle upon 52; which
done, set down the point, and this short length over against it, which here you
may, suppose to be 10 Inches: having so done, and made a mark, or dropped a Plum
at the end of these 10 Inches, this short length will give you liberty to take
a long length forwards in the Drift: So let him take the string, and go as far
backwards as he can, till the string almost touches somwhere in the middle on
the side; then (holding one end in the mark you last made, when you took the
short length) stretch the string straight, and apply the side of the Dial to
the string, and take the point the Needle stands on, which here you may suppose
to be 36; so set down the point, and bid him make a mark at the end; then pull
back the string and measure it, setting down the length directly against the
point you last took, which you may here suppose to be 24 Rules and 14 Inches;
and that to reach to the Turn-head. So being now come to the Turn-head, you
must fall to plumming again.

Therefore set the Needle upon 52, your old Square, and if there be any need,
to take a short length, whereby to give you liberty to plum the deeper in the
Turn, then you must take it; so bidding him go down the Turn, let the string
down after him, and where it touches on the side, let him make a mark; you
holding one end of your Rule in the mark that was made at the Turn-head, lay
the edge of the Rule to the side of the Dial, and wave them together till the
Needle stands upon 52; then set down that short length, which you may here
suppose to be 8 Inches, and pull up the string and measure it; which you may
here suppose to be 28 Rules and 6 Inches; set it down, and the point 52 also;
which done, go down to the mark he made; and because the Turn hades, put one
end of the Rule in the mark, and lay the other cross into the Turn; so put the
side of the Dial to the edge of the Rule and wave them together, till the
Needle stands upon 52: Then let the string down to the Turn-foot; if it will
not touch the sides betixt the Turn-foot and you; so holding the string at the
end of the Rule, set down this short length, which is 1 Rule, and the point 52;
and bidding him make a mark at the Turn-foot, measure the length, which you and
2 Inches; And so you have plummed the Turn.

If you have any further to Dial, observe to take your square point, where
there is occasion; for if you omit taking your square, you will lose your self
in the exactness of the grounds length, sometimes making it more, and sometimes
less than really it is, and so commit great error, when you come to Dial it
obove ground: You must also take care that you hold your Rule level, when you
take your cross lengths, and also your string when you take lengths in Drifts;
and by that means you will have the exact depth: You must also observe that
your Rule and string lie parallel with the edge of your Dial, that is, equally
at both ends; or else you will miss in taking the true point. Under ground the
Dial is guided by the string; but above ground the string is guided by the Dial.

Example.
Depth: Points. Length. Ru. Inch. Ru. Inch. 24. 00. 52: 00: 00. 16. 00. 52. 00.
22. 26. 14. 52. 01. 02. 28. 22. 52. 00. 18. 00. 00. 52. 01. 10. 00. 00. 36. 22
08. 00. 00. 52. 00. 10. 00: 00. 36. 24. 14. 28. 06. 52. 00. 08. 30. 02. 52. 01.
00. That is 152 Ru. -- 44 Inch.

And the Rule containing 2 Foot, it makes in all 307 Foot and 8 Inches for the
depth of the Shaft and Turn; which by Reduction makes 51 Fathoms, 1 Foot and 8
Inches, for the true depth of that Mine.

Example. 44 Inches make 3 Foot 8 Inches; which set below 304; and added makes
307 0/1 8/2

Now, if you would know how much your Shaft and Turn haded, you must add up the
lengths that stand against your square-point 52. As for Example.

Rules Inches 00. 22. 01. 02. 00. 18. 01. 10. 00. 10. 00. 08. 01. 00. Rules 03.
70. Inches.

Which by Reduction makes 11 Foot and 10 Inches; and so much your Shaft and
Turn hades. To know the exact length you have driven in your ground, without
laying it forth above, you must add up the Rules and Inches that stands under
the word Length, against your by-points; which in this Example is only Rules
22. and 8. Inches. and 24. and 14. That is, Rules 46. and 22. Inches.

Which by Reduction is 93 Foot and 10 Inches; which makes 31 Yards and 10
Inches you have driven; But if you are to dial and lay it out above ground, set
the Dial upon the point 52; and looking in your Note for 22 Inches, which was
the first length; put one end of the Rule to that place of the Stows where you
held the string when you began to plum the Shaft; the Rule lying to the side of
the Dial, and the Needle standing upon 52, make a mark at 22 Inches upon the
ground; and so you have done the first point: And in like manner you must do
all the rest, if you go over these points singly, one by one; but because here
is several square-points before you come to any by-point, that goes as the Rake
goes; therefore you may take all these square points together, first adding
their lengths up, and knowing how many Rules and Inches they make: As for
Example.

Ru. Inch. The first point is 00. 22. The second point is 01, 02. The third
point is 00. 18. The fourth point is 01. 10. Sum is 2. 52.

Which by Reduction makes 4. Rules and 4 Inches; that is, 3 yards wanting 8
Inches, and so much your Shaft hades; Therefore if you first measure out so
much upon your Cord, and hold one end at the same place on the Stows, and give
him the other end to go forwards with; then the side of the Dial lying straight
with the string, and the Needle standing upon 52, bid him make a mark there;
and so you have taken all the 4 points together, and found the mark above
ground, which he made at the Shaft-foot: Then go to the mark he made, and
looking in your Note what your next length is, (which is 22 Rules and 8 Inches)
measuring out so much upon your Cord; let him go forwards with one end, and
cause some one to hold the other end in the mark he last made; then look in
your Note for your point over against that length, which is 36; so setting the
Needle upon 36, let him that has the Plummetend bring the Cord to the side of
the Dial, you standing some distance from him that holds the other end in the
mark: Then (the Cord lying exactly even with the side of the Dial, and the
Needle standing upon 36) bid him make a mark at the end of the Plummet; and so
you have done that length; Go then to the last mark, and put one end of your
Rule in it, and set the Needle upon 52, laying the edge of the Rule to the
Dial, the length being but 10 Inches, make a mark there; Then look in your Note
for your next lengths which is 24 Rules and 14 Inches; which measure out, and
let him go on with the string, causing the other end to be held in the last
mark; and setting the Needle upon 36, the point over against that length, bid
him wave the Cord up and down till it lies exactly straight with the side of
the Dial; then bid him make a mark; so you have done that length. Lastly,
because the other 2 lengths are both to be taken upon one point, and there
being no other by-point betwixt them, therefore you may add the lengths
together (and take them at once) which is 1 Rule and 8 Inches, the Needle
standing upon 52; the end hereof is the place above ground directly over the
mark you made at the Turn-foot.

Now, to know whether you have dialled this exactly or no (without going over
it again) first add all your square lengths together: As for Example.

Ru. Inch. 00. 22. 01. 02. 00. 18. 01. 10. 00. 10. 00. 08. 01. 00. Sum is 5. 22.

Which conve^ted into Fe^t makes 11 Foot 10 Inches; and so much your Shaft and
Turn hades, and declines from the place you first begun to plum at the Stows:
Then add up the lengths you took Rake-ways, which was only 22. Ru. 08. Inch.
and 24. 14. 26 22

Which by Reduction is 93 Foot and 10 Inches, or 31 yards and 10 Inches: so
taking your Rule and measuring out the 46 Rules and 22 Inches; give him the
plummet-end to go Rake-ways, causing some one to hold the other end at the
place on the Stows where you first began to plum; then go you to the middle of
the string, and setting the Needle upon 36, bid him wave it up and down, till
you see the string lie exactly straight with the side of the Dial, then bid him
make a mark at the end: go to this mark, and measure out your square length,
which in all was 5 Rules and 22 Inches; give him the end, holding the other end
in the mark, set the Needle upon 52, bid him wave the string up and down, till
it lie parallel with the Box: Then bid him make a mark: And if this mark hit
the mark you made when you dialled it before, you have done the work exactly,
or else you have committed some Error.

Note, this Rule always holds true, when you take square lengths, and your
lengths forward, Rake-ways, or any ways, by one point: As here you took by the
point 36.

How to plum Shafts and Turns that hade, and beat into the end.
FIrst, let down your Cord as far as you can, holding it at the most convenient
place on the Stows, where it will go down deepest; and where the end touches
below bid him make a mark: Then apply your Dial to the side of the Cord,
(whilst it hangs there) and take that point you judge to be the nearest
crossing the Rake for your square point, which here you may suppose to be 48;
set the point down, pull up the string and measure it, which suppose here to be
26 Rules and 8 Inches; set them down: Then go down to the mark he made, put one
end of the Rule therein, laying the other cross into the Shaft, apply the Dial
to the edge of the Rule, the Needle standing upon 48, let down the Cord, (which
by reason that the Shaft beats much one way, the Plummet will fall upon the
end) and where it touches the end bid him make a mark, observing what Inches of
the Rule you hold the string at, which suppose here to be 18; set them down,
and the point 48 also; Then go down to the mark he made in the end of the
Shaft, and putting one end of your Rule or string (whether you find more
convenient) in that mark, lay out the other end toward the other end of the
Shaft, and take the nearest square point you can to 48; which here suppose to
be 32; make a mark at the end of the string, in the other end of the Shaft, if
you take it quite through; but if you take it half way by the Rule, then
perhaps the Rule may touch the lying-side, and then you must make a mark there,
the Needle standing upon 32, and set down the length taken upon that point; and
so afterward take a cross length from that mark upon your square 48; but if
you take it quite through the Shaft, to give more liberty to plum deeper the
next time; then measuring it, set down the length, and the point 32 over
against it, which here you may suppose to be 2 Rules and 8 Inches; which done,
hold one end of the string in that mark you made in the end of the Shaft, and
let down the Cord as far as you can, till it either touch the side or end of
the Shaft; which here you may suppose to touch both end and side in the corner
of the Shaft; bid him make a mark there: Then pull up the Cord, and measuring
it, set it down under Depth, which you may suppose to be 8 Rules and 10 Inches:
And here you are to take no point, this being only a plum: Then go down to the
mark, and put one end of the Rule therein, and lay the other against the Wough,
lengthways of the Shaft, and apply the Dial to the side of the Rule, the Needle
standing upon 52, make a mark at the end of your Rule, or where you see most
convenient; so counting the Inches, set them down, and the point 32, which here
suppose to be 23 Inches: But if it chance, when your Rule lies to the Wough,
you cannot take the point 32 exactly; In such case, put the end of the Rule 3
or 4 Inches, or more or less, as you see convenient, toward the hanging side,
but be sure it be level with the same mark, and then set down so many Inches
for a length as you judge it to be, and over against the square point 48: or if
it happen that the Wough flies back, so that the Rule needs not touch it, yet
keep the Rule and Dial together, the Needle standing upon 32, set down that
length you think most convenient to take, and then fall to plumming again: And
if your Plummet falls upon the end of the Shaft, or upon both end and side, as
before, yet take your length upon the point 32, by help of either of those ways
you last took it; that is to say, by shifting your Rule or String something
nearer the hanging side, taking care to set down those Inches you so allow
against your square point: But if it falls upon the side, and the Shaft has
left off underbeating, and goes straight, only hades, then lay your Rule cross
into the Shaft, and take your length upon the square point 48, till you have
finished plumming the Shaft: So by observing these directions well, you may
exactly plum and measure to an Inch, any Shafts, Turns, Lobs or Stumps, that
either hade, or hade and underbeat.

The Table of the foregoing Operation.
Depth. Points. Length. Ru. Inch. Ru. Inch. 26. 08. 48. 00. 00. 12. 10. 48. 00.
18. 00. 00. 32. 02. 08. 08. 10. 00. 00. 00. 00. 00. 32. 00. 23. Sum 46. Ru. 28.
Inch.

Which converted into Feet makes 94 Foot and 4 Inches; For you must observe,
that the 28 Inches, is equal to 1 Rule and 4 Inches, or 2 Foot 4 Inches: So if
you divide 94 Foot and 4 Inches by 6, the number of Feet in a Fathom, you will
find the Shaft to be 15 Fathoms, 4 Foot and 4 Inches deep: Now if you would
know how much the Shaft hades and under-beats, and would find the place above
ground where you made the mark last below; First, add the lengths together you
took upon your square point 48; which here was only 18 Inches: Then putting one
end of the Rule to that place of the Stows where you first began to plum, lay
the Dial to the side of the Rule, the Needle standing upon 48, make a mark
there: Then add together the lengths you took upon the point 32, which makes 3
Rules and 7 Inches; measure out so much, holding one end in the last mark, let
him go forwards with the other, set the Needle upon 32, the string lying
straight with the side of the Dial, bid him make a mark there, and this is the
exact place above ground right over that where you made the mark last below.

How to plum and dial in an open Rake, where there is many cross drifts and
turnings, and afterward to square the same above ground.
FIrst plum the Shaft, Turn, Lob and Stumps if there be any, by the directions
afore-delivered, choosing that point for your square which you judge goes
nearest cross to the Rake or Pipe; which suppose here to be 28; and take all
your cross lengths upon that point, till such time as you have done plumming,
unless it happen that your Plummet falls upon the end of the Shaft or Turn as
you Plum; If so, then take a new square to this square of 28, as you did in the
last Example before, or the nearest it you can; setting down the length and
points in order: Now suppose you come to take a length forwards into the Drift
at the Shaft foot, having first made a mark there where the Plum fell, let a
Boy hold one end of the string therein, and bid another man take the Plummet,
and go as far back into the Drift as he can, till the plum he has in his hand
touches the side; and stretching the string straight, observe that it touches
no where betwixt that end he holds in the mark and the Plummet the other man
has in his hand, (if it touches the side bid him come nearer) then apply the
Dial to the side of the string and when the string and Dial lie exactly
straight together, take the point the Needle stands on, which suppose here to
be 44: Set down the point, bid him make a mark at the Plummet: then pull back
the string and measure it; which suppose here to be 12 Rules and 14 Inches:
Then go to the mark he made hold one end of the string in it, bid him go back
into the Drift with the Plummet as far as he can, till the middle of the string
begins to touch the side; then stretching the string straight, observe that it
touches no where betwixt them that hold it, apply the Dial to the side of it,
and take the point the Needle stands on, which here suppose to be 50; set it
down, bidding him make a mark at the Plummet; pull back the string and measure
it, which suppose here to be 8 Rules and 6 Inches; which set down over against
the point: Then go to the last mark he made, hold one end of the string
therein, bid the other go back with the Plum as far as he can, stretching the
string straight, observe that it touches no where on the side betwixt them that
hold it; apply the side of your Dial parallel to the string, and take the point
the Needle stands on, which suppose here to be 48; set it down, bid him make a
mark at the end; pull back the string and measure it, which suppose here to be
14 Rules and 8 Inches; then go to that mark, and laying the string out as
before directed, take the point there, which suppose to be 52; set it down, and
making a mark at the end, let this be the Fore-field of your work: pull back
the string and measure it, which suppose to be 16 Rules and 10 Inches: Then go
up to the day, and having gone over the lengths and points you took in plumming
the Shaft, and found the mark above ground you made at the Shaft-foot, (which
you may do by the Rules and Directions already delivered,) measure out your
first length, 12 Rules and 14 Inches, hold one end of the string in the mark,
bid the other man go forwards with the Plummet, then do you set the Needle upon
44, (and bid him wave the string to and fro, till it lies exactly straight with
the side of the Dial,) the Needle standing upon that point, bid him make a mark
there; And so you have done your first point; and in like manner you must do
all the rest following, till you find the place above ground right over the
mark you made at the Fore-field below; which done, make a mark, and drive down
a Stake. Now if you would know how far you are driven in your Mere, you must
square the ground above: therefore tie one end of your Cord to this Stake, and
bid him go cross with the other end, 10, 20, or 30 yards, more or less, as you
think good; set the Needle upon 28, which was the square you took when you
first began to plum the Shaft, and do you stand in the middle (betwixt him that
holds the string, and the Stake) with the Dial, bid him move the string to and
fro, or do you shift, if you see cause, till the string lies exactly straight,
and equally even with the side of the Dial, the Needle being precisely upon 28,
bid him make a mark at the end, drive down a Stake there, and pulling the
string straight, fasten it to the Stake and leave it; Then come back to the
Shaft, having another string ready, put one end to that place of the Stows from
which you first began to plum, set your Needle upon that point, which is
exactly square, to that square you took when you first began to plum the Shaft,
which was 28; therefore the point that squares it is 44: then let him go
forwards with the string upon that point, till the string you fastened betwixt
the Stakes, go you into the middle, and apply the Dial to the side of the
string, bid him move it up and down till the Needle stands exactly upon 44;
then bid him make a mark where the strings cross one another, and drive down a
Stake there; So the distance measured from this Stake to the Stows is the true
length of your ground driven.

How to Plum, and Dial, and bring up Soughs, Drifts, or Addits, to hit any
place or depth desired; and to know whether a Sough begun will lay a Mine dry
or not.
HAving first plumed your Shaft, Turn, Lobs and Sumps by the Rules
afore-deliver'd, and knowing the depth thereof: Because few or any Miners
understand a Quadrant, the Instrument for this purpose may be like this
following, viz. A Water Stand, with one or more Channels; which the Miner may
make himself, upon an old seasoned Joyce, cutting a mortess therein a yard
long, or more, as his own discretion directs, plaining the same very well and
even.

dialing diagram

Having the Instrument ready, and a Staff or Pole of 5 or 6 yards long, which
you may call the Perpendicular-pole; as A B presents: D the mark levelled at:
m the Leveller looking over the Channel: a the hole above the Channel of Water,
through which the Leveller looks: e the Chanel full of Water. o the pin at the
end of the Channel n a piece of wood with three Iron-forks at the end, to stick
in the ground: L a Board set up cross over the Channel, having a little slit
under it, as at a: E F the Levelling-Line.

Suppose you be called to level a piece of ground, to know whether it will lay
dry a Mine (by a Sough) that is to be begun in any place appointed.
First view over the ground, then erect your Instrument at the Mine, and cause
some one to take the Pole, and go as far toward the place where you intend to
begin your Sough, as the length of your Pole will admit; then see that the
Water stands even in the Channel. look through the slit at a, and bid him shift
the Pole to and fro, till you see the pin at o interpose your eye and the mark
you level at, as D: which done, bid him make a mark at the foot of the Pole;
and shift your Instrument thither, and erect it there, setting down the length
of your Pole in Yards and Inches: Then do as you did before, till you have
finished the the whole, and come to the place where you intend to begin your
Sough: Then reducing your Poles into Fathoms, compare them with the depth of
your Mine, and thus you may know whether it will lay it dry or no.

Naturam ubique compendium am are. Sensibus haec imis (res uon est parva)
repone.

Ingraft these Precepts deep within your senses.

The Matter's good, and got by small Expenses.

from my Lodging near the Apothaceries-Hall in Black Friars, London. Feb. 8
1680/1.
FINIS.
The last Opperation in Dialling.
Depth. Points. Length. Ru. Inch. Ru. Inch. 00. 00. 28. 008 00. 00. 00. 44. 12.
14. 00. 00. 50. 08. 06. 00. 00. 48. 14. 08. 00. 00. 52. 16. 10.

A TABLE showing the CONTENTS of the Articles.
1. THe first shows, the Constitution of the Bar-Master, and what a Mere of
ground contains. 2. That every man must free the Old as well as New; that the
13 Dish is the Farmer's lot 3. That none shall set on Old Mines in possession
without the Bar-Master and Twenty Four. 4. That Grooves are no Entailed Estate
but pass by Assignment 5. Concerning possessions taken away by theft or other
indirect ways. 6. The time of laying forth the Miners ground. 7. That Crosses
and Holes serve but for 3 days, and that Timber and Stows gives the Right. 8.
That the Miner shall chase on his Mere. 9. That the Bar-master ought to give
warning, or nick the Stows, before he gives the ground away. 10. What is to be
done when two or more set Stows for one Mere in a Rake: 11. That the Farmer
shall provide impartial Dishes. 12. That Smytham nor Forested Ore pay no
Duties. 13. The Miners Liberties, and Timber from the Wastes. 14. The Miners
shall have ways to their Grooves. 15. Concerning Fatts and Sieves. 16. What
ground may be dug in. 17. That none shall keep false Gages. 18. What may be
done when the Bar-master neglects coming to measure. 19. The measure to be
made, and the penalty of shaking the Dish. 20. What Cope is, and for what paid.
21. That if any man claim, he ought to arrest, and the Dish to be bound with
Sureties. 22. That a Court is to be held within ten days, upon request. 23.
That Pawns shall be put in, or no Plea. 24. That two great Courts be kept. 25.
That the Defendant shall have six days before any Court. 26. That the Ore got
after arrest is liable to the Trial. 27. What men, and from whence, shall serve
for Jurors. 28. That Maintainers as well as Miners shall serve. 29. What
Verdicts for wages, and to prove Interest shall suffice. 30. The time of
arresting after Trial. 31. That none shall sue for Mineral Rights but in
Barmoot-Court. 32. That no Bailiff or Officer shall serve Writs or Warrants on
the Mine. 33. What is to be done when any refuses to maintain. 34. Concerning
Water-Mines, Soughs and Engines. 35. When any has found the Vein, they ought
to direct the next Taker. 36. What is to be done when one possesses the Front
of another Mine. 37. That the first Workman shall work, and the Claimer
arrest. 38. The liberty he has that finds a Pee. 39. How two Veins may be
known. 40. The time of firing. 41. Concerning trespassing in another ground.
42. The penalty of those that fill up other men's Grooves. 43. That none shall
pass away parts in variance for maintenance. 44. Who shall enquire of Mineral
homicide. 45. Concerning Weapons, and drawing Blood upon the Mine. 46. The
Liberty of Wash-troughs. 47. Concerning Caving on the Mine. 48. Concerning
Felony. 49. That Stocks ought to be kept on the Mines. 50. Concerning not
appearing at the Barmoot-Court. 51. What the 24 may do, when called to view
Mines in controversy. 52. That none shall hinder the 24 from doing their
Office. 53. That the Bar-master ought to collect all Fines and Forfeitures. 54.
That if any will make claim, he shall do it within six months after
workmanship. 55. Concerning putting in pawns and taking parts on both sides.
56. Concerning suing for wages. 57. Concerning putting in a Bill of Complaint.
58. That none shall hinder the 24 from Dialling. 59. That all persons shall put
up their Bills while the Court sits.
The Contents of the second BOOK.
1. THe form of a Bill of Complaint at the Great Barmoot-Court. 2. The form of
a Cross bill at the same Court. 3. The Jurors Verdict upon the aforesaid Bills.
4. The form of a Bill at the small Barmoot-Court. 5. The Jurors Verdict upon
that Bill: 6. The form of a Bill put to the 24, when called to view a Mine in
question. 7. Of Dialling and Levelling in general.
ERRATA:
Page 3. line 9. for refera read rejera. page 25. line 2. for eepired read
expired Art. 41. line 1. for Mines read Miners. Art. 46. line 3. for foorts r.
foots. p. 85. l. 21. for conveted r. converted. p. 86. l. 4. for 26. r. 46.

ADVERTISEMENT.
NOt long since having business (upon the account of Mines) to ride over the
west of England, and chiefly the Counties of Devonshire and Cornwall: This is
therefore to let all persons know, (whose inclinations directs them to deal in
Mines) That there is three Mines in the Counties aforesaid, which (if prudently
and well managed) might yield great advantage and profit to the Undertakers:
They are 20 or 30 miles distant one from another. Here follows a brief account
of one.

It Is an Old Mine not wrought since the momory of man; It had formerly an Addit
or Sough brought up to it, (but no one knows how long since) which is yet to
be seen: This Water-pipe was cut all open work to the Grass, and when it was
brought up to the Mine was six or seven yards deep and in length about a
hundred; being more like a Ditch than a Sough: It Is not wrought above 8 or 9
fathoms deep: There might be a Sough brought up (with reasonable charge) to lay
it dry 14 or 15 fathoms. It Is good Ore, which yields some Silver: When it was
last wrought it was for Refining. Any that desires to know further of it may
hear of me at the Paracelsus, a Chemist in Old Fishstreet, London.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE MINERS Terms of Art Used in this BOOK.
BAr-master is he which keeps the Gage or Dish to measure all Miners Ore, he
or his Servant being present when measured.

Brazen-Dish is the Standard by which the other Dishes are gaged, and is kept
in the King's Hall.

Cavers are any poor people that go about the Mines to beg or steal Ore from
the Miners.

Coes are little Houses which the Miners make over their Mines to lay the Ore
in.

Cope is 6 d. for every Load of Ore, nine Dishes making one Load.

Crosses are two Nicks cut on the Superficies of the Earth, thus which the
Miners make when they take the Ground to dig for Ore; This Cross gives the
Miners three days liberty to make and set on Stows: As many of these Crosses as
the Miner makes, so many Meers of Ground he may have in that Vein, if he set on
Stows within three days after the making his Cross or Crosses; but if he make
but one Cross, and a stander by makes the second, and a stranger makes the
third, every one is served with the next Mere, according as they have first or
last, sooner or later made their Cross or Crosses upon the Ground.

Dish is a Trough made of Wood, about 28 Inches long, 4 Inches deep and 6
Inches wide; by which all Miners measure their Ore: If any be taken selling
their Ore, not first measuring it by the Bar-masters Dish, and paying the Kings
Duties, the Miners incur that forfeiture which the 17th. Article has imposed
upon them.

Drift is a passage thus (...) cut out under the Earth betwixt Shaft and Shaft,
or Turn and Turn, or a passage or way wrought under the Earth to the end of a
Mere of ground or part of a Mere.

Farmer is the Lord of the Field; or one that farms the Lot and Cope of the
King.

Fodder of Lead at the Mines contains Twenty two hundred and a half weight,
though in London but Twenty hundred weight.

Forestid Ore is Ore that is gotten out of Earth and Dirt that has been washed
and Ore taken from it before.

Forfield is the furthest place that a man has wrought in his ground; or the
end of a Mere above-ground.

Groove is the Shaft or Pit sunk into the Earth; they are sometimes sunk in the
Vein and sometimes out.

Hack is a Tool that Miners use like a Mattock.

Hade is where any Shaft or Turn goes descending like the side of a House, or
like the descent of a steep Hill, then it is said to hade.

Load is nine Dishes of Ore; each Dish being about half a hundred weight.

Lobs are steps that ascend or descend within the Mines, as stairs up to and
down from a Chamber.

Lot is the 13th. Dish, Measure or Part of the Miners Ore, which the Bar-master
takes up for the King or the Farmer.

Mere contains Twenty nine yards in length in any Vein.

Meer-stake is a pin of wood drove into the superficies of the Earth, to show
the extent or end of a Mere of ground.

Old works are such that are either fallen in or stand unwrought.

Pipe is where the Ore runs forwards endways in a hole, and does not sink
downwards or in a Vein.

Pee is where two Veins meet and cross one another thus the place where they
meet is called the Pee.

Possession is the right to a Mere of ground, which Miners enjoy, by having
Stows upon that ground; and it is taken generally for the Stows themselves; For
it is the Stows that give Possession.

Pawn is a Pledge of Money put into the Bar-masters hand at the time when the
Plaintiff causes the Bar-master to arrest the Mine.

Pick is a Tool the Miners use to cut down the Cliffs and Rocks of stone to
make passages in the Earth.

Rither is a Stone or thin Cliff that lies in the Vein; The Ore sometimes runs
on both sides it; Sometimes this Rither is so thick, it parts the Vein and
makes one Vein two.

Quarter-Cord is seven yards and a quarter, which the Miner has cross ways of
his Vein on either side; for liberty to lay his Earth, Stones and Rubbish on,
and to wash and dress up his Ore.

Rake is the same with a Vein.

Shaft is the same with a Groove or Pit; They are sunk some ten some twenty
Fathoms deep into the Earth, more or less.

Stows are seven pieces of Wood (set upon the superficies of the Earth)
fastened with pins of wood together; Two are called Soul-trees; two
Stow-blades, two Hang benches and a Spindle: These Stows give a Miner, or any
person that owns them, as good right to a Mere or Meers of ground, (so that
every Mere have a pair of Stows set on them) as a Deed of Conveyance does to
any Purchaser.

Stool is where the Miners leave digging deeper, and work in the ends forwards;
the end before you is called the Stool.

Spindle is a piece of wood fastened into either Stow-blade.

Smytham is Lead Ore stamped and pounded down, like Powder or Sand, to cleanse
the Stones and Earth from the Ore.

Sough is also called an Addit; It is a passage like a Vault cut out under the
Earth, to drain the water from the Mines.

Smelting house is a House where they run and melt the Ore into Lead; One of
these will run a Tun in ten or twelve hours, A Fodder is their usual days work;
that is, Twenty two hundred and an half weight.

Sumps are holes sunk in Drifts to to the depth of two or three yards, more or
less.

Twenty four men, they are Twenty four men chosen every half year to redress
the grievances of the Mines and Miners; But every man generally serves his year
when chosen.

Next Taker is he that makes the next cross, or he that has the next Mere in
possession.

Turn is a Pit sunk in some part of a Drift; If the Mine be deep, there is many
of these Turns one below another.

Vein is that which is bounded with Woughs, and contains Ore, Spar, Cauck,
Clay, Chirt, Croil, Brown-hen, Pilcher-chirt, Gur, which the Philosophers calls
the Mother of Metals, and soil of all colors sometimes. When it bears Ore it
is called a quick Vein, when no Ore a dead Vein.

Woughs are the Walls or sides sometimes of hard stone, and sometimes soft;
when soft, then the Miners say they are rotten: These are the bounds of an
entry. Betwixt them all sorts of Earth, Stones and Ore lies, or, as
Philosophers say, grows.

The End of the Explanation.

