HALESIADOS. A MESSAGE FROM THE NORMANS, TO THE GENERAL of the Kentish Forces.
WITH The GENERALS Answer to the NORMANS Letter. Also two State-Pasquils, 1.
The Independent Suspended. 2. The Leveller Listed.


-- Famam spectate parentum. Printed in the Year, 1648.

HALESIADOS. A Message from the Normans, to the General of the Kentish Forces.
WOnder not Albion, that these lines are sent
From the Norman Duke to the General of Kent.
For wee'r concerned in the quarrel you are in,
And must expect you be what you have been
Victorious Champions; as, to give your due,
You showed your selves when we invaded you.
Your hearts, no doubt, are same, brave Kentish-men,
Fighting for that which you pretended then,
Your Liberties, Laws, Privileges, Rights,
All which you gained in being Opposites
To our time-memoriz'd Progenitour.
Whose valiant hand spread his Commanding Power
Over all the British I Will to Thames famed flood,
And by you only in his march withstood.
Shall those victorious State-triumphant Bays
Which decked your Phanes and Temples in those days,
From you receive their Winter: and decline
Through your remissness in this feverish time?
Have you no mind to vindicate your wrongs,
Which shrilly Echo with as many tongues
As there be Nations? If your easy rage
Be so soon calmed, why did ye first engage
Your County in this action: or foreslow
The pursuit of that which ye resolved to do?
When the Actor's on a Stage, he must not start,
His reputation prompts him to his Part.
And tell us, are ye not in self-same sphere
Of active worth and resolution here?
Are not the Eyes of all Spectators on you,
Wishing you may perform what does become you?
And will ye make retrait, when you may wing
Your fame, and right a State-devested King?
Is this the Copy which your valors show
To other parts in imitating you?
But you will say, "There Is not a helping hand
"That would supply our breach, were we at stand:
"All Is out of joint: the fabric of our State
"Finds only fuel to a Civil hate.
"The People strive to please the Consuls will,
"The Consuls in their Synods act what is ill:
"The City times it; cares not who is oppressed
"So she may eye her private interest.
Admit all these; you have a freeborn State,
Which were no County your Associate,
If ye retain your valor, can oppose
The insulting braves of such licentious foes
Who forage on your fortunes: and would eat
The labors of your hands for which ye sweat.
These came not to you, as we came to treat,
Or to debate, but violently beat,
And with their vaunts amate your Country Bores
By acting Execution at their doors.
Where be those Legates which ye sometimes sent
Unto our Army from the Wild of Kent?
These slighted our Proposalls, and would pledge
Their lives before they lost their privilege.
These could contest before by spritely power
With Britains sole subduing Conqueror,
And stand upon their terms, till they had got
That Grant which other Counties purchased not.
Naught could decline their aims: -- and is it just
Such valiant Spirits now should sleep in dust,
And lose their memory unto your shame,
Whose actions gave your County life and fame?
Who could endure to see an ancient Shrine
Reared to preserve the honor of his line,
And spreading family, to rubbish dashed,
And not remember the ashes that were placed
In that obsequious Urne? -- The Case is yours:
Those who derived their Liberties from ours;
Those who dis-valued popular command,
And would be free-indeniz'd in a Land
Subject to servile awe, lie there among you;
Would ye then know by us what does become you?
Preserve their fames; let not a matchless State
By spurious blood become degenerate.
Let those rich monumentall Columns bear
The Names of those for which they mounted were:
And in their Modells, represent them too
In acting those achievements they would do.
Now, should you answer, that you have not cause
To fight as they did, since ye have your Laws
And Liberties confirmed: nor ought deni'de
That might by Law of Arms be rectifide:
Hear your incensed friends: -- what can be free
Before an Independent Enemy?
When Soveraignties contemned, the Law abused,
And Senators just for their purpose chus'd;
When Arms make Laws: -- nay, when Astraeas seat
Such Centaurs and such Lapithees beget,
As the HALL where JUSTICE sometimes sat aray'd
In purple, now is a SANGUINE SHAMBLES made
Begor'd with Christian blood; that 't may appear
Justice has naught but Swords to manage there.
What can thou challenge for thy self, brave Kent,
But that thou have so many ages spent
In the fruition of thy Liberty,
But now ore-aw'd by lawless tyranny?
What a poor honor is it for man to say,
Once in my time I had a prosperous day?
Naught to oppose my wishes; all success
To crown the Abstract of mine happiness.
But Evning crowns the day: it is present state
Which humane frailty only levells at:
Those glorious beams of his which shone so clear,
When they are removed from his Hemisphear,
And with a sable sullen Cloud impall'd,
How may those vading rays of his be called
But Lights before his Death? Whose twinkling shine
Conducts him in the Exit of his time.
And such are you; -- for wherein could ye vant
That you had freedoms other Counties want;
As for example, The Son no loser by his Fathers attainture.
Father goes to the bough,
And's Son enjoyes his State, and goes to the plough:
With sundry other privileged powers
Conferred on you by our Ancestors:
When ye are stripped of these, and made as nak't,
As if such Bounties ye had never partak't?
Now tell us, do you not deserve the nooze
If what they got, your Cowardice shall lose?
Rouse up your Spirits then, and now prevent
This imputation to the Wild of Kent.
Retain your pristine prowess, and make good
That antient-line all-uncorrupted blood,
Which ye derive from them from whence ye came,
And who have chalked the way to crown your fame.
But you will ask; how is it that Normans are
So interested in their Kentish care
For shielding of the honor they have got?
We Will tell you, GENERAL, if you know it not.
Balance the skale aright, and you will confess
That we, in our concerns can do no less.
Ye, for an Impreze on your parcels set
That Kentishmen were never conquered yet.
Nay, that ye conquered us, when we did show
Our Soverainty over all your Isle save you.
And will you now that Badge of Honor lose
By yielding up the buckler unto those
Who are of such contemtible race
They dare not look a Norman in the face?
How may this correspond with valor, say,
You to quell us, who are more stout then they
(...) whom yee'r crushed? For tell us, are not these
Whom ye give way to plunder where they please;
Soldiers of fortune, and the dregs oth' Land,
Who would for pay be at the Turks command?
And must this Hand-full put brave Kent to the rout,
Who should they fall have small hope to recruite?
Must these their Orange-colour Ensigns rear
Before your Maid-stone and your Rochester
With a victorious Entry and Surprise?
Can Normans hear this, think you, with dry eyes?
For if the issue of these Acts prove true,
We were but Cowards to subscribe to you.
But we will renew no wounds; we will only make
This Application: as your fames at stake
It is too rich a gage for you to lose,
Or prostitute to such inferior foes.
Be your selves still: let us hear by next report
There Is not a Town, Grainge, Citadell nor Fort
Your sword has not re-gain'd. -- By sacred Powers,
Those precious ashes of your Ancestors,
Your glorious Conquests, and whatsoere is dear,
We do conjure you, like your selves appear
Death-fleighting Kentists: this will make you great,
In The Court of Honor, and restore your Seat
To her proceeding fame: Our Ears and Eyes
Thirst after your succeeding Victories:
Crown our desires, so shall your actions bring
Fame to your selves, and freedom to your King:
And be such patterns unto others too,
As Pious Zeal may do the same you do.
Let Us hear this from you, and we will never repent
Since Kent roles others, to be ruled by Kent.
It Is no dishonor, so our Stories show,
To be subdude by them that can subdue.
The GENERAL of Kent's Answer to the NORMANS Letter.
YOurs we received; and we confess, we are
Bound to your princely favors for your care
Of our succeeding honor; which shall be
So fortifide with Subjects loyalty,
As no Rebellious hand shall e're undo
That loyal Contract wee'r obliged to.
The Spirit of the Camomile is shown
By rising higher when it is trod down:
And precious Odours never smell so sweet
As when they are pounded: then they breath their heat
And balmy liquor: -- you, perchance, may hear
That we have born as much as Men can bear;
Taxes and Onerous Levies, as if sense
Had lost it self by Soldiers insolence.
All this we grant: our State has been distressed;
Our wrongs petitioned; but still unredrest;
With gilded promises, we often were fed,
And by Committees into error led:
For when we hoped they would our wrongs look over,
Our hopes grew weaker then they were before:
Delays spun our Conclusions, which wrought such
Deep impression, as our County sought
To right their wrongs, when Justice would not do it,
By force of Arms; and so we flew unto it.
But this induced us most: Some did complain
That diverse just petitioners were slain
Who came from neighboring Counties for redress,
Which they conceived would prove remediless
Without the Senats order: but so far
Were they from help, as they commenced a war
Upon those naked Plaintiffs, who lay dead
Even in that Room where Justice used to tread,
By Military Cohorts, who were sent
To execute this tragical Event.
This much enraged our Spirits: So as we
Presenting to our thoughts this injury,
Or barbarous practice rather, we intended
To lose our lives, or have these errors mended.
Nor was our Senate slower in their care
To have their powerful Army to prepare
To answer our Petition in the field,
The only choice Receipt (for so they held)
Apt to deter Petitioners hereafter
By this presentment of a Kentish slaughter.
Now you expect the Event 'twixt us and them,
And you shall have 't with an impartial pen
Portray'd to life: For we do scorn our tongue
Should right our valor, and do truth a wrong.
Choosing our ground, and our Battalia set
Cheerful as if we at a Banquet met,
Some for a Treaty looked, but they spoke higher,
The General commanded to give fire:
Nor was this Charge unanswered to our foes,
Shot answers Shot, and Blows encounter Blows.
But to join issue, we will here divide
Those losses that occurred to either side.
It Is true, that we have lost two of our Towns
By the remissness of unmannag'd Clowns;
Who would no long time Martial Order keep,
Lest by their absence they might lose a sheep:
For this Plebeian Heard is such a Beast
It ever tenders private interest:
His way is how he may some profit win,
A Crown at stake is nothing unto him.
But in our loss and theirs the Stories err,
For though they took Maidestone and Rochester,
There was no breach but sealed with their blood,
All which our Foes have lately understood;
For we believe, they will scarce, for all their boast,
Recrute so many as their Conquest lost.
Five hundred Foot, we know lie buried there
Under those ruins: neither do we fear
The Remnant of their Army: Well we know
When Forces are at height, they must grow low
And feel their degradation: -- When the Sun
To the highest period his Cariere has run,
He suffers a decline: his shade contracts:
Part of his former rigor too he lacks.
So Lakes and Moats dry up that have no Spring,
So all unbounded Powers that want a King:
So Trees grow hapless, when they drop their fruit;
So Armies hopeless, when they want recrute.
Some of their Party (peradventure) scoff,
And say, we came far better on then off:
But when they play their Cards (as they must play)
They Will grant we came far better off then they.
Our Body holds complete, prompt to receive
Active Commands when they occasion have:
But theirs are so disheartened of late,
Through want of present pay, and peoples hate,
For though each man may have five shillings pay
(Auxiliar's we mean) for every day,
Scarce one of five, they were discouraged so,
Will march one foot, but run before they go.
There are indeed, some Senate favorites,
Who in these Stories of our age delights:
And these will tell you, how our Maidstone wives
Preferred the Public good before their lives.
How they imbrude their hands in Husbands blood,
Because the Saints were by their force withstood.
But there is small truth in this: these wives through fear
Might pull their Husbands back, or shed a tear,
Or beg a peace: -- ( -- no Amazonian time
For femal Spirits to be masculine!)
But to imbrue their hands in the blood of men
Is a mere fiction, odious to our pen.
They speak the like, would credulous ears believe them,
Or for authentic histories receive them,
That when they were at Maidstone Conquerers,
They took in Kent two thousand Prisoners.
But what were these? Infants that hung at the teat,
Old men, whose toothlesse age required chewed meat;
Weak helpless women, Criples, and such like,
Who wanted strength to stand, much more to strike;
These were those Conquered captives which they took,
To be registered in Primaleons Book.
And yet these Booties, to increase the wonder,
Put them together, fall short of their number.
Now to your princely self: -- it is your desire
That Kentish Spirits should retain that fire
Which our Progenitors did sometimes show
When they received their Liberties from you.
Let not your HIGHNESS doubt on it; wee'r the men
Both for our hearts and hands, that we were then.
Our GENERAL like hail will fall upon them,
And crush those Foes to dust that sought to wrong them:
He Will pound to powder these rebellious Slaves,
And cause the Furies caper over their Graves.
Their late proscribed Lords called home again
Must not secure their House: SAYS Plots are vain,
Nay, should they all those rotten Imps restore,
We Would graple with them at their Senats door.
Patience abused is boundless fury made,
We find by whom our Country was berai'd.
To chastise these, our forces have decreed
To Sacrifice their Blood to right their Head.
If we turn tail, and not our State deliver,
May long-tail'd Kentists be cashir'd for ever:
If time-succeeding Annals show not these,
We Will forfeit Charter of our Liberties.
Mean time suspend your judgment: and retain
Opinion of us, as our Actions gain:
And if we prove same men we were before,
Hold us true Kentish: we do crave no more.
The Jndependent Suspended.
Referring to the Sacrilege lately committed at S. Giles Church in the Fields.
SAint Giles, though such as here retain thy Name,
Have got into the Proverb to be lame:
Thy swift pursuing feet must not be so,
In the revenge of a licentious foe;
Lest Independents Act of Privilege
Commit upon thy Temple Sacrilege.
But some will say, that Act's mis-understood,
Whats'ere they did, was for the Churches good.
O no! This Crime must aggravate our grieves,
To see the House of Prayer a prey for theives.
If this continue, our imperious foes
May pitch on Tiburne for their Rendezvouze.
The Leveller Listed.
YOu, Sir, who from a pure pretensive zeal
Observe the Rule of Plato's Commonweal;
Who would have all in Common; not for love
But Envy, seeing others rankt above
And you below. -- Nor is it only state
That your Anarchiall Model levells at.
Blood mixed with blood: wound paralleled with wound,
Priority laid level with the ground.
Listed in these designs you strive to be,
And so you may: We hear from Tartarie
How Prince and People are at great debate
'Bout their precedent quality of State;
For this SUPREMACY does so much move them,
They Will scarce endure Heaven to be sphear'd above them.
Imbark you in this Action, and be gone;
Leave us alone, and we shall knit in one.
Charon the Tartars Ferriman's a shore,
And waited long to waft your Worship over.
If you recoile; let Brandon have a care
To nooze your level betwixt earth and air.
FINIS.

