Horrible News from HVLL.

Wherein is declared how the Kings Majesty, attended by the Prince and 400.
Horsemen, and 700 footmen are gone to besiege HVLL.

Likewise four of the Kings Ships under the Command of the Palsgrave, and the
Earl of Danbie, which have endeavored to mount Ordnance against the said Town
on the other side of Humber.

Also His Majesty's Resolution to take up Arms against all those that shall
oppose Him.

With many Remarkable Passages concerning the last meeting of the Gentry and
Commonalty of Yorkshire on Thursday last the 7. of July.

Whereunto is annexed A Remarkable Report concerning the Lord Digbie.

Ordered that this be Printed and Published.

Io: Brown, Cler. Parl.

July, 11. LONDON, Printed for I. H. and T. Ryder, 1642.

Exceeding true News from HULL
IT is a horrible thing for us that are Subjects to the King of England, we
that have lived so many years under a peaceable government, and enjoyed the
fruits of our Vinyard, yea all the blessings that could be heaped upon a
Nation, to make it happy, that now after these Halcion days, a storm
threating so much danger should eclipse the Sun and usher on destruction,
what greater terror can there be immagined to fall upon a Kingdom (so great)
as Civil Wars, the King against his people, the Son against his Father,
when blood, revenge, and slaughter will triumph and revell in our Cities, our
Wives and Children ravished and destroyed before our faces, we our selves
spectators of such horrible and unhumane Tragedies, being in no waves able to
help or defend them; these are the effects of Civil discords, and have we not
just cause to fear that such will be the event of these Distractions, for
these discontents between the King and Parliament, vomited by the malignant
party has already wrought a sad effect.

For His Majesty has declared his irefull Resolution, conceiving all those
that have opposed him, and that shall oppose him, by whose hand or by whose
directions soever it was done in both cases, by the help of God, for he will
have justice, or else loose his own life in the requiring of it.

Likewise his Majesty declares, that if it be possible for his Subjects to
believe that such a defense of himself with the utmost power he can make, Be
raising War against the Parliament, he doubts not (howsoever it shall please
God to deal with him in this contention) but that the justice of his cause
will at last prevail against all those that have for their own ends corrupted
the understanding of the people.

Likewise it is apparent that his Majesty intends to put this his resolution in
speedy execution, For the King is gone to Hull, attended with the Prince, with
about 400 horsemen and 700 footmen musketieres, but the Inhabitants of Hull
having intelligence of their intended purpose, forthwith raised 1000 men well
armed to stand upon their guard, to prevent ensuing dangers; there is two Ships
lately come from Holland, the Palsgrave being in one, and the Earl of Danbie
in another, and many other Lords besides, and they came both to the mouth of
Humber, but there arose a great wind, insomuch that they were forthwith driven
from the shore, and dispersed at Sea from each other, but one of them coming up
very boldly toward Hull, Sir John Hotham made shot at them, and beat them to
other side of Humber, whereas yet they lie and have drawn certain of the
chiefest of their Ordnance a shore, and have raised certain Batteries, and
mounted their Ordnance thereon, against Sir John Hotham, and all the Soldiers
aforementioned, accompanied with the Prince, are gone to aid and assist him
against the Town, and they have brought with them great store of Ammunition,
beside 300 thousand pounds of Money, so that the King, and the Prince, is gone
to meet them with a strong Guard of Soldiers for his own defense.

Upon Thursday last, being the 7. of July, the King summoned all the Gentry
and Commonalty of Yorkshire, that are Protestants to attend his Commands,
where there was assembled great multitudes of Protestants, and many others that
are favorers of the Malignant Party, and many professed Papists which were there
(notwithstanding his Majesty's command to the contrary) from which we may
infer, that they that do presume to meet in a tumultuous manner, contrary to
his Majesty's command, while War is but in agitation. will be much boulder,
and contest with that command, were War put in execution.

Likewise the Cavalieres commit outrages of all sorts, dreading nothing,
neither Law, nor Authority, being countenanced by some great men that are too
near the King in power, and Authority, so that we are not certain to enjoy
any thing but by their allowance, nay they are so confident, that they will not
stick to swear, that they will teach us new obedience, and many other
reproachful and dangerous words.

Likewise in the near adjoining Counties, as Leicestershire, Lancashire. and
other parties, the Lord Strange, Mr. Hastings, Sir Thomas Aston, and diverse
others Commissioners of Array, have made great disturbances in those parts to
the terror of the Inhabitants.

Also it is feared that the Lord Digbie is secretly landed and both endeavor
to raise men in Dorsetshire.

These disturbances the Parliament having seriously considered of and found the
great detriment that these evil affected persons may do to the Subjects under
their authority of the Commission of Array, they have thought good to declare,
that the Commission of Array is against Law, and that all those that are Actors
in putting the Commission of Array in execution, shall be esteemed disturbers
of the Peace of the Kingdom, and destroyers of the the Liberties of the
Subject.

Ordered that this be Printed, and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.
FINIS.

