CERTAIN LETTERS Sent from Sir JOHN HOTHAM, Young HOTHAM, the Major of HULL,
and others.

Intercepted, and brought to Court to His MAJESTY, April 16.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall. M.DC.XLIII.

READER,
THese Intercepted Letters which we here impart to thee are exactly printed
without the le is it alteration of word or spelling from the Originalls which the
Printer has in his custody under the Authors own hands and seals.

The first letter superscribed to Mr Pym, From Sir John Hotham. The second to
Sir Matthew Boynton, and Mr Nigh, From Sir John Hotham. The third to Sir Thomas
Barrington, From Sir John Hotham. The fourth to Sr Philip Stapleton, From Young
Hotham. The fifth to one Mr Darly, From Young Hotham. The sixth to Mr Pelham
Burgess of Hull from the Major and others of that incorporation.
1st FOR MY MVCH HONORED friend JOHN PYM Esquire.
Sir,
I Received yours of the 4 of April with the Orders enclosed; for which I
desire you will present my humble service to the House, I hear from many of my
friends as well as from your self, the jealousies was so upon me by reason
of that fact of Sir Hugh Cholmeley's, it is the Evening Crowns the day, and I
hope to make it in the end well appear they were without cause; I confess, I
much marveile how such things should find the least belief, being that I have
ever since I was trusted by you in this imploiment served you to the best of my
Judgment, not according to the strict letter of my Commission, but have acted
all things both here and in other places that I thought might conduce to the
advancement of your service. I have now sent some good force both of horse and
foot into Lincolneshire, and my son with them to the aid of our friends
there; I assure you if Prince Rupert with his forces come down into these
parts, unless you send forces down to attend upon him, all these parts will
be in very bad estate, if there were any considerable forces to fight with my
Lord of Newcastle, before his new raised men be with exercise made soldiers,
truly I believe the victory would not be very difficult, but if you suffer
Prince Rupert and him to join together, though soldiers that are now of noe
value will within a while be as good as the other.

That business of Scarbrough Castle of which I writ to you in my last letter
is fallen out unfortunately, for Captain Bushel after he had surprised the
Castle and was in full possession of it dispatched a messenger to me for
instant aid, which I presently sent him with two Catches, he in the mean time
most treacherously delivered the Castle, and had the impudence to come to me
to Hull, I have clapped him up close prisoner, and intend to call him to a
Council of war^e, there to be punished according to his Demerits, if such
Villains be not made examples noe man will be deterred from doing ill.

I have received your order for the customs and have received of Mr Somerfield
betwixt four and five hundred pound, being all he had in his hand, my order is
for the time to come, and this was of money in his hand before the receipt of my
order, therefore I pray you Sir by the next post send him a discharge for that
money, which I have promised him to procure the customs by reason of the decay
of trade hear I fear will not be above 100 l in the week at most, which you
know how far short it will come of our pay, I shall therefore entreat that you
will not fail to speed us down money, for in good faith else your affairs
will suffer irrecoverably without my power to help it. I have during almost
all the time of your business maintained 4 troops of horse, 4 troops of
dragoones, a Regiment of foot without any charge to you more then the public
faith, I conceive then you may be better satisfied to pay this garrison which
cannot shift without it, Sir this is all I have for the present but his best
respect who ever is.

Your most humble servant JOHN HOTHAM.
Hull the 7th of April. 1643. Postscript.
Sir, you must needs send us down two Demi-Cannon, and we shall make a shift
for the rest: There is one approach to the town and we want great pieces to
hinder that, so as you must needs send us down two Demi-Cannon, we sent you
diverse good ones from hence, if you send them down I pray do it by the next
Ship and send bullets with them.



2d. For my much honored friends Sir Matthew Boynton Knight and Baronet, and
Master Nay Preacher of Gods Word, these.
Sir,
I Received yours of the 4 of April. and in a letter from Sir William
Stricland, the order for receiving the Customs. they were usually before these
ill times 7 and 800 l a week, I fear they will not be for the present 100 l a
week. so that you see in what case we are at, I desire you will do the
utmost with our friends, that the 6000 l whereof I have had one may be sent
speedily down, truly I am driven to my wits end for moneys. The news you
heard of my Lord Fairefax loss was too true, he had 700 of his Club men Carried
prisoners into York where they now are. My Lord Fairefax is now at Leedes, and
my Lord Newcastle is drawn with most of his forces into the West: Major
Jefford is Battering Pomfret Castle, while the other increases in strength and
reputation; we take it here for granted Prince Rupert is coming Northward, if
some strong forces march not in the Back of him, our forces in Yorkshire
will subsist but a while. My son at the Extreme earnest solicitation of our
Lincolneshire friends, is to morrow settinge forwards to their assistance, with
some troops of horse and two strong companies of foot, he is to command in
chief all their forces, I hope with Gods blessing he will give a good account
of his actions. In the Business of Scarbrouge Castle we are betrayed. Bushel
has surrendered the Castle; and my Catches I sent to his aid, like fools
contrary to my express order entered the Haven, and are surprised. yet had
Bushel the impudence to come to Hull, where I have him fast, and intend to
Judge him according to his deserts by a Council of war; such villains cannot
suffer sufficiently. For those letters of Mart, I think it not amiss to
leave them for the present: If it were not for those foolish Jealosies* (which
I endeavor to avoid) I dare say at this time I could have done the Parliament
more service then all the actions I ever did them was worth; but I dare not
adventure upon it I saw my self so much mistaken, as God willing it shall well
appear in the End: Sr I am so much your debtor for your so painful a journey
as I know not how to requite. But upon all occasions you shall ever find me*

Your most faithful friend JOHN HOTHAM.
Hull 7th 1643. Postscript.
We hear there is an Order of Parliament for the sequestration of the
spiritual liveings of the malignant priests; if it be so their is three good
livings, within 10 miles of Hull, the least worth 200 l per annum, I could
dispose to three good friends: I pray see what may be done in it.

If their be any good to be done for the sequestrations of these livings Master
Nie, my Cosen Salt-marshe, and my son Charles might well supply those three
places, and they are within the protection of Hull; the livings are Bainton,
Elton, Lockington.



3d For my much honored friend Sir THOMAS BARRINGTON Knight, these.
Sir,
I Received yours of the 29 of March, and must give you many thanks for the
expressions of your love and favor to me; but those jealousies that I hear
are raised upon me, I hope in God it shall well appear that as I have ever
abhorred from the deceaving of the least private friend that trusted me, I
shall much more be far from betraying a trust put upon me by so great a body
as the House of Parliament. It is the evening Crowns the day.

I hear that this unfortunate business of Sir Hugh Cholmelies did in the
opinion of many reflect upon me, but truly without all cause, as shall well
appear in the end. Captain Bushel as I writ in your former letters had
ceased on Scarbrough Castle and dispatched away a post to me to send him aid,
which I suddenly sent him in two Catches, but he as I conceive has
treacherously surrendered up the Castle, and my Catches coming thither,
contrary to my order entered the place, and wear both surprised; Captain
Bushel as soon as he had yielded upp the Castle had the impudence to come
hither to Hull, I suppose with the intent to work some further mischeife, but I
have clapped him close, and intend to call him to a Council of war, for
betraying the Castle which he had once in his power, and my Catches; and if
such villains be not punished noe man will be true.

My Lord Fairefax has 700 of his clubb-men slain and taken prisoners, his
quitting his quarters at Selby being as we conceive against all reason, and I
fear will prove prejudicial to his affairs, My Lord of Newcastles forces are
many of them gonne toward the west, God send us a good issue, Sir I have no
more at this but his best respects who ever is

Your faithful friend to serve you, JOHN HOTHAM.
Hull the 7th of April 1643.
4th. For my much honored brother Sir Philip Stapylton Knight these present.
Noble Sir,
I Doupt not but you that are upon the*** have a great deal better
intelligence then we can expect here, yet something sees the by-stander that
the gamster does not. I have some cause to believe that a very great part of
the Kings Army will with speed march from Oxford to York, and that Oxford will
be left only with the Kings Person and some 3000 to guard it, and countenance
his party; and the 2 Armies be joined, if you follow not, you may easily guess
in what condition these Northern counties will be in, that now can hardly
defend themselves. Sir, I shall not take upon me to offer any thing to you in a
business of so great weight as this, but to desire from you some directions
for the management of our business here, for my Lord Fairefax lies in the
West, we in the East, and some few at Lincoln, so divided as neither able to
do the public good nor our selves. My Lord Fairfax has I doupt presuming too
much upon the foolish clubb-men lost a matter of 700 of them, yett is in
condition good enough yett to keep from being broken if it be well managed, as
Mr Stockdale will do it you will think; the worst is leaving Selby, Cawood and
those quarters he has put himself out of any possibility of being supplied
with ammunition; Sir, if the Counsels at Court alter not, this was the last
resolution. My Lord Newcastle has raked up a great many men but wants arms
for some; Sir Hugh Cholmely has given us the slip, and Captain Bushel took
the Castle for us one day, and let them have it the next. THE SCOTS ARE SCOTS,
ALL IS LOST HERE WITH TRUSTING TO THEM. Sir John Seton has betrayed them in
Lancashire. Your goods are all safe at Hull, and the quick goods in
Holdernesse; Colonel Boynton never touched any of them; I thought it was time
to remove them when Sir Marmaduke had sent for his from them. I have sent 2
good Foot companies to help them in Lincolne-shire, and will follow my self
presently. Sir, I shall ever remain your most affectionate Brother to serve
you.

Beverly April 7th 1643. JOHN HOTHAM
Postscript.
Sir, if our army follow the Prince you will have 5 or 6000 good men to join
with you, if you delay time they may well come to be broken.



5th. For my much honored friend HENRY DARLY Esquire these present.
Sir,
I Should be gladder to see our BRETHREN then to hear of them, they have
talked of coming long, but all is words, and the enemy mightily strengthens in
the mean time. I would the Treaty were at an end, for I think neither North,
nay nor South intend it, and I have some reasons to believe so; and so I wish
with all my heart we might hancker no more after it but fall to good earnest.
Bushel has as basely given up the Castle, as he seemed bravely to regaine it,
and has to boot betrayed our two Cattches with 10 piece of ordinance and 80
men that was sent from Hull to relieve itt: we have him close prisonnier and
intend the Counsel of war to proceed against him according to his high and
Capital offense. My Lord Fairfax his sudden quitting of his strong quarters
upon the rivers has taken all hopes from him of being supplied either with
forces or ammunition from hence. we hear Prince Rupert is coming down with
6000 horse to the Queen, and then you will think this Country will be in a
good condition, unless our army follow fast which I am afraid they will not.
That unlucky over-swelling commission has undone all our business, Master
Stockdale and his accomplices have with it given that discontent that all men of
courage have left them but their own clan. I assure you, you will find my Lord
Newcastles Army very numerous, and many good Commanders, and if they have time
they will make the soldiers good too. Sir, if our army follow not, your party
here will danger to be broken, Sir I will trouble you noe longer but remain

Beverly April 7th 1643. Your most affectionate friend to serve you. JOHN
HOTHAM.
Postscript.
I have sent two very good foot companies into Lincolneshire and intend to
follow as soon as I can. Sir, I hear the Lords would have you disavow the
Captains for shooting at Where the Queen landed.
Birlington, pray tell all my friends my opinion, that if you do, you will
discourage all men of honor or worth to serve you.



6th. For the worshipful PEREGRINE PELHAM Esquire, one of the Burgesses of
Parliament for the Town of Kingston upon Hull, at his lodging in Wolstable
markett in Westminster these.
Sir,
We are glad to understand by your Letters that you have procured a warrant
from the Committee for the ordnance to be sent hither, being assured you will
now hasten them away with all speed (as we much desire:) But withal we thought
fit to signify unto you, that (as the case stands) some care had need to be
taken by the ships that bring them, and other our Neighbors at London, for
convoy; or otherwise that they come well appointed; for since our last writeing
unto you, Scarbrough castle which was then taken by Captain Bushel (and as
was thought) for the Parliament, is delivered up to the Earl of New-castles
Forces; and (as is reported) by Captain Bushells treachery: who
notwithstanding that his fact returned hither, thinking (as it seems) to brave
it out; but is now Sir John Hothams prisoner in the Jail upon suspicion of his
voluntary betraying the Castle; which if it prove true, he deserves no less:
for by reason of Sir John Hothams credulity of Bushells fidelity; he forthwith
upon Bushells taking of the Castle, sent him up (as he desired) some men,
ordinance, powther, and ammunition in two of his Catches and a Pyncke; who
fearing no harm, the two Catches went boldly into Scarbrough, and were there
surprised by the Malignant forces, and the men taken prisoners; which the
pyncke perceiving returned hither safe: And now (as we hear) these two
Catches are well manned and provided; and are roving upp and down the coast
waiting their opportunity of prise. Therefore we pray you use your discretion
in giving notice hereof to our Neighbors. This is all we have at present,
save the remembrance of our loving respects to your self and Mris Pelham, and
so taking leave we rest

Kingston upon Hull the 7th of April. 1643. Your very l^ving friends Tho.
Rickes Mayor, Lancellot Roper, Jno Barnard, Robbert Morton, N. Denman, William
Popple, Joseph Blandes, Henry Barnard.


FINIS.

