THE SPIRITUAL BE, OR A MISCELLANEY Of Scriptural, Historical, Natural
Observations, and Occasional occurrencyes, Applied IN Divine MEDITATIONS.

By an University Pen.

It is my Meditation all the day long. Psalm. 119. 97. OXFORD, Printed by A. and
L. Lichfield, for Edw. and Joh. Forest, 1662.

To the Much Honored Sr. COPLESTON BAMPFIELD High Sheriff for the County of
Devon.
Much Honored Sir,
I should not have known how to have skreened my self from the imputation of
Overvaluing this Paper, if I had thought it had merited your Acceptance, much
less your Patronage: for, in reference to the latter, as I esteem custom no
sufficient Warranty, for men's making the Portal a guard and defense to the
City, judging themselves sufficiently secured from those assails to which they
are otherwise liable and exposed, by placeing some Name of Repute in the Entry;
so I could not but account it, as highly above the infirmities as the bulk of
this pamphlet, to deserve the Pasport of your Name standing in the Front, to
induce the world (which is that I design in this Dedication) to be at least
Civil to it: And in reference to the former, could these Lines change their
hue and put on Red, they would but in type represent that Consciousness of many
imperfections which Guilt has made legible in the Authors Countenance: So
that waving all plea of Title by desert, to your acceptance as well as
Protection, I must cast my self entirely upon your Pardon; which I presume I
shall not be long in suing out, having anticipated the severest Award any other
Judge can pass, by a more rigid Censure of my own, which I hope will procure
favor for him, who is

Much Hond. Sir, Yours truly devoted in all Christian Observance.
Oxon. Aug. 2d. 1661.
To the Christian Reader.
Reader,
IT is the happy advantage of our Contenplative Life above all others, that we
can never find the leisure to be truly and entirely Idle; and when we have a
Writ of Ease given us from more ordinary and necessary occasions, even in our
relaxations and remissions, the Mind inured to Speculation will find out some
matter or other to work on, and busy it is self about; and it can as little be
wholly reposed from that activity and motion, as the Sea from agitating and
moving its self, or the eye while open from seeing. This small Collection of
Thoughts which thou art here presented with, has the issue of my improvement
of that advantage (Loss of Time in its smalest parcels, being that which I
have always desired to reckon in the heaviest Jtem of those things I am
accountable for to my Discretion) being only the product of my retirement home
into mine own bosom, in those intervals, and respites which have been afforded
me from other Litterary Employments, quibus in occupationis exilium missus sum:
(which consideration will also furnish me with an Apology for that Inequality
of style which the more judicious reader may observe the various parts of this
Abortive to be formed with) and I confess scarce any thoughts did ever with so
great a relish steal my time and mind away as those which I have thus expended.
My Papers would easily have afforded to have swelled the size, but I would not
presume to entrench further upon thee, till thy candor toward this were
secured.

As I judge it vainly imprudent to have recourse to those known and usual
pretenses of, preventing false Copies, importunity of Friends, casting in their
Widow's mite etc. so commonly served up as excuses, and Vouchees of Publication
(though I might perchance use some of them with more grounds then some, who
impose upon the vulgar by setting up their cry at greatest distance from their
Nest, like Lapwinges) So likewise I deem it tediously formal to make
Defensatives and enter cautions against the Critic and the censurer (the
Zoilus and Momus:) Although, as they are wont to rub Hives with bitter herbs to
defend them from venomous creatures, so I could wish I had an Antidote against
some Readers that make it their business, like Flies to seek out and stick upon
sore places only, or which is worse, like Spiders, to gather and by an innate
virulency concoct into poison that, which of it self was of an innoxious
nature: However, while I lie post siparium, and my writing is like that upon
the Wall to Beltshazar, where the hand only was seen not whose it was, my
Curtain will be instead of a Shield as well as a veil.

As for this manner of writing some have thought it as advantageous to public
improvement as any; having observed that it has been the unhappy fate of
Polemicall and controversall books rather to enlarge and widen then close
differences, in so much that their usefulness otherwise does seldom
countervail and expiate for their disadvantage this way: and for Doctrinall
writings their numerousness does rather oppress then benefit, rather satiate
then satisfy the Reader; and I have sometimes thonght the case to be much the
same here, as it has been observed concerning being versed in Books of History
that it makes men wiser then those of Policy, as furnishing us with Instances
as well as Rules, and (...).
as it were upon the Stage dressing up and personating the Precept so, as that
our minds shall have a more full and advantageous prospect of it.

I doubt I am justly jealous in fearing it a self flattery to think here may be
that variety which may not be wholly without profit: That Divine whose aim is
only to please, never pleased me; and yet withal I ever judged it impossible
for a man to profit that pleased not. If wax may be here hiv'd up as well as
Honey, yet both may be some way useful. Where the grounds from which I have
made my startes do not afford such plenty of beneficial thoughts (which is to
be imputed to the poverty of that treasure of which the Author is owner) yet
there perchance what is discoursed may administer the happy occasion of better
thoughts in others: and the Honey which drop's from the dryest of these leaves
may not be wholly unimproveable.

I had once thought to have marshalled and ranged the things according to their
nature under their distinct Titles, but upon second thoughts I waved this piece
of Herauldry, as deeming it needless with such curious and nice Ceremony to
seat every thing in it is proper place. Farewell.

THE Spiritual BE, OR A Miscellany etc.
I.
There Is a very little Viper at Amyclae (says Solinus) which is disregarded
for its smalness, but hurts the more easily because slighted. And they say of
Witches that they beg and are pleased with small things to be given them; but
they thereby procure a power to work what mischief they please on the Donours.
The Devil comes often a pleading for some sins sub forma pauperis; Is it not
a little one? and being listened to, he can improve the smallest grant to his
great advantage in our hurt and discomfort. As he represented it to Eve 'twas
but tasting an Apple; which proved the ruin of Mankind. Therefore when he
shoots this Shaft, let us take it up and retort it on himself again: if he
make the smalnesse of the thing a consideration to tempt us to a compliance,
let us make use of it to facilitate our resistance; if it be small to yield to,
it is little to resist, and it is easiest to deny Satan in the smallest things,
whom we must not gratify in any. So long as we show no kindness to him he can
never hurt us: But if we give him the least corner of our souls but to sojourn
in, he will soon litter a whole hellish brood of sins in a small room, and by
an increased force, get an absolute rule. If he have easy admittance at the
smalest pass, Gad, behold a Troop comes; as the whole power of an Army may
fall in upon a City at a narrow breach. A little spark may be so fewel'd and
managed as to set on fire a whole Town. It Is therefore an excellent saying of
the son of Syrack, he that despises little things, shall perish by little and
little. Let me crush the Cockatrice in the Egg, that I feel not the mortal
stinges of the Serpent when engendered; and strangle sin in its Infancy, that
the first breath it takes may be likewise the last, and it may expire in the
first motions; that though it be conceived, yet it may prove abortive. Happy
shall he be, O daughter of Babylon, that thus takes thy children while young,
and dasheth them against the stones before they are arrived to a more adult and
unresistable growth.

II.
I have sometimes seen a blazing Comet much outshining other Stars, and
attracting the eyes of men to behold it with wonder; which yet by its decay,
and vanishing awhile after has appeared to have had no true place among the
Stars, but in the lower Regions; to have been nothing else but a slimy
Meteor, and notwithstanding its glaring luster, secretly to have sent forth
vapors of a virulent and malignant nature. How many in our days have been
seen and gazed on with admiration, who have shined with glorious beams, which
yet by their fall have at length discovered themselves to have been
Exhalations, only gilded with rays, and counterfeiting Stars by an exceeding
splendor (for often does the Hypocrite outgoe the Saint in Appearance, as much
as he com's short of him in Reality) Many have had a shining zeal in those
exercises of Religion that lie open to the view, and so have gotten and kept up
an high esteem and credit, but not trading on a solid stock, but taking up
their Saintships all upon trust, no wonder they prove Bankrupts at last. The
foolish Virgins made a great blaze with their Lamps, which yet by their going
out appeared to want Oil. These Falling-starres shall never shine in the
Firmament of Heaven. Let all therefore try and assure to them selves the
fixednesse of their station, the consistency of their substance; and making
just allowances for that ascititious and imposturous Light, which Interest,
Profit, worldly credit and advantage, slavish fear of God, may have vested them
with, examine what remain's of what is true and firmly grounded. Let me never
deceive my self or others with a false Light: I had rather be a true star,
though the smallest, and shining undiscerned (as the Stars in the Milky-way,
which cannot be seen without a Galilaeo's Tube) then be the most glorious
Comet. Lord, though a spiritual Falling Sickness may cast me into a swoune for
a time, yet let it never mortally seize on my vitals.

III.
Justinian the Emperor having had his Nose cut off by his Enemies, when he was
their prisoner, and afterward recovering his liberty and his Empire, when ever
the wipeing off the filth from it, put him in remembrance of the injury, he
caused still one of his enemies to be brought before him, and put to death. A
holy Revenge would well be thus exercised against Satan; whenever the working
of our corruption remindes us of that cursed depravation of our Natures which
that Arch-Enemy of our salvation was the Author of, to slay a Lust and make it
fall a sacrifice to the zeal of our indignation; if there be any Agag or Ruling
one, let not our eye spare him, but bring him forth and hew him in pieces. This
will be, by a spiritual Chemistry to extract an Antidote out of the Viper, to
make a sovereign Treacle of the Scorpions own flesh; to pave our way to heaven
with the scul's of our Enemies: in a sense, by a holy guile to make Satan cast
out Satan: to turn an overthrow into a victory, and raise a Trophee out of our
ruins; to rise by our falling. As Peter could then perfectly conquer his
self-confidence when he remembered the sad story of his foul fall in the Priests
hall; and could give a more humble and modest answer when Christ asked him,
love thou me more then these? Thus St Paul, when he found Satan knocking for
entrance, fell a buffeting himself.

IV.
Finding my Friend in a passion of anger, I gave him a check, and endeavored
by some motives to reduce him to moderation; but I perceived he was the more
incensed and that after the attempts I made to slake and lay his heat, it was
become greater then before. Passion is deaf to all advice but what may seem to
encourage it; this Wildfire makes that its Fuel, which was intended to quench
it, and turn's that into food, which was designed for Remedy. Water cast on the
Smith's forge does the more inflame it, and makes it burn the fiercer: a
Torrent is so far from being restrained by what is set to stop it, that it
swel's the higher and spread's the farther, Pontem indignatur. To encounter a
man in the boisterousnesse of his passion, is, to enter the combat with such
creatures as St Paul fought with at Ephesus; to cast reins on the waves of the
Sea when it rages: and to use rational endeavors, is to call a Soldier to
Council in the heat and fury of a Battle. The method therefore both most kindly
and most effectual is, to give place to wrath while the tempest rages: not to
apply our selves to the cure of it in its Paroxysme, not at too great a
disadvantage to meet it with reason and counsel when it comes forth armed with
fury and hooded with blindness: when the Fire has got a full conquest, and
the flame is outrageous, we seek not to quench it with water, and so save the
house, but by pulling down the next, make the want of fuel diminish the flame.
The violence of Anger is best broken by giving way, and yielding to it, (as a
Flint is easiest broken on a Cushion) and time is the best Lenitive to mollify
it.

V.
It has been observed, that those who have the longest freedom from diseases
and least infested with their assaults, do most hardly escape when a disease
once tak's hold of them; Nature being easiest subdued where it has not been
quickened by exercise and opposition: and hence it is that Feavours are
generally more pernicious here in England then other where in places about us,
because that disease is less familiar to our natures, then to those in our
neighbor country's.

Temptations usually are most dangerous where least frequent, and their
assaults most effectual on those who have seldomest experimented them: they are
then most to be feared when their power is increased by a strength gathered
from long discontinuance, and the edge of our resistance rebated by a long
restivenesse: when our shield is laid by, and may have contracted rust, then
those fiery darts are with most difficulty repelled; when our Bow is unbent,
and our hand in our bosom, no wonder if our disadvantage be great in the
enemy's onset. Hence Satan has this Stratagem amongst others, not to be
frequent in his assaults there, where former Alarmes have excited to care and
vigilance, and set continual watch and ward: but to attempt entrance rather,
where a long quiet has bred security, and lessened the power of Defense: where
he bestow's his visits seldomest he is least feared, and consequently least
provided against. Let me not think my self secure from those temptations with
which I have been little exercised, lest I find my self most overpowred there
where I least suspected Assault, and add to those Advantages, of which Satan
has otherwise too many over me, that of mine own Security.

VI.
I read of an African beast, called the Dabuh, Scal. Exer. adv. Card. 217.
which they take with Music; for being charmed with the sweet sounding of it
in his ears, he suffer's his feet the while to be fettered; and so his death
is the Minstrels pay: And the folly of the Lark is pitti'd by us, which while
it plays with the Feather and stoupeth to the Glass, is caught in the
Fowler's net. There Is a spiritual charmer which by the pleasing delights and
allurements of the world, cast's us into security, and then we are with ease
enchain'd in his shackels: a Siren that sing's us to death. This is that, which
has by sweet and soft conquest enervated the Sampsons, overcome the David's,
subdued the Solomon's; that, in whose triumphs have been led the most resolved
and generous spirits, the stoutest and ablest Champions. Do thou (with the wise
Grecian) stop thine ear to the Music of Pleasure, for it is Magic; trust not
her flattery's, O my soul, for her kisses are but to betray thee, and there are
snares in her smiles: when she fawn's, on thee and windeth about thee, cast off
the Viper; in the end she will bite as a Serpent: to relish her sweetness is
Mortal, for she is the highway to Death, and if thou affect her thy face is
set toward Hell, and thou art in the road thither. Lord, if I am at any time
allured into Satan's nets, and his bolts are cast over me, do thou knock off my
chains, and loose my bands (as thou did to Paul and Silas) break the gins and
deliver me, that my soul may escape as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler.

VII.
Alexander the Great was wont to say of Homer's Heroic Poem, that, it ought to
be sung only to a warlike nation, and at the noise of a Trumpet, not when it
sounds a Retreat, but when it call's to the Battle: For it is not for mean
spirits to resent motions of Generosity at the recounting of affairs which have
no less Difficulty in the Conduct then Beauty in the Description. What he said
of that admired Poem, may with more aptness be applied to the Gospel of Christ;
Tuba est Christi Evangelium; it proclam's a war, sounds an Alarm, and call's
us to the Camp; to make every place a Pitchtfield, every day a day of Battle
against those many and incessant assaults, both from intestine and foreign
force. And who but those that are inspired with a heavenly courage, can bear
the Thunder of that sound, that calls them, to love them that hated them, to
do good to them that Persecute them; to take up a heavy cross, and follow
Christ naked, to glory in reproach; to hate Father and Mother, and (which com's
to the quick) their life also to be Christ's Disciples. How many refuse to take
up the weapons and enter the Lists; and cry these are hard saings, who can bear
them? And those who engage in the encounter, when they find the greatest enemy
they are to Combat with is Self, many throw down their arms, and fall to
caresse and embrace that which they should Duel with.

VIII.
The Deepest Waters move most silently and undiscernably; and the Spheres have
the swiftest motion, yet move without noise: The Stars, though vast and
glorious bodies, yet distance makes them seem very small; and many Stars as in
the Galaxie, shine unseen: The Moon when that side toward the Earth is
darkened, toward heaven shines bright. If in some men's conversation I seem to
discern little, or nosplendour, let me not be too rashly forward in my censures
of their estate; it may be I do not approach near enough to them: perchance
our heavenly Father may see that in secret which does not discover it self
openly; he may have a bright-side heavenward, though toward Earth he seem
wholly Eclipsed: Perchance he has so much more of the Publican in him, then of
the Pharisee, as to think it a good work to conceal his good works; and
therefore is so far from making his prayers in the open streets, to be seen
of men, that he thinks his Closet scarce private enough when the door is shut:
and so far from proclaiming his Almsgiving by sound of Trumpet, that he will
not let his left hand know, what his right does, when it dispenses them: The
Flax may have fire in it though it be but smoking, and do not break out into
a flame. As most men do seem better then they are in truth, so some are better
then they seem to be. I had rather be good and not seem so, then seem good, and
not be so: For the Publican went home rather justified then the Pharisee.

IX.
THe unjust Steward in the Gospel, Luke 16.
having wasted his Master's goods, and by high dieting his own Lusts brought a
plentiful estate to a Consumption; and being thereupon accused and discharged
his Stewardship, casts about with himself what to do, and finds he was
reduced to a great extremity, not knowing how to dig, and to beg he was
ashamed; get a sustenance out of the sweat of his brow he could not, and turn
beggar to crave it he would not. Lord, when I enter into a serious review with
my self, and cast up my accounts, I find the endowments, gifts and advantages,
the goods thou have entrusted me with, to have been very carelessly Stewarded by
me, and I have forfeited the benefits both of them and of thy service: Dig I
cannot, I know not how to earn a reward of glory by my own righteousness; but I
am not ashamed to beg; my spirit is not so stiff and incompliant, but that
I can come once and again to beg relief at thine hands for Christ's sake; yea,
I am not ashamed to be a daily beggar at this door; for I know, the more
importunate I am in cravinge, the more bountiful thou will be in giving.

X.
THe Book which St. John eat, while in his mouth was sweet and pleasant, but in
his belly became bitter: and we read of waters in Miletum and elsewhere, fresh
at the top and bitter at the bottom; and of a Lake in Phrygia whose water
make's those that drink it strangely jocund and full of Laughter, but such as
it ends in their death: The Be has honey in the mouth but a sting in the
tail. While we are pleasing our selves in carnal contents, and rolling a
sweet morsel in our mouths, we should do well to consider whether it will not
be bitterness in the end: there is noe earthly pleasure which has not the
inseparable attendance of Grief, and that following it as closely, as Jacob
came after Esau, houlding it by the heel: Yea, worldly delight is but a
Shadow, and when we catch after it, all that we graspe is substantial sorrow in
it is room. The honey shonld not be very delightful, when the sting is so
near; better want it then feel the smart and venom that attends it. A nail
in the temples may be the Entertainment, where Fair speech was the Usher and
butter in a lordly dish the first course, to make way for it. These Gnats that
make a pleasing sound awhile flying about our ears, will bite us ere they part.
Let me rest on nothing that has not a real and unmixed pleasure in it, and
then I shall find I must leave this world, and take a higher flight; here is no
such thing for me to rest the sole of my foot on, all things have both the
saltness and turbulency of the Sea in them. I will not bid adieu to innocent
delight, but neither shall it have any thing of my heart; if I unwarily press
too much on Roses in the pulling, the prickles may run into my fingers. I will
honestly enjoy my delights, but not purchase them at so dear a rate as my own
Danger and hazard. That Mortal laughter and dancing which the bite of the
Tarantula causes, is only cured by Music: The best remedy against the
Madness of Laughter is the voice of that wise Charmer; God can cure and
retrench the exorbitances and profuseness of our spirits in wordly delights.

XI.
LEt us contemplate Prayer in it is journey between Earth and Heaven (as Jacob
did the Angels ascending and descending:) It ascends lightly mounted on the
wings of Faith, but it come's ever laden down again upon our heads; it goes
up, it may be, in a shower of tears, and descends in a shower of blessings:
it is wafted into heaven with groans (for these have a force to open heaven
gates, and that prayer fly's fwiftly that is carried on the wings of a Groan)
and those Sighs return again laden with comforts (like the Southern winds in
Egypt whose wings are charged with the sweet odours of Spices.) They go out
weeping but never come weeping back, for where the Spring and Seed-time is wet,
the Harvest is clear and joyful, they that sow in tears reap in joy.

XII
I Have somerimes wondered, and almost judged it another Miracle, that Balaam
was no more appalled and amazed at that most strange uncouth Miracle to hear a
voice come from that mouth which was wont only to Bray, and to see himself
outreasoned by that, which was remarkable for nothing so much as it is stupidity
and dullness (almost as though He and his Beast had exchanged natures:) that
his knees did not tremble, and heart become like a stone, nor did he so much as
alight off for it: but as though no strange thing had fallen out he gives the
beast a wrathful answer, without any Symptom of wonder. Although perchance
being a Sorcerer he might be not wholly a stranger to converses not much
different from this, which might make it seem less uncouth; yet I rather think
that the transport of Madness which so possessed this Prophet, and the
covetousnes which blinded his eyes, left no room or capacity to reflect on the
unnaturalness of the accident. And then see how senseless and stupid Lust and
Passion make us. Many are so eager in the pursuit of their carnal desires, so
wholly possessed with contrivances, to compass, and Hopes to attain their
satisfaction, that they regard not any providence though never so strange and
remarkable that enterfear and cross them in their course: though God meet them
in the way with a drawn sword, though he speak from heaven in a voice of
Thunder against them, they are not astonyed or appalled: they may storm and
rage at the impediments that traverse their unlawful pursuits, and at the
blocks which are laid in their way, but they take no notice of the Hand of
providence which casts them there, though it be perchance as visible and
miraculous as that which wrote Beltshazzar's Doom on the Wall.

XIII.
WE read in Agellius of a Soldier, Noct. At. lib. 4. c. 20.
who riding forth to a Muster with a horse as lean and carcaselike as if he had
been newly raised out of a Charnel; and himsef so well habited and full that he
might have been a very sufficient burden for a more able beast; and being
demanded by the Censors whence came such a great disproportion, between the
Meagernesse of the one, and the Grossness of the other, answered that it was
because He took care of himself, but his Servant took charge of his Horse.
Most men have languid and infirm souls while their Bodies are in a vigorous
athletick habit: Their spiritual parts are reduced to meagernesse and
Consumption, whiles their Sensual parts are Full even to a Plethora. And whence
is it? because their Souls have noe share in their care and treatment, they do
not mind them as their own charge: their time and diligence is all laid out on
their Bodies; these are the Darlings they pamper, and which ingrosse all their
thoughts and care; or if through a vouchsafement they expend any the other way,
they soon rescue themselves as from an Usurpation and encroachment. But surely,
souls so weakened and emaciated will not be able to stand the least brunt in the
day of Battle with the Enemy's of their salvation, laboring under the pressure
and weight of a so much indulged Flesh. Let me have a lean, unhealthy,
neglected, deformed body, no matter, so I may find my soul sound, in good
liking, strong, and beautiful in the eyes of God.

XIV.
HOw many weary and tedious steps do many Mahometans tread in their long
Pilgrimages which multitudes of them yearly take to Meccha, the place where
their grand Seducer Mahomet was buried? and that merely for the increase of a
carnal imposturous Devotion. (that they may be reputed Hoggees i. e. Holy men,
as such are ever after styled) And how many a deluded Popish Pilgrim measures
thousands of tiresome paces, adventureth through many dangers, endures many
hardships and severe and grievous Entertainments, in a journey to the Holy
Land; and is content at last when come in view of Jerusalem to pay a great
Entrance-Tribute to the Turks for admission, and all merely to see the
Sepulcher which enclosed our Savior's body, and the place which once had the
marks of his footsteps. I am a pilgrim not by choice but by an unhappy
Necessity; my Journey is toward a Holy Land the heavenly Canaan; I Seek a
City which is from above, the New Jerusalem: which my Savior not only has but
always does bless with his presence; not in his low, abject, humbled estate;
but in his exalted wonderfully glorious presence. Shall I complain of the
tediousness of the way, the Terror of incident dangers, the sweat the toil
and laboriousness of the travel to be undergone, where the contentment and
delight at journey's end is so infinitely transcendent? What Red Sea can have
so much horror? What wilderness so much dismal and sad amazeme^t, what
occurrences can be so fearful, hardships so grievous, dangers so terrible, what
condition so necessituous or State so bewildred, as will not be rendered Amiable
and desirable when leading to the sight and enjoyment of our Savior? No
Tribute either of sorrow or death its self, but is an easy Purchase for
admittance, not to his Sepulcher but his Throne* not to see the place where the
Lord lay, but where he reigns; and not to look on, as an Alien, but to Enter
and possess as a Denizon.

XV.
SOme are so Curious as to conjecture that Christ's Prayer which he made after
his withdrawment from his Disciples, was not merely Mental but vocal,
inferring it from the manner in which the Evangelists relate it, he prayed
Saying; which they will have to imply an audible speech and voice.

However, whether we have so great a Pattern for it or no, I think there is
some advantage to be observed that secret Prayer has which is vocal above
what is Mental only, (although it be all one to God who has an ear to hear
what the heart prays as well as what the Mouth.)

1. In that by joining a voice to our Mental prayer, our Affections are more
awakened and quickened; as we find by experience, that the Sense of a Misery
when cooped up in our own thoughts may not express it self in tears* (which
are the Language of grief) but yet when we vent it to others, in our recounting
it, we cant't refrain from weeping.

2. It limits the mind more and keeps it more fixed and intent upon what is
spoken.

3. We find sometimes that vehemence of affection does force us to it, for when
our passion and devotion is ardent, and the fire is kindled within us, it
breaks forth into outward expressions, complaints or tears. I may add
lastly, that we can sometimes better form, or at least draw out in better order
our conceptions of what we pray for in an audible voice.

XVI.
WHen the Assyriant were blinded they were easily led into the midst of
Samaria. A benighted Traveller is easily deceived by false lights and Ignes
fatui, to follow their guidance which do but conduct him inro bogges and lakes.

What great advantage did the Romish Foxes make of this policy these late years
among us; first extinguishing our lights, and then by subtle Emissaries playing
their tricks in the dark: dealing with us as the Philistines did with Sampson,
first putting out our eyes and then making sport with us: Surely it was this
Dragon's tail that drew down more then the third part of the Stars from our
Firmament, and cast them to the earth to be stamped upon. And whither would our
new lights have led us? were not most of our new principles and opinions mere
Decoys, and Captains chosen (though silently) to lead us back in a return into
Egypt? But now those evil Spirits that haunted us in the night do withdraw and
disappear. Had not the mercy of Providence seasonably prevented, we might by
that time our eyes had been open have found our selves in the midst of Samaria.

XVII.
I Saw a Painter having made the Picture of a Face smiling, on a sudden with
no more then one dash of his pencil make it seem to weep. How near are the
confines of Joy and Sorrow, which with the change of a line may be made to sit
both on the same countenance: their nature is much more distant, then their
Abode. In the twinkling of an eye, in the turning of an hand, sadness may
justle out mirth; and deep sighs may be fetched from that breast whence loud
laughter made it is eruption. Pleasure may die in the same moment that gave it
it is birth, and a sudden succession of grief may turn it is cradle into a
grave. The Tears which an enlarged and vehement passion of joy had run over
with, may in the middle of their course find an Arrest and be made to Minister
unto Grief. In the flight of a minute, in the beating of a pulse, the dilating
of the Heart by a Diastole of Pleasure, may be turned into a contracting it, by
a Systole of Sorrow.

XVIII.
LIvy tells us that the Galls when they had once tasted of the Wines of Italy,
were so much taken with the pleasantness and lusciousness of them, that they
would not after rest contented with a bare commerce and trade thither for this
Wine, but fixed their resolutions by conquest to get possession of the Land
which brought it forth (and that was the inciting occasion to their Invasion)
The like we read was the occasion of that inundation of the Lombards into Italy
under Alboinus their King. P. Diacon. l. 1. c. 1.
Thus the Antepasts of glory do but provoke the desires and erect the appetite
of the believing soul: he is so far from being satisfied by foretasts, that
they do but augment his thirst after a plenary fruition. He is not content with
so small drops that are derived unto him at so great a distance from the
Fountain: nor are those degrees of grace and comfort which he gains by
holding commerce with Heaven upon earth by those two factours Prayer and Faith,
by trading in the worship and ordinances of God sufficient to allay the hunger
of his appetite: he cannot drink his fill nor slake his thirst at those
cisternes: A holy insatiablenesse does so enlarge the capacity of his soul that
the more he has the more he longs for, and the wideness of his increasing
desires is proportioned to the largeness of his receivings. Therefore his
resolves and aims are by a holy violence and conquest to get a possession in
that spiritual Canaan from whence these grapes are brought him as prelibations;
that he may there drink of that wine of the Kingdom, and of those Rivers of
pleasure.

XIX.
CHrist is wont still to back his checks and reproofs with a Reason. As to the
Disciples going to Emaus, Luk* 24. O Fools and slow of heart: but why so? Ought
not Christ to suffer, etc. to the Disciples in Simon' s house, Mat. 26. Why
trouble ye the woman? For she has wrought a good work: for the poor you have
always with you, not me: for she did it for my burial. To Mary in the Garden,
touch me not, John 20. Why? because I am not yet gone to the Father. Lastly, to
Peter for drawing his sword, Mat. 26. John 18. he subjoynes to his reprehension
a fourfould reason. 1. He that takes the sword shall perish by the sword;
therefore it is an unjust attempt to resist and hinder my passion. 2. The cup
which my Father has given, shall I not drink? therefore impossible.

3. Can I not ask my Father and he would give me more then ten Legions?
therefore the attempt is foolish.

4. How else should the Scripture be fulfilled? therefore it is undue. Our
Reproofs would have a more effectual operation, if they were thus still
attended with reason; The ears of men are generally very tender and delicate,
and a reprehension grateth on them if not attemper'd by a due conveyance. A
smart rebuke if not clearly evidenced to be just by being backed with
sufficient reason does but irritate and imbitter the minds of men: the
Plaster makes the wound rage if this Ingredient be not in the compost; the
cauterisme does more hurt then the disease. The reproof even of a righteous man
though it be an excellent oil (to allude to the Psalmists expression) yet may
break the head, if unduly administered.

XX.
Many there are that are wont to bestow visits on others, not so much out of a
motion of love and kindness, as, either not to be reputed negligent in the
formalities of common courtesy, or to make the wheels of Time seem to move the
faster by trifling it away; or to make discoveries and observations, that they
may by prying, gather up a stock of discourse for the next. The visits which
men for the most part bestow on God in his worship are out of principles
analogous to these; not out of any principle of sincere love and delight; but
either that they may not seem wanting at least in the formal and Customary
Exercises of Religion, or to pass away the time only, or it may be where they
should be Bees to suck honey, to play the Spiders and suck poison; to gather up
matter to defame and calumniate and raise an evil report on the things of God.

XXI.
AMong the Prospects which the Scripture open's to us of Eternity, my
contemplation sometimes places me in the midst of that great Gulf fixed
between Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham, and Dives in the midst of foul
Fiends, with eyes directed, now to the consideration of the one, then of the
other. Whither are all the Rich man's joys fled in which his soul was steeped
and inebriated? what is become of his heightened delights, his Music and
Masks, Unctions, Feastings ample buildings, and large and jolly
entertainments, his train of attendants, the purple and the fine Linen, his
wanton pleasures and the whole Pageantry of his happiness? On the other side,
where is the misery and contemptiblenesse, the nakedness and hunger, the aches
the soars and the stench of the poor man? These things are all vanished: and
the Scene is altered. Their past condition is changed into a present as
different each from other as Heaven from Hell; and the present is fixed in a
stability as unalterable as Eternity. Let us consider and weigh their Purchases
in the Balance of the Sanctuary: The Rich man's exchange is, the pleasures of
sin which were but for a season for those dreadful pains which are the reward
of sin, and which never shall have a season either to mitigate or conclude
them; a seeming Paradise for a real dismal Dungeon; moment any contentments for
eternal torments: Delights that are as empty as froth, and as short-lived as
the age of a Minute, for sorrows so heavy and acute, that no Metaphor can equal
or Hyperbole transcend them in expression, so durable that they shall run
parallel with Eternity. The Poor man's exchange is, from a small weight of
infelicity to an exceeding weight of glory, from a Wilderness to a Land
flowing with plenty; from a Cross to a Crown; from tears without their
saltness, sorrows deprived of their sting, griefs as short (at longest) as the
span of life; to pleasures untainted, joys in the most exalted and sublimated
quintessence, a happiness as much without a period as Eternity it self. And who
but joins with that Ecphonesis of the Father? O miserable happiness of the one
that concluded in everlasting misery! O happy misery of the other, that ended
in everlasting happiness! I had rather with Lazarus beg in rags, then be in
Dives's coat ruffling it in Silk,, and faring deliciously every day: his low
estate is so far above my contempt, that it is the object of my wish, rather
then Dives's, which is so far below my envy that it falls within my pity.

XXII.
THere may be Livery and Seisin taken of a whole Lordship only by the delivery
of a turfe of earth: and a Deed of Gift of the whole may be executed only by
giving a parcel of the goods. The Rent that is given may be small and
inconsiderable, yet if it be an anknowledgement of Homage and Fealty and
wardship, it is of great consequence. The smallest Grant that we make to Satan,
may give him a right to the whole; if he be complied with in the least
temptation it may be enough to admit him to a full possession and dominion over
us. Where this Serpent harh but insinuated his head he can with ease wind in
his whole body after: Therefore see thou grant him nothing, lest he make his
advantage of it to the claim of all. 'Twas said of Hannibal, he knew well how
to conquer, but knew not how to improve his conquests: Satan is well skilled in
either; he will easily lose no ground he has got; he will be sure to prosecute
a victory, and improve an advantage.

XXIII.
IT is strange how Peter who not long before had been so daring as to draw his
sword on a whole Regiment (as though he were his Master's Champion) and
notwithstanding all his resolves and protestations of not forsaking Christ, yet
how on a sudden he was infected with the air of the Priest's Hall; for as soon
as he had got in thither, as though a contagion had seized on him his temper
was changed, and while he did but warm himself at their fire, his zeal and
respect for his Master was abated and chilled. Many times our foot in the
Devil's snare and we are grievously entangled, where we thought we might have
been safe enough: we venture upon occasions of sin, and put our selves within
Satan's circle, thinking we are sufficiently armed and secured by peremptory
resolves and engagements, little considering, either the plausible and
insinuative nature of sin to work it self in, the treachery and deceit of our
hearts to betray us to an admission of it, or the craft and importunity of the
Tempter to win upon us. Hard it is to avoid infection in the company of those
that have the Pestilence (especially evil men having so much of that quality,
which they say is in those who have the Plague on them, that they desire to
taint others;) hard not to be seized by evil though by gentle and insensible
degrees in the society of the wicked. Evil converse cannot but leave a tincture
of corruption upon us if rare, if more frequent a deep and double dye. The
Spirits and manners of men are by a secret bewirching enchantment transformed
into the conditions and fashions of those with whom they communicate. It is not
easy to retain our fresh taste (like fishes) while we live in salt waters. We
may say generally of Rivers that they never run within the same bancks without
mixing their current, (though the River Savus streameth together with the Danow
in the same channel without blending his waters with him, as Mr. Blunt assures
us.) Waters passing through the earth have a quality and savor derived to them
from the nature of the Soils and Minerals they have their course through.

XXIV.
WE read of some rhat by use have brought themselves to swallow Poison without
harm, yea, and to make their food of it. And Albertus tell's us of a Girl that
fed continually on Spiders: So strange a power has custom to alter the temper
of the body, and to change almost it is very Economy: The like effect it
likewise has on the souls of men, in reference to those pernicious sins which
have most of the poison of the old Serpent in them; from which their
inclinations and dispositions were at first utterly averse and abhorrent, but
by custom and habituating themselves to them, they come to make them at last
matters of daily practice: which perfect conquest over all good inclinations of
their mind and reluctancies of their consciences that they may arrive to, the
Devil leads them by these steps; beginning by wicked suggestion, he offers
the poisonous Pill, but being gilded; so Pleasure is ushered in; Pleasure
draws on consent, consent makes way for practice, and practice brings on
custom, which by excuses, palliations, defenses, obstinacy, and lastly
glorying and boasting, corrects, evirtuateth and rendereth ineffectual all
motions or endeavors of conscience from within, and all influence of
Applications from without. But such Venomous creatures can live no where but in
Hell, Heaven is a country will never admit them (as they say, Ireland, Majorca
and some other places will not enterrain any poisonous thing.)

XXV.
I Have seen a pretry deceit used to keep some from their meat, that they dare
not eat, by laying shreds of Lute-strings on it which have appeared like Worms;
and from their drink by putting into it the counterfeit of a Toade. Satan often
plays this part, and uses such a wile to affright the children of God from
their Father's Table, and to make rhem out of conceit with duties: he presents
to their sight, the corruptions of their performances, and so represents them
that they shall appear formal though never so zealous, proud or hypocritical
though attended with never so much humility and sincerity. When thou have done
thy work then he comes to thee with his Sophistry to put thee into a distrust,
that what thou have done will turn to thy great hurt, and opening the parts of
thy duty tells thee, here thy corruption wrought, there thy pride discovered
it is stirrings, here thou were as cold as if thou cared'st not whether thou
were heeded or no, there thou had lost thine heart; and is there not death
in the pot, think thou? or expectest thou wages for what deserves stripes?
These sleights he uses to dishearten believers from their services, and he
has this great advantage that they are usually very apt to suspect themselves;
their humors are stirred to his hand, and therefore he may the more easily
work on them; they are ready to give credit to any that comply with their
pensive apprehensions; and therefore are easily induced to use Satan's
Perspective, which at one end magnifies the evil of their performances, and
makes it seem greater then it is; at the other end extenuates the Good and
makes it appear less. It is easy for Satan to press him down that is already
sinking, and to dye that soul sable black, which is of a dark and sad hue
before. Thou that art not ignorant of Satan's devices, show him that thou see
the Sophistry, and understandest the cheat.

XXVI.
THere is that we are wont to call Good nature, which however desirable, yet
does very much prepare and expose those in whom it is found to temprations:
(...).
for it is nothing bnt a pliable, yielding, waxen frame, which is so much the
more subject to evil impressions rather then good, as wickedness is more
insinuative then virtue: such flexible twigs are easily bowed into
crookedness; such a soft temper of mind is easily wrought and molded to a
compliance with any the most dangerous suggestions, as the soft grisly head of
the Infant is framed into any fashion by the Midwife and Nurse. Their facility
and bashfulnesse often betrayeth them to a Grant of that which yet they secretly
condemn themselves for not denying; and they know not how not to comply with
the desires of the boldest and most unreasonable Insinuatour. That bashfulness
is dangerously bold which durst offend God, lest it displease Men. Nothing more
laudable then a firm inflexible temper when found in the way of righteousness.
Let me never be abashed to deny what another is so shameless as Sinfully to
ask: Let my heart be wax to the impressions of goodness, but marble to those
of evil: as pliant as an Osier to the hand of Virtue, as stiff as an Oak to
Satan and his Instruments. Let a righteous and just Request be as a command to
me, let me obey it as a Law though it be but a Desire: but let an unjust and
wicked demand be cast back by me with abhorrency. If my Friend in any thing be
a Factour or Spokesman for Satan, let me bid him, get him behind me (as our
Savior did Peter.) I Will use him as Moses did his Rod, while a rod he held it
familiarly in his hand, but when it began to wind and hiss and show it self a
Serpent, he cast it down and ran from it Better lose my Friend then my
Innocence; and safest to keep at a distance from him when he breathes
contagion. I may be an Adversary to his uice while a friend to his person, like
that Archer Alcon who when the Dragon was enfolded with the Child, could strike
his Arrow in the one and not hurt the other.

XXVII.
I Find both by the course of God's Providence and and the instructions of his
word, that he has sometimes a Rod to lay on the back of Friends and Favors to
bestow on enemies. But surely God know's who he is dealing with; and then he
favors these in Anger, and punishes them in Love. He gave the mutinous
Israelites Quails, but so sawc'd that they might wish them out of their mouths
before they swallowed them. God fatneth some for the day of slaughter (as the
old Heathens were wont to deal with their Sacrifices, first to feed them, then
Crown them, and at last kill them:) and lifts many up high that their fall
might be the greater; who might apply that expression to their case, thou have
lifted me up, and cast me down; And others he casts down that they may by a
happy rebound rise the higher. I would rather be dieted with the three
Children's fare, bread and water, then on Isreal's Quails; rather gater crumbs
under the table with Lazarus as God's friend, then sit at it, as Dives's guest:
And I choose affliction and adversity with Love, before happiness and
prosperity without it. Lord, as I pray, that thou would not rehuke me in
arger (I do not deprecate thy Rebuke (my sins call for it) but thine Anger,
this word has the Accent of my desire, not that) so likewise, that thou
would never bestow mercy on me in judgment, or blessings with a curse
attending.

XXVIII.
SOmetimes I have intermitted or deferred the performance of duty upon
apprehension of some present indisposednesse and unaptnesse: I have thought;
better not set mine hand to God's work then spoil it: better omit mine
offering then give the lame and blind in Sacrifice; the next time I Will make
amends when I am fitter to do it: And the next time perchance the task has
been more irksome to me, and my Plea of unfitness has seemingly more strength
then before; so that what before I did defer, now I could be content should
be wholly neglected. Have I found thee, O mine enemy? here the Serpents head
discovers it self. Hereafter when this plea is put in it shall be cast back
without hearing: I will check the least thought of loathnesse toward the
performance of the work I have stinted my self unto: A lame prayer may get to
heaven: I may by rubbing and chafing my heart get a warmth in it. If I put
forth my strength, I may break asunder the cords and withs with which I am
bound, The Spirit may come and fill my sails, and I may have the wind with me,
though the tide be against me. However, that Rule of Physicians is well
applied, to practice here, who advice weak and nauseating stomachs to eat,
though they have no present appetite, because they shall feel the effects
thereof in their future increasing strength.

XXIX.
THe Turks have a saying concerning the Tartars (whom they repute a very wise
Nation) that other Nations) have their wisdom written in their Books,
Busbequ. epist.
but the Tartars have devoured their books, and so have wisdom lodged in
their breasts which on all occasions they can draw forth to practice. Many
Christians have the Word of God written in their Bibles, but they never (as St.
John) swallowed the Book. The Laws of God are best inscribed in the Tables of
the Heart, the soul is the best Phylacterie and Repository for them, and
Practice the fairest Transcript of them. He is a good Text-man whose life is a
comment on Scripture.

What actual benefit can there accrue to us of Gold in the Mine or Pearls in
the bottom of the Sea, except we dig for the one and coin the Bullion of it
into Money, Il vin nel fiasco non cava la sete del capo Wine in the bottle
quenches not a man's thirst.
and dive for the other that we may have them to apply to our use. He to whom
the Word of God is not as his necessary food, that does not tanquam saeer
Helluo, devour, digest, and convert it in succum and sanguinem, is like him,
who as long as he had Plato's book of the Immortality of the soul in his hands,
he was a Platonist, but as soon as he had laid it by, he became an Epicure
again. As we use to say of some Physicians, that they are better acquainted
with Galen then with the Disease; so of such we may say, that they carry their
Wisdom rather in their Book then in their Heart.

XXX.
ONe of the most Tragical and sad arguments of humane Misery, that is wont to
be brought on the Scene, is that of the Purchase of the unhappy King
Lysimachus, who made an exchange of his Crown and Kingdom for one draught of
Water: which bargain the constraint of that necessity he was reduced to, does
sufficiently excuse; for now his soul sat on his lips being forced out of his
body by a violent Thirst, and a Kindome was not an overrate in the purchase of
that aquavitae by which the King's life was redeemed (though the water when
drunk might be distilled through the Alembicks of his eyes in sorrow for so
great unhappiness.) Who then will account that a hard saying in the Laws of
Christ that commands us to forsake all and follow him; where the is Life; not
a temporal Life only, which is always subect to the changes and incursions of
fortune, exposed to labor, infirmities and diseases of the Body, infested with
more troublesome and incessant distempers of the Mind, always either languishing
under chillness of Fears, or burning in Feverish Desires; a Life still
besieged with temptations: but an Eternal Life, which is not only free from all
those Evil Attendants with which the other is rendered miserable, but possessed
also with an unconceivable Felicity. Who would not go and sell all that he
has for the purchase of such a Pearl? who would not disesteem all though he
were as great a Monarch as Adam or Noah for the gaining of that living water
which he that drinks of shall never thirst more, for out of his belly shall
flow ^ivers to life eternal? yea, who would not barter his Trifles for an
immarcescible Crown?

XXXI.
THey say of Trifoile that by observation guesses may be taken from it of the
future season of the weather; that when it generally bear's many flowers it is a
sign of plenty of rain and showers to succeed, and when few, it portendeth
great drought. No better prognostic can be taken of what Heaven designeth
concerning a people, then from the Lives of Christians; if they are fruitful
and plentiful in good works, that is a forerunner of God's bountiful effusion
and showring down of mercies, but when they are generally barren, it is a sad
sign of approaching judgment, and of God's making such a Land dry and barren
for the iniquity of them that dwell therein.

XXXII.
It Is said of an Eastern King that he was so fat and gross that he was not
sensible of pain when Needles were stuck into his body: And the Numidian Bears,
they say, are so fat that they feel no stripes though blood be drawn from them.
Those who, as the Psalmist phraseth it, are enclosed in their own fat; who are
puffed up with a worldly prosperity and wallow in a voluptuous plenty, are so
insensible and obdurate, that, though every new sin that is committed by them
fetches blood of the soul; and every wilful sin be to it as the Dagger driven
up to the haft in Eglon's bowels, yet they feel it not. See how stupidly and
senselesly the Epicurean Carnalist runs himself upon the pikes without fear
or feeling, Job 15. 26. He runs upon God, even on his neck, upon the thick
bosses of his buckler, but whence such a gross stupid insensiblenesse? v. 27.
because he covers his face with his fatness, and makes collops of fat on
his flanks: He has so gorged himself and is so plunged in sensual delights,
that all sense is drowned and lost in him. God no where threatens a more
benumbed and Lethargick frame of Spirit, then where he says, Make the heart of
this people Fat.

XXXIII.
IT has always been the fate of Neutrality to please neither party; and those
who would compound and medley themselves to comply with opposite interests, are
disliked and maligned on both sides: therefore the Praetor of the Samnites
wisely observed in Livy, Media via nec amicos parit, nee inimicos tollit, the
middle way neither procures friends nor removes enemies: As the Flying Fish,
which being partly Bird, partly Fish, is still persecuted in the water by the
Fish, and in the air the birds have an enmity against him. Thus Alphonsus
observed of the Senenses, that being Neuters in the Italian War, were
afterward made a prey on both sides; comparing them to such as dwell in the
middle story of a house, annoyed from beneath by smoke,, and by urine from
above. Such is the condition of the Religious Hypocrite, who will give God his
outside, but bestow his heart on some other Treasure; who will serve the Devil
and his Lusts under Gods Livery; who will give him the courtship of the lip and
knee; but his Heart falls down before some other Idol; and in his breast he
recanteth what his tongue and gestures pronounce: And in this Scenical and
artificial dress he applaudeth himself secretly for thus Acting his part with
two faces, for his wise and crafty compliance to the doubly gainful service of
two Masters. As though he had found out the Polirick Art of Atoneing the
opposite Interests of Heaven and Hell, and marrying and compounding them in one
common temper. But alas! nothing has more in it of Folly; for because he is a
Saint though only in profession therefore the world hates him which hates
Sheeps clothing though upon a Wolves back; Chi pecorasi fa il lupo la mangia.
He that makes himself a Sheep, the Wolf will eat him.
and because he has the form only denying the power therefore God hates him
the more, in whose eye, simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas, sin appears
double, when beheld under a Mask of Holiness: The world hates him because he
seems good, and God because he no more then seems so. Religion is the best
Armor in the World, but he that makes a cloak of it, will find when God
calls him to a reckoning that the stuff will cost him dear. He that under a
specious and vain pretension of Sanctity hides a Nest of Lusts, will at length
find himself as much deluded in his close contrivance, as that Cardinal
Campegio was in Henry the Eight's time, whose twenty richly covered
Sumpter-horses, being by chance overturned in Cheapside, discovering nothing
but a petty Magazine and Trumpery of old Bootts and Shoes and Marrow-bones,
exposed him to the just scoff of all. Better timely uncase thy self, throw off
thy Vizour and show thy self what thou art, then appear to be what thou art
not: but 'twere best of all for thee no longer to personate and merely act a
part, but truly to be what thou have endeavored to seem.

XXXIV.
YOung Lapwings when hatched are (as it were) so impatient of delay, that
before the shells open of themselves; they break their passage through those
walls not enduring to be pent up by their confinement, and as soon as their
head and feet are at liberty, they run away with the remainder yet upon them.
Many we have seen whom a strong confidence grounded on but weak abilities has
put forward before their time; who have rather rushed out then been sent forth;
that have put out on their voyage before their vessel has been sufficiently
ballasted or rigged: Envoys that have gone forth before they have had
Instructions, like Ahimaaz who would needs be running, though without a command
for it, and if Examind can give as little an account of what Message they bring
as he could: Such, as are like unthrifty Heirs, when they should be gathering
Knowledge, spend faster then they get; their expenses exceed their receivings:
Such who venture to set up, though all the stock they have, if any, is
(perchance) a borrowed one: who enter on an Embassy without credentials. Such
Lapwings as these that go from under the wing of their Dam while their heads
are green and the shell on them do soon run wild: The conclusion is that as the
enterprise was rash, the progress uneffectual and unprofitable, so they reap
in the end blushing and discomfort. The protection of a flock against ravenous
heasts is a weighty charge, and though young David could slay the Lion and the
Bear when they set upon his sheep, yet every ruddy youth is not sit to be a
Shepherd. Where a rare precocity of understanding anticipateth years and
supplieth age, yet methinks (that I may here apply what one said) they might
tarry at Jericho till their beards are grown. I ever thought it more safe to be
drawn forth and forced by importunities to set our hands to that Work for
which, who is sufficient? rather then to rush on it uncalled as that for which
any might be sufficient that would think himself so: It is obedience to go
when we are called, but to be running forth before a Gall, is a too forward
officiousness, arguing pride and boldness. If such Novices would go and
learn what that of St. James means, Jam. 3. 10.
My brethren be not many teachers, they would find it would give Writ of ease
to their too forward Adventures.

XXXV.
OUr Savior (Luke 4.) would not give the Devil Audience even where he spoke
truth, I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God; refusing to have the
Father of lies bear witness of him, because he knew he used that truth only to
countenance error: And on the same account the Apostles (Acts 16, 17.)
silenced the Spirit of Divination, and set a gagge in his mouth when he would
have defiled the Gospel by preaching it. Mat. 4. 6. we find the Devil quoting
Scripture, but strangely maimed and perverted, to make it serve his own turn;
for one part is left out, the other misapplied. We may be sure this Impostour
has never any Errand but deceit, whatever Message he seems to bring: This Liar
always mixeth some truth with his Tale that may make way for it to enter into
belief. For Vice and Falsehood must still borrow the assistance of Virtue and
Truth. There is always true corn strewed under a pit-fall; and they are full
and weighty ears which we daube with lime to deceive the poor Birds in a snow.
In Lottery's there are some few prizes among many Blanks to keep up the Game.
Even in the dunghill of Mahomet's Alcoran there are some jewels, and Sergius
has bespangled and decked it with some parcels and branches of Scripture and
Christianity.

Et partem very fabula quaeque tenet. This great Deceiver Satan, deals as
Cheaters are ordinarily wont, who to make their Impostures more current and
passable, use some means to gain a credit before they can cozen. Alchymists
bring forth sometimes true and real Gold out of their furnaces pretending it
made there, which was secretly conveyed thither, that they may the more easily
impose upon belief. Let me beware of Satan's hook though covered with never so
specious and pleasing a bait. Though his Pills be gilded, yet they are
poisonous. Though he take the covering of an Angel of Light on him, yet by a
circumspect eye the black Fiend may be discerned under it: There suspect him
most where his pretenses are most plausible.

XXXVI.
THe Cinnamon Tree is killed by water, which quickens other Trees and makes them
fruitful; and Narne (as Pliny says) becomes the dryer for Rain: It is likewise
reported that the ground about Armagh in Ireland grows more barren by being
manured. I find as great a wonder that St. Paul tell's us of, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
that the same doctrine should work the savor of death in some, which to
others was a savor of life unto life: and that the preaching of the Cross
which is to them that are saved, 1 Cor. 1.
the Power of God, should be to another sort which perish, Folly. The same
Light of the Word which gives to sound eyes comfort and refreshment, increases
the distempers of those eyes that are sore and makes them smart the more; and
the Warmth of it (for it is a Fire, which has both these qualities) may exhale
a fragrant savor from those hearts that are as a garden which the Lord has
planted; and noisome streams from such as are Corrupt. Thus, what stays the
stomach of one man will (as Physicians tell us) make another to regorge: and
the sweetest Honey procure's in some the most bitter choler.

XXXVII.
I Have sometimes wondered at a strange perverseness of the Israelites, who
when God Slew them then they sought him, and returned early: but when they had
Quails to the full, Ps. 78. 34.
and Manna in abundance then they repined and tempted him most. Like some Dogs
which if you stroke them they will snarle and be ready to turn upon you, but if
you strike them they crouch and fawn: or like those things in Nature which
being gently handled will sting (as Nettles) but being crushed hard they will
reflect no smart. Terent.
That Father in the Comaedian hit upon the right cause of his Son's
untowardness, Male te docuit meafacilitas multa: and Servants are no where more
apt (...) (as Philo phraseth it) so to behave themselves as if they had no
Master, Philo. (...).
then where they most experience his Lenity and Goodness. We may daily observe
it, that the too gentle disposition of Governors (...), Clem. Alex.
is apt to cause and cherish those discontented and Rebellious humors, which a
rigorous severity curb's and restrain's. Yea, the Man after God's own heart,
while he was kept in Chase and hunted on the Mountains like a Partridge, was so
jealous and sensibly conscientious; that, for but cutting off the skirt of his
unjust and causeless Pursuer's garment, as though the same Instrument had
wounded the tendrest part of his soul, his heart smote him: And yet when
brought to his ease and plenty, and Courtly jollity, he boldlyadventures to
flesh himself in those Crimina devoratoria salutis, Tert.
Adultery and Murder: Whole Camels will go down now, where a Gnat was
strained at erewhile: and these foul sins though mingled with Blood are not so
soon disgorge by Repentance, as a more innocent action was before. Thus a
condition of prosperity and affluence and immunity from evil, does as it were
debauch the mind and make it grow wanton by excess; whereas nature when kept
under restraint and depression, is capable of just obedience: as in the body, a
high and full Diet breed's many noxious and superfluous humors, whereas a
spare feeding keeps it both clean and healthful. We are most fruitful in a Low
estate; as Trees in an humble Valley are fertile, but on a high Hill more
barren. There Is as much variety in the tempers of our souls in reference to the
different conditions of Adversity and Prosperity, as there is in some
Fountains, which in the night are warm, in the daytime cold: or that Indian
Taddy we read of, which is sweet before the Sun rises on it, but when warmed
with it is beams it becomes Sower. It Was when he was pampered in the Land
flowing with milk and Honey, that Jesurun waxed fat and kicked; and became more
Unruly then he had been before, while under the Discipline of the scourge in a
dry and barren Desert.

XXXVIII.
MAn that was once in honor, and placed little lower then the Angels, having
lost his Birthright, is now become lower then the Beasts that perish; and the
Scripture now sends him to School to them; to the Ant to learn Industry, to
the Ox and the Ass to learn Duty to God, to the Dove to learn Innocence, to the
Serpent to learn Wisdom. But how many do descend so far even below their
Degraded Estate, that they transcribe these Patterns not in the Good but the
evil; and whereas they should make use of them as Tutours and Monitours, they
degenerate into the very Nature of beasts, and make Nebuchadnezzar's punishment
their option. We know that Centaures made up of half Man, and half Beast came
not from Thessaly, but had their original in Pindar's Poetic fancy, he was the
Prometheus that fashioned them; and Galen considering the utter
irreconcileablenesse of the fiction with principles of Anatomy, is very angry
at his Vanity in it: But we may find many such Monsters in Morality, if we
consider the strange discomposure that is in the Souls of Men; where the
difference is only, that here the Prodigy is more wonderful, in that the Beast
is placed above the Man, Passion and Lust above Reason. How much rather should
men endeavor to advance their Natures above their present Sphaere, to recover
and raise them rather then thus depress them: and if they will needs forsake
their Humanity, to assume the nature of Angels, and succed to that voided Rank
which the Prinee of the morning was willing to leave.

XXXIX.
POpe Alexander the Fifth, who had been so bountiful to the Poor, that he had
left little or nothing to himself (Records do not abound with many such Popes)
would often take occasion to say merrily of himself, that he was a rich Bishop,
a poor Cardinal and a beggarly Pope. Many are thus retrograde in Christianity;
like Nebuchadnezzar's Image, the further off from the Beginning the more their
worth and goodness decay's, as in that, the further from the head the courser
the Metal; their first commencing Christian had a golden beginning, they went
on to a Silver progress, and in the conclusion they are all earthy: Or as we
see salt Candles, they blaze a while at first kindling with fair hopes and a
clear luster, but they soon wear out to Leaks and Snuffs; and expire at last in
smoke and stench. True Saints go up the Hill to Zion, every day bears them a
step nearer Heaven; but these go down the Hill, and are further from Salvation
in the evening of their life then when they first believe: Whereas they should
be like the Sun going on from strength to strength, till they come to their
Meridian luster, they rather resemble him as he was in Ahaz's time when he
stood still; for in this subject the case is one, where non progredi est
regredi, he that does not go forward in Christianity, goes backward; He is
already come to a decrease of goodness, that does not strive after an increase
of it. Many the higher they rise in the World, the more they descend and fall
in goodness; and their true riches decrease and are impaired by the increase
of outward Acccessions: like Trees which as they advance higher in growth,
their Roots proportionably go deeper downward into the Earth; and as Stars
which the higher they are the more their beams are contracted and narrowed. The
Devil effects on them what he did but tempt our Savior to, no sooner are they
raised to a high Pinnacle, but straight it follows that they cast themselves
down; and being placed on a Mountain where they have a more large and Alluring
View of the World, they fall down before Satan.

XL.
I have sometimes observed such a thing as a proud Humility in the world. Some
will reject a merited Commendation only with a desire to be commended for
rejecting it, and that their Esteem may grow by their seeming restraint of
it is increase; these look one way and row another, and shun praise with a
greater vainglory; they hate pride, but so as that there is pride in their very
hatred of it. 'Twas a smart reproof of Diogenes, who trampling on Plato's rich
Bed out of contempt, was told, that he trampled on it with more pride then
Plato possessed it. Some are wont to enquire into the blemishes and crimes of
their own Actions and discourses, on purpose or hear that it was well done or
spoken, and without blemish: There may be an equal vanity sometimes in
praising and dispraising our selves; for as they who commend themselves desire
consent, and seek after others approbation, so likewise many times they who
balm themselves, seek after opposition and desire they may be contradicted:
Such have petty Arts and contrivances to lay a foundation for a Reputation
where they would seem to be undermining it, and closely to raise an esteem
where openly they seem to design the ruining of it. Because the way to be
exalted is to be abased, therefore they will seem to cast themselves down in
their own opinion that they may rise in the esteem of others. While they seem
to be pouring contempt on themselves, they are drinking in the waters of
vanity: Their humility and modesty is only Scenical, a dress and Mask; and
usually at times they are discerned through their vizour; their dissimulation
is not of perpetual continuance (ficta cito in naturam suam recidunt) As the
Devil sometime said to Job, touch him in his body and see if he will not curse
thee to thy face; so touch such a man a little in his reputation and see if he
will not grow impatient, make an assault upon his esteem and see if his vanity
do not cast off the Mantle and betray his humor which he feign would have
concealed. There Is no more Critical Indication of our Humility whether it be
serious or only Personated, then by this, whether we are content to hear
dispraise not only from our selves but from others.

XLI.
I meet with an excellent advice of a Heathen (soexcellent, Anton. (...).
that I cannot but think it proceeded from a higher Dictate then that of his own
spirit, as likewise many other sayings, both of the same and other Stoical
Authors) to procure that which in the issue is the Goal, which all men's
pursuits do drive at, Contentment; (...). To will nothing but what God wills.
Methinks, this is like a North-west pasage or a shorter cut to a Treasure
greater then that of the Indies, to a haven of Satisfaction and Rest, which men
seek to arrive to generally by a wide compass of vain contrivances: This is
such an excellent Elixir that the very touch of it turn's all into Gold. This
is that Panacea and Universal remedy that preventeth and removes all
discontents, frettings, tumults and disqviets, murmurings and discouragements
of the soul, and put's it into a temper so equal so calm and serene, that it
does in a measure anticipate its future Happiness by a present enjoyment. For
when our will is thus as it were resolved and melted into the will of God, we
have all that we desire and nothing can happen to us but what we will, and what
more needs there to make us happy here? This is a higher degree then mere
submitting our selves to God's will, (which yet is a high attainment,) for it
makes the divine will and out's te be the same: This is the ready way to
procure riches and honors and pleasures, not by using endeavors to Add to
our Wealth, Reputation, and Carnal enjoyments (for thus we find by experience,
that he that has most, has greatest want in his store) but by a more
compendious and less tiresome way, by Detracting from our desires and by
reducing them to a due proportion, and thus we shall find it true, that He has
most that has as much as he desires; as he is not Rich that has much, but he
that has enough, nor he Indigent that has little, but he that craves more;
for we are not rich or poor, happy or unhappy, honorable or mean so much
according to the proportion of what we possess as of what we desire. Therefore
I commend his answer, who when his friend wished him, that the Gods would give
him whatever he desired; Jambl. in vita Pythag.
nay rather (says he) that they would give me to desire but what they give.

XLII.
WHen Nebuchadnezzar straightly begirt Jerusalem and they were reduced to
extremities, the Jews made a solemn Covenant with God to dismiss their
Servants and set them free: but no sooner had the King removed his siege and
left the City open, but they reverse and repeal their Vow, and bring back their
Servants to their former bondage.

How often do we find such whom God has beleaguered with an Affliction, or
planted his battery against by a disease, and seemed to have marked out
fordeath make Covenants and Promises of a future reformation, and of putting
away their sin, which yet when he withdraws his terrors, and puts up his
Arrows, or causes the sickness to retreat, those ties do no more bind them
then the Withs did Sampson, but they arise and go out and do as at other
times: while their backs smart under the Rod and they sit on the margent of the
grave, their spirits stoop, their passions are broken and the heat of them
assuaged, their thoughts are humbled to a Sobriety; then to be liberal of
Promises is an easy Bounty: but when the storm is over and they return to their
former freedom and delight in sensible Converses, then they are hidebovnd and
restrained in performances, and rescind former engagements: the sighs of their
sickbed which they turned into penitent groans are now vanished into air and
forgotten; the sad reflections on their former vanity's, the serious
Recollections of their way's, which they were reduced to when the flesh sat
uneasily upon them, and dwelt in sorrow, are now as little thought on, as the
dolorous accents of their grief. When they are come newly out of the Furnace of
affliction, while the smell of fire is yet on them they are scrupulous and
tender; but it is but as those who come out of a hot stove, that shrink from a
cold air at first, but by degrees are soon brought to their former hardiness
of temper if the soul be not changed, though there may for a while some
religious color appear in the man's face, he will at last return to his former
habit.

It was therefore wise advice which Theodoricus Bishop of Coleine gave to
Sigismund the Emperor, who demanding how he might be directed the way to
heaven, he answered If thou live so as thou promisedst in a painful fit of the
Gout or Stone. The Israelites when they had been humbled with the voice out of
the fire, the uproar in all the Elements, the thunder, darkness and terror of
Mount Horeb, were very prodigal of their promises, All these things will we
do: but God foresaw, though they spoke as they intended in that distress that
they would after be no less niggardly in their performances, O that there were
such a heart in them! and what people ever more rebellious then they? Never was
a heart harder then Pharoah's; and yet upon the repetition of every Plague; how
Couchant is the Lion! how does he fawn and crouch to the Power which his
stubbornness incensed! at every stroke, how he cries out, Spare me this once
and I will offend no more! And at length when Death had made all Egypt at once
to ring with Passing-Bells, and his Palaces were even invaded by that king of
terrors, he suddenly gives the Israelites a dismission, and as it were
thrust's them forth as if he could not be soon enough rid of them, Rise up,
get you forth from among us: And yet no sooner were they gone but the stream of
his Passion has a reflux, being only diverted by that Judgment, and he makes
after them with the whole Posse of his Country to fetch them back again.

Lord, let never my holy resolutions go away with my Afflictions, nor my Health
dispense with the Vows of my Sickness: Let me not, when I have in my
distress found Sanctuary in thy mercy as a Votary, in my enlarged condition
indulge my self the loosnesse of a Libertine: Let me quit my credit, and
faithfully pay my vows, and discharge the Bonds I have entered into with thee
in my necessitous and low state. Let Immunity from evil never render me such a
stranger to what I were in distress, that I should recoyle from my promises,
and disown them.

FINIS.
The Spiritual Be: Or A MISCELLANY, etc. The Second Part.
I.
IT is now no new advertisement, that the Spirit of God himself does in
Scripture make use of heathenish speeches and observations, and apply them to a
Spiritual use. Thus St. Paul took notice of a Paganish Inscription of an Altar
(...), and begun his Sermon to the Athenians on that text: and in the same
place v. 28. he quotes one of their Poets, Aratus, (...). As also Menander 1
Cor. 15. 33. (...). And Callimachus (or Epimenides) Tit. 1* 12. (...) etc. And
James 1. 17. we have a perfect Hexameter verse, (...) etc. and a double Jambick
2 Pet. 2. 27. Surely the warranty of such an Example will give good ground for
our making use of the borrowed helps of humane Writers in Sacred things, so we
deal with them as God commands the Israelites to deal with the Canaanitish
captives, Deuteronomy. 21. 10 11.
if they would wed them, to shave their head and pare off their nails etc. if
we divest them of their paganish superfluities. For surely it would reflect
injuriously upon the wisdom of God to think that he has given the Gold and
treasures of Arts and Learning, the spoils of the Egyptians, to be converted
and made use of only for the making of a golden Calfe (such are all other
subjects compared with divine) rather then to be applied to the use of the
Sanctuary, and the Service of God, as Exodus 35. to the building and adorning of
the Tabernacle: so be, that they be made to pass through the fire (as the
Midianitish gold and silver, Number. 31. 22) and be thoroughly refined and purged
from their heathenish dross. He that furnished Cyrus with treasure and riches
of secret places, Is. 45 3.
for the building of his Temple, Ezra 1. 2. doubtless had an eye to the
framing and edifying of his Church in that light of knowledge and literature
with which he has imbelished such writers. Hagar must not bear children to her
self, and her Mistress Sarah obtain none by her; and as long as this Handmaid
has her eyes toward her Mistress in due subserviency, and is observant of
her direction, while she seeks not to rule in the house, why should she be cast
out? Elias did not nauseate or reject the food that was brought to him by a
Raven, an unclean creature under the Law.

II.
The Mahometans are wont at their entrance into their Mosquits (or Churches) to
put off their shoos and leave them behind them: and so when they bein their
devotions they stop their ears, and fix their eyes, that their thoughts be not
diverted. When we enter into the house of God we ought to take heed unto our
goings: the shoos we are to put off (as Moses when he entered upon holy ground)
are worldly and carnal affections; we must divest our-selves of all earthly
encombrances, not bring that into God's presence which may profane his
Sanctuary, but wash our hands in Innocence before we compass his Altar: much
less may we carry into his house any resolutions of sin, or allowed and
cherished inclinations to it; for this were to enter not only with shoes on,
but with feet filthy and bemired, which cannot but pollute the ground we tread
on, and cause God not only to be angry at, but loath and abominate us. And when
we are engaged in duties of worship, a strict guard must be kept on our Senses,
that they be not inlets to that which may steal away our Hearts, and through
their treachery our Sacrifice be not found (what the Heathens counted
Prodigious in their Victimes) without a Heart.

III.
A Vine which is one of the most fruitful of Trees, (made use of by God to
compare the Christian unto) if it be left to its natural excrescencies,
unregarded and unpruned, shootes forth into many superfluous branches and
stemmes, and spends its most g^nerous strength that way, and so becomes weak
and fruitless. If God should leave the best Christian to the vicious
exorbitances of his own heart and affections, and not curb and prune them, and
retrench the extravagancy of his desires, his strength would be spent on that
which profits not, and he would soon grow barren and useless. There is need
that both by his restraining grace he reduce and limit our desires, and by the
sharpness of afflictions he cut short and check their excrescencies. Jonah
grew fond of his Gourd, and God smote it, and therein nipt and restraind the
unrulinesse of his Spirit, which would have spent his love and delight on a
silly plant. Hezekia's pride was grown to such a height, that he must needs
vent it by boasting of his treasure; but God blasteth it by sending the
Chaldaeans to plunder him. When mine heart does irregularly run out after
vanity, let the smart of thine hand correct my wanderings, and tame the
wildness of my affections. Better I should bleed by thy pruning hook, then be
cut down by thy Axe as withered and fruitless, and cast into the burning.

IV.
WE may observe that Lightning does work with more potency and force, where it
meets with the greatest resistance; and acts more on that which has hard
and firmly compacted parts, then on what is soft and yiedling, and gives easy
passage to it: hence it is, that it has been sometimes said to pass through
the scabbard without any effecton it, and to melt the sword in it; hence also,
the hard Oak and firm Cedar are exposed to its force, and feel its effects,
when the Bay which is of a more yielding tender nature, is passed over
untouched by it. The Judgments of God in their working are much accommodated to
the temper of the Subjects on which they light. Where they meet with a
stubborn, unpliant enemy, they fall with greater force, and are most pressing
and heavy; they will break, where they cannot bow: the foolish heart (Prove.
19.) fretteth against the Lord, he is careless and rages; but what is the
effect? The man that hardneth his neck when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy: those that are as wild Bulls in the net of
God, their own fury and rage does but the more entangle, perplex, and weaken
them; but where God meets with souls of a soft, complying, and obedient
temper, his dealings are accordingly gentle, he afflicts them lightly, and
does not stir up all his wrath, he does but shake his rod over them, with which
he lasheth the backs of others. In this respect, because God does thus wisely
and carefully distinguish between the different states and tempers of the
Patients he deals with, he is said to correct us in Judgment.

V.
AN indiscreet, imprudent reproof has usually a double ill effect first, in
that by the fault of the manager (as a good story may be quite spoild in the
relating) the action in its self good, is rendered for the present irksome and
tedious: as a plaster laid on the wrong side may only smart, when on tbe right
it would have cured. And next, in that it leaves a prejudice behind it very
disadvantageous at the like future occasion. A good stock of prudence and
caution is in no duty more requisite then in this of Christian reproof, which
requires such an exact observation of circumstances, time, manner, persons,
etc. to a wise management of it. As I desire never to act that tacit part of a
Flatterer, with silence seemingly to sooth and cherish him that deserves
reproof; and by a Friendly Cruelty to betray him into a security: so I think it
both more safe and more wise to tarry on the shore, rather then lanch forth,
when I know the wind will be contrary, and beat me back again with bruises and
rents. Where the person has so much of the swine and dog in him, that he will
trample under feet instruction and reproof, and turn again and rent me.
Christ's prohibition warns us not to dispense holy things, Luke 7. 5.
nor to cast pearls to him. When the dose meets with such tough ill humors,
that it does but stir and anger them, not purge them out, there mostly it is
more wisely withheld then administered.

VI.
CHrist I find before his passion, Mark. 14.
repeateth the same prayer thrice, Math. 26. 44.
Father if it be possible etc. which yet is so far from a Tautology, that there
is in it the divinest Art of Rhetoric. For the reiteration is a great evidence
of the strong intention and affection of the mind: as it was the overflowing of
compassion, which doubled the Compellation in that, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the Prophets; and of love, in that, Simon, Simon, Satan has
desired to sift thee: and the sweet Singer of Israel is no where more
Patheticall, then where he twice doubles the Note, Sing praises to our God sing
praises; sing praises to our King, sing praises; all crowded within the
compass of one verse: he found so much melody on that string, that he could
not leave harping on it. Heaven cannot be proof against a Petition so often
darted toward it, it pierces the more forcibly where it is so by renewed
applications driven home. In a strong Prayer a force is used upon Heaven, the
violent take it by force, and when the strokes come so thick, and are so urged
by redoubling, there can be no resistance. But further I observe likewise that
our Savior's latter prayer is somewhat longer then the rest (as the wave which
comes last swells highest) his mind was inflamed to a greater fervency in the
progress; insomuch that at last his ardency brake out into a sweat, a sweat of
blood. But how often do I find that my vigor and fervency rather loose then
gain ground of my deadness and coldness in the continuance; my hands fall and
my desires sink; the sails flagge, which at first setting out (it may be)
seemed to have a full gale. This yeildeth suspicion, that the work is not so
naturalized to me as it should be: for ^ll natural motions increase their
swiftness the more near they draw to their period.

VII.
IN Civil converses, those whom we are not acquainted with, we cannot find
that pleasantness and relish in their society, as we do in their converse
which familiarity seasoneth with a delightful gust; because where we converse
as strangers it is with some distance, and as it were under check and restraint
(as in a strange country we will not adventure any thing abroad without guard
or convoy) and so not without a kind of uneasinesse: but where as familiars we
have more freedom and openesse. If we transfer this Experience to our
spiritual Intercourse with God, we shall find the case very coincident; surely
it would be far more gustfull and delightful unto us, if we did not by our
neglect of it keep our selves still as strangers to him. Frequency in our
Accesses would breed a familiarity, that we might converse with God with that
freedom with which friends open their bosoms one to another; we should be
more enlarged in our Addresses, and that would make them have a more pleasant
relish to us. By often treading the way, we shall beat out a path to the throne
of grace, free from that uneasinesse and discouragement which in unfrequented
ways we meet with: want of Use makes that irksome, which otherwise would be
pleasant. He who bestows the frequentests visits on Heaven, finds himself
most welcomed there, and has the best entertainment; and he who comes
oftnest, will still desire to come oftnest. Therefore let those who esteem
that, as void of delight in its self, which their own negligence only renders
so, learn to judge righteously, and impute the effect to it is genuine cause:
Manna is here to be gathered, if they would come out and bring pots to vessel
it up. The Table lies spread, and Christ bids his Guests be merry; Cant. 5. 1.
Eat* O Friends, drink, yea drink abundantly; but they stand off as strangers,
and will not be among his Friends.

VIII.
SAltpeter, though it self observed to be of a fiery nature, yet being mixed
with lue-warme water, at first it contesteth with it, but when overcome and
dissolved by it, the water becomes abundantly more cold then otherwise it
would have been. And that water which has been warmed, and after returns to
its native temper, becoms more cold, and more subject to be frozen, then that
which has not felt the fire. The convictions of the Spirit of God, where they
do not work a thorough change, the heart becomes afterward benumbed into a
greater coldness and deadness. A spiritual Relapse is very pernicious: where
God has been knocking and sent away with a Repulse, in judgment he will suffer
another bar to be clapped on that door, and make the sinner more hardened. He that
has conquered the good motions and desires which heaven kindled in him, is
given over to a more reprobate sense (as the temper of Iron is more hardened by
being quenched after it has been heated in the forge.) No sinner does more
eagerly wallow in the mire, then he that returns to it after he was once
washed: and the Dog will not easily again cast up that Vomit which after his
first disgorging he has licked up. Where the unclean Spirit after his
departure for a season, in his return finds the soul empty of Christ, swept
and voided of all gracious dispositions, and garnished with whatsoever vice may
suit the entertainment of so unclean a Guest, his reentrance as with new
Attendance, and his Hold is rendered sevenfold more impregnable then before; he
takes to himself the black company of seven other spirits worse then
himself, and that man's last estate is worse then his first. Lord, let me never
quench those sparks which I should be always quickening and kindling into a
flame, lest by so doing. I make my self fuel for a flame, that shall never
be quenched.

IX.
PLiny (as his Nephew tells us) out of curiosity praying into the mountain
Vesuvius, Plin. Epist. l. 6. c. 16.
that he might discover the manner and causes of those fiery Eruptions (in
Natures Kill) was devoured by them, and made fuel to that, by which he
thought to have increased his knowledge; and so found his death in his too bold
advance in quest of that Mystery of Nature. Surely to be too curious in our
Enquiries and researches into the Mysteries of God, cannot but be dangerous.
God has drawn a Veil over some things, and if we are so bold as to go about
to lift it up, he may justly strike us with blindness, even in those things
which were before exposed to our view. If we long after such Forbidden fruit,
God may by a flaming sword set to turn to all points of the Compass keep us
not only from the tree of Life and Knowledge, but from all other trees in his
Paradise. Moses might come to the Hill, but not to the burning Bush, Come not
hither; if he had, it might have proved a consuming fire to him. If the waves
of the Sea have their limits set, hither to shall ye go; much more man's
presumption and curiosity: And what security can he give himself that will
boldly invade the Privacy's which an infinite wisdom has lock^d up in
concealment, and break down the Enclosures which the Allmighty has set up.
Cannot we be content to be admitted into his House except we ransack his closet
and Cabinet; to be of his court except we be his Secretarys? If we have an ear
to hear where God has no tongue to speak, he may justly cause us to have no
eye to read where he has a hand to write. It Is dangerous presumption to break
open God's Seal; to go in quest after the knowledge of that, which he has
therefore, hidden that we might not know it. He who is not content to look on
the Sun where his rays are refracted through a cloud, will but loose his sight
by staring on him in his naked brightness.

X.
ONe that had a thorn run into his foot, of which he took small notice, till
it after caused an Inflammation, and Gangrene, which soon seized on his whole
leg, was yet unwilling to undergo an excision to prevent it is further
spreading; but at length it seized on his vitalls and proved mortal. The event
of this disaster when told me, made me consider, how many inlets there are unto
death, and how the most contemptible thing may be Harbinger to that King of
terrors: examples of the like kind are frequent in story, of Fabius choked by
a hair, Pope Adrian by a gnat flying into his throat, Anacreon by the stone of
a grape etc. Sir. T: Norris President of Munster. Cambdens Eliz:
One of the bravest Spirits that England ever gave a Cradle to, or Ireland a
Grave, having received a light hurt, beneath his high mind to stoop to the
dressing of it, by neglecting it lost his life: And we read of another whom the
prick of a needle under the nail of his thumb sent out of the world. Surely I
cannot be certain this day whether death may lodge with me before the next, if
the least prick of my foot may make way for it; if the smallest passage be a
door wide enough for it to come in at and the soul to go out at. Any thing
from the bow of death, when our appointed time is come, may be a sure Arrow to
hit the mark; a thorn may be as mortal as a sword. Though nature had never
exposed our bodies to the assaults of an army of 300 diseases (for so many
Pliny's List informs us we are infested with, and a more exact accountant
would find upon enquiry that the number might be set much higher without any
error in the stating of it) yet that variety of Instruments, chances, states,
and circumstances of life which we lie open unto, might administer sufficiently
unto the womb of death. Let me be prepared for that by every thing and at all
times, which may come at any time and by any thing, must come one time or
another. I shall not hasten my death by being still ready fot it, but make it
less terrible and deprive it of it is sting. He that looks for death daily,
shall never meet it the sooner, but the better and the more joyfully.

XI.
SHimei when eager in the pursuit and search after his Renegades, was
unmindfull of the injunction Solomon had laid on him, and the limits he had
confined him to, and so ventured the loss of his life for the finding of his
servants. God has made laws that might limit and circumscribe the ways and
actions of men, and has menaced death for the transgression of them; but most
men are so earnest in the pursuit of transitory things riches and pleasures
(which are but servants and should not command our desires) that they mind not
the bounds which God has prescribed them. While they are in the heat of their
range, and carier in sin, there is no time for a sober weighing of that
startling question, What will the end of these things be? or for a serious
reflection on the terror of that threatening voice, the soul that sins it
shall dye. The Voluptuous man will as little own any bounds set to moderate his
pleasures, as rivers do acknowledge their banks when they swell and spread
themselves out of their due channel: the Ambitious man is as vast and wide in
his aims and hopes as the boundless Ocean: the Covetous tradesman can inch
his measure, and foist in false weights and use the balance of deceit, while
he minds only his gain, and considers not that his conscience is fold in
the bargain Lord let me never endanger the loss of my soul in the unlawful
or unwarranted pursuit of any temporal good.

XII.
IN the rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram wherein they rose up against
Moses and Aaron to bereave the one of his rule, the other of his priesthood; it
was a dismal terrifying sight to see their punishment; the earth to open under
them and swallow them up alive and close her mouth on them; that which is wont
to be only a grave to be their executioner: insomuch that I do not wonder that
the people (which by God's command were all called thither to bespectators) all
that were round about fled at the cry of them; for they said, lest the earth
should devour us also: for though they were not guilty of the conspiracy; yet
the horror of such a sight could not but affrighten them to seek for security.
If we might in like manner se how rebellious impenitent sinners go hence into
the pit of destruction, if we might in visible manner behold how hell open's
her mouth to receive them, and how they fall into the womb of death which is
closed upon them to all eternity; surely it would make us tremble and flee,
endeavor to avoid the danger and seek out for a refuge, lest it should devour
us: their destruction would put us on vigorous endeavors of working out our
salvation with fear and tremling; and the sad evils of their death would be a
means to remedy and cure the sinful evils of our life. That which we cannot
see by an eye of sense, we may discern with an eye of faith, let it therefore
have the same effect on us as believed that it would as visibly seen.

XIII.
A Subtle Lawyer desires no more advantage in an hold which he would take in a
conveyance then many words; somewhat he will find to fasten on, and will so
blanch the matter, that that shall seem plausible at last, which at first had
no such appearance. I date the beginning of the Fall from thence, where Eve
took the boldness to hold chat with the Serpent; if once we enter into a
discourse with the Tempter, and proceed so far as to listen to him, we are
half won already; there is a ready passage for him from the ear to the
heart. Where such a Sophister is admitted to reason the case, and our ears are
open and our tongues free, the matter is as sure given up as if it had been
yielded without dispute. Evil and Error is of it self insinuative and
plausible, much more when managed by so subtle and persuasive a Rhetorician. If
the devil be entertained in our Parlor he will soon get a lodging in our
bedchamber, if we give him easy entrance into an Outworke, he will soon
possess himself of the City. Therefore stop thine ears at the voice of this
Hellish Charmer: As Soon as he addresseth himself to a temptation send him going
with an Avoid Satan.

XIV.
IT seemed strange to me when* I first understood that some venomous things
would yield an Antidote to their own poison, and that the viper will offord a
remedy against the deadliness of his own stinge; and since I have learned that
it is a frequent thing in Chemistry to extract Alexipharmacall Medicines out of
things which in themselves are most noxious and destructive; thus the Artist
will make Mercury and Antimony, deadly poisons, by the power of his operation
to yield remedy's of rare virtue: We read of a Plant also in the West Indies
whose leaves are venomous, and yet the root of it, is an excellent Antidote.
Let me not then wonder that he who brought all things out of nothing and light
out of darkness, can educe good out of evil: that this Omnipotent Chemist can
out of sin draw a Restorative Elixir, and make the poisoned darts of Satan
prove Antidotal; that he can make our disease afford a Medecin; that he can
out of the Gall and Wormwood of Affliction extract a Quintessence of Pleasure,
and sublime tears into spiritual Joy. Let me admire and adore thee Lord, not
only for thy grace and love in our Salvation, but for thy Power and Wisdom in
the methods of it.

XV.
THe Apostle compares those subtle Impostures by which Factours for Hell drew
men aside from the faith to the embracing of strange Doctrines, unto
Witchcraft. Gal. 3. 1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you. And 2 Timothy:
3. (where he painteth out the condition of the last days in such lively
colors, as if the state of our unhappy ages had been present before his eyes)
he parallel's the seducers with Pharaoh's sorcerers and Magicians, Jannes and
Jambres who withstood Moses. What strange effects of this Sorcery have we seen
in our days? did Satan ever play so much above board and act so openly upon
the stage as in these times he has sometimes even laid aside his mask and
adventured to appear in his own shape. And of what little avail have the
Countercharms of sound principles formerly instilled been to many on whom God
has suffered these Impostours to practice their Magic? And how have the
Devil's Instruments by this black Art, and Spiritual Necromancy, raised out of
their graves errors long since dead and buried, and putting a new guise on
them made them walk up and down again? And many have been wrought upon by such
an unhappy Fascination, that (as Machates (mentioned by Phlegon) supposed he
had caressed and happily enjoyed his Spouse, when it was but a dead and rotten
carcass; So) they have fallen in love with and espoused that for truth and
religion which is but Heresy long since laid in it is grave.

XVI.
I Read that the Mahometans have set hours for their daily Oraisons, in which
they are so constant that not any secular matters, whether impediments of
business or divertisements of pleasure do keep them from praying five times a
day; whether they are fixed at home or abroad moving in a journey, when their
stinted times come they apply themselves to their (O that I might call them,
true) devotions; and this does every one, from him that bears the Scepter to
him that carries the Sheephooke. How many are there called Christians that
cannot afford to pray so many times in a week, in a month, as those Infidels
in a day; that can be content to crowd a whole Sennight's devotion into one
Prayer; and count them too lavish in their expenses of time that make greater
allotments of it for that business then they: yea, some think it enough if
they sum up their lives and expire their last breath with a, Lord have mercy
upon me. Christ commands us to pray for Daily bread. Every day Manna must be
gathered from Heaven. It is as necessary to the Spiritual life of our souls
as our often repeated meals and refections to the subsistence of our bodies. We
justly deem it strange and wonderful in some that we read off, who have lived
without meat, some whole Weeks, others Months, others years, (and a creditable
author tells us of one who lived 15 years withous eating or drinking.) But
here a long fasting and Abstinence from this Spiritual refection is a thing so
frequent that it meriteth not so much admiration. But what account Quercetan
gives of the former, that in such strange fastings the inspired air has been
sufficient in attraction to afford nourishment to such bodies; is more truly
applicable here; for the souls of such are (like Chameleons) fed on the air
and vanity.

XVII.
VVAlking in a hot summerday, I was somewhat annoyed with a multitude of flies
and gnats humming about me; drive them off wholly from me I could not whatever
means I used, yet I could hinder them from settling on me.

And thus I find it sometimes with the thoughts and motions of my heart; evil
suggestions are very busy within me, and though they much infest me and are
troublesome to me, and I endeavor to drive them away, yet I cannot free my
self wholly from them; but they shall not rest there: the birds might light on
Abraham's sacrifice, but they were soon driven thence. Though Satan and the
Corruption of my heart do send forth a noxious Offspring, yet my heart shall
not harbor nor cherish them. Evil motions may arise within me or be injected
into me against my will, but I will not be Nurse to foster the breed, nor host
to lodge or entertain such hellish guests. As Vagrants that range the Country
are wont to be served, whom though we cannot prevent from passing through our
town, yet we do not permit them to make any abode there, but whip them away,
and so send them to their own home: I cannot hinder them from passing through
me, but I will look to it that such straglers shall have the Law executed on
them, that they do not either make their stay there, or return thither any
more. These Malefactors may come to me for harbor or shelter but the only
thing I shall do with them, shall be to make their Mittimus and send them away.

XVIII.
THe Rabbines tell us, according to their wonted vanity, that Aaron Exodus 32.
intended not to make a Calfe, but cast the golden earrings into the fire to
consume them; but by the operation of Satan working by some Egyptian Magitians
in the camp the form of a calfe came forth.

But surely it is very usual for that old Serpent thus to over-act us, and
make us unwittingly advance his interest, while we think with innocent
intentions we drive on a good design; to use Zeal without knowledge as an
Instrument to promote his own cause under the pretext of God's: Where men
think they are building a Church for God, to make it a Chapel for himself.
Peter thought he had uttered that which would have pleased Christ, Master pity
thy self: yet the Devil (it seems) had made him his spokes-man, get thee
behind me Satan. That design which to gain Proselytes and Assistants had pro
aris stamped upon it in the front, holiness to the Lord written on it; when
the other side is seen, sometimes proves to be only pro focis, for the
advancing of a carnal Interest which some have set up to be promoted and driven
under that Mask: Hence has it proceeded, that what David said the zeal of
thy house* has eaten me up, may be by a prodigious Inversion truly applied to
some, their zeal has eaten up the house of God.

XIX.
SErpents which in the cold of Winter growing impotent and languid retire
themselves to their dens and caverns, unable to hurt, or to stand out against
the least resistance; when warmth returns with the Sun, renew their former
strength and vigor, relinquish the holes and retirements in which they lay
folded up, can use their force and their stinge again and appear dreadful to
the most armed opposition. Those Temptations which in the season of Adversity,
we seemed to be wholly freed from, or had lost all their efficacy and force,
that it was an easy conquest to subdue them; when the Sun shine of Prosperity
comes on, it cherishes* and envigeurateth them, their number is augmented,
their strength more prevailing, and their assaults more frequent; scarce a step
we take in which we are not in danger of a Serpent's stinge.

XX.
SOme Christians have been earnest and curious that they might know the very
day of their conversion; the time of their Spiritual Nativity, when there was
an access of joy among the Angels in Heaven because a new Saint was borue to
it; the day from which as the Epoch of their salvation they are to date the
beginning of their Happiness; that they might set a mark upon it, and make it
signal in their Calendar in a scarlet-Text as the Day of their Second Birth.
But let it not be so much my care to know when I commenced Believer as to
assure my self that, the day is past, and the happy work wrought. The voice by
which God raises a sinner from the dead, is not always accompanied with
thunder and Tempest, but sometimes it is a still voice: He sometimes comes
early and preventeth Satan's harvest, and steals into the Creatur's bosom
silently and undiscernedly before any Giant-sin has deflour'd the soul; and
then by no token can we retrive or find out the determinate season, by the
most careful search. Some in the Spiritual travel of their second birth have
few or no painful panges, while others have sharp and grievous throws which
make them remember the time as long as they live; as the women of Israel were
sprightful and quick and lively in there delivery* unlike the Egyptians. The
streams of grace may be large and full, where yet the head of it may be
undiscovered, as the river Nilus has a great and plentiful current, yet his
spring is unknown: The Sun may rise with his head veiled under a cloud, and
unobserved, and yet after appear in full strength and glory. S. Paul had his
eye upon the Goal, Phil. 3. 13.
and forgetting those things which are behind, press^d forward toward those
things which are before: and (in allusion to his practice) we should not so
much busy our selves to know where we first made our start, as mind the
running of our Race.

XXI.
LEt us observe the several steps and descents which Eve made in her fall, that
brought with it the ruin of Mankind.

First, she enter's into a discourse and holds parlee with the Serpent at the
forbidden tree, and so sets her self out of God's guard.

2. She listneth to the plausibleness of his pretexts, is moved with the doubts
which he starteth, and gives credit to his false and sly insinuations, and
believes his lying suggestions.

3. She looks on the fruit with a longing eye as pleasant and desirable. The
heart is soon bewitched when the eye is fascinated, when the object finds
easy admittance there, it soon set's the affections on fire, and the fumes from
them cloud the understanding and make the will to warpe.

4. Her longing must be satisfied; she took of the fruit; her hands execute
the commands of her perverted Will.

5. And she did eat; And what else could be expected but that when she had
received the cup so willingly at the Devil's hand she should drink off the
poison? But Lastly, she gave also to her husband with her: The Devil that
before was a modest beggar without door, now he is entered command's the house;
and she is so officious for him as to become a Tempter herself, desirous to
diffuse her sin beyond her personal confinement See by what winding stairs we
were led down into these depths of misery we now are in.

Therefore give not place to Satan, not for a moment; retire not the least
step: stifle his primitive and seemingly innocent motions; play not about the
bait lest thou be caught unawares: Yield not at first lest thereby thou
unwittingly part with thy strength to resist him in his following*
ollicitations: If he loosen the roots of thy Faith at first the next gust of
temptation may cast thee quite down. If we stop not the journey of sin by a
seasonable Arrest at it is first stage, the further it goes the more strong
and numerous it grows, like a River which the farther it runs from its
spring the more it enlarges it is strea^ and windeneth the Channel. David
walking on the Battlements of his house in a loose and careless manner, gave
his eye liberty, and in that free gaze it soon ran out of God's keeping, and
through amorous and light glances on Bathshebah let in Adultery, and so holy
David became one of the fools in Israel; neither rest's he there, that was a
Pearl in his eye, it soon becomes bloudshot, and by degrees he compasses a
cruel, yet deliberately plotted murder. Absalon at first only entertained some
ambitious thoughts, and a secreet desire of anticipating his future hopes and
Antedating his style of King; but the swelling imposteme soon ripened and brake
out to his own destruction in Rebellion, incest and murder. One sin is the
decoy to another; and though God never pronounced an, increase and multiply, on
it, yet nothing is more fruitful: The giving way to it is as the pouring out of
water, which before might be kept within the bounds of what contained it, but
when poured forth it is course is uncontrollable, and we cannot limit it; it is
not for us to say of sin hitherto it shall go and no farther.

XXII.
THe Panther is wont to be taken by the Hunters by two sorts of wiles;
sometimes by wine in which he has so much delight that he will drink of it to
inebriation: at other times they are wont to lay glasses for him, which while
he tarryeth to behold himself in, he is with ease overtaken and destroyed.

Satan make's men drunk with the pleasures of sin, and then deals with them
as he pleases: By immersing and drenching themselves in carnal delights they
are transformed into swine, (which the drunkard to a proverb most resemble's)
swallowing in the mire, and are a prey open and exposed to him that goes about
seeking to devour. Sampson having his mind weakened and inebriated by a too-fond
and strong affection to his Dalilah, was thereby betrayed to the loss of his
great strength, and laid himself open to the unresisted assaults and insults
of them, of whom thousands before could not effect that which a handful did
then. But where he cannot allure to gross sensuality, he compasses men with a
device no less effectual and more refined: This mighty Hunter of souls sets
a glass before them, wherein they may view and contemplate their own
excellencies; and that usually so falsely flattering as that it shall represent
a fair beauteous image to the most deformed misshapen face: He know's that the
reflection on his own perfections with admiration was his own ruin, made him
measure the distance between Heaven and Hell by a fall, and changed him from an
Angel to a fiend; and from a personal experience made use of this slight to
intrappe our first patents in his first grand Attempt to destroy Souls, in
which he found such answerble success, that no wile ha^h been ever since more
practiced, by one has he more filled the Region of darkness with lost souls:
By this he sets the Creature in the Throne and makes him in a direct way
advance himself above his Creator. When an unballasted spirit is so overset
and swelled up with fond and vain conceits of it is own excellencies, 't is
easy for him to overturn it: When he has set the soul on a Pinnacle there to
be presented with a large view of it is glory, and to gaze on it is own
perfections, the weak head scon grow's dizzy and addle through pride. These
entrapments the Devil had practiced on the Publican and the Pharisee, the one
he had made to run into more enormous and gross sins, the other he had set his
glass before, and he was so taken with his own image, that he could find no
other matter to fill his prayers with, but the recounting of his own
perfections. Lord, suffer not Satan by any of these wiles to ensnare me; Not to
intoxicate me by the pleasures of sin, and so weaken, and shave off my locks,
lest the Legions of Hell be upon me: Let me not drink of the Devil's wassel,
his wine is a mocker; my Soul, look not on it when it is red, When it gives
it is color in the temptation, for in the end it will bite like a Serpent, and
hurt like a Cockatrice: Pride goes before destruction, and a high mind before
a fall; therefore also lay thine hand upon thy mouth, for God hates an haughty
eye.

XXIII.
WHen Nathan had given holy David a relation of the cruel extortion and
injustice of the rich man in wresting the poor man's ewelamb out of his bosom,
2 Sa^. 12.
how does this anger kindle presently and his passion rise against the
wickedness of the injury; insomuch that he straight resolve's, and backe's it
with an oath, that the man should surely dye who had done that thing: But in
the issue it soon proved that David was a little more nearly concerned in the
matter then he was aware of, when the Prophet came home and closed with him
with a Thou art the man. The sentence he had pronounced was on his own person,
and righteous David had unwittingly been the judge to condemn David* the
Adulterer and Murderer; at his own bar, out of his own mouth. Do not we
thus often condemn our own vices in other men's Persons, and pass a just
censure on those sins in them which we have inconsiderately indulged in our
selves? Many do severely sentence worldly mindedness, sharply declaime against
coveteousnes, brand and defy the sensualist, pronounce condemnation on the
Hypocrite, and can with heat enveigh against such other sins; whereas if they
would turn their eyes inward they might see what they thus condemn within
their own bosom; and their sentence would be no where better applied then to
themselves.

When I read the relation of Judas's cursed treachery, his coveteousnes and
dissimulation, in selling his Master for thirty pieces of silver (the price of
him that was valued) betraying him into the hands of the Jews to a grievous
Passion and Death, making a kiss the Prologue to the hellish part he acted:
how does mine anger boil and mine heart rise against his wickedness? How
severely is Pilate condemned at my tribunal for sentencing my Savior? And I
pronounce the Jews a thousand times worthy of that scourging, and buffeting
and death, which they inflicted on Christ. But if I seriously reflect on my
self may I not find a traitorous Judas within mine own home? I may startle,
and disown it; Judas himself would not answer to his name, but put it of with
a, Master, is it I? But surely it will appear I may return upon my self with a,
Thou art the man, if I consider, that I have betrayed Christ to my lusts and
delivered him into the hands of his enemies: I have sold him by preferring the
pleasures of sin, the satisfaction of my carnal defires, the dross of the
world before him; by advancing some fleshly interest above him: And I have by
mine hypocrisy made a kiss the covert of my treachery. I by my sins have
pronounced Pilate's sentence on him, let him be crucified: Every transgression
has been a thorn, and nail, and spear to him; I have spit in his face by
despising his ways; and by my vanity and pride have clothed him with the
purple, the crown of thorns, and reed of reproach: he has been wounded not
only for, but by my transgressions: Though he pronounced a consummation of his
sufferings on the cross, It is finished; yet by these new (...) and afterings
of sufferings, I have acted over the Tragedy on him again, as though it had not
been finished. Therefore, as Seneca said of himself, that if he would seek a
fool [non long quaerendus, meipsum invenio] he need not go far for him, one
might be found within his own skin: So I need go no farther then my self
(though I cry Hosanna to Christ) to seek a Judas, a Pilate, a Jew.

XXIV.
GAleacius that noble Marquis of Vico, was so effectually wrought on and
persuaded by an elegant similitude in a Sermon of Peter Martyr's, that he soon
after laid down all his honors interests and relations at the feet of Christ,
and by a voluntary choice took up his cross, and became a Convert. Perhaps the
same thing nakedly and barely proposed would not have made so easy and great
impression upon him, as it did set forth and adorned in that Rhetorical dress.
The same passage in a different habit, may be vigorous and piercing, or languid
and dispirited.

Hearers are generally like Bees, they go all to the flowers; therefore our
discourse may be profitably as well as pleasingly strowed with them, so they
yield as much honey as they make a fair show: The food will be received more
readily when thus candied and sweetened, as Pliny says the Elephants eat their
provender the better if the manger be garnished with flowers. The assistance of
oratoury (so it be duly applied, and come in only as an Auxiliary) is no way to
be slighted and rejected; for by this chiefly (among second means) the
Preacher in the affections of his Auditors, by this he thunder's and lighten's
in them (as Pericles was said to do by his eloqnence.) The palm may sometimes
strike more effectually then the fist. The potion will down in sack which
otherwise would have been nauseated; and bitter Pills under the covert of
somewhat that is toothsome will be admitted. The feathers that impe the arrow
make it fly the faster and pierce the deeper. Surely it could not be without
the help of this Art that Christ was so graphically described, and (as it were)
painted forth in his crucifixion before the eyes of the Galatians (Gal. 3. 1.)
(...). Although the Imposture of that Rhetoric, Which make's me think on
Homers description of Paris II. (...).
deserve's more reproof then commendati- which worke's on the Affections alone,
and not at all on Reason or conscience; and so kindles a strange fire in the
Heart, (thorough the glass of the Fancy rather then the Judgment) which God
will not own in our Sacrifice: As likewise the wantonness of that, which is as
gay and gaudy in the dress of every sentence, as a young Scrivener is in
flowring a Capital letter with his luxuriant pen; Truth (specially divine) will
not be decked thus like a strumpet, although it refuse not that her native
beauty should have the advantage of a decent matronlick ornament. The pearls
of the Kingdom of Heaven should be set in Gold (not in Lead) though not so
curiously wrought and embelish'd, as that the Artifice should hide the native
luster of the Jewel. Comely and neat apparel is an ornament to the body, but if
either gaudy or course, a disgrace.

XXV.
A Spartan having long busied himself about the carcass of a dead man to try
if he could settle it firm in an upright posture; perceiving how ineffectual
his endeavors proved, sometimes the head falling into the bosom, sometimes
the arms flagging downward, and the whole, at last, falling to the ground*
told the slanders by (who smiled at his unsuccesful attempt) There Is wanting
((...)) something within, meaning a Soul. Thus it is in dealing with those who
are dead in trespasses and sins; if we endeavor to hold up their countenances
heavenward, and would have them fix their eye on Eternity, and an immortal
estate, we cannot hold them to it one moment; they presently incline toward the
earth again: if we would set them on their feet, and make them upright, if we
would set their hands at work in deeds of righteousness, justice and truth;
and have them to stretch out their arms to the relief of those that are in
distresses; all is in vain; while there is no spirit nor principle of motion;
something is wanting within. If God's dreadful threatenings be sounded in their
ears with a voice of thunder they hear it not; if Hell be set before their eyes
in clear and visible representations, they see it not; if a scourge be laid on
their backs their dead flesh feel's it not.

XXVI.
It Is a true and pithy proverb which is in use among the Levantines, that
Heaven and Hell are seated in the heart of man. Every man is a little world
within himself, and his soul is the scene and Theater in which are represented,
the Process of a Court of Judicature, the pronouncing of a sentence of
condemnation or Absolution, a binding and loosing, and according to that
awarde, an execution; in which, conscience (as in the former it sit's as a
deputy Judge under God, so in this it) act's the Executioner; and there are in
the Heart a Paradise of pleasure, streams of comfort on the one hand; on the
other, a gibbet, fire and a rack. Does not he find a Heaven within him, that
has that certain and sincere and untroubled happiness* those gleams of joy
and refreshment which a good conscience is author of? Let popular noises,
vulgar suffrages and opinions, outward commotions and attempts be what they
will, they can no more disturb or raise a wrinkle in this inward calm and
Pacifique Sea, or correct and restrain that transport of comfort that arises
from the triumphs and applauses of Conscience, then all the thunderings and
storms in the lower Regions can discompose the serenity of those which are
above the stars: This made Paul and Silas sing in their prison, while the
foundations of it were shaken by an earthquake. And does not he carry a very
Hell in his bosom, whose soul is rent and distorted with those convulsions of
horror and terror, distracted, by those fearful amazements, pierced, by those
sharp Agony's which a guilty conscience punishes him with? Though he seek
relief by diversion to wordly business. by consorting with merry society, by
running for Sanctuary to false and flattering opinions, by rolling himself in
his uneasy chain of fire; yet he may as soon forsake himself, as by all his
Arts and methods get out of these suburbs of Hell.

XXVII.
OLd Ely who was so mild toward the notorious sacriledges, Adultery's and
incests of his sons, of which all Israel rang, how uncharitably does he
misconstrue poor Hannah's devotion, and upon what a weak ground (only, seeing
her lips move without noise) does he build the heavy charge of drunkness
against her: But afterward perceiving his error, he recant's, and turne's his
condemning Hannah into praying for her.

Thus it often happen's, that those who are most mildly indulgent to their own,
are most sharply censorious of others (As the Hedge-hogge has sharp prickles
without, but is smooth and soft within: And the Snakes in Syria, do sting
foreigners, but will not hurt any of the inhabitants, as some say.) He whose
judgment is suborned or bribed by Affection to a too partial and soft
Gentleness; will on the same account, where the subject is different, be as
much warped and bias'd to a contrary extreme of a too unjust rigor: For the
case is much altered with the persons that are concerned in it: If nature or
affection be allowed to pass the sentence, and in judging offenses to accept
the persons of the offenders, the judgment must needs be partial: The same eye
which was so blear'd that it could not discern a beam in one case, will be so
quicksighted as to spy a moate in the other. And how apt is hasty and
in-considerate zealt to pass a grievous censure, where there is no other ground
for it but mere misprision? Those that are too forward and rash in their
reproofs before they have taken sufficient estimate of the ground on which they
are to level them, are often guilty of a zealous breach of charity. Let me
imitate Ely, not in committing but amending his fault, and if in my haste I
have prejudiced or injured another by an unjust censure, let me not persist in
my error, but be as unquiet till I have made satisfaction for my offense, as I
was till I had committed it: Let me in cool blood make the best reparation I
can for the wound I have given in my heat and distempered zeal.

XXVIII.
A Dr. Spigelius, Fab. Obser. Cent. 5.
that incomparable Anatomist, while (at the marriage of his only daughter) he
was gathering up the broken relics of a Glass, it happened that a fragment of
it scratched one of his fingers; but the hurt because of it is seeming
slighteness being neglected, created at last an inflammation which possessed
his whole arm, and raised a swelling under it, and in the conclusion (though he
might seem by his excellent skill in Physic to have command over death it
self) by an Empyema brought him to his grave. Thus the least wound given to our
souls by the smallest sin, if neglected and slighted may by degrees fester and
gangreen into the intolerable torment of a wounded spirit: And the lightest
hurt if we have not timely recourse to our spiritual Physician and to the balm
of Repentance, may grow to our irremediable woe. If we wash not our wounds with
our tears while they are fresh and make not speedy application of the plaster
of Christ's blood, a scratch may soon contract such a purulency as may ripen it
to an ulcer: Specially considering that the flesh of the mind (pardon the
grosseness of the metaphor) is not easy to heal, being full of evil, corrupt,
and morbifick humors which will make the least hurt fester and ranckle.
Neither must we content our selves with a palliative cure, a skinniug over the
wound; for that leave's it securely to gather all superfluous and noxious
humors to it self, as to an Abscessus, which will in the issue exulcerate and
inflame the mind.

XXIX.
GOld in the Oar, as it newly comes out of the mine, before it has passed
through the fire, can hardly be discerned from stone or a piece of hardened
earth; but yet when it has felt the furnace, and is by it purged and separated
from its dross, it come's out the most precious of metals; In so much that the
flames seem rather to make then purify the Gold. Many who before they were cast
into the furnace of Affliction, had so much dross and impurity, and earthliness
cleaving to them, that little of Heaven was discernable in them, come out of it
wholly unlike themselves: That searching and penetrating flame, separateth the
precious from the vile, divides between them and those corruptions which are
most closely and intimately combined with and embraced by their Spirits: They
enter into the fiery trial earth, and come out Gold: This endue's them with
that holiness and humility by which they are prepared for that high perfection
of beauty and glory, which they shall be vested with when they enter that great
and glorious city, whose streets are paved with pure Gold, and whose
foundations and gates are precious stones. The hue and complexion of their
souls who thus pass thorough the fire, is altered; they have abandoned and laid
aside all their carnal adhaerency's, repaired the breaches of their
consciences, the decays of their graces, their neglect of duties, their
coldness in religious services: Though before they were bound and fettered by
their lust, yet they come forth, (as the three children out of Nebuchadnezar's
Furnace) free and at liberty.

XXX.
'TWas an inference that deserved laughter which one made, who reading in the
subscription of some of S. Paul's Epistles, Missa fuit Romae, presently thence
concluded that surely Mass was said at Rome in S. Paul's days. Pointz a Jesuit
cry's out, there is no hopes of prevailing with these Heretics because it was
long since Prophesied of them. 2 Chronicles. 24. at illi Protestants noluerunt
audire. ('It Is well (as one says) Protestants were heard of in the old
Testament as well as Jesuits, whose name by good hap one of them has found
out Numb 16. 24. even as Erasmus found Friars in S. Paul's time inter falsos
fratres.) Many there are whose dictates are as little favored by Scripture,
and who are not ashamed to make as ridiculous a claim to it is patronage: That
will not bring their opinions to the word of God, but draw it to their
opinions; and force their own sense out of it, with as much violence and
torture, as that whereby Chemists endeavor to extract that out of Metals which
God and Nature never put into them. Such would make the divine oracles ((...).)
to speak to the patronizing of their own interest; and would suborne God for a
witness to their errors. As Caligula dealt with Jupiter's statue, taking off
the head of it, and placing his own in the room, so they substitute the
devices of their own brain in place of the sense of God's word. Yea, sometimes
such interpretations and Glosses are given as do not only corrupt but
contradict the Text, and that with as open and declared an enmity, as that of
the Papists, when they make in one of their Pope's Canons by the word statuimus
to be meant Abrogamus. Such might with greater show of reason pretend either to
a new Revelation, or to have found what they deliver in some of those
(spurious) writings, the Epistles of Paul to Seneca, the Gospel of the Hebrews,
the Acts of Paul and Tecla, etc. rather then in the Old or New Testament.

XXXI.
It Is as strange as true what we are told of the Tarantula an Insect not
unfrequent in Italy, that if it happen to bite any, usually with a wonderful
fit of mirth and laughter by degrees they dye away: And nothing but Music can
cure them. A Viti saltus does the like in those who are feiz'd by it, their
humors and spirits being so distempered, that they are continually dancing
till death take's hold of them, and conclud's their comic mirth in a Tragical
Catastrophe. Methinkes the case of those is much the same who are bitten by
that Infernal Serpent; All whose years are spent in mirth, and their days in
laughter, but in a moment they go down unto the grave. Let us see a little how
the humor worke's, and look on the image of this spiritual Phrensy, and listen
to this crackling of thorns. Let out hearts cheer us, say they, and let all
care be extinguished in laughter; let a solemn aspect never be entertained in
our countenance, and let a sad look be perpetually banished: Let a serious
speech be interpreted the raising a Mutiny against the reign of Mirth, a sigh
be punished with manacles, and the dropping of a tear as the venting of a
Pasquil: Let him that break's not out every way in jollity (like the wheel of
a well-couch'd firework, that flye's out on all sides) be baulked as a male
content; as one that would blend and dash our wine with water, or that would
corrupt the charms of our Music with discord. Let us own no care but how we
shall multiply and vary our methods of delight; how to make the ensuing day
glide away with more softness and jollity then his forerunner; how to sublime
and exalt pleasure, and extract an Elixir from all the flowers in the Paradise
of Delight; let us eat our bread with joy, and drink our wine with a merry
heart, for there is nothing better then this: Let disports and Revels,
feastings and dalliance be our daily and nightly entertainments.

Rejoice o young men in your youth, Eccl. 9. 11.
and let your heart cheer you in the day of your youth, and walk in the ways
of your heart and in the sight of your eyes. But listen, and you shall hear a
clappe of thunder; Know that for all these things God will bring you to
judgment. Your Joy is but a flash, your mirth vanishes in the noise, your
disports do but impe the wings of Time, your feasts are but Running banquets,
short delights, your Ordinary's are pleasant, but the Reckoning is Ruin, your
Dalliances do not embrace content, your Music is as empty as sound. What is
the sum of your misery, the frolicksome excesses and extravagancy of your
mirth are the Harbingers of anguish and sorrow; these symptoms are the
Prognostics of destruction, the end of these things is death: Eternal wrath is
entailed upon your momentany delights, and nothing can cut off the entaile but
an act of sovereign mercy: The Kisses of Pleasure (like Joabs to Amasa) are but
a glosing to mask the conveyance of the Sword into your bowels. Surely that
laughter well deserve's experienced Solomon's definition of Madness, which is
thus the forerunner and symptom of destruction: Prove. 26. 18
Which (as he speake's elsewhere cast's arrows and firebeands, and death, and
all in sport.

XXXII.
WE read of Agrippina that the course she took to destroy her husband Claudius
was, by tempering poison at a banquet with the meat which he most delighted in,
Suet. Claud.
a Mushrome (boletum medicatum avidissimo talium ciborum obtulit.) And we know
that what is venomous, being mingled with Wine, worke's more furiously and
incurably then with Water. The Devil's great business is, to search into our
tempers, thoughts, inclinations and affections, that finding which way the
pulse of our soul beate's he may apply himself accordingly; that he may suit
and attemper his temptations so, as most effectually to work on the humor that
abound's most in us; that he may lay his poison in our daintyest dish; and bait
his hook with what he is sure we will swallow with most eagerness* If he
finde's the heart bent upon Riches, he will present such a man a golden Idol
for him to fall down unto (as Nebuchadnezar set up an Image of gold for his
subjects to worship:) When he entered Judas to hurry him to that horrid
treachery, 'twas a silver Key that let him into his heart, and he knew that the
Bag which he carried was so closely hugged by him, that poison would be best
conveyed to him in a Cordial of gold. Are unclean and wanton desires accustomed
guests to his soul? The Devil will be the Pander to his lust, and by effectual
contrivances will so order things as that they shall fall in with the current
of his affections: Thus he endeavored to compass David's death by the poison
of a look; and when he found Amnon's soul hot with this Fever, he by Ionadab's
mouth inspire's a crafty fetch into his head of feigning himself sick, whereby
he inveagled his sister. Has pride and Ambition the throne in his heart? How
does the Devil sublime his thoughts, and raise them up to high and soaring
hopes, engaging him in such designs as cann^t be compassed but by wading
through deep and enormous sins: Thus Haman that he might engross the favor of
his King, and shine with a luster of glory free from that shadow which the
contempt of an unbended knee seemed to eclipse it with, is draw'n to contrive a
cruel epidemick plot against the whole nation of the Jews; and which proved in
the upshot most fatal to himself in an advancement which his ambitious thoughts
had never proposed to him.

XXXIII.
THe Universal Center to which all the thoughts actions, and contrivances of
Men, tend, the Point to which they are all directed is Contentment; this is the
great Spring to all the various motitions of Mankind: And however distant and
contrary their ways and courses, their inclinations and constitutions are, yet
here they all meet and concenter in this one reconciling object: They do
perhaps propound to themselves as several Idaea's thereof as they have
different faces, but their desire is one and the same. Contentment is that
which the Learned* seek's to attain in his industrious quest after knowledge,
this Jewel the Merchant seeks in his dangerous voyages, the Ambiti^us in his
passionate pursuit of Honor, the Coveteous in his unwearyed heaping up of
treasur^, the Lascivious in the pleasing charms of beauty, the Conqueror in
his earnest desires after victory, the Politician in his deep designs and
crafty knacks. But alas! The misery of men is that they would find that in the
variety of the creatures, which is no where to be found but in the unity of the
Creator. It is not in the Wise Solomon's dear bought Experience, in the Rich
Fools full Barnes, in ambitious Haman's state and Grand^ur, in Ahab's ravished
Vineyard, in Sampson's lovely Dalilah, in Nebuchadnezar's Rule over the World,
in Achitophel's deep-pated Wit. It is peculiar to God's Wisdom to engross all
content in his own hands that he may dispose of it by retail to the children of
men, and enforce all, either to purchase it of him or want it. Hence it is that
men generally waste themselves in desires, tire themselves with labors, form
new projects, and yet all this while spend their money for that which is not
bread; and take up with glassebeads instead of that pearl of price. I condemn
their desires as unjust, not because they are without prudence* No matter
though they be unsatiable, if they were not blind and fixed on objects too
scanty and disproportioned. God as he is the only Principle of Being, so he is
the only Fountain of content; I will therefore desist from all vain, amazed
and unsuccesful pursuits of it within the bounds of finite things where it is
not to be found, and procure a Patent of it from him who has reserved the
Monopoly of it to himself.

XXXIV.
ONe says of Italy, Guevara.
that though in it there be a great many Sanctuary's to provoke and stir up
to prayer, yet the people thereof have little or no devotion* And in this
respect he compare's it is condition to that of Bells, which call men to service
and never enter into the Church themselves. Many there are who can teach others
to know and practice that, which themselves have learned to know only not to
practice: (Like Scheub^lius, that great Mathematician, but by Book only, not by
Practice; who being required once in an Army to make use of his Quadrant, knew
not the difference between, umbra recta, and umbra versa:) Whose lives and
Doctrines are so little relative; that they are a downright contradiction to
each other. Their precepts are a Directory for the way to heaven, but their
examples if followed would lead to Hell. They never ruminated on that prudent
advice of wise Solomon, if thou be wise, be wise for thy self; carrying their
wisdom as birds do Meat to their young, not in their breasts but in their
Beakes: Like the holy Paraemiast's sland^rer, though they speak well yet there
are seven Abominations in their heart: Prove. 26.
At the best they are but Fools that have learned to be wise by rote only, not
for themselves, and their Clergy will scarcely save the^ at the tribunal of the
Judge of all flesh who has no other peculiar respect for him that know's his
will and does it not, but a greater number of stripes to reward his learned
folly. Such, what they teach is good warrant for our practice, but what they
do is unsafe President for us to live by, because they say and do not. Where
I meet this unhappy conjunction of a bad life and good Doctrine (a Light
shining but not burning) the one may excite in me indignation and pity, but the
other only merit's my practice (though we are all more apt to tread in the
footsteps of Example then Precept, so Apish is our nature) what he says well
belong's to all, but what he does ill should be left only to it is Author as
his crime, not followed by others as their rule.

XXXV.
THough our Laws make so great a difference between and elder and younger
brother, that the elder has assigned to him the maine bulk of the estate; yet
it does not so entirely go into his propriety, but that the Father charge it
with requisite provisions for the younger: The measure whereof if it be not
determinately limited, the greater engagement his Father's confidence in him
lay's on him not to frustrate it by a too contracted and narrow dispensing. God
who is the common Father of all, never so far either gratified the lusts or
disregarded the indigency's of men, as by a large affluence to design an
indulgence to the excess; and luxury's of some and in the mean while no way to
provide for supply of the necessary wants of others: No, he has given an
Abundance to the Rich upon this Proviso that the Poor is to have his Dole out
of it: God has placed them in the midst of such Affluence not as Proprietary's
but rather as Stewards, the things that are in their possession are not merely
and entirely their own, though they have the dispensing power given them: And
according to their Receipts so must be their disbursements, if they expect joy
and reward at the last great Auditing of their Accounts. They are God's
Almoners and must relieve the poor out of their surplusage. Though God's hand
of Providence does not deal out to the indigent their portion immediately, yet
he has given a right to be supplied out of the Largesses of the others. And
the Scripture's silence in a punctual limiting the proportion of our charity
and as it were trusting it to our hands should the more engage us, not
treacherously to deceive that trust by scanty allotments: Forasmuch as thereby
we not only detain the Rights of the Poor, and turn their Lot into instruments
of supply of our pomp, excess or covetousness; and so sin against them; but
also against God, in the unfaithful management of that Trust wherewith he
engages us to take care for a supply of that part of his family which is bare
and needy.

XXXVI.
I Find it to be more hard to combat Pleasure then grief, and that I am more
easily foiled by the insinuating and victorious nature of that, then overthrown
by the open and harsh violence of this: For grief where it make's it is onset
cannot hold any intelligence within me to facilitate a surprisal, but Pleasure
has a treacherous party in my bosom that have secret compliances with her, a
thousand Passions that favor her Admittance and by all endeavors seek to
frustrate my resistance: The soul barricado's itself against grief, and by all
wards seeke's to keep off the fury of it is assaults, but to pleasure it ly's
open and naked, and upon saying siege or retrenchment, it soon hearken's to the
summons; it admit's of Parlyes, Truces, Correspondency's, and Compliances here;
whereas in the other war, it fight's it out to the last, without quarter; that
is like the strife between the Torrent and the Damme, alway's struggling to
force one another, but this is like that between Wind and Tide, which sometimes
strive, sometimes come about and are both of aside. The will keep's it is forces
firmly united and closely conjoined when she enter's the lists with that; but
when Pleasure is to be resisted they are divided and dissipated and not easily
rallied. The soul's resolution will not be born down by force, but it gently
serrender's to the delight that would corrupt it: It soon come's to a Treaty
here but the stormings of grief it firmly opposes. Therefore I will adventure
to pronounce it, though it be a bold Aphorism that it is more easy to live on
the dunghill of Job with patience, then in the midst of Solomon's great
affluence and soft contents with moderation: Those paths washed with butter
(as the Scripture phraseth it) must needs be more slippery, and rank, then the
way that has blocks and crosses in it, or that is strewed with the salt of
affliction.

Surely if we go out upon an Inquest, and retrive the examples of those, who
have marked the way's that lead to destruction with their blood, we may return
with that in our mouths. Adversity has slain her thousands, but prosperity her
ten thousands. D. Balcanq let. from Dort.
King James once asking a Gentleman of note, what the people talked of the
Spanish Navy, was answered, Sir, the people is more afraid of the Spanish
match, then of the Spanish Powder. I more fear Satan's kind offers and
courting addresses, then his hostile attempts.

XXXVII.
IT may be observed that our Savior sometimes where the beams of his Deity
have broken forth does straight cast a cloud over them and shut up his great
and Divine miracles with, See you tell no man: He will not permit his glory to
appear in it is full and unalloy'd luster, but draw's a Curtain upon it. How far
different from this is the Spirit of many we meet with, whose only desire is
that they may dazzle the eyes of others with their splendor; who would have all
they do taken notice of and set on Record, and esteem that treasure to be as
good as not possessed and enjoyed which is unknown: That look on a virtuous
modesty only as a fine innocent qualification, serving a little to commend and
set off a man under the defect of more real merits: They desire always to be on
the stage, and to be acting some part that may procure them some renowned
Title: Glory is the Center to which all their actions are directed, and they
care not how crooked the lines they draw and paths they proceed in are, so
they all concenter in this. Their great aim is to gain Admiration; and that I
may so far gratify them, I will wonder at them, but it shall be only because of
the folly and vanity of their humor; it were a wrong to our selves to envy
them, because they are indeed below deserving it, or to pity them, because they
think themselves above meriting it. In truth, they are but the wonder of
fools, and the fools of wise men. Christian modesty teaches a prudent man,
not to expose himself to the greatest advantage of view, nor to live at the
highest rate of his value: Some Talents are best improved when laid up: And
solid and true esteem and reputation grow's the more by being suppressed. Many
a rich mine is enclosed in the entrails of the earth, and many a fair Pearl
ly's in the Sea's womb which never came to view, or shall come.

XXXVIII.
THey who indulge themselves the divertisement of reading Romantic storys and
fables, do experience, that though they know all to be false and fictitious,
yet many times they cannot hold from having as violent Passions as if it were
true; and as if they saw that really before their eyes, which they are sure is
but painted: Sometimes they are under a transport of Joy, sometimes of Sorrow,
as it pleases the Romancer to tell his story of good or unhappy fortune: They
are in fears when extremity of danger is represented, and in hopes when a good
issue of the matter seems to open itself, and that with as lively a sense, as
if they were in good earnest interessed in the Affair: And though still they
can reflect on all as the dreams and fancyes of another man, yet when they find
themselves so truly afflected they are ready to think them their own proper
concernments. This plainly evidenceth what vain, irrational things our Passions
for the most part are: How eager and vehement they may be in the pursuit of
that which is as empty as shadows and dreams: And it would be a good Lesson
from this Experience to learn how little we are to trust their Impostures and
the Representations of our deceitful Fancy's there, where the matter is of a
more concerning and weighty nature: It being an approved Rule in Prudence,
never to trust those entirely who have deceived us, though but once. How great
folly is it in us, to permit our selves to the hurry, of these blind and
hoodwink't, yet impetuous guides? In this instance likewise, methinks we have
an insight into the misery and unhappiness of our Natures, what a strange and
secret violence Sense exercises over Reason; what a tyrannical power Passion
usurpeth in the Soul: How extremely contagious the neighborhood of the
inferior faculty, the Imagination, is to the higher and more refined the
understanding part of the soul: Certainly, there is in man more of the earth
out of which he was taken and framed, then of that living spirit which was
breathed into his nostrils: There Is more body then soul in this proud creature
which think's himself created to have dominion over all others.

XXXIX.
SAint Paul when he was breathing out threatenings and committing Murders in
the high roadway to damnation, was met by God, and by a sudden arrest made
stand, thrown off his horse, and forced to surrender up his heart heart*
Sometimes God set's a stop to a sinner in his hottest cariere, when he is (like
that Son of Nimshi) driving furiously, and break's his course on a sudden
while in his full speed: His proceedings in this work are not always gradual
and leisurely, but he delight's sometimes by a speedy rescue to recover those
entirely that were deeply sunk into the jaws of Hell; and by a mighty
surprise to bring them on their knees to beg for peace whose hearts are full
of rage and war against Him and his Laws, so that the suddeness of the work may
seem to anticipate all previous promptness, dispositions, and inclinations to
good. How soon do we find the Jailour (Acts. 16.) anointing those wounds which
a little before his own scourge had inflicted on the Apostles: And that proling
extorting Publican Zaccheus from a grinder of the faces of the poor is on a
sudden become a charitable refresher of their bowels.

XL.
QUeen Elizabeth before she came to her Crown, being kept in restraint as a
Prisoner, happened to hear a simple Milkmaid sing cheerfully in the field, while
herself was more inclined to sadder Aires of sighing, then singing; which
occasioned her to say, that that poor maid was happier then herself. Peace and
freedom of heart and contentment is more often to be found in a cottage then
under a high and magnificent roof: The greatest outward splendor and pomp
cannot secure against misfortune, or give one night's sleep (though it do
disturb many) or satisfy any appetite of reason or nature or religion; all
which the meanest fortunes may afford. Worldly glory and grandeur only make it
possible for a man to be made more profoundly and extremely miserable: It is
the unhappy Privilege of being advanced to a great height that it make's a man
liable to a greater and more sadly calamitous fall (As the Shell fish is
carried up by the Eagle high into the air, only that he may be the more surely
broken in the casting down.) A great condition is exposed to great crosses and
misfortunes; but rags and a mean fortune can have but small ones. However, it
is certain that greatness of state is but a great vanity; and high fortune is
nothing but danger, trouble* and temptation. I would rather choose a mediocrity
then the highest condition: There I am high enough where I can best stand
upright, and where my fall can be lest miserable and dangerous.

Fata si liceat mihi
Fingere anbitrio meo,
Temperem Zephyro levi
Vela, ne pressae gravi
Spiritu autennae tremant. etc.
Sen. Oed. Act. 4. XLI.
IT is storyed of Primislaus first King of Bohemia that being raised from a
very mean birth to that top of dignity, he always kept his country shoes by him
to mind him from whence he took his rise to that advancement, and prevent
pride and insolence. And we know Agathocles would always have his table
furnished with earthen vessels in memory of his being raised from a Potter to
be King of Sicily. Methinks every man carry's that about with him that might
temper and allay his pride and vanity were his advancement never so high,
either in external things, honor, and riches, or internal endowments gifts and
accomplishments of mind; were he no stranger to that great and necessary work
of selfreflection: For let him consider his Extraction, his soul was drawn out
of nothing, and his body formed out of the slime of the ground, a clod of earth
kneaded into humane shape: If he would think on his relations, corruption is
his Father, and the worm his mother and sister (J^b. 17. 14.) Surely that man
must needs forget his rise, and alliances, that entertain's pride and vain
glory; and he need only study and mind himself to learn to be humble.

XLII.
IT has been a matter of no small debate where Paradise was situated; some
placing it beyond an immense Ocean, others by an extravagant fancy have made a
room for it near the Moon's Orb, some in the third region of the air, others
have set it under the Aequinoctial, most in or about Mesopotamia: But the
enquiry is as fruitless as it is curious; and the certainest determination we
have of it, is that which places it in Terra incognita, I mean out of the
Sphere of our knowledge. All the Paradise that now the Scripture speak's of is
that third heaven into which S. Paul was rapt. I will not employ my self to
seek where that Paradise was which we lost, while I know where that is which I
must busy my self to seek. Our sin set the guard of the Cherubins and flaming
Sword at the entrance of that, and has since spoiled and defaced it is glory;
our Savior has opened a free passage to this, and has prepared it for a
reenstatement of us in happiness; and this which our second Adam has purchased
does in as great a portion surpass that which the first Adam lost, as the
highest heavens do excel the beautifullest and richest earth: For that Paradise
was but as a transient representation and type shadowing forth the much more
exceeding and abiding glory of this our heaven.

XLIII.
IT is observable in what manner the contention between Abraham's herdsmen and
Lot's is related Genesis 13. 7. and there was a strife between Abraham's herdsmen
and the herdsmen of Lot's cattle (and immediately fallows in a strange seeming
dependence at first blush) and the Cananite and Perezite dwelled in the land:
Which surely the Spirit of God inserted as no small aggravation of the
unseasonableness of the strife, that they should fall out and quarrel while the
Heathens lived so near them and were looking on, and so expose their Religion
to contempt and reproach. How great an aggravation have our dissentions and
differences received from the neighborhood of those that are Adversary's to
the Truth who have delighted themselves to look on, and see our scuffles, and
have clapped their hands at the sport, saying Aha, so would we have it* from
hence also taking occasion to reproach and vilify our Religion. As S. Paul
says of speaking with several tongues, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
would not he that come's in say you are mad? So when those that are without
hear of so many dissensions and brawles such jangling opinions among us, will
they not think us mad? They will not easily be induced to believe there is a
Church or Temple of God building, where there is such a noise and clatter of
knocking of hammers and iron instruments. Surely Sion can as ill be built with
discord of Hearts as Babel could with discord of tongues. God is not wont to be
in the whirlewind of dissensions and uproars but in the still voice: And that
Heavenly Dove the H. Ghost, like the Halcyon build's his nest only in a calm.
Though the garment of the King's daughter the Church be of diverse colors,
though there be variety of gifts, yet it should be like Christ's garment
without seam; in vest varietas sit, scissura non sit. Lines the nearer they
approach to the Center the nearer they come to one another, and those are at
greatest distance from God who are furthest off from one another in
uncharitable differences.

But have the Canaanite and the Perezzite been merely lookers on, or have they
not had an other interest in the strife, by strong and secret influences
causing and fomenting differences and contentions, and kindling sparks into a
flame? Surely the hand of Joab has been in all this matter: To this sower of
tares we are in great part to impute the stirs and disturbances which new
Disciplines, new Doctrines, Sects and Schisms have raised among us: Who has
been diligent in improving that rule in the Machiavelian Politics, Divide and
impera, making divisions and disuniting that he may bring the broken parties
more easily under his own Mastery.

Let the words of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord my strength and Redeemer. Ps. 19.

READER, THat the remaining pages might not be left vacant and naked, I have
inserted a Poem, which I entreat thee to receive with the same Candor, with
which I desire thou would accept the rest.
THE SOULS VALEDICTION TO THE WORLD.
(...), I desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1* 2 3.
COme Death, and antedate thy blow;
Why are thy Chariot wheels so slow?
Is Time grown slugge? or have no dart
To smite through such a willing heart?
Oh! that some kind and wished disease
Would have my unexpir'd release;
That Agues shakings, Cholick's wind
And Dropsy's water were combined
To make this claiey Cotte to fall,
And storm its too well tempered Wall;
Or that a Feaver's Fire would burn
And turn't to ashes for my Urn*
What Is Life? a span of naught but trouble,
Less, like its Hierogliphick Bubble,
In frailty then in emptiness;
Its real Ills have no redress
But by the shadows of false Joies:
Its Good's exceeded by alloyes
Of much more numerous misery:
Nor does 't in Aequinoctiall lie
Of night of Grief and day of Pleasure;
It drinks in Sorrow in large measure,
But tastes of Joy; it gleanes of this,
Of that its fertile Harvest is.
Now Hope deceives, then double Doubt
And baser fear do justle'tout:
Now griefs disturb, and cares divide,
Now passions blind, and errors guide.
Had my life by Methus'lems fate
Ten Ages thrown into one date,
My sorrows would renew, till death,
As often as I renew my breath.
I Am weary of the World, and can
Not relish more its husks and bran.
How dath this grand Impostor cheat
Blind mortals, giving stones for meat,
Scorpions in lieu of fish, and Air
In stead of food, Chamaeleo'ns fare!
How does she trash obtrude for treasure,
For true delight counterfeit pleasure!
She makes her bastard bullion price
To barter for rich Merchandise,
(As foolish Indians are deceived
For Beads to be of Gold berev'd.)
Go, rifle her Exchange, and there
Thou Wilt find but toies and trifling ware:
Ransack her Chequer, and thou It see
Dross and adulterate coins there be.
The temptingst fruit sour relish leaves,
And at the rotten Core deceives:
The fairest Apples thou can cull
Vanish to cinders if thou pull.
Every grain of Gold has Clay
Mixed with it, and pounds of base allay.
What poison and what mortal Ills
Men swallow under gilded Pills!
Vain pleasures do but so content
Our feverish minds, as to torment
The more, improving hot desire
To a more fervent ravenous fire;
As waters in a Hectique please
Greedily swallowed with false ease,
But the deceit of that relief
Is followed with redoubled grief.
Blithe mirth, and unctuous delights,
Days spent in jollity* and nights
In downy soft reposes be
Sirenian baits, and vanity
That fair and slattering Gloss does borrow;
Specious and complementall sorrow.
When will my thread of life be spun!
Time shake thy Glass, thy sands don't run;
The wings of Hours unpinion'd are
Else sure they'de move more swift by far.
Oh that I might find heavens ears
Not proof to the Rhetoric of my tears:
That 't would no longer me deny
The easy privilege to dye!
A thousand drags and nets are cast,
And Stratagems and Engines placed,
To circumvent poor mortals way,
Who, had Hell no Arts to betray,
No sleights or force, too pronely do
By inward promptness Death pursue.
What treachery, what traps and snares
The world hides in her smiles or tears!
Do charming looks smooth up her face?
She would but kill by an Embrace:
Or if the Crocodile do weep,
Purpose of death she still does keep.
How often by kind and fond address,
By glosing words and fair caresse,
Has she attempted me, and I
Alas! too often did comply:
My easy soul too often did yield
Her sovereign conquering look the field:
But soon I found that I was led
By fair speech to a Bankrupt bed.
Her strong Protests of pleasures great
Raised hopes but to a sad defeat.
The Honey (I remember't well)
Had in it a taste of Death and Hell;
And every traitorous kiss bred smart,
Masking a sword aimed at the Heart.
All her sweets had bitter closes,
Thousands of thorns did guard her Roses.
Her Gemmes were flaring glass I found,
When viewd in a full light all round.
Oh that my Leases date were here
Determined, and that slight debt were
To Nature paid! this Tenement's woe
My inmate soul would fain forgo,
It Is a small boon, an easy suit,
No great Alms; Oh that heaven would do'it
Alas! how I Am divided here
Amphibious 'twixt hope and fear!
Now hopes do raise, and Joies tide in;
Then fears deject, and griefs begin.
Now faith absolves, and love inflames,
Then guilt condemns, and folly shames.
Now heaven shines, and clear light guides;
Then errors darken, doubt divides.
Alas! my actions all are stained
By flesh, and every word profaned
By sinful and corrupted breath,
And every thought does merit death.
How often my laboring Mind would dart
Desires to heaven from my heart,
But heavy clogs do dragge it back.
And make its strong endeavors slack.
Often have I spread my ready wing
(As Larkes when going to soar and sing)
And thought to mount a pitch as fair
As ever towering Hawk in the air;
But flesh's leash and tiresome weight
Did check and soon restrain my flight.
How wavering and unconstant is
My heart: how apt to leave its bliss
In wild persuits! how apt to change!
How often does the vagabond range!
Maugre the fetters and the ties
Of all my vows, my watchful eyes,
The discipline of my strict care,
It Is often gone ere I Am aware.
At the bright flame of golden Trash,
At Honor's every glittering flash,
At Pleasure's wanton fires, my mind
Too ready to dissolve I find;
And melting like to easy wax,
To break resolves as threads of flax.
These Ills that are upon my breath
Entailed, naught can cut off but Death;
Oh that 'twould charitably smite
This breast that ope's so fair a white!
Would the salt humor of mine eyes
(Like Aquafortis) break the ties
And chains that shackle me, I Would vye
Floods with the boundless Sea, and dye.
Oh! might I have so full a fight
Of Heaven as by strong rapture might
Oppress my weak mortality,
And stretch my heart stringes, till that I
Do feel them break a passage free
For my glad soul unlinkd to flee
On flaming chariot of Desire!
Oh! I Would rejoice thus to expire,
And in these beams my Death to find,
To cinders Phoenix like calcind.
Or that by large and lavish grief
While woing heaven for deaths relief
In silent tears (tears without noise
Are louder languag'd then a voice)
My heart might quite dissolve and melt,
Till in the swelling stream I felt
My soul to make its vent, and fly
Wasted to Heaven in one great Sigh.
FINIS.

