THE SAFETY OF JERUSALEM, EXPRESSED In a SERMON to the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, with the Aldermen, and Common-Councill of LONDON.

In the Parish Church of Laurence Jury. On Tuesday the XXIV of March, MDCLVI.
Being, the day of Their Solemn THANKSGIVING, For the Health and Safety of the
City, In its Preservation from Pestilence, Fire, and other Calamities.

By THOMAS HORTON, D. D.

ESAIAS. 68.18. Thou shall call thy Walls SALVATION, and thy Gates PRAISE.

REVEL. 21.26. They shall bring the GLORY and HONOR of the Nation into it.

LONDON: Printed for John Clarke at Mercers-Chappell in Cheapside, near the
great Conduit, 1657.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir ROBERT TICHBOURN, Knight Lord Mayor, with the
Right Worshipful the Aldermen, And the rest of the Common-Councill of the
Famous City of LONDON.
RIGHT HONORABLE, etc.
I WAS in good hope when this Sermon was once preached, that I had no further
work about it, except it were only to work it upon my own heart, and to pray
for a Blessing upon it, in the hearts of those that heard it. Whereas now since
some weeks after, I received an Order from your Court, for the commending it
to public view; But it took me at such a time, when I was very little at
leisure for it; From whence it is now come forth both too soon and too late.
Too soon in regard of it self, which deserves not this Publication, Too late
in regard of the Occasion, which is now so long time past as that I fear it is
almost forgotten in the minds of many men, although it be such as has cause to
be always remembered.

I do so much the willinglyer close with the impartment of this Discourse, as
it may serve to revive the memory of that mercy, which is the subject of it;
and may confer something to the renewall of our Thankfulness for it. The
more and greater Blessings we do profess to have received from God, the more
and greater do we consequently declare our Engagements to be to Him which are
to run out in answerable Fruitfulness and Activity for Him. That this may be
the General Improvement of the mercy, which is here proclaimed, is the hearty
wish and Prayer of

Your Honor's most humble Servant for the Truth's sake, THOMAS HORTON.
THE SAFETY OF JERUSALEM.
ESAIAS. XXXVII. VER. XXXV. For I will defend this City to save it for mine own
sake, and for my servant David's sake.


IT is the great care, and tenderness of God toward his Church and people,
not only to keep them from Evil, but likewise from the Fear of evil, which
sometimes is a great deal more then the Evil it self; The former, to provide
for their safety; the latter to provide for their security, and tranquillity of
mind. Look, as on the one side the Enemy, he does not only persecute, but
threaten, nor he does not only project and design mischief, but often braggs,
and boasts of it aforehand thereby to daunt the courage and to allay the
Spirits of the people of God: So on the other side God himself, he does not
only protect, The Coherence.
but comfort, nor he does not only purpose and intend preservation, but gives
some hints and predictions of it, that so thereby he may the better strengthen
and encourage his peoples hearts. This we may observe him to do in the drift
of this present Scripture, which we have now in hand. Senacherib the King of
Assyria had in the foregoing chapter, and this sent his servant Rebshakeh with
an insolent and reviling message to Hezekiah, and the rest of Judah threatening
them what great matters he would do against them, and their City; This
Hezekiah and his people were very much affrighted, at, and affected with, and
accordingly spread their case and condition before the Lord. Now the Lord
hereupon undertakes the satisfying, and comforting of them; tells them what
ever threats their enemy might make against them, he should not once come near
unto them, nor enter amongst them, and in the Verse which I have now read unto
you gives an account and reason of it whence it should be so; not from any
change in the enemy, as if his mind were bettered toward them, but rather from
Gods own constancy of affection to them, and care for them, For I will defend
this City to save it for mine own sake etc. This is the Cohaerence of the words.

The Text (as you see) points at the safety and preservation of a City, the
City of Jerusalem; and so very well suits with the occasion of our coming
together at this time, which is the safety and preservation of our own, the
City of LONDON: And though not every way just in the same Circumstances of
deliverance, yet perhaps (if we consider all) not altogether different from
them, and besides with some what more, joined, and super-added unto them, not
only from the sword of the Enemy, but also from the sword of the Angel, nor
only from the combustions of war, but from the fires of Peace.

In the Text it self there are two general parts observable, First, the Mercy
signified, The Division.
And Secondly, the Ground, or Motive for the bestowing of it: The Mercy
signified, that we have in these words; For I will defend this City to save it.
The ground or Motive of it, in these; For my own sake, and for my servant
David's sake.

We begin with the first general, viz. The first General.
The mercy signified, wherein two Particulars more. First, The Specification.
And secondly, The Amplification. The Specification, or mercy it self, which is
expressed, I will defend this City. The Amplification or extent of the mercy, To
save it.

First, To speak of the former, viz. The Specification of the mercy.
The Specification of the mercy, or the mercy it self, which is here
signified; it is Divine protection, and defense, I will defend this City, 1?
Who is that? Namely, God himself, who here sends this message by his Prophet,
it is he that takes this business of defense and protection upon him, one who
was able enough to do it, and to go through with it. And this City which was
that? Namely, Jerusalem, the City of God, where his name and worship was
celebrated; That Is the City which is here promised the benefit of Gods defense
and preservation of it; so that there are two things here now considerable. The
Defended, and the Defendant, The Defended, that is this City; The Defendant
that is the God of Israel, Himself.

For the First, The Defended.
The place defended, it was Jerusalem, the City of God; This was that which was
the object of this defense, and which this protection extended unto, which
accordingly shows unto us the state and condition of the Church in all
succeding ages and generations; This promise it is not to be limited or
restrained to this present time, or occasion whereupon it was made, but in the
force and efficacy of it, does reach to all periods of time throughout the
World, And is written even for our consolation, upon whom the ends of the world
are come, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope: Romans 15.4. and 2 Cor. 10, 11. The point before us is this; That the
Church and people of God, they are under a special safeguard and protection,
for the security and defense of them. This City, though it be a word of
mixture, and so does seem to take in all with it, who were occasionally
involved in the mercy, yet it does principally, and more particularly referr to
the Church and true Believers, who were the better part of it. The Church it is
not without a fence, it is a Garden enclosed; and those places wherein it
resides, they do partake of special custody, and preservation, in reference
to it. This City it shall be defended; Thus Zechar. 2.4, 5. Jerusalem shall be
inhabited as Towns without walls, for the multitude of men and cattle
therein, For I (says the Lord) will be unto her a wall of fire round about,
and will be the glory in the midst of her. So Zechar. 12.8. In that day shall
the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them
at that day shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as the
Angel of the Lord before him. So Isa. 31.5. As birds flying, so will the Lord
of Hosts defend Jerusalem, defending also he will deliver it, and passing over
he will preserve it, As Birds flying, that is with great deal of tenderness.
Birds we know, they are very careful of their young ones for the preserving of
them; Even so will God be of his people. As an Eagle stirrs up her nest,
flutters over her young, spreads abroad her wings, bears them on her wings,
etc. Deuteronomy. 32.11. And so Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, How often would
I have gathered thee together, as an hen gathers her chickens under her
wings! That is, with very much affection of and regard unto thee, He that
touches you, touches the apple of mine eye Zechar. 2.8, 9. Or again; as
Birds flying, that is with a great deal of swiftness, and speed for the
accomplishment of it, In Psalm. 125.2. It is said, that as The mountains are
round about Jerusalem, so is the Lord round about his people, from henceforth
even for ever. The Mountains round about Jerusalem, they are for the Defense
and security of it, even so is the Lord himself unto it, and a great deal
more; For the Mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, etc. says the Lord, that has mercy on
thee, Isa. 54.10.

This serves to discover to us the happiness and privilege of Gods people,
Use.
and their advantage above other men. Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto
thee, O people saved by the Lord, who is the shield of thine help, and who is
the sword of thine excellency! Duet. 33.29. As for other people in the world,
there is no great care taken of them, for the defense and protection of them. Oh
but the Church, that is sure to be defended, what ever becomes of Babylon, God
will be sure to look after Zion, and what ever becomes of Lachish, God will be
sure to defend Jerusalem, and to provide for the safety of it. Indeed, other
places and persons may occasionally, and accidentally partake of the protection
of the Church; wicked, and ungodly men, who are intermixed with the people of
God, they do partake of defense with them, and defense from them, as cursed
Cham from his abode in the Arc, but it is not they, which are so much aimed
at, or intended in this preservation; no, but Gods people themselves, and the
City, by which his Name is called on. He will defend this City especially; and
this he will not be failing to it, in the defending of it, whiles He says He
will do it, He hereby signifies his Purpose about it. It is not only a word
of Intimation, but also of Resolution, and that peremptory which cannot be
frustrated, or disappointed.

If against this shall now be objected, An Objection Answered.
that experience oftentimes proves the contrary; so that notwithstanding this
promise here made, and this point maintained by us, there is not always this
defense vouchsafed, but that the people of God are, for all that, involved in
sundry, and frequent evils; To this we answer, that still the promise of God
stands sure, I will defend this City: Because as all other conditional
promises besides, it holds good for the most part, and so far forth as may
best consist, both with the Honor and Glory of God, and the greatest welfare
of his people, This is a most certain Truth; That God will be no way wanting
to his Servants in the reasonable defense of them. The Lord God is a Sun and
shield; Psalm. 84.12.
The Lord will give Grace and Glory, no Good thing will he withold from them
that walk uprightly.

This is matter of very great comfort, Use.
and encouragement to them, which may make them to go on with cheerfulness,
and resolution in his service; Fear and apprehension of danger, it is a grand
obstruction to performances. Where men cannot think themselves safe, they
cannot there so quietly act, or undertake what belongs unto them; But, now this
is the happiness of Gods people, that they shall be kept and preserved from
danger: whiles they walk in his ways, they are sure to have his Protection;
Not only Cities, and Public places in General, but particular Persons;
especially as their work is larger, and of more General concernment. Public
Persons they being themselves of Public interest, and the Good and welfare of
the Public being in some manner wrapped up in them, they do therefore
accordingly partake of the Benefit, and comfort of those promises, which are
made to Public Relations, whether in Church or Common wealth. Magistrates in
the discharge of their places, and Ministers in the discharge of theirs; The
Defense of the City, it is the Defense also of them who are in a special, and
more then ordinary consideration comprehended in it. And thus ye shall find it
to be set even by the Scripture it self in those Encouragements, which are
therein given unto them. Thus in Gods expression to Joshua, Josh. 1.5. There
shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life; As I
was with Moses, so will I be with thee, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee.
And thus in Gods expression to Paul. Acts 18.9, 10. Be not afraid, but speak,
and hold not thy peace; For I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee to
hurt thee; For I have much people in this City. I have much people in this
City; what was this to Paul's protection? Yes very much; not only by taking it
of those, which were Gods people already, and so likely to take his part
against those, which would set themselves against him: but especially
understanding it of those, which were Gods people in decree, to be converted,
and wrought upon by Paul in his Ministry, which could not consist with the
taking away of the Apostles life before that work was done by him. This is the
great advantage of those, which are the servants of God; that their Employment
is their security; and the more business they have to do for him, the more
defense they shall receive from him. And this for the Defended, This City, in
the full acception, and consideration of it.

Now as for the Defendant, The Defendant.
that is here expressed to be God himself. It has been intimated, and employed
hitherto in that which we have spoken all this while of the Defense, and
Protection it self. But we may here now take a more particular view and notice
of it. It is not said only: This City shall be defended; which had been enough,
as to the safety of the place; but I will defend this City, as pointing out the
Principal Author, and Actor in the defense of it, It is God, and he alone that
is, to any purpose, the Defender of the City, I the Lord do keep it. I will
water it every moment, least any hurt it, I will keep it night and day, as he
speaks concerning his Vineyard, Isa. 27.3. It is true indeed, God does commonly
make use of others to this purpose both Angels and men, which are Creatures.
Magistrates they are in their places, (...).
and ex officio the Defenders of the City, and therefore called in Scripture
the Shields of the Earth, Psalm. 47.9. Because as a Shield does defend the
Person that bears it, and by taking the blow it self does ward it off from him
that uses it, even so also Governors in the execution of their places, are
Persons of great Security to the People that partake of them. So also
Counselors and men of advice they are in like manner men of Protection.
Wisdom, Eccles 7.12.
(says Solomon) is a Defense and, money is a Defense; but the Excellency of
knowledge is that wisdom gives life to them that have it; which money without
wisdom cannot do, though wisdom can sometimes without that: The poor wise
man by his wisdom delivered the City. Eccles. 9.15. And in the multitude of
Counselors is safety. Prove. 11.14. and Prove. 24.6. Watchmen, and inferior
officers, they have a share also in this defense; But yet these and all others
with them, they fetch their strength and assistance from God, Except the LORD
build the house, they labor in vain that build it, except the LORD keep the
the City, the watchman watches but in vain. It is God must help the Builders;
and it is God must keep the Keepers, and it is God must watch the Watchers: If
we desire to have an House, it is he that must raise it; and if we desire to
keep an House, it is He that must watch it: It can neither go up without him,
nor yet stand without him, neither an House, nor whole City it self. We find
as I said in the Psalm before alleged, that Magistrates are called the
shields of the Earth, but yet in the same place these shields are said to
belong to God. They belong to God to make them, (...)
and they belong to God to keep them and they belong to God to use them, and to
manage them, and to defend with them. A shield in a weak hand, is to little
purpose but is easily struck out and remooved, yea, but therefore do these
hold upon God, without which they are all in vain.

And as all defense is in vain without God, so none is in vain with him;
whenever he undertakes it, there is safety and security enough even from his
undertaking. This is also hinted to us in the Scope, and drift of the Text,
where this I is to be taken not only simply but emphatically. The Lord here
for the comfort of his people, who were now insulted over by their enemies, and
apt to be daunted by them sets Himself in a way of opposition to all contrary
attempts, as a sufficient bulwark against them. What Is Sennacherib to me? And
what is Rabshakeh to me? Or what is all Assyria to me? as long as I have taken
upon me this City for the defense and protection of it, what evil can now
happen unto it? or what Enemy in the assaulting of it, can prevail against it?
If God be for it, who can be against it? Or if he be to what purpose?

This is further observable from the Cansall, FOR in the beginning of the verse
which joins this, and the foregoing together; It was said there, that Ashur
should not come into this City nor shoot an arrow there nor come before it,
etc. Now it might be demanded, what might be the ground of so much considence
in the consideration of so much danger? This is here answered in the Text. For
I will defend this City, etc. It is no matter what may be the Danger, so long
as God is the Defender, and undertaker, for deliverance from it, which holds as
in case of Enemies, so also of all other evils besides, whether sicknesses, or
famins or desolations, or what ever we can name; Forafmuch as the Lord has all
these in his own hand, and they are at his disposing therefore may the people
of God in an holy manner triumph over them, and assure themselves so far forth
as is fitting of preservation from them. This is that which the Psalmist
bottoms on, and teaches us to bottom on to. Psalm. 115.9. O Israel trust in the
Lord, he is their help and their shield: O house of Aaron trust in the Lord, he
is their help and their shield. Te that fear the Lord trust in the Lord, he is
their help, and their shield. It is thrice repeated, for the better carrying of
our minds thereunto. And thus much of the mercy signified, as considerable in
the Specification, or simple Proposition of it: For I will defend this City.

The second is in the Amplification or Extent, 2. The Amplification.
in these words; To save it. This is added to the former by way of further in
largement, and explanation of it. And there are two things considerable in it;
First, The Efficacy of this Defense what it is, whereunto it attaines, And
Secondly, The end of this Defense, what it is whereunto it drives, and which is
propounded in it, and it is salvation in either of them.

First, For the Efficacy or effect of it, 1. The Efficacy.
the thing whereunto it reaches or attaines, and that is to save; This is more
then can be said of all defendings in the world, they do not all end in
saving, there is many a Person, and Place, and City, which is held up for a
while, which yet at last is not preserved; because there is not so much Power,
or strength or ability, as will amount to the preserving of it; yea, but where
God undertakes, it is so, where ever he will defend he saves; where he defends
in the undertaking, he saves also in the accomplishment. According to that
again in the prophet, Isa. 31.5. Defending also he will deliver, and passing
over he will preserve. So Isa. 26.1 In that day shall this Song be sung in the
Land of Judah; We have a strong City, Salvation will God prepare for Walls and
Bulwarks; His arm brought Salvation. Isa. 59.26. Stand still and see his
salvation, Exodus 14.13. This is the excellency of the Lord; That he is mighty
to save. Isa. 63.1. His hand is not shortened that it cannot save, Isa. 59.2.
No, But he is able to save to the uttermost those that come to him, both in
spiritualls and temporalls too.

This accordingly teaches his people to expect it from him, Use.
not to limit the holy one of Israel, or to call in Question his power, to
this purpose, as the distrustful, and unbelieving Israelites, sometime did,
but to embrace it, and to depend upon it. As the Church, Isa. 25.9. Lo this is
our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: This is the LORD, we have
waited for him; we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. There Is none that
ever yet trusted, and depended upon God, as they should do, who were
frustrated in this particular. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon
him, to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him, He will also hear their cry, and will save them. He will save
them in the actual accomplishment of salvation to them.

This is the difference now betwixt God and men in this respect; Men they can
use the means, but they cannot promise the success: They can set upon the
undertaking but they cannot assure the Perfomance; Physicians can give
Physic, but they cannot give Health, and Magistrates can give Assistance, but
they cannot give Diliverance, yea, but the Lord he can do all these; Health
and Victory, and Protection, and Salvation it self; not only in the Endeavor
but in the Event, defend to save; as to the Efficacy, or Effect of it, that is
the First Explication.

The Second is the End, 2. The End
or intent. I will defend it to save it, as signifiing Gods gracious aim, and
drift, in the defending of it. There are defendings sometimes which as they do
not always end in Salvation, so neither do they always tend to salvation,
but rather no somewhat else, which is either contrary or different from it.
Thus Enemies they sometimes defend those persons whom they take captive in War,
but it is not so much to save them, as rather to make advantage of them, and
sometimes advantage against them, to abuse them, and to exercise so much the
greater cruelty upon them, as the Philistims did with Sampson whom they kept to
make themselves Sport, and to insult so much the more over him. Judge. 16.28.
Thus we see how that all defending, or keeping, it has not saving with it, And
as not with men, So not with God neither. The Lord he does not defend some
people always to save them, but rather in Indignation toward them. He keeps
them from one Judgment that he may reserve them for another, and that for a
worse, keeps them from the Pestilence, that he may deliver them to the Famine,
delivers them from the Famine, that he may give them up to the Sword, he shifts
and changes their punishments but does not remove them, or take them away.
According to that expression, Isa. 24.17, 18. Fear and the pit, and the snare
are upon thee, O Inhabitant of the earth. And it shall come to pass, that he
who flees from the noise of the fear, shall fall into the Pit, And he that
comes out of the midst of the Pit, shall be taken in the snare. Here Is now
defending, and evading, but yet still Salvation far enough from it either in
the thing it self, or in the intention of him that vouchsafes it; yea but here
in the Text it is otherwise, when the Lord says concerning Jerusalem, that he
will defend that to save it, he signifies that he will defend it with the
greatest benefit, and advantage to it, as he speaks sometimes to Abraham.
Blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee; that is, I
will make those things which are Blessings an Increase, in the show, and
purport of them, to be so indeed, in the Event and Effect, that thou may
find them to be so to thy self, in thy own experience. This is that which
God promises to his people in his defending of them. Indeed they sometimes make
other interpretations of it; as if he defended them to destroy them, rather
then to save them. As the Israelites in their murmurring and repining temper.
Numb. 21.5.
He brought us out of Egypt, that he might destroy us in the Wilderness. Yea,
but it was not so for all that; God had other intentions toward them. I know
the thoughts that I think toward you, (says the Lord) thoughts of peace, and
not of evil, to give you an expected end, Jer. 29.11. Men in their courtesies
they are many times false and uncertain: If they do one kindness, they will do
sometimes two unkindnesses for it, Perhaps, unkindnesses in it. Timeo Danaos
vel dowa ferentes. but it is not so with God, He defends to save, and he saves
in defending, especially such as are his people, and belong unto him.

This is a very great happiness, and answerably should be pursued by us; Try
all of our Conditions.
we should examine not only what we have, but upon what terms we have it, to
see that it be in mercy and love, and as a fruit of Gods good will toward us,
and as relishing his favor in it. This we may judge according as we are any
thing made better by it, and do any thing better with it Then are mercies
saving, when they are sanctifying, and sanctified to us; Then they are bestowed
in favor, when they are improved in fruitfulness, and made encouragements to
further usefulness and cheerfulness, and activity in Gods service, otherwise
we shall have but little comfort or satisfaction from them, but even our
blessings will be cursed unto us. Malach. 2.2. which is the sad condition of
many wicked and ungodly Persons, God defends them not so much to save them as
rather to harden them, and so at last to ruin them, Psalm. 92.7. when the
wicked spring as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is
that they shall be destroyed for ever. But as for the Servant, of God, he does
not deal so with them, God has not appointed them to wrath, but to Salvation,
as the maine end of his dispensations toward them, which he promises here to
this City of Judah; 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.
I will defend this City to SAVE it.

For a further opening and inlargeing of this present passage to us, The nature
of the mercy.
we may here moreover take notice of the Nature and quality of the mercy it
self, and that is not of delivering mercy, but of preventing mercy. It is not
said I will rescue this City but I will defend it, nor it is not said, I will
recover this City, but I will preserve it. It is not said, I Will let the
Assyrian come in, and when he has been in for a while, and done his pleasure
in it, i will them expel him, and drive him out of it again, no, but I will not
suffer him so much as to enter into it, in the two verses before the Text. He
shall not come into this City nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with
shields, nor cust a bank, against it, By the way that he came, by the same
shall he return, and shall not enter into the City (says the Lord) See here,
He shall not come into it, He shall not come into it; it is twice repeated to
make it more remarkable; and that also with the Circumstances of it, not shoot
at it, not besiege it, not encamp about it, such is the tenderness of God
toward his people, as to keep off calamities from them.

This is to be observed by them, 1. Preventing.
where it is, and to be acknowledged with greater Thankfulness. Preventing
mercies are the greatest mercies of all: though such is our weakness, and
corruption, that we are not always so senssible of them, nor do so much lay
them to heart: we are commonly more apprehensive of Deliverances, then we are
of Preservations; of health recovered, then we are of health continued; and of
safety or plenty restored, rather then of either of them maintained still unto
us. But that is rather I say from our Infirmity, then from the Nature of the
things themselves. If we take the thing simply in it self, so continuance is
more then restoration, because it has the sweetness of the Good in it,
without experiences of the contrary Evil. Indeed in some cases, and
accidentally, the latter may be much better then the former, and the restoring
of a comfort, may be a greater mercy then the Constant enjoyment: when as
namely occasionally from the temporary want of that Comfort a man's Heart is
made so much the better; As when from some intermission of Health, a man has
his Spirit hereby the more mortified, 2 Cor. 4.16.
and crucified, and estranged from the world, and he grows stronger in the
inward man, which is hence renewed day by day: here the recovery may be more
happy then the Continuance; But yet absiractly and in the nature of the thing,
especially alike sanctified to us, so it is otherwise and to be apprehended by
us: we should have our hearts much drawn out in Thankfulness for Gods
withholding of Evils from us, as it was here with this City before us. He did
not rescue them so much as defend them; It was not restoring mercy, but
preserving; Not delivering mercy, but preventing.

Again further, Take one more, 2. Indefinite.
It was not determined mercy, but indefinite, I will defend this City to save
it; To save it? from what? It may be you will say from the fury, and rage of
the King of Assyria; from the oppressions of a foreign Enemy. It is true
indeed, that was the occasion, and the maine and principal thing that was here
intended, but yet that was not all. To defend and save, it is an expression of
large Extent, and comprehends many things in it. Those who are kept from the
Evils of war, are kept from more then war it self, as having many other
Evils with it, and consequent to it. Now this was the State and condition of
this people, and Gods carriage toward them. His mercy it was full, and
complete; He did not only defend them, but save them; Not restore them only,
but preserve them; Not preserve them from one Evil, but from many more
together with it; from the Sword of their Enemies, with all the mischief
attending upon it. Thus as in matter of Judgment where God begins, he will make
an End, so also in matter of mercy, where he undertakes, he will fully
accomplish, and bring to perfection.

And so I have done with the first General part of the Text which is the mercy
signified both in the Specification and the Extent. I will defend this City to
save it.

The Second is the Ground, The second General.
or Motive for the conferring of it, and that is double; The one taken from God
himself; For mine own sake, and the other taken from his servant; For my
servant David's sake.

We begin with the First, viz. The argument taken from God himself: For mine
own sake; where three things more by way of explication: First, For my mercies
sake, 1. Argument from God himself.
for the Honor of my free Grace. Secondly, for my Glories sake, For the honor
of my Great Name. Thirdly, For my Truths sake; For the honor of my Ancient
promise.

First, For my mercies sake; for the honor of my free Grace; 1. For my mercy.
The best account of Gods actions is that which is resolved into himself, but
it holds good of none more then of his actions of Goodness, and Favor. These
take the chiefest rise from himself, as the Ground of them. 1 These. 5.10
Even so O Father because it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11.26. It is true
of spiritual, and eternal salvation, more especially, of Gods defending and
saving from Hell, and from wrath to come, God does this for his own sake
indeed; but it is true also of salvation, which is Temporal, and so of this in
the Text; when the Lord would show a reason of his Favor, and kindness to
this people in preserving them from the Violence of their Enemies, He says I
will defend this City to save it for mine own sake.

When it is said here; For mine own sake; we are to take this expression with
restriction, signanter, and exclusive; Exclusive.
It shutts out this people themselves as any motives, or arguments hereunto.
For mine own sake, that is, not for theirs. Thus Ezekiel. 36.22. I do not this
for your sake, O House of Israel, but for mine holy Names sake. And again v.
32. Not for your sakes do I this (says the Lord God) be it known unto you. And
here two things more. First, Nothing in you to deserve so much from me.
Secondly, Much in you to deserve the contrary from me; nothing on your part of
meritt, why it should be: much on your part of provocation, why it should not
be.

First, Nothing in you of merit to deserve it. It is the Conceit of most kind
of men, 1. No merit in them.
when they have any thing more then ordinary from the hands of God, that it is
from some special worth in themselves; And so it is likely God saw that it was
ready to be with this people; Luke 17.10.
for which cause he puts in this Caveat to prevent such a mistake in them. When
we have done all we can, we must needs say we are unprofitable servants; we
have done no more then was our Duty to do, nor so much as that. Esaias. 64.6.
All our righteousness but as a menstruous cloth, and as filthy rags.

Secondly, There Is much also of Provocation, and contrary behavior; as no
merit, 2. Much demerit
so a great deal of demerit. We are so far from deserving from God, that we
are obnoxious to him, and give him daily occasion (if he would take occasion
against us) utterly to consume, and destroy us. Thus it was with this people of
Jsrael: It is noted of them, that they provoked him to anger from day to day by
their continual abominations, and yet notwithstanding he followed them with
his mercies; He suffered them with a great deal of Patience, and bore with
their manners in their mildernesse (...), or (...), as a Nurse bears or
feeds her children, Acts 13.41. Doing acts of courtesy for them, even whiles
they were full of frowardness, and rebellion against him, This is Gods way,
and manner of dispensation.

From whence we may therefore learn occasionally how to deal with him,
Direction.
and to address our selves to him for any thing which we stand in need of.
Alas, when we look upon our selves, and our own deservings, there is nothing at
all, which may encourage us, 1. How to deal-with God.
nay there is much rather which may dishearten us, and keep us off; yea but
here is now an argument which will take, and prevail with him from his mercy,
and free grace, and accordingly we should use it to him. Lord, if thou will not
do it for our sakes, yet do it at least for thine own; There Is nothing in us to
move thee, but there is a great deal in thy self: Our deserts are none, our
provocations are many, but thy grace is above them all: And therefore according
to the multitude of thy tender mercies be gracious to us; seeing God will do
for it himself, let us not loose such an argument as this is for prevailing
with him. Thus we shall find the church to do, Jer. 14.7. O Lord though our
iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy Names sake, for our
bachslidings are many, we have stnned against thee. And so David in his own
particular; For thine Names sake O Lord pardon mine iniquity for it is great:
As knowing that this would work upon him, where nothing else would.

And here as we have an argument to prevail with God, 2. How with Satan.
so an answer to return upon Satan, when he labors to discourage us from the
suggestion of our own unworthiness, 2 Timothy 2.13.
we may here tell him, that it is not upon such terms that we deal with God,
but upon the account of his own mercy, and grace; Let us be what we will be,
yet he still abides the same, and cannot deny himself.

Again, For his mercies sake, that is, for his bowels, and out of regard to
his own compassions, which never fail. God will save his people, as being
himself interested in their sufferings, and afflicted in all their afflictions;
From whence he is ready to say with Esther, Esaias 63.9.
How can I endure to see the destruction of my people, Esther 8.6. And that is
the first explication; For mine own sake, i. e. for my mercies sake, For the
honor of my Free Grace

Secondly, For mine own sake, that is, 2 For my Glory.
for my Gloryes sake, For the honor of my great Name. The preservation of Gods
people is for the glory of God himself, which therefore carries him to it: And
that in two respects. First, For his Glory, which would be otherwise neglected;
He would have else none to serve him; Secondly, For his Glory which would be
otherwise polluted; He would have else many to blaspheme him.

First, God preserves his people for his glory, 1. Lest it be neglected.
which would be otherwise neglected; He would have else none to serve him. Take
away the Church of God, and ye take away the Service of God, destroy his
People, and ye consequently destroy his Worship and his Name which is advanced
by them, and by them alone. As for the rest of the World, which are altogether
strangers to him, they care not what becomes of him, nor of any honor which is
done unto him: It is the Church which is called by his Name, by whom his Name
is called upon. Now therefore as they are tender of him, even so is he also of
them, upon the same consideration, As Samuel tells the Israelites, 2 Samuel
12.22. The Lord will not for sake his people, for his great Names sake, because
it has pleased the Lord to make you his people. And so Psalm. 132.13. The Lord
has chosen Zion, he has desired it for his habitation; This is my rest for
ever, here will I dwell, etc. It is spoken in reference to the Arc, and to the
Temple, in the dedication of it, The Arc, of God it has a Blessing of
preservation with it, which belongs unto it. 2. Sam. 6.12. The Lord has
blessed the house of Obed-Edom and all that pertain unto him, because of the
Ark of God, The same Privilege also has the Gospel, and Evangellicall
Administrations in the right use and improvement of them, to wit a preserving
Efficacy to the Contryes and Cities, wherein they are, so far forth as God is
zealous for his Glory, and the continuance of his worship in the world so far
forth will he defend his people, where his true worship and fear is maintained
in the power and purity of it.

Secondly, 2. Lest it be polluted.
For his Glory, as who would else have many to blaspheme him, If God should not
defend his people, his enemies would be ready to reproach him, This is that
which they have been ready still to do upon the least advantage, we need to
go no further for an instance then the occasion of the Text it self, in
Senacherib and Rabshakeh, Isa. 36.15. Let not Hezekiah make you to trust in the
LORD, saying, The Lord will surely deliver us, This City shall not be delivered
etc. Where are they amongst all the Gods that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem
out of mine hand? here now were provokeing speeches, Improvement.
even to the dishonor of God himself, and therefore it concerned him to bestir
himself, and to deliver his people for his Names sake. Thus have the servants
of God sometimes made it an argument to him; As Moses interceding for the
Israelites, 3. By the Church.
Numb. 14, 15. Now if thou shall kill all this people as one man, then the
NATIONS which have heard the fame of thee will speak saying, Because the Lord
was not able to bring this people into the Land, which he swear unto them,
therefore has he slain them, etc. And so Exodus 32.12. Wherefore should the
Egyptians say, for mischief did he bring them out to slay them, etc. And so
Joshuah, in their discomfiture at At, Josh. 7.9. The Canaanites and all the
inhabitants of the Land shall hear of it, and environ us round, etc. And what
will thou do unto thy GREAT NAME? still the Name of God (as ready otherwise to
be blasphemed by his enemies) is improved for the protection of his people.

And as it has been improved by them to him, 2. By God himself.
so it has also been considered by himself, even of his own accord, as ye
may see in Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. Speaking there of the people of Israel, I said I
would seatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease
from among men, were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest the
adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and least they should say, our
hand is high, and the Lord has not done all this, Gods people are sometimes
accidentally so far forth beholding to their enemies, as that their
intolerable insolences do move God to keep them from these evils, which
otherwise for their own provocations would fall upon them. The Blasphemies of
the Adversary they are the shelter and defense of the Church; for mine own
sake, (i. e.) for my gloryes sake, for the honor of my Great Name; that on the
one side it may be advanced, and that on the other side it may not be
blasphemed, That's the Second explication.

Thirdly, For mine own sake; that is, 3. For my Truth.
for my Truths sake, for the glory of mine Ancient promises The Israelites they
were people of Gods Covenant, whom he had bound and engaged himself to, by
many gracious and comfortable promises for the deliverance and preservation of
them; and now therefore in referrence to these, will he defend them to save
them, God has magnified his word, that is his promise above all his Name,
Psalm. 138.2. Now this is that which He so much stands on, and makes it an
argument to himself. The NAME of the LORD is a strong Tower, the righteous run
unto it and are safe. Prove. 18.10. What Is the Name of God? It is the True and
faithful one, Temporal Promises.
The God that keeps Covenant. That Is a great letter in his Name; and very much
for the Comfort of his People, 1. Of protection in General.
He is faithful that has promised, Heb. 10.23. His Truth shall be thy shield
and buckler, Psalm. 91.4. How is the Truth of God a shield? Namely, as included
in his Promise, which ingages him to the protection of his people, according as
he has declared himself to them, 2. In Particular.
and that in all sorts of conditions, John 5.19. He shall deliver thee in six
troubles and in seven there shall no evil touch thee, In famine he shall
redeem thee from Death, and in War from the power of the Sword, Thou shall be
hid from the Scourge of the Tongue, 1. From sickness.
At destruction and famine thou shall laugh, So Psalm. 91.5. Thou shall not be
afraid of the terror by night, nor of the arrow that flies by day, nor of
the Pestilence that wastes in darkness, nor of the Destruction that walks
at noonday, a thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right
hand but it shall not come nigh thee.

And again, 2. From Fire.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the
rivers they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the fire thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Isa. 43.2. In
these and many such Scriptures have we the promises of Temporal protection
made to the people of God, and the Lord does answerably hold himself to be
tied and bound up by them, so far forth as may best consist with the Glory of
his own holy Name, and the greatest Good and Benefit of his people, and
accordingly likewise may his people depend upon him for it, Lord remember thy
Promise unto thy Servant upon which thou have caused me to hope. Ps. 119.49.
For mine own sake, that is, for my Promise, That Is the Third Explication. And
so the First Part of the Argument, for Gods defending, and saving of his
people, to wit, which is taken from himself.

The Second is taken from his Servant. And for my Servant David's sake, where
before we go any further, Second Argument from David.
we may here by the way take notice of the Title, and honorable Appellation,
which God puts upon David, My Servant David. It was not plain David, nor it was
not King David, but David my Servant. God cannot let David pass without a
Title of Honor; and God cannot put a greater Honor upon David, then by
calling him his Servant, Gods Servant, it is the best Title, and it is the best
Office, In the Thing it self.
there is none like unto it, Not but that there are other Titles, and such as
are in their places also Honorable, and as Men to be acknowledged by us (
Rligion does not destroy civility, but rather establishes it) but this is the
Highest Title of all, especially in a Spiritual sense.

There are two things observable in this expression; First, Gods Servant two
ways.
That David was Gods Servant for the thing it self; And Secondly, That God
does here own him, and acknowledge him to be so, as to the Title, and
Apellation.

First, He was Gods Servant, His Servant David, There were two ways in which
David (as any other besides) might be said to be the Servant of God, 1. As to
his work.
either in reference to his Particular calling, and the work wherein he was
employed, or in reference to his General calling, and the frame and temper of
his heart in it.

First, As to his particular calling as a Magistrate, and Governor of Gods
people, He was the Servant of God thus, Magistrates, as they are Gods
Vicegerents so also his Servants, and his Servants therefore. This is a very
great honor and Dignity to them, It is an Honor to be used by God though in
works of an inferior nature, not to be wholly useless or laid aside as broken
vessels wherein is no pleasure, but the Higher the Service, still the higher
the Honor, and the Honor is from the Service, this is the Honor of those
which are in place of public Government and Authority, But an Honor and
Dignity with a duty belonging unto it, which is to approve themselves to him
whose Servants they are.

But Secondly, As David was Gods Servant in regard of his place, and
employment, So more especially in regard of his Spirit, and the frame of his
heart, This was that which made him Gods Servant in a more Principal manner,
2. As to his Spirit.
and for which God does here so entitle him, There Is a great deal of
difference betwixt my Servant David, and my Servant Nebuchadneezzar, we shall
find in Scripture that Nebuchadnezzar, was called Gods Servant, Jer. 25.9.
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my Servant, Namely, as employed by God in
that work, which he used him for. There Is not the worst men that are but in a
sense, they may be Gods Servants, so far forth as he does make use of them for
the accomplishment of those Gracious ends, which he designs to himself, God
improves many men's parts and power, and wisdom, and interest, and estates
beyond the thoughts of their own minds; and so they are Servants to God in the
matter, and substance of their Employment. But this was not that which served
David, neither should it serve any of us. He was the Servant of God in another
manner then so; and that is in the Gracious frame of his soul, which was
brought in subjection to God and whereby he aimed at Gods glory in the service
of him, this was that which was David's temper and which was David's Honor, and
in which sense he might well say of himself, as he sometimes does; O Lord,
truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, etc. Psalm. 116.16, David, He was Gods
Servant in the Thing it self.

And Secondly, God ownes him in it, 2. In the Appellation.
and so denominates him for the Appellation; My Servant David. Thus God
delights still to speak of Useful, Persons, Abraham my Servant, and Jacob my
Servant, and Moses my Servant, God speaks of them as taking a great deal of
Pleasure in their relation to him: He is not ashamed to be called their God,
nor that they should be called his Servants.

Yea, and that also even under some defects, and infirmities, and
imperfections, As David here, he had sometime his miscarriages, yet truly
repenting, and turning to God, and becoming a New-man, God owns him for his
integrity, and uprightness of heart, and reformed conversation; My Servant
still, still my Servant, My Servant David, so much for that.

Now for the Argument it self, which is here used, The Argument it self.
For my servant David's sake, God joins David with himself as an argument for
his goodness to his people; why for David's sake? Namely, for his Covenant with
David, and so it referrs to that which we spoke of before, concerning his
Truth, Thus Psalm. 132.11. The Lord has sworn in truth to DAVID, he will not
turn from it. We might here at large take notice of the Benefit, which
Posterity partake of from their Godly and Faithful Predecessors; even then,
when they are dead and deceased, DAVID was now gone, and in his grave many
years since, yet this people they fare the better for his sake; not for his
present Intercessions (as the Papists would feign enforce it) but for his
peculiar Interest and relation, and the COVENANT which was formerly made with
him; Jerusalem shall now be kept, and preserved for David's sake, And so it is
still from time to time. The just man walks in his integrity, his children are
blessed after him, After him, Yea, and for him, and in referrence to him. God
will show mercy unto thousands, of them that fear him, even unto the Third and
Fourth Generation.

But this mention here of David in the Text has somewhat a further reach in
it, The Spiritual since.
then as yet we have spoken unto; and that is as it points out Christ, of whom
David was no more then a Type. And so it shows us the true, and proper
conveyance of all Good, and comfort to the Church. In these two expressions
before us: For mine own sake; and for my servant David's sake; we have two main
Principles of faith exhibited to us; The one is the Spring, and Fountain of
our mercies: The other is, the Conduit-pipe, and derivation. The Spring, and
Fountain, that's the free grace, and goodness of God; He does it for his own
sake. The Dirivation, or conveyance that's the mediation of Jesus Christ, He
does if for his servant David's sake.

The Sum of all is this; That all the Good, which Believers do partake off
from the hands of God, The Sum.
it comes to them in the way of the New Covenant, which is founded in Christ;
Who has the Throne of David his Father given unto him, Luke 1, 32. And who
sits upon this Throne and Kingdom to order it, and to establish it for ever,
Isa. 9.6.7. Christ, who was figured by David and descended from him according
to the Flesh, he has changed David's temporal Kingdom into an everlasting,
and spiritual one; And for his sake will the Lord in this sense defend
Jerusalem to save it, that is, keep and preserve his true Church from all the
Adversaryes, and Enemies of it. In his days shall Judah be saved, and
Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and this is the Name wherewith he shall be called
The LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jer. 23.6. and 33.16.

Here Is the great safety, and security of the Church of God, The Safety of the
Church.
that it stands upon a Covenant made with the Son of God. God cannot break with
Christ, in whom all his promises are made yea, and amen, and therefore he
cannot forbear to protect, and to defend the Church. Therefore the Gates of
Hell shall not be able to prevail against it. Sennacherib, and Rabshakeh, and
all the host of the Assyrians, they shall not be able to fight against this
City, so, as to overcome it; that is, Satan, and all his instruments, they
shall never be able to overthrow it. God will put his Hook into their noses,
and his Bridle into their lips, and turn them back by the way, in which they
came. He has sent Redemption to his people: He has commanded his COVENANT for
ever. Holy, and Reverend is his Name, Psalm. 111.9.

This is matter of Consolation not only to the Church in General, and at
large, The Comfort of the Church.
but likewise to every true believer, who is a part, and member of it; For upon
the same terms as God defends this City it self, he does likewise defend every
Citizen of it. Every good Christian may assure himself of preservation from all
his Enemies from this Covenant, which God has made with Christ, but I cannot
now insist upon this. That Is the Second motive or argument for Gods defending
this City to save it. Namely, which is taken from his servant, For my servant
David's sake.

I shall have quickly done with the Text, when I have taken notice of one thing
more, and then proceed to Application. And that is the manner, or way in which
the Lord did accomplish this promise, The manner of the Churches preservation.
which he here makes for the defense of this City. This will appear to us out
of the Context in the following verse. Then the Angel of the Lord went forth,
and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore, and five thousand.
The Salvation of the Church, it is procured by the Ruin of the Enemy. The
destruction of the Assyrians it is the Preservation of the People of God. These
two are like a pair of Bucketts, or Balances; when the one goes up, the other
goes down.

The Reason of it is this; The Reason.
Because they are of Contrary interests, and consist of contrary Principles,
which cannot Cohaere, or hold together. They are like fire and water, which do
mutually take away each other. The seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent are opposites.

This is a point of very great Terror to the Churches Enemies, 1. Terror to
the Enemies.
and shows their ruin to be un-avoydable. If the people of God cannot be
saved unless their Adversaries be destroyed, then their Adversaries
destruction is necessary, because their own salvation is infallible. Look upon
what terms, the Church stands for safety, upon the same do the Enemies for
undoeing.

If it be ask't, why it pleases the Lord to take such a Course as this is. We
answer,

First for his own sake, and the greater manifestation of his Power, and
dominion in the world; God could (if he had so pleased) have defeated Ashur,
and yet not have destroyed them, hindered them from hurting Jerusalem, and yet
not have hurt themselves; yea but then this had not been so much for the
advancement of his Power; which God delighted to manifest toward them, as he
did with Pharaoh. He would show his Power in him, Rom 9.17. Be still and know
that I am God; I will be exalted among the Heathen: I will be exalted in the
Earth, Psalm. 46.10.

Secondly, for the comfort of his people. in their security, and greater
satisfaction. 2. Comfort to Gods People.
If God had driven the Assyrians back, and kept them still alive, Jerusalem
might still have been ^om what anxious, and sollicitous about it, as thinking
that they might happily recruit, and recover themselves again; now whiles they
see them dead and destroyed before their eyes, here this solicitude is taken
off from them, and they are now sensibly assured of this promise, which God
made unto them; that he would defend them to save them.

Now in that it is here further said: The Instrument
That this was done by the Angel of the Lord; it teaches us how these Glorious
Spirits are ministering to the salvation of the Church, Psalm. 78.49.
and active in the preservation of it. Look, as sometimes they are instruments
of Gods Corrections. He sent evil Angels amongst them. not evil in regard of
their Nature, and in reference to sin, but evil in regard of their Effects,
and in reference to punishment, so are they also instruments of Gods
preservation; both in the sheathing the sword, and in drawing it: In sheathing
it as to the sparing of Jerusalem in David's time. In drawing it as to the
defending of Jerusalem now in the Time of Hezekiah. 2 Samuel, 24.16.
So much may be spoken of that. And so much also of the Text it self.

And now for the Application of the Text to the present Occasion.
THat which has been hitherto said, The Application of the Text to the
Occasion.
in that by way of promise, the same is made good in this by way of
accomplishment. And that which was true of Jerusalem, it is abundantly true of
London in all particulars. The Lord has defended this City to save it, for his
own sake, etc. Defending and saving (as I told you) is a large word and of
indefinite signification, and truly we have found it so for our selves in the
full latitude of it. There Is no evil which any City could be well defended and
saved from, but we have had our share and interest in that Salvation.

We Will begin with that which is next at hand, Preservation.
and in the scope of the Text, the evils and callamities of War, How has the
Lord saved us, and defended us from these! From War.
Indeed we have heard of such a thing as this is, we have had the Rumors of
War, amongst us but we never yet felt the smart of it, as other parts of the
Nation have done; we have had the Alarm, but we never yet came to the
Enconnter, (...). Matthew. 24.6.
no compassing of our walls, no battering of our Forts, no plundering of our
houses, no demolishing of our Temples no slaying of our Wives and Children
before our eyes, nor carrying of our selves as Captives into another Country;
when almost all the Land besides as it were upon a light flame, Dan. 3.27.
Not an hair of our head singed, nor our our coats changed, nor the smell of
fire passing upon us.

And as through the goodness of God we have been prevented from foreign
invasions, so likewise, from domestic combustions, and tumults amongst our
selves. No breaking in, Psalm. 144.4
nor going our nor complaining in our streets. It is a thing wonderful to
consider, how in such a Populous City as this is, wherein there are such
multitudes of Persons, and withal such varietys of Interests, and difference,
and contrariety of affections, yet not withstanding there should be so much
outward agreement, and correspondency and external compliance, as is easy to
be observed; Where again almost in all the world can a man walk with so much
safety at all times and hours of the night, without fear, or molestation, as
he may do in the City of London, or where may he stay in his House with so
much security!

War, It does not usually go alone, but for the most part has other evils,
and calamityes attending upon it. The Scripture points out two especially, The
Famine and the Pestilence; as in that eminent place of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 7.15.
The sword is without, and the Pestilence and the Famine within. He that is in
the Field shall dye with the sword, and he that is in the City, Famine and
Pestilence shall devour him. This has been the case of others, But this case
has not been ours, we have not known what Famine meant nor Pestilence neither.

For Famine, From Famine.
though it is true it has been an usual consequent of War, and of Civil
war, more especially, yet it has been so with us here in this Land, nor so
consequently here in this City, nay we have been so far from being troubled
with Famine, as that some of us (the more shame for us) we have rather been
troubled at Plenty, and almost hungered for Famine it self, so great has been
the abundance of Food and Provision amongst us, which God has bestowed upon
us. Yea, and that in such Circumstances to, as wherein the Contrary might
rather have been expected, we have had years of Drought, and yet not years of
Dearth; wanted Water, and yet not wanted Bread.

And for the Pestilence, From Pestilence.
which is the buisinesse that we do more particularly take notice of this day,
in this our solemn meeting, we have cause to take notice of it indeed, as
little less then a miracle it self, our preservation from it; especially so
long together as we have been without it in these latter years, whiles other
Countries and Nations about us have been so sorely visited with it.

Especially if we shall also further add the forerunners, and prognostications
which we have had of it in inferior diseases, as smallpox measles and the
like, yet not leaving this other in their room as they are usually observed to
do, but so kindly parting with us, like the thaw of some great frost without a
rain following upon it.

That we should have so much Health in so much Company; the number of Houses
and Inhabitants increased unmeasurably; The number of the Dead not increased,
but rather diminished; Take but this last week for an instance, wherein the
sum of all the Buryalls within the City and Suburbs and Libertyes, and
out-Parishes of it does not come up to the number of two hundred in the whole
account.

Add to this (which is added in the occasion) our late remarkable preservations
from Fire, From Fire.
which for some time we had been afflicted withal, Tower-street.
we know how many sad and fearful accidents of this kind did for a while
happen unto us in sundry eminent and seattered places of the City, Thread
needle-street, Fleet Street. Bermondsey-street. etc.
which in a sort was become another Taberah, to us, Numb. 11.2. God has
graciously quenched and extenguish these flames amongst us, and he has done it
also as a return of Prayer; as he did there with his people of Israel, in v.
2. of that Chapter, It is not a mere co-incidence, but a relative providence,
and so we are to take it; Faith, whereof Prayer is the flame, it has quenched
the violence of fire, Heb. 11.34. And we are to bless God for his acceptance
of it. That we have neither the fire in our Bon^s, in burning and inflaming
distempers, nor yet the fire in our Houses in those terrible and lamentable
Conflagrations, neither the Dever, nor the resheph; The Pestilence which goes
before him, nor the burning coals which go forth at his feet, as Officers,
and Attendants upon him, both before and behind, Habback. 3.5. But that each
of these have been kept off from us, and restrained from their violence amongst
us, what does this but declare Gods special care and tenderness over us, for
the defense and preservation of us? And how much does it concern you all to
consider it and to lay it to heart, and to be affected with it! ye go into the
Country, and ye find your houses and families safe there; ye come back again
to the City, and ye find your houses and familyes safe here; ye change your
Places, but ye do not change your Protection, nor your condition with them.
And this ye do also in a Variety, and succession of Time, Psalm. 65.12.
Summer after Winter, and Winter after Summer, and one year after another; God
Crowns your years with his Goodness, and his paths dropp fatness to you,

I say it is God that does it and he exclusively; By God alone-
it is as true of us, as ever it was of Jerusalem, He that is our God, is the
God of our salvation, and to God the Lord belong the issues from Death, Ps.
68.20. But what is that which has moved him, and persuaded him and encouraged
him hereunto all this while, Perhaps it has been somewhat in us, who have
deserved as much at his hands. It may be it has been our strictness and
exactness of conversation before him; Our care of his worship, our Vindication
of his Truth, our observation of his Sabbaths, our Honor of his Ordinances, our
respect to his Servants our love of his Children, Perchance it has been our
charity, our humility, our sobriety, our integrity, our zeal, etc. Which has
so far taken with him, and prevailed upon him, Surely, it is because he has
not spyed in us those errors, nor lusts, nor filthiness; nor horrible
abominations; which He has seen, and beheld in some other places and times;
Esaias. 1.9.
Oh Beloved! should the Lord but have gone by this Rule, I fear this City had
been in its ashes long before now, We had been as Sodom and had been made like
unto Gomorrah. Not but that God has a Number, not a small but a very great
remnant of those that truly fear him amongst us, Act. 18.29.
He has much people in this City. But if we speak of the common frame of men's
spirits, and tenor of their lives, For his own sake.
we shall find it to be for otherwise, in so much that the safety which we
enjoy, must be resolved into the Free Grace and goodness of God toward us; He
has defended us and saved us for his own sake, as the proper Ground and Motive
to it.

And yet I must also add, For his Servant David's sake.
as himself does here in the Text, For his servant David's sake; too we enjoy
the Benefit of the graces of the Godly Martyrs, and other holy Persons, our
Fore Fathers in former ages who by their Prayers and votes for us, whiles they
were here alive did reserve a special Blessing for us in these succeeding
times; As we are not the worse neither for the faithful Servants of God, which
at this day reside amongst us, and are mingled with us, who both keep of many
judgments from us, which we otherwise deserve, and secure many mercies to us,
which we might otherwise lose.

Now what is the result of all this to our selves? Namely, that which is the
proper work and buisinesse of our coming together, even to labor to get our
hearts enlarged in thankfulness to God for it, It is a work well becoming the
Representative body of the City, as ye are now met together this day, and
wherein ye have very happily consulted the welfare of it, and of your selves,
God expects such acts as these from us, answerable to his goodness to us,
especially upon our intreatyes of him; Forasmuch as we had humbled our selves
before God, for the vouchsafing of these mercyes to us (as sometimes we had
done) we cannot in all reason but return our acknowledgements to him for the
bestowing of them Every day of humiliation, whenever it obtains its effect
has a day of thanksgiving in course and of right belonging unto it. They that
seek the Lord must praise him, Psalm. 22.26.

Among many other matters besides as I have already mentioned which you have
not excluded, there are two which ye have especially intended, The preservation
of the City from Fire, and the preservation of it from sickness, and
principally those contagious diseases, which have raged in other places of the
world; and it is a very good course which is here taken by you, in the serious
improvement of it for the preventing of such judgments from your selves by
thankfulness and humble deprecation, as the Captain of fifty, to Elijah, in 2
King. 1.13. This is that which we are to do at this time; and that not for a
day only, but all our lives. There Is no such thankfulness as reformation, and
and amendment of life. 1 Samuel 15.22
To obey is better then to sacrifice; and to bearken then the fat of Rams. 1
King, 8.28.
Alas Beloved, what will it avail us, Esaias. 9.18.
to be freed from the plague of the Body, and to be infected with the plague of
the Heart? or to be freed from the firing of our Houses, and to be inflamed
with the fire of lust? of wrath, of contention, of revenge, of wickedness,
which burns as a fire? Scornful Persons (as all ungodly men are both
actively, Pro. 29.8.
and passively) they set a City on fire, as Solomon tells us, But wise men,
that is, those which are Gracious and Faithful, they turn away wrath. This
let us be careful to do. That so as God has delivered us formerly, so he may
please to deliver us still; and may say to us in the words of the Text in the
future expression; I will defend this City to save it, That is; I will
continually defend it, from fire, and sword, and pestilence and such evils as
those are.

Yea, let us answer this goodness of God to us in a suitable and proportionable
Improvement, Here are now two great mercies together, which we now celebrate,
The one, that our Houses are not burnt down. And the other, that our Houses
are not shut up, Now each of these calls for answerable carriage and
conversation, on our behalf, How should this now engage us to make our Houses
and Familyes to be the receptacles and habitations of Holiness, and to devote
them to his worship and service; that as they stand, so they may stand for Him,
and his Spirit to dwell and reside in.

And so for our preservation from Pestilence, and such like distempers, what an
engagement is this to us to fruitfulness of society and communion one with
another! To the frequenting of the public Assemblyes: and congregations of
the people of God, We need not now to be afraid of the breath one of another
or of coming into one another company, which people in such times and cases
and conditions are wont to be.

But yet withal, whiles we are thankful for deliverances, it concerns us to
tremble at judgments The experiences of Italy and of Rome, especially which is
mystical Babylon the mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the earth; partake
not in her sins, that so we may not partake in her plagues. The sins of
Italy in England, Revel. 17.5. Revel. 18.4.
are worse then in their proper place; by how much our profession is better,
and our Religion purer, and our Engagements more.

Therefore let us renew our Covenants with God this day, and labor to be every
way answerable to his providence toward us; seeing He has defended us, let
us also defend him in his Truth, and worship and Servants. And seeing it is God
alone that can defend us, that is, defend us to save us, let us hide our selves
all we can under his shelter, and wings, etc. We are now in the turn and
revolution of another year, which we know not what it may bring forth; Oh but
if we can get but a share and portion in God, we shall be provided against all
occurrences whatsoever they may be. He that dwells in the secret place of the
most high shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; He shall say unto the
Lord, he is my Refuge, my God in him will I trust. Psalm. 91.1, 2.

There are two things which lies upon us in this particular, to be pursued by
us. The one is Interest in God. And the other is Communion with him. The former
as a foundation to the latter. And the latter as a Perfection of the former.

First, Accquaintance and Interest in God through Jesus Christ, Accquaint now
thy self with him, and be at peace, Job 22.21. There is nothing more miserable
in times of public danger or calamity, then for a man to be a stranger to
God, and un-acquainted with him; It is sad and ill at any time, but it is then
so more especially; that so we may by all means take heed of being guilty of
it. Remember, that it is for David's sake, take this City is defended and saved;
therefore those who have no portion in this David, they can expect none of this
defense. Christ will own none but his Members, in the day of his wrath, and
them He will be sure to own, one way or other. Then happy are all they that
put their Trust in him. Lord I am thine, save me, that is the best plea of all.
Psalm. 119.94.

Secondly, as Interest in God, so likewise actual Communion with him, let us
preserve that also. As there should not be in us a strangeness of condition so
neither a strangeness of Spirit, or conversation in such times as these are,
but we should still be careful to keep up our hearts in a blessed and constant
frame of recourse unto him; that so, what ever may befall us, it may be sure to
go well with us; which is the difference betwixt the children of God, and
other men; As for other People; Carnal, and worldly persons, they are well in
times of Freedom, and security, when there is no plague, or judgment stirring
abroad, then they can make a shift to do as well as any men else, and as they
think better too; yea but how is it with them in times of Trouble, and sadness
indeed? Here they are all amort, and know not which way to turn themselves: as
those which swagger most in a Calm, in a Storm are at their wits end; so is
it with such kind of men. Eut I know it shall be well with them that fear the
Lord, that fear before him, as the Preacher tells us, Eccles. 8.12. This is the
Excellency of a Christian especially living in the Power of Christianity, that
he can in some manner hold up even in bad times, and in bad conditions. He can
be safe in the midst of evils, and calamities themselves: safe, not only from
them, but in them, yea and under them too, as it may be with him. The servants
of God have this privilege, that those things, which are evil in themselves,
yet they are not evil to them, as having all Estates sanctified to them
through Christ. That which is a Plague in the nature of the Disease, and the
Physical consideration of it, yet it is not a plague to them, in regard to
Gods ordering it to them, as having the Spiritual venom and malignity taken
out of it for them; and so for any thing else besides; A Christian has learnt
to commend all he has or is to the wise and holy providence of a gracious God;
His Times are in Gods hands, and so he is not in thraldom to sickness: and
his Estates in Gods hands, and so he is not under the power of Fire, or wind,
or water, or malice, or any other casualty whatsoever; There Is nothing can
absolutely hurt him, because he is Good, and right himself. But I cannot
press these things at this time.

To return to that which we spoke of before, The Conclusion.
and which this performance call's us to, and so to conclude. Let us be much in
the thoughts and meditation of Gods goodness to us, whether in our own
particular persons, in the mercies, which we have received there, or in the
General state of the City, in the mercies, which we have received in common,
and together with that; Both of them are to be considered by us, and both very
suitable to this work of our Public Thanksgiving. Look as in a day of public
Humiliation, we are to be humbled, not only for National, but for Personal
sins: So also in a day of Public Thanksgiving, we are to remember not only our
National, but Personal mercies; especially as our particular Persons have any
thing more sh^red in those mercies as we have some of us done; In the recovery
and continuance of our Health; In the increase, and preservation of our
Estates; In the freedom, and deliverance from Enemies, or whatever else we can
name, or think of. Look how far any do more partake in mercy, so should they
more partake in Thanksgiving. The Observation of Public mercies should
occasion in us private Reflections; And the reflecting upon private mercies,
should more quicken us in public acknowledgements. But this is our great
misery, that we are for the most part but defective in either. We are so busy
commonly in the enjoyment of mercies, that we have no leisure to be thankful
for them. Though the Lord does exceedingly abound in the manifestation of his
Goodness to us in all respects, in our health, in our plenty, in our safety,
and miraculous preservation: And above all in the continuance of his Gospel,
and Ordinances, and soul opportunities amongst us; yet truly for the General
we are very little sensible of them, or affected with them, or thankful under
them; even those who if they should loose them, would soonest miss them. What
do I speak of Thankefullnesse; when we have much ado to keep our selves from
murmuring and repining at Gods dealings with us. The Lord had never an heavier
hand in his Contestations with backsliding Israel, then he has with many
amongst our selves.

Well, Let us here be seasonably awakened from this present Occasion before us,
to lay these things more to Heart, then ever yet we have done. Oh it should
make us to love and serve this God so much the more, who has done so much for
us; that so he may still take pleasure in us, and delight to dwell amongst us
for Good: To bless us in our Persons, in our employments, in our estates, in
our Families, and in all our Relations: And may defend this City to save it for
his own sake, and for his servant David's sake, that is, for his son Jesus
Christ's sake to all following, and succeeding Generations even to the end of
the world. Amen, Amen!

FINIS

