A TRVE RELATION OF A GREAT DISCOVERY Intended against HVLL.

Sent in a Letter by Sir John Hotham to both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

With a true Copy of a Letter sent from Master Beckwith, a Recusant, to
Lieutenant Fooks his Son in law, in service at Hull under Sir John Hotham.

Also three Proclamations lately sent from the Kings Most Excellent Majesty
from York.

Published by His Majesty's special command.

royal blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed for F. Coules and T. Bates, June 4. 1642.

Sir John Hothams Letter to a worthy Member of the House of Commons, concerning
the late Discovery at Hull.
SIR,
SInce my last to you, It has pleased the Almighty God, out of his great mercy
to us here, and the Kingdom, to preserve us from an eminent danger, and ruin
plotted against us here, which I thought fit to acquaint you with. I writ a
word of it to the Committee at York, but since have made a more ample
discovery. I have within my Company a Lieutenant, his name is Foolks, son in
law to one Master Thomas Beckwith a Recusant at Beverly, a good Soldier but
poor. This man, his father in law, thought a fit Instrument to work upon, and
to that end, sent for him to come over to him. The Gentleman presently
acquaints me with it, and asked my leave and advice therein; Protesting, that
both in regard of the honor of a Soldier, and a Gentleman, nothing should
pass but I should know. He had formerly been obliged to me, and therefore I
gave him leave to go, with directions to yield to such propositions as should
be made him; for otherwise being in their power, I knew not how they might have
used him. At his return he told me, that at his first coming, after an
unusual kind welcome, that Master Beckwith broke the matter to him, That if
he would do service, etc. he should be rewarded in a great measure,
intimating to him how unable I was to prefer him in any way of subsistence:
To be short, He made a plain contract with him, That if he could betray a
Port, he should have five hundred pound in hand, and two hundred and fifty
pound per annum for his life, this he willingly accepted: Then Beckwith
discoursed with him of the means how he could do this; he told him, that upon
Thursday night, the six and twenty day of May, he had the guard at the North
gate, and if Alarm were given at another gate, called Hessell Gate, he could
then let them in. This thus overnight concluded upon, next morning he was
brought into the presence of one Trist, he was a Papist, and commanded Master
Percies Troop of Horse at the defeat at Newbourne, and one Captain Courtney,
and six others; some of which his father-in-law told him were Lords disguised:
These promised him to make good his reward, but they doubted, unless some
Captain might likewise be aiding, it might miss of performance; and therefore
propounded to him to draw his Captain into the business. Lowanger a Dutchman
(a man truly of that faith, courage, and ability, that were I to manage an
enterprise of the greatest moment that might be, I would not wish a better
second) they propounded to him that he should have in reward 1000 pounds, 500
pounds for his life, and be made a Knight. You see, Sir, whatever the
performance would have been, they were not spare in promises. Trist told him
he had a man of his, whom under color of carrying Arms as a Voluntiere, he
might employ as he saw cause. Beckwith, it appears, some time before, had an
eye to have corrupted Lowanger, for he had invited Lowanger to his house, and
sent him word he would bestow a Gelding upon him, which he presently then
acquainted me with, and told me he thought there was some ill meant in it, and
so would not go: He has exceedingly labored in the discovery of this, being
in a great measure sensible of his honor herein. Upon Tuesday we caused the
Lieutenant to write back to his father-in-law, that Lowanger liked well of the
business, but desired some better assurance of his reward then Trist and
Courtneyes words, and sent a boy with the Letter; and that it might appear to
Mr Beckwith (...) be carried with more secrecy, the boy was caused to put the
Letter in his Shoe: the return was this Letter enclosed; the original (being
well known to be his hand) I keep (to be sent when the Parliament shall
command) least it might miscarry, as some other Letters of his, whereby his
hand may be known. I have Trists man in hold, who confesses he was sent
hither by Trist (under color to carry Arms) to give intelligence: and I find
he had endeavored to send to York diverse of my Soldiers. This morning I
received a Letter from Master Mayor of Beverley, the Copy of which I send you,
of diverse assembled at Master Beckwiths house: We had another, as I think, to
surprise the Block-house, being the strong Fort of the Town; but how that is,
I have not yet made a full discovery.

I have sent to the Mayor of Beverley to search Master Beckwiths house, being a
Recusant, and to tender them the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and to know
their names. If there had been open war, I could soon have told what to
have done in this business: And truly, if I should have let the Plot gone on,
and given them what they deserved, I think, being they came that way to have
taken the Town, I might have justified it before God and man: But being loath
to be the first letter of blood, I resolved of another course; which was, To
advertise His Majesty of the Plot discovered, least some should advise Him
upon a design, might prove dishonorable and dangerous to Him. This dispatch I
sent away last night. I shall trouble you no farther, but rest,

Hull, 1642. Your affectionate faithful friend, John Hotham.

The true Copy of Master Beckwiths Letter, a Recusant.
Son, the Iron is hot, I guess at the sense of your Letter, that all is
right as was intended, for more security, in the morning, I expect strong here.
My Son went yesternight to York, comes with great ones this night Lor: I
send what I have from you this night thither: if it may breed suspicion, let
your friend believe well, and not come to morrow; If I could send safe, I
would, but the trust holds on our part, as I shall be advised by your Fathers
Master to morrow, I must work; yet this Boy is a fine way to come and return:
Your Letters are so wasted in his shoe, as I guess at the sense; yet send it
broken with my exposition, for I dare not bogle with promises, no doubt is to
be made of any thing promised; I write more confidently, because I know your
hand, I name none but your self, he cannot come to morrow I fear, without
suspicion; But I refer all to your selves, wishing to see him, I mean (in
the morning) it will be better satisfaction to him, to all here.

T. B.

By the King.
WHereas the High and Mighty Prince, John the fourth, King of Portugal, etc.
has lately sent his Ambassadors to the Kings most Excellent Majesty;
declaring his desire to renew the ancient Confederation and Amity between their
Royal Predecessors, Crowns, and Subjects; His Majesty out of His Royal Care
of the Peace and Tranquillity of His Kingdoms, and the freedom of Trade and
Commerce of His loving Subjects, by the advice of His Privy Council, has
been pleased to yield thereunto, and does make known to His loving People That
the said Peace and Confederation is concluded and established between the said
Kings, their Crowns, Kingdoms, Territories and Subjects: And the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, for the direction of His Merchants in their Trade and
Commerce, has given Command, That the Articles of this Treaty of Peace shall
be published, straightly charging and commanding all His loving Subjects of
whatsoever degree and estate to observe the same.

Given at the Court at York the two and twentieth day of May, in the eighteenth
year of His Majesty's Reign* 1642. God save the King.
A Proclamation by the King.
WHereas by the Statute made in the seventh year of King Edward the first, The
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm affirmed in Parliament,
That to the King it belongs, and his part it is by his Royal Seigniority,
straightly to defend wearing of Armor, and all other Force against the Peace, at
all times when it shall please Him, and to punish them which shall do
contrary, according to the Laws and Vsages of the Realm; and hereunto all
Subjects are bound to aid the King, as their Sovereign Lord at all seasons,
when need shall be. And whereas We understand, That expressly contrary to the
said Statute, and other good Laws of this Our Kingdom, under color and
pretense of an Ordinance of Parliament, without Our consent or any Commission
or Warrant from Us. The Trained Bands, and Militia of this kingdom have been
lately, and are intended to be put in Arms, and drawn into Companies in a
Warlike manner, whereby the Peace and Quiet of Our Subjects is, or may be
disturbed: We being desirous by all gracious and fair admonitions to prevent,
That some malignant Persons in this Our Kingdom, do not by degrees seduce Our
good Subjects from their due obedience to Us, and the Laws of this Our
Kingdom, subtly endeavoring by a general Combustion or Confusion, to hide
their mischievous designs and intentions against the Peace of this Our
Kingdom, and under a specious pretense of putting Our Trained Bands into a
Posture, draw, and engage Our good Subjects in a Warlike Opposition against Us,
as Our Town of Hull is already by the Treason of Sir John Hotham, who at first
pretended to put a Garrison into the same, only for Our Security and Service.

We do therefore by this Our Proclamation expressly charge and command all Our
Sheriffs, and all Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Sergeant Majors, Captains,
Officers, and Soldiers belonging to the Trained Bands of this Our Kingdom,
and likewise all high and petty Constables, and other Our Officers and Subjects
whatsoever, upon their Allegiance, and as they tender the peace of this Our
Kingdom, Not to Muster, Levy, Raise, March, or to summon, or warn upon any
Warrant, Orders or Ordinance from one or both Our Houses of Parliament,
(whereto We have not, or shall not give Our express Consent) any of Our
Trained Bands or other Forces to Rise, Muster, March, or Exercise, without
express Warrant under Our Hand, or Warrant from Our Sheriff of the County,
grounded upon a particular Writ to that purpose, under Our great Seal. And in
case any of Our Trained Bands shall rise or gather together, contrary to this
Our Command, We shall then call them in due time to a strict account, and
proceed legally against them as violaters of the Laws, and disturbers of the
Peace of the Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at York the 27 day of May. 1642.
By the King.
OUr Will and Pleasure is, That the Ministers, Freeholders, Farmers, and
substantial Copyholders of this Our County of York, do assemble and meet
together at Heworth Moor, near Our County of York, upon Friday in Whitson
week, according to former summons by nine of the clock in the morning. For
that We are informed there are diverse Faires to be kept in this Our County the
day following, at which time many of them may have necessary occasions to be
absent: and therefore out of Our tenderness and care of Our good Subjects, We
have thought fit to give this early notice, to the end the said Inhabitants may
be put to as little prejudice as may be. And this Our pleasure We require to be
forthwith Printed, and Copies thereof to be speedily published and dispersed by
the Sheriff of this County: For which this shall be sufficient warrant.

Given at Our Court at York the 27 day of May. 1642.
FINIS.

