Horrible Nevves FROM VVARVVICK-SHIRE.

Declaring the Kings Majesty's intention to go up against Warwick Castle, with
his Army, and to oppose all that party that stands for the Parliament.

Also the Lord Brooks his intention to meet his Majesty, and to hazard his life
in the just maintenance of the Commands of the High Court of Parliament,
against the malignant party of this Kingdom.

Likewise, the Protestation of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
concerning their intentions for the employment of these forces now raised in
this KINGDOM.

Ordered to be printed, Ion. Bron. Cler. Parl.

London, Printed for T. Rider, Aug. 20. 1642.

Horrible Nevves from Warwickshire.
MAny troubles and distractions have the County of Warwick groned under these
late days, being occasioned by those broils between the Lord Brooks and the
Earl of Northampton, the one being Lord Lieutenant of this Shire for the
Militia, the other Commissioner for the Array, authorized by his Majesty.

But now their fears are greater than ever, and their distractions occasioned
by supposition of what might happen, are now molded into a fearful assurance
of what must happen, if God prove not more merciful (namely) a bloody war. For
they have received certain intelligence that the King has set down his
resolution to come to Warwick with his forces, withal, resolving to endeavor
by fair means to reduce them to their former obedience, if possible, (but if
not, as it is not to be expected) they have great cause to fear a more fatal
event, the Cavaliers being apt to engage themselves in any business that may
promote a war between the King and Parliament. Which the Lord Brooks
knowing, has so taken order both for the security of the Kingdom and the
Castle which was committed to his trust, that he sent private intelligence to
the inhabitants of that party in the County, withal certifying that his intent
was to meet his Majesty, and if occasion should require (the malignant party
offering any violence) that he was fully determined to hazard his life in the
defense of his Majesty and the Parliament, and the preservation of the Peace of
the Kingdom.

VVithall desiring their assistance intimating unto them the great missery that
they should undergo, should the malignant party prevail and get the upper
hand, their wives should be subject to rape, their children to murder, their
houses to be burnt, and all to be destined to ruin, and other confusion.

This News being whispered through the county, wrought more with them than if a
general alarm had been beat through the whole County, for each man with
speed and privacy armed himself and repaired to Warwick, where they were with
joy entertained by the City, who with fearful hearts expected the issue; for
it was expected that the King would have been there on Thursday the 8 of Aug.
but his resolution altered, and he goes not thither till Saturday the 20 of
Aug. what the end will be, God knows, but the general County is full of fear.

On the 17 day of Aug. to Southam there came in 2 Companies of Volunteers, who
were billetted there that night, but on the next day between Lemington and
Southam they were met by the Earl of Northampton, who with an 100 and odd
Cavaliers opposed them but they joining both Companies and doubling the front,
gave them a sound charge; but wanting experience to level, their muskets shot
so low, that they killed more horses than men, by which means they took ten
prisoners, and killed 5, the rest flying as fast as their horses could run, some
men they had wounded, but not many, so for that night they marched to East
Lemington and were billetted that night, and entertained by Parson L^ver, who
feasted both Companies at his own charge, being the first good deed that ever
he did in his life, and some think that it was done more for fear than
affection, being a very factious turbulent fellow, and hated of all that part
of the Country.

This is the chief of the Nevvs in this Country, only we received A
Declaration or Protestation concerning the intention of the Parliament, for the
employment of those forces now raised throughout the Kingdom, the full
substance was as follows. We the Lords are resolved to expose our lives and
fortunes for the defense and maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the
Kings Person, Honor and Estate, the Power and Privilege of Parliament, and the
just Right and Liberties of the Subject. And We do require all those who have
any sense of Piety, Honor, or Compassion, to help a distressed State, and to
come in unto our aid and assistance, this being the true Cause, for which Cause
and in the just defense whereof We will live and dye.

FINIS.

