The Way TOWARD THE FINDING OF A DECISION OF The chief Controversy now
debated CONCERNING Church Government.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1641.

The Way TOWARD THE FINDING OF A DECISION OF the chief Controversy now
debated concerning Church Government.
FIRST, I presuppose I am to speak to men that make conscience of their ways,
and consequently study to walk by a rule. I presuppose in the second place,
that the rule by which they desire to walk, is chiefly the clear word of God,
but where this cannot be had, that the principles and inditements of sound
reason they will not reject: and lastly, when reasonings may be doubtful, that
they will neither be singular and wilful in their own sense, but inclining to
hear the judgment of others, nor unwilling to yield unto that, wherein all
such as are esteemed to be most rational do agree: with such men I desire to
speak, and would tell them that I find in the controversy of this time,
diverse little Treaties put forth, many bitterly, and indiscreetly, some
modestly, and wisely written; some for, and some against Episcopacy, all of them
standing for particular tenets, labor to uphold their own form of government
as the best, and only lawful ordinance of God. None that I have met withal
do look upon the matter without partiality to seek concerning the points
chiefly to be questioned, a Decision, which I think may be taken from
undoubted grounds, and undeniable principles. Therefore I thought it might be
of use to put something to paper also in this kind, as it were to make a
trial, whether or no the way to decide this great controversy might not be
found out so as to give present satisfaction to the more simple and scrupulous;
and to show to the more learned and judicious (whose doubts lie deeper) a
method whereby to resolve themselves, if they will follow the same without
prejudice, I shall endeavor to do.

I take then the matter chiefly questionable, though not hitherto mainly, and
expressly questioned to be this. Whether or no Christ has not for the uniting
and building up of his Church, instituted some overseers or Bishops (for I use
these names indifferently) to be before, and above others in Church government?
or whether for the uniting and building up of his Church, he has made all
overseers to be equal and independent one from another?

If the first be affirmed, then the question must be what that Priority, and
Superiority is which Christ has allowed of? and how it ought to be exercised
above others? But if the last be maintained, then we must be taught, what that
prime and unsubordinate Authority of every overseer is, in his peculiar charge?
and how he should exercise it? Now to find a way to decide these questions, I
am as one who is doubtful, that I may bear a part of the burden of those who
are in doubt. Therefore to be able to resolve my self, it will be necessary
to lay some grounds from whence inferences may be made appliable to the
questions now in hand.

The grounds must be clear doctrines of holy Scripture, concerning the matters
which are fundamental in the question. The inferences must be rules taken from
those doctrines, whereby my understanding may be directed to go the straight
way toward a decision of the question, and the application must be a
consideration of the particular circumstances of things now debated, so far as
they are determinable by the rules which may be found out.

Thus then to find grounds of Decision I must take notice first, of things
fundamental to the question, which I suppose are these.

1. To what end Christ has gathered together and compacted into one body
several believers which are called his Church?

2. What it is properly to build up his Church?

3. What Officers were appointed by Christ to be the builders of his Church?

4. What their several charges and duties were in the Church, and how they
were to administrate the same every one according to his gift and place?

5. How these that were committed to their charge, were to behave themselves
toward them?

6. How according to the intention of Christ and the rules proceeding from his
spirit, the chief builders his immediate followers the Apostles did put all in
execution? here then their practice in the way of government is to be taken
notice of.

If these things can be found clearly in Scripture, I hope they will afford me
some light, to satifie the doubts of my weak conscience, which now must be
full of scruples for other men's sakes.

But when I shall have gathered all that from clear Scripture can be gathered
in these matters, if yet something should be found obscure, and doubtful
concerning particulars now agitated, whereof perhaps no clear precept is
extant in Scripture from whence I may be able to gather such inferences as may
settle my conscience and put it out of doubt concerning some questions in
government, as whether this or that, in such or such a case ought either to be
or not to be done. Then I think I should do well to look first, upon the
Apostles practice in like cases, or if that be perhaps also either unknown or
not well known, as not recorded in the word, then I suppose it will not be
amiss to consider the laudable practice of other times, and chiefly those who
most immediately followed the Apostolical age, taking notice of that which
they did in such like cases; that if perhaps in all Churches of all ages and
places, I find some undoubted tokens of universal consent, I may be willing
to rest in it, and not affect singularity; chiefly if I should also find, that
all the Churches of this present age, do either consent fully thereunto, or at
least do not so far dissent from the same, as to condemn others who follow
not their different practice in such cases. In all which Churches I say, I
ought to take notice in those cases, which shall be thus doubtful, of their
forms of government so far as I shall find the same subordinate unto the
maine end for which Christ gathered his Church, and not repugnant but consonant
unto the rules and practice of the Apostles which are clearly recorded.

For I conceive that if it can be made apparent, that either the end for which
Christ gathered a Church, or the means of building it up appointed by him, or
the rules and constitutions of the Apostles delivered to the builders which
were to be their followers; or their own practice in governing the Church
according to Gods will, is repugnant to all Priority, and Superiority, of one
Pastor above another, then it must be granted, that no such government ought to
be admitted. But if this not only cannot be made apparent, but rather the
contrary, namely that both the aim of Christ in compacting his Church into one
body, and the means by which it is to be built up, and the rules given to the
builders, and the practice of the chief Master builders, whom I take to have
been infallible in the way of public government, do show forth that a
Priority and superiority of one overseer above another, is allowed of: then me
thinks the first question will be decided, and must be answered yea: but then
the second question will come into consideration, namely that Priority, and
Superiority, is which being according to Christ's aim, is answerable unto the
means of mutual edification, is settled by express rules, was practiced by
the Apostles themselves, and has been continued by all their followers, from
the most incorrupt primitive times, until this present age? which if I can by
clear word of Scripture, and testimony of Authors worthy of credit, in all ages
find out, then I think I ought to set my mind at rest, and cast off further
doubtings.

If this rule of proceeding toward a decision of the matter, be thus without
further restriction and exception admitted, then my next care must be to follow
it closely, and take heed lest it be unsappled to things indifferent, either in
nature or proportion, from those wherein Christ and his Apostles with their
true followers in times most incorrupt were conversant.

Now then to make only at this time a brief trial of this way (for hereafter
if need be matters may be enlarged) I will summarily observe that which is
clear Scripture concerning the forenamed heads.

First, I find that the end wherefore Christ would have all his believers
compacted and gathered into one body, is that the world should believe and know
these two things: That the Father has sent his Son to us, and that the
Father loves the believers as he loves his Son. This is clear in Ioh. 17.
21, 22, 23. Another end of this union is that the believers may be able to
build up themselves in grace. This is clear in Ephesians. 4. 16. Another end is,
that they may preserve themselves from the dangers of adversaries, and the
causes of overthrow, Phil. 1. 27, 28. Gal. 5. 13, 14, 15. And a further end is
the holding up of the credit of Gods Kingdom in the world, as well by life, as
by doctrine, Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. and sequent: but chiefly verse 14, 15, 16. From
whence I suppose these assertions may safely be gathered as rules of future
Decision.

1. If the knowledge and faith of Christ, if the Fathers love to all believers
be made manifest unto the word, if the building up of all believers amongst
themselves, if their preservation from adversaries, and if the credit of Gods
Kingdom both in life and doctrine, be upheld in the Church of God, more
directly justly and safely by a Priority and Superiority of overseers one above
another, then by an independency of spiritual persons and charges one from
another, then it is to be conceived, that a Priority and Superiority of
overseers in Christ's Church, is more answerable to his aim in compacting it
into one body, then an independency. But it may be conceived, that these ends
may be attained more directly, justly and safely by the one, then by the other.
Therefore it may be conceived, that the one is more answerable to his aim then
the other.

2. If there be any Priority and Superiority of spiritual charges, and
persons, or any parity and independency of charges amongst persons which is not
subordinate, but repugnant unto those ends; then it is to be conceived that
such both Priority and superiority, as also parity and independency is
altogether unlawful. But perhaps there is some both Priority, and Superiority,
as also independency and parity, not subordinate but repugnant to these ends:
therefore it is to be conceived, that perhaps some both parity and
independency, as also Priority, and Superiority is unlawful.

I take these assertions though doubtfully proposed in respect of particulars,
to be nevertheless out of all doubt in their generality; and therefore I lay
them as grounds of future directions toward a Decision of the point.

Secondly, concerning the building up of the Church, I find in Scripture that
to build up the Church of Christ is to use means to perfect the Saints till
they all come unto the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, that they may not always be carried to and fro as Infants with diverse
winds of doctrine; but dealing truly in love may grow up in him, that is the
head even Christ, from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted
by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self
in love, Ephesians 4. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

These are words of exceeding deep and great sense, and yet me thinks
exceeding clear if they be resolved into single propositions, which now I will
not stand to do, because I must be brief. Therefore I will again take up
these rules.

1. If it may be conceived, that a Priority and Superiority of some spiritual
overseers over others, be a more direct and proper means then a parity, and
independency of the same is, to bring all the Saints of God unto the unity of
Faith, and Knowledge, and therein to a perfect manly stature, and the measure
of the fullness of Christ; then I am bound to think that a priority and
superiority is more answerable to Christ's intention in building up his Church,
then is a paritie and independencie, but the Antecedent is perhaps true;
therefore the Consequent perhaps also.

2. If I find that the independent paritie of Ministers does keep the Saints
of God always in infancy, suffering them to be carried to and fro with diverse
winds of Doctrine, and makes an open way to the slight and cunning
craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; then I am bound to
think that an independent parity of Ministers is not answerable to Christ's
intention in building up his Church. But I find that the independent parity of
Ministers does perhaps this. Ergo I must conclude that it is not perhaps
answerable to Christ's intention in building up his Church.

3. If the independent parity of Overseers may seem to me repugnant to that
fit joining and compacting of all believers into one body, whereby as members
one of another they should supply by their common joints each one toward
another that which according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, should make the increase of the body to build it self up in love; and if
a priority and superiority of Overseers may seem not at all repugnant, but
most consonant to this kind of work, then I may conceive that the independent
parity is not at all, and that the superior priority is altogether answerable
unto Christ's intention in building up his Church; but the former may seem so to
me, and therefore also the latter.

Thirdly, concerning the Officers, we find in Scripture these by name: 1.
Apostles, 2. Prophets, 3. Evangelists, 4. Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11.
elsewhere we find other names of Gifts and Offices; as workers of Miracles,
Gifts of Healing, Helps, Governors, Diversities of tongues, Interpreters of
tongues, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29, 30. Item, Deacons, Exhorters, Rulers, Romans 12. 7,
8. and Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 8. and 5. 17, 18, 19.

From whence I make these inferences. 1. If these Officers appointed for the
first building of Christ's Church were by degrees set in a priority and
superiority one above another, then I may conceive that a priority and
superiority of spiritual Officers is not repugnant to the government of
Christ's Church. But these Officers were so set in relation of degrees one above
another; therefore I may conceive that such a gradation of spiritual Officers
is not repugnant to the government of Christ's Church.

2. If there was no independent parity in the first Officers instituted in
Christ's Church, then I have reason to conceive that an independent paritie is
not answerable to Christ's intention, in instituting Officers in his Church. But
there was no independent parity in these first Officers instituted in the
Church: Therefore I have reason to conceive, that an independent parity is not
answerable to Christ's intention.

Here two things may be objected or excepted against this Rule of Decision.
First, that the Apostles who were Christ's first Officers were equal one to
another, and independent one from another. But to this I answer, That I speak
not of the Officers appointed before the constitution of the Church, but of
those that are named expressly to bear office in the Church already
constituted. Secondly, if then it be said, that the inequality of these first
Office-bearers does proceed from the difference of extraordinary and ordinary
Officers, then requisite at the first constitution of the Church which is not
now requisite after it is once constituted; then I answer, that here I neither
intend nor have need to consider which Officers were extraordinary, and which
ordinary, because I take notice of them only at this time as they were
Officers extant at first, to build up the Church; and my inference goes no
further as yet; nor must I come to admit of that distinction in my thought,
till the matter it self carry me to it.

Fourthly, I find the several charges and duties of these Officers to be
these.

1. Christ sending forth his Apostles appoints them to be his witnesses unto
the utmost parts of the earth, of that which he has done for our salvation,
Acts 1. 8. Also he gives them charge to teach all men to observe whatsoever
he had commanded them, and to baptize those that received their doctrine,
Matthew. 28. 19. 20. This they did, and so gathered a Church together; wherein at
first, the faithful having all things common, brought their goods to the
Apostles feet, making them distributers thereof unto such as had need. But the
Apostles found this charge imposed upon them to be too troublesome, and not
proper unto their spiritual calling; therefore they betook themselves unto
their own peculiar charge which was to attend unto prayer, and the Ministry
of the word; Acts 6. 4. and gave advice that Deacons, should be chosen, whose
peculiar charge at their first institution, was to serve the tables, Ibid.
verse 2, 3. yet it is evident that they also preached the word, and bore
witness of Christ, Ib. verse 9. 10. and Cap. 8. verse 5. and baptized the
believers, Ib. Chap. 8. verse. 12. 38.

Besides these Deacons, we find that the Church being constituted, other
Officers in it are named and said to be different in charges. As the charge of
Prophets was to prophecy according to the Analogy of faith, of Deacons to
attend their Deaconship, of Teachers to attend teaching, of Exhorters to attend
exhorting, of Distributers to distribute, of Rulers to rule with diligence,
Romans 12. 6. 7. 8. of speakers with tongues to speak, and of Interpreters to
interpret, 1 Cor. 14. 27.

Besides these duties thus generally mentioned, we find more particular
charges mentioned. As first, concerning the duties of Prophets, how they ought
to prophecy, and of speakers with tongues, how they ought to speak unto
edification in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

Secondly, concerning Rulers, where we find the charge given to Timothy, and
Titus, either as Evangelists, or as ordinary Bishops, and Overseers of the
Churches, next unto the Apostles; their charge was to set in order things which
the Apostles left undone for the constituting of the Churches; amongst which
the ordaining of Elders, and Deacons in every Church, was a chief duty
belonging to them, 1 Timothy 1. 3. Tit. 1. 5. item To repress and inhibit false
doctrines, 1. Tim. 1. 3. Tit. 1. 10. 11. item To settle a course of prayers in
the Church, 1 Timothy 2. 1. item To appoint due maintenance for widows, and
Elders, 1 Timothy 5. 9. 17. 18. item To be Judges in matters of accusation against
Elders, ibid. verse 19. and to give imposition of hands to those that were
approved and fit for the Ministry, ibid verse 22. item To maintain their
authority, and not to suffer themselves to be despised therein, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
Tit. 2. 15. And lastly, to commit the things which they had heard of the
Apostles, unto faithful men, able to teach others who should be successors in
that place, 2 Timothy 2. 2. As for other Rulers in the Pastoral charge, their
duty is specified to be a watching over the souls of their flock as those
which must give an account, Heb. 13. 17. and in doing this, they are bound to
call their sheep by name, to lead them out and to go before them, Ioh. 10. 3.
4. item To defend them against the wolves, though they hazard their life in so
doing, ib. verse 11. item To visit the sick, and pray for them, Iam. 5. 14.
item To keep the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to shut it, and open it as
occasion shall require, Matthew. 16. 19, and 18. 17, 18. and 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5.

And then the general duty of all Officers is, that as every one has received
the gift, so he should minister the same to others as a good steward of the
manifold graces of God, 1 Pet. 4. 10.

From all this I make these inferences.

1. If all these charges and duties are different, and yet should be
administered jointly as by several members of one body, then it seems such a
priority and superiority in some, and subordination in others, is to be
observed as is in the members of a natural body, one in respect of another.
But all these charges are different, and yet so to be administered as is
mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5. and till the end of the Chapter. Therefore it seems
such a priority and superiority in some, and subordination in others, is to be
observed.

2. If these charges in their natural property as they stand in relation one
to another, be repugnant to an independent parity, then there is no independent
parity allowed of amongst the Officers who are to discharge the same. But it
may perhaps be made good that these charges are in their natural property as
they stand in relation one to another, repugnant to an independent parity,
therefore perhaps there is no independent parity allowed of amongst the
Officers who are to discharge the same.

Fifthly, the duty of the flock is in a word to be obedient unto their Rulers,
and to submit themselves unto them, Heb. 13. 7. 17. and to provide necessary
maintenance for them, Gal. 6. 6. 8. 1 Cor. 9. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14.

From hence I infer, that if submission and obedience is to be yielded, and
if Rulers be different in charge, then according to every ones degree and
different place in his charge, the submission ought to be differenced: But the
Antecedent is true, and therefore also the Consequent. Therefore I conceive,
that more respect was due unto Apostles even, as they were ordinary Ministers,
then to their ordinary Rulers; and more to the Bishops and Overseers that were
made Judges of other Elders, then to the Elders that were subject to be judged;
and more reverence due to the Elders then to the Deacons.

Lastly, the practice of the Apostles as chief Masterbuilders was this: they
laid the foundation which is Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11. they built by preaching
upon the foundation gold, silver, and precious stones, they baptized the
believers, and gathered them together in one body, and ordained Elders and
Officers over them to rule them, and do the work of the Ministry. See Acts
13. and 14. Chapters, and particulerly in Chap. 14. the verses 21, 22, 23. They
gave orders to their followers concerning all things needful for edification
in the Churches, as may be seen in 1 Cor. Chapters 5, and 6, and 7, and 8, and
9, and and 10, and 11, and 12, and 14, and 16. verse 1. and in the 2 Cor. Chap.
8, and 9. in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus throughout, and elsewhere, as in
the Acts in Chap. 6. and 15. and 20.

From whence I infer, that if neither in the Apostles own practice, nor in the
practice of those whom they set over the Churches in their own time there be
any example of independent parity intimated or used in the way of ordinary
government, then such a parity may seem to be inconvenient to be admitted into
the Church of God.

But perhaps no such example is to be found in their practice or in the
practice of those whom they appointed to be ordinary Rulers of the Churches in
their own time. Therefore an independent parity may seem inconvenient to be
admitted.

Thus I have briefly run over the fundamental matters of the first question in
hand, not intending to determine any thing precisely, but to gather some rules
of determination whereby the matter of priority and superiority in government
may be tried more at large in due time.

Only thus much I must now intimate, that my doubt concerning priority and
superiority of spiritual Officers in the Church is so far resolved, that it
seems not at all repugnant to me but rather more consonant and answerable to
Christ's intention in the first institution of his Church, then an independent
parity. And this is the first position wherein I receive some satisfaction to
my doubts.

If therefore any will contradict this position to make me again doubtful of
it, I think he is obliged to show that an independent parity of Rulers is not
only no less, but as much, and rather much more answerable to Christ's
intention: and this he must show from the same grounds which I have laid,
except he can show these to be insufficient, and lay some others that are more
satisfactory: which if he does, then it will be also requisite, that he define
clearly what that prime and independent authority is, which every Ruler has by
himself in his particular charge.

As for me, because I take this position as granted, that Christ did institute
in the first constitution of his Church a priority and superiority of
spiritual Officers; therefore I think I may safely gather, that for the
building up and perpetual propagating of the same, his intention was not
altered: which second position if any will deny, I suppose he will find
himself obliged to show unto me sufficient and evident causes, why his
intention should be altered: and therefore that frame of government which was
either necessary or most convenient for the first constitution and building up
of his Church, is inconsistent with the perpetual propagation thereof.

But seeing I conceive it not likely that this can be shown, therefore I ought
to proceed and come to the second question, to find out what the priority and
superiority is which Christ does allow of in the spiritual Rulers of the
Church, and to find out this, it will be requisite to review again the
grounds heretofore laid from whence the position has been gathered, that a
priority and superiority of Rulers in spiritual government is answerable to
Christ's intention; which that we may do, let us begin at the last and go
upward toward the first.

The last of our grounds was the practice of the Apostles, which yields no
example to us of any independent pa^^ty, but rather of a superior priority
which in the way of their ordinary government they used over others. For I
suppose no man doubts of this, but the Apostles were in the ordinary course
of their mystery above all other spiritual Officers which ordinarily ruled the
Churches. If then it be granted that in the ordinary course of their Ministry
they were above others, the next thing to be sought after will be this, wherein
their superiority did consist? and how far it was derived or not derived unto
their successors?

And to find out this, I conceive that in the Apostles discharge of their duty
some thing was extraordinary, as being useful and requisite only for that
time wherein they lived; and something ordinary and of perpetual use which was
to be transmitted unto their successors.

The extraordinary discharge of their Apostolical duty was first to lay the
foundation, and then to raise and settle that frame of Christ's Church upon the
same which was most answerable to his Kingdom: And to do this, God ^^dued
them with extraordinary gifts, of tongues, of knowledge, of wisdom, of
prudence, and of infallibility in truth and public government, and confirmed
their authority with his own testimony bearing them witness as the Apostle
says, Heb. 2. 4. both with signs and wonders and with diverse miracles and
gifts of the holy Ghost; which by the imposition of their hands he conferred
upon the believers, as is evident by Acts 8. 17. and 19. 6.

This I conceive was their extraordinary authority and discharge of their duty
which should not be transmitted to any after them, but should rest in their
persons and be for after times recorded in Scripture, that thereby they should
become perpetual Apostles unto all ages; as being set on their thrones in Gods
word to judge the twelve tribes of Israel; so that their Apostleship although
in respect of their personal condition it was temporary, yet in respect of
their charge and message from God to his Church it is perpetual, and yet still
extant in the Church.

The ordinary discharge of their ministerial duty, was to bear witness of
Christ unto the world, to declare by preaching the counsel of God unto
mankind, to attend the work of prayer, and to govern the Church according to
the rules by which they did at first constitute the same. For no doubt the
Rules which they gave to others for the work of the ordinary Ministry and
Government, they themselves first observe, so that not only by precepts but by
practice they left their examples to be followed as rules, see Phil. 3. 17. 2 Timothy 3. 10, 11. From whence I gather that what priority and superiority soever
in the ordinary government of the constituted Church of God they used over
other Ministers to whom the particular spiritual charge of a Church did
belong, that the same priority and superiority may upon the like occasions be
used in the same ordinary government: item, I gather further, that they did
transmit their priority and superiority unto those whom they appointed to be
their successors in the ordinary charge: I say they did transmit it either by
express precepts, or by actual practice proposed to be an example unto them
to be followed in like cases, for thus 2. Tim. 3. 10, 11. the Apostle
recomendeth his own practice to be observed. And lastly, from both these
inferences I gather a third conclusion, that if we will truly know what the
priority and superiority of one spiritual governor is above another in the
ordinary course of government, we must take notice of all the passages of
Apostolical practice in this case. And this will suffice at this time for an
entry toward the determination of that which we seek for.

The next ground going before this, was the precept of obedience and submission
due by the members of the Church unto their Rulers that watched over them: the
precept is clear, Heb. 11. 17. the rule inferred from thence was, that
according to the difference of Rulers in the degrees of place, the submission
and obedience was to be differenced. Now if I would know what the different
degrees of Rulers are, I think I ought to observe the property which the
Apostle adds unto the office of a Ruler as a characteristicall note of his
charge when he calls him a watching Ruler over the flock. From which property
I gather this inference toward a further determination of the point in hand;
namely that what priority and superiority soever may be found in the ordinary
course of watching, practiced by the Apostles, and so consequently transmitted
unto their followers, that same priority and superiority in watching may be
lawfully used now a days; and therefore if in the ordinary course of watching
they did extend their care unto more particular congregations then one, then I
think it may be safely concluded that such an extent of care in a priority and
superiority of watching, and consequently of ruling, may also be used. And let
this also suffice for a further entry at this time toward the determination of
that which we seek for.

Again, the ground precedent to this had four branches, whereof the last
concerned the peculiar duty of perpetual Rulers, where we observed their
charge to consist in watching over the souls of their flocks, by calling them,
by leading them, defending them, visiting them, and keeping the keys of the
heavenly sheepfold, to shut out the sheep, or let them in, as they should see
occasion.

From whence I gather this inference, that what priority and superiority
soever, any ordinary Rulers had in the Apostles time above others in their
watching over the flock, by calling, leading, defending, visiting and keeping
the keys of the fold, that now also the same priority and superiority may be
lawfully exercised: and if it can be made apparent, that any ordinary rulers
had a priority and superiority of watching above others which extended it self
unto more congregations then one, then I suppose it may safely be concluded
that such a superior priority of watching may be lawfully exrcised.

The other concerned the peculiar charge of Timothy and Titus as they were
either Evangelists, or ordinary overseers, I take them either way and look
upon that which they had to do, and say thus: If all the things which they had
recommended to them be of perpetual use in the Church of God, then what
priority and superiority soever they had over others in their course of
government for the administration of those charges, that same may now also be
made use of, and is requisite to be in the Churches of all ages. But all things
recommended to them as I conceive are of perpetual use.

Therefore the priority and superiority which they had for the administration
of the same may also be made of: for although it be said that Timothy and Titus
were no ordinary overseers but Evangelists that is extraordinary, yet I cannot
conceive them (no more then I do the Apostles themselves) to be extraordinary
governors of the Church, in these duties which are perpetually to be
discharged in time to come; for what reason is there to think a man an
extraordinary Officer for discharging an ordinary duty? as for the rest who are
called Prophets, Teachers, Exhorters, Deacons, Distributers, Speakers of
tongues, and Interpreters of tongues; all these though something there might be
extraordinary in them, yet so far as the substance of the office is in some
kind, or altogether remaining until this day in the Church, so far also
that relation of priority, or posteriority of superiority or inferiority,
wherein they stood one toward another, or all toward the chief ruling
watchmen of the Churches ought to remain.

But it may be thought, that they stood under Timothy and Titus, as under
chief watchmen, that they should be ordered and regulated by them in their
public actions, according to Apostolical rules; therefore it may be thought
also that all Officers having the same charge now a days, ought to stand in
the same relation under the like chief watchmen.

And lastly, concerning the duties laid upon the Apostles and Deacons
heretofore mentioned; if there be nothing extraordinary therein for substance,
but only in respect of certain circumstances of that time, of their persons,
and of the outward manner of that society wherein they lived at Jerusalem; then
it may be thought that the authority whereby they ordered all things for the
good of the Church, is not abolished, but regularly transmitted unto their
successors, that in like cases it may be made use of by the chief watchmen
over the Churches: From whence I gather, that what priority and superiority was
deferred by the Church in temporal things, first, unto the Apostles, and
afterward by them resigned unto the Deacons, may in like cases be exercised in
these times. And this may suffice also concerning this matter to give yet a
further entry toward the determination of the point in hand.

Then the ground next precedent, was the distinction of Officers first
instituted in the Church; from which I did infer, that if there was no
independent parity, but a superior priority amongst them, that then a superior
priority was not to be thought repugnant to Christ's intention in building up
his Church: which being granted, I now proceed further to gather this, that if
the superior parity was not ground upon the persons of the Officers, but upon
the offices committed unto them, which in some respect were to be perpetual in
the Church; then I may infer, that as the perpetual offices are in priority
and superiority one above another, so the Officers must be distinguished by
their degrees* and therefore to find out the degrees of subordination in the
Officers, we must reflect upon the nature of the offices as they stand in
relation one to another. And this also may suffice at this time toward a
further determination of the point in hand.

And then the ground that went before this, was that which concerned the
building up of the Church, from whence as heretofore it has been described, I
infer this, that such a priority and superiority of spiritual Officers one
above another as is most fit.

1. To unite all Saints into one perfect man till they come to the fullness of
the stature of Christ.

2. To free them from the diverse winds of doctrine, and deceit of seducers.

3. To make them able to supply spiritual gifts one to another, for their
mutual edification: is that priority and superiority which Christ does allow
of. If therefore we can observe what kind of priority and superiority is best
able to work the effects; or if it be found that they cannot be brought to
pass, except several congregations become as one body under one watching
superiority, which may have an eye unto them all alike, then we shall be able
yet more fully to determine this point in hand.

And then the first ground of all was, that which described the ends wherefore
Christ would have all believers united to one body. From whence I gather this,
that the priority and superiority of officers in spiritual government, which
is most fit to make the faith and knowledge of Christ apparent unto the world,
to build up the believers amongst themselves, to preserve them from all
adversaries, and to uphold the credit of Gods Kingdom, is most answerable to
Christ's intention; and therefore to know what that priority and superiority is;
the properties which can reach these ends must be found in it, which
properties if they be not repugnant but rather consonant to that inspection
which one overseer may have over others in many congregations; then it will
follow, that such an inspection is not repugnant, but rather consonant to
Christ's intention.

And so I think I have found matter enough whereby the nature of that priority
and superiority which is to be defined may be known: if we will meditate now
fully upon these heads, and discuss more distinctly the particulars contained
under the same, which in due time may be done by Gods assistance.

Thus I have laid grounds and gathered rules to resolve my doubts, first,
whether yea or no a superior priority be more answerable to Christ's intention,
then an independent parity in the government of his Church? Secondly, what that
priority and superiority is? Now I must come to the consequent of this second
question. viz. How this priority and superiority ought to be exercised toward
others, and to determine this, we may gather rules from three grounds which
clear Scripture does yield unto us.

The first ground is to be taken from the nature of the duty expressed in the
peculiar name, wherein the singular properties of the charge is denoted.

The second is to be found in the special commandments given to the chief
Watchmen; according to which they were to behave themselves in their charge of
Superiority above others.

The third is to be observed, in the examples and practice of those that
commendably and lawfully exercised their authority over others; or in the
discommendable practice of those that varied from the Rules.

To touch these things, but in a word at this time; I observe from the chief
Names, viz. of Shepherd, of Ruler, of Watchman, and of Bishop or Over-seer,
that the property of Superiority stands chiefly in the Relation which he
that is set over others has unto the members of the Church, who in comparison
of him are like a flock of sheep; or like a Commonwealth, and company of
men; subject to certain Laws and Constitutions, by which they are to be
directed in their joint course and way of life, and lest they should fall into
some danger by transgressing the same; the inspection to be had over them is
committed to his charg: So that if we take notice what the true essential
property of a Shepherd is in his leading superiority, or of a watchman set in
the Tower of a City, or of an Overseer set to look to a family in a house, the
same Priority and Superiority may be atributed unto the chief officers, which
Christ has appointed for his Church. From whence again I infer, that
according as the flock is small or great, the watchtower high or low in a big
or little City; the company less or more; so the superiority in the charge
may be differenced, and by degrees extended or contracted.

The name of Steward also is attributed unto the chief officer but not unto
him alone; yet it imployeth a power of dispensing these things which the M. of
the house has appointed to be given unto his household. Therefore as the things
to be dispensed are different, and either more or less uniuersally to be
administered, so the difference of superiority may be observed in the
Stewardship.

The name of a husbandman is somewhat of an other kind, for it imployeth a
property rather of painfulnesse then of power and authority wherein we
conceive, that according to the intent and nature of the soil, so the
husbandry must be; for as the soil may be larger or lesser, so the Charge in
the husbandry thereof may be differenced.

In like manner, the name of Builder may be differenced according to the
largeness of the house, and different duties in the building thereof.

Lastly, the name of Angel is given to the Chief Officer in a peculiar manner,
as denoting a Superiority of message, wherein he is employed by God toward
others, to declare his will and see it executed in his Kingdom. For he is the
Ambassador of God unto his people, and has the beams of his authority
conferred upon him. Thus then I gather that all these names of Shepherd, Ruler,
Watchman, Over-seer, Steward, Husbandman, Builder, and Angel denote clearly a
Superiority of Office over and toward the persons unto which they are
appointed to discharge the same; nor do their properties seem repugnant to a
gradation and differencing of that superiority which their name denotes. 2ly.
A peculiar manner of discharging the duty committed unto the Office-bearers in
Christ's Church, for as each name has a several signification, so it carries
with it a peculiar relation which the Office bearer has toward the Church,
according to which he ought to behave himself in the manner of discharging his
duty. And this will suffice to show in general the way, how this priority and
superiorite ought to be exercised toward others.

The more particular determination of this matter must be taken from the
special commandments which are given to this effect, which are many, and
cannot now be insisted upon at large. therefore we will only point at them, in
showing the places of Scripture, where they maybe found.

The peculiar duties of a Shepherd, and the manner of performing the same, are
set forth, John 10. 1. till 16. and Ezekiel. 34. 2. till 20.

The Rulers duty is mentioned, Romans 12. 8. and Heb. 13. 17. and Math. 18. 17,
18, 19.

The Watchmans duty is mentioned, Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20. 21.

The Bishops duty is largely mentioned in the Epistles to Timothy, and Titus,
throughout, and chiefly in the places heretofore alleged concerning their
peculiar charges, and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13, 14

The Stewards duty is mentioned, Matthew. 13. 52. and 24. 45. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.

The Husbandmans and Builders duties are mentioned together, 1 Cor. 3. 6.

The Angels duties are mentioned, Revel. 2. and 3. Chapters throughout. In all
which places I do perceive that the manner of discharging their duties is
chiefly insisted upon, as it has a relation unto the flock; so that their
Priority and Superiority is only in that respect, clearly to be gathered,
namely from the duty which toward the flock is to be done: Therefore perhaps
very little will be found tending to resolve us of the doubt in hand, namely,
how the Priority and Superiority in Charge which one Over-seer may have above
another, is to be exercised. Yet then if there be nothing at all repugnant unto
this Superior Priority of one Over-seer above another in the discharge of the
duties here mentioned; then I say I ought to conceive that they may very well
stand together: But if on the otherside any thing here mentioned in the manner
of exercising these Charges of Superiority, be altogether inconsistent with an
Independent Paritie of Overseers, and yet if that which is to be done must
be perpetually made use of in Church Government: then I say it may be strongly
inferred, that as for this reason an independent parity is not to be admitted,
so a superior priority ought to be allowed, yet always so, as it may be a
furtheranc to all the duties of a particular pastoral charge; and no ways a
cross to the true manner of discharging the same. And here I will leave it
unto the impartial consideration of those that are juditious, whether or no
the special commandments given unto Timothy and Titus for the discharging of
that Priority and Superiority wherein they were set above other Officers, be
not of perpetual use both in respect of the thing to be done, and in respect
of the manner of doing the same, as it is recommended unto them; where special
notice may be taken of that inspection, which is deferred unto them, over
others, for the repressing of false Doctrines, for the ordaining of Elders in
several Churches, for the imposition of hands, for the receiving of
accusations against Elders, and for the power of the Keys: which things ought
still both for matter and manner to be continued as they were recommended unto
Timothy and Titus, except some substantial difference can be showed, which as
yet I cannot see.

The examples of Practice both commendable and discommendable, in respect of
the lawful or unlawful discharge of this duty, may be gathered from such
places of Scripture, wherein the Acts of Priority and Superiority, and the
manner of exercising the same are mentioned, I will name some few that come now
in my mind.

First, the practice of the Church, to which Christ does send us in cases of
scandal, Math. 18. 17. whose authority is established there, ver. 18, 19, 20.

Secondly, the practice of the Apostles at Jerusalem, Acts 1. 15. till the end.
And Chap. 6. in the ordination of Deacons. And Acts 15. in holding of the
Synod, which determined the controversy risen at Antiochia. And Acts 14. 23.
in ordaining Elders.

Thirdly, the practice of Paul in the matter of excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 3,
4, 5. and in the manner of exercising his power, 1 Cor. 9. throughout. And 2
Cor. 10. throughout. And ibid. Chap. 13. 2. 3. 10. Item, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 3. till
12. Item, Acts 20. 20. 26, 27, 33, 34, 35.

These are examples of commendable practice: the examples of practice which is
discommended are these:

First of Diotrephes, 3. John 9. 10. who loved to have a preeminencie.

Secondly, of those that in the last times should be disobedient unto the truth
through presumptuousnesse, who despising all Superiority should perish in the
contradiction of Core, Judge. 21. by which we perceive that Core, Dathan, and
Abiram, were types of that disobedience which will be under the Gospel in
some, who will take upon them to be equal, and in nothing inferior to their
lawful Superiors.

Thirdly, the reproof of the Angels of the Churches for not exercising the
authority which they had, Revel. 2. 14, 15, 20.

These examples being well examined, I suppose, may give us some light to show
the manner how the Superior Priority which some have over others in the Church
ought to be put in practice.

Thus having laid the grounds, and gathered some inferences, whereby to
regulate my thoughts in this doubtful matter. I think I may come to the
application of the same unto the Controversy at this time debated, to see by
what means a decision thereof may be found. And here I must consider the
circumstances and properties of that Authority which is now questioned, whether
it be lawful or no? But when I intend to do this, I meet with a difficulty
incident to all great disputes, which are commonly involved in a multiplicity
of particulars and variety of circumstances; confusedly debated, and partially
related by opposite parties, where every one seeks his own advantage; so
that it is very hard to state the case truly, according to the circumstances,
which are most materially therein to be considered, that the Rules may be
applied unto the fundamental matter of doubt, which ought to be decided.

Yet if I must be impartial to clear mine own and other men's scruples, I
ought to state the matter so, as both sides may agree to have the forenamed
Rules applied thereunto; And to do this, I conceive, it is best to proceed
from that which is general, till by degrees I come to that very particular,
wherein the controversy and contradiction of parties is most apparent. To
which effect, I reflect first upon this general assertion: Namely, that there
be some Ecclesiastical Overseers, which have a Priority and Superiority of
government above others in the Church of England; to which, as it is, out of
all doubt, that it is so in England, so in the general notion my former Rules
are not repugnant; but rather agreeable, that it may be so.

Then in the next place, I say, that this Priority and Superiority given to
some in the Church of England, is in the purpose of the Law, by which it is
publicly authorized; no more, but a Superiority and Priority of watching over
others for the good of the Society. And this, I suppose, as it is granted by
both sides to be true; so I think that it is not repugnant to my former Rules.

Thirdly, I comceive that this watching Priority and Superiority intended by
the Law, is appointed to be for this particular good of the Society; namely,
that the Flocks committed to every Overseers Charge, should be called and led
on in the way of Godliness, through the public profession of Gods true
worship, so as it may become most lawfully conspicuous unto the world. And to
this effect, the Overseers are authorized to see, that the flock be provided
with fit Teachers, Pastors, and Deacons, by lawful election and ordination
through imposition of hands, that it should be settled in a course of public
prayers and ordinances, befitting the administration of Christian Religion;
that it should be preferred from false Doctrines and ravennous Wolves: That it
should not want a spiritual Judicature, as well in matters of accusation
against Elders, as in matters of scandal and offense betwixt member and
member; and that in it the power of the keys, to shut open the Kingdom of
heaven, as occasion should require might not be wanting; and that such
maintenance as is due unto these that labor in the Word and Doctrine, and
necessary for the poor, the vvidow, and the fatherless, may be provided for
them. Those I take to be the true ends, for which the superior Watchmen in the
Church of England are appointed by the Church and State, to have inspection
over other Watchmen of an inferior degree.

And that such Superiority in watching may be exercised, I take it as granted
from my former ground and Rules.

So then I find no difficulty in the thing it self; nor do I think that any
does oppose a Superior Priority of Governors in this respect. But if any do,
then I conceive they are bound to show, that in such things no Priority or
Superiority in watching of some few over many, may lawfully be appointed in the
Church of God; but that every particular Officer in all these things is
independent, and may do herein by himself, whatsoever he shall think good,
without all relation or subordination unto any, whom the Church does appoint
over such businesses.

Therefore from the thing appointed, and the end wherefore it is appointed in
this Church; I come to the manner of appointing it: and here I enquire whether
this Priority, and Superiority in government, has not been appointed by those
who have authority to do it, that is, by the Church it self (here I mean by
the Church, the body either representative or collective) according to the
precepts of the Apostles, and the most laudable examples of primitive times? If
yea, then I suppose no exception ought to be taken at it; but if no, then I
think that the irregularity of the appointment, ought only to be excepted
against and corrected, and the Office it self neither condemned nor rejected
but maintained.

Now what the Apostolical Precepts were, or whether or no there were any at
all ever given for the manner of appointing such Officers in the Churches, I
do not know because I find nothing in Scripture more then I have intimated
already; which is, that such Superior Officers, are neither repugnant to
Christ's intention, nor to the Rules and forms of Government expressly delivered
unto us in Scripture; but how they to be appointed (that is to say) what manner
of proceeding ought to be used for their Election, calling and institution in
their Superior Charge) I find nothing in Scripture that I can call to mind,
except I will represent ancient types unto my self, from which I can perhaps
gather no more but the shadows of inferences. Therefore in this case, I
suppose, I must betake my self unto my next general ground of proceeding,
which is the laudable practice of primitive times, to see what has been done
in like cases by those, whom we esteem to have been most rational in the
ways of true government, and most likely to have seen and known the
Apostolical Practice if there was ever any in this kind, different from the
ordinary way of appointing other Officers in the Church. But if it be more
likely that the manner of appointing such Superior Officers was rather not
different in substance then different from the ordinary way of calling and
installing other Officers; then perhaps it will not be amiss to reflect upon
the most immediate followers of the Apostles, so as to take notice of their
practice both in respect of the thing it self, viz. that they had such
Superior Officers; and of the manner of appointing them as it was most
answerable unto the ordinary Institution. And this I will rather do from other
men's Observations, then from mine own.

I find then that Doctor Reynolds in his Conference with Heart, Chapter 8. in
the end of the third Division, and the beginning of the fifth does well
observe; when as Elders were ordained by the Apostles in several Churches,
that in process of time they did use to assemble themselves, to the end that
things belonging to mutual and common edification, might be done by mutual
and common counsel and consent. In these meetings they did things orderly, and
followed the examples of their predecessors in like occasions, to choose one
who was to be of their company, and Moderatour of their actions.

So amongst the Apostles at Jerusalem, James, Peter, and John, are called the
Pillars, Gal. 2. 9. and in the meeting, Acts 15. the matter was concluded at
the determination of Peter and James.

Thus also in after times although there might be many Elders and Pastors in
one Church, as at Ephesus, Acts 20. 17. yet it may be gathered from Revel. 2.
1. that there was one Chief in that Church, whom Christ calls the Angel
thereof, and directs that to him which the rest were to know by his means.
He was afterward from the Priority and Superiority of his Office by the
Fathers called a Bishop; For it is apparent, that in ancient times there was
one who had the Presidentship amongst the Elders.

This Doctor Reynolds in the forenamed gathers from Cyprian, Epist. 6. and
13. Prebyteris and Diaconis. From Eusebius Histor. Eccles. l. 6. c. 42. and
from Cornelius letter to Cyprian Epist. 46. apud Cyprian. which Doctor Usher
also has made more clear by some observations taken from Ignatius his Epistle
to the Church of Ephesus, written but twelve years after the writing of the
Revelation of Saint John, and from Tertullian who flourished about a hundred
years after Ignatius, and from Leontius of Magnesia, who at the General
Council of Chalcedon testifies that from Timothy until that time, there had
been at Ephesus a continued succession of seven and twenty Bishops, which
Bishops (no doubt) were none else but the Presidents of the Ephesine Presbytery.

These witnesses being next to the first times, and worthy of credit seem to
make the matter of primitive, and (for ought that I see can be excepted) of
Apostolical practice also, out of doubt. And if this Prioritie and
Superiority was such, and was in this manner, received and deferred to one
above others; I conjecture, that it was by imitation of Apostolical practice
thus deferred and received, because I find nothing therein repugnant, but every
thing rather, and every way consonant to Apostolical Rules, so that unto this
Bishop as President of the Presbytery all the power belonging to the ordinary
Rulers did primely belong, which he by consent of the rest did exercise, or
the rest by him did put to execution.

And this I conceive was the practice of the Apostles themselves in their
course of ordinary government, as may be gathered, from Acts, 3. 15. and 1 Cor.
5. This in my apprehension is also most answerable to the rules of perpetual
government given unto Timothy and Titus. and this is every way consonant to the
distinction of officers in the Church to the means of building up the Church
and to the intention of Christ in uniting all believers into one body, and
therefore may without scruple be believed to have been the practice of the
first primitive and incorrupt times* which being granted as I think it should,
then I ought not to make any more doubt of the matter; chiefly if from that
time to this day; and now also at this time, in all the Christian and
protestant Churches except only those that are in fear of danger by reason of
the abuse of this authority, or are under the cross of a superstitious
State-government) either the undoubted footesteps or the manifest use of such a
Priority and Superiority has been in all ages and places and still is in some
measure to be found which if I perceive so to be, as truly I do; then I judge
that my mind should fully be at rest, and trouble it self no more about this
matter. Thus I have satisfied most of mine own doubts so far as I conceive
them to be common both to the simple and more learned. There be some other
Scruples more proper to those that dive deeper into matters, which I know not
if it be fit to propose to every one least in stead of taking away ordinary,
we may ordinary, we might raise extraordinary scruples; therefore till I be
better resolved, what ought to be done in this, and perceive how far this
way of deciding matters does give satisfaction unto divided Judgments. I
think it will not be amiss to surcease. In the mean time such as are
spiritual, ought to exhort all sides not to censure one another, with rigor,
nor to do things with passion and rashly, or to judge of persons according to
the outward appearance, but to judge righteous judgment which may be done if
they will study to separate in these particular courses and different opinions
of most men, the precious from the vile, and apply themselves rather to heal
then to exasperate sores, rather to build up then to pull down. The Lord give
us all understanding that keeping the foundation as well in knowledge as in
practice we may through Charity build thereon, not hay and stubble, but Gold,
Silver and, precious stones, yet when we shall be careful, first to keep our
selves without blame in the midst of this froward generation, we may then also
be able to hold forth unto all the word of life; and making a difference have
compassion of some and save others with fear as pulling them out of this fire
of endless strife and contention. Now the Lord enable us to do this in the
Spirit of lenity, with godly Zeal to his Glory, Amen.

FINIS

