Truth's Triumph OVER DECEIT: OR A Further DEMONSTRATION that the people called
Quakers be Deceivers, and such as people ought to account accursed in their
Doctrines and Principles.

In VINDICATION of A Former Proof of that Charge, made good against them for
the sorry shifts and evasions from it, and cavils of George Whitehead against
it, in a pamphet of his, called, The Quakers no Deceivers.

Written by John Horn, Teacher at Lin-Alhallowes.

As a further Preservation of people from following any of their pernicious
principles, but that they might inquire after, and more adhear to the truth of
the Gospel, as delivered in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles in the
Holy Scriptures.

They have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood have they hid
themselves, but the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters
shall over flow the hiding place.

Isa. 28.15, 17. But this I know, that the Lord is with me, because mine enemy
does not triumph over me.

Psalm. 41.11. LONDON. Printed for J. Allen at the Rising-Sun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

Truth's Triumph over deceit.
GEorge Whitehead has made another scrible, in pretended answer to my book
entitled, The Quakers proved Deceivers, etc. In which he does but more
manifest his folly and falsehood, as the more he scribles, the more it will yet
appear, to such as are not blinded with ignorance or error. I shall, God
assisting, show the reader briefly what pitiful stuff he has, in some brief
observations.

That in his title he calls my charge unjust, and my book a pamphlet, and the
people I preach to, Mooreans, or Vniversalists, are but some overflowings of
the Gall of bitterness that he is possessed with, as also his calling my
relation, a pretended and imperfect relation, and saying, that I falsely boast
that I made good the charge, and of a pretended victory where I had none, which
I leave to the judgment of the Lord, and of the auditory that heard our
discourse, though for the perfection and truth of my relation, George's
inability to correct or contradict it in any thing of moment, in what he has
wrote against it, may pass with sober men that hard us not, for a pretty good
proof, or demonstration. And as for his charging me with false doctrine,
lyings, slanders, and perverting of the truth, I may give him leave in such
terms to vent his passion and never envy him for it, seeing God has put him
to rebuke before me, and the truth, notwithstanding his serpent-like winding
about to hide his deceits before his deluded followers tryumps over and against
his errors.

His preamble begins with truths wrongly applied by him to his deceits: the
Serpent and his subtilty which appears against the seed of God, and against
the power and wisdom of God] is manifest in him and his party, and the torment
and vexation which the striving against the truth brings, and the confusion and
darkness that overwhelmes them that so do] is evident enough to them that can
see in this envious and imbittered people, who hiss, like Serpents out of their
holes, when the truth disturbs them, and lays them open. How empty and foolish
a vapor it is that he says, the Lord was with him, and by his strength they
were made able to tread upon their enemies. All that were at the dispute (and
remember how pitifully he was confounded, so that he would needs, for want of
any reasonable answer, have left the argument, and fallen to read on our book,
to begin some charge against us, instead of defending himself against my
charge) may easily discern. I bless the Lord, I was in my spirit clearly above
his deceits, and my mouth was enlarged over him, and the people generally
received satisfaction against him. His charging me with rage and madness
against the truth, because I was courageous for it, against his deceits, and
was so far from raging, that I rejoiced against him, nothing moves me. I look
for an hundred worse things from Satan than such an aspertion.

But whereas he says, he several times sent to me, to come forth in public
before he could get me; take the truth of the thing, that thou may (Reader)
see his deecit herein. When George Fox challenged me to make good my charge, he
bad me appoint time and place; I appointed mine own house, or Mr. Iohnsons,
against which he excepted not, but only that time he said he could not.
Therefore when George Whitehead sent to me to meet him, to do it either in the
Market place or Steeple-house, or Steeple-house-yard, or streets, I returned
him answer, what George Fox and I had agreed on, as to that matter; and yet,
that if they would procure the steeple-house, I would meet him there: this he
refused, and then would have me meet him at Isbel Barnards, which I told his
friend, I should not refuse, if my friends judged it convenient, or because he
had upbraided me with my God, I was not unwilling to meet him in the market
place, would my friends thither accompany me, and the Magistrates approve it;
upon advice with my friends they were not willing I should go to Isbel Barnards
or the Mraket-place. Then I sent him word, that if he and his friends would
join with me and mine, in repairing the harms might by occasion of the
meeting in the steeple-house, be done to the seats, I would join with them in
procuring it. But this also, though one of his own party judged it but
reasonable, he refused, because he would not put his party upon any charge:
then he desired me to nominate some indifferent private house, seeing he judged
mine not indifferent, and we judged Isbel Bernards as little or less
indifferent; and I did procure Mr. Philips his, where we should have met, had
his party, upon viewing of it, liked it; but the Churchwarden in the mean
while (without whose concent I would not make bold with the Church or
steeple-house, or put either my friends or the parish upon the charge of
repaires, they having been put to charge before at our former meeting by their
occasion) sending me word that we might in the Chancel: so soon as we had that
liberty granted, I sent G. W. word of it, and accordingly there we met. Now
judge Reader whether of us were most guilty of backwardness to meet in the
public, so as was convenient, seeing I offered him so reasonable, even in the
judgment of some of his own party, and he refused it; but this is no new
thing, to hide themselves, and intimately accuse others in deceit. He says,
The chief thing I drove at, was to make people believe, that there is no man
living upon earth that sins not, or can be perfectly freed from sin in this
life, and that the Prophets and Apostles had sin in them so long as they lived]
which though it is not altogether true; because the main thing, I drove at was
not that, but to prove the Quakers deceivers. Yet those things, he says, I
drove at, and would have people believe me in, are in part, that very words of
the Prophets and holy men of God; and so if I drove at that to make people
believe those things, I drove but at the making them believe the truth of the
Scriptures, in those sayings and by consequence George endeavored to drive
them from believing them. For, that there is not a just man upon earth that
does good and sins not, and no man that sins not, is not mine but Solomon's
by the spirit of truth, I trow, Eccles. 7.20. 1 Kings 8.46. and that no man is
perfectly freed from sin in all respects in this life, is evident both in Psalm.
143.2. and in that sicknesses, diseases, and mortality that came in by sin,
abides upon all men till death, yea, and the bodily death that came in by sin,
abides upon all till the resurrection: and so long as any fruit of sin abides
upon a man, he is not perfectly in all respects freed from sin. And to say as
he does [that the asserting these things is the making way for my Fathers
Kingdom which is upheld by sin, as much as I could] is evident blasphemy. For
God being my Father (at least by creation as he after, though erroniously
says, the Disciples were taught so to call him their Father) his kingdom is
not upheld by sin; and if he calls him the Devil, he blasphemes; or if he judge
the Devil to be my Father, as no doubt his charity leads him, yet then he
blasphemes the spirit of truth which breathed in the holy men of God, while he
makes the asserting their sayings a warring for the Devils kingdom, that they
be their sayings, the places above quoted with, Romans 7.17, 20, 21, 22, 23. Jam.
3.2. 1 John 1.8, 10. and 2.1, 2. make it evident. See Reader how this man
discovers his shame and falsehood in all his oppositions, his intimations that
we denied him liberty to speak in evidence of his (pretended) truths, is so
false, that the contrary, namely that when he would have been reading, and at
other times he was called upon again and again to answer, he would not for some
time; yea, and sometime he had liberty, or took it, to talk so much, that I
could not have liberty to reply upon him, and the calling out of the company to
him to answer or else own himself proved a deceiver, and perhaps sometimes
laughing at his folly, is that he calls the incivility toward him, and
clamoring of many at once against him. And where he says that, many hearing
him with soberness, was (as appears) a grief to me, and probably some cause
of my publishing of an imperfect relation of the discourse in print to render
him, and what he calls the truth, odious, and in my pride to make people
believe I had got the victory. I avouch in the presence of God, that the people
hearing him with soberness was no grief at all to me, or any thing that I see
as making against me in the people, and if it appears so to him, it is because
his eye sees by a false light, and the spirit of truth guids him not therein. I
was very much rejoiced in the Lord to see his helpfulnesse afforded me, and
Geo. Whit. so made manifest to the people, and the people so satisfied: for
which cause also I published as perfect a relation of the discourse of these
points spoken to, as possible I could, and could I possibly have come by every
word, or fillable of it, I was not afraid nor ashamed to make it public,
knowing right well the more perfectly it had been published, the more perfectly
his folly had been made manifest: So that if what I have published in print
render him odious, it is because his folly and deceit in the dispute was such
as deserved it. As for what he says, he shall make good against me in the
strength of God, it will appear to be but a deceived vapor in him by what I
shall (through Gods assistance) say here to his two latter charges, which (he
says) his Treatise makes good, namely; That my Ministry, in which he (falsely)
says, I contend for sin ( just as the Apostle John did in 1 John 1.8, 10. with
2.1.) is Antichristian and both against the commands, promise and works of
God, and leads to the making both the preaching and praying of Christ and the
Saints ineffectual, and that. 2. I (like a chollerick envious man against the
truth of God and his people) am a forger of lies, a false accuser and
slanderer, and so one of the Dragons army, etc. By this making good, or not
making, thou may judge Reader, whether the strength of God be with him to
make good his former against me by dispute, which he could challenge me to in
public, either in market place, Steeple-house or their meeting house in Lin,
namely. 1. That I am out of the steps of the true Ministers, and am in the
practice of deceivers, an hypocrite, and no Minister of Christ, and being a
parish Priest am guilty of the Priests iniquity in many things against which I
have declared. And 2. That I uphold a dead formal worship like the world,
whereunto people are not called by the spirit of truth; which is not the true
worship, and keep people from the life of God, and my Ministry formal and
corrupt. Which his foolish challenge I shall not accept, both because his folly
and falsehood in his boasts of strength, to that may be sufficiently discovered
in his failers, of what he boasts he has done in his Treatise, as also because
he therein lays a trap for me, to get occation to reproach me; for he knows I
sent him word, that I should henceforth have no more to do with him, but
according to the Apostles counsel reject them; now should I accept his
challenge, he and his party would reproach me, as they did upon a less
colored occasion as a liar and false. Besides these being personal charges,
and the overflowings of their anger against me, because foiled at the dispute,
and such things as these spoken so much as we thought needful in answer to his
former book in which he spits such venomous stuff against me, I shall not go
about to plead my own cause, but leave it to God; and rather take good
Hezekiahs course when Sennacherib railed upon him, that would not have him
answered again.

That he is far from making good his charges in the two other points of it
spoken to, as he says in his treatise, these things that follow in answer
hereunto, I hope will fully evince.

To my proofs for the Scriptures (which he only sets down the quotations
without saying any thing to them particularly,) that the Prophets, Apostles,
and holy men of God (even after they were Prophets, Apostles, and holy men)
came confessing themselves sinners, and to have sin. He says, I have not made
it appear that the Quakers do not so, for they own their confessing sin, and
they have confessed their sins to the Lord as they did. To this I answer,
that is evident enough that the Quakers do not boast by their not denying our
charge against them in our first book, but pleading for their conceited
sinlessenesse, and by what they say here; for, observe I pray, 1. They do but
say, they own the Apostles and Prophets, confessing their sins, seeing they say
a man born of God has no sin to confess, either then they deny the Apostles
and Prophets, when such, to have been born of God, or how do they own their
confessing sin? Nay, George says, Paul (and he may as well say it of all the
rest) spoke not of his own state, but other men's.

2. What if they own their confessing sins, that proves not that the Quakers do
confess them. The Scribes and Pharisees owned the Prophets doings, yet they
did not as the Prophets. Thirdly, He says they have confessed them, that implies
they do not so now. But the Apostles and Prophets do not say only they had in
times past confessed and forsaken them, but even when Apostles and Prophets
confess them, in the present; see else David again and again as Psalm. 6. and
19. and 25. and 38. and 40. so Paul Romans 7.17, 20. We find no time of the
Apostles and Prophets, while here, in which they said, they had no sin in them.
But it seems the Quakers would be thought to be better than the Prophets and
Apostles: As for their denying themselves and sin, I would they did as truly as
pretend it, but their lying, falsifying, and passionate language, discovers the
conntrary in them, for all their saying as this piece of Georges sufficiently
proves, his reproaching the Ministers by the name of Priests, as he does me
often with much bitterness, as Priest Horn, this Priest, this scornful
Priest, Horn, etc. As they argue him not to have put off all malice,
bitterness, etc. So are they not to be mattered by us; nor his reproaching any
of us, as not forsaking our sins, but pleading for them; its likely David's
enemies did so in Psalm. 38.15, 16, 17. to which George has given no answer,
though alleged to prove the Quakers such toward us, as David's enemies were to
him. Doubtless these Quakers would have accused the Apostles of not forsaking
sin too but pleading for it, had they lived in their time, and heard them say
sin dwelt in them, and that in many things they all offend, especially they
would have taxed David with it that is so often confessing his sin, as in part
I have noted. But see how silly his pretended proof is, that sin does not abide
in all men the term of this life, and that they are out of the spirit and life
of the Prophets and holy men of God, it is this, They know the fear of the
Lord, which is to depart from iniquity, which fear keeps the heart clean, and
such as live in it shall not depart from the Lord, Jer. 32.40.] as if where men
know, or have the fear of the Lord, there is no sin in them, and as if to have
sin in a man, and to depart from the Lord, was all one. See the folly and
falsehood of this passage. Did not David know the fear of the Lord which is
clean, when he said, Psalm 19.9. the fear of the Lord is clean enduring for
ever? or did he speak at random? and yet did not pray presently after, cleanse
thou me from my secret sins? or had not Paul the fear of the Lord, or did he
depart from the Lord when he delighted in the Law of the Lord in his inner man,
and yet found another law in his members, warring against the law of his mind?
Romans 7.21, 22, 23. Does not these passages evidence, that George Whitehead is
so far from being in the strength of God, as he boasts, that he is a man of no
judgment (that is, right understanding) that cannot distinguish between sins
being in men, and the heart departing from the Lord by sin offending in a man's
walking and leaving the way. How silly also it is that he accounts it absurd
for me to say, That people ought to account the Quakers accursed, whom we have
said to be an heavy judgment of God to us in this Nation, for then they must
count the judgment of God accursed. And again pa. 11. That in striving
against, and reviling the Quakers, we strive against and revile Gods judgment,
when as we should patiently bear Gods judgments? for does not judgment begin
at the house of God? 1 Pe. 4.17. and does he not ordain wicked men for
judgment, such as the Caldeans? Heb. 1.12. and false teachers? Jude 4. yea,
and Satan too, as to Job? and may we not account Satan his instruments
accursed, and yet not count Gods judgment so? or because the judgment of God
is just and holy, are the wicked men ordained as a judgment holy and just too?
If God should judge a Nation by sending wild beasts among them, must they
patiently let the wild beast devour their folks, because they be a judgment
sent of God? or else do they resist the judgment of God? I trow not; its a
judgment that we must be put to strive against such beasts, and yet that
judgment we may patiently bear in all our strifts against them. Sure if G. W.
cannot distinguish between the judgment of God as a judgment from him, and as
to the conditions of the thing which he uses as judgments, he is but a blind
guide and they that follow him will fall into the ditch with him. Whereas I
say, the true Apostles and Prophets never use to speak of themselves as
finlesse. G. W. says its false, for the true Prophet says, all his judgments
were before me, and as for his statutes I did not depart from them, I was also
upright before him, and have kept my self from my iniquity, 2 Samuel 22.24. But
mark here Reader, that David acknowledges he had then iniquity, for how was
iniquity his, if there was none in him, his keeping himself from it, is the
same with that in the Apostle, of not walking after the flesh, which also
implies flesh to be in them, and entice them that walk not after it. And David
speaks there of his innocence in respect of his carriages toward Saul and his
other enemies in the things they accused him in, and pretended as just causes
of their persecuting him, the Psalm being pend upon that occasion as the title
shows, besides which he committed many sins, though yet then notwithstanding it
is said of him, that he did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and
turned not a side from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his
life, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, 1 Kings 15.5. But in those
things between him and his enemies, God rewarded him (not after his iniquity
which he kept himself from, as in another place, Psalm. 107.10. he has not
dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our iniquities; in which he
acknowledges, even he among others, that they had sins and iniquities, but they
being kept from serving and living in them, God dealt not with them after them,
but after the righteousness and cleanness found, according to the spirit or
inward man; even as Paul when he had said, he served with his mind the Law of
God, but with his flesh the law of sin; yet adds, there is therefore no
condemnation to them that walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; God
therein deals with them according to their cleanness in Christ, and in their
walking after the spirit, and not after their sin in their members: so that
quotation also clearly fails him. It is true too that God promises that his
people shall be all righteous, and clean from all their filthiness; yea, and
they are righteous in Christ, and his blood actually and continually cleanses
them; but that proves not that the Saints and Prophets ever boasted themselves
to be without sin: But even they that said, the blood of Christ cleanses us
from all sin, say too imediately after, if we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves; nay, seeing Gods afflicting his people, is to purge away their sin, as
Isa. 27.8, 9. and the temptations he tries them with, are to try and purify
their faith from the mixtures therein, (both of them being as baptizings with
water and fire to those ends) it appears, that so long as they are subject to
afflictions and trials, (which is so long as they live, death it self being one
way of afflicting and trying) they have dross and uncleanness to be purged
from, and God is performing his promises to them therein, that they may be all
perfectly righteous even in themselves, in the new heaven and earth and new
Jerusalem, where shall be no unclean thing, and where shall be the full
accomplishment of Gods righteousness upon them, to which also Isa. 60.
alludes. As for those that John saw Rev. 14. that were without fault before the
Throne of God, and that could sing to the Lord a new song, I say all that
heartily believe in Christ, and are not moved away from the hope of the Gospel,
it is Christ's office to present them holy unblameable and without reproof in
Gods sight, Col. 1.22.23. not because they are sinless in themselves, but
because they are in him who is their perfect righteousness; nor is that the
new song they sing, that in us is no fault or blame; but while they accuse
themselves and confess their sins, he is just and faithful and forgives them,
and so presents them in himself without blame before God, and their song is
praises or salvation to the Lord, as in Psalm. 40.23. David sung that new song,
and yet complained of innumerable sins, and evils compassing him about in
himself: See else Psalm. 40.11, 12, 13. So that still here appears in George
nothing but ignorant mistakes, or the spirit of deceit. He adds, that that song
cannot be sung by those that are in their iniquities, and pleading for sins,
being enemies to the state of the new creature. But he herein grossly
prevaricates and deceives his Reader, confounding men's having sin in them, and
confessing their sins with men being in sin, and pleading for it; between which
is a vast difference: Paul was not in his sin, but in Christ, nor did he plead
for sin, but strive against it and deny it, when he said, sin was in him, and
bewailed that he did what he would not. We say not then, that the true Apostles
and Prophets were in sin, and pleaded for it, but had sin in them, and bewailed
their sins; nor do we in so saying, plead for sin, no more than they did.
Therefore George herein bewrayes his great ignorance and mistake, and his
conclusion is mere vanity and deceit, viz. That they have a cloud of witnesses,
and many evidences for their testimony that it is of God, and that what they
hold is truth, and that all that own God must own them herein. Which is all
false, as by what is said may be seen.

I said, that when John said, 1 Ioh. 4.17. As he is so are we in this world, he
could not mean it, we are without sin, because that is contrary to his own
expressions, 1 Ioh. 1.8. This G. W. railes on me for, and adds, That John who
knew the state in which they had sin, and in which if they said they had no
sin, they deceived themselves, etc. did not say they should have sin so long as
in the world, for he says, little children let no man deceive you, he that
does righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous, 1 John 3.6, 7. Plainly
implying that they are deceivers that say, men cannot be without sin while they
are in the World, etc. Mind Reader the wildness of his answers, and how he
leaves my saying undisproved, do what he can; for what if John did not say in
express words, that they should have sin so long as they were in this world;
Seeing that Scripture speaks of what they were at present (as he is, so we are
in this world?) it is enough to prove, that what John said there, of their
present state, may not be interpreted as the Quakers do, that they were then
without sin, seeing it crosses what he said before of their present estate, in
that respect. And what though he that does righteousness is righteous, even as
he is righteous; that proves not that he that does righteousness has no sin
in him, for he that confesses his sins, does righteousness therein, otherwise
how is it righteousness and faithfulness in God to forgive him, 1 John 1.9.
So then he that, in such a sense as in that, 1 John 1.9. confesses his sins,
is righteous as Christ is righteous, for Christ is his righteousness; and yet
he that confesses his sin, is not without sin in himself, for then he should
confess a falsehood: And what though (as he adds) that in 1 John 4.17. have
relation to their dwelling in God and God in them (that is but George's
affirmation) do not they that walk in the light, as he is in the light, dwell
in God, and God in them? and yet have sins that the blood of Christ cleanses
them from: and if they said, they have no sin, they deceive themselves, 1 John
1.7, 8. I say, the true Apostles and Prophets used not to glory in their
perfection, and finlesnesse. He answers. Then they used not to glory in Christ,
and who is it that will believe this deceit, for Christ was their
righteousness and persection, See Reader, what a deceitful man is this, that
leaves out the word sinlesnesse, which I added on purpose, to show what
perfection I meant of, and then to ask if the Apostles gloried not in a
perfection, which he was sure I meant not of, for though Christ be by the gift
of God their perfection, yet he is not their personal sinlesnesse or self
perfection, that I spoke of; these men are good at little, but at crafty
catching at, and perverting expressions.

Again, to our saying they reproached us, for owning our selves part of the
Nation, guilty of sin with them. He taxes us, For finding fault with the
Teachers and people, and yet now we are joined with them, and guilty of sin
with them, and that I join my self with the blind watchmen, and dumb dogs, and
then tax us with hypocrisy and deceit, for one while declaring against the
Teachers, and people of the Nation, and another while to join with them.] But
mark Reader, that I said not we joined our selves with them in their sinning,
but in confessing sins; that is, we consesse ours with theirs, nor say we, that
we are guilty of all their sins, but guilty of sin. And will not his charges of
us, for this, fall upon the Prophet Isaiah, did not he one while inviegh
against the watchmen and the people, yea many times, and yet another while
join in himself among them, in confessing the Nations sins, in Isa. 59.10, 11,
12, 13. when he said, we grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if
we had no eyes, and our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
testify against us. Did Isaiah speak those things of himself and the
Disciples, as a distinct party from the body of the Nation, or as joining in
the Nation with themselves? If as a distinct party, would not George say then,
they were hypocrites for faulting others, and being as bad themselves? If as
joining themselves in with the Nation, were they not guilty of the same that
George throws upon us, if we be therefore guilty, as he says? Surely all that
read these things, may see herein G. W.'s weakness. My charges of them denying
Christ to have that body glorified in heaven, in which he suffered, is not
disproved by my saying, they granted the same body that suffered was glorified
at Gods right hand, because (as elsewhere we have cleared it) they meant
equivocally in that saying, and not of the personal body of Christ: but to that
and their denial of the resurrection of men's bodies, we have spoken fullyer, in
our answer to their book against us. Nor will my saying, they are persons of no
judgment in these things, save them from being guilty of endeavoring to
subvert the faith about them, seeing judgment, in Scripture expression,
signifies right understanding, as in Isa. 42.14. and 59.8. and they that have
no understanding to do good, may be wise to do evil, as the Prophet says. Jer.
4.22.

To that of our Savior, Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect,
alleged by G. W. to prove, that some men are without sin here. I noted, That
men may in Scripture sense be said to be perfect, that have sin in them.
Instancing in Job. and Asa. And 2. That exhortations to things, prove not those
things to be perfectly attained by any here, nor does the Scripture ever say,
Let not sin be in you, etc. The first of these George passes over, which, would
he have defended himself to purpose he should not have done. To the 2. he
says, To what end or effect then was his exhortation? What, must men be under
the commands after death which they had in their life time, and not till then
fulfill them? here is darkeness indeed (says he) made manifest, and the command
put a far off. To that consider, are all commands to no end and effect, that
are not fulfilled by them to whom they are given? Sure then many commands given
of God, must be concluded to be so, for how many commands of his are broken by
men, and not fulfilled of them? Neh. 9.29. Jer. 32.23. Shall we say therefore
they were to no end or effect? Sure his end is that we should press, in his
strength, after what is commanded, to our ability, knowing that he accepts
through Christ our endeavor, though we attain not here its perfection: and
that where we are short we acknowledge it, and in the sense of it, being
humbled in our selves, give glory to God, in, and for Christ, in whom we are
(and by whom we shall be made) perfect; as Paul said of himself, to will was
present with him, even to will all that the commandment requires, but how to
perform it, he found not: yet was not the commandment without end or effect, in
as much as in the inner man, he delighted in it and groaned for the day of
perfect liberty, when there should be no let to do it perfectly; and thanked
God in Christ Jesus, in whom he being perfect, was not under condemnation, for
what he found not; as for being under commands after death, I say men shall
fulfill commandments after death given in this life; for must not the spirits
of just men love God after the bodily death and in the resurrection? yea, shall
they not then love him with all their heart, more perfectly than now they do,
when they more perfectly enjoy him? And yet they are commanded now to love him.
So that the darkness appears in G. W. To the other, that the Scripture says
not any where, Let not sin be in you. He says, Is it not all one to say, be ye
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, or wash you, make ye clean, keep
Gods commandment, love and serve him with all the heart, which must be
fulfilled: then what part of man must be a subject for sin to dwell in while he
lives here?] To the first of these, the saying, Be ye perfect, etc. Is not the
saying, Let not sin be in you? Those words are not these, and no more
necessarily included in them, than, Let no weakness, infirmity or mortality be
in you, or no ignorance of any thing in heaven or earth; seeing God is as
perfectly free from them, as from sin: but the sayings of Scripture are to be
interpreted according to their scope, which there appears to be perfect in
testifying or extending love to enemies, as well as friends, as God does. As
God is so perfect in charity, as to love and do good to the evil, and good, so
would Christ have his disciples in an answerable sense, which how G. W. and the
Quakers fail in their bitterness and reproaches sufficiently evidence. Nor is
it all one to say, Wash you, make you clean, and let no sin be in you; for
these phrases alluding to the washings under the Law; as it was not one and the
same there, to say, Wash you from some uncleanness defiling the flesh, and let
no such unclean or defiling humor, as of blood or other matter, be in your
bodies; for the cleanest body had such humors in it, as, issuing out upon it,
would defile it: So, neither is it all one to say, Wash you from your sins and
defilements (which is done in confessing and denying them) and let no sin be in
you; the being of sin in men, being not imputed, were not consented to, or
sided with, no more than the being of unclean humors within the body, were
accounted to men when they did not issue out, to touch and ly upon the body. As
Romans 7.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. and 8.1. Nor is it all one to say,
Keep the commandments, love God with all the heart; for that requires no more,
as to Gods gracious acceptance, than that as he is in the light, we walk in
the light, and love him with all the ability of knowing and loving here given
us; which is not, while here, so perfect as to have no ignorance of God, and so
no sin in us; however those sayings are not that. To that question, In what
part must sin dwell, etc. I say sin will, whither we will or no, dwell in our
members while they be mortal. Romans 7.17.20. with Psalm 143.2. So as no man
living, should God enter into judgment with him, can be justified in his
sight, which, ^he says next^ Proves not that the Prophets and Apostles had sin
in them while they lived, and seeing the Scripture it self does not prove it,
he says, it is no matter of my word, who (he says) perverts the Scripture
therein, both belying me and the Scripture, for the Scripture gives this as the
reason wher^o^e David would not that God should enter into judgment with him,
though his servant, that no man living should be justified in his sight. Does
not, no man living, include no Prophet or Apostle, as men while here living,
Suitable to that, Psalm. 130.3. if thou Lord mark iniquities, Lord who shall
stand? as implying none should. So that Scripture proves what I asserted,
unless the Apostles and Prophets could be proved not to have been men so long
as they lived.

He says, That Scripture includes not the Saints, as to prove them
unjustified, who were changed from that state wherein no man living could be
justified in the sight of God, and were come through the death and the many
trials and tribulations into the life and righteousness of Christ.] See here,
Reader, if this man has any thing but deceit? And is it a matter for his words
without Scripture proof? Was not David a Saint, when the servant of the Lord,
and desires God to answer him in his faithfulness and righteousness? who is
the accuser of the Saints here, but G. W. that implies, that David was not a
Saint? or is no man living a Saint? Must they stay from being Saints till they
are dead and Canonized by the Pope? If the Saints while they live here be men
that live, then cannot they be justified if God should enter into judgment
with them; either then say, that the Saints are not men living, while here
alive, or that David said false, or else that G. W, is a deceiver, and not to
be listened to by us. And yet we say not, that the Saints be so included as to
be unjustified while here, but that is not because they could be justified,
should God enter into judgment with them, though he may judge them through
him; he deals not with them immediately, as, or according to what they are in
themselves, or according to their sins, Psalm. 103.10, 11. But in, and according
to his good will in Christ, what he speaks of a state in which they are come
through the death, etc. What be they but his additions to the Scriptures, of
which David's saying gives no intimation. Is there any Saint living here in any
state that is not a man living? or is it said, no man in the death, or that is,
not yet passed through the death, can be justified? Alas, what be these things,
but sorry deceitful evasions from plain truth. He says, I relate part of our
discourse deceitfully and imperfectly, and yet after questions, whether I
relate it or not, and then lays down part of what is related about Paul's
groaning to be delivered, etc. But wherein I relate it imperfectly, much less
deceitfully, he shows not, only says, I have belyed and wronged his words and
left out the greatest part of them that cleared his answer: and yet afterward
says, he could not have liberty to open what he said so much there as here;
and yet if the Reader compare what I related, with the sum of what he says
here, where he took his own liberty assuredly, without molestation from us, he
will find, that besides his quotations and perversions of what he quotes from
John, Jeremy and Isa. of which he then made no mention, I clearly laid down the
substance of his sayings, and that he could not have liberty there to clear his
sayings, is so far from truth, that we often urged him to answer, and he was so
void of any clearing answer, that he would have left the argument to read on
our book what did nothing concern it. And that I have cast no lie nor
scornful slander upon him in saying, he was baffled (as he here charges me)
may be evident from this, that to my demand of him, Whether the Apostles and
Prophets, were not Apostles and Prophets when as he granted, they confessed they
had sin: he denies not that he granted, yea, nor that to my questioning, what
state it was, then of which he said they had a time and state that they had no
sin: he replied, when they were born of God, nor that to my question whether
they were not born of God when Apostles and Prophets? he answered, that they
(as Paul for instance) had a time when not born of God, viz. when he groaned
and traveled, waiting for the adoption, nor does he deny, that he went about
to clear up that, that he was not born of God while he so waited for the
redemption of the body, only faults me for not giving a full relation of what
he said to it: now then I do demand, if he was not baffled, to what purpose did
he (upon my quoting 1 John 5.1. to prove that he was born of God all the time
he was an Apostle) fly to another answer; that Paul spoke to conditions below
his own? If he was not quite beat off his other answer, why fled he to this?
which cannot be true and the other too: For if Paul was but then groaning to be
born, and not born of God, then spoke he of his own state, and if he spaek to
others states below his own then, then is it not true that he had, while an.
Apostle, or then when he said, he so waited a time in which he was not born of
God, so these two shifts clearly overthrow one the other. And whereas he says,
many that heard the dispute can witness against me for impudent belying and
slandring him. I call God to witness, in whose presence I am, and dare appeal
to all indifferent and understanding Auditors, that I have not in any thing
belyed or slandered him, much less impudently. Let us see what he himself
says he said, Paul witnessed, says he, the groaning and traveling in pain
before the birth was born in him, or before he was born of God, or in the state
of him that was born of God. (Mark Reader his own inconstancy and confusion, as
not knowing how to phrase it) intending (says he) as 1 John 3.9. who cannot
sin, it seems he was so baffled that he could not then tell us his intention,
nor now does explain here those in 1 John 3. are said to be born of God, only
seems to imply, that he thinks there be other kinds of being born of God than
that speaks of, which would or could he have cleared himself, he should have
proved, and not so spoken without distinction and understanding. He adds, that
Paul could sin, when he could do the evil he would not] which yet he proves
not, seeing he expressly says, it was not he that did it, but sin that dwelt in
him, and to the Galatians, that the flesh lusting against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, they could not do what they would, and so it was
there with him, as the law in his members, warring against the law in his
mind, he could not do what in his spirit he would, so the inner man or spirit
delighting in the law of God, and lusting against the flesh or law in his
members, he could not do what his flesh would, and what sin in him did: yea,
what his members or flesh, and so he (as denominated by it) did, he as in the
spirit, or according to the inner man (accoring to which John says, whosoever
is born of God cannot sin) could not do. What he adds about his traveling in
pain for deliverance from the bondage of corruption, and that where the son or
birth from above is born, the glorious liberty of the Sons of God is enjoyed,
which the creatures waited for, and the traveling in pain for deliverance is
ceased, as also the first clause of his saying above related, that Paul
witnessed the groaning and traveling in pain before the birth was born in him.
Is all besides the bush, as in our relation of the discourse also is evidenced,
for as I then and there cleared it, what Paul says of traveling in pain and
of deliverance from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God, he says of the whole creation, distinguishing himself and the
Sons of God, who had then received the first fruits of the spirit from the
creature before spoken of, as is clear, Romans 8.20, 21, 22, 23. for he says,
not only they, but we our selves also that have the first fruits of the spirit,
even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, the
redemption of the body. It Is clear, that the Apostles there, in ver. 19, 20.
etc. speaks of the restitution of all things spoken of by the Prophets (as
Act. 3.21. When the glory of the Sons of God, that now suffer with Christ (as
ver. 17.) even to the bodily death, shall be revealed; and when the creature it
self, as distinct from them, even the fabric of the world shall be renewed and
freed from the bondage of corruption, that it is by occasion of men's sins
subjected to in hope, for which freedom in it is kind, it groans and travels
together till now, and for the redemption of the body, then also to be
effected, from the bondage, to what it suffers now, and shall lie under, in
some things till then, they the Sons of God distinct from the other creatures,
also waiting, groaned; what groaning or traveling was necessary to precede the
being born of God, Joh. 1.12, 13.
so as to be made Sons of God, Paul and the other holy Apostles and Prophets
had it in their receiving Christ, before they were made Apostles and Prophers,
though I deny not but in that birth there might be degrees and growth after,
nor will the perfection of it, be as to the body till the resurrection thereof
from the dead: So that yet it abides firm, that Paul, when born of God,
confessed he had sin dwelt yet in him. Whereas he adds, That I perverted his
comparison, and that it was not intended to prove that Paul was not born into
the world according to the flesh wherewith he traveled, etc. I answer, that G.
W. grossly plays the Sophister in representing me as wresting his comparison to
any such intention. It Is evident what I said is to this purpose, that as no
woman travells with natural children before she her self be born, and be a
woman; So neither did Paul groan for the resurrection of the body, till himself
was born of God in the mind and spirit, and so that he was born of God, when he
so groaned as he there speaks of. His quotation of John 16.21, 22. is
impertinent, for Christ speaks there of the sorrow they had before the spirit
was powered down upon them, before they were sent out into all the world, as
Act. 1.8. with Luke 24.49. which Paul had before he was an Apostle, and so
before he made that confession of sin, Act. 9.17.
in Romans 7.17.20. or else also of their having sorrow in traveling to bring
forth the knowledge of Christ in others, and their joy after in their being
brought forth unto God, and most fully when they shall be presented with them,
together at the great appearance of Christ in his glory at the resurrection of
the just, as 2 Cor. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. that in Jer. 30.6. speaking of Jacobs
sorrow in captivity, and their joy in their return again, is yet more
impertinently alleged by him, and so is that in Isa. 9.6. abused; for the
Prophet Isaiah does not witness as George pretends, that in them a child was
born, and in them a son was given; but to them, which he speaks prophetically
of Christ given in the counsel, purpose and promise of God, and to be born in
his time, which he speaks of, for its certainty as if then accomplished, though
not to themselves, but to us in these after ages, they ministered the things now
preached as accomplished; as the Apostle Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12. His
confusion in saying one while, The Disciples traveled in sorrow before the
man, or birth from above, was born in them, and presently, that they were in
pain before they became that birth, I pass, as also his judging me as ignorant
of the states he speaks of, their talking of a babe in them, fashioning their
bodies to the likeness here of Christ's glorious body, I have writ and yet do
testify against, as arguing their unbelief, and denial of the resurrection of
the body, and the power of Christ thereto, which makes them turn the things
thereabout into fancies and allegories of their own divifing, which shows them
to be such as subvert the faith, and such as are to be counted accursed. That,
I wickedly belyed the people in saying they all laughed, because many of his
friends, and others that were sober minded did not join with them, etc. Is as
false as that Matthew wickedly belyed the people of Judea and about Jordan, in
saying all Judea, and all the regions about Jordan went out to John, and were
baptized of him, when it appears that the Pharisees rejected the counsel of
God, and were not baptized of him, Mat. 3.5, 6. with Luke 7.30. I distinguished
the people both from his friends and our selves, but are his friends no sober
minded men, that they are distinguished from them; I speak of the generality of
the people, if there were one or two did otherwise, it is more then I observed.

To that of, 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of
God. he cavils that I did it without understanding and without distinction,
whereas it was his part being the answer, to have distinguished, if he
understood any ground for it, and not mine, who was opponent; but something he
will say, though to no purpose, how much more truly might I have said, what he
charges me with, of the generality of his own quotations in his answer, as that
in 2 Samuel 22. 1 John 3.9. and 1 John 4.17. and yet when in my postscript I
distinguished of that in 1 John 3.9. He snatches at the first part of my
distinction, ( viz. that whosoever is perfectly born of God (as the spirits of
just men made perfect, and the men themselves in the Resurrection) cannot sin
at all; but none so perfectly born of God here) taking no notice of the other
propositions that speak of men, as here born of God, and then cries out. Oh
what pitiful stuff is here to imagine men are not perfectly born of God, so
as not to sin till deceased; this would make the work of God imperfect here,
when all his works are perfeci; and then taxes me as if I had said, that those
that were born of God in the Apostles days, were some that were deceased and
risen again. Whereas I in the other part of the distinction showed how those
that are born of God, while here, may be said not to sin, and that they cannot
sin; but why is it such pitiful stuff, to say, that the spirits of just men
deceased, and the men themselves when raised, are, or shall be, more perfectly
born of God, the while here living? do they gain no degree of perfection by
death? where then is the advantage they have by it? Nor shall they gain none in
the resurrection neither, when seeing him as he is, they shall be like him? 1
John 3.2. or have the present propositions of truth, all their fulfilling at
the present? He that has the Son has life, 1 John 5.12. Have they not so that
are deceased in him? and shall they not have him, and life more fully in the
resurrection, if G. believe it? And why must the work of God be imperfect, if
men be not perfectly born of God here? was the work of God, all whose works are
perfect, imperfect when Paul said, not that I am already perfect, or have
already attained? Philip. 3.12. or because the Fathers dyed in the faith, not
having received the promises God, having provided some better thing for us,
that they without us should not be made perfect, Heb. 11.39. Were the works of
God therefore imperfect till these last ages? If so, then why not so too till
the resurrection? If they were perfect always, and in all generations, then
men's not being perfectly born of God, while here, hinders not their perfection,
no more then Paul's or the Fathers being not perfect did. Surely G. W. is very
silly, if he think as he writ here, and a very deceiver, if he thought
otherwise, and they be simple that are caught with such chaff, or worthy to be
blind still that will not see it, but let us see what distinction he has
devised upon, 1 John 5.1. to save his credit. He says, It Is true according to
John's testimony of a true believer, who by faith has victory over the world,
and so being born of God, is not under the bondage of corruption, etc. But such
he says I. H. does not own while men are here.] Folly and falsehood, folly,
for he implies, that John's saying is not true without distinction, and yet John
said it without distinction; for he said not, whosoever so, or so, believes
that Jesus is the Christ, but in general expressions whosoever believes that
Jesus is the Christ is born of God. True it is that he says ver. 4. whatsoever
is born of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith, but then in ver. 5. he explicates what their faith
was answerable to, ver. 1. saying, who is he that overcomes the world, but he
that believes that Jesus is the Son of God, which is all one with whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ; clearly fignifying, that he that believes
that, is born of God, and so overcomes the world, even the spirit, rudiments,
and pollutions of the world so as none else: and that they who believe not
(that is, with their heart believe not) that Jesus (even that Jesus of Nazareth
whom the Jews crucified bodily, and God raised from the dead (for hesides him
the Apostles did preach no other Jesus, name, or thing, within men or without
men to be the Savior, or salvation of God to be believed on, Acts 4.10, 11,
12.) is the Christ the Son of God, the Savior of the world, the anointed one
to bring us back to God, the propitiation for our sins, the righteousness and
life given us of God; I say he implies that they who believe not him to be the
Christ, or anointed Savior, in, and through, what he has done and suffered
for us in the body of his flesh, and is become for us therethrough, and is
doing for us in heaven on Gods right hand, as the great Mediator and high
Priest for us, and from heaven, to, and in us, as the great Apostle and Prophet
of our profession, and Lord of all; and in what he is appointed to do, and will
do at his glorious descent from heaven, and appearing, and kingdom then to be
revealed in glory; they have not, nor do overcome the world: But whatever be
their pretenses and appearances to men of being out of, and above the world,
they are overcome of the world and are in the worlds state; being led of and by
the god of the world and rudiments of it, which lead men that seek after
righteousness and hope toward God, to seek it in themselves and their doings,
mortifications and frames; but not to go out of themselves into Christ and his
name, to accept of him (even that Jesus of Nazareth, as made sin for them, and
raised again for their justification, and glorified at Gods right hand) for
their wisdom, righteousness, holiness and redemption, and so to have their
rejoicing in him, and expectation from him, and of him, at his appearing: they
who have so received him and abide in him, are indeed born of God, and have
overcome the world: But they that do not so receive him, are in and of the
world, who neglecting him, and counting faith in him foolishness, live and
rejoice in their own good meanings, honesty, zeal, blamelesnesse,
mortifications and devotions, as the Pharisees and some false Apostles did, who
yet were of the world, though they had avoluntary humility and show of wisdom
therein, in neglecting the body, etc. Col. 2.18, 23. And much men may have that
way, and great appearance of having overcome the world, because they can, and
do deny themselves of many grosser comforts and vanities of it, and endure much
voluntary hardship or sufferings from others of it, as the Priests of Baal, 1
Kings 18.28, 40. And the old Philosophers, and wordly religious amongst both
Turks and Papists, who also glory in such things, and yet are deeply in the
spirit of the world, even as by that description of the overcomer of the world,
here given by John; the Quakers, so called, are evidenced to them, that
judgment carnally by outward appearance (as most do, which makes them have so
many Proselites) but by the spiritual eye of faith, however they bost
themselves as perfect, and vaunt themselves as out of, and overcomers of the
world; yet they are most deeply and dangerously, though most mystically, and to
the world-ward indiscernably overcome of the world, and the spirit of the
world; as being most out of, and reprobate concerning the faith that overcomes
the world, viz. That Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, they accounting his
coming in the flesh (as Rich. Hubberthorne seconded by G. W.) to be but a
figure, and touching his being in heaven and work there, and coming thence,
being most dangerously corrupt and unbelievers; having their rejoicing and
glorying not in that person of Jesus and his sufferings and sacrifice according
to the Scripture; as their book, in answer to us, and their writings generally
evidence, but in themselves, their sinlesnesse pretended, and in their actings
and sufferings, by which it is evident that they are not born of God, nor have
overcome the world whatever outsideappearances they walk and glory in. 2.
Because I produced according to John's testimony without distinction or
alteration, and meant it only of true believing. 3. He says it is true of true
believers; as if he would imply that Paul and the other holy men, when they
said they had sin in them, were not true believers, though in some other false
sense believes that Jesus is the Christ; what, were the Apostles hypocrites
when they said they had sin in them; that George thinks them not then to have
been true believers? For if they were not true believers, they were feigned
believers; and we may well bear G. W.'s railing language of us, and his judging
us to be hypocrites, if he judged the Apostles, when Apostles, were such, sure
G. W. did better before, when he waved it, and fled before the power of God in
it, than to rake up such an evasion, as implies his taxing the Apostles to be
no true believers when they confessed their sins; or that they ^ad not overcome
the world, when they were translated out of it, into Christ, and held forth the
faith of Christ against all oppositions of the World; then he is guilty of
falsehood, in saying John describes the true believers to be from under the
bondage of corruption, when he makes no mention of the bondage of corruption,
though that they are so in some sense is true; but then he says false, and
belies me in saying, that I own not such while men are here, for in such a
sense, as true believers are free from the bondage of corruption, that is, from
being detained under the guilt of sin and condemnation for it, or the dominion
of it, so as to inslave them to it; I own believers, though not from the being
of it in their members, is it all one to have corruption in a man, yea, and in
many things to offend, and to be under the bondage of corruption? Was James
under the bondage of corruption, as corruption signifies sin, when he said, in
many things we offended all; or John, when he said, If we say we have no sin we
deceive our selves, etc. Surely G. W. had need to go to school to learn more
understanding before he be a teacher, that cannot distinguish things that so
broadly differ. He says, A man must believe that Jesus is the Christ, and
believe in him too, before he be born of God, as Christ said believed in the
light, (...) ye may be the children of the light. What is this but to fight
against the Apostle John, and to tell him, Nay John thou say not truly in
saying, who ever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. Men may
believe that and yet not be born of God, for that goes before a man's being born
of God, and yet some things are before others in order of nature, that yet are
not without them; as he that has life has breath, and yet, in order of
nature, life is before breath: and so though it be true, that men must believe
in the light, that they may be the children of the light; yet, it follows not,
that some do believe in it that are not the children of it, and yet even they
that are born of God, and so are children of the light, may be further born of
it, and so more the children of God; that is, like unto God, as the Disciples
when born of God (for God was their Father) yet Christ bids them to love their
enemies, etc. That they might be the children of their Father, Mat. 6.44, 45.
And yet again, There is some difference between believing in the light, and
believing Jesus to be the Christ, some did believe in the light, before they
believed that Jesus is the Christ as Nathaniel and Cornelius and diverse others.
So that here is nothing in Geo. yet, but deceit, and opposition to the
Scripture sayings, nay, G is broadly contradictory to John the Apostle, and
sticks not to make him a liar, plainly afterward, as well as safely to persuade
people that some of his party perceived my deceit. For says he, What people
are there of any understanding, even among those Priests, which this Priest
Horn calls greedy dogs, strong to appetite, that do not believe that Jesus is
the Christ? Are they therefore born of God?] What is this but to cast the lie
upon John, for being so rash as to say, whosoever believes Jesus is the
Christ, is born of God, when as he says, such as he reviles as the worst of
men, do that, and yet are not born of God? Judge Reader, Whom shall we here
believe? the Apostle John or Geo. Whitehead? Is it not better and truer to say,
what ever men persuade themselves of, and what ever they pretend, they do not
believe Jesus to be the Christ, that are not born of God, than thus rashly to
give the Apostle the lie: That George fled to another shift when beat by that
Scripture from his former answer, that the Apostles were not born of God while
they confessed sin, he denies not; but endeavors to justify here, what he
therein said. For he says here again, that The Apostle condescended to the
Romans to several states which be passed through, and which was below his own,
when he writ to them. Which is not to the purpose, For when he writes to the
Romans of the states, he had passed through, he writes of them as things past,
not as present, as Romans 5.10. When we were enemies he reconsiled us; he says
not, we are yet enemies, so Chap. 7.9. I was alive without the Law, but when
the Law came, sin revived and I dyed; and so in 1 Timothy 1.13. Who was before a
blasphemer and a Persecutor and injurious; we never find him when he was an
Apostle, to say, I am a blasphemer, etc. But of sin being in him, he writes in
the present time; I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells no good
thing, and I am carnal, sold under sin, (not, I sell my self to sin as Ahab,
but am sold as by an other, with reference to what was done to him in Adam, and
yet remained upon him, as to the flesh,) and that he spoke of himself too, and
not of others excluding himself, is evident, ver. 25. So then I my self (mark
he says I my self) with my mind serve (he says not did serve) the Law of God,
but with my flesh the Law of sin. Should we say, we our selves do what we only
mean others do, he and his fellows would call us liars, and yet he fears not
to fasten such an imputation in effect upon the Apostles, one after another.

He would confirm his former saying from Romans 6.19. which is to as little
purpose, as if he had quoted Genesis 1.1. For the Apostle there speaks nothing of
himself, or of any state that he says he was then in, as mentioning his own
person, but speaking of spiritual things under earthly metaphors (as of Masters
and Servants, and freedom from servitude) He says, I speak after the manner of
men, because of the infirmity of your flesh. But is this the manner of men, to
speak untruths of them selves, as to say, they are in that state they are not,
to make their speech more understandable, or does the Apostle speak any thing
sounding to that sense there? He says not there, I yield my members servants
to uncleanness; but as ye have (in time past) yielded your members servants to
uncleanness, etc. so yield your members now servants of righteousness. Was it
not as understandable, for the Apostle to have said, I did sometime find a Law
in my members, but now I have got rid of it, and there is no sin in me, as if
it had been so as to say, I do see a law in my members? yea, might not this
more encourage them to sin than that, if it be as G. W. often casts upon us a
pleading for sin, to confess that sin is in the Saints? It clearly appears in
all this still, that G.W. is much out of the way, and the truth is, neither in,
nor with him; for where it could distinguish between Paul, as after the flesh,
and as after the spirit in the same time, in his flesh in bondage, and in his
mind free, and waiting for the deliverance of his body too in due time, both
from sins and sufferings: But how can he distinguish such things, that could
not distinguish things nearer hand? But whereas I said, I was able in the
strength of God to worry such Foxes as he, that is to bassle and confound them,
as I also actually was helped to do, yet because I say, after that people see I
was weary and spent, he vapors as if I was not therefore in the strength of
God, forgeting that of the Apostle, that at the same time in different
respects, a man may be strong and weak both; when I am weak, then am I strong;
and, I was among you in weakness, yet my speech was in the demonstration of
the spirit and power, 1 Cor, 2.3, 4. Surely when I said I was able to worry
him, in the strength of the Lord, I did not say, or signify, nor could any of
the people I suppose so apprehend me, that I was able to beat him at
handicuffs, or had stronger Lungs then he, but that I was able, by the power of
the truth, to make manifest his deceits: which also God gave me bodyly strength
to do, so as to the satisfaction of the indifferent auditory, and had I needed
more to that, I question not but he would have given it me: He that cannot
distinguish spiritual strength from bodily, how should he distinguish between
Paul's state after the spirit, and his state at the same time after the flesh?
As a man in the flesh, warring yet against sin, and wishing for deliverance
(for that is the force of that phrase (who will deliver?) as Deuteronomy. 5.29.
according to the Hebrew, who will give them an heart to fear me? argues not
that the Lord was ignorant, or doubted who would, but an earnest desire that
they had such an heart) but in the same time he thanked God by Jesus Christ.
Romans 7.24, 25. and so Paul was free in his spirit and more than a conqueror in
all his sufferings, though Christ who dwelt in his heart by faith (though I
never read what G. W. intimates that Christ was in Paul's flesh, though therein,
and therethrough he might manifest his power and virtues) but us to his body
that was not above prison and weakness and death, even so, neither was his
flesh free from sin being in it, though his spirit was set free and above it.

Paul (says he) made himself a servant to all, that he might gain the more,
and became a Jew to the Jew, and weak to the weak. True, in his use of
indifferent things, such as meats, drinks, wages, etc. But he became not a Jew
to the Jew, in not believing or confessing Jesus to be the Christ, and though
to those that being weak in the Faith, doubted of their liberty to some such
outward things as before mentioned; he also abstained from the use of his
freedom to them, not telling them of his liberty, lest he should offend them;
but in those things having his faith to himself, as if he also was weak, as
he advises others, Romans 14.22. 1 Cor. 10.28, 29. Yet it is evident that was not
the case here. For to what purpose should he pretend, in some places to be in
such states, and in other places of the same Epistle, to the same people,
express himself to be far above such states, as G.W. says he did, in saying,
he was at peace with God, etc. So that these appear (as indeed they are) silly
shifts of G. W. to hide the nakedness of his assertion and corruption of his
judgment, but they will not do it. As for his personal accusations of us, as
uncivil, and bawling and wrangling, and desiring to tie him up to Yea and Nay,
they are vain and false accusations, and so I shall pass them; As also his
after insinuations of rantings, and loves amongst us, and of a woman set up for
a Teacher by us (when of any woman set up to teach by us, I know none: who
turned Ranters is known so be some of their lusts, etc.) as also his charging
me, as speaking of G. Rose as a distracted man, and yet bringing his words
against them, when as I said but, that the people heard him begin at a distance
like a kind of distracted man, to call out, not that I counted him a distracted
man; these personal and untrue reflections, I say I pass as impertinencies.
And as for his saying, We would not suffer him to read in our Book, and yet we
read out of theirs, and his vain and false insinuations therefrom, the
ridiculousnesse thereof is sufficiently cleared in the relation of our
discourse, though he take no more notice of it, than if no such thing had been
mentioned. His asking questions, when he should have answered, were mere
diviations from our business; and yet I know of none that I answered not then,
except that [what death came in by sin] which he sought in subtilty, as I
conceived, to put me upon, that he might wind out from the thing that puzzled
him. As for his feeling the power of God over us] He might feel it over us
indeed, to protect us, and enable us to baffle him, for which we bless the
Lord, but otherwise it appeared not with him, in his answers, nor yet appears
with him, in what he has written in his own vindication. He says, The
Apostles wept with them that wept, and wait for the Redemption of the body
where it was not redeemed; as he traveled for the Gallatians, etc. Which are
nothing to the purpose, for a man may weep with those that weep, without saying
falsely, that he is exercised with the same trials in himself, and of his own,
as others weep under: Cannot I weep with such as weep for the absence of Gods
spirit from them, or for the loss of some near relation, unless I say, I am
in the same condition with them. Nay, if I say its so with me, as with them,
then do I not show such charity to them; for then it may rather be judged, that
I weep for my own afflictions, than with them for theirs, one saying of the
Apostle any where, that his body was already redeemed from that bondage, the
redemption of it from which he there says, he waited for, were more then and
hundred such shifts, his proofs alleged in our discourse, from Romans 8.2. 2
Cor. 13.8. He was then so answered to, and beaten from that, he has here
passed them over, as not able to relieve him. For the Apostles traveling for
the Galatians; as I remember in the dispute, he disclaimed it then, for making
for his purpose when T. M. was answering him to it, thinking he had had some
reference to it, in what he spoke about Paul's traveling, and that, its not to
his purpose is evident, because the Apostle says not there, as in the other
place of the Romans, that he waited or traveled for the redemption of his own
body, no, nor for the redemption of their bodies, but till Christ was formed in
them, not coupling in himself together with them as condescending in such a
manner to their states.

Setting down two or three of my questions, together without his answer to
them, he then taxes me for omitting the word (bondage) in speaking of the
redemption of the body, which word he says he used, a great matter, is it not,
when as the very word redemption implies some bondage to be redeemed from, nor
does the Apostle use the word, Bondage, in speaking of the redemption of their
body, the creatures groaning to be delivered, and the Saints waiting for the
redemption of the body we before showed (at the dispute also) to be distinct
things and not the same.

He says here again, That the Saints had that redemption of the body from the
bondage of corruption, when the creatures were delivered into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God before their decease. But he proves it not, nor
could do at the dispute; it is proofs we look for, and not bare assertions upon
his own authority, which without proof from Scriptures, weighs with us nothing.
The Scripture neither says, that the creatures had the deliverance into the
liberty of the Sons of God, nor that the Saints had the redemption of their
body before their decease, but speaks of both as things future, and therefore
groaned and waited for, see else, Romans 8.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. And indeed they
could not be before those Saints deceased, for evident it is that the Apostle (
ver. 17.18.) speaks about their sufferings with Christ, and reigning with
Christ, and speaks of the sufferings with him; as first, and the Reign, as a
thing afterward; the sufferings are of this present time, or life, but the
glory is to be after revealed, and therefore spoken of as in the future, to
this present time, [shall be revealed in or upon us] and about that glory and
revelation of it, and the redemption of the body from the sufferings that go
before it speaks, ver. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Now seeing the glory could not be
revealed nor the redemption of the body (from the sufferings) be before the
sufferings be accomplished, and their sufferings (even the sufferings of the
present time) were to bodily Death, therefore it follows, that the redemption
of the body from the bondage it was under, in, and by those sufferings could
not be till after their decease, except the Redemption be before the bondage,
and the glory thereof before the sufferings, contrary to the Apostles order, in
speaking of them; which one consideration to those that can and will see, may
suffice to show, that it is no error or absurdity in me (as G. W. after reckons
it) to say, that the corruption which Paul waitted and groaned for, the
Redemption of his body from, is the corruption of mortality (in part) though he
has belyed me, by his addition, in saying, as part of my assertion [in which
the body is in death, when it is in corruption] for I had no such non-sensical
expression.

That the Apostles waited for the Redemption of the body from all the bondage
and misery that the sufferings of this time, or life could bring it to, and so
from bondage to death and grave also, and in that hope and expectation, yielded
up their bodies to sufferings for Christ's sake, is evident in the Scriptures.
It was the hope of the Resurrection even of that resurrection of the dead, in
which, what is sown in Corruption, is raised in Incorruption, that led them
into Jeoperdies, and to fight with Beasts after the manner of men, 1 Cor.
15.30, 32, 42, 53. and that made them speak, though death therethrough wrought
in them, 2 Cor. 4.12, 13, 14. Oh how wicked and corrupt concerning the faith,
are these men that deride the looking for, and hope of that Redemption of the
body, because a thing so many hundreds of years off! as if because so far off,
therefore they did not look for it: Whenas the Fathers that died in the Faith,
and received not, as then, the promises, lived many hundred years before the
Apostles, and yet they saw these promises a far off, and embraced them, and
confessed themselves strangers and Pilgrims in hope and expectation of a City
and Country prepared for them, Heb. 11.13, 14, 15, 39, 40.
in the receipt of which they shall not be perfect without us believers of these
last ages. Now what they hoped for they waited for too; For if we hope for what
we see not, then do we with expectation wait for it, says the Apostle, Romans
8.24, 25. And if they (the Fathers) hoped and waited, and yet wait, for the
Redemption of their body in the resurrection of it, might not the Apostles much
more, to whom it was by many hundreds of years nearer? or is it more absurd to
say Paul has not yet the Redemption of the body for which he waited, then that
Abraham has not yet received all the promises for which he hoped? or that
either of their bodies are not yet raised, nor that glorious appearance of
Christ yet come, in which they are to be raised? Their expectation of which,
while here, led them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12, 13, 14.
But it appears plainly (...) G. W's. deriding such an expectation, that he
expects and waits for, nor groans after no such thing, whatsoever he subtly
say after that, ver. 13, 14, 16. of 1 These. 4. he never denied nor doubted of,
and so slighted disputing about it, no, no, he was not willing to open his
corrupt sense too broadly about them, as may after appear.

He says, Paul groaned not to be uncloathed, but clothed upon; True, it was
not death he groaned for, but to be clothed upon with his house from heaven,
which because they knew they could not be clothed with, till the earthly house
of this Tabernacle were dissolved, therefore they were willing rather to be
absent from the body, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. But if Paul, when he
wrote that Epistle, groaned for that redemption of the body, which he says he
groaned for when he writ to the Romans, (as G.W. also implies, by his quoting
that place to parallel the other, as indeed it does) then why did G. W. at the
dispute endeavor to prove, that the Apostle had that Redemption of the body
when he writ this Epistle, because he says therein, Chap. 13.8. he could do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth? Thinks he, that Paul received
that Redemption of the body, between his writing, what is in Chap. 5. and what
is writ in Chap. 13? Surely such a charge would have made him some where, in
the very writing, break forth into an extraordinary Triumph, more than we find
him therein, between the said passages to do. Indeed Chap. 12. he tells us, of
being taken up into Paradise, and of abundance of Revelations, but whither in
the body, or not, he knew not; and besides, he speaks of things above 14
years before, and sure he was not so long writing that Epistle, or did G. W.
rather wittingly, bring that saying, to blind and deceive people? That appears
most likely, and so that he is a Deceiver indeed, and to be therefore counted
accursed. 'Its true, too that Paul calls that Redemption of the body, the
Adoption, and Christ was made under the Law, to Redeem those that were under
the Law, that they might receive the Adoption of Sons;] and that Adoption the
Apostle had received in his spirit, when he said he waited for the Adoption,
the Redemption of he body, for in Romans 8.15, 16. he says, even of them he
wrote to (and therefore their state was not a state below being Sons of God,
and so born of God) Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry
abba Father, and the spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we
are the children of God. And therefore surely born of God, though yet they
waited for that Adoption, the Redemption of the body, ver. 23. So that still
the more G. strugles, the more he is proved a deceiver, and my charge appears
made good against him, and no ly for me to say so. Nor need to prove, that the
Prophets and Apostles had sin in them, and were sinners so long as they lived
(though that also was done from Psalm. 143.2. as before) it is enough that they
confess sin in them, and waited for the Redemption of the body, after they
were born of God, which was the thing that G. denied. Nor need I prove that the
Quakers preach themselves free from sin, seeing they grant (or deny not) that
charge against them in their answer to our first Book. Nor will their having
confessed their sins serve the turn, as was showed at the beginning; though
yet G. W. is here covering and pleading for his sins or errors, as it is
apparent, so the Apostles did not, much less need we, prove that they, preach
themselves perfect, as if their preaching made them perfect] for no body ever
charged them with such a thing in that sense. It Is enough, that they preach
themselves to be so perfect, as that they have no sin, for which they need
Christ to be their Propitiation.

See again Reader, how George is put to his shifts about Asa. It Is not said
(says he) that his heart was perfect all his life-time] as if all his days
(to wit, of his reign) did not last to the end of his life, had he a life time
after all his days were ended? If he lived some days after his heart ceased
to be perfect, then was not his heart perfect all his days, and then the
Scripture says not truly, shall we believe the Scriptures or G. W's, gloss?
That his heart was perfect all the while be did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, and while the Land was quiet under his reign, but not
after. That is a gloss of his own brain, against the authority of the Text,
seeing that time was not all his days, nor is it said, his work was perfect
all his days, but his heart; and that might be perfect, as to his owning no
god but the true God, and desiring to approve it self to him, notwithstanding
some rash passions, and neglect in seeking to him for a time, as well as it is
said to have been perfect, notwithstanding the high places were not removed, 1
Kings 15.14. As some Kings whose works were perfecter did, and as he also
should have done, had his works been perfect and sinlesse. But we see, both by
what he says to this and other Scriptures before mentioned, George makes no
great matter of justling his authority with the authority of the Scriptures,
which evidences him to be a dangerous fellow, not to be listened to. View we
his endeavors, to vindicate his corrupt sayings about the coming of Christ,
mentioned, 1 These. 4.15, 16. to which coming they said in their Book, the
Saints that were then alive remained. He says, I wrested their words, and made
a false construction of them, contrary to the end and intent of them, for what
they said (he says) was against our imaginations, who look (he says) carnally
for the coming of Christ, as many of the World do, of whom Christ said, I go
away and the world sees me no more. John 14.

Ans. That I wrested not his words, let their words and mine, being compared,
witness; They said, as for that, 1 These. 4.15. (our quotation they answered
to, was 1 These. 4.15, 16. concerning the coming of the Lord from heaven (which
phrase is v. 16. not the 15th. though they both speak of the same coming) that
coming of Christ the Saints that were then alive remained to it. Now from that
I inferred, that if they remained to that coming, wherein they that are found
alive, shall not prevent them that sleep, then they remained to that coming, in
which the dead in Christ (even the dead bodies of the Saints that sleep in such
sense as it is said, that Stephen fell asleep when he dyed, shall be raised, and
the living changed, etc. Now let the Reader, read 1 These. 4.15.16. and see if
that does not necessarily follow; and whither that be not the coming of the
Lord there spoken to, to which that phrase [we that live and remain] is
coupled, in verse 15, 16, and 17. So that if the Apostles and Saints then
living, did remain to the coming of Christ from Heaven there spoken of, (as
they said) then did they remain till his coming with a shout, and the voice of
the Archangel, and the dead in Christ being raised, as is evident; And I did
not wrest their words besides the drift of them, only they meant not indeed,
that they lived to the Resurrection of the dead bodies of the Saints (though of
that the Apostle there speaks) because they believe no such thing, but
undermine it as I charged them. That we carnaly look for the coming of Christ,
as many of the world do] is not only their reproof of us, but an intimate
blaspheming of the truth, for we expressed no other looking for the coming of
Christ from Heaven, but that spoken to in 1 These. 4.15, 16. Philip. 3.21. which
here they reproach as an imagination of ours, as earnally looking for him; as
if it was but a carnal imagination, to think that Christ shall ever so descend,
and come in like manner from heaven, as the Disciples see him go up into
heaven, that is, visibly and bodily, by which reproach they are more made
manifest to be Deceivers, and such as ought to be accounted accursed by us, as
underminers of the hope of the Gospel, nor does Christ say in John 14. as G.
secretly implies, that the world shall see him no more, he shall come no more
visibly to them, but the world (after a little while) sees me no more, or not
yet ((...)) it is in the present time, sees me not yet, or no more, because he
is now only to be seen in the spirit by faith, whilst he is in bodily a bsence,
and the world has not that faith by which to see him.

He says, He vindicated those words of theirs, and witnessed to the several
comings of Christ, as he was revealed to the Saints, from glory, to glory] How
he vindicated their words, both the relation of our discourse (which he
confirms herein to be true, and that he had no cause to fault me, for saying
his answers were to that purpose, as I have related them (which I added because
I did not pretend to, nor could I relate every word of his answer, with all the
circumstances, tautologies and circumlocutions of them) for to the same purpose
as he here expresses I related) and what he says here shows: unless by
(vindicating their words) he mean (as a distinct thing, from witnessing to the
several comings of Christ, as he was revealed to the Saints, etc.) what he
alleged from the next Chapter about sleeping, and from Jo. 5.25. about the
dead hearing the voice of the Son of God, and from 1 These. 1.10. Of the
Thessalonians waiting from the coming of Christ from Heaven; and then also, he
both confirms my relation, that mentions those answers, before his talking of
the several degrees of Christ's revealing himself to the Saints, and so that he
falfly cavils afterward, when he says, that, in page 11. I lay down many words
that he never spake] for there are not many words of his laid down in that
page, as the Reader thereof may see, and what is laid down as his, I dare call
God, and the Auditory to witness I have not wronged him in, yea and he himself
in this answer, acknowledges diverse of them, and also how sorrily he vindicated
their words, or rather how grossly he prevaricated instead of vindicating them,
alleging the sleeping in security, against which the Apostle warnes them, 1
These. 5.6. as an interpretation of the sleeping in Jesus, about which in, 1
These. 4.13, 14, 15. he comforts them; and the raising the dead in sins, 1 John
5.25. as answering to the rising of the dead in Christ, 1 These. 4 16. and the
coming of Christ from Heaven, which the believing Thessalonians that had turned
from dumb Idols waited for, as all one with that efficacy of the voice of
Christ, causing the dead in sins to hear, and hearing, to live, spoken of John
5.25. Such a vindication of their words, was but a more evident manifestation
of their ignorance and corruption.

He adds, that he, Never denied the coming of the Lord from Heaven, when he
shall bring with him, them that sleep in Jesus, and raise the dead in Christ,
nor ever said, that that was already over and past. As he says I belyed him.
That he in so many express words, denied the coming of Christ from Heaven,
when he shall bring with him them that sleep, I never charged him; nor did he
ever confess that coming, and that bringing with him them that sleep in him,
and raising the dead in Christ, the Apostle there speaks of, but undermines it,
while he says, that the Saints then alive remained to it: And calls our
expecting it, but an Imagination of ours, and a carnal looking for him, yea,
and though he did not in express words directly say it is over and past, yet
his saying the Saints then alive (namely when the Apostle so wrote) remained to
it, clearly implies it, for is not remained a word of the time past, he said
not, they do or shall remain to it, but remained in the time past and over.
Thinks he we cannot understand words, when we hear them? But he intimates his
crafty meaning, in saying he never said, that was already over and past, a few
line, after. When he says, What confusion would I charge upon them (and is
that a strange thing to find them in confusion) as to say, the coming of
Christ, at which, the dead in him are to be raised, is already past and over,
as if that which is yet to be, is over and past.

See here, the sense in which G. W. never said, that coming of Christ, is over
and past, not that that coming of Christ there spoken of, 1 These. 4.15, 16. Is
over and past to the Apostles and Saints of that age; To them Christ came, and
the dead in him were raised, and they, the then living Saints, were changed,
and all caught up together to meet him in the air; This G. denies not to be
their meaning; nay he implies it to be their mind, in his next words. viz. That
with that nonsense I might as well have charged the Saints as them, who
remained, unto the coming of the Lord, and yet did not prevent them, which were
asleep from being raised, in which (besides other corruptions, which I may by
and by mention) he asserts that those Saints, did remain to that coming of the
Lord, mentioned, 1 These. 4.15, 17. that's not the thing he ever said was over
and past, viz. That coming of the Lord to those Saints; but in this sense, he
never said it, viz. That as it is to come yet, or yet to be (as he implies the
same, or like coming is to some in these and following ages) so he never said
it was over and past, for that is nonsense, to say, what shall be, is past.
Mind then Reader, what corruption of mind he here implies, namely that, that
coming of Christ there spoken of, is not to be, to all dead and living Saints
at once, even to all that dyed and lived in their several ages, together with
those of us (that is, of the body of believers, all which, in all ages, the
Apostle speaks there of, as of one society or body, as in mine answers I
cleared, that to be the sense of the Apostles) that shall then be found living,
and remaining to it; But that that coming of Christ was to the Saints in that
age, and is to the Saints in every age; but if so, then I would know what
Saints did not live and remain to that coming, if he come to the Saints in
every age, do any Saints dye before he come, and not remain to it, as the
Apostle implies distinguishing the living and remaining, from them that sleep
and are dead in Christ? If some dyed before his coming to the living, did those
dead Saints rise at his coming to those living ones in every age? If so, then
they make a Resurrection of the dead, even the dead in body, in every age, or
continually, and yet that which was corruptable in them, never puts on
incorruption, but lies and Rots, for their corruptable bodies lie yet in their
Sepulchers, as it is said of David's after many generations. But if the dead
Saints rise not again, in every age when Christ comes to the living, then how
do not the living Saints prevent those that are asleep? Why, for that G. W.
finds out a new devise to salve that matter, while he ads of his own head, they
prevent them not from rising, but those words (from rising) are his own, not in
the Text, nor does the word ((...), prevent) signify such a thing there, as to
hinder or keep from a thing, as G.W. ignorantly implies; but the sense is, we
shall not be before them. The living Saints shall not be in their glory before
those, which are dead, even as to their bodies, and so the word (prevent) that
comes of prevenire, signifies in Psalm. 88.13. and 119, 147, 148. and else where.

He says, When he urged the Apostles remaining till the coming of the Lord, as
in 1 These. 4.15, 17. I to render him edious (nay to discover his deceits)
urged, ver. 13, 14, 16. which he says, he never denied, nor doubted of her.
And so he slighted disputing about it, though I would make it disputable, as if
all those verses spoke not of the same coming of Christ; or as if the word,
then, (then we which are alive, and remain, ver. 17.) did not clearly pelate to
the coming with a shout, and the dead in Christ rising, spoken of in ver. 16.
And as if he slighted and waved disputing about those verses, and yet mentioned
the sleeping spoken of in Chap. 5.6. and the dead living by the voice of
Christ, 1 John 5.25. With evident reference to what I urged from ver. 13, 14,
15. where those phrases of sleeping, and dead in Christ are mentioned, thus we
see Foxes have their holes to creep into when persued by the truth; but these
do but slenderly hide his deceit. He grants, his mention of John 5.25. touching
the dead hearing the voice of the Son of God, and what occasion had he to
mention that, if he slighted disputing about the 16. verse, where the dead
being raised, is mentioned? He ha^h a starting hole, such as it is, for that
too; For he says, That these that were dead, or asleep, in their sins, might
come to be raised out of them, and live. This he says, He knew was the most
needful for many people that heard us, to know, they having such as I for their
Teachers, whose Ministry (he slanderously says) does greatly tend to keep men
in their sins, when we so much strive for sin, in contending and pleading for
it, as I have done. Ah shameful subterfuge! can thou not smell a Fox hear,
Reader? Historians say, when they are closly persued, they fling about their
piss with their tails to annoy their persuers with its stench, and so does G.
W. here; For is it likely he would run from vindicating himself against my
charge, and clearing himself of the guilt of it (which had been the best course
to bring people off from listening to my Ministry, and to have attended to
theirs, in which he supposes the voice of Christ may be better met with to
raise them from their sins) to mention a Scripture as paralleling the rising of
the dead in Christ, which is quite to another purpose, and so to give me
advantage against him, to make all the people see his weakness and
impertinency, and inability to defend himself against my charge? Was his bare
mentioning that Scripture and waving it again, when I showed its impertenency,
that way to raise them out of their sins, that were a sleep in them? Or was
that the voice of the Son of man, that the dead hear? Oh sorry man and hard put
to it, that is forced to devise such sorry shifts to hide himself in! and what
would he do if he had not that slander at his tongues end (that we plead for
sin, and that our Ministry tends to keep people in it) which reflects upon the
Apostles equally with us, as I have before showed?

Surely a great part of his Books are usually made up with the repeating of
that senseless reproach. For surely our Preaching the Doctrines of the
Resurrection and the judgment to come, more directly tend to awake people out
of sins; yea, our telling them that they have sin in them to watch against,
then their corrupt denyals and underminings of those doctrines do. Thus I have
further made good my charge in vindicating my mannagement of it from his cavils
thereagainst, in the main things objected by him. The rest are more trivial,
and a shorter touch will serve to overthrough them, as his chargeing me with, A
dissembling imitation, in saying I appealed to that of God, in all the people
when he says, I deny that all have the light of Christ in them, which is that
of God they speak of, and appeal to in all. How filly is this, For had we all
men before us to speak to? Or if the light of Christ was in all them, follows
it, that it is in all the infants and Reprobates in the world? (...), when they
appeal to that of God in all, they mean it, of the light of Christ (namely his
spiritual light, which only I deny to be in all at all times) follows it that
I must do so to; Is there nothing of God in men besides that spiritual light?
Is not the soul, the understanding faculty, and the reason, of God? and is that
the light of Christ, they speak of, as brought forth in some to be the Prince
of peace? So his taxing, My laughing at them, as not ministering grace to the
people, but stirring up folly and madness. What? coth not the laughing of the
just to see their enemies defeated, as Psa. 52.6. minister grace to the
hearers? might not my expressing my joy in the Lord, for his goodness in
strengthening and helping me against such a Bravado, that brag of what they were
and could do, provoke the people to seek to know the truth of, and trust in
that God whom they see after solemn appeals to him, before them, and desire to
manifest his truth, and stop the mouth of error, so to baffle him by his poor
weak servant? Surely it might.

Whereas I said, and proved from Col, 2.10. with 3, 5, 8. That men complete in
Christ, may yet have sins in themselves to mortify, he turns and perverts my
saying shamefully, when he says, The Apostle said not those that were in
fornication and uncleanness, etc. were complete in Christ, for those that were
complete in Christ had put off all these]

Answ. Nor said I, those that are in fornication and uncleanness are complete
in Christ. Is G. so simple as not to discern a large difference, between sins
being in men, and men being in those sins! as much as between men's having
unclean humors, as of blood or excrements in them, and their being in
uncleanness by the issuing of them upon them, as was noted before. I said not
men that are in those evils, but that have such evils in them to mortify, may
yet be complete in Christ, and that the Scripture above quoted clearly proves,
nor does that hinder that G. W. alleges. viz. That those that are complete in
Christ have put off those things; for those that have put them off, are bid to
put them off still, See else Col. 8.3. But now you also put off all these
things, Anger, Wrath, etc. Seeing that you have put off the old man with his
deeds. They had put the old man off, and yet are bid to put them off, because
they are not perfectly put off at once, so as no need of putting them off any
more. So 1 Cor. 5.7. They that are said to be unleavened, are yet bid to purge
out the old leaven. As a Wife in taking an Husband yields up her self to be
his, and puts off her will, or power over her self, and yet needs daily to be
exercising herself therein to put off and deny her will. George says, The
members could not remain, where the body on which they were, were put off.
Shall we believe Georges reason, or the Apostles saying? Sure it is George's
ignorance and error that he cannot apprehend (or else his worse mind, to
deceive people that he will not own) the things of God. They seem foolishness
to him, that a man may be complete in Christ, and yet have sins in him to
mortify. And because he cannot comprehend them (and how should he, when he is
so far out about the faith of the person of Christ and believes not in him, but
in an internal principle only in himself and others?) he endeavors to render
them foolishness to others also, and sticks not to oppose his sayings to the
Apostles, and to invent glosses and shifts, as if the Apostles said not those
things to the same persons, but to persons in different states. And whereas I
replied, did the Apostle write one Chapter, to one part of the poople, and
another Chapter, to another part of them? He says, I manifest my blindness,
because the Epistle was not then divided into Chapters.

And he manifests his cavilling mind in so saying, For, what if the Epistle
was not divided by him into Chapters, as I know it was not? there is the less
color for him to say, that those things in Chap. 2.10. according to our now
division of it, were writ to people in one State, and those in Chap. 3.5, 8.
writ to people of another. His own conceit would rather imply that the Apostle
had so divided his Epistle into several Chapters, to several Persons or states,
than my asking him that question upon that blind shift of his.

Would George and the Quakers instead of diverse states of diverse Persons,
consider or believe the diverse and different respects or states of the same
persons, they would avoid all this their error and confusion as to this point,
and the controversy thereabout between us would cease. However, I propound it
to the Reader, for thy usefulness, namely, That the same persons that believe,
are considerable, as they are men and women, and have natural beings of Souls
and Bodies, as springing from Adam by propagation, and so they are sinful,
mortal, subject to many infirmities, and have members on earth to mortify. And
yet the same persons as they are, by the grace of God, begotten to know and
believe in Christ, and are reckoned after him, have another state in him, which
is not reckoned after Adam, and whatthey are in themselves; And so they are
Saints, Holy, Spotless, complete, and the Apostles sometimes speaks of the
same persons with reference to the one consideration, and sometimes with
reference to the other, as men, to keep them lowly and little in their own
eyes, and to provoke them to look more diligently to Christ, and abide in him,
and as in Christ to encourage them against the discouragements from self and
world, and to provoke them to thankfulness to God, and confidence in him, and
to abide in him, where it is so well with them. So the Apostle speaks in
differently of himself, Romans 7.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. And that one
consideration too shows how both Solomon, in saying there is no man that
sins not, and John in saying he that is born of God sins not, do both
speak truly of the same persons with different respects. No man living, as he
is a man from Adam, though a believer, but as so considered, has sin, and
sins; that is, does that that is sinful, though its not imputed to him that
believes, because his mind being renewed, consents not to it, but strives (not
for it, as these men say of us) but against it: and yet as born of God and
according to the spirit or new man, the man that believes and abides in
Christ, sins not, nor can sin, commit or consent to the sin that is and
remains in his flesh and members, and is there to be put off yet and
mortified by him.

He says, Many saw the truth over me. Yes over me, as my defense and
Protection, I believe they did, and error under my feet. But none that saw
things rightly, could see truth with them, nor what they erroneonsly call
truth, damping or confuting me, for then could I not have laughed (as he says)
or rejoiced over them. As for what peace they had in the truth, may be
conjectured from their want of honesty and truth in all hitherto discovered,
and I shall not need to grudge them their Peace, but wish them more truth, that
their peace may be therein, and not in deceit. As for his coming alone into the
Congregation, that may be; and yet it may be truly said, his friends came
thither with him, as the word with signifies a consent with him in their coming
also, even as though Christ was buried alone, before the believers now living
were born into the world, yet they may be said to be buried with him, as those,
Col. 2.12. My discovery of his deceitful abuse of Psalm. 103.1. he wisely passes
over; I hope he is ashamed of it, that he neither at his coming then, or now,
has a word to justify himself therein. That I would encourage those in power
to persecute him, and to cause the outward man to suffer, follows not from my
saying, that they (namely, those of them amongst us where he has been proved a
Deceiver) should do well, not to suffer him to speak his pretended words from
the Lord, except he recant his errors, no more than our Savior encouraged the
Church of Thyatyra to persecute Jezebel in reproving the Angel thereof, for
suffering her to teach, and to seduce the people. Rev. 2.20. and in such ways
as he ought not to have suffered Jezebel to teach and seduce, in the like way
persons in power hinder G. W. or any that are proved to be deceivers without
persecution of their bodies, except that was persecution Christ approved; no
more does it follow, that we are such, by our own confession, as have not the
Seal of God upon our foreheads, because we say they (the Quakers) are a heavy
judgment of God to us in this Nation, and are like the Locusts out of the
bottomless Pit, for it is not said that the Locusts were a judgment or trial,
to none that had the Seal of God in their foreheads, but that they should not
hurt them. And, I trow, the house of God is not hurt by the judgment of God
that begins there, nor are we hurt by the Quakers; though they be troublesome,
yet by occasion of that trouble, blessed be the Lord we have got good: they
being made as means to provoke as to exercise our selves more to look to God,
and by contending for his truth against them, to grow more clear and confident
therein. As for his boasts of their borders enlarged. See what is said of the
false Prophets; many shall follow their pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2.2. All they
in Asia turned away from Paul 2 Timothy 1.15. Thy were never the better for that,
not the multitude of followers, but the truth of the Doctrine is to be regarded.

But above all, Reader, see and admire, that a man should be so infatuated or
blinded with malice as this G. W. appears to be, in his cavilling against the
words of the Holy Ghost quoted by me, from Psalm. 63 10. Which he repeats as my
words thus. I. H. says, The King Christ shall rejoice in God, every one that
swears by him shall glory, etc.

To which he says, If every one that swears by Christ shall glory, then must
the drunkards and Liars and all such profane persons as swear by him glory:
And so this Doctrine, (mark this doctrine) which is the Doctrine of the
Scripture, and only quoted by me, and with an explication of the word swear
too, according to the languag of the new Testament, for I said every one that
swears or confesses, which he wilfully ^^^^ed. This Doctrine (says he,)
tends to the encouraging of drunkards, and profane persons in swearing, which
is against the doctrine of Christ, which is against the Oaths and swearing
which was under the Law, etc. What may we think of such a pitiful man as this,
that shames not thus to revile the Scripture sayings? What, would he not have
those words Printed or read? would he take away those Scriptures for fear the
Profane should abuse them? Nay, ought they not to be taken away, (as I have
heard it said of some of them, that they reject the Bible, and say it is good
for nothing, or fit to be burnt, or the like,) if the Doctrine contained in the
Psalms and Prophets tend to encourage drunkards and Profane persons in their
swearing, and be contrary to the Doctrine of Christ? If this be not a desperate
deceiver, that durst thus revile and blasphene the very words of Scripture, and
a man bitterly malicious, that the better to color over his charge of me
therein, witholds (...) my explication of the word swearing, by the word
confessing (as it is explicated in Romans 14.11. and Philip. 2.11. with Isa.
45.23.) and so a man not to be listened to, but to be accounted accursed, I
know not who is: I might also note his errors, in implying, the Disciples were
taught by Christ to call God Father, as he is Creator, and not as born of God,
and that some thing in the Disciples, but not the Disciples themselves called
Father, but they praying, in that, received what forgiveness they asked, but it
seems were not to ask that daily as they did their bread, for when they
received what they asked, then they had to more sin, nor need to pray for
forgiveness: And so he implies, that before they were born of God, or could by
the Holy Ghost call Father, before the Birth was brought forth in them, they
might pray for forgiveness; as when our Savior teacht them to call God
Father, and yet to pray for forgiveness. A deal of such confused Babylonish
stuff George is full of.

A gain in asking, Why Christ should teach his to pray that his will may be
perfectly done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, if it be not in this world to be
done. He implies there is nothing to be prayed for, but what is here to be
enjoyed in this world, and so would exclude the coming of Christ in glory, and
his glorious Kingdom out of our Prayers, for that is in the world to come. But
sure that world is neither in G. W's. Faith nor hope, and how should it be in
his Prayers, nor is that the end with him of preaching and praying, seeing he
implies that if it be not to be had in this world, It Is against the end for
which the Discples of Christ prayed as he taught them. His calling me, Scornful
tempter and blind unbeliever, for saying, if the Quakers have no sin in them,
let them manifest it by living without bread. I pass as proceeding from his
Gall, and tell him there is difference between Christ's and other men's cases. He
was made under infirmities for our sins sake, but if any of us have no sin, I
know no reason why we should be infirm, nor find I any thing from Christ, that
implies men shall need to pray for daily bread longer than for forgiveness of
and keeping from sin; yea even then when the Disciples are come to that perfect
charity, as to make their own forgiveness of others, a rule after which they
desire God to forgive, yet they are willed yet to ask forgiveness of God, and
that is a state above G. W's. who is ever and anon at his bitter words, and
reproaches, as the Reader of him may see.

His asking, How men may be kept from sin, if they may not be kept from it,
according to me? Intimately charges a lie upon me, or discovers great ignorance
and deceit in him. David was kept from his iniqnitie, yet he calls it his
iniquity, a man that has sin in him may be kept from its getting dominion over
him, as David implies, Psalm. 19.12, 13. And from committing it, or consenting
to it, as Paul was, when he says, it was no more he that did it, but sin that
dwelt in him. That Their root is rottenness though they be appointed as a
judgment, is as understandable as that the Caldeans were wicked and unholy,
and yet ordained for judgment of God; And as their being unholy hindre^ not
the holiness of Gods Judgment, so neither does the rottennes^ of these men's
roots at all reflect upon the soundness of Gods judgments, seeing he makes
use of wicked men, whose roots are rottenness, to be for his rods and
judgments. Lastly, to his casting the lie upon me, in what I related of their
uncivil and impudent posting me up, as going away to avoid them, because he
says, those words were not in it. I answer, what if those very express words
were not in it? things may be couched in expressions, where the very same words
are not expressly mentioned, as the Doctrine of the Resurrection of Christ
showed to be in Moses doctrine, though the word Resurrection is not expressed
therein: their words in what they posted, were thus. This is to give notice
that the said I. H. was lawfully called (which was false, for a call to break
promise was not lawful) by the Q. whom he so accused, so publicly to prove,
if he could, what he so promised, and that he had sufficient notice, being
three days aforehand of the time, wherein we desired to meet him, (wherein
also their falsehood and wikednesse appears. Their falsehood, for I had notice
but the day before they came, whereas I was to have notice two or three days
before that. Their wickedness, in that it appears, they would dave tied me to
have met them on the Saturday, which I knew must have been on purpose to spend
me, that I might have been disabled from preaching the following day) But in
stead of performing his promise (mind) against the Q. he the said I. H. went
out of the Town, and so has not performed his promise against the Qua. (which
is false, for I did not promise to do it at their next coming, but expressly
excepted against it, because of my fore-ingaged journey) neither can he. And a
little after, they say, People hereby may discern the diceit of these men, how
having spread many railing and false accusations against the Q. when they are
tried, have refused to meet us publicly. Now Reader, compare these shameful
falsities, and see if they amount to less than an impudent suggestion, that I
went out of Town, to refuse making good my charge; which that I have made good
through the strength of God, both my former relation and this vindication of it
clearly testify. What they note as lies in me, stand firm for truths, both as
to my assertions, so far as asserted by me, without his alterations, and as to
my charges of them, as is made manifest, and George and the Quakers are found
clearly to be the Deceivers and Liars, as in these following particulars
amongst others, in saying or implying.

1. That I have not proved my charge, but bragged of a victory where was none.

2. That they come as the Apostles, because they have confessed fins, though
now they do not as they (the Apostles) did, when Apostles.

3. That they (the Quakers) have forsaken their sins, yet they are found in
lies and bitterness.

4. That the judgments of God are such (as his judgments) as the nature of
the things or persons that be used by him as Judgments.

5. That David boasted of finlesnesse in him, where he calls iniquity his.

6. That they that say the Saints have sin in them, plead for sin, and so they
make the Apostles and Prophets pleaders for sin.

7. That the Apostles were without sin in this world, as Christ is, contrary to
their own sayings in 1 John 1.8, 10. and 2.1, 2. Jam. 3.2.

8. That not whosoever believes Jesus to be the Christ, is born of God, for
many, he says, believe^ that are not born of God; contrary to 1 John 5.1.

9. That the Apostles and Prophets when they confert sins, were not true
believers, nor born of God.

10. Nor the Disciples when Christ taught them to call God Father, etc.

11. That some men living are so sinlesse in themselves, that if God should
enter into judgment with them, yet they may be justified in Gods sight,
contrary to Psalm. 143.2.

12. That Asa's heart was perfect all his days, but not all his lifetime.

13. That persons of no judgment or right understanding, can affirm or deny
nothing, contrary to Jer. 4.22.

14. That Christ's coming from Heaven spoken of 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17. is either
often in diverse ages, or else over and past already.

15. That the Redemption of the body waited for, and groaned after by the
Apostles and Saints, they had it in this life, before they deceased.

16. That the Saints waited not for things to be given them many hundred years
after, contrary to Heb. 11.13, 39, 40.

17. That our looking for the coming of Christ from Heaven personally and
visibly, to raise the dead Saints that are bodily dead, is but our imagination,
and a carnal looking for him.

18. That the coming of Christ mentioned, 1 These. 4.15. is but a revelation of
Christ to the Saints, from glory to glory.

19. That men in whom sin is, are not, or cannot be, while such, complete in
Christ.

20. That to have sin in men, and to be in those sins, is all one.

21. That the 63. Psalm verse 11. tends to encourage Drunkards, and Profane
persons in swearing, which is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ.

These and such like be his intimations, as is before more fully showed. The
Lord deliver the Reader from such deceits, and make the folly of these men yet
more evident, that poor Souls may not be snared by them. I shall add no more
to G. W. but leave him to the Lords convincement and silencing: Who when he
sets home his repro^ to any of them, will do it to such purpose, as to stop
their clamorous cavils, which they cease not to invent and raise up against us,
though against our clearest confutations of them, because they be absurd and
unreasonable men. The Lord exalt his Name and truth, to the rebuke and silence
of their errors against him.

Queries sent by Richard Hubberthorne, to us, with our answer to them; And the
like number of Queries sent by I. H. to Richard Hubberthorne, to be answered
plainly by him.
Richard Hubberthorne sent these ensuing Queries to us, thus entitled.

These few Queries, grounded upon the Scriptures, concerning the resurrection
of the body of Christ, I send unto you to Answer in the form of sound words,
according to your Faith in the same.

1 SEeing the Scripture says, no man Ascended up to Heaven, but he that came
down from Heaven, even the Son of man, which is in Heaven, with what body was
the Son of man then in heaven, when the man Christ Jesus was upon the Earth, in
that boy which was crucified at Jerusalem?

2. And when Christ was raised from the dead, whither might any (...) before he
was Ascended to the Father, seeing he said unto Mary, touch me not, for I am
not yet Ascended to my Father, but go to my brethren, and tell them I Aseend to
my Father, and your Father, to my God and your God? Joh. 20.17.

3. And whether at the same time, did not the same Mary touch him, seeing that
in Mat. 28.9. it is said she met Jesus, saying, All hail, and held him by the
feet and worshipped him?

4. Whether the two men that stood by the Sepulcher in shining garments, or
white apparel, as in Luke 24.4. which they both saw as men, and heard them
speak, had two real individual distinct bodies, as the bodies of men; and
seeing that those two men, and also Jesus is said all to appear in white Linen
or shining apparel, whether had they all bodies alike of flesh and bones,
which a Spirit has not, as Luke 24.39. or they only had such bodies as a
Spirit has, without flesh and bones?

5. And how did the women distinguish which was Christ, whether by his bodily
appearance, not to be like the other, or by the power of his voice, seeing they
all was both seen and heard, and Mary when she first saw him, knew him not till
he first spoke to her, John 20.16. and seeing that both the Angels and Christ,
spoke the same words to Mary, whereby did she distinguish?

6. Again seeing the Scripture says, that the same women, at the same time
found not the body of Christ, but returned and said, they had seen a vision of
Angels, which said that he was alive, as Luke 24. Chapter at the 23. whether was it
only a vision of Angels seen invisible, or it was visible bodies or persons of
men, or visible voices?

7. And seeing the Scripture says in Mat. 28.7. That they should go in
Gallilee, and there should see him, whether did the eleven Disciples first see
him at Gallilee or at Jerusalem, seeing that Luke says, Luke 24. that the same
day in which he did arise, he appeared in the midst of them, where the eleven
were met together in Jerusalem, ver. 33. and John 20.19. it is said, the same
day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut Jesus
stood in the midst of them? here is the eleven mentioned to be met together,
and yet it is said that Thomas was not among them, John 20.24. And after the
eight days in which he appeared to them again: Whether in all this time had he
Assended to his Father and their Father, to his God and their God?

8. And whether is not all these things mystery, and cannot be seen nor known
nor understood as they are, but as the Spirit does open and reveal them?

Richard Hubberthorne


These for John Horn and Thomas More to answer.

Note here Reader, 1. That the form of sound words is according to our Faith in
the Resurrection of Christ: So the Title perfixed by him implies, and that is
rightly employed, though hapily more than he intended, therein he spoke truth
like as Caiaphas did.

2. That they are not of our Faith, and so not of a sound faith about the
Resurection of the body of Christ.

3. That he says these Queries be concerning the Resurrection of the body of
Christ. And yet the first speaks of what Christ said, while he was not yet put
to death, or risen from it. And in all the rest he implies his curiosity and
evil design, to render the Scriptures but a cunningly devised fable or
Allegory, having no real truth in them, in what they speak about that
Resurrection: and to that he believes neither it nor them according to their
Testimony concerning it, but endeavors to render them, not to be regarded or
believed according to their sayings, as being full of contradictions and
absurdities, that so people might wave them, and learn the mystery from the
Quakers. Such wickedness is clearly enough to those that have the eyes of
their understanding opened, touched in those Queries, as the eighth more
clearly implies.

To these Queres I J. Horn returned this following answer, which I also
prepared for him, and had in readiness to have sent him, upon the receipt of
his answers to my eight Queries after mentioned, which seeing I have not
hitherto received from him, I have now made public, as follows.

1. To the first I say, That the Scripture in John 3.13. Does not say, that
Christ was in Heaven in his body then, and therefore that Question (in what
body was the Son of man then in Heaven) is not grounded on the Scripture, Paul
was wrapped up into the third heaven, when yet his body was upon earth. Men may
be in their minds and spirits where their bodies are not, as Col. 2.5. much
more might Christ, who was also God. He as God, or the eternal Word, was then
in heaven and in his Spirit ascended up to heaven, so as no man else could,
even when his body was upon the Earth and not in heaven, as now it is.

2. To the second I say, some might touch Christ when he was raised from the
dead, before he was ascended and taken up in his body into heaven, there to be
and remain, for the confirmation of their faith in the reality of his
Resurrection, though he said to Mary, taking hold of his feet to worship him,
touch me not, for I am not yet ascended, Mat. 28.9. with John 20.17. For the
Disciples were bid, to the end aforesaid, to handle and touch him, Luke 24.39.
John 20.27.

3. To the third I say, It Is probable Mary did at the same time touch him, and
intended to worship him with Divine adoration, and that occasioned his saying
to her, touch me not, even as Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet to worship
him, and worshipped him, and John fell down to worship the Angel, and both were
thereupon forbidden by them so to do, Act. 10.25. Rev. 19.20.

4. To the fourth, The two Angels that stood by the Sepulcher in shining
garments, or white apparel, etc. were, two Angels, and had two individual
forms, but that they had bodies as the bodies of men, of the same substance
with them, the Scripture says not, nor do I believe it. Nor find I it said,
that Jesus appeared to his Disciples after his Resurrection in white or shining
garments, or that he and the Angels had bodies alike of flesh and bones, which
a spirit has not, nor that a spirit has a body without flesh and bones, or a
body at all otherwise then it assumes a body, or appearance of a body to appear
in. And the inquiring and prying into these things about what is written argues
a proud Luciferian spirit, and a man rashly puffed up with fleshly mind not
holding the head, or an Atheistical deriding (and design to undermine) the
authority of the Scriptures. There is enough in what is revealed to busy
ourselves about, and no need to inquire of things kept secret, as Judge. 13.18.
Deuteronomy. 29.29.

5. To the fifth, That the women did distinguish which was Christ, is certain:
but how they did so, is curiosity to inquire, and persumption to determine, one
of the foolish and unlearned questions, which we are to avoid, 2 Timothy 2.23. He
that could appear to them in diverse forms as he pleased, could also appear in
such a form, as in which they might know him, when he pleased, and in such a
form when he pleased, as in which they did not know him; as to Mary, and the
two Disciples going to Enimaus, or he could open their eyes to discern him, or
hold them from it as he would. The like may be said for his speech, Luke 24.16.

6. The sixth, The Angels, of whom the women had a vision, were seen visibly
without doubt, for of seeing invisibly I have not heard, except in such a
fence, as the seer be not seen again, which was not their case. Nor were those
Angels bodies or persons of men, much less had they visible voices, as is
ignorantly and non-sensically queried. Visible voices and audible colors are
both alike.

7. To the seventh, in which are several Queries, I say, 1. That the 11
Disciples saw him after his Resurrection at Jerusalem, before they saw him at
Galilee, for at Jerusalem they saw him the same day he arose. But Galilee was
above a days journey thence, Luke 2.44. much less could they, being in mortal
bodies, go thither and return again to Jerusalem the same day.

2. To what is said, That Luke 24.33. He appeared where the 11 were met
together, And yet it is said, John 20.24. That Thomas was not there with them.

I Answer, It Is clear, That Luke mentions together the things of two
appearances to them distinctly mentioned by John. And yet, 2. It Is not said in
Luke that the 11 were together when he appeared, but when the two disciples
returned. How know thou but after that, Thomas might be gone out before
Christ's appearing. 3. Thomas is called one of the 12. John 20.24. Mathias was
chosen into their number, and reckoned with them before the Evangelists wrote
those books though not before those appearances, it may be, and the Evangelists
might speak of them according to their present account of them, when he wrote
that book. And so Thomas (who was one of the 12 when the Evangelists wrote)
being absent, there were besides him but 11 of the 12.

3. As for his Ascending to his Father, before that time; possibly he might be
said in such fence, as in John 3.13. to have ascended more than once; yea,
frequently in his spirit, but in the most proper sense of his body going up
thither, there to be contained or received till the time of restitution of all
things, he was not as then ascended.

8. To the eighth, If by my story you mean, that these are not to be taken as
they are spoken of, I deny it. They are a history or relation of things not now
to be so done, or so seen now as then they were done and seen. Though the
usefulness of them is not to be known and understood, but by the Spirits
opening it to us, in his Testimony concerning him, and giving us an
understanding therein. But herein the Q's corrupt judgment is seen, that they
imply, that they believe not that there was ever any such things really done or
seen; And so that they are very Atheistical, not believing further than their
reason can comprehend, and therefore where they judge it absurd (as generally
they do the truth of Christ) they turn it into a fancy, and believe nothing
really as it is recorded.

Written by J. Horn,
April 19. 1660.

Eight Queries propounded to Richard Hubberthorne, by John Horn, to which his
plain answer is desired, accord-to his real mind in them.
1. IF the believing Samaritans did know rightly, and by the Spirit of truth,
that Jesus of Nazareth, as then come in the flesh, is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the world, John 4.42. and if Paul was a true Apostle and preached the
truth, when he proved that that Jesus is the very Christ. And Christ himself
said truly, that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed, John
6.53, 54, 55. And the spirit of truth witnesses Christ come in the flesh, 1
John 4.2. How can thou clear thy self of being a Deceiver and false Teacher,
in saying and publishing, that Christ's coming in the flesh was but a Figure?

2. What but a silly deceiver was he (G.W. in his answers to the Cambridge
Queries) who in justification of thy said saying, alleged, that Christ was
transfigured? Might it not as well by the same reason be touched, that the
Apostles and Believers were but forms of men, or of godly men, because
transformed in the renewing of their minds? Romans 12.1.

3. And if Christ's coming in the flesh was but a figure, whether do thou
believe indeed that that Christ, or Jesus, was a real man consisting of a real
humane body and soul, that had in his body real flesh and blood, really and
verily conceived in the natural womb of a corporal Virgin; A Virgin in such
sense as other Virgins be before married to, or carnally known by any man, and
born really of her into the world: or do thou rather believe all those things
to be only Allegorically spoken?

4. And if thou do believe that that Jesus the very Christ was indeed a real
and personal man, whether do thou believe that he really and verily and in a
real and very body of flesh dyed, and rose in the same real and very body the
third day from the dead, and therein after 40 days conversing by times with
his disciples ascended or was taken up into heaven; and be those things also
only figuratively to be taken?

5. And whether do thou believe that the sufferings or dyings of that man in
any such real body of flesh, and his rising again in the same body and
ascending, is truly availeable to the taking away or procuring pardon for any
man's sin, and obtaining blessing and salvation for men? or do thou thy self
believe to be saved from thy sin and from destruction by virtue thereof, yea,
or nay?

6. Whether do thou indeed believe, that there are any Angels or created
spirits distinct from men, and what is in men, and in other visible creatures,
yea, or nay?

7. And if neither the bodies of men that die, and go to the grave, shall ever
be raised out of their graves to a sensible life again, nor (as Geo. Whitehead
implies in some questions sent us) the souls of the wicked after death shall
come out of Hell again, to receive any further judgment: Whatof the wicked
shall be raised up again after their bodily death and judged to eternal
punishment, as John 5.29. Mat. 25.46. Is it any thing, or nothing? and if any
thing, What is it?

8. Does the soul of the wicked at, or after the bodily death, go to any hell
in which they sustain or feel any torment? and if so, what is the hell they go
to, and are tormented in?

I challenge thee, to return me, if thon dare, a plain and direct answer to
these queries, according to the very truth and belief of thy heart, not giving
revilings instead of answers, but observing, 1 Pet. 3.15.

John Horn.


This was sent him April 19. to which I have as yet received no answer from him
this fourteenth of May, so that I hope, his mouth is stopped with them: However
for any plain positive and sober answer.

John Horn


Richard Hubberthornes Letter in answer to my Queries, is thus.

London 6th. day 4th. Mon. 1660. John Horn.
I Have received a paper of Queries from thee, by which it is easily known to
be thine, by thy preface of lies, which is thy usual and accustomed manner, and
mark of the beast (in all thy papers) thou say I am guilty of seven or
eight falsehoods, but do not mention any of them; neither do answer my
paper, which proves to the contrary: So thou being so often reproved, and yet
hardens thy heart against it, so, if thou will be filthy, thou may be filthy
still, and if thou will be unconvinced, when the truth has been so plainly and
often declared unto thee, thou may be wicked still.

Answ. As unto thy first query, I can clear my self from being a deceiver or
false Teacher in all things which I have spoken; and can also prove thee to be
a false accuser (in saying) that I said and published, that Christ's coming in
the flesh was but a figure, which thing I never said, nor published, and so thy
query is grounded upon a lie: But those that did say and publish that falsehood
of me, was thy brethren the hirelings, and deceivers at Newcastle upon Tyne,
and so thou takes their lies to be a strength unto thy own. And as for the
believing Samaritans, they did know by the spirit of truth that Jesus of
Nazareth, as then come in the flesh, was indeed the Savior of the world; and
Paul was a true Apostle, when he proved that Jesus was the very Christ, as Acts
9.22. And that which Christ himself said, in the first of John 4. and 2. was
true; but what is all that unto thee, to ground thy lie upon, as above
mentioned?

Answ. As for thy second query, calling George Whitehead a silly deceiver, for
justifying of my saying, in his answer to Cambridge queries; What G. Whitehead
said in that answer to Cambridge Queries was truth, and was a question put
forth unto them, which neither they, nor thou, have answered, which Query was
this: Could Christ have been said to have been transfigured, if his coming in
the flesh had not been a figure, or example till his glory was revealed? and
have thou not read that he was the express figure of his Fathers substance,
instead of which it is translated, he is the express image? etc. And if thou will prove him a deceiver, first, deny what he has said, or that it is so
written, which if thou do affirm, thou go but about to turn the truth of
God into a lie, and if thou do confess, thou ownes what G. Whitehead has
said, and so not prove him a deceiver; and as for thy reason to contradict it,
which is that the Apostles and believers were but forms of godly men, because
transformed in the renewing of their minds, Romans 12.2. In this thou have
appeared very ignorant, void of reason and true comparison; for the Apostles
and believers were neither in the power nor form of godly men before the
renewing of their minds, but were children of wrath, and were in the form and
power of wicked men.

Answ. Again, Thy third Query is grounded upon the same lie with the first, if
Christ's coming in the flesh be but a figure, which was never spoken by me, nor
any of us, but if we should say that Christ was an example, or was the express
figure of the Fathers substance, yet thereby we do not say, that Christ's coming
in the flesh is but a figure.

And as for my belief of Jesus, he was real man, and had a real body prepared
for him, and in it both soul and spirit, power and life, which was immortal and
Eternal, in which body was real flesh and blood, and was born of the Virgin
according to the Scripture.

Answ. As to the fourth Query, that which thou queriest of me, thou do not
believe thy self, that Christ in that very body of flesh and blood and bone in
which he suffered did arise again, but thou say, with flesh and bone without
blood he is in heaven; so then, not with that real and very body born of the
Virgin, which thou say is real flesh and blood, and so according to thy own
writings, not the same: But we do believe, that in the very same real body in
which he after his resurrection did converse with his Disciples, is ascended
into heaven.

Answ. To thy fifth Query I say, That the suffering and dying of that man
Jesus, and his ascending into heaven, is truly available unto those which do
receive him; by which their sins are taken away, and they saved from
destruction, but those that do not receive him, but reject him, his light and
spirit, his suffering, dying and rising again, and ascending, is not available
to the taking away, or procuring pardon for their sins, for by their rejection
of him, to teach and lead them into all truth, they make his blood and all his
works, unto them as of none effect.

To thy sixth Query, wherein thou asks whether I do believe there are any
Angels or created spirits distinct from men, and from what is in man, and other
visible creatures.

Answ. Whether would thou have any to believe above what is written, or
where do thou read, that there is any created Angels or created spirits
distinct from God, which is in man, and from all other visible creatures, if
thou can show me any such Angel or created spirit which is distinct, both
from him which did create it, and from all other things created, then thou
show some ground for such a faith, but the Scripture is not a rule for any
such faith, neither does it speak any such thing, and herein thou would
appear wise (or manifest thy self a fool) above what is written, and not as one
that would be instructed, though thou be ignorant.

Answ. To the seventh Query, That which shall rise again after death out of the
graves, is the Seeds, and each Seed with its own body, for there are two seeds,
and two bodies, which shall arise, the one into Everlasting life, the other
into condemnation.

Answ. To the eighth Query, The Souls of the wicked at death go to a Hell where
torment is, felt, which is the eternal wrath of God, the just recompense of
reward to all hypocrites hirelings and deceivers, who have not only refused to
receive the truth in the love of it, but have also set themselves in enmity
against it, and this shall thou also know hereafter better than thou do now,
and here is an answer returned unto thee without railing according to (1 Pet.
3.15.)

Richard Hubberthorne.


The Reply to Richard Hubberthornes Answer.
THough there is no end of controversing with evil spirits, nor the answers
sent by R. Hubberthorne need no Reply, the very comparing them with the
questions they relate to, being a sufficient discovery of Richards
erroneousnesse in them, to those that are intelligent, yet for the sakes of
some weaker ones, and to stop the mouths of the deceived, I shall note his
falsehoods and deceits therein. 1. His falsehoods: as,

1. It Is false, That I had in my paper a Preface of lies. My Preface was thus,
Richard Hubberthorne, I once received a letter from thee, and I gave thee an
answer to it, in which I noted thee guilty of 7 or 8 falsehoods, thou did
return me an answer to it, but did neither therein confess thy evils nor
disprove them, so that I might slight thee as a proved liar. In that answer I
remember I took notice of some corrupt passages about the Resurrection of
Christ, by which I am satisfied in part that thou art out of the truth; yet
because thou should not think, nor thy party vapor (as one of them yester
night began to suggest) that I am afraid to answer thee. (...) Thou having not
multiplied thy questions to very many, I shall be willing for this once to
return thee an answer to them, provided that thou will plainly and nakedly
answer me in the like number propounded by me, to thee; and when thou sendest
thy answers to them, to me, thou shall God willing have mine, to thine,
returned by me; this was what he calls my preface, of the truth of which in
every particular, I call God to witness between us.

2. It Is false, that it is my usual and accustomed manner, and the mark of the
beast in all my papers to make prefaces of lies, a thing said of him without
proof.

3. It Is false, that I said he is guilty of 7 or 8 falsehoods, for my words were
not so, but that in his former letter (which was some years since sent me) I
noted him guilty of 7 or 8 falsehoods, that he is guilty now of them, and
repented none of them since, I affirmed not.

4. It Is false that his paper proves to the contrary, for neither is his paper
in being, and so now proves nothing, nor did it, when in being, take notice of
those falsehoods that I charged him with, so as to disprove them.

5. It Is false, that I brought as a reason to contradict G. Whitehead's
endeavored proof, that the Apostles and believers were but forms of godly men,
because transformed in the renewing of their minds, Romans 12.2. for that was not
my reason, nor my assertion, but by saying was my way of question. Might it not
as well by the same reason, be avouched, that the Apostles were but forms of
men or of Godly men, because transformed into the renewing of their minds,

6. It Is false, that in that saying of mine I appeared very ignorant, void of
reason and true comparison, for I appeal to all intelligent men, whether the
word transformed, applied to the believers, signifies not every jot as much,
that they were before, or then also, but forms, as that the word transfigured,
applied to Christ, proves that he was, or his coming in the flesh, a figure, or
but a figure; Besides, that he left out part of my saying, for I said, forms of
men or of godly men.

7. False it is too, that the Apostles or believers, before that transforming
of them in the renewing of their minds, mentioned and exhorted to, were neither
in the form nor power of godly men, but were children of wrath and in the
power and form of wicked men, for when the Romans were exhorted to be
transformed in the renewing of their minds (which as it was a thing but
exhorted to, they had not as then; for exhortations respect things, things yet
to be done when such exhortations are given) they, those Romans, were believers
and Saints and in part renewed, as appears in Romans 1.7, 8, 12.

8. It Is a gross falsehood, that he says in his answer to Qu. 4. that I do nor
believe myself, what I query therein of him: and as,

9. False too that he charges me with querying, whether Christ in that very
body of flesh blood and bone, in which he suffered, did arise again. My words
were not so, but whether in a real and very body of flesh he dyed, and rose in
the same real and very body the third day.

10. False it is again that he says, I say with flesh and bone without blood
he is in heaven, for I have no such saying, nor have so determined of it.

11. False it is too, that he in his next words implies, that if he be not in
heaven with flesh blood and bones, then not with that real and very body born
of the Virgin, for he was laid into the Sepulcher in that very body born of
the Virgin, and not with another, when as yet his blood was before shed out of
that body: the body and blood are spoken of as distinct things, and his body,
was his body, and the same body in which the blood was, while alive, when in
the Sepulcher the blood was not in it; and so the same body may be in heaven,
and is, that was born of the Virgin, though it have not all the same things in
it that it had when born, as not the same weakness, littleness, mortality, the
same body that was peirced with a spear, (...) the issuing out of it is blood
was after it is blood was out laid in the Sepulcher, and the same it was laid in
the Sepulcher, arose and ascended, though not in the same condition for it had
no life in it, when it was laid in, it had when it arose and ascended; yet dead
and living the body was the same.

False it is too that I said, his body born of the Virgin is real flesh and
blood, I had no such expressions; my expression was, that his body born of the
Virgin had in it real flesh and blood, not is (now at present) flesh and blood.

13. False it is, that they (the Quak.) do believe, that in the very same real
body in which he after his resurrection did converse with his Disciples, is
ascended into heaven; for both his eighth question implies that they believe,
that what is said about the resurrection of that body is a mystery, otherwise
to be understood than as it is recorded: And G. Fox and the Whiteheads, in their
answers to us, grant no other body in heaven but the body the Church, and that
is not the body of Christ, in which he after his resurrection conversed with
his Disciples, for his Disciples were the body, the Church, or of it, and not
the body dead and raised in which he conversed with them. Had he said, they do
believe that in such a body, as they imagine him to be raised in, they also
believe he is ascended into heaven, it might have gone for a truth, as touching
their belief; but that they believe, that in that body (even of flesh and
bones, that personal body) in which he conversed with his Disciples after the
resurrection, he is ascended into heaven, is too broadly contradictory to their
other writings to be true.

14. False it is, that by my own writings it is not the same body that was born
of the Virgin, or that dyed, or that is ascended; for I never writ that it was,
or is not the same substance or body, though not in the same condition, or have
not all the same things in it it had when it was born, or dyed.

15. False it is, that he suggests of me in answer to Quer. 6. as if I had
implied such a faith as to believe, that there is any Angel or created spirit
which is distinct both from him which did create it, and from all other things
created, if by other, he means other from God who created it, otherwise it is
false that the Scripture is not a rule for such a faith, as says, that there
is some Angel distinct from God that made it, and from all other things created
besides it, for the Scripture is grounded for such a faith as that there is and
was an Angel called Gabriel sent from God, and so distinct from God who created
it, as he did all things, and distinct from all other creatures, so as Gabriel
was none of the other creatures, nor any other creature was that Angel Gabriel,
see Dan. 9.21. Luke 1.24.

16. False it is then, that in that 6th. Query, I would appear wise or manifest
my self a fool above what is written, etc.

17. His answer to the 7th. query, about what shall rise is altogether corrupt
and false, when he says it is the seeds shall rise; whereas the Scripture says
the men shall rise, every man in his own order, 1 Cor. 15.23.

18. It Is false, that here is an answer returned without railing according to
1. Pet. 3.15. for he neither balked reviling or railing language in his
beginning, nor in his proceedings, nor in his end, as the answer it self may
witness, nor did he render a reason of the hope that is in him, as 1 Pet.
3.15. but in his answer to query 5th. leaves that part of the query unanswered
that required a reason of his hope, nor is it at all with meekness and fear or
reverence, as the Reader may well perceive. Thus for his falsehoods, a sufficient
number in so short an answer, besides what else might have been noted.

2. His defects in his answers are many too, for besides what may be said to
his denial of ever saying that Christ's coming in the flesh was but a figure,
and charging it upon some about Newcastle, as if raised falsely upon him, by
them, and that I strengthened my self by their lies, which I might have noted as
another falsehood, for I never read that I know, of any of their books, but
found it charged upon him by the Author of the Cambridge queries, and not
denied, but pleaded for by G. W. in his answer to them, and I took it as a
sufficient evidence of his being guilty of it, that his brother G. undertaking
to answer that charge, did not deny it, but endeavored to make it good, though
but sorrily, as also his answer to that second query shows; besides that, I
say --

1. His answer to the second query is defective and foolish, for,

1. It Is silly, that he says, what George Whitehead said was truth, and yet
adds it was a question. Sure if it was a question, it asserted nothing, and so
was neither in it self truth nor falsehood; and if it was an intimate assertion
by way of question, then it was more then a question simply, and so it was a
falsehood, because what was therein intimately asserted, was that Christ being
transfigured proved his coming in the flesh a figure, or but a figure, which is
no more true, then, that the believers being transformed proves them to have
been forms, or but forms, in that part of his answer there was fillinesse or
falsehood. To the question I say by way of answer, Christ might have been said
to have been transfigured because the form or figure of his countenance was
changed, though his coming in the flesh was no figure, or though it had been no
example till his glory was revealed, besides there is this fillinesse in G's.
answer by the question, that it implies that Christ was no example for us after
he was transfigured, in that he says, till his glory was revealed, namely, in
the transfiguration, which is contrary to 1 Pet. 2.21. which tells us he was an
example in his sufferings, which were after he was transfigured.

2. His saying, have thou not read, that he was the express figure of his
Fathers substance, instead of which, it is translated, the express image? etc.
is but simple, for if it be translated the express image, how or where should
I read it the express figure? not in the Greek, for there it is not figure
which is an English word, nor is it such a Greek word as is in any other place
of the Bible translated figure, and why is it translated image instead of
figure, if the word there used, is none of those words elsewhere in the
Scriptures translated by the word figure? besides that, he corrupts the text,
and says the figure of his substance, instead of the image of his person, but
what if it had been read, the express figure of his Fathers substance? does
that prove his coming was a figure too? so then to prove him a Deceiver, I have
denied, and do deny what he says to be true, if in his question he imply
affirmatively, either that those words be so read, or that they prove Richards
saying that he defends; the falsenesse of what he adds, to what he calls my
reason is before spoken to.

2. His answer to my third question prevaricates, for Rich. Hubberthorne by G.
Whiteheads pleading for his saying, said more than he supposes that Christ was
an example, or the express figure of the Fathers substance, but what? is it
all one to be an example, and the express figure of the Fathers substance that
they are put so together, as if they amounted to the same thing? are all
examples then in the Scripture the express figure of the Fathers substance?
but besides that, he in answering leaves out, and durst not touch the terms of
my question, as that Jesus was a real man consisting of a real humane body and
Soul, and that he was really conceived and born in the natural womb of a
corporal Virgin, in such fence a Virgin, as other Virgins be, etc. he durst not
speak so distinctly, but hides himself in such general terms as might keep
him from being so easily seen.

3. He gives the go by to the fourth question too, and plays the prevaricator
in the last clauses of it, as is before sufficiently noted

4. He hides himself in his answer to the 5th. and leaves out the latter part
of it, for in the former part the word^, by which their sins are taken away,
those words (by which) are equivocal, and are so subtly placed as he may
mean, that by their receiving him, their sins are taken away and not by the
suffering and dying of the man Jesus, etc.

5. In his answer to the sixth, he plainly enough casts mists before his
readers eyes, to dazzle him, that he might not discern, that he believes no
Angles or created spirits distinct from God and the spirits of men, and that
are in other visible creatures, and yet his intimate joining with the Sadduces
in denying them, appears clearly enough, to those whose eyes can see through
his mists; for he implies, it is to believe above what is written, to believe
that there are Angels or created spirits distinct from men, and what is in man,
and in other visible creatures: and by his question, where I read, that there
is any created Angels or created spirits distinct from God, which is in man and
from all other visible creatures; what does he, but imply his unbelief or
denial of any such thing? To answer briefly to the question, I say, that though
I do not read in just so many words put together that saying, yet I find it
clearly in the Scriptures in every part of it, as to say, 1. That there are
Angels and Spirits, I read in Heb. 1.7.14. that they are created, is also both
there employed, and in Ephe. 3.9. where it is said that God created all things
by Jesus Christ, and in Col. 1.16. all things were created by him that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, whether visible and invisible, etc. so then
there being such things as Angels and spirits, and those Angels things in
heaven, Mark 13.32. Angels in heaven, and all things in heaven and earth being
created of God by Christ, it necessarily follows, that they be creatures and
created also. 3. That they are distinct from God, whether as in man, or in
heaven, as more usually he is said to be, is as evident if we first show what
it is to be distinct; now that is distinct from another thing that is not that
thing, as the Soul is distinct from the body, because it is not the body, and
the body is distinct from the Soul, because it is not the Soul, and the eye is
distinct from the sight, because the eye may be without sight, and the servant
is distinct from the master, because he is not the master, so the Angels are
distinct from God and Christ, because they are not God nor Christ, but created
by God and Christ, and made ministering spirits, and sent forth from God to such
purpose, and that they are distinct from all other visible creatures, is
evident because they are not any of the other creatures visible or invisible,
but are a distinct kind of creature themselves, distinctly named from them, and
that have distinctly some of them appeared, when made visible to the sight of
men, without the bodies and beings of all other creatures, as in those that
ministered to Christ, and that appeared to Daniel, to Peter, to Paul, to
Cornelius and diverse others, which were neither properly men, nor women, nor
any other creature distinct from Angels or ministering spirits; etc. So that
that question implies great ignorance and unbelief of the Scriptures, as also
his adding that, if I can show him any such Angel or created spirit, that is
distinct both from him which did create it, and from all other things created,
then I show some ground for such a faith, this with his changing my words which
were distinct from men, and from what is in man and in other visible creatures,
into another form, viz. distinct from him that made them, and from all other
creatures implies that he thinks there is no creature but what is visible or
may be seen, sure his other senses may confute such a fancy, for did he ever
see any man's Soul? or see the wind that blows? and yet I trow these be
creatures, but why will he not believe more then I can show him? Angels be of
themselves invisible, pitch their tents about men, who yet see them not, as Ps.
34.7. with 2 Kin. 6.16, 17. but I have showed him in the Scripture, if he have
any eyes of understanding to see with, that there was, and truly is an Angel
Gabriel sent of God, and not God himself, who is distinct from all other men,
Angels and creatures besides him, they none of them being him; yea many
thousand such shall Christ appear with at his coming, as in Mat. 16.27. 2 These.
1.7. so that his falsehood and impiety appears in what follows in the answer as
that the Scriptures is not a rule for any such faith, nor does speak any such
thing.

6. And his Answer to the 7th. Query joined with his former answer proves him a
direct Sadducee to them that can understand him, for as his answer to the 6th.
denies intimately, and yet plainly enough, that there be many such Angels and
Spirits as the Scripture declares, so his answer to the 7th. denies the
resurrection of the body, as will appear if he will clearly speak out his mind
in explication of his said answer, for to that query, what it is of men that
shall rise again after the bodily death? he answers, That which shall rise
again after death out of the grave, is the seeds and each seed with its own
body, for there are two seeds and two bodies which shall arise, the one into
everlasting life, and the other into condemnation, which though it be the most
positive answer of any he gives, and freest from reviling language, yet cannot
be understood unless it be known, what be those two seeds? whether they be not
the wheat and the Tares spoken of Mat. 13.37, 38? or what else they be? and who
sowes, or sowed them? and when? and where they be sown? and what be the graves
they be in? and whether they be but two seeds in all the world over, or two in
every man, one the incorruptible seed, the other the corruptible seed? and
whether they be sown or raised after the bodily death of men, or only after
some spiritual death of the feeds? for I named after the bodily death, and he
leaves out the word bodily, and so speaks equivocally: and whether be each of
these seeds a man, seeing the Apostle says not every seed, but every man shall
rise in his own order? and whether did the Apostle forget one of those seeds,
when he says, it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power, when of two he
should have said, they are sown in weakness they are raised in power? and
whether is either of these seeds, when its sown a natural body, and either of
them when they rise a spiritual body, seeing the Apostle says it is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual body? and what be the two bodies they
shall rise with? are they two in every man? or be they humane bodies, or bodies
of men? and why says he the one into everlasting life, the other into
condemnation? and why not unto everlasting life and unto condemnation? and why
is not the condemnation said to be everlasting by him as well as the life?
Those things I challenge him for explaining his answer before it can be seen to
agree with the Apostles Doctrine of the Resurrection.

7. For the eighth query, he in his answer leaves out the word Bodily again,
and so tells us not of any hell men go into, or their souls, after the death of
their bodies; but prevaricates and hides himself again: nor proves that eternal
wrath shall give up any that shall be in it, as it is said hell and Death shall,
(...) 20.13.

But if Hell be the reward of all Liars, Deceivers, Hirelings and Hypocrites,
what will become of Richard Hubberthorne, who has told so many falsehoods, and
dealt so deceitfully and hypocritically in those his answers; if he repent not,
let the Reader judge.

John Horn.

FINIS.

