THE BLESSEDNESS OF THE RIGHTEOUS Discoursed from Psalm. 17, 15.

By John How M. A.

When he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is,

1 John 3. 2. (...). Plat. in (...).

LODON, Printed by Sarah Griffin, for Samuel Thomson and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bishops-head in Duck-lane, 1668.

To the Reader.
I Am not at all solicitous, that the World should know the History of the
conception of this Treatise. If there be any thing that shall recompense the
pains of such as may think fit to give themselves the trouble of perusing it,
in the work it self; I should yet think it too much an under-valuing of them,
if I did reckon the minuter circumstances relating thereto, fit matter for
their entertainment.

Nor am I more concerned to have it known what were the inducements to the
publication of it, Earnest protestations and remonstrances of our good
intentions in such und^rtakings, as they leave men still at liberty to believe,
or doubt, at their pleasure, so they gain us little if they be believed. It is
no easy matter to ^arry one, even, constant tenor of Spirit, through a work
of time. Nor is it more easy ^o pass a settled, invariable judgment,
con^erning so variable a subject: when an heart that may seem wholly framed and
set for God ^is hour; shall l^ok so quite like another thing (...) next: and
change figures and postures al^ost as often as it does thoughts.

And if a man should be mistaken in judging himself, it would little mend the
matter, to have deceived others also into a good opinion of him.

But if he can approve himself to God in the simplicity of an honest and
undeceived heart; The peace that ensues, is a secret between God and him. Senec.
They are Theater enough to one another (as he said to his friend.) It Is an
enclosed pleasure. A joy which the stranger cannot intermiddle with.

It Is therefore any man's concernment, herein rather to satisfy himself, then
the world. And the world rather to understand the design of the work then the
Author: and whither it tends, rather then whereto he meant it.

And it is obvious enough to what good purposes discourses of this nature may
serve. This is, in the design of it, wholly practical; Has little or nothing
to do with disputation. If there be any whose business it is to promote a
private, divided interest; or who place the sum of their Religion in an
inconsiderable, and doubtful opinion: It does not unhallow their altars, nor
offer any to affront their idol. It intends n^ quarrel to any contending, angry
party. But deals upon things in the substance whereof, Christians are at a
professed agreement. And has therefore the greater probability of do^^g go^d
to some, without the offense of any.

It Is indeed equally matter of complaint and wonder, that men can find so much
leisure to direct from such things, wherein there is so much both of importance
and pleasure unto, what one would think should have little of temptation or
allurement in it, contentions jangling. It might rather be thought, its visible
fruits and tendencies should render it the most dreadful thing to every serious
beholder. What Tragedies has it wrought in the Christian Church! Into how weak
and languishing a condition has it brought the Religion of professed
Christians? Hence have risen the intemperate preternatural heats and angers
that have spent its strength and spirits; and make it look with so Meagre and
Pale a face. We have had a greater mind to dispute then live; and to contend
about what we know not, then to practice the far greater things we know: and
which more directly tend to nourish and maintain the Divine Life. The Author
of that ingenious sentence Pruritus disputandi scobies Ecclesia.
(whoever he were) has sitly expressed what is the noisome product of the itch
of disputing. It has begot the ulcerous tumors; which, besides their own
offencive soreness, drain the body, and turn what should nourish that, into
nutriment to themselves. And it effects are not more grievous, then the
pleasures which it affects and pursues are uncouth and unnatural.

Ut ulcera quaedam nocituras manus apoetunt and tactu gaudent and faedam
corporum scabiem delectat quicquid ^x^sper^t: Non alite^ dixerim his m^ntibus
in quas voluptates velut mala ulcera crupe unt, voluptati esse laborem,
vex^tionemque S^n. de tranquillitate an^^^.
The rough touch of an ungentle hand. That only pleases which exasperates (as
the morallist aptly expresse^ some like disaffection of diseased minds.) Toil
and vexation is their only delight what to a s^und spirit would be a pain, is
to these a pleasure.

Which is, indeed, the triumph of the disease, that it adds unto torment,
repr^ach, and mockery, and imposes upon men by so ridiculous a delusion (wh^le
they are made to take pleasure in punishing themselves) that even the most
sober can scarce look on in a fitter posture, then with a compassionate smile.
All which were yet somen hat more tolerable if that imagined vanishing
pleasure were not the whole of their gain: or if it were to be hoped that so
great a present real pain and smart, should be recompensed with as real a^
consequent fruit and advantage. But we know, that general^y, by how much any
thing is more disputable, the less it is necessary or conducible to the
Christian life. God has graciously provided, that what we are to live by
should not cost us so dear. And possibly as there is less occasion of
disputing about the more momentous things of Religion, so there may be somewhat
more of modesty, and awe in reference to what is so confessedly venerable and
sacred (though too ma^y are over-bold even here also) then so foolishly to
trifle with such things. Therefore more commonly, where that humor prevails,
men divert from th^se plainer things, with some slighter and superficial
reverence to them, but more heartily, esteeming them insipid and jejune,
because they have less in them to grati^ie that appetite; And betake themselves
to such things about which they may more plausibly contend; and then what
pitiful trifles oftentimes take up their time and thoughts. Questions and
Problems of like weighty importance (very often) with those which, the
abovenamed Author tells us, Sen de Brev. vit.
this disease among the Greeks prompted them to trouble themselves about, as
what number of Rowers Ulisses had? Which was written first the Iliad or the
Odysses? etc. So that (as he says) they spent their lives very operously doing
nothing. Their conceits being such that if they kept them to themselves, they
could yield them no fruit: and if they published them to others, they should
not seem thereby the more learned, but the more troublesome, (To this purpose
he truly speaks.) And is it not to be resented that men should ^ell away the
solid strength and vitals joy which a serious Soul would find in substantial
Religion for such toys! Yea and not only famish themselves but trouble the
world, and imbroil the Church with their impertinencies! If a man be drawn
forth to defend an important truth against an injurious assault, it were
treacherous self-love to purchase his own peace by declining it. Or if he did
sometimes turn his thoughts to some of our petite questions, that with many
are so hotly agitated, for recreation sake, or to try his wit, and exercise his
reas^n without stirring his passions, to the disturbance of others or himself;
here an innocent divertisement, and the best purpose that things of that nature
are capable of serving. But when contention becomes a man's element, and he
cannot live out of that fire, strains his wit, and racks his invention to find
matter of quarrel; is resolved, nothing said or done by others shall please
him, only because he means to please him in dissenti^g. Disputes only that he
may dispute, and loves dissension for it self. This is the unnatural humor
that has so unspeakably troubled the Church, and despised Religion, and filled
men's Souls with wind and vanity. Yea with fire and fury. This has made
Christians gladiaters, and the Christian World a clamorous Theater, while men
have equally affected to contend: and to make ostentation of their ability so
to do.

And surely as it is highly pleasurable to re^^re ones self, so it is
charitable to call aside others out of this noise and throng, to consider
silently and feed upon the known and agreed things of our Religion; which
immediately lead to both the duties and delights of it.

Among which there are none more evident and undoubted, none less entangled
with controversy, none more profitable and pleasant then the future
blessedness of the righteous which this discourse Treats of. The last end is a
matter to little disputable, that it is commonly thought (which is elsewhere
more distinctly spoken to) not to be the object of election, and so not of
deliberation consequently, but of simple intention only, because men are
supposed to be generally agreed as touching that. And the knowledge and
intention of it is apparently the very soul of Religion; animates, direct,
enlivens, and sweetens the whole thereof. Without which Religion were the
vainest irrational and most unsavory thing in the World.

And because the more clearly this our last end is understood, the more
powerfully and sweetly it attracts and moves the Soul, this Treatise endeavors
to give as plain and positive a state and nation of it as the Text insisted on,
compared with other Scriptures would afford to so weak an eye.

And because men are so apt to abuse themselves with the vain and
self-contradicting hopes of attaining this end without ever having their
spirits framed to it, or walking in the way that leads thereto, as if they
could come to Heaven by chance, or without any design or care of theirs. The
proportion is endeavored to be shown between that Divine likeness in the
vision and participation whereof this Blessedness consists, and the
Righteousness that disposes and leads to it. Which may it be monitory to the
ungodly and profane, who hate and scorn the likeness of God wherever they
hehold it. And let me tell such from (better-instructed) Pagans,

That Nihil est Deo similius aut gratius quam vir animo perfect bonus, etc.
Apul. de Deo So^^atis.
there is nothing more like or more acceptable to God, then a man that is in
the temper of his Soul truly good who excells other men, as he is himself
excelled (pardon his Hyperbole) by the immortal God.

That Inter bonos viros ac. Deum, amicitia est conciliante virtute, amicitiam
dico? etiam necessitud^, and similitud^, etc. Sca de prove.
between God and good men, there is a friendship, by means of virtue; a
friendship? yea a kindred, a likeness, inasmuch truly as the good man differs
from God but in time ( here sprinkle a grain or two) being his Disciple,
Imitatour, and very offspring.

That (...) -- Plato in Min^e.
God is full of indignation against such as reproach one that is alike to him,
or that praise one that is contrarily affected ( or unlike) bu^ such is the
good man ( i. e. he is one like) God, A good man (as it shortly after follows)
is the holiest thing in the World, and a wicked man the most polluted thing.

And let me warn such haters of holiness, and holy men in the words of this
Auth^urs immediately subjoyned. (...).
And this I say for this cause, that thou being but a man the son of a man, no
more offend in speaking aginst an Hero; One who is a Son of God.

Me thinks men should be ashamed to pro^esse the belief of a life to come,
while they cannot behold without indignation, nor mention but with derision,
that holiness without which it can never be attained, and which is indeed the
seed and principle of the thing it self.

But such are not likely much to trouble themselves with this discourse.
There Is little in it indeed of Art, or Ornament to invite or gratify such as
the Subject it self invites not. And nothing at all but what was apprehended
might be some way useful. The affectation of garnishing a margent with the
names of Authors, I have ever thought a vain pedantry yet have not declined
the occasional use of a few that occurred. He that writes to the World must
reckon himself debtor to the wise and unwise. If what is done shall be found
with any to have promoted its proper end. His praises to God shall follow it
(as his prayers do that it may) who professes himself.

A Well willer to the Souls of men. J. H.

Christian Reader.
YOu whose hearts are set on Heaven, who are daily laying up a treasure there,
here is a welcome messenger, to tell you more th^n perhaps you have well
considered, of the nature of your future Blessedness, and to illustrate ^he Map
of the Land of promise, and to bring you another cluster of its grapes: Here is
a useful help to make you know that Holiness does perticipate of Glory, and
that Heaven is at least Virtually in ^he Seed of Grace: Though this life be
properly called a life of Faith, as contradistinct from the ^^ntuition and
fruition hereafter, as well as from the lower life of sense; yet is it a great
truth, and not sufficiently considered and improved, that we have here more
than Faith, to acquaint us with the Blessedness expected: Between Faith and
Glory, there is the Spirit of Holiness, the love of God, the heavenly desires,
which are kindled by Faith and are th^se branches on which the happy flower and
fruit must grow: They are the name and mark of God upon us: They are our
Earnest, our Pledge, and the first fruits; And is not this more than a word of
pr^mise only? Therefore though all Christians must lively Faith, marvel not
that I tell you, that you may, you must have more than Faith. Is not a Pledge,
and Earnest, a first Fruits more? Therefore have Christians, not only a Spirit
to evidence their Title, but also some foretast ^f Heaven it self: for Faith in
Christ is to recover us to God and so much as we have of God, so much of
fruition And so much as Faith has kindled in you of ^ love of God, so much
foretaste you have of He^ven: for you are deceived if you think that any ^
Notion speaks more to you of Heaven and of y^^ Ultimate end, than THE LOVE OF
GOD And though no unsound ill-grounded Faith, ^^serve to cause this sacred
Love, yet when it caused, it over-tops this cause, and he that pe^ceiveth the
operations of a strong effectual Lov^ has an acquaintance with God and Heaven
whi^^ is above that of believing: Faith sees the Fea^^ but Love is the tasting
of it. And therefore it that the Holiest souls sticks closest unto God, because
(though their re^soning faculty may be d^fective) they know him by the highest
and m^ Tenacious kind of knowledge, which this Wor^ ^ff^rdeth, (as I have
lately showed elsewhere; ^ Here you have described to you, the true witness the
spirit; Not that of supposed Internal Voice^ which they are usually, most taken
up with, wh^ have the smallest knowledge, and Faith, and Love and the greatest
self esteem or spiritual pride, with the strongest fantasies and p^ssi^ns, But
the objective and the sealing Testimony, the Divine Nature, the renewed Image
of God, whose Children are known by being like to their Heavenly Father, even
by being Holy as he is Holy. This is the Spirit of Adoption, by which we are
inclined, by Holy Love to God, and confidence in him, to cry Abba Father, and
to fly unto him: The Spirit of Sanctification is thereby in us the Spirit of
Adoption: For both signify but the giving us that Love to God, which is the
filial nature, and our ^athers Image.

And this Treatise does happily direct thee, to ^^at faithful beholding God in
Righteousness, which ^ust here begin this blessed Assimilation, which full
^tuition will for ever perfect.

It is a happy sign that God is about to repair our ^ins and divisions, when he
stirs up his ser^ants to speak so much of Heaven, and to call ^ the minds of
impatient complainers, and con^tious censurers, and ignorant self conceited
di^ders, and of worldly, unskilful, and unmerciful ^stors, to look to that
state where all the godly shall one; and to turn those thoughts to the
furtherance Holiness, to provoke one another to Love and to ^od works, which
two many lay out upon their hay ^^d stubble, And to call men from judging and
^spising each other (and worse then both those) out their Meats, and Drinks,
and Days, to study ^^ghteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. ^r he
that in these things serves Christ (in which ^ Kingdom does consist) is
acceptable to God, and proved of men (that are wise and good.) Let us ^^erefore
follow after the things which make for ^ace, and things wherewith one may
edify ano^^er; whilst the contentious for meat will destroy ^e work of God.
Romans 14. 17, 18, 19, 20. The ^ion between Peace and Holiness is so strict that
he ^o truly promoteth one, promoteth both. Heb. 12. ^4. Jam. 3. 17. The true
way of our Union is ex^lently described, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, ^6.

If any plain unlearned Readers, shall blame the ^curateness of the style, they
must remember that those persons have not the least need to hear of He^ven, and
to be drawn up from the vanities of ear^^ who cannot digest a looser style.

As God has endued the worthy Author with more th^n ordinary measure of
judiciousness, (...) soundness and accurateness of understanding, (...)
seriousness, spirituality, and a heavenly mind; we have for our common benefit,
the effects of these happy qualifications, in this judicious, he^venly
discourse. And if my recommendations m^ in any measure, further your
acceptance, in provement and practicing of so edifying a Treat^^ it will answer
the ends of him who waits with (...) in hope for the same Salvation.

Rich. Baxter.
Acton May 30. 1668*
THE BLESSEDNESS OF THE RIGHTEOUS.
A Proemial Discourse to the intended Subject.
THe continual mixture of Good, and Evil, in this present state of things; with
its uncertain fluctuations, and subjection to perpetual changes; do naturally
prompt a considering mind to the belief and hope of another; that may be both
more perfect, and more permanent. For certainly it could never be a design
adequate (or any way agreeable) to the Divine Wisdom and goodness, that the
blessed God should raise such a thing, as this lower Creation out of nothing;
Only to give himself the temporary pleasure of beholding (the alternate Joys
and Sorrows of the best part thereof) his reasonable creature seated in it. Nor
a delight at all proportionable to an eternal happy being; when he has
connaturalliz'd such a creature to this sensible world; only to take notice
how variously the passions he has planted in him may be moved and stirred by
this variety of occasions, which he shall thence be presented with. And what
sudden, and contrary impressions may be made upon his easy passive senses, by
the interchanged strokes and touches of contrary objects. How quickly he can
raise him into a transport of high contentment, and pleasure; and then how soon
he can again reduce him to a very Paroxism of anguish and despair. It would
discover us to have very vile and low thoughts of God, if we did not judge it
altogether unanswerable to his perfections, to design no further thing in
creating this world, and placing such a creature as man in it; then only to
please himself for a while with such a spectacle, and then at last clear the
Stage, and shut up all again, in an eternal Silent darkness. If we could
suppose a man furnished with such power, he would surely add little to the
reputation of his being wise, or good beyond other men, by a design so to use
it.

Much less, can we think it worthy of God to perpetuate such a state of things
as this; and continue a succession of such persons and actions, as we now
behold in the world, through eternal generations; only to perpetuate to
himself the same pleasure, in the exercise of his immense power, upon created
natures; over which he has so infinite advantage.

And indeed nothing can be more unconceivable, then that the great Creator and
Author of all things, should frame a Creature of so vast comprehension, as the
Spirit of man, put into it a capacity of knowing, and conversing with himself;
give it some prospect of his own glory and blessedness, raise thereby in many,
boundless unsatisfied desires after him, and an unexpressible pleasure in the
preconceived hope of being received into the communion of that glory and
blessedness; and yet defeat and blast so great an expectation by the
unsuspected reducement of the very subject of it again to nothing. Yea, and
that he should deal herein (as in that case he must) the most hardly with the
best; And that such souls, whose mere love and devotedness to him, had made
them abandon the pleasures of this life, and run thorough whatsoever
difficulties for his sake, should fare worse then the very worst, were, (...),
etc. Dyonys. Halicar. Antiq. Romans lib. 8.
beyond all the rest, most utterly unimaginable; and a thought which
Pagan-reason has not known how to digest or entertain. If (says one, and he
speaks the sense of many another, as well as his own) with the dissolution of
our bodies, the essence of the Souls, whatsoever that be, should be dissolved
too, and for ever cease to be any thing; I know not how I can account them
blessed, that never having enjoyed any good, as the reward of their virtue,
have even perished for virtue its self.

Wherefore it is consequent that this present state is only intended for trial
to the spirits of men, in order to their attainment of a better state in a
better world. That is, that inasmuch, as the infinitely wise and blessed God,
had given being to such a creature, as man, in which both words (the material,
and the immaterial) did meet; And who, in respect of his Earthly, and Spiritual
natures, had in him somewhat suitable to each. And whereas this Creature had
lost (with his interest) his very inclination to the Spiritual Objects, and
enjoyments of the purer immaterial world (wherein alone his true blessedness
could consist) suffered a vile depression of his Spirit unto this gross
corporal world; and hereby brought himself under a necessity of being
miserable; his nobler part having nothing now to satisfy it, but what it was
become unsuitable and disaffected to.

His merciful Creator, being intent upon his restitution, thought fit not to
bring it about by a sudden and violent hand (as it were to catch him into
Heaven against his will:) But to raise his Spirit into its just Dominion and
Sovereignty in him, by such gradual Methods, as were most suitable to a
rational, and intelligent nature. That is, to discover to him, that he had such
a thing as Spirit about him; whence it was fallen, how low it was sunk, to what
state it was yet capable to be raised; and what he had designed, and done for
its happy recovery. And hence by the secret and powerful insinuations of his
own Light and Grace to awaken his drowsy slumbering reason, and incline his
perverse, and wayward will, to the consideration and choice of such things, as
that felicity consists in; which that better world can afford, and his better
part enjoy.

And while he propounds such things to him, how reasonable and agreeable was
it, that he should keep him sometime under a just probation (yea, how much was
there in it, of a gracious and compassionate indulgence, often to renew the
trial? whether he would yet bestir himself; and (having so great hopes before
him, and such helps and aids afforded him, and ready to be afforded) apply, at
last, his intellectual, and elective powers, to mind and close with so gracious
overtures, in order to his own eternal advancement and blessedness.

Nor was it an unreasonable expectation, that he should do so. For, however the
temporal good, and evil that may constantly affect his sensitive part and
powers, be present and near; but the eternal misery, or blessedness of his Soul
future, and remote: Yet inasmuch as he is capable of understanding, the vast
disproportions of time and eternity; of a mortal flesh, and an immortal Spirit:
How preposterous a course were it, and unworthy of a man; Yea, how
dishonorable and reproachful to his Maker; should he prefer the momentary
pleasures of narrow incapatious sense, to the everlasting enjoyments of an
enlarged comprehensive Spirit? Or, for the avoiding the pains and miseries of
the former kind, incur those of the latter?

Whence also, the holy God does not expect and require, only that men should
make that wiser choice; But does most justly lay the weight of their eternal
states upon their doing, or not doing so. And in that day when he shall render
to every one according to their works; Romans 2, 6, 7, 8, 9.
make this the Rule of his final judgment. To allot to them, who by a patient
continuance in well doing, seek for honor, glory, and immortality, eternal
life. To the rest, indignation and wrath, tribulation, and anguish, etc. and
that whether they be Jews, or Gentiles.

Nor is it a new thing in the world, that some among the children of men,
should in this comply with the righteous will of God, and so judge, and choose
for themselves, as he is pleased to direct and prescribe. It Is a course
approved by the concurrent suffrage of all them, in all times and ages, into
whose minds the true light has shined, and whom God has inspired with that
wisdom, whereby he makes wise to salvation.

That numerous Assembly of the perfected Spirits of the just, have agreed in
this common resolution. And did in their several generations ere they had past
this state of trial, with an Heroique magnanimity trample this present World
under their feet, and and aspire to the glory of the world to come. Relieving
themselves against all the grievances they have fuffered from such, whose
portion is in this life, with the alone hope and confidence of what they were
to enjoy in another.

And hereof we have an eminent and illustrious instance in this Context, were
the ground is laid of the following Discourse.

THE BLESSEDNESS OF THE RIGHTEOUS.
Psalm. 17. 15. As for me, I will behold thy Face in Righteousness: I shall be
satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness.
CHAP. I.
A reflection upon some foregoing verses of the Psalm, by way of Introduction
to the Text. A consideration of its somewhat various readings, and of its
literal importance. A discussion of its real importance, so far as is necessary
to the settling the subject of the following discourse.

THe Title speaks the Psalm a Prayer of David. The matter of the Prayer is
preservation from his enemies. Not to go over the whole Psalm, we have ^n the
13. and 14. verses, the sum of his de^ires, with a description of the Person he
prays to be delivered from; in which Description every Character is an
Argument to enforce his prayer.

From the Wicked] q. d. They are equally enemies to thee and me: not more
opposite to me by their cruelty, then by their wickedness they are to thee.
Vindicate, then at once, thy self and deliver me.

Thy sword thy hand] Thou can as easily command and manage them, as a man may
weild his sword, or move his hand. Will thou suffer thine own sword, thine own
hand, to destroy thine own Servant.

Men of the world, which have their portion in this life] Time, and this lower
World bound all their hopes, and fears. They have no serious believing
apprehensions of any thing beyond this present life: therefore have nothing to
withhold them, from the most injurious violence, if thou withhold them not (
Men that believe not another world, are the ready Actors of any imaginable
mischiefs, and Tragoedies in this.)

Whose belly thou fillest] i. e. Their sensual appetite. As oftentimes that
term is used Romans 16 18.
With thy hid Treasures, Phil. 3. 19.
viz. the riches, which either God is wont to hide in the bowels of the earth,
or lock up in the repository of Providence, dispensing them at his own pleasure.

They are full of Children] So it appears by that which follows, it ought to
be read, and not according to that gross (...)
(but easy) mistake of some Transcribers of the Seventy.

As if in all this he had pleaded thus; Lord thou have abundantly indulged
those men already, what need they more? They have themselves, from thy
unregarded bounty, their own vast swollen desires sufficiently filled, enough for
their own time; and when they can live no longer in their Persons, they may in
their Posterity, and leave not Strangers, but their numerous Offspring, their
heirs. Is it not enough, that their avarice be gratified, except their malice
be also? That they have whatsoever they can conceive desirable for themselves,
unless they may also infer what ever they can think mischievous on me?

To this description of his enemies, he ex opposito, subjoyns some account of
himself, in this his closure of the Psalm: As for me] Here he is at his
statique point, and, after some appearing discomposure, his spirit returns to a
consistency, in consideration of his own more happy state, which he opposes and
prefers to theirs in the following respects.

That they were wicked, he righteous. I will behold thy face in
righteousness.] That their happiness was worldly, terrene, such only as did
spring from the earth; his heavenly and divine, such as should result from the
Face and Image of God. Theirs present, temporary, compast within this life;
His, future, everlasting, to be enjoyed, when he should awake. Theirs partial,
defective, such as would but gratify their beastial part, fill their bellies;
His adequate, complete (the (...)) Such as should satisfy the Man: I shall be
satisfied, etc.

The variety in rendering this Verse (to be seen, (...)
by comparing, the Original and Translations noted in the Margent, need not
give us any trouble, the differences not being of great moment, nor our own
reading liable to exception. The word (...), about which is the greatest
diversity, Sept. (...).
has the significancy we here give it, in the second Commandment, and
constantly elsewhere. And then, what more proper english can this text be
capable of, than it has in our Bibles? Each word has its true and genuine
import; The v^lgar Latin, E^oautem (...) appa^c^o ^o^spectui (...), satiabo^
(...) ^^p^^u^ri^ glo^ia tua. Exactly following the Seventy, as does the
Ethiopique. the Chaldee Paraphrase disagrees little, the Arabique less, the
Sy^i^ck mistook it seem^ (...) for (...) and so read that word says which we
read likeness.
and the Syntax is sufficiently regular, and grammatical of the whole.

Only as to the former, that usual and obvious observation must here have
place; tha^ the (...) prefixed to (...), and which, with it, w^ read, [in
righteousnesse] does often signify among its various acceptations) by or
through and that, not only as denoting instrumentality; but more at large, the
place of any medium necessary to the attainment of the end, it subserves to,
whence the same use of the Grek (...), that answers thereunto, is wont to go
for an Hebraism.

And as to the latter, the only thing liable to controversy is; whether the
Gerund (...) is to be construed with the Person speaking [when I awake] or [in
my awaking] or with the thing; the likeness or image spoken of [in the awaking
of thine image] or [when thine image shall awake] and I conceive, Hieronymus
(juxta Hebr.) reads the words exactly as we do. Ego in justi^ia vi^^bo faci^m
tuam, implebor, cum evigilavero, similitudine tua.
we need not discuss it; but following our own Translation, leave the
judgment of it to the ear it self, which (as Elihu tell us) tries words.

In the mean time, the real importance of this Scripture, more calls for
discussion than the literal; concerning which a threefold enquiry will be
necessary, for the settling the subject of the following discourse: 1. What
relation this [righteousnesse] must be understood to have to the Vision of Gods
face, and the other consequent blessedness. 2. What time or state [awaking]
refers to. 3. What is intended by the [likenesse of God.]


To the first, (...)
It is only necessary to say at present: Seems best to be rendered here [by or
through righteousness,] as by the condition in which he may expect the return
of Gods mercies here, or the eternal vision of him hereafter, etc. So the
learned Dr. Hammond, Annot. in loc. quoting also Castellio. to the same purpose.
that the already noted import of the preposition [in] being supposed most
suitable to this text (as apparently it is) Righteousness must be looked upon in
reference to this vision, not as in an idle, or merely casual concomitancy;
or as an unconcerned circumstance, that has nothing to do with the business
spoken of; but as in a close and intimate connection therewith; being 1.
Antecedent. 2. Conducible. 3. Necessary thereto. Nor can I better express its
place, and reference to it, generally and in one word, than in saying it
qualifies for it, which how it does will be more proper to consider hereafter.
It may now suffice to say those words give us the qualified subject of this
blessedness [I in righteousness.] A righteous person as such.

2. To the Second: Taking it for granted th^^ none will understand this awaking
as opposed to natural sleep in the tralatitious or tropica^ sense; it must be
understood to intend either some better state in this life in comparison
whereof the Psalmist reckons his present state but as a sleep; or the future
state of blessededness in the other life. There have been some, who have
understood it of the former, and thought the Psalmist to speak only of an
hoped freedom from his present temporal afflictions, but then, that which will
be implied seems not so specious; that trouble and affliction, should be
signified by the (necessarily) presupposed sleep, which sure does more resemble
rest than trouble.

I conceive it less exceptionable to refer [awaking] to the blessed state of
Saints after this life* For;

That Saints, at that time when this was writ, had the knowledge of such a
state (indeed a Saint not believing a life to come, is a perfect contradiction)
no doubt can be made by any that has ever so little read and compared the Old
and New Testament. Heb. 11.
We are plainly told that those excellent Persons mentioned in that famous roll
*, ver. 1.
lived by that faith, which was the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen. 9.
That of them Abraham, 13.
Isaac, 14.
and Jacob, while they lived in Canaan, yet sought a better, 15.
an heavenly Country; Confessing themselves pilgrims and strangers on earth: 16.
We know it was the more general belief of the Jews in our Saviors time. And
whence should they have it, but from the Old Testament? Thither our Savior
remits them to search it out, John 5. 39.
and the way to it. The Apostle Saint Paul gives it as the common faith of the
twelve Tribes; Act. 16. and 6. 7. compared with the 8.
grounded upon the promise made to their forefathers: and thence prudentially
he herein states the Cause, wherein he was now engaged; supposing it would be
generally resented, that he should be called in question, for avowing (only)
so known, and received a truth. Sure, they were beholding to these sacred
Writings they had then among them, for so common a belief: and since it is out
of question, from our Saviors express words, they do contain the ground of
that belief; what cause have we to be so shy of so interpreting Scriptures,
that have a fair aspect that way?

Is it, that we can devise to fasten here and there another sense upon diverse
such? I wonder, what one text can be mentioned in all the Old Testament to this
purpose, wherein one may not do so: and what then would be the tendency of this
course, but to deny in all the particulars: what, upon so clear evidence, we
are, in the general, forced to admit? and to put Moses, and Abraham, and David
in a lower class, then Pythagoras, and Socrates, and Plato.

And I think, it would not be easy to find one text in all that part of the
Bible; where both the words thereof, and the context, do more fairly comply
than in this, so as not only to admit, but even to invite that interpretation.

For the term [awake] about which the present enquiry is, how apt and obvious
i^ the analogy between our awaking out of natural sleep, and the holy souls
emerging out of the darkness and torpor of its present state, into the
invigorating light of Gods presence. It is truly said so to awake, at its
first quitting these darksom regions, when it lays aside its cumbersom
night-vail. It does so more perfectly in the joyful morning of the Resurrection
day, when mortality is swallowed up in life, and all the yet-hovering shaddows
of it are vanished and fled away. And how known and usual an application this
is of the metaphorical terms of sleeping and awaking in holy Writ, I need not
tell them, who have read the Bible. Nor does this interpretation less ^itly
accord to the other contents of this verse. For to what state do the sight of
Gods Face, and satisfaction with his likeness, so fully agree, as to that of
future blessedness in the other world.

But then the contexture of discourse, in this and the foregoing verse
together, seems plainly to determine us to this sense. For what can be more
conspicuous in them, then a purposed comparison and opposition of two States of
Felicity mutually each to other? That of the wicked, whom he calls Men of time
(as the words are rendered by (...)
one, and do literally signify) and whose portion, he tells us, is in this
Life; and the righteous man's, his own; (...) Pagnin.
which he expected not to be, till he should awake, i. e. not till after this
life.

Thirdly, it is further to be enquired, how we his glory. And the only
difficulty which it will be necessary, at present, to consider, about it, is;
whether we are to take it objectively or subjectively, for the glory to be
represented to the blessed soul; or the glory to be impressed upon it; the glory
which it is to behold, or the glory it shall bear. And I conceive the
difference is more easily capable of accommodation then of a strict decision on
either part.

By [Face] is undoubtedly meant objective glory, and that in its most perfect
representation (the face being, as we know with men, the chief seat of a
spectable Majesty and Beauty.) Hence when Moses desires to see Gods glory;
though he did vouchsafe some discovery of it, yet he tells him his face cannot
be seen. Hereupon, therefore, the next expression [thy likeness] might the more
plausibly be restrained to subjective glory; So as to denote the Image of God
now in its most perfect impression on the blessed souls.

But that I insist not on; Supposing therefore, that what is signified by
[Face] be repeated over again in this word [likeness] yet I conceive the
expression is not varied in vain, but having more to say than only that he
expected a state of future Vision, viz. that he assured himself of satisfaction
too, another word was thought fit to be used that might signify also somewhat
that must intervene in order to that satisfaction. It Is certain the mere
objective representation and consequent intuition of the most excellent, (even
the Divine) glory, cannot satisfy a soul remaining disaffected and unsuitable
thereunto. It can only satisfy, as being represented, it forms the soul into
the same image, and attempers it to it self. q. d. I expect hereafter to see
the blessed Face of God, and to be my self blessed or satisfied by his glory,
at once appearing to me and transfusing it self upon me. In short therefore, I
understand by that term, the glory of God as transforming, or, as impressive
of it self. If therefore, Glory the Object of the soul^ Vision, shall by any be
thought to be intended in it, I contend not; Supposing only, that the Object be
taken not materially, or potentially only, for the thing visible in it self
considered* but formally, and in esse actu^ti objecti: that is, as now actually
impressing it self, or as connoting such an impression upon the beholding soul.
For so only is it productive of such a pleasure and satisfaction to it, as must
ensue. As in this form of speech [such a man takes pleasure in knowledge] it is
evident knowledge must be taken there both objectively, for the things known,
and subjectively, for the actual perception of those things; in as much as,
apparently, both must concur to work him delight. So it will appear, to any one
that attentively considers it, glory must be taken in that passage we rejoice
in hope of the glory of God. Rom 5. 2.
It Is Divine glory both revealed and received. His exhibition and communication
of it, according to his immensity, and our participation of it, according to
our measure that must concur to our eternal satisfaction. Herein the
Platonique adage Voluptatis generatio est ex infiniti and finiti copulatione.
has evident truth in it. Pleasure is here certainly made up of something
finite and something infinite, meeting together. It Is not (as the Philosopher
speaks) a (...) but a (...), not any thing separate from the soul, but
something it possesses that can make it happy. It Is not happy by an
incommunicate happiness, nor glorious by an incommunicate glory. Indeed the
discovery of such a glory to an inglorious unholy soul must rather torment than
satisfy. The future glory of Saints is therefore called a glory to be revealed
in them (or into them as the word signifies.) Romans 8. 18* (...)
And in the foregoing words, the Apostle assures Christ's fellow sufferers that
they shall be glorified together with him. Surely the notation of that word,
the formal notion of glorification cannot import so little as only, to be a
Spectator of Glory: it must signify a being made glorious.

Nor is the common and true Maxim otherwise intelligible, that grace and glory
differ only in degree For certainly, it could never enter into the mind of a
sober man (though how dangerously some speak that might possibly have been so
if too much learning had not made them mad, will be animadverted in its place)
that objective glory, and grace in Saints, were the same specifique (much less
the same numerical) thing.

It Is true that Scripture often expresses the future blessedness by vision of
God. But where that phrase is used to signify it alone, it is evident (as
within the lower region of grace, words of knowledge do often imply affection,
and correspondent impressions on the soul) it must be understood of affective
transformative Vision, such as has conformity to God most inseparably conjunct
with it. And, that we might understand so much, they are elsewhere, both
expressly mentioned together, as joynt-ingredients into a Saints blessedness; as
in those words so full of clear and rich sense. When he shall appear, we shall
be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

Which Text I take for a plain Comment upon this; and methinks it should not
easily be supposeable they should both speak so near the same words and not
intend the same sense: you have in both the same season When he shall appear,
when I shall awake, the same subject the righteous person born of God, (compare
the close of the former Chapter with the beginning of this) and I in
righteousness, The same Vision, We shall see him as he is, I shall behold his
face, The same Assimilation, We shall be like him, I shall be satisfied with
his likeness; (concerning the (...) or habitude this vision and assimilation
mutually have to one another, there will be consideration had in its place.)

I therefore conceive neither of these Notions of the Divine likeness, do
exclude the other; if it be enquired which is principally meant, That needs not
be determined; if the latter, it supposes the former; if the former, it infers
the latter. Without the first, the other cannot be, without this other, the
first cannot satisfy.

If any yet disagree to this Interpretation of this Text, let them affix the
Doctrine propounded from it to that other last mentioned (which only has not
the express mention of a consequent satisfaction as this has, whence
therefore, as being in this respect fuller, my thoughts were pitched upon this.)

Only withal let it be considered how much more easy it is, to imagine another
sense, and suppose it possible, than to disprove this, or evince it impossible.
How far probable it is, must be left to the judgment of the indifferent: With
whom, it may not be insignificant to add, that thus (mostly) it has been
understood by Interpreters, (I might adventure to say the generality) of all
sorts: however the few annexed Agitur de resurrectione and Manifestatione
gloriae coelestis* Ruffin. in loc. Cum apparuerit gloria tua. i. e. gloria
resurrectionis. Bed. Comment. in Psalm. How the Jews were wont to understand
it, may be seen at one view in that of Petrus Galatinus in loc. Duo mi Caprio,
me hic per priscas Judaeorum Scripturas ostendere ho^taris, and generalem
mortuorum resurrectionem futuram ess^ and came per Messiam factum iri, Primum
itaque pat^t no^ solu^ per sacrae scripturae testimo^ia verum etiam per
Talmudistarum dicta. N^m illud quidem Psalm. 17. dictum Ego (...) justitia --
etc. sic e^ponuat, and presertim Rabbi Abraham Aven Ez^a and Rabbi Solomo, etc.
And so he goes on to recite their words. De Arcanis Catholicae veritatis.

Opponit ^aec, iis quae de impiis dixerat. Illi Sapiunt terrena Saturantur
filiis, and portionem suam in hac vita ponunt, mihi vero contempta est haec
vita; ad futuram festino, ubi non in divitiis, sed i^ justitia videbo non
terren^ haec transitura, sed ipsam faciem tuam, nec saturabor in siliis carnis
sed cum evigilavero tua similitudine ^icut. 1 John 3 2. -- Cum apparuerit, etc.
I^th in Psalm.

-- Resurgam e mortuis -- videbot^ perfectissime sicut es Similis ^ro (...)
Jan. and Tremel. in Psalm. 17.

Mollerus thinks it ought not to be restrained to life Eternal, but says, some
understand it of the glory, qua ornabuntur pii in vita aeterna. And adds, --
and quidem non male. in loc.

-- Ego ver* and omnes electi tui -- pie and just vivimus in hoc soeculo, ut
aliq^ando ^n saturo saeculo videamus faciem tuam, and ea sattemur cum (...) a
pulvere terrae evigil^verimus and reformati fuetimus ad similitudinem Christi
tui. S^b. Munster. in notis in loc.

-- Cum ego ad imag^nem tuam conditus resurrexero. Vatablus ( though he adds,
alii ad resurrectionem non referunt.)

-- De futurae vitae soelicitate ait satiabor quum expergiscar. i. e. quum
resurgam e mortuis -- Similitudine tua hoc est videbo te perfectissime, sicuti
es and (...) ^ro tibi quum patefactus Christus glorioso adventu suo. 1 John 3
2. Fabrit. Conc. in Ps. 17. ult.

D^sc^^bit his verbis Psalmographus beatitudinem ^ternam filiorum Dei. Gesnerus
in loc.


(for I neither apprehend the necessity, nor have the present convenience of
alleging many) will suffice to avoid any imputation of singularity or novelty.

CHAP. II.
A summary proposal of the Doctrine contained in this Scripture. A distribution
of it into three distinct Heads of Discourse, viz. 1. The qualified subject. 2.
The Nature. 3. The season of the blessedness here spoken of. The first of these
taken into consideration, where the qualification righteousness is treated of.
About which is shown, 1. What it is. 2. How it qualifies.

NOW the foregoing sense of the words being supposed, It appears that the
proper Argument of this Scripture is, The blessedness of the righteous in the
other life, consisting in the vision, and participation of the Divine glory,
with the satisfaction that resulteth thence.

In which summary account of the Doctrine here contained. Three general Heads
of Discourse offer themselves to our view.

The Subject, Nature, Season,
of this Blessedness.

Or to whom it belongs, wherein it consists, and when it shall be enjoyed.

First then, we begin with the consideration A Righteous person as such. They
represent to us, the subject of this Blessedness in its proper qualification.
Wherein, our business is to consider his qualification, Righteousness, under
which Notion only he is concerned in the present Discourse. And about which two
things are to be enquired.

What it Imports, How it Qualifies.
First, What it imports. I take Righteousness particular, but of universal
righteousness: That is, not that particular virtue, which inclines men to give
every one their right (unless in that every one, you would include also the
blessed God himself, the Sovereign common Lord of all) but an universal
rectitude of heart and life, comprehending not only equity toward men, but
piety toward God also. A conformity to the Law in general, in its utmost
extent, adequately opposite to sin, 1 John 1. 9.
(which is indeed of larger extent than wickedness; and in what different
respects righteousness is commensurate to the one and the other, we shall see
by and by) as that is, generally, said to be (...), a Transgression of the Law.
1 John 3. 4.


Among Moralists, (...).
such a comprehensive Notion of righteousness as is inclusive of all other
virtues is not unknown. But in Scripture, it is, its much more ordinary
acceptance. To give instances, were to suppose too much ignorance in the
Reader, and to enumerate the passages in which this term is taken in that
extensive sense, were too great an unnecessary burden to the writer. It were
indeed to transcribe a great part of the Bible. How familiar is the opposition
of righteous and wicked, and righteous and sinner in sacred Language! And how
fully coextent righteousness is in the Scripture Notion of it to the whole Law
of God, that one passage sufficiently discovers, Where it is said of Zacharias
and Elizabeth that they were both righteous before God, Luke 1. 5, 6.
walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.

It Is true indeed, that when the words godliness or holiness are in conjunction
with this term, its significancy is divided and shared with them, so as that
they signify, in that case, conformity to the will of God in the duties of the
first Table, and this is confined to those of the second: Otherwise, being put
alone, it signifies the whole of man; as the other expressions also do in the
same case, especially the latter of them.

As it seems not to be within the present design of the Context to take notice
of any imputed wickedness, of the opposite sort of persons, other than what was
really in them, and whereby they might be fitly characterized: so I conceive,
imputed righteousness is not here meant that is inherent in the person of the
Mediator, but that which is truly subjected in a child of God, and descriptive
of him. Nor must any think it strange, that all the requisites to our Salvation
are not found together in one Text of Scripture. The righteousness of Him, whom
we are to adore as made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him, has a much higher sphere peculiar and appropriate to it self. This
of which we now speak, in its own inferior and subordinate place, is necessary
also to be, (both had and) understood.

It must be understood by viewing it in its Rule, in conformity whereto it
stands; which must needs be some Law of God. There has been a twofold Law
given by God to mankind, as the measure of a universal Righteousness, the one
made for innocent, the other for lapsed man, which are distinguished by the
Apostle under the names of the Law of works, Romans 3. ^^*
and the Law of faith. It can never be possible, that any of the Apostate Sons
of Adam, should be denominated Righteous by the former of these Laws, the
Righteousness thereof consisting in a perfect and sinless obedience.

The latter therefore is the only measure and rule of this Righteousness, viz.
The Law of Faith; or that part of the Gospel-revelation which contains and
discovers our duty, what we are to be and do in order to our Blessedness;
being, as to the matter of it, the whole Moral Law, before appertaining to the
Covenant of Works; attempered to the state of fallen sinners, by evangelical
mitigations and indulgency by the super-added precepts of repentance and faith
in a Mediator, with all the other duty respecting the Mediator, as such: and
clothed with a new form as it is now taken into the constitution of the
Covenant of grace*

This Rule, though it be in the whole of it capable of coming under one common
Notion, as being the standing obliging Law of Christ's mediatory Kingdom, yet
according to the different matter of it, its obligations and annexed sanctions
are different.

As to its matter; it must be understood to require

1. The mere being and sincerity of those gracious principles with their
essential Acts (as there is opportunity) expressed therein, in opposition to
the nullity and insincerity of them.

2. All the possible degrees and improvements of such principles and acts, in
opposition to any the least failure or defect. In the former respect, it
measures the very effence of this Righteousness, and enjons what concerns the
being of the righteous man as such: in the latter, it measures all the
super-added degrees of this righteousness, (which relations, where they have a
mutable foundation admit) injoyning what concern's the perfection of the
rightous man. In the former respect, righteousness is opposed to wickedness, as
in that of the Psalmist, Psalm 18. 2^. Ver. ^4.
I have kept the ways of the Lord and have not wickedly departed from my God
-- therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness. In the
latter to sin, with which the Apostle makes unrighteousness coextent, in these
words, If we say we have no sin re deceive our selves, etc. if we confess our
sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleans^ us from all
unrighteousness.

Accordingly are its sanctions diverse. For wherein it injoyns the former of
these, the essence of this righteousness, in opposition to a total absence
thereof; it is constitutive of the terms of salvation, and obliges under the
penalty of eternal death: So are faith, repentance, l^ve, John 8. 24. c. 3 18,
36.
subjection, etc. required, If ye believe not that I am he ye shall dye in your
sins. He that believes not is condemned already. -- The wrath of God al ideth
on him -- If ye repent not ye shall all likewise perish. Luke 13. 3, 5.
Repent that your sins may be blotted out. Act. 3 19. c. 5. 31
-- Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance and
remission of sins. 1 Cor. 16. ^^.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha. He
that loves Father or Mother more than me is not worthy of me, Mat. 10 37.
etc. Luke 14. ^6*
If any man come to me and hate (...) his Father and Mother, and Wife and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, (that is as
the former Scripture expounds this, loves them not less than me) he cannot be
my Disciple, (i. e. While he remains in that temper of mind he now is of, he
must needs be wholly unrelated unto me, and incapable of benefit by me, as well
as he is indocible, and not susceptible of my further instructions, neither
capable of the precepts or privileges belonging to Discipleship.) He is the
Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9.
and will come in flaming fire to take vengeance of those that know not God, 2
These. 1. 8, 9, etc.
and obey not his Gospel; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, etc. Where it is only the sincerity of those
several requisites, that is, under so severe penalty, exacted and called for;
in as much as he that is sincerely a Believer, (...) Penitent, a lover of God
or Christ, an obedient Subject, is not capable of the contrary denomination,
and therefore not liable, according to the tenor of this Law, to be punished
as an Infidel, an impenitent person, an enemy, a rebel.

When it enjoins the latter, viz. All the subsequent duty through the whole
course, whereof the already sincere soul must be tending toward perfection;
though it bind not thereto under pain of damnation further then as such
neglects and miscarriages, may be so gross and continued, as not to consist
with sincerity: Yet such injunctions are not wholly without penalty, but here
it oblidges, under less penalties, the hiding of Gods face, and other paternal
severities, and castigations. They that thus only offend, are chastened of the
Lord, ^ Cor. 11.
that they may not be condemned with the world. Psalm 89.
Their iniquity is visited with the Rod, and their transgression with stripes,
though loving-kindnesse be not taken away -- Yea, and while they are short of
perfect holiness, their blessedness is imperfect also; which is to be
acknowledged a very grievous penalty, but unconceiveably short of what befalls
them that are simply unrighteous. That it obliges thus diversely is evident; for
it does not adjudge unto eternal death for the least defect; for then what
other Law should relieve against the sentence of this? or wherein were this a
relieving Law? Yet does it require perfection, that we ^erfect holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
that we be perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect. Mat. 5.
And otherwise, did it bind to no other duty than what it makes simply
necessary to Salvation, the defects, and miscarriages that consist with
sincerity, were no sins not being provided against by any Law that is of
present obligation. For ^o suppose the Law of works in its own proper form, and
tenor to be still obliging, is to suppose all under hopeless condemnation; in
as much as all have sinned. And besides, it should oblige to cast off all
regard to Christ and to seek blessedness without him, yea, and it should oblige
to a natural impossibility, to a contradiction: to make that not to have been
which has been: a sinner to seek happiness by never having sinned. Yet though
it cannot ^n its own form be man's rule of Duty, it is nevertheless Gods rule of
Judgment upon all whom the Law of faith relieves not, as not coming up to the
terms of it (whom also this super-vening Law brings under a super-vening
aggravated condemnation) For where the obligation to obedience is violated, the
obligation to punishment, naturally takes place.

The rule of this Righteousness therefore being evidently the Law of Faith, the
Gospel-revelation, wherein it is preceptive of duty* This Righteousness can be
understood to be nothing but the impresse of the Gospel upon a man's heart and
life. A conformity in Spirit and Practice to the revelation of the Will of God
in Jesus Christ, a collection of graces exerting themselves in suitable actions
and deportments toward God and man. Christ formed in the soul, or put on; the
new creature in its being and operations, the truth learned as it is in Jesus,
to the putting off the old man and the putting on the new.

More distinctly, we may yet see wherein it lies, upon a premised view of some
few things necessary to be foreknown in order thereunto. As

That this righteousness is a renewing righteousness, or the righteousness of
one formerly a sinner, a lapsed perishing wretch, who is by it, restored into
such a state toward God, as he was in before that lapse (in respect of certain
great essentials, though as yet his state be not so perfectly good while he is
in his tendency and motion; And shall, by certain additionals, be unspeakably
better, when he has attained the end and rest he is tending to.)

That a reasonable creature, yet untainted with sin, could not but have a
temper of mind ^uteable to such apprehensions as these, Viz. That as it was not
the Author of being to it self, so it ought not principally to study the
pleasing and serving of it self, but him, who gave it being: that it can no
more continue and perfect it self unto blessedness, than it could create it
self; and can therefore have no expectation hereof, but from the same Author of
its being: And hence that it must respect, and eye the great God, its Creator,
and Maker, as

The Sovereign Authority whom it was to fear, and obey. Sovereign Good whom it
was to love, and enjoy.
But because it can perform no duty, to him, without knowing what he will have
it do; nor have any particular expectation of savours from him, without knowing
what he will please to bestow: and is therefore obliged to attend to the
revelations of his Will concerning both these. It is therefore necessary, that
he eye him under a notion introductive, and subservient to all the operations,
that are to be exerted toward him, under the two former notions: i. e. as the
Eternal never failing Truth, safely to be depended on, as intending nothing of
deceit in any the revelations, whether of his righteous Will, concerning matter
of duty to be done, or of his good Will, concerning matter of benefit to be
expected and enjoyed.

That Man did apostatize and revolt from God, as considered under these
several notions: And returns to him, when an holy rectitude is recovered, and
he again becomes righteous, considered under the same.

That it was not agreeable to Gods wisdom, truth, and legal justice, to treat
with Man a Sinner, in order to his recovery, but through a Mediator: and that
therefore he was pleased in wonderful mercy, to constitute and appoint his own
Son Jesus Christ God-man, unto that Office and Undertaking; that, through him,
man might return and be reconciled to himself, whom he causlessely forsook;
designing that man shall now become so affected toward himself, through the
Mediator; and firstly therefore toward the Mediators own person, as he was
before, and ought to have been toward himself immediately.

Therefore, whereas God was considerable, in relation to Man, both in his
innocence and Apostasy, under that forementioned two fold notion of the supreme
Authority. Goodness.
He has also set up and exalted our Lord Jesus Christ, and represented him to
Sinners under an answerable two fold notion of a Prince Savior
i. e. a mediating Prince and Savior to give repentance first; to bow and
stoop the hearts of sinners, and reduce them to a subject posture again, and
then remission of sins to restore them to favor and save them from the wrath
to come. Him has the Father clothed with his own authority, and filled with
his grace: requiring sinners to submit themselves to his ruling power, and
commit themselves to his saving mercy; now both lodged in this his Son: to pay
him immediately, all homage and obedience, and through him ultimately to
himself; from him immediately, to expect Salvation and blessedness, and through
him ultimately from himself.

That whereas the Spirits of men are not to be wrought to this temper, but by
the intervention of a discovery and revelation of the divine Will to this
purpose: Our Lord Jesus Christ is further appointed by the Father to reveal all
this his counsel to Sinners. And is eminently spoken of in Scripture upon this
account, under the notion of the Truth, in which capacity he more effectually
recommends to Sinners, both his authority and his grace. So that his three fold
(so much celebrated) Office of King, Priest, Prophet,
(the distinct parts of his general Office as Mediator) which he manages in
order to the reducement of lost Sinners, exactly correspond (if you consider
the more eminent acts, and properties of each Office) to that threefold notion
under which the Spirit of Man must always have eyed and been acted toward
God, had he never fallen, and hence this righteousness, which consists in
conformity to the Gospel, is the former righteousness, which was l^st; with
such an accession as is necessary, upon consideration that it was lost, and was
only to be recovered by a Mediator.

Therefore you may now take this short, and as compendious an account as I can
give of it, in what follows.

It includes, so firm and understanding an assent to the truth of the whole
Gospel Revelation; as that the soul is thereby brought, through the power of
the Holy Ghost, sensibly to apprehend its former disobedience to God, and
distance from him, the reasonableness of subjection to him and desirableness of
blessedness in him; the necessity of a Redeemer to reconcile, and recover it to
God; the accomplishments and designation of the Lord Jesus Christ to that
purpose: And hence, a penitent and complacential return to God, as the supreme
Authority, and sovereign Good, an humble and joyful acceptance of our Lord
Jesus Christ as its Prince and Savior, with submission to his Author^y, and
reliance on his grace (the exercise of both which are founded in his blood)
looking and pitching upon him, as the only medium, through which he and his
duties can please God, or God and his mercies approach him: and through which
he has the confidence to venture upon a Covenant-acceptance of God, and
surrender himself to him, afterward pursued to his uttermost, by a continued
course of living in his fear and love, in obedience to him, and communion with
him through the Mediator, always, while he is passing the time of his
pilgrimage in this world, groaning under remaining sin, and pressing after
perfect holiness: with an earnest expectation (animating him to a persevering
patience through all difficulties) of a blessed eternity in the other world.

That such a conformity to the Gospel should be expressed by the name of
righteousness, cannot seem strange to such as acquaint themselves with the
language of the Scripture. That graoious frame which the Gospel (made
essential) impresses upon the soul, is the Kingdom of God, in the passive
notion of it, his Kingdom received and now actually come with power upon our
Spirits. And this Kingdom, (sometimes also by an apt Synecdoche called Judgment
in the same notion) is said to consist in righteousness; whence then result
also, Romans 14. 17.
Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. The same holy impressions, and consequent
operations are mentioned, by the Apostle, Phil. 1. 11.
under the name of fruits of righteousness, wherewith he prays his Philippians
might be filled. It was Elym^s's opposition to the Gospel, that stigmatized him
with that brand, Thou enemy of all righteousness. To yield our selves servants
to righteousness, in opposition to a former servitude to sin* is obeying from
the heart the Doctrine of the Gospel, into the type or mould whereof we have
been cast or delivered. And sure, both the seal and the impression, Gods
revelation and holiness (however now more explicit and distinctly conspicuous
in all their parts) are the same, with us, substantially, and in David's time;
whence we need make no difficulty to own this latter, when we meet with it, as
here, under the same Name.

By what has hitherto been said, it may be already seen in part, how exactly
this righteousness corresponds to the blessedness for which it qualifies;
whereof we shall have occasion hereafter to take further notice. In the mean
time, it will be requisite to show (which was promised to be done in the next
place.)

How it qualifies. To which I say (very briefly) that it qualifies for this
blessedness two ways.

1. L^gally, or in genere Morali, as it describes the Persons, who by the
Gospel-grant, have, Mat. 25.
alone, title thereunto. -- The righteous into life eternal. 1 Cor. 6.
-- The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Say to the righteous
it shall be well with them. Isa. 3.
The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him. Ezekiel. 18.
-- In his righteousness he shall live. In which last words, how this
righteousness conduces to life is expressed by the same Praeposition as in the
Text. In this kind it is not at all causal of this blessedness, but it is that
which the free, and wise, and holy Lawgiver thought meet, by his settled
constitution (besides what necessity there is of it upon another account) to
make requisite thereto. The conformity of our Lord Jesus Christ to that severer
Law, under which he is said to have been made, is that which alone causes,
merits, purchases this blessedness which yet is to be enjoyed, not by all
indiscriminatim, or without distinction; but by such alone, as come up to the
terms of the Gospel, as he did fully satisfy the strict exactions of that
other rigid Law, by doing and suffering for their sakes.

2. Naturally, or in genere Physico. In this kind it may be said to be some way
causal, that is, to be a causa materialis dispositiva, by a proper positive
influence, disposing the subject unto this blessedness, which that it shall,
yet, enjoy, is wholly to be resolved into the Divine good pleasure, but it is
put by this holy rectitude into that temper, and posture that it may enjoy it,
through the Lords gracious vouchsafement; when without it, 'twere naturally
impossible that any should. An unrighteous impure soul, is in a natural
indisposition to see God or be blessed in him. That depraved temper averts it
from him, the steady bent of its will is set another way, and it is a
contradiction that any ( in sensu composito) should be happy against their
wills, i. e. while that aversion of will yet remains. The unrighteous banish
themselves from God, they shun, and hate his presence. Light and darkness
cannot have communion. The Sun does but shine, continue to be it self, and the
darkness vanishes, and is fled away. When God has so determined that only the
pure in heart shall see him, that without holiness none shall; he lays no
other Law upon unholy souls than what their own impure natures lay upon
themselves. If therefore it should be enquired, Why may not the unrighteous be
subjects of this blessedness, See God, and be satisfied with his likeness, as
well as the righteous; the question must be so answered, as if it were
enquired, Why does wood admit the fire to pass upon it, suffer its flames to
insinuate themselves till they have introduced its proper form, and turned it
into their own likeness: but we see water does not so, but violently resists
its first approaches and declines all commerce with it? The natures of these
agree not. And is not the contrariety here as great? We have then the qualified
subject of this blessedness; and are next to consider This Blessedness it self.

CHAP. III.
The nature of this Blessedness propounded unto consideration, in the three
ingredients (here mentioned) whereof it consists. 1. Vision of Gods Face. 2.
Assimilation to him. 3. The satisfaction resulting thence. These propounded to
be considered 1. Absolutely and singly each by it self. 2. Relatively in their
mutual respects to each other. The first of these, Vision of Gods Face
discourst of. 1. The Object. 2. The Act.

the Nature of this Blessedness; or the inquiry wherein it lies, so far as the
Text gives us any account of it, we are invited to turn our thoughts and
discourse to it. And we have it here represented to us in all the particulars
that can be supposed to have any nearer interest in the business of
Blessedness, or to be more intimate and intrinsical thereunto.

For (the beatifique Object supposed) what more can be necessary to actual,
complete formal blessedness, than the sight of it, and adaptation or
assimilation to it (which is nothing else but its being actually communicated
and imparted to the soul, its being united and made as it were one with it) and
the complacential fruition the soul has of it so communicated, or having so
transformed it into its self?

And these three are manifestly contained in the Text (the beatisique Object
being involved with them) the first in the former clause, I shall behold thy
face, the second and third in the latter, I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness; where, being made like to God has been discovered to be supposed,
and the satisfaction, the pleasant contentful relishes consequent thereto,
plainly expressed.

We shall therefore have stated the entire nature of this Blessedness in the
handling of these three things.

Vision of the Face of God. Participation of his likeness. Satisfaction
therein.
And I shall choose to consider them 1. Absolutely, and singly, each by it self.
2. Relatively, in the mutual respects (by way of influence and dependence) they
may be found to have toward each other.


Therefore first, in the absolute consideration of them severally, we begin with

First the Vision of Gods Face, where

The Object, the Face of God, Act of seeing and beholding it are distinctly to
be spoken to.


1. The Face of God (the Object of this Vision) which is his glory represented,
offered to view. And this objected or exhibited glory i^ twofold.

1. Sensible, such as shall incurr and gratify (after the resurrection) the
bodily eye.

2. Intellectual, or intelligible: that spiritual glory that only comes under
the view and contemplation of the glorified mind.

1. A sensible glory, (to begin with what is lower) is fitly in our way to be
taken notice of; and may well be comprehended (as its lesse-principal
intendment) within the significancy of the expression the Face of God. So
indeed it does evidently signify, Exodus 33. 11. And if we look to the notation
of the word, and its frequent use as applied to God, it may commodiously enough
and will often be found to signify, in a larger and more extended sense, any
aspect or appearance of God: And though it may be understood verse 23. of that
Chapter to signify an overcoming spiritual glory, as the principal thing there
intended, such as no soul dwelling in flesh, could behold, without renting the
vail and breaking all to pieces; yet, even there also, may such a degree of
sensible glory be secondarily intended, as it was not consistent with a state
of mortality to be able to bear.

And supposing the other expression [Thy likeness] to signify, in any part,
the objective glory Saints are to behold, it is very capable of being extended
so far, as to take in a sensible appearance of glory also, which it does in
these words, The similitude of the Lord shall he behold (yet even that glory
also was transformative and impressive of it self: Numb. 12. 8. to Ezekiel 1. 28.
Moses so long converst with it, till he became incapable, for the present, Ex.
34 35. etc.
of converse with men, as you know the story relates.)

Such a glory as this, though it belong not to the being of God, yet it may be
some ^mbrage of him, a more shadowy representation, as a man's garments are of
the man, which is the allusion in that of the Psalmist, Thou art clothed with
Majesty and Honor, Ps. 1^4 1^.
Thou coverest thy self with [Light] as with a Garment.

And in as much as that spiritual Body ( the House not made with hands)
wherewith the blessed are to be clothed upon, must then be understood to have
its proper sensitive Powers and Organs, (...)
resined to that degree, as may be agreeable to a state of Glory; so must these
have their suitable objects to converse with. A faculty without an object is
not possible in Nature; and is altogether inconsistent with a state of
Blessedness. The bodies of Saints will be raised in glory -- fashioned like
Christ's glorious body; 1 Cor. ^
must bear the image of the heavenly; Phil 3^
and this will connaturalize them to a Region of glory, render a surrounding
sensible glory necessary, and natural to them, their own element: they will as
it were not be able to live but amidst such a glory. Place is conservative of
the body placed in it, by its suitableness thereto. Indeed every created being
(inasmuch as it is not self-sufficient, and is obliged to fetch in continual
refreshings from without) must always have somewhat suitable to it self to
converse with, or it presently languishes. By such an harmony of actives and
passives the world consists and and holds together. The least defect thereof,
then, is least of all supposeable in the state of blessedness.

The rays of such a glory have often shone down into this lower World. Such a
glory we know, showed it self upon Mount Sinal: afterward often about the
Tabernacle, and in the Temple, Such a glory appeared at our Saviors Birth,
Baptism, and Transfiguration; and will do at his expected appearance, which
leaves it no unimaginable thing to us; and shows how facile it is to God to
(do that which will then be, in some sort necessary) creat a glory meet for the
entertainment, and gratification of any such faculty, as he shall then continue
in being. But,

2. The intellectual glory, That which perfected Spirits shall eternally
please themselves to behold, calls for our more especial consideration. This is
the glory that excels hyperbollical glory (as that expression imports) such,
(...).
as in comparison whereof, the other is said to be no glory: 2 Cor 3 10.
as the Apostle speaks, comparing the glory of the Legal, with that of the
Evangelical dispensation, where the former was, we must remember, chiefly a
sensible glory, the glory that shone upon Mount Sinai, the latter a purely
spiritual glory; and surely if the mere preludes of this glory, The primordia,
the beginnings of it, The glory -- yet shining but through a glass (as he there
also speaks of this glory) were so hyperbollically glorious, what will it be in
its highest exaltation in its perfected state? The Apostle cannot speak of
that, but with hyperbole upon hyperbole in the next chapter, (...).
as though he would heap up words as high as heaven to reach it, 2 Cor. 4 17.
and give a just account of it.

Things are as their next Originals. This glory more immediately, rays forth
from God, and more nearly represents him. It Is ^is more genuine production. He
his styled ^he Father of Glory: Ephesians. 1.
every thing that is glorious is some way like him, and bears his ^mage. Heb. ^^
But he is as well the Father of Spirits, ^s the Father of Glory; and that
glory, which (...) purely spiritual, has most in it of his nature and image:
as beams but in the next ^escent from the body of the Sun. This is ^is unvailed
face, and emphatically, the divine ^^keness.

Again things are as the Faculties which ^hey are to exercise and satisfy,
this glory must exercise and satisfy, the noblest ^aculty of the most noble
and excellent crea^ure. Intellectual nature in the highest im^rovement it is
capable of in a creature must ^ere be gratified to the uttermost, the most
^nlarged contemplative power of an im^ortal Spirit finds that wherein it
terminates ^ere, with a most contentful acquiescence.

It Is true it must be understood not totally to exceed the capacity of a
creature, but it must fully come up to it. Should it quite transcend the Sphere
of created nature, and surpass the model of an humane understanding (as the
divine glory undoubtedly would, did not God consider us in the manner of
exhibiting it to our view) it would cofound not satisfy. A creature even in
glory is still a Creature, and must be treated as such. After the blessed God
has elevated it to the highest pitch, he must infinitely condescend, it cannot
otherwise know or converse with him. He must accommodate this glory to the
weaker eye, the fainter and more lang^id apprehensions of a poor finite thing.
I had almost said, nothing, for what is any creature, yea the whole creation in
it is best state compared with the I AM, the being (as he justly appropriates to
himself that name) the All in All. We must be careful then to settle in our own
thoughts such a state of this glory (in forming that indeterminate notion we
have now of it) as may render it (though confessedly above the measure of our
present understandings as to a distinct knowledge of it) not manifestly
incompetent to any created understanding whatsoever, and as may speak us duly
shy of ascribing a Deity to a worm, of affixing any thing to the creature,
which shall be found agreeing to the blessed God himself alone* Their
expressions therefore, who over magn^fie (even deifie) the creature assumed
into glory, must be heard and rea^ with caution and abhorrency, as the high
swelling words of blasphemous vanity. Is it not enough that perishing wretches,
Not being willing to tro^ble a discourse wholly of another nature and design,
with any thing of controversy: I have chos^n only to annex a marginall
digression, wherein, somewhat to animadvert upon the overbold disputes and
definitions of the Schol^stique generation, touching what we have now under
consideration. Some of whose. Writings seem the very Springs of the putid
conceits (there no^ wanting those, that are offiicious enough to serve the
illiterate, in accommodating things of that kind to their genius and language)
o greedily imbibed by modern Enthusiasts.

It Is a Question much agitated among the Schoolmen, whether the Divine Essence
be exhibited to the veiw of the Blessed in Heaven, in it self, immediately, or,
by the inter^ention of any (...) or similitude.

Had it been agreed to forbear looking within this vail (the (...) attempt
whereof, rather rents than draws it aside) and to shut up all discourse of this
kind, in a modest awful silence; or had the Adventures some have made been
fool^sh only, not (...), this present labor had been spared. But when M^n
speak of things ^^ove their reach, not to no purpose barely, but to very bad;
what they say ought to be considered. The Divine Essence, say the (...) (and
the Scotists here disagree not) is it self immediatedly united to the intellect
of the blessed [in rat^on^ Spec^^i intellig^bilis] so as there is no place for
any intervening likeness, or representation. Ipsa Dviaa Ess^ntia est, quae
videtur and q^o v^d^tur. Them. Sum. p^imd pa^^^, q 12. A^t. 2. 3 contr. Gentes
c 51. Now they assert concerning the Sp^cies intelligibiles, in general, that
they have not, Locum objects, intell^ctionem termi^a^tis (which they make the
place and office of the verbum mentis per intellectionem productum) but formae
(...) and actus primi, and that the understanding so act, by them, as fire by
it* proper form, Thom. Sum. primd part, q. 85. A^t. 2. (the contrary whereto
is asserted by Scotus in 1. Sentent. distinct. 3. q. 6.) Yea and Caj^t. affirms
1. ^p. q. 76. Art. 2. That the Intellect and the intelligible species are more
one than the matter and form in the compositum. For, says he, (or to that
purpose, not having him now at hand (the matter is not turned into the form nor
^e contra, but the intellect, which is in it self mere power, does, in genere
intelligibili turn into its very intelligible object; and the intelligible
obj^ct it self is after a certain manner imbibed in the intellect. So ^^desma
de Divin. per^ect. q. 3. Art. 5. Unum transit in aliud ex quo scqu^tur, qu^d
unum sit aliud. And hence, say they, applying this doctrine to the present
purpose, [and secundum illum ^^dum, in conjunctione illa essabili divinae
essentiae cum intell^ct^ creato, sit unum agens integrum, scil. intellectus
creatus factus D^us mirab^ls modo] [Intellectus in visione beatifica, est
potentia jam deficata, per lumen gloriae, Cajet. prima part q. 12. Art. 2. ex
Ledes. q. 8. Art 8.] For besides this immediate union of the Divine Essence it
self with the intellect they assert a lumen gloriae, an accident superadded,
without which the vision cannot be performed; which additional the Scotists
reject. Some, though they admit it, think the vision may be without it, and
that it does not implicare contradi^^^nem visionem beatificam fieri sine lumine
gloriae, cum solo speciali (...) auxilio, q^od item asserunt multi ex
scholasticis, Palud. in 4. did. 49. q. 1. Ar^. 3. Corel. 2. Thom. de A^gent.
q. 2. Art. 1. Major. q. 4. H^nr. qu^^ibet 7. Zumel. 1. p. q. 12. Art. 5. disp.
2. c^ncl. 3. Ita O tuphr. de virtute poe^tenti. Whether there be any ve^bum
creatum, the product of intellection, The Thomists are themselves divided.
Their more common opinion is, that there is none, as Ledesma assures us;
telling us also his reason, why he conceives there can be none. Beati no^
forma^t verbum in videndo Deo, sed plus vident quam verb^ creato dicere p^ssunt
-- nam beatus per visionem beatam quamvis non vi^eat [infinite] videt tamen
infinitum. -- (which is their great argument against any intelligible species)
and he further adds, sicut visio Dei quae est in ipso Deo h^bet pro principio
and specie intelligibili ipsam Divinam Essentiam; and protermino ips^m Divinam
Essentiam visio beatorum est ita supernaturalis, and divini ordinis, and
participatio divi^ae visionis ita perfecta, ut ipsa etiam habeat pro principio
and specie intellig^bili, divina Essen^ia^, and p^otermino sive verbo producto,
ipsammet divina^ Ess^ntia^.

So that the principle and term of this vision are owned to be nothing else,
but the simple Divine Essence. Concerning the formal act it self, it is much
disputed, whether the creatures intellect do at all effectively concur to it,
or whether God himself, be not the only efficient or agent in this vision.
Some stick not to a^^irm the latter, Marsil. in 3. q. 1. Palud. in 4. did. 49,
q. 1. A^t. 2. (referente Led^s^a) and say plainly, that the action of the
in^eriour agent wholly ceases, and the superior only acts, the same thing
that D. M. Causabon in his Enthusiasm charges one M^ximus with, who in a book
entitled (...) writes thus; (...). That the Soul taken into immediate union
(...) Go^, loses all us k^owing power (though this be not distinctively spoken
of the state of glory, And what does this amount to? but that while they are
eagerly contending about the Saints blessedness, and too curiously laboring
to explicate the manner of their seeing God, they unawares destroy the subject
of the question, and deny that they see him at all; and so upon the whole,
dispute themselves into a worse than P^ganish infidelity. And even the rest,
that agree in the sense of the passages above recited, will not be easily able
to avoid the charge of as intolerable consequences; which it is my business,
here, only to discover, and not to determine any thing in this controversy,
whiles I tax the too much boldness of others, who adventure it. And here not
to insist on the absurdity of what they say concerning the intelligible species
in general, let it be considered. 1. That the Divine Essence is said to be
united to the intellect of the blessed, as an intelligible species. 2. That the
intelligible species, in the business of intellection, and the intellect,
become one another, do not remain distinct things united, but are identified.
3. That hence in understanding God, the intellect is deified and becomes God,
which naturally follows from the two former; and is moreover expressly
asserted in plain words. What need is there to press this Doctrine with hard
consequencies? or how can it look worse than it does already, with its own
natural face? Nor can I apprehend which way it should be made look better. For
should it lay claim to that favor, to be understood acco^ding to the usual
sense of the peripat (...) m^xime, Intellectus, intelligendo, sit omnia; it
will be found manifestly to have precluded it self: That maxim is wont to be
understood thus; that the intellect becomes that which it understands (...), by
putting on the species or likeness of its Object, the representation of it. For
instance, when I form in my mind the notion of a mountain, my understanding
becomes an Ideal or Spiritual mountain: it becomes that species (which is
liable to more exception too than I shall now insist on, and looks more like
the language of a Poet than a Philosopher) that is now formed there; and not
the material mountain it self. But how shall this assertion [The understanding
by its act of understanding God becomes Go^] be capable of that int^rpretation,
i. e. It becomes his likeness, his Id^a, his representation now formed in it,
when any such intervening likeness or representation is utterly denied; and
that supposed species is said to be the simple Divine essence it self* and if
the Divine essence it self be that species by which it is understood, will it
not follow from that other Arist^t^^an axiom (which with them must signify as
much as a Text from Saint Paul) s^^bile and (...): That our very knowledge of
God must be God too, or would they disown that maxim, sure, when once the
faculty is supposed dei^ied, the act immanent in it, cannot be a created
accident; nor can that maxim (understood of the (...) or the (...) denied by
them: And sure. if the Saints k^owledge of God; the likeness of him in their
(...) be God; their holiness, the likeness of him in their h^arts, must be so
too. How absurd then would it be, to use that Scripture language, and speak of
these under the names of Gods image or likeness, when (...) and (...), are
notion^ so vastly disagreeing; and since a Saints knowledge and holiness here
and in heaven differ but in degree; they can be, here on earth, nothing but God
dwelling in them. And supposing that Scotus have better defended than his
adversaries impugned the real identity of the soul and its faculties, that must
be deified too. However, wh^t could be imagined more absurd, than that the
substance of the soul should be a creature, and its faculty God? Whence then do
we think that modern familists have fetch their admired nonsense? Whom have
they had their original instructors? or who have taught them that brave
magnificent language of being Godded with God, and Christed with Christ but
these? Nor sure need they blush to be found guilty of so profoundly learned
inconsistencies, or to speak absurdly after such Patrons. And what should
occasion these men so to involve themselves, I cannot find, or divine more than
this, that they were not able to fasten upon any more tolerable sense of the
word (...) 1 Cor. 13. 12. 1 John 3. 2. but taking that in its highest pitch of
significancy; all their arguments are generally levelled at this mark to prove
that no created species can possibly represent God [sicuti est] and thence
infer that he cannot be seen by any created species in the glorified state,
where he is to be seen sicuti est. But could we content our selves with a
modest interpretation of these words, and understand them to speak not of a
parity, but of a similitude only between Gods knowledge and ours, nor of an
absolute omni modous similitude, but comparative only; that is, that comparing
our future with our present state, the former shall so far excel this, that,
in comparison thereof, it may be said to be a knowing of God, as we are known,
and as he is; insomuch as our future knowledge of him, shall approach so
unspeakably nearer to his most perfect knowl^dge of us, and the truth of the
thing, than our present knowledge does or can; by such an interpretation we are
cast upon no such difficulties. For admit that no species can represent God as
he is, in the highest sense of these words, yet sure, in the same sense wherein
he can be seen by us as he is, he may be represented to us as he is. And what
can be more frivolous than that fore-recited reasoning to the contrary? There
can be no created representation of God [sicuti est] adequate to the Vision the
blessed have of him; but they see more than any created representation can
contain, for they see ^^finitum, though not infinite. For how must we
understand the i^finitum they are said to see? Materially or formarlly? must we
understand by it him that is infinite only, or else as he is infinite? If it
be said the latter, that is (...) say, they see infinite too; If the former
only; Do not Saint on (...) see, ( viz. mentally which is the vision we are
speaking of) him who is infinite, in their present state, where it is
acknowledge their knowledge is by Species.

Yet would I not hence conclude, that the knowledge Saints shall have of God
hereafter shall be by Species, for my design in all this is b^t to discover the
vanity of too positive and definitive conceptions concerning it, beyond the
measure of G^ds Revelation, and the ducture of clear and unintangled reason.
All knowledge has been thought to be by assimilation, i. e. by receiving the
species or images of the things known. So the intellect is not really turned
into the things which it understands but only receives their species wherewith
it is united so closely that it is therefore said to be [like] to them.
Virtuosi of France Confer. 65. One way or other it has been judged necessary
the mind should be furnished with such images of the thing it is said to
understand; which therefore, some have thought connate, others, supplied by
sense totallie; others, by a separate intellectus Agens; which some have
thought to be God himself: others one common Intelligence. Others a particular
Genius so indispensably necessary it has been reckoned unto intellection,
that office should be performed by one or other. If any clearer explication can
be given, or better way assigned of the souls knowing things, it cannot but be
welcome to rational men. But I se^ no necessity or reason it should have a
specificallie distinct way of knowing here and in heaven. Much less that we
should imagine to our selves such a one as to that other state, as is
altogether unaccountable and capable of no rational explication. And reckon it
much more becoming to be silent, than on pretense of any mysteriousness in the
things we discourse of, to talk absurdlie and unintelligiblie about them. A
confessed ignorance in this case is becoming to say with that great Apostle, It
does not appear what we shall be. But to conclude and define such matters is
surely (...).


that were within one hands breadth of Hell, are saved except they be also
deified too? that they become happy unless they also become Gods? The distance
even of a glorified creature from the glorious God is still infinitely greater,
than between it and the silliest worm. The minutest atome of dust.

And by how much more we shall then know of his glory, so much more shall we
understand that distance. Yet as he shall then enlarge the capacity of the soul
he glorifies to a very vast comprehension, so shall the exhibition of his glory
to it, be fully adequate to its most enlarged capacity. They are as yet but
obscure glimmerings, we can have of this glory; But so far as, without too bold
curiosity, we may, and wherein Scripture light will give us any preapprehension
of it, let us consider a while,

The Nature Excellency
of it.

We cannot indeed consider these separately, for we can no sooner understand it
to be glory, than we conceive it excellent; Glory, in the proper Notion of it,
being nothing else but resplendent excellency, the luster of excellency or real
worth made conspicuous. Yet as there is an excellency conceivable in the nature
of it, that excellency whereof it is the splendour and brightness; so we must
conceive a peculiar excellency of that very radiation, that splendour it self,
wherewith it shines unto blessed souls. In its very nature it is the brightness
of Divine excellencies: in its present appearance, it shines in the highest
excellency of that brightness; in its nature it excels all things else: in
its present exhibition, compared with all its former radiations, it excels
it self.

As to the nature of this glory, it is nothing else but the conspicuous luster
of Divine perfections. We can only guide our present conceptions of it, by the
discovery God has already given us of himself, in those several excellencies
of his Being, the great Attributes that are convertible and one with him. When
Moses besought Him for a sight of his glory, he answers him with this, I will
proclaim my name before thee. His Name, we know, is the collection of his
Attributes.

The Notion therefore we can hence form of this glory, is only such as we may
have of a large volume by a brief Synopsis or Table; of a magnificent fabric,
by a small Module or Platform, a spacious Country by a little Landscape. He
has here given us a true representation of himself, not a full: such as will
secure our apprehensions, being guided thereby, from error not from ignorance.
So as they swerve not in apprehending this glory, though they still fall short.
We can now apply our minds to contemplate the several perfections which the
blessed God assumes to himself; and whereby he describes to us his own Being:
and can in our thoughts attribute them all to him, though we have still but low
defective conceptions of each one. As if we could at a distance, distinguish
the Streets and Houses of a great City; but every one appears to us much less
than it is; we can apprehend somewhat of whatsoever he reveals to be in
himself, yet when all is done how little a portion do we t^ke up of him! Our
thoughts are empty and languid, straight and narrow such as diminish and limit
the holy one: Yet so far as our apprehensions can correspond to the discovery
he affords us of his several excellencies, we have a present view of the Divine
glory. Do but strictly and distinctly survey the many perfections comprehended
in his name, then gather them up and consider how glorious he is! Conceive one
glory resulting from substantial wisdom, goodness, power, truth, justice,
holiness; that is, beaming forth from him who is all these by his very Essence,
necessarily, originally, infinitely, eternally; with whatsoever else is truly a
perfection. This is the glory blessed Souls shall behold for ever.

For the excellency of it, it is called by way of discrimination, 2 Pet. 1. 17.
the excellent glory. There was glory put upon Christ in the transfiguration;
of which, when the Apostle speaks, having occasion to mention, withal, the
glory of heaven it self, from whence the voice came, he adds to this latter,
the distinguishing note of the excellent: He himself was eyewitness of the
honor, and majesty, and glory which the Lord Jesus then received; but beyond
all this, the glory from whence the voice came, was the excellent or stately
glory, (...)
as the word imports.

It Is a great intimation how excellent a glory this is, 1 Pet. 4. 13.
that it is said to be a glory yet to be revealed, as if it had been said, What
ever appearances of the Divine glory are now offered to your view, there is
still somewhat undiscovered, somewhat behind the Curtain that will out shine
all. You have not seen so much, but you are still to expect unspeakably more.

Glory is then to shine in its Noonday strength and vigor: It Is then in its
Meridian. Here, the riches of glory are to be displayed, certain treasures of
glory, the plenitude and magnificence of glory. We are here, to see him as he
is, to know him as we are known of him. Certainly, the display of himself, the
rays of his discovered excellency must hold proportion with that Vision, and
be therefore exceedingly glorious. John 17.
It Is the glory Christ had with the Father before the foundations of the world
were laid; into the vision and communion whereof, holy souls shall now be
taken, according as their capacities can admit; that wherewithal his great
achievements, and high merits shall be rewarded eternally; that wherewith he
is to be glorified in heaven, in compensation of having glorified his Father on
earth, and finished the work whereto he was appointed. This cannot but be a
most transcendent glory. It Is in sum, and in the language of the Text, the
glory of Gods own face, his most aspectable, conspicuous glory. Whose
transforming beams are productive of the glory impressed; the next ingredient
into this blessedness, which will presently come to be spoken of, after we have
given you some short account of

2. The Act of beholding: the vision or intuition it self, by which,
intervening, the impression is made.

Glory seems to carry in it a peculiar respect to the visive power (whether
corporal, or mental; as it is it self of the one kind or the other) it is
something to be contemplated, to be looked upon. And being to transmit an
impression, and consequent pleasure to another subject, it must necessarily be
so, it can neither transform, nor satisfy but as it is beheld.

And here the sensitive intuition, I shall not insist on, as being less
intended in the Text, and the discourse of it less suitable to such, as with a
spiritual mind and design, set themselves to enquire into the nature of the
Saints blessedness. Yet, as this is the most noble, comprehensive, quick, and
sprightly sense, so is the Act of it more considerable, in the matter of
blessedness, than any other of the outward man, and the most perfect imitation
of the act of the mind, whence also this so often borrows the name of the
other, and is called seeing. It Is an act indeed very proper and pertinent to a
state of glory. By how much more any sensible object is glorious (supposing the
sensorium to be duly disposed and fortified, as must be here supposed) so much
is it the fitter object of Sight; hence when we would express a glorious
object, we call it conspicuous, and the less glorious, or more obscure any
thing is, the less visible, and approaches the nearer to invisibility, whence
that saying in the common Philosophy, Arist. in 3. Meteor^l^g. Cap. de ^ride.
To see blackness is to see nothing.

Whatsoever a glorified eye, replenished with a heavenly vitality and vigor,
can fetch in from the many glorified objects that encompasse it, we must
suppose to concur to this blessedness. Now is the eye satisfied with seeing,
which before never could.

But, it is intellectual sight we are chiefly to consider here, that whereby we
see him that is invisible, and approach the inaccessible Light. The word here
used, (...)
some Critics tell us, more usually signifies the sight of the mind. And then,
not a casual, superficial glancing at a thing, but contemplation, a studious,
designed viewing of a thing, when we solemnly compose and aplly our selves
thereto, or the vision of Prophets or such as have things discovered to them by
divine Revelation (thence called Chozim, Seers) which imports (though not a
previous design, yet) no less intention of mind in the act it self.

And so it more fitly expresses that knowledge which we have, not by discourse
and reasoning out of one thing from another, but by immediate intuition of what
is nakedly, and at once offered to our view, which is the more proper knowledge
of the blessed in heaven. They shall have the glory of God so presented, and
their minds so enlarged, as to comprehend much at one view, in which respect
they may be said, in a great degree, to know as they are known, in as much as
the blessed God comprehends all things at once, in one simple act of knowing.
Yet that is not to be understood as if the state of glory should exclude all
ratiocination, more than our present state does all intuition (for first and
indemonstrable principles we see by their own light, without illation or
argument) nor can it be inconvenient to admit, that while the knowledge the
blessed have of God is not insinite, there may be use of their discursive
faculty with great fruit and pleasure. Pure intuition of God, without any
mixture of reasoning, is acknowledged (by such as are apt enough to be
over-ascribing to the creature) peculiar to God alone. Cognoscere deum clare
and intuitive est proprium and natural soli deo sicut est proprium ig^i
calefacere and soli illuminare Ledesm. de divin. perfect. q. 8. Art. 7.
But as the blessed God shall continually afford (if we may speak of continuity
in Eternity, which yet we cannot otherwise apprehend) a clear discovery of
himself, so shall the principal exercise, and felicity of the blessed soul
consist in that less laboring and more pleasant way of knowing: a mere
admitting or entertaining of those free beams of voluntary light, by a grateful
intuition, which way of knowing the expression of sight, Mat. 5. 8.
or beholding does most incline to, Heb. 12. 14.
and that is, we are sure, the ordinary language of Scripture about this matter.

CHAP. IV.
The second ingredient into this Blessedness considered, assimilation to God or
his glory impressed. Wherein it consists, discovered in sundry Propositions. The
third ingredient, The satisfaction and pleasure which results, stated and
opened.

AND now, upon this Vision of the blessed face of God, next follows, in the
order of discourse, The souls perfect assimilation unto that revealed glory, or
its participation thereof, (touching the order the things themselves have to
one another, there will be consideration had in its proper place) and this also
must be considered as a distinct and necessary ingredient into the state of
blessedness we are treating of.

Distinct it is, for though the vision now spoken of, does include a certain
kind of assimilation in it, as all vision does, being only a reception of the
species or likeness of the Object seen: This assimilation we are to speak of,
is of a very different kind. That is such as affects only the visive or
cognitive power, and that not with a real change, but intentional only, nor
for longer continuance than the act of seeing lasts; but this is total, real,
and permanent.

And surely it is of equal necessity to the souls blessedness, to partake the
glory of God, as to behold it; as well to have the divine-likeness impressed upon
it as represented to it. After so contagious and over-spreading a depravation
as sin has diffused through all its powers: it can never be happy without a
change of its very crasis and temper throughout. A diseased ulcerous body would
take little felicity in gay and glorious sights: no more would all the glory of
heaven signify to a sick, deformed, self-loathing soul.

It must therefore be all glorious within, have the Divine nature more
perfectly communicated, the likeness of God transfused and wrought into it.
This is the blessed work begun in Regeneration; but how far it is from being
perfected, we may soon find by considering how far short we are of being
satisfied in our present state, even in the contemplation of the highest and
most excellent Objects. How tasteless to our souls are the thoughts of God! How
little pleasure do we take in viewing over his glorious Attributes! the most
acknowledged and adorable excellencies of his Being! And whereto can we impute
it but to this, that our spirits are not yet sufficiently connaturallized to
them? Their likeness is not enough deeply instamped on our souls: nor will this
be, till we awake; when we see better, we shall become better: When he appears
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

But do we indeed pretend to such an expectation? Can we think what God is, and
what we are in our present state, and not confess these words to carry with
them an amazing sound, we shall be like him! How great an hope is this! How
strange an errand has the Gospel into the world! How admired a design! to
transform men and make them like God! Were the dust of the earth turned into
stars in the firmament, were the most stupendous poetical transformations
assured realities, what could equal the greatness and the wonder of this mighty
change? Yea, and does not the expectation of it seem as presumptious, as the
issue it self would be strange? Is it not an over bold desire? too daring a
thought? a thing unlawful to be affected, as it seems impossible to be attained?

It must be acknowledged there is an appearance of high arrogance in aspiring
to this, to be like God. And the very wish or thought of being so, in all
respects, were not to be entertained without horror: It Is a matter therefore
that requires some disquisition and explication wherein that impressed likeness
of God consists, which must concur to the Saints blessedness. In order here
unto then take the following Propositions.

1. There is a sense wherein to be like God is altogether impossible,
Proposition 1.
and the very desire of it the most horrid wickedness. The prophet in the name
of God charges the proud Prince of Tire with this, as an inexpiable arrogance,
that he did set his heart as the heart of God, and upon this score challenges
and enters the lists with him: Come you, that would sain be taken for a God,
I Will make a sorry God of thee e're I have done, verse 6.
because thou have set thy heart as the heart of God, I Will set those upon thee,
that shall draw their swords against the beauty 7.
of thy wisdom, and that shall defile thy brightness; And what? Will thou yet
say in the hand of 8.
him that slays thee I am a God? Thou shall 9.
be a man and no God in the hand of him that slays thee, -- I have spoken it
says the Lord God. 10.
He will endure no such imitation of him, as to be rivaled in the point of his
Godhead. This is the matter of his jealousy. Deuteronomy. 32.
They have moved me to jealousy with not-God. (so it is shortly and more
smartly spoken in the Original Text) And see how he displayes his threats and
terrors hereupon in the following verses. This was the design and inducement
of the first transgression to be as Gods. And indeed all sin may be reduced
hither, what else is sin (in the most comprehensive notion) but an undue
imitation of God? an exalting of the Creatures Will into a supreamacy; and
opposing it as such to the divine. To sin, is to take upon us, as if we were
supreme, and that there were no Lord over us, It Is to assume to our selves a
Deity, as if we were under no law or rule, as he is not under any, but what he
is to himself, herein, to be like God, is the very core, and malignity of sin.

There is a just and laudable imitation of God, a likeness to him, that is
matter of command, praise, and promise, as wherein both the duty, excellency
and blessedness of the reasonable creature does consist; and which is in some
respect inseparable from the nature of man. Ephesians. 5. 1.
We are required to be followers of God, (...).
as dear Children (imitaters the word is) David is commended as a man after
Gods own heart (though but now we saw, in another, with what disdain and
indignation it was resented, that he did set his heart, as the heart of God.)
J^m. 1. 18.
The new Creature, the new Man, the first fruits, Ephesians. 4. 24.
(as he is called) the flower of the Creation is made after God. Saints expect
upon the assurance of his word, to be more fully like him, as we see in the
text, and parallel places. Yea man was made at first with a concreate
similitude to God, which we know was the counsel of Heaven, and the result and
issue of that counsel. Genesis 1. 26, 27. This is evident enough in it self, and
needs no more words. But to make a further step in this business, observe next.

3. There can be no allowable imitation of any one, but with an exception, as
to some peculiarities, that may belong to his special station, relations, and
other circumstances of the condition in which he is, or with limitation to such
things as are of common concernment unto both. Regis ad exemplum totus
compo^^tur orbis.
It Is commonly observed how naturally a people form their manners and fashions
to the example of the Prince; and there is no well disposed ruler, but would
take it well to be imitated in things that are of common concernment to him and
his subjects, Nam facere rect^ bonus princeps faciendo docet. Cumque sit
imperio maximus, exemplo major est. Velleins Paterculus.
that is, that concern him, not as he is a King; but as he is a man, or a
Christian. To behold the transforming power of his own example; where it is
such as begets a fair and unreproachful impress * how his virtues circulate
(his justice, temperance, love of religion) and produce their likeness among
his people twill be a glory, Romans Hist. l. 2.
and cannot but be resented with some delight. We cast an honor upon them whom
we imitate: for we acknowledge an excellency in them (which is all that honoring
imports in the first notion of it) and that naturally is received with
pleasure. But now should subjects aspire to a likeness to their Prince, in the
proper appendages, and acts of sovereignty; and because he is a glorious King,
they will be such too: and assume the peculiar cognisances of regality; ascend
the Throne, sway the Scepter, wear the Crown, enact Laws, etc. There cannot be
more of dutifulness and observance, in the former imitation; than there is of
disloyalty, and treason in this. A Father is pleased to have his Son imitate
him, within such limits beforementioned; but, if he will govern the Family, and
fill up his room in all relations, this will never be endured.

There are some things to be found in the blessed God, not so incommunicable,
and appropriate; but that his Creatures may be said to have some participation
thereof with him: and so far to be truly like him. This participation cannot
be univocal; as the nature of a living creature in general, (...)
is equaly in Men and Brutes. So it is a self evident principle, that Nothing
can be c^mmon to God and an inferior being. Nor is it only aequivocal; a
participation but of the same name, when the natures signified thereby are,
altogether diverse; but analogical, in as much as the things spoken under the
same names of God and the creature, have a real likeness, and convenience in
nature with one another; and they are in God, primarily; in the creature, by
dependence, and derivation: in him, essentially, as being his very Essence: in
them, but as accidents, (many of them) adventitious to their beings: and so
while they cannot be said to be the same things in them, as, in him, are fitly
said to be his likeness.

This likeness, as it is principally found in man among all the terrestrial
creatures; so has it man for its seat and subject, his Soul or spiritual part.
The effects of divine wisdom power, goodness, are every where visible,
throughout the whole Creation; and as there is no effect, but has some thing
in it, corresponding to its cause (wherein it was its cause) so, every creature
does, some way or other, represent God. Some in virtues, some in life, some in
being M^ltis enim modis dici res possunt similes Deo, aliae secundum virtutem,
and sapicatiam, ^actae; qui^ in ipso est vi^tus and sapientia non facta; aliae
in quantum solum vivunt, quia ille sum and prime vivit; il^ae, in quantum
sunt, quia ille sum and primitus est, Aug 8^. quest. p (mihi) 211.
only, the material world, represents him as an house, the builder. But
spiritual beings, as a child, the father (...).
. Other Creatures (as one P. Moulin^us de cognitione Dei.
fitly expresses it) carry his footsteps; these, his image: and that, not as
drawn with a pencil, which can only express figure and color: but, as
represented in a glass, which intimates action and motion. To give the
pre-eminence therefore Heathens have disdained and declaimed against so
unworthy thoughts of God. (...), etc. Maximus Tyr. Disser^. 1.

The same Author warns us to take heed, that we ascribe to God, (...), Ibid.

Unto which purpose is that decant^te Distich of Home^ (...), etc. And that
saying of Pli^y, Quapropter effigiem Dei formamqu^ quaerere imb^cilitatis
humanae^r or, applied by Z^ach. de operibus Dei. And we may see much of like
import alleged by Natal. Com. l^b. 1. p. 13 Which (by the way) discovers how
^^atly opposite the Idolatry forbidden in the second commandment is to the
light of Nature it self. Which has been also the just Apology of the Ancient
patrons of the Christian cause for the simplicity of their worship in this
respect: and their not imitating the pompo^s vanity of Pagan Image worship.
(...), Origin. coatr. Celsum. lib. 7.

To which purpose see at large Min. Felix, Quod simulacrum Deo fingam? etc.

And surely it is as improvable against the same piece of Christian Paganism.
The usually assigned differences would easily be shown to be trifling
impertinencies.


in this point to the body of man, was a conceit, so gross, that one would
wonder how it should obtain; at least in the Christian world.

Yet we find it expressly charged by Saint Angustine upon the Antropomorphites
of old (or Melitonians, Corpus hominis noa animam esse imaginem Dei, Aug. (if
it be Augustines) lib. de haeresibus.
as he calls them, from one Melito the Father of them) not only, that they
imagined God in a humane shape (which was their known conceit) but that they
stated Gods image in Man, in his body, not his soul. Nor are Van Helmonts
phansies, See Dr Charleton of his Image of God in man.
about corporal likeness capable of excuse by any thing, but that they were a
dream (as they are fitly styled) and not likely to impose upon the waking
reason of any man.

6. This image or likeness of God in the Spirit of Man, representing what is
communicable in him, is either Natural or Moral. There is first, a natural
image of God, in the soul of man, which is inseparable from it; and which it
can never divest it self of Est Dei similitudo quaedam, quam nemo v^vens, nisi
cum vita ^xuit; qua^ habet homo and volens, and no^ens, etc. Bernard. de vi^a
Solitar.
. Its very spiritual immortal nature, it self, is a representation of his. Its
intellective and elective powers are the image of what we are constrained to
conceive under the notion of the same powers in him. Yea, the same
understanding, with the memory, and will, in one soul are thought a lively
resemblance of the Triune Deity. D. Aug. ( su^^) lib. 10. de Trinitat.
But there is further a similitude of him in respect of moral Sed e^t alia,
magis Dei propinqua, similitudo (...), Bernard.
virtues or perfections answering to what we conceive in him, under that
notion. His wisdom, (so far as it has the nature of a moral virtue) his
mercy, truth, righteousness, holiness, etc. These two kinds or parts (as they
may be called) of the divine impresse upon the Spirits of men, are distinguished
by some (I see not how properly) by the distinct names of Image, denoting the
former: and similitude, the latter: answering, as is thought, to two Hebrew
words of the like import (...) Zanch.
: but the things themselves are evidently enough distinct, viz. what perfects
the nature of man; in genere physico, as he is such a particular being in the
Universe: and what perfects him, in genere morali, as he is considerable in
reference to a Law or rule guiding him to blessedness: as his end.

7. It Is a likeness to God in respect of those moral excellencies or
perfections, that is especially, considerable by us, in reference to our
present purpose; as more immediately relating to the souls blessedness in God.
By the former it has a potentiality, by the latter an habitude in reference
thereunto. Or (to use terms, more liable to common apprehension) by the former
it has a remoter capacity, by the latter a present fitness; or, as the
Apostle expresses it, is made meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the
Saints in Light (i. e. considering this likeness, as begun in the soul.)

8. Besides what is thus (in the sense before expressed) communicable between God
and man, there are some things so peculiarly appropriate to God, as that, in
respect of them, there can be no formal likeness in the creature: and it would
be impious boldness to aspire thereto. Many things of this kind might be
mentioned; I shall only instance in two, wherein there is a manifest
competition of the Apostate world with him; and which are therefore more
relative to practice. His Sovereign authority, and his Independency. In these
while men affect to imitate they wickedly ^ffront him. And here is the great
controversy between the glorious God, and the degenerous Children of Men.
Every man would catch at a Godhead, and either assume it to himself, or cast
it, many times upon other creatures, viler and more ignoble than himself.
Snatch the reins of Government out of Gods hand; and exalt their own wills into
an absoluteness as liable to control from none; place and settle their
dependence on their own wit, power, fortitude, industry; or, if that be a more
hopeless course (for they often find an entire Godhead too much for one
creature, and are therefore constrained to parcel it out among many) place
their confidences, and expectations in something else without them: do, often,
that ridiculous thing, so worthy to be hooted at, make the congested dirt of
the earth their trust (the righteous shall laugh at him, and say, Psalm. 52. 6,
7.
Lo! this is the man that trusted in riches) their wealth, their strong Tower;
which only the name of the Lord is to his Righteous ones. Yet, all the while,
self is the center, and end in which all must meet, and terminate. This at last
carries away the assumed fictious Deity. And this thing, that is thus now made
like God, is an Idol (which indeed signifies so much) and this imitation of him
wicked Idolatry, than which nothing more debases a reasonable soul, or devests
man of himself, Isa. 46. 8.
that ^ill they redress this they give no proof of their being men.

This assimilation of our selves to God is very remote then from being a
perfection; it is a most reproachful deformity, as we know imitations, if they
be visibly affected, and strained too far, are always thought ridiculous by
Wise men.

9. Though, in respect of these incommun^cable

For instance, is he absolutely Supreme, in as much as he is the first Being?
the correspondent impression with us, and upon the same reason, must be a most
profound, humble self-subjection, disposing our souls to constant obedience to
him. Again, is he simply independent, as being self-sufficient and all in all?
the impression with us must be a nothingness; and self-emptiness, engaging us
to quit our selves, and live in him.

This is the only conformity to God, which, with respect to his incommunicable
excellencies, our creature state can admit; It may be also styled a likeness to
him, being a real conformity to his Will concerning us: and his very nature as
it respects us. We may conceive of it, as of the likeness between a Seal, and
the stamp made by it; Especially, supposing the inequality of parts in the
Seal, to be by the protuberancy of what must form the signature. In that case
there would be a likeness, aliquatenus, that is, an exact correspondency, but
what would then be convexe or bulching out in the Seal, would be, as we know,
concave, or hallow in the impression. Such is the proportion between
Sovereignty and Subjection, between self-fulness and self-emptiness. Whereas a
similitude to God, in respect of his communicable perfections, is as that
between the face and its picture; where no such difference is wont to appear.

Assimilation, or conformity to God in both these respects composes that
excellent frame of moral perfection, which the divine glory, beheld, impresses
upon the soul; and which immediately conduces to its satisfaction and
blessedness. I say, moral perfection, because that only is capable of being
impressed by the intervening ministry of our own understanding: viz. by its
Vision, intimated, as was formerly observed, in that of the Apostle, We shall
be like -- for we shall see him, etc. Its natural perfections are antecedent,
and presupposed, therefore not so fitly to be understood here. And I say, both
these ways, for, as we cannot form an entire Idea of God, without taking in,
together, his perfections of both sorts, communicable, and incommunicable, (the
former whereof must serve instead of a genns; the latter of a differentia, in
composing the notion of God T^^s. Salm^. de D^o imm^^so.
) so nor will his impresse on us be entire, without something in it respecting
both; in the senses already given.

What it will contribute to future blessedness, we shall shortly see, in its
place, when we have made a brief enquiry (which is the next thing, according to
our order proposed) concerning.

Thirdly, The satisfaction that shall hence accrue. (...)
And not to insist on its affinity to the word used for swearing, or rather,
being sworn Which some think to be the Niphal of the same word notwithstanding
the different punctation of the (...).
(which; an oath, being the end of controversies, and beyond which we go no
further nor expect more, in way of testifying; would, the more fitly here
represent to us the soul in its non-ultra; having attained the end of all its
motions, and contentions) Its equal nearness to the word signifying the number
of seven, is not altogether unworthy observation. That number is, we know,
often used in Scripture as denoting plenitude and perfection; and God has, as
it were, signalliz'd it, by his rest on the seventh day How fit a Symbol it is
of God^ Sabbatique rest, see Dr. Moris's defense of his Philosophical Sabbata
from Philo Judaeus.
and if this were not designedly pointed at here in the present use of this
word (as it must be acknowledged to be frequently used where we have no reason
to think it is with such an intendment) It may yet occasion us to look upon the
holy soul now entered into the eternal Sabbath E^it ibi vere maximum Sabbatum,
non habens vesperam, quod commendavit Dominus in primis operibus mundi, ut
legitur and requievit die Septimo -- Dies enim Septimus etiam nos ipsi erimus
quando ipsius ^uerimus benedictionum and sanct^ficationum pleni atque resecti
-- ibi vocabimus and vid^bimus, vidi^bimus and amabimus amabimus and
laudabimus, etc. Aug de civit. Dei l. 22. c. 30. vid. eund. de civit. Dei l.
17. c. 4.
the rest of God: which, (secluding all respect to that circumstance) is yet
the very substance and true notion of the thing it self (to the consideration
whereof I now pass) under the word held forth to us.

For this satisfaction is the souls rest in God. Its perfect enjoyment of the
most perfect good. The expletion of the whole capacity of its will; the total
filling up of that vast enlarged appetite; the perfecting of all its desires in
delight and joy. Now delight or joy (for they differ not, save that the latter
word is thought something more appropriate to reasonable nature) is more fitly
defined the rest of the desiring faculty in the thing desired Quies appe^itus
in appetibili Aquin. Su^.
. Desire, and Delight are but two acts of Love, diversified, only, by the
distance, or presence of the same Object; which, when it is distant, the soul,
acted and prompted by love, desires, moves toward it, pursues it; when
present, and attained, delights in it, enjoyes it, stays upon it, satisfies it
self in it (according to the measure of goodness it finds there) Desire, is
therefore, love in motion; Delight, is love in rest: and of this latter delight
or joy, Scripture evidently gives us this Notion, He will rejoice over thee
with joy, Zeph. 3. 17.
(unto which is presently added as exegetical) he will rest in his love: Which,
resting can be but the same thing with being satisfied.

This satisfaction then is nothing else but the repose and rest of the soul
amidst infinite delights. Its peaceful acquiescence, having attained the
ultimate term of all its motions, beyond which it cares to go no further; the
solace it finds in an adequate full good; which it accounts enough for it, and
beyond which, it desires no more; reckons its state as good as it can be, and
is void of all hovering thoughts (which perfect rest must needs exclude) or
inclination to change.

And so does this being satisfied, not only generally, signify the soul to be
at rest; but it specifies that rest; and gives us a distinct account of the
nature of it. As that it is not a forced violent rest; such as proceeds from a
beguiled ignorance, a drowsy sloth, a languishing weakness, or a desire and
hope of happiness, by often frustrations bafled into despair* (to all which,
the native import and propriety of that word [satisfaction] does strongly
repugne.)

But it discovers it to be a natural rest. I mean, from an internal principle;
the soul is not held in its present state of enjoyment by a strong and violent
hand; but rests in it by a connaturalness thereunto, is attempered to it, by
its own inward constitution and frame. It rests not as a descending stone,
intercepted by something by the way, that holds and stops it, else it would
fall further; but as a thing would rest in its own center, with such a rest as
the earth is supposed to have in its proper place; that, being hung upon
nothing, is yet unmoved ( ponderibus librata suis) equally balanced by its own
weights every way.

It is a rational judicious rest, upon certain knowledge that its present state
is simply best, and not capable of being changed for a better: The soul cannot
be held under a perpetual cheat, so as always to be satisfied with a ^hadow.
It may be so befooled for a while, but if it remain satisfied, in a state that
never admits of change; that state must be such as commends it self to the most
thoroughly informed reason and judgment.

It is hence a free voluntary chosen rest: Such as God professes his own to be
in Zion. This is my rest, Psalm. 132. 14.
here will I dwell, for I have desired it.

It is a complacential rest, wherein the soul abides steady bound only by the
cords of love; a rest in the midst of pleasantnesses; The Lord is my portion,
Psalm. 16. 6. (...)
the lots are fallen to me [in amanitatibus] it cannot be more fitly expressed
than [amidst pleasantnesses] And this speaks, not only what the Psalmists
condition was, but the sense, and account he had of it. That temper of mind
gives us some Idea of that contentful, satisfied abode with God, which the
blessed shall have. He intimates how undesirous he was of any change. Their
sorrows (he told us above) should be multiplied that hasten after another God.
Ver. 4.
Hereafter there will be infinitely less appearance of reason for any such
thought. Now it is the sense of an holy soul, Whom have I in heaven but thee,
and there is none I desire on earth besides thee (q. d. Heaven and Earth yield
not a tempting Object, to divert me from thee) it is now, so at sometimes, when
faith and love are in their triumph and exaltation (but the Lord knows how
seldom!) but much more when we see him as he is, and are satisfied with his
likeness.

It Is an active vigorous rest. Action about the end shall be perpetuated, I
think not worth the while to engage in the disp^te (so much agitated between
the (...) and (...)) whether blessedness do formally consist in this satisfying
fruition, or in the anteced^ne vision: This satisfaction is certainly
inseparable from it, and I see not how to be excluded out of its formal Notion,
it is not vision as visica, but as (...) ^ying, that makes us happy; and to talk
of the satisfaction or pleasu^e which the understanding has in knowing, is
insipid: wh^le the soul understanding, i. e. the mind, knows it is the soul
enjoying, i. e. the will is pleased and finds content, and till the soul be
fully contented, it is not blessed, and it is, by being so, when it says, now
am I full-satisfied, I have enough, I desire no more.
here, though action toward it ceases. It Is the rest of an aw^kned, not of a
drowsy, sluggish soul; of a soul sati^fi^d, by heavenly sensations and
fruitions: not incapable of them; or that has its powers bound up by a
stupifying sleep.

Its the rest of hope perfected in fruition, not lost in despair; of satisfied,
not defeated expectation. Despair may occasion rest to a man's body, but not to
his mind; or a cessation from further endeavors, when they are constantly
found vain, but not from trouble and disquiet. It may suspend from action, but
never satisfy.

This satisfaction therefore speaks both the realitie and nature of the souls
rest in glory: that it rests; and with what kind of rest.

CHAP. V.
The relative consideration of these three ingredients of the Saints
blessedness. Where it is propounded to show particularly. 1. What relation
Vision has to Assimilation. 2. What both these have to Satisfaction. The
relation between the two former inquired into; an entrance upon the much larger
Discourse, what relation and influence the two former have toward the third.
What Vision of Gods Face, or glory contributes toward Satisfaction, Estimated
from the consideration. 1. Of the Object, the glory to be beheld, as it is
divine, entire, permanent, appropriate.

THUS far have we viewed the parts or necessary concurrents of which the
blessedness of the Saints must be composed absolutely, and severally each from
other. We proceed

Secondly, to consider them relatively, viz. in the mutual respects, they bear
one to another; as they actually compose this blessed state, wherein we shall
show particularly,

1. The relation (by way of in^luence, and dependence) between Vision and
Assimilatio^.

2. Between both these and the satisfaction that insues: Which latter I intend
more to dwell upon; and only to touch the former, as a more speculative and
less improvable subject of Discourse, in my way to this.)

1. First, It may be considered, what relation there may be between vision of
God, and assimilation, or being made like to him; and it must be acknowledged
(according to what is commonly observed of the mutual action of the
understanding and will) that the sight of God, and likeness to him, do mutually
contribute, each toward other. The sight of God assimilates, makes the soul
like unto him; that likeness more disposes it for a continued renewed vision.
It could never have attained the beatifical vision of God, had it not been
prepared thereto by a gradual previous likeness to him Which necessity of a
likeness to God to dispose ^or the vi^^^n of him, is excellently expressed by a
(...) Philosopher. The divine nature, the (...), which he says is lia^^e to no
sense, ((...), etc.) is yet visible to that in the soul which is most
beautiful, most pure, most perspicacious, most sublime, most noble, in respect
of a certain similitude and cognation that is between them. Max. T^^.
. For righteousness (which we have shown qualifies for this blessedness)
consists in a likeness to God; and it could never have been so prepared, had
not some knowledge of God introduced that conformity and yielding bent of heart
toward him. For the entire frame of the new man, Col. 3. ^0.
made after the image of God, is renewed in knowledge.

But as notwithstanding the circular action of the understanding and will upon
one another; there must be a beginning of this course some-where, and the
understanding is usually reckoned the (...), the first mover, the leading
faculty: So notwithstanding the mutual in^luence of these two upon each other,
seeing has a natural precedence and must lead the way unto being like; Which
is sufficiently intimated in the Text, [I shall behold thy face] and then I
shall be satisfied with thy likeness, and more fully in that parallel
Scripture: We shall ^e like him for we shall see him, etc.

From whence also, and from the very nature of the thing, we may fitly state
the relation of the first of these to the second, to be that of a cause to its
effect. Sight begets likeness, is antecedent to it, and productive of it.

That is the face or glory of God seen; that glory, in conjunction with our
vision of it: for the vision operates not; but according to the efficaciousness
of the thing seen, nor can that glory have any such operation, but by the
intervention of vision.

It Is therefore the glory of God seen, as seen, that assimilates, and impresses
its likeness upon the beholding Soul: and so its causality it is that of an
objective cause (which whether it belong to the efficient or final, I shall not
here dispute) that operates only as it is apprehended: so introducing its own
form, and similitude into the subject it works upon. Such a kind of cause were
Jacobs streaked rods of the productions that ensued; and such a cause is any
thing whatever that begets an impression upon an apprehensive subject by the
mediation and ministry, whether of the fancy or understanding. This kind of
causality the word has in its renewing transforming work; and the Sacraments
wherein they are (...) of real physical mutations on the Subjects of them. So
much of the Image of God as is here impressed upon souls by Gospel dispensations,
so much is impressed of his glory. The work of grace is glory begun.

And now as glory initial, and progressive in this life enters at the eye --
(beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
we are changed) so does perfect, and consumate glory in the other life. For we
have no reason to imagine to our selves any alteration in the natural order the
powers of the soul have toward each other, by its passing into a state of
glory.

The Object seen is unspeakably efficacious; the Act of intuition is full of
lively vigor, the Subject was prepared, and in a disposition before; and what
should hinder, but this glorious effect should immediately ensue; as the Sun no
sooner puts up its head above the Hemisphere, but all the vast space whether it
can diffuse its beams is presently transformed into its likeness, and turned
into a Region of light.

What more can be wanting to cause all the darkness of Atheism, carnality, and
every sting of sin, for ever to vanish out of the awaking soul, and an entire
frame of holiness to succeed, but one such transforming sight of the face of
God? one sight of his glorio^^ Majesty presently subdues, and works it to (...)
full subjection; one sight of his purity makes (...) pure: one sight of his
loveliness turns it into (...) and such a sight always remaining the impress
remains always actually (besides that it is in it self most habitual and
permament in the souls now confirmed state) fresh and lively.

The Object has quite another aspect upon a wicked soul, when it awakes, and
the act of seeing is of another kind; therefore no such effect follows: besides
the subject is otherwise disposed, and therefore as the Sun inlightens not the
inward parts of an impervious dunghill, but it inlightens air, so the sight of
God transforms and assimilates at last, not a wicked, but it does a godly soul.
That which here makes the greatest difference in the temper of the subject is
Love. I look upon the face of a stranger, and it moves me not, but upon a
friend, and his face presently transforms mine into a lively, cheerful aspect.
P^ov* 27. 17.
(As iron sharpens iron, so does the face of a man his friend) puts a sharpness
and a quickness into his looks. The soul that loves God opens it self to him,
admits his influences and impressions, is easily molded, and wrought to his
will; yields to the transforming power of his appearing glory: There is no
resistent principle remaining, when the love of God is perfected in it, and so
overcoming is the first sight of his glory upon the awaking soul, that it
perfects it, and so his likeness both at once.

But enmity fortifies the soul against him, as with bars and doors; averts it
from him; carries with it an horrid guilty consciousness, which fills it with
eternal despair and rage, and enraps it in the blackness of darkness for ever.

2. Both the vision of God, and likeness to him must be considered in their
relation to the consequent satisfaction, and the influence, they have in order
thereto. I say both; for though this satisfaction be not expressly, and
directly referred by the letter of the text, to the sight of Gods face, yet its
relation thereto, in the nature of the thing, is sufficiently apprehensible and
obvious, both mediate, in respect of the influence it has toward the
satisfying assimilation, and immediate (which we are now to consider) as it is
so highly pleasurable in it self: and is plainly enough intimated in the text,
being applied in the same breath to a thing so immediately, and intimately
conjunct with this vision, as we find it is. Moreover, supposing that
[likeness] here do (as it has been granted it may) signify objective glory
also as well as subjective, and repeat what is contained in the former
expression [the face of God] the reference satisfaction has to this vision
(which the remention of its object, though under a varied form of expression
supposes) will be more express: therefore we shall show.

1. What the vision of the divine glory contributes to the satisfaction of the
blessed soul: and what felicity it must needs take herein, which cannot, but be
very great whether we respect.

The glory seen, the object of this vision, or, The act of vision, or,
intuition it self.
1. The Object, the glory beheld: what a spring of pleasure is here? what
rivers of pleasure flow hence? In thy presence (says the Psalmist) is fullness
of joy: Psalm. 16. 11.
at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore, The awaking soul, having now
past the path of life (drawn through Sheol it self, the state of deadly head)
appears immediately in this presence; and what makes this presence so joyous,
but the pleasant b^^ghtness of this face? to be in the presence of any one, and
before his face (in conspectu) are eq^i^alent expressions: therefore the
Apostle (...) this passage, renders it thus, Thou have (...) me with gladness,
(...)
by thy [countenance.] Now in this glorious presence or within view of the face
of God is [fulness] of joy, i. e. joy unto sati^f^ction. And the Apostle Jude
speaking of this presence under this name [a presence of glory] tells us of an
exceeding joy, (...)
a jubilation (an (...)) that shall attend the presentment of Saints there. The
holy Soul now enters the divine Shechinah, the Chamber of presence of the great
King, the ha^itation of his holiness and glory. The place where his honor
dwells. Here his glory surrounds it with incircling beams: it is beset with
glory, therefore surely also filled with joy. When the vail is drawn aside: or
we are within the vail, in that very presence whither Jesus the forerun^^^
(...) for u^ entered (through that path of life) O the satisfying overcoming
pleasure of this sight! Now, that it is to us revealed or unvailed glory, which
was hidden before. Here the glory set in Majesty (as the expression is, Ezekiel. 7.
concerning the glory of the Temple) is presented to view openly and without
umbrage. G^d is now no longer seen through an obscur^^g medium. They are not
now shadowed ^^mmerings, transient, oblique glances, but the direct beams of
full eyed glory that shine upon us. The discovery of this glory is the ultimate
product of that infinite wisdom and love, that have been working from
eternity, and for so many thousand years through all the successions of time
toward the heirs of salvation. The last and complete issue of the great
atchievments, sharp conflicts, glorious victories, high merits of our mighty
Redeemer. All these end in the opening of Heaven (the laying of this glory as
it were common) to all believers. This is the upshot, and close of that great
design: will it not (think ye) be a satisfying glory! The full blessedness of
the redeemed is the Redeemers reward. He cannot be satisfied in seeing his seed
if they should be unsatisfied. He cannot behold them with content if his heart
tell him not that he has done well enough for them. Heb. 11. 16.
God would even be ashamed to be called their God, had he not made provision
for their entertainment worthy of a God. It Is the season of Christ's Triumphs,
and Saints are to enter into His joy. It Is the appointed jubilee at the
finishing of all Gods works, from the Creation of the world, when he shall
puposely show himself in his most adorable Majesty, and when Christ shall
appear in his own likeness (he appeared in another likeness before) surely
glory must be in in its exaltation in that day. But take a more distinct
account, how grateful a sight this glory will be in these following particulars.

1. It is the Divine glory, Let your hearts dwell a little upon this
consideration. It Is the g^ory of God, i. e. the glory which the blessed God
both enjoyes and affords, which he contemplates in himself, and which rays
from him to his Saints, it is the felicity of the divine Being. It satisfies a
Deity, will it not a worm? It Is a glory that results and shines from him and in
that sense also divine (which here I mainly intend) the beauty of his own face
the luster of Divine perfectio^s, every Attribute bears a part, all concur to
make up this glory.

And here pretermitting those which are less liable to our apprehension; his
Eternity, Immensity, Simplicity, etc. (of which, not having their like in us,
we are the more incapable to form distinct conceptions, and consequently of
perceiving the pleasure, that we may hereafter upon the removal of other
impediments, find in the contemplation of them) let us bethink our selves how
admirable and ravishing the glory will be.

1. Of his unsearchable wisdom, which has glory peculiarly annexed and properly
belonging to it. Glory is as it were, by inheritance, due to wisdom. Prove. 3.
35.
The wise shall inherit glory. And here now the blessed souls behold it in its
first seat, Job. 12.
and therefore in its prime glory, wisdom, counsel, understanding, are said to
be with him; as if no where else. Twice we have the Apostle ascribing glory to
God under the notion of only wise: Romans 16. 27.
which is but an acknowledging him glorious in this respect. 1 ^^m. 1. 17.
Wisdom, we know, is the proper and most connatural glory of intellectual
nature; whether as it relates to speculation, when we call it knowledge, or
action, when it is prudence.

How pleasant will the contemplation be of the divine wisdom in that former
Notion; when in that glass, that speculum aeternitatis, we shall have the
lively view of all that truth, the knowledge whereof can be any way possible
and grateful to our natures; and in his light, see light; when all those vast
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. ^.
(which already by their alliance to Christ, Saints are interested in) shall
lie open to us. When the tree of Knowledge shall be without enclosure; and the
most voluptuous Epicurism in reference to it be innocent! Where there shall
neither be lust, nor forbidden fruit, no withholding of desirable knowledge,
nor affectation of undesirable. When the pleasure of speculation shall be
without the toil; and that maxim be eternally antiquated, that increased
knowledge increases sorrow!

As to the other notion of it; how can it be less grateful to behold the
wisdom that made, and governed the world? that compast so great designs; and
this, no longer in its effects, but in it self? Those works were honorable and
glorious, sought of all them that have pleasure in them. What will be the glory
of their cause? It would gratify some men's curiosity to behold the unusual
motion of some rare automaton; but an ingenious person would, with much more
pleasure, pry into the secret Springs of that motion; and observe its inward
frame, and parts, and their dependence, and order each to other. It Is comely to
behold the exterior economy of a well governed people; when great affairs are,
by orderly conduct, brought to happy issues; but to have been at the helm, to
have seen the pertinent, proper application of such and such maxims to the
incident cases; to have known all the reasons of state, heard debates,
observed, with what great sagacity, inconveniences have been foreseen, and
with what diligence prevented; would much more gratify an inquiring Genius.

When the Records of Eternity shall be exposed to view; all the counsels and
results of that profound wisdom looked into, how will it transport! when it
shall be discerned, lo^ thus were the designs laid, here were the apt
junctures and admirable dependencies of things, which, when acted upon the
stage of the world, seemed so perplexed, and cross, so full of mysterious
intricacy?

If Saint Paul were so ravished at those more obscure appearances of divine
wisdom, which we find him admiring, Romans 11. 33. O the depths, etc. what
satisfaction will it yield to have a perfect model of the deep thoughts and
counsels of God presented to open view! How is the happiness of Solomon's
Servants magnified, that had the privilege continually to stand before him,
and hear his wisdom. But this happiness will be proportionably greater, as
Solomon's God is greater than he.

The glory of his power will add comeliness to the Object of this Vision. Power
duly placed and allayed is lovely. Beauty consists much in a Symmetrie or
proportion of parts. So must there be a concurrence of divine perfections to
compose and make up the beautiful complexion of his face, to give us a right
aspect, the true Idea of God. And here his power has a necessary ingrediency.
How incoherent, and disagreeing with it self were the motion of an impotent
God. (...). Col. 1. 11.
His power gives lively strokes to his glory. It Is called glorious power, or
the power of glory. Yea, it is simply called glory it self; Romans 6. 4.
the Apostle tells us, Christ was raised from the dead by the [glory] of the
Father, when it is plain he means [power]: And the same Apostle prays, Chap. 3.
16.
on the behalf of the Ephesians, that God would grant them according to the
riches of his glory to be strengthened with might, etc. How frequently are
power and glory ascribed to him in conjunction; intimating that as he is
powerful he is glorious. And certainly even this glory, cannot but cast a
grateful aspect upon the blessed soul, and be infinitely pleasant to behold.
What triumphs does it now raise in gracious Spirits to behold the exertions of
it in his works; Job 26. 9.
to read its descriptions in his word, while as yet he holds back the face of
his throne, while the countenance of inthroned Majesty cannot be seen: when so
little a portion is heard of him, Ver. 14.
and the thunder of his power so little understood. The infinitely fainter
Rays of this power in a creature; power in that unspeakable diminution and
abatement, that derived, precarious power, when it is innocently used, is
observed with pleasure; Here is power in the throne, power in its chief and
highest seat; essential, and self-originated power; the root and fountain, the
very Element of power; power in its proper situation, in its native place to
which it belongs. God has spoken once, Psalm. 62. 11. power to God Hebr.
twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God. It languishes in a
Creature as in an alien Subject. If I speak of strength, Job. 26.
lo he is strong (says Job) q. d. Created power is not worth the speaking of;
Here is the power that deserves the name, that is so indeed. How satisfying a
pleasure will this afford to contemplate this radical power? this all-creating,
all-ruling power, the principle of all action, motion, and life, throughout the
whole Creation. This will be as natural a pleasure, as the Child takes in the
Mothers bosom, and in embracing the womb that bare it. How grateful to behold
whence the vast frame of nature Sprang! what stretched out the Heavens,
established the Earth, sustained all things, what turned the mighty Wheels of
Providence throughout all the successions of time; what ordered, and changed
times and seasons, chained up Devils, restrained the outrages of a tumultuous
world, preserved Gods little Flock; especially what gave Being to the new
Creation, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.
The exceeding greatness of power that wrought in them that believed, etc. what
made hearts love God, embrace a Savior, what it was that overcame their own,
Psalm. 110. 3.
and made them a willing people in that memorable day.

How delightful a contemplation to think, with so enlarged an understanding of
the possible effects of this power, and, so far as a creature can range into
infinity, to view innumerable creations, in the creative power of God.

And yet how pleasant to think not only of the extents, but of the restraints
of this power, and how, when none could limit, it became ordinate, and did
limit it self; that, since it could do so much, it did no more; turned not
sooner a degenerous world into flames: Posse and nolle nobile.
withhheld it self from premature revenge, that had abortiv'd the womb of Love,
and cut off all the hopes of this blessed Eternity that is now attained. This
also speaks the greatness of power. Numb. 14. 17, 18.
Let the power of my Lord be great according as thou have spoken the Lord is
gracious, long-suffering, etc. This was his mightiest power, whereby he
overcame himself. Fortior est qui se, etc.

3. And what do we think of the ravishing open faced, and have laid aside its
vail; when his amiable smiles shall be chekered with no intermingled frowns;
the light of that pleasing countenance be obscured by no intervening cloud!
when goodness (which is love issuing into benefaction, or doing good) grace
(which adds freeness unto goodness) mercy (which is grace toward the miserable
shall conspire in their distinct, and variegated appearances to set off each
other, and enhance the pleasure of the admiring soul! when the wonted doubts
shall all cease, and the difficulty vanish of reconciling (once necessary)
fatherly severity with Love. When the full sense shall be unfolded to the life,
of that description of the divine nature, God is Love; and the soul be no
longer put to read the love of God in his name (as Moses was when the sight of
his face could not yet be obtained) shall not need to spell it by letters and
syllables, but behold it in His very nature it self, and see how intimately
Essential it is to the divine Being. How glorious will this appearance of God
be (we now hear something of the glory of his grace) and how satisfying the
intuition of that glory! Ephesians. 1. 6.
Now is the proper season for the full exercise and discovery of Love. This day
has been long expected and lo now it is dawned upon the awaking soul: It Is now
called forth; its senses unbound, all its powers inspirited, on purpose, for
love visions and enjoyments, it is now to take its fill of loves. The Apostles
extatical prayer is now answered to the highest degree possible with respect to
such a one. Ephesians. 3. 16. 17. 18. 17.
He is now according to the riches of divine glory, strengthened with might by
the Spirit in the inner man -- to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; to know the love that passes
knowledge, etc. He shall now no longer stand amazed spending his ghesses What
manner of love this should be and expecting fuller discoveries, further effects
of it, that did not yet appear; but sees the utmost, all that his soul can bear
or wish to see. He has now traced home the rivulets to their fountain, the
beams to the very Sun of Love. He has got the prospect, at last, into that
heart, where where the great thoughts of love were lodged from everlasting?
where all its counsels and designs were formed. He sees what made God become a
man? what clothed a Deity with humane flesh? what made Eternity become the
birth of time (when come to its parturient fullness) what moved the heart of the
Son of God to pitch his Tabernacle among men? Gal. 4. 4.
what engaged him to the enterprise of redeeming sinners? what moved him so
earnestly to contest with a perishing world? led him at last to the Cross, made
him content to become a sacrifice to God, a spectacle to Angels and men in a
bitter reproachful death, inflicted by the Sacrilegious hands of those whom he
was all this while designing to save. The amazed soul now sees into the bottom
of this design; understands why it self was not made a prey to Divine revenge;
whence it was that it perish't not in its enmity against God; that he was not
provoked, by the obstinacy of its disobedience, and malice of its unbelief,
beyond the possibility of an atonement; why he so long suffered its injurious
neglects of him, and unkind repulses of a merciful Savior; and persuaded till
at last he overcame, made the averse heart yield, the careless disaffected soul
cry out, Where is my God? now a Christ or I perish? All this is now resolved
into love; And the adoring soul sees how well the effects agree to their cause,
and are owned by it. Nothing but heaven it self that gives the sense, can give
the notion of this pleasure.

4. Nor will the glory of holiness, be less resplendent, that great Attribute
which even in a remote descent from its original, is frequently mentioned with
the adjunct of beauties. What loveliness will those beauties add to this
blessed face! Psalm. 110. 3. etc.


Not here to insist (which is besides my purpose) upon the various notions of
holiness. Real holiness Scripture states in purity, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
an alienation from sin, it is set in opposition to all filthiness to all moral
impurity, and in that notion it best agrees to God, and comprehends his
righteousness, and veracity, and indeed, whatever we can conceive in him under
the notion of a moral excellency.

This may therefore be styled a transcendental attribute, that as it were runs
through the rest, and casts a glory upon every one. It Is an attribute of
attributes; Those are fit predications, holy power, holy truth, holy love, etc.
And so it is the very luster, and glory of his other perfections. Exodus 15. 11.
He is glorious in holiness. Hence in matters of greatest moment, he is
sometimes brought in Swearing by his holiness (which he is not wont to do by
any one single attribute) as though it were a fuller expression of himself,
Psalm. 89. 35. Amos 4* 2.
(an adaequalior conceptus) than any of the rest.

What is of so great account with him, will not be of least account with his
holy ones, when they appear in his glorious presence. Their own holiness is a
conformity to his, the likeness of it. And as their beholding it forms them
into that likeness: so that likeness makes them capable of beholding it with
pleasure. Divine holiness does now more ravish than affright. This has been
the language of sinful dust, 1 Samuel 6.
Who can stand before this holy God? when holiness has appeared armed with
terrors, guarded with flames, and the Divine Majesty been represented as a
consuming fire. Such apprehensions sin and guilt naturally beget. The sinners
of Sion were afraid. But so far as the new man is put on, created after God,
and they who were darkness, are made light in the Lord, he is not under any
notion more acceptable to them, than as he is the holy one. They love his Law,
because holy; and love each other, because holy, and hate themselves, because
they are no more so. Holiness has still a pleasing aspect when they find it in
an Ordinance, meet it in a Sabbath, every glimpse of it is lovely. But with
what triumphs has the holiness of God himself been celebrated even by Saints
on earth? Exodus 15 11.
Who is a God like unto thee, 1 S^m 1 2.
glorious in holiness! There is none holy as the Lord, Psalm. 30. 4* 97. 12.
for there is none besides thee. Sing unto the Lord, all ye Saints of his, and
give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness. What thoughts will they have of
it, Si ergo pulchritudo divina nondum visa, sed totum cr^dita and spera^a
tantum ign^m desiduii excitat: Quid faciet cum remo^o v^le ut est in se
conspicitur? Omnia ^id faci^^ ut to (...) voluptatis illius inebriati, neque
velimus, neque passi^^es, vel ad punctum tempo is ocu^os ab ea divertere. Bella
made ascens. mentis ad D^um grad. 2.
when their eyes can behold that glory? when they immediately look on the
archetypal holiness, of which, their own is but the image; and can view that
glorious pattern they were so long in framing to! How joyfully will they then
fall in with the rest of the heavenly host; and join in the same adoration and
praise; in the same acclamation, and triumphant song, holy, holy, holy, Lord
God of Sabbath. How unconceiveable is the pleasure of this sight; when the
(...), the first pulchritude, the original beauty offers it self to view!
Holiness is intellectual beauty; Divine holiness is the most perfect, and the
measure of all other; And what is the pleasure or satisfaction, of which we
speak but the perfection and rest of love! Now Love, Max. Tyr. dissert. 11.
as love, respects, and connotes a pulchritude in its object. And then the most
perfect pulchritude, the ineffable, and immortal pulchritude, that cannot be
declared by words, or seen with eyes, (they are an Heathens expressions
concerning it) how can it but perfectly, Id. Ibid.
and eternally please and satisfy!

And we are told by the great Pagan Theologue Plato in Phaedro p^ssius. (Though
he there speak these things as the memories of his supposed praeex^stent soul)
(...).
in what state we can have the felicity of that spectacle; not in our present
state: When we have, indeed, but obscure representations of such things as are,
with souls, of highest excellency. But when we are associated to the blessed
quire. When we are delivered from the body (which we now carry about as the
Oyster does its shell.) When we are no longer sensible of the evils of time,
when we wholly apply our selves to that blessed vision, are admitted to the
beholding of the simple permanent sights, and behold them, being our selves
pure, in the pure light; Then have we the view of the bright shining
pulchritude, etc.

2. It is an entire or united glory. We have something of the divine glory
shining, now, upon us: but the many interpositions cause a multifarious
refraction of its light. We have but its dispersed rays, its scattered
dischevel'd beams; we shall then have it perfect and full. It Is the eternal
glory we are hereafter to behold.

Eternity (as the notion of it is wont to be stated) is a duration that
excludes both Succession, and End.

And if it be an unsuccessive duration, (though it is more difficult to
apprehend how the being or enjoyments of a creature can come under that
mensuration) the glory presented to the view of a blessed soul, cannot be
presented by parcels, but at once. Aeternitas est interminabilis vitae tota
simul and perfecta possessio.
In our temporary state, while we are under the measure of time, we are not
capable of the fullness of blessedness, or misery, for time exists not
altogether but by parts. And indeed we can neither enjoy, nor suffer more at
once than can can be compast within one moment; for no more exists together.
But our relation to eternity (according to this notion of it) will render the
same invariable appearance of glory always presentaneous to us, in the entire
fullness of it. We read indeed of certain (...) afterings of Faith (as it may be
significantly enough rendered, 1 These. 3. 10.
let but the novelty of the expression be pardoned) things lacking we read it,
but there will be here no (...) afterings of glory. What is perfect admits no
increase; it is already full, and why should not a full glory satisfy? there is
here no expectation of (greater) future, to abate the pleasure of present
discoveries. Why therefore shall not this satisfaction be conceived full and
perfect? It must be the fullness of joy.

It Is permanent glory; a never fading, unwithering glory, 1 Pet 1 3.
((...)) glory that will never be sullied, 2 Cor* 4. 17.
or obscured, never be in a declination. 2 Timothy 2 10.
This blessed face never grows old; 1 P^t. 5 10.
never any wrinkle has place in it. It Is the eternal glory, in the other parts
of the notion of eternity; as it imports an endless duration, neither subject
to decay, in it self, or to injury, or impairment from without. Isa. 60. 14.
As stable as the divine being [thy God, thy Glory, the Lord thy everlasting
light] if that have a true sense with respect to any state of the Church
milit^^^ on earth, it must needs have a more full t^nse, in reference to it
triumphing in heaven. As, therefore, full, entire glory afford's fullness of
joy, permanent, everlasting glory affords pleasures for ever more. Psalm* 16 11.


An appropriate glory, even to them it is so, a glory wherein they are really
interessed. It Is The glory of their God, And their happiness is designed to
them from it.
They are not unconcerned in it as it is the glory of God. It cannot but be
grateful to them to behold the shining glory of their God, whom they feared,
and served before; while they could have no such sight of him. That glory of
his was once under a cloud, concealed from the world, wrapped up in obscurity; It
now breaks the cloud, and justifies the fear, and reverence of his faithful,
and Loyal servants, against Atheistical Rebels that feared him not. It Is
infinitely pleasing to see him now so glorious, whom they thought to have a
glory beyond all their conceptions before; while others would not think so of
him, but judged it safe to slight, and set him at naught. Subjects share in
their Princes glory, Children in their Fathers. But besides that collateral
interest, that interest by reflection.

They have a more direct interest in this glory. A true and real right upon a
manifold title, The Fathers gift, Sons purchase, Holy Ghosts obsignation, and
earnest; The promises tender; their faiths acceptance; their forerunners
prepossession; Romans 8. 17.
yea it is their inheritance; they are children, Chapter 15 7.
and therefore heirs, heirs of God, 1 These. 2. 12.
and joynt-heirs with Christ, to the same glory with him. They are by him
received to the glory of God, called to his Kingdom and glory. Will it not
contribute exceedingly to their satisfaction, when they shall look upon this
glory, not as unconcerned spectators, but as interressed persons. This is my
happiness to behold and enjoy this blessed God? what a rapturous expression is
that, God our own God shall bless us, Psalm. 67. 6.
and that, Thy God thy glory. Upon interest in God, follows their interest in
his glory and blessedness: Which is so much the dearer; and more valuable, as
it is theirs. Their glory, from their God. They shall be blessed by God, their
own God; Drink waters out of their own well. How indearing a thing is
propriety* Another man's son is ingenious, comely, personable; this may be
matter of envy, but mine ^wn is so, this is a joy. I read in the life of a
devout Nobleman of France Monsieur de Renti.
that receiving a Letter from a friend, in which were incerted these words,
Deus meus, and omnia; my God, and my all; he thus returns back to him, I know
not what your intent was to put into your letter these words, Deus meus, and
omnia; my God, and my all: Only you invite thereby to return the same to you,
and to all creatures; My God, and my all, my God, and my all, my God and my
all: If perhaps you take this for your Motto, and use it to express how full
your heart is of it; think you it possible I should be silent upon such an
invitation? and not express my sense thereof? Likewise be it known unto you
therefore, that he is my God, and my all; and if you doubt of it, I shall speak
it an hundred times over: I shall add no more; for any thing else is
superfluous to him that is truly penetrated with my God, and my all; I leave
you therefore in this happy state of subjection; and conjure you to beg for me
of God the solid sense of these words.

And do we think my God, and my all, or my God, and my glory, will have lost
its emphasis in heaven! or that 'twill be less significant among awaked souls?
These things concur then, concerning the object; it is most excellent (even
divine) entire, permanent, and theirs: How can it but satisfy?

CHAP. VI.
What the Vision of Gods face contributes to the Souls satisfaction. Estimated
from the consideration of the act of vision it self. Wherein this pleasure
surpasses that of sense. A comparison pursued more at large, between this
intuition and discourse between it, and Faith. This intuition more absolutely,
considered its characters; and why they contribute to the satisfaction of the
blessed Souls. That it is (viz.) efficacious, comprehensive, fixed,
appropriative.

THe act of vision, or intuition it self. How nature of the act; Res sunt
perfectio^es vel imperfectiores prout a summa perfectione magis vel minime
abscedu it.
as well as the excellency of the object. In as much as every vital act is
pleasant, the most perfect act of the noblest faculty of the soul must needs
be attended with highest pleasure. It Is a pleasure that most nearly imimates
divine pleasure. And every thing is more perfect, as it more nearly approaches
divine perfection.

Intellectual pleasure is as much nobler than that of sense; as an immortal
Spirit is more noble than a clod of earth. The pleasure of sense is drossie
feculent, the pleasure of the mind refined, Pet. (...) de cogau^o^e dei.
and pure; that is faint and languid, this lively, and vigorous; that scant and
limited, this ample and enlarged; that temporary and fading, See C^l^^rwel of
the light of nature speaking (as I remember) to this purpose. c. 17.
this durable, and permanent; that flashie, superficial; this solid and
intense; that raving, and distracted; this calm and composed. Whence even that
great (reputed) sensualist Epicure himself, professedly disclaimes (or is
represented as disclaiming) the conceit of placing happiness in sensual
delights. Quo ci^ca and cum universe (...) beatae vi^^e esse finem di^imus;
long profect^ ^bsumus ut e^s voluptates quae sunt virorum luxa^d (...), aut
aliorum etiam, qu^tenus spectantu^ in ipsa mo^ione, (...), qua nimirum sensus
jucunde dulciterque assicitur, intelliganus: vel^ti quidam rem ignorantes, aut
a nobis dissentientes, aut alioquia (...) nos male affecti, int^pretantur; Sed
illud duntaxat (ut res (...)) intelligimus; no^ dole^o corpore; animo non
perturb^ri, Gassend. Syn^^^. Philos. Epicur.


And, as the pleasure of intellection excells all the pleasure of sense, so
does the pleasure of intuition, excel all other intellectual pleasure. Let us
to this purpose, but consider, generally, this way of knowing things, and
compare it with those two other waves, by Discouse. Faith.


1. Discourse. I mean (that I be not mistaken by the vulgar Reader) the
discourse of the mind or ratioc^nation, that way of attaining the knowledge of
things, by comparing one thing with another, considering their mutual
relations, connexions, dependencies; and so arguing out what was more doubtful,
and obscure, from what was more known and evident.

To the altogether unlearned it will hardly be conceiveable; and to the learned
it need not be told, how high a gratification this employment of his Reason
naturally yields to the mind of a man: When the harmonious contexture of truths
with truths; the apt coincidence, the secret links, and junctures of coherent
notions are clearly discerned; When effects are traced up to their causes;
Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
Properties lodged in their native subjects: Things sifted to their Principles.
What a pleasure is it when a man shall apprehend himself regularly led on
(though but by a slender thread of discourse) through the Labyrinths of nature;
when still new discoveries are successfully made, every further enquiry ending
in a further prospect; and every new Scene of things entertaining the mind with
a fresh delight! How many have suffered a voluntary banishment from the world,
as if they were wholly strangers, and unrelated to it; rejected the
blandishments of sense, macerated themselves with unwearied studies for this
pleasure; making the ease and health of their bodies, to give place to the
content and satisfaction of their minds!

But how much intuition has the advantage, above this way of knowledge, may be
seen in these two obvious respects. No^ ^ulli laed^o (...) ve^tatis, cuilib^t
opinioni potius igaavi succumb ^nt; quam i^ explorand^ (...), pertinaci (...)
persev rire (...) Mr. Felix. Octiv. 9.


1. It Is a more facile way of knowing; Here is no need of a busy search; a
tiresome indagation, (the difficulty whereof makes the more slothful, rather
trust than try) a chaining together of consequencies. The Soul has its
clothing (its vestment of light) upon as cheap terms as the Lilies theirs;
does neither toil nor spin for it: And yet Solomon, in all the glory of his
(famed) wisdom was not aray'd like it. This knowledge saves the expense of
study, is instantaneous not successive; The soul now sees more, at one view, in
a moment, than before in a lifes-time. As a man has a speedier, and more
grateful prospect of a pleasant Country, by placing himself in some commodious
station that commands the whole Region; than by traveling through it. It Is no
pains to look upon what offers it self to my eye. Where there is a continued
series of consequencies, that lie naturally connected; the soul pleasingly
observes this continuity, but views the whole frame, the whole length of the
line, at once (so far as its limited capacity can extend) and needs not discuss
every particle, severally, in this series of truths; and proceed gradatim from
the knowledge of one truth to another; in which case only one, at once, would
be present to its view. It sees things that are connected, not because they are
so. As a man coveniently placed in some eminent station, may possibly see, at
one view, all the successive parts of a gliding stream (...)
; but he that sits by the waters side, not changing (...) place, sees the same
parts only because (...) succeed, and these that pass make way (...) them that
follow to come under his eye: (...) does a learned man, apply, describe the
^^successive knowledge of God; of which the glorified souls way of knowing, is
an imitation, (...) the very words seeing or beholding (which it ^^so
frequently set forth by in Scripture) do naturally import. Yet that as to them,
all ra^^cination shall be excluded that state, I see (...) reason to admit;
though with God it can ^^ve no place. And, as he is reckoned to live
^^pleasanter life, that spends upon a plentiful ^^ate; than he that gets his
bread by the sweat (...) his brows; so this more easy way of knowing must
needs be reckoned more pleasing. This knowledge is as Jacob's Venison, not
hun^^ed for, but brought to hand. The race is not ^ere to the swift; The
unlearned Idiot knows as much as the profoundest Rabbi (at least with as much
satisfaction) and all arms are of an equal size. Herbert.


2. It Is more certain. For what do we use ^o reckon so certain as what we see
with our eyes? Better (even in this respect) is the sight of the eyes, than the
wandering of the desire. While, here, the mind is carried with most earnest
desire to pursue knowledge, it very often mistakes its way, and miserably
wanders. In our most wary ratiocinations, we many times shoot at rovers; but
when we know by ^his Vision, our mark is immediately presen^ed to our eye. We
are in no danger to be ^mposed upon by delusive appearances of things. We look
through no fallacious medium's, are held in no suspense; puzzled with no doubts,
whether such consequencies withhold, such conclusions be rightly inferred, an^
so are not retarded from giving a present unwavering assent. Here are no
perplexing intricacies, no dubious hallucinations, or uncertain guesses; we see
things as they are by ^ simple and undeceiving light, with both subjective, and
objective certainty, being secure both from doubt, and error.

2. Faith. How magnificent things does Scripture speak of this grace! which the
experience also of such as have been wont to li^^ by it ( i. e. to make it the
governing principle of their lives) does abundantly confirm. Ho^ clear are its
apprehensions? (...)
it is the evidence ^ things not seen; Heb 11. 1.
how sweet its enjoyments whom not seeing ye love, and though now you (...) him
not, 1 Pet* 1. 8.
yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Even the Heathen Theology has magnify it above knowledge, What is it (says
one that unites us with the self-goodness, and (...) joins us thereto, that it
quiets or gives re^^ to all our action and motion; I will express^ it in one
word, it is faith it self, which un^speakably and after a hidden manner, do^
unite and conjoyn happy souls with the sel^ good. For (says he) it concerns us
neither in a way of Science (...) etc. (...) Plat. T^^el.
or with any i^ perfection to enquire after the good but (...) behold our
selves in the divine light, and (...) shutting our eyes, to be placed in the
unknown and secret unity of beings.

And a latter writer gives us this, as a conclusion from that former Author.
That as Faith which is credulity, P^cus Mirand.
is below Science, so that Faith, which is truly so called, is,
super-substantially, above Science, and intelligence immediately uniting us to
God.

But it is evident intuitive knowledge far exceeds even faith also. Isa. 53. 1.
Romans 10. 16.


1. It Is more distinct and clear, Faith is taking a thing upon report; Who has
believed ^ur report? And they are more general, languid apprehensions, we have
of things this way. Faith enters at the ^ar; it comes by hearing. And if we
com^^re the perceptions of these two external (...)* that of hearing, and
sight, the latter is unspeakably more clear, and satisfying. He that has
knowledge of a foreign Country, only by report of another, has very
indistinct apprehensions of it, in comparison of him who has traveled it
himself. While the Queen of Sheba only heard of Solomon's glory, she could not
satisfy her self, without an (...), (...) ^^ght of her own eye; and, when she
saw it. (...) ^aith, the one half was not told her of wh^^ she now beheld. The
Ear more slowly and gradually receives; and the Tongue more defectively
expresses, to another, an account of things, than ones ocular inspection would
take it in* But, as to the excellency of this (...) above Faith, the comparison
(...) knowing by the ministry of a more (...) sense, and a less noble, but
knowing by dependence on a less noble, and without dependence upon any at all.
When God has been pleased to afford discoveries in that way of Vision to men
in the body (his Prophets, etc.) he has usually bound up all their senses by
sleep, or trances; sense has had no part or lot in this matter, unto believing
it must necessarily concur.

2. More affective. What we see, even with our external eye, much more
powerfully moves our heart, than what we only give credit to upon hearsay. The
Queen of Sheba much admired no doubt Solomon's famed splendour, and magnificence,
while she only heard of it, but when she saw it, it puts her into an ecstasy,
it ravished away her soul, she had no more spirit, etc. What would the sight of
the Divine glory do, if God did not strengthen with all might; were there not
as well glorious power to support, as powerful glory to transform!

Job had heard of God, by the hearing of the ear, but when once his eye saw him
(whether that were by the appearance of any sensible glory, which is probable
enough, for it is said, the Lord answered him out of the whirlewind, or whether
by a more immediate revelation, it is less-material (what work did it make in
his soul?

The Devils believe, and tremble; so impressive are the pre-apprehensions of
Judgment to come, and the consequents thereof with them; yet their present
torment, thence, is no torment, in comparison ( art thou come to torment us
before the time?) of what they expect. Let wicked men consider this (they will
have their intuitions in hell too) were your belief, and terror thereupon, with
reference to the eternal Judgment, and the impendent wrath of God, equal to
what the Devils themselves have, upon the same account; actual sensation will
make you more exceed your selves in point of misery, than the Devils do now
exceed you. There is, no doubt, a proportionable difference between the
impressions of present faith, and future vision, with holy souls. Now, not
seeing, yet believing, they rejoice with joy unspeakable: their present joy
cannot be spoken; their future then cannot be thought! Experience daily tells
us, how greatly, sensible, present objects have the advantage upon us, beyond
those that are spiritual and distant, though infinitely more excellent and
important. When the tables are turned, the now sensible things disappear, a new
scene of things invisible and eternal, is immediately presented to our view;
the excellency of the objects, the disposedness of the subjects, the nature of
the act, shall all multiply the advantages on this part, How affective will
this vision be; beyond what we have ever found the faint apprehensions of our
so much disadvantaged faith to amount to? A kind message from an indulgent
Father to his far-distant Son, informing of his welfare, and yet continuing
love will much affect, but the sight of his Fathers face will even transport
and overcome him with joy.

But further consider this intuition a little more particularly and absolutely
in it self. So you may take this somewhat distincter account of it in some few
particulars, corresponding to those by which the object (the glory to be
beheld) was lately characterized.

1. It will be a vigorous efficacious intuition; as that which it beholds is
the most excellent, even the divine glory; such an object cannot be beheld but
with an eye full of lively vigor; a sparkling, a radient eye; A weak eye would
be struck blind, would fail, and be closed up at the first glance. We must
suppose, then, this Vision to be accompanied with the highest vitality, the
strongest energy: A mighty plenitude of Spirit, and Power, no less than the
divine; nothing but the divine power can sufficiently fortify the soul to
behold divine glory. When the Apostle speaks only of his desire of glory, he
that has wrought us to this self same thing (says he) is God; he that has
molded us, suitably framed us for this thing (as the word signifies) is God;
it is the work of a Deity to make a Soul desire Glory; certainly then it is his
work to give the power of beholding it, and by how much the more of power, so
much the more of pleasure, in this Vision. Weak sight would afford but languid
joy. But when the whole soul animated with divine power and life shall seat it
self in the eye: when it shall be as it were all eye, (as one said of God, whom
now it perfectly imitates) and be wholly intent upon Vision; apply it self
thereto with all its might as its only business, S. Hye^onym.
what satisfying joys does it now taste! renewed by every repeated view! How
does it now as it were prey upon glory, as the eye of the Eagle upon the beams
of the Sun! we meet with the expression of aures bibulae, here will be oculi
bibuli, thirsty eyes. A soul ready to drink in glory at the eye. If vision be
by intermission, what attractive eyes are here? drawing in glory, feeding upon
glory: If by extramission, what piercing darting eyes, sending forth the soul
at every look to embrace the glorious object.

There is a great power that now attends reallizing thoughts of God; whether it
appear in the consequent working of the soul directly toward God, or by way of
reflection upon it self. If directly toward God, how mightily is he admired;
who is a God like unto thee! If by reflection upon our own sin, and vileness;
how deeply does it humble, -- Now mine eye sees thee, therefore I abhor myse^f
-- Woe is me, I am undone, -- mine eyes have seen the Lord of glory. If by way
of reflection upon our interest in him, or relation to him; how mightily does
it support and comfort? I will look to the Lord, M^ca^. 7. 7.
-- my God will hear me. How full of rich sense is that Scripture, They looked
to him, and were lightened, Psalm 34* 5.
one look clothed them with light, cast a glory upon their souls; filled them
with life and joy: 'twas but a thought, the cast of an eye, and they were as
full as hearts could hold. O, the power then of these heavenly visions! when we
dwell in the views of that transforming glory!

2. This will be a comprehensive intu^tion; as its entire glory. I mean
comparatively, not absolutely comprehensive. More of the divine glory will be
comprehended, unspeakably, than before. It Is called, we know, by the Schoolmen,
the knowledge of comprehensors, in contradistinction to that of viators; we
shall better be able to discern the divine excellencies together; have much
more adequate conceptions, a fuller, and more complete notion of God: We shall
see him as he is. It Is too much observable, how in our present state, we are
prejudiced by our partial conceptions of him, and what an inequality they cause
in the temper of our Spirits.

For wicked men, the very notion they have of God, proves fatal to their souls;
or is of a most destructive tendency, because they comprehend not together what
God has revealed of himself. Most usually, they confine those few thoughts of
God they have only to his mercy, and that exclusively, as to his holiness, and
justice; hence their vain and mad presumption. The notion of an unholy (or a
not-holy, and not-just) God what wickedness would it not induce? Thou
thought I was altogether such a one as thy self: A God after their own
hearts: then the reigns are let loose. More rarely, when the conscience of
guilt has arrested the self-condemned wretch; God is thought of under no other
notion, than of an irreconcilable enemy, and avenger; as one thirsting after
the blood of Souls, and that will admit of no atonement; so without all
pretense, and so slatly contrary to all his discoveries of himself, do men dare
to affix to him black and horrid characters, forged only out, the radicated and
inveterate hatred of their own hearts against him. (That never takes up good
thoughts of any one) only because they have no mind to acquaint themselves with
him; and that they may have some color for their affected distance; and so,
perhaps, never return, but perish under an horrid, wilful despair.

And even the people of God themselves are too apt, sometimes, so wholly to fix
their eye upon love, and grace; that they grow into an unbecoming, uncreaturely
familiarity, while the thoughts of Infinite Majesty, adorable greatness, and
glory are asleep sometimes, possibly, apprehend vindicative justice, the
indignation and jealousy of God against sin, (precluding, meanwhile, the
consideration of his indulgent compassions toward truly humble, and penitent
souls) to that degree of affrightment, and dread, that they grow into an
unchildlike strangness toward him; and take little pleasure in drawing nigh to
him.

But when now our eye shall take in the discovery of divine glory equally; how
sweet, and satisfying a pleasure will arise from that grateful mixture of
reverent love, humble joy, modest confidence, meek courage, a prostrate
magnanimity, a triumphant veneration, a soul shrinking before the divine glory
into nothing; yet not contenting it self with any less enjoyment, than of him
who is all in all.

There Is nothing here in this complexion, or temper of Soul, but has its
warrant, in the various aspect of the face of God comprehensively beheld,
nothing but what is (even by its suitableness) highly grateful, and pleasing.

'Twill be fixed, steady intuition (as its object is permanent glory.) The
vision of God can neither infer, nor admit weariness. The eye cannot divert,
its act is eternally delectable, and affords an unvariable, undecaying
pleasure. Sensual delights soon end in loathing; quickly bring a glutting
surfeit, and degenerate into torments, P^^baist^s, quae (...) apt^^s vo^^ntur
(...) modum trans^^^ (...) S^n. Ep. 83. (...), etc. Socra^^^^m Epist. 9.
when they are continued and unintermittent. A Philosopher in an Epistle which
he writes to a friend, from the Court of Dionysius, where he was forceably
detained, thus bemoans himself, We are unhappy O Antisthenes, beyond measure,
and how can we but be unhappy that are burdened by the Tyrant every day with
the most sumptuous feasts, plentiful compotations, precious ointments, gorgeous
apparel, and I knew as soon as I came into this Island and City, how unhappy my
life would be. This is the nature and common condition of even the most
pleasing sensible objects. They first tempt, then please a little, then
disappoint, and lastly vex. The eye that beholds them blast's them, quickly
risles and de^lowers their glory; and views them with no more delight at first,
than disdain afterward. Creature enjoyments have a bottom, are soon drained
and drawn dry: hence there must be frequent diversions; Other pleasures must be
sought out; and are chosen, not because they are better, but because they are
new.

This demonstrates the emptiness and vanity of the Creature. Affectation of
variety only proceeds from sense of want; and is a confession, upon trial, that
there is not, in such an enjoyment, what was expected.

Proportionably, in the state of glory, a constant, indesicient fullness renders
the blessed soul undesirous of any change. There is no need of varieties, or
diversions; what did once please, can never cease to do so. This glory cannot
fade or lose any thing of its attractive power. The faculty cannot languish or
lose the disposition by which it is contempered and made proportionable
thereto: Hence no weariness can ensue. What, a soul in which the love of God is
perfected, grow weary of beholding him! The Sun will sooner grow weary of
shining; The touched Needle of turning its self to its wonted point; every
thing will sooner grow weary of its center, and the most fundamental Laws of
Nature be sooner antiquated and made void for ever.

The eye of the fool, Prove. 17. 24*
Solomon tells us is in the ends of the earth; his only, is a rolling wandering
eye, that knows not where to fix, wisdom guides, and fixes the eye of the holy
soul, determines it unto God only. Psalm. 16. 7, 8*
I will bless the Lord, who has given me counsel, my reins ^^so instruct me.
-- I have set the Lord always before me. Surely heaven will not render it less
capable of dijudication, of passing a right judgment of the excellency and
worth of things. And, here, a rational judgment will find no want; and an
irrational will find no place. Therefore, as permanent glory will certainly
infer a perpetual vision: perpetuated vision will as certainly perpetuate
thesouls satisfaction, and blessedness.

4. 'Twill be a possessive intuition: as it is an appropriate glory which it
pitches upon. 'Twill be the language of every look; this glory is mine. The
Soul looks not upon it shily, as if it had nothing to do with it; or with
slight, and careless glances; but the very posture of its eye speaks its
interest, and proclaims the pretentions it has to this glory. With how
different an aspect, does a stranger, passing by, and the owner look upon the
same house, the same lands. A man's eye lays his claim for him, and avowes his
right. A grateful object that one can say is his own, he arrests it with his
eye. So do Saints with appropriative looks, behold their God, and the Divine
Glory, Even with such an eye as he was wont to behold them. Isa. 66. 1, 2.
To this man will I look, etc. (that is, as the place of my rest, mentioned
before) he designs him with his eye, ^ Tim. 2. 19.
which is the import of that expression. The Lord knows who are his. His eye
marks them out; owns them as his own. As concerning others, whom he disowns,
the phrase is, I know you not. And how vastly different is such an intuition,
from that, when I look upon a thing with an hungry lingering eye which I must
never enjoy, or never expect to be the better for. This vision is fruitive;
unites the soul with the blessed object. Which kind of sight is meant when
actual blessedness is so often expressed by seeing God.

We see then what vision, the sight of Gods face contributes to the
satisfaction of blessed souls.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein assimilation (the likeness or glory of God impressed) contributes unto
satisfaction. Where is particularly propounded to be shown; what pleasure it
involves; what it disposes to. What it involves in the esse of it, what in the
cognosci. 1. The pleasure of being like God, discovered. 1. Showing, concerning
the Image of God (generally considered) that it is the souls health and
soundness restored; that it is a vital, an intimate, a connatural, a perfect
image.

OUr next business is to discover what assimilation, or the impressed likeness
of God may further add to this satisfied state, or what satisfying pleasure the
blessed soul finds in this, that it is like God.

And here we are distinctly to enquire into The pleasure which such an
assimilation to God involves in it self, tends, and disposes to


1. The pleasure it involves in it self; or which is taken in it abstractly
considered; which we may, more particularly unfold by showing.

The pleasure involved, 1. In being like God. 2. In knowing or reflecting upon
the same.


The Esse, Cognosci Of this assimulation.


The pleasure in being like God; which may be discovered both by a general
consideration hereof, and by instancing in some particulars, wherein blessed
souls shall be like him.

1. It is obvious to suppose an inexpressible pleasure in the very feeling, the
inward sensation, the holy soul will have of that happy frame in general,
whereinto it is now brought. That joyful harmony, that entire rectitude it
finds within it self. You may as soon separate light from a Sunbeam, as
pleasure from such a state.

This likeness, or conformity to God is an (...) a perfect temperament; an
athletique health ness; a strong sound constitution of soul: Do but imagine
what it is to a man's body, after a wasting sickness, to find himself well.
Frame a notion of the pleasure of health and soundness, when both all the parts
and members of the body are in their proper places and proportions, a lively,
active vigor, a sprightly strength possesses every part, and actuates the
whole, how pleasant is this temper! If we were all body, there could be no
greater felicity than this. But by how much the more noble any creature is, so
is it capable of more exquisite pains, or pleasures. (...), etc. Mo^. Tyr.
(...) 41.
Sin is the sickness and disease of the soul, infeebles all its powers;
exhausts its vigor, wastes its strength. You know the restless tossings, the
weary rollings to, and fro of a diseased languishing body; such is the case of
a sinful soul. Let it but seriously bethink it self, and then speak its own
sense, (but here is the malignity of the disease, it cannot be serious, it
always raves) what will it be; O I can take no rest. (The way of wickedness is
called a way of pain: Sinners would find it so, (...)
if the violence of the disease had not bereft them of sense.) Nothing savors
with me, P^al 139. ^4.
I can take comfort in nothing. The wicked is as a troubled Sea, Is. 57.
( as their name imports) that cannot rest. (...) H^c illud and ^ae^^um and
displicentia sui and nusquam r^sident^s animi votut^t^o and. Sen. de Tranquil.
animi.
Whose waters, etc. The Image of God, renewed in holiness and righteousness, is
health restored after such a consuming sickness; which, when we awake, when all
the drowsiness that attends our disease is shaken off, we find to be perfect.
The fear of the Lord (an ordinary paraphrase of holiness or piety) is said to
be health to the navel, and marrow to the bones. Our Lord Jesus invites wearied
sinners to come to him, Ma^th 11 28.
to take his y^ke on them, to learn of him, (that is, to imitate him, to be
like him) and promises they shall find rest to their souls. How often do we
find grace, and peace in conjunction in the Apostles salutations and
benedictions? We are told that the ways of divine wisdom ( i. e. which it
prescribes) are all pleas^ntness and peace. P* ^. 3. 13.
Psalm 19.
That in keeping the Commandments of God, 1 John 5. 3.
is great reward. That they are not grievous (i. e. for there seems to be a
Meiosis in the expression, are joyous pleasant.) And what are his Commandments,
but those expresses of himself, wherein we are to be like him, Romans 14. 17.
and conform to his will? The Kingdom of God (that holy order which he settles
in the spirits of men; his Law transcribed and impressed upon the soul, which is
nothing else but its conformation and likeness to himself) is righteousness,
Romans 8 6.
and then peace. The (...), (That notion, and judgment, and s^vour of things,
that excellent temper of mind and heart (for that is the extent of the
expression) whereof the holy Spirit of God is both the author, and pattern) is
life, and peace; involves them in it self. When one thing is thus in casu
recto, predicated of another, it speaks their most intimate connection, as Romans
14. 7. above, so 1 John 5. 3. This is love that, etc. So here, such a mind is
life, and peace (though the copula be not in the original, it is fitly supplied
in the translation) you cannot separate ( q. d.) life, and peace from such a
mind. It has no principle of death, or trouble in it. Let such as know any
thing of this blessed temper, and complexion of soul; compare this Scripture,
and their own experience together, when, at any time, they find their souls
under the blessed Empire, and dominion of a Spiritual mind; when wholly
spirituality rules and denominates them: are not their souls the very region of
life and peace? both these in conjunction, life and peace, not raging life, not
stupid peace; but a placid peaceful life, a vital vigorous rest and peace; it is
not the life of a fury, nor peace of a stone: Life that has peace in it, and
peace that has life in it. Now can the soul say, I feel my self well; all is
now well with me, nothing afflicts the Spiritual mind, Invulnerabile est no^
quod non feritur, sed quod non laeditur. Sen. de constantia sapientis, sive
quod in sapientem non cadit injuria.
so far, and while it is such: It Is wrapped up, and clothed in its own innocence,
and purity, and hereby become invulnerable, not liable to hurtful impressions;
Holiness (under the name of light, for that is by the context the evident
meaning of the word there) is by the Apostle spoken of as the Christians
armor. Put on, says he, the armor of light (in opposition to the works of
darkness which he had mentioned immediately before) strange armor! Romans 13. 12.
that a man may see through. A good man's armor is, Integer vitae scelerisque
pu^us, etc. Hor.
that he needs none, his armor is an open breast; that he can expose himself,
is fearless of any harm. Who is he that shall harm you, (...).
if ye be followers of that which is good? It should be read imitators, (...).
so the word signifies, and so, where as following is either of a pattern, or
an end, the former must be meant hear by the natural importance of that word
and hence, by [that which is good] is not to be understood created goodness;
for it is not enough to imitate that goodness, for so we must be good, but the
words are capable of being read, him that is good, or (which is all one) the
good. As Plato and his followers used the expression (...) fully, according to
the sens^ of M^t. 19. 17
And so it is the increate good, the blessed God himself, formally, considered
under the notion of good. Nothing can harm you; if you be like God, that's the
plain sense of this Scripture. Likeness to God is armor of proof, i. e. an
imitation of him, viz. in his moral goodness, which holiness (as a general name
of it) comprehends. A person truly like God is secure from any external
violence, so far as that it shall never be able to invade his Spirit. He is in
Spirit far raised above the tempestuous, stormy region, and converses where
winds and clouds have no place.

Nor can (so far as this temper of soul prevails) any evil grow up to such a
mind within it self. It is life and peace; It is light, and purity; for it is
the image, the similitude of God. God is light, 1 John 1.
and with him is no darkness at all. Holy souls were darkness, ^ut they are
light in the Lord. He the Father of lights, They the children of light. They
were darkness; not in the dark; Ephesians. 5. Jam. 1.
but (in the abstract) [darkness] as if that were their whole nature; and they
nothing else but an impure mass of co^globated darkness. So, ye are light, as
if they were that, and nothing else, (...), etc.
nothing but a Sphere of light.

Why, suppose we such a thing, as an entire Sphere of nothing else but pure
light; what can work any disturbance here? or raise a storm within it? A calm,
serene thing; perfectly homogeneous, void of contrariety, or any self-repugnant
quality, how can it disquiet it self?

We cannot yet say, that thus it is, with holy souls in their present state,
Marc. Anto^in. lib. 11.
according to the highest literal import of these words, ye are light. But thus
it will be, when they awake, when they are satisfied with this likeness: They
shall then be like God fully, and throughout. O the joy and pleasure of a soul
made after such a similitude! Now glory is become as it were their being, they
are glorified. Glory is revealed into them, transfused throughout them. Every
thing that is conceivable under the notion of an excellency, competent to
created nature, is now to be found with them, and they have it inwrought into
their very beings. So that in a true sense it may be said (that they are light)
they not only have such excellencies, but they are them. Omnia non tam habere
quam esse. Sen.
As the Moralist says of the wise, or virtuous man, that he not so properly
has all things, as is all things. It Is said of man, in respect of his
naturals, he is the image and glory of God. 1 Cor. 11. 7.
As for his supernatural excellencies, though they are not essential to man,
they are more expressive of God, and are now become so inseparable from the
nature of man too, in this his glorified state, that he can as soon cease to be
intelligent, as holy. The image of God, even in this respect, is not separable
from him: nor blessedness (surely from this image. As the divine excellencies,
being in their infinite fullness in God, are his own blessedness; so is the
likeness, the participation of them in the soul that now bears this image, its
blessedness. Nothing can be necessary to its full satisfaction, which it has
not in it self, by a gracious vouchsafement, and communication. The good man
(in that degree which his present state admits of) Solomon tells us is
sati^fied from himself; Prove. 14 14
he does not need to traverse the world, to seek his happiness abroad. He has
the matter of satisfaction (even that goodness which he is now enrich't with)
in his own breast and bosom; yet he has it all by participation from the
fountain-goodness. But that participated goodness is so intimately one with
him, as sufficiently warrants and makes good the assertion; he is satisfied
from himself, viz. from himself, not primarily, or independently; but by
derivation from him, who is all in all, Intimonostris intimior. Esse nostru^^
laudabis. Gibl. de lib. ex Plat. and Aug.
and more intimate to us, than we to our selves; and what is that participated
goodness, but a degree of the divine likeness? But when that goodness shall be
fully participated, when this image, and imitation of the divine goodness shall
be complete, and entire; then shall we know the rich exuberant sense of those
words. How fully will this image or likeness satisfy then?

And yet more distinctly we may apprehend how satisfying this likeness (or
image impressed) will be, if (a little further deferring the view of the
particulars of this likeness which we have defigned to instance in) we consider
these general properties of it.

1. It Is a vital image, not the image only of him that lives; the living God;
but it is his living and soul quickening image. It Is the likeness of him, in
that very respect, an imitation, and participation of the life of God, by
which, once revived, the soul lives that was dead before. It Is not a dead
picture, a dumb show, an unmoving Statue; but a living, speaking, walking
image; that wherewith the Child is like the Father: the very life of the
subject where it is, and by which it lives as God, speaks and acts comformably
to him. An image, not such a one as is drawn with a Pencil, (...)
that expresses only color, and figure, but such a one as is seen in a Glass,
that represents life, and motion (as was noted from a worthy Author before.)
It Is even (in its first and more imperfect draught) an analogical participation
(as we must understand it) of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 14.
before which first tincture, those preludious touches of it upon the Spirit of
man: his former state is spoken of as an alienation from the life of God; Ephesians
4 18.
as having no interest, no communion therein. The putting on of the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness, V. 23, 24.
and true holiness, is presently mentioned, in direct opposition to that dismal
state; implying that, to be a participation of the divine life. And certainly
so far as it is so, it is a participation of the divine blessedness too.

2. It Is an image most intimate therefore to its subject. Glory it is; but not
a superficial skindeep glory; such as shone in M^s^s his face, which he covered
with a Vail. It Is throug^y transformative; changes the soul throughout; not in
external appearance, but in its very nature. All outward imbellishments, would
add little felicity to a putrid corrupt soul. That would be but painting a
Sepulcher. Thi^ adds ^rnament unto life, and both, especially, to the inward
man. It Is not p^int in the (...), while d^^th is at the heart; but it is (...)
of such a principle within, as will soon form and attemper the man universally
to it self. It Is glory, blessedness participated, brought home and lodged in a
man's own soul, in his own bosom; he cannot then but be satisfied. A man may
have a rich stock of outward comforts, and while he has no heart to enjoy
them, be never the happier. But it is impossible that happiness should be thus
lodged in his Soul, made so intimate, and one with him, and yet, that he should
not be satisfied, not be happy.

3. An image connatural to the Spirit of man. Not a thing alien, and foreign,
to his nature, put into him purposely, as is were to torment and vex him; but
an ancient well-known inhabitant, that had place in him from the beginning. Sin
is the injurious intruder, which therefore puts the soul into a commotion, and
permits it not to rest, while it has any being there. This Image calms it,
restores it, works a peaceful orderly composure within, returns it to it self,
to its pristine blessed state being reseated there, as in its proper primitive
subject.

For though this image, in respect of corrupted nature, be supernatural; in
respect of institute, and undefiled nature it was, in a true sense, n^tural (as
has been demonstrated by diverse of ours against the Papists; and upon the
matter yielded by some of the more mode^^^e, among themselves. As may be seen
by comparing what I^st^^s says to the two q^estions. (...)
At least it was (...) with humane nature; consentane^us to it, and per^ective
of it. (We are speaking, it must be remembered of that part of the divine Image
that consists in moral excellencies, there being another part of it, as has
been said, that is even in the strictest sense, natural.)

There is nothing in the whole moral Law of God (in conformity where unto this
Image did, ab origin consist) nothing of what he requires from man, that is at
all distructive of his being; prejudicial to his comforts, repugnant to his
most innate principles; nothing that clashes with his reason; or is contrary to
his interest; or that is not, most directly, conservative of his being, and
comfors, agreeable to his most rational principles, subservient to his best and
truest interest. Deuteronomy. 10 12.
For what does God the Lord require but fear and love, Mich. 6. 8.
service, and holy walking, from an entire and undivided Soul? What? but what
is good, not only in it self, but for us, and in respect whereof his Law, Romans
7. 1^.
is said to be holy, just, and good.

And what he requires, he impresseth. This Law, written in the heart, is this
likeness.

How grateful then will it be, when, after a long extermination and exile, it
returns and repossesses the Soul; is recogn^zed by it, becomes to it a new
nature (yea even a divine) a vit^l, Rom ^. ^
living Law; The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus. What grievance, or
burden is it to do the dictates of nature? actions that easily, and freely slow
from their own principles; and when blessedness it self is infolded in those
very acts and inclinations? How infinitely satisfying and delightful will it
be, when the soul shall find it self connaturallized to every thing of its
duty, and shall have no other duty incumbent on it than to be happy! when it
shall need no arguments, and exhortations to love God, nor need be urged and
pressed, as heretofore to mind him, to fear before him. When love, and reverence,
and adoration, and praise, when delight, and joy shall be all natural acts. Can
you separate this in your own thoughts from the highest satisfaction?

4. This Image will be now perfect. Every way fully perfect.

First, In all its parts; as it is in the first instant of the souls entrance
into the state of regeneration (the womb of Grace knows no defective maimed
births.) And yet here is no little advantage, as to this kind of perfection;
For now those lively lineaments of the new creature all appear, which were much
obscured before; every line of glory is conspicuous; every character legible;
the whole entire frame of this Image is in its exact Symmetrie, and apt
proportions, visible at once. And it is an unspeakable addition to the pleasure
of so excellent a temper of Spirit, that accrews from the discernable
intireness of it. Heretofore some gracious dispositions have been to seek
(through the present prevalence of some corruption or temptation) when there
was most (...) occasion for their being reduced (...). H^nce the reward and
pleasure of (...), and improvement of the principle were lost together. Now the
Soul will be equally disposed to every holy exercise, that shall be suitable to
its state. Its temper shall be even, and Symmetral; Its notions uniform, and
agreeable; nothing done out of season. Nothing seasonable omitted, for want of
a present disposition of Spirit thereto. There will be not only an habitual,
but actual intireness of the frame of holiness in the blessed Soul.

2. Again, this Image will be perfect in degree; so as to exclude all degrees
of its contrary; and include all degrees of it self. There will now be no
longer any colluctation with contrary principles; no law in the members warring
against the law of the mind, No lustings of the flesh against the Spirit. That
war is now ended in a glorious victory, and eternal peace. There will be no
remaining blindness of mind, nor error of judgment, nor perverseness of will,
nor irregularity or rebellion of affections. No ignorance of God, no aversation
from him, or disaffection toward him. This likeness removes all culpable
dissimilitude or unlikeness. This communicated glory fills up the whole soul,
causes all clouds and darkness to vanish; leaves no place for any thing that is
vile or inglorious; it is pure glory, free from mixture of any thing that is
alien to it.

And it is it self full. The Soul is replenish't not with airy, evanid shadows,
but with substantial, solid glory, a massy, mighty glory, (for I know not but
subjective glory may be 2 Cor. 4 17.
taken in within the significancy of that known Scripture, if it be not more
principally intended in as much as the Text speaks of a glory to be wrought out
by afflictions, which are the files and furnaces, as it were, to polish or
refine the Soul into a glorious frame.) It Is cumulated glory, glory added to
glory. Here it is growing progressive glory; we are changed into the same image
from glory to glory. It shall now be stable, 2 Cor. 3 18.
consistent glory; that carries a self-fulness with it (which some include also
in the notion of purity Purum est quod est plenum ^ui, and quod minimum habet
ab^^ai.
it is full of it self, includes every degree requisite to its own perfection.
God has now put the last hand to this glorious Image, added to it its ultimate
accomplishments. Now, a conformity to Christ, even in the resurrection from the
dead, in his glorious state is fully attained. That prize of the high calling
of God is now won. And the humble sense of not having attained as yet, and of
not being already perfect, in which humility, the foundations of the temple of
God in a Saint is laid, and the building raised, is turned into joyful
acclamations, Grace, Grace for the laying on of the top stone, the finishing of
this glorious work.

And when this Temple is filled with the glory of the Lord, the soul it self
replenished with the divine fullness, will not its joy be full too? For here is
no sacrifice to be offered, but that of praise, and joy is the proper seasoning
for that sacrifice.

Now the new creature has arrived to the measure of the stature of a perfect
man in Christ Jesus. The first formation of this Spiritual (as well as of the
natural) man was hidden and secret, it was curiously wrought, and in a way no
more liable to observation, than that of framing the Child in the Womb; as that
is as hidden as the concoction of Minerals, or precious stones in the lower
parts of the earth; (no secrets of Nature can outvie the the Mysteries of
godliness) Its growth is also by very insensible degrees; as it is with the
products of nature; but its arrival to perfection is infinitely more strange,
than any thing in nature ever was, how sudden and wonderful is the change; when
in the twinkling of an eye, the blessed soul instantly awakes out of drowsy
languishings, and miserable weakness, into perfect strength, and vigor!

As a man is, Psalm. 19.
so is his strength; and as his strength is, so is his joy, and pleasure. The
Sun is said to go forth as a strong man, rejoicing to run his race. When a man
goes in the fullness of his strength upon any enterprise, how do blood and
spirits triumph beforehand, no motion of hand, or foot is without a sensible
delight. The strength of a man's Spirit is unspeakably more than that of the
outward man: Its faculties and powers more refined and raised; and hence are
rational or intellectual exercises and operations, much more delightful than
corporal ones can be.

But (still as the man is, so is his strength) it is an incomparably greater
strength that attends the heaven-born man. This man born of God, begotten of
God after his own likeness. This Hero, this Son of God, was born to Conflicts,
to Victories, to Triumphs. While he is yet but in his growing age, he overcomes
the world: (as Hercules the Serpents in his Cradle) overcomes the wicked one,
and is at last more than Conqueror. A mighty power attends godliness, a Spirit
of power, and of a sound mind: but how much this divine creature grows, so much
the more like God, and being perfect, Conflicts cease: (he had overcome, and
won the Crown before.) And now all his strength runs out into acts of pleasure.
Now, when he shall go forth in his might to love God (as we are required to
love him now with all our might) and every act of praise shall be an act of
power; done with a fullness of strength (as it is said their praises at the
bringing home of the Ark, were with all their might) O! what will the pleasure
be that shall accompany this state of perfection. Perfect power, and perfect
pleasure are here met, and shall for ever dwell together, and be always
commensurate to one another. They are so here, in their imperfect state; our
feeble, spiritless duties, weak, dead prayers, they have no more sweetness than
strength; no more pleasure, than power in them. Therefore we are listless, and
have no mind to duties, as we find we are more frequently destitute of a
spiritual livelyness and vigor therein. When a spirit of might, and power goes
on with us in the won^^d course of our converses with God; we then forecast
opportunities, and gladly welcome the season; when it extraordinarily occurs,
of drawing nigh to him. It cannot be thought that the connection and proportion
between these should fail in glory, or that when every thing else is perfect:
Matthew. 5.
The blessed Soul it self made perfect, even as God himself is perfect (this
bearing his likeness) should be unlike him in bliss; or its satisfaction be
imperfect.

CHAP. VIII.
The satisfaction carried in the glory of God impressed, further shown by
instances. Certain particulars of this impression instanc't in. A dependent
frame of Spirit. Subjection, or self-devoting, Love, Purity, Liberty,
Tranquillity.

BUt besides the general consideration of this likeness, we shall instance in
some of the particular excellencies comprehended in it. Wherein the blessed
shall imitate, and resemble God. Whence we may further estimate the pleasure
and satisfaction that being like God will afford. Only here let it be
remembered, that as we all along in this discourse, speak of likeness to God in
respect of moral excellencies; So by likeness to him in respect of th^se* we
understand not only a participation of those which are communicable; but a
correspondent impresse also, as to those that are incommunicable, as has been
more distinctly opened, in the Propositions concerning this likeness: Which
being premised I shall give instances of both kinds, to discover somewhat of
the inexpressible pleasure of being thus conformed to God.

And here, pretermitting the impresse of knowledge, of which we have spoken
under the former head of vision, we shall instance.

1. In a dependent frame of Spirit; which is the proper impress of the divine
all sufficiency, and self-fulness duly apprehended by the blessed soul. It is
not easy to conceive a higher pleasure, than this, competible to a creature,
The pleasure of dependence. Yea this is a higher than we can conceive.
Dependence (which speaks the creatures (...) or habitude to its principle as
the subserviency which imparts its habitude to its end, is twofold.

1. Natural, which is common and essential to all creatures; Even when no such
thing is thought on, or considered by them. The Creatures live, move, and have
their beings in God whether they think of it or no.

2. Voluntary or rational, which is de facto, appropriate; and de jure; common
to reasonable creatures as such. A dependence that is, (...)* Elective, and
with a foregoing reason, (which I understand by elective, not a liberty of
doing or not doing it) and concomit^nt consideration of what we do, and
animadversion of our own act, when knowingly and willingly, understanding our
selves in what we do, we go out of our selves and live in God. This is the
dependence of which I speak. And it cannot but be attended with transcendent
pleasure in that other State, when that knowledge and animadversion shall be
clear and perfect. Both, as this dependence imports.

A Nullifying of self. Magnifying (I may call it omnifying) of God, a making
him all in all.


As it imports (which it does most evidently) a self-annihilation. A pure
nullifying of self. It Is a continual recognition of my own nothingness. A
momently, iterated confession, that my whole being is nothing but a mere puff
of precarious breath, a bubble raised from nothing by the arbitrary fict of the
great Creator, reducible, had he so pleased, any moment to nothing again. These
are true and just acknowledgments; and to a well-tempered soul infinitely
pleasant, when the state of the ca is thoroughly understood (as now it is) and
it has the apprehension clear, how the creation is sustained, how, and upon
what terms its own being, life, and blessedness are continued to it; that it
is, by its self, nothing, and that it is every moment determinable upon the
constancy of the Creators Will, that it is not simply nothing. It Is not
possible that any thing should hinder this consideration from being eternally
delightful; but that diabolical uncreaturely Pride, that is long since banished
Heaven, and banished its very subjects thence also. Nothing can suit that temper
but to be a God; to be wholly independent; to be its own sufficiency. The
thoughts of living at the will and pleasure of another, are grating; but they
are only grating to a proud heart, which here has no place. A soul
naturallized to humiliations, accustomed to prostrations, and self-abasements,
trained up in acts of mortification, and that was brought to glory, through a
continued course, and series of self-denial: That ever since it first came to
know it self was wont to depend for every moments breath, for every glimpse of
light, for every fresh influence ( I live yet not I --) with what pleasure does
it now as it were vanish before the Lord! Gal 2. 20.
what delight does it take to diminish it self; and as it were disappear to
contract and shrivel up it self; to shrink even into a point, into a nothing,
in the presence of the divine glory, that it may be all in all. Things are now
pleasant (to the soul, in its right-mind) as they are suitable; as they carry a
comeliness and congruity in them. And nothing now appears more becoming, than
such a self-annihilation. The distances of Creator and Creature, of Infinite
and Finite, of a necess^ry and arbitrary being, of a self-originated and a
derived being of what was from ^ver^^sting, and what had a beginning, are now
better understood than ever. And the soul by how much it is now come nearer to
God, is more apprehensive of its distance. And such a frame, and posture does
hence please it best, as does most fitly correspond thereto. Nothing is so
pleasing to it as to be as it ought. That temper is most grateful that is most
proper, and which best agrees with its state. Dependence therefore is greatly
pleasing, as it is a self-nullifying thing. And yet it is, in this respect,
pleasing, but as a means to a further end. The pleasure that attends it is
higher and more intense, according as it more immediately attains that end, Viz.

The magnifying and exalting of God; which is the most connatural thing to the
holy soul. The most fundamental and deeply impressed Law of the New Creature.
Self gives place that God may take it, becomes nothing, that he may be all. It
vanishes, that his glory may shine the brighter.

Dependence gives God his power glory. It Is the peculiar honor and prerogative
of a Deity, to have a world of Creatures hanging upon it, staying themselves
upon it: to be the fulcrum, the center of a lapsing Creation. When this
dependence is voluntary and intelligent, it carries in it a more explicit
owning acknowledgment of God. By how much more this is the distinct and actual
sense of my soul: Lord, I cannot live but by thee, So much the more openly and
plainly do I speak it out, Lord, thou art God alone, thou art the fullness of
life and being, the only root and spring of life, The Everlasting I Am. The
being of beings.

How unspeakably pleasant to a holy soul will such a perpetual agnition or
acknowledgment of God be, when the perpetuation of its being, shall be nothing
else than a perpetuation of this acknowledgment; when every renewed aspiration,
every motion, every pulse of the glorified soul, shall be but a repetition of
it, when it shall find it self in the eternity of life, that everlasting state
of life, which it now possesses, to be nothing else than an everlasting
testimony that God is God: He is so, for I am, I live, I act, I have the power
to love him; none of which could otherwise ^e. When amongst the innumerable
myriads of the heavenly host, this shall be the mutual alternate testimony of
each to all the rest, throughout eternity will not this be pleasant? When each
shall feel continually, the fresh illapses, and incomes of God, the power, and
sweetness of divine influences, the inlivening vigor of that vital breath, and
find in themselves, thus we live and are sustained: and are yet as secure,
touching the continuance of this state of life, as if every one were a God to
himself; and did each one possess an entire Godhead. When their sensible
dependence on him, in their glorified state, shall be his perpetual triumph
over all the imaginary Deities, the phansied Numina, wherewith he was
heretofore provoked to jealousy: And he shall now have no rival left, but be
acknowledged and known to be all in all. How pleasant will it then be, as it
were to loose themselves in him! and to be swallowed up, in the overcoming
sense of his boundless, alsufficient, every where flowing fullness!

And then add to this; they do by this dependence actually make this fullness of
God their own. They are now met in one common principle of life and
blessedness, that is sufficient for them all. They no longer live a life of
care, are perpetually exempt from solicitous thoughts which here they could not
perfectly attain to in their earthly state. They have nothing to do but to
depend, to live upon a present self-fufficient good, which alone is enough to
replenish all desires; else it were not self-sufficient. (...). A^^st. de mer.
lib. 1. c. 4.
How can we divide in our most abstractive thoughts, the highest pleasure, the
fullest satisfaction from this dependence! It Is to live at the rate of a God; a
God-like life. A living upon immense fullness, as he lives.

2. Subjection; which I place next to dependence, as being of the same allay.
The product of impressed Sovereignty; as the other, of all-sufficient fullness:
Both, impressions upon the creature, corresponding to somewhat in God, most
incommunicably appropriate to him.

This is the souls real, and practical acknowledgement of the Supreme Majesty:
Its homage to its Maker: Its self-dedication: Than which nothing more suits the
state of a creature, or the Spirit of a Saint. And as it is suittable, it is
pleasant. It Is that by which the blessed Soul becomes, in its own sense, a
consecrated thing, a devoted thing, sacred to God: Its very life, and whole
being referred and made over to him. With what delightful relishes, what sweet
gusts of pleasure is this done! while the soul tastes its own act; approves it
with a full ungainsaying judgment; apprehends the condignity, and fitness of it
assents to its self herein; and has the ready suffrage, the harmonious
concurrence of all his powers. When the words are no sooner spoken, Worthy art
thou, O Lord, to receive glory, honor, and power, for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created; but they are resounded
from the penetralia, the inmost bowels, the most intimate receptacles, and
secret chambers of the Soul. O Lord, thou art worthy; worthy, that I, and all
things should be to thee; worthy to be the Omega, as thou art the Alpha, the
last, as thou art the first; the end, as thou art the beginning of all things;
the Ocean into which all being shall slow; as the Fountain from which it
sprang. My whole self, and all my powers, the excellencies now implanted in my
being, the privileges of my now glorified state, are all worth nothing to me
but for thee, please me only, as they make me fitter for thee. O the pleasure
of these Sentiments, the joy of such raptures! when the soul shall have no
other notion of it self, than of an everlasting sacrifice, always ascending to
God in its own flames.

For this devotedness, and subjection speak not barely, an act, but a state. A
Being to the praise of grace. Romans 12. 1.
A Living to God. And it is no mean pleasure that the sincere soul finds in the
imperfect beginnings, the first Essays of this life; the enitial breathings of
such a Spirit, its entrance into this blessed state; when it makes the first
tender, and present of it self to God (as the Apostle expresses it) when it
first begins to esteem it self an hallowed thing; separate, and set apart for
God. Its first act of unfeigned self-resignation; when it tells God from the
very heart, I now give up my self to thee to be thine. Never was marriage
covenant made with such pleasure, with so complacential consent. This quitting
claim to our selves, parting with our selves upon such terms, to be the Lords
for ever: O the peace, the rest, the acquiescence of Spirit that attends it!
When the poor soul that was weary of it self, knew not what to do with it self,
has now on the sudden found this way of disposing it self to such an
advantage! there is pleasure in this Treaty. Even the previous breakings and
relentings of the soul toward God are pleasant. But, O the pleasure of
consent! Romans 6. 13.
of yielding our selves to God, as the Apostles expression is: when the Soul is
overcome, and cries out, Lord, now I resign, I yield, possess now thy own
right, I give up my self to thee. That yielding is subjection, self-devoting;
in order to future service, V. 16.
and obedience. ( To whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, etc.) And
never did any man enrol himself, as a servant, to the greatest Prince on earth,
with such joy. What pleasure is there in the often iterated recognition of
these transactious: in multiplying such bonds upon a man's own soul (though done
faintly, while the fear of breaking, checks its joy in taking them on.) When in
the uttering of these words, I am thy servant, Psalm 116. 1^.
O Lord, thy servant, the son of thine handmaid; (i. e. thy born servant,
all^ding to that custom and Law among the Jews.) Ps. 119 38.
Thy servant devoted to thy fear, a man finds they fit his spirit, and are
aptly expressive of the true sense of his soul; is it not a grateful thing? And
how pleasant is a state of life consequent and agreeable to such transactions
and Covenants with God! when it is meat and drink to do his will. When his zeal
eats a man up; and one shall find himself secretly consuming for God! and the
vigor of his soul exhaled in his service! Is it not a pleasant thing so to
spend and be spent? when one can in a measure find that his will is one with
Gods, transformed into the divine will; that there is but one common will, and
interest, and end between him and us; and so that in serving God, we reign with
him; in spending our selves for him, we are perfected in him. Is not this a
pleasant life? Some Heathens have spoken at such a rate of this kind of life as
might make us wonder, and blush. One speaking of a virtuous person; says, he
is as a good Soldier that bears wounds, (...) de vita ^^ra, lib. 15. Et ut
b^^us (...) ^eret (...), etc.
and numbers skars, and at last, smitten through with darts, dying, will love
the Emperor, for whom he falls; he will (says he) keep in mind that ancient
precept, follow God. But they that complain, cry out and groan, and are
compelled by force to do his commands, and hurried into them against their
will, and what a madness is it (says he) to be drawn rather than follow? And
presently after subjoyns, we are born in a Kingdom; to obey God is liberty. The
same person writes in a Letter to a friend: If thou believe me when I most
freely discover to thee the most secret fixed being of my soul, Epist. 76.
in all things my mind is thus formed: I obey not God so properly as I assent
to him. I follow him with all my heart, not because I cannot avoit it. And
another, Epictet. Enchit.
Lead me to whatsoever I am appointed, and I will follow thee cheerfully, but
if I refuse, or be unwilling, I shall follow notwithstanding.

A Soul cast into such a mould, formed into an obediential subject frame, what
sweet peace does it enjoy! how pleasant rest! every thing rests most composedly
in its proper place. A bone out of joint knows no ease, nor lets the body enjoy
any. The creature is not in its place but when it is thus subject, is in this
subordination to God. By flying out of this subordination the world of mankind
is become one great disjoynted body; full of weary tossings, unacquainted with
ease, or rest. That soul that is but in a degree reduced to that blessed state
and temper, is as it were in a new world; so great, and happy a change does it
now feel in it self. But when this transformation shall be completed in it;
and the will of God shall be no sooner known than rested in with a
complacential approbation; and every motion of the first and great mover shall
be an efficacious law to guide and determine all our motions: and the
lesser-wheeles shall presently run at the first impulse of the great and
master-wheel, without the least rub or hesitation; when the law of sin shall no
longer check the law of God; when all the contentions of a rebellious flesh;
all the counter-strivings of a perverse, ungovernable heart, shall cease for
ever; O unconceivable blessedness of this consent, the pleasure of this joyful
harmony, this peaceful accord!

Obedience, where it is due but from one creature to another, carries its no
small advantages with it, and conducibleness, to a pleasant, unsolicitous life.
To be particularly prescribed to, in things about which our minds would
otherwise be tossed with various apprehensions, anxious, uncertain thoughts; how
great a privilege is it! I cannot forget a pertinent passage of an excellent
person of recent memory. And (says he) for pleasure I shall profess my self so
far from doting on that popular Idol, Dr. Ham^^^'s Sermon of Christ's easy yoke.
liberty, that I hardly think it possible for any kind of obedience to be more
painful than an unrestrained liberty. Were there not true bounds of
Magistrates, of Laws, of piety, of reason in the heart, every man would have a
fool, I add, a mad Tyrant to his Master, that would multiply him more sorrows,
than briars and thorns did to Adam, when ^e was freed from the bliss at once
and the restraint of Paradise; and was, sure, greater slave in the wilderness,
than in the enclosure; would but the Scripture permit me that kind of Idolatry,
the binding my faith, and obedience to any one visible infallible Judge or
Prince, were it the Pope, or the Mufti, or the grand Tartar; might it be
reconcilible with my Creed, it would be certainly with my inter^st, to get
presently into that posture of obedience: I should learn so much of the
Barbarian Ambassadors in Appian, which came on purpose to the Romans to
negotiate for leave to be their servants. 'Twould be my policy, if not my
piety, and may now be my wish, though not my faith, that I might never have the
trouble to deliberate, to dispute, to doubt, to choose (those so many profitless
uneasinesses) but only the favor to receive commands, and the meekness to obey
them. How pleasurable then must obedience be to the perfect will of the blessed
God, when our wills shall also be perfectly attempered and conformed there
unto! Perfectiflimum in suo genere est mensura reliquorum.
Therefore are we taught, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. What is
most perfect in its kind gives rule to the rest.

3. Love. This is an eminent part of the image or likeness of God in his
Saints; As it is that great Attribute of the divine being that is, 1 John 4. 8,
16.
alone, put to give us a notion of God. God is love. This is an excellency
(consider it whether in its original, or copy) made up of pleasantnesses. All
love has complacency or pleasure in the nature, and most formal notion of it.
To search for pleasure in love, is the same thing as if a man should be
solicitous to find water in the Sea, or light in the body of the Sun. Love to a
friend is not without high pleasure, when especially he is actually present,
and injoye'd. Love to a Saint rises higher in nobleness, and pleasure,
according to the more excellent qualification of its object. It Is now in its
highest improvement, in both these aspects of it, where whatsoever tends to
gratify our nature, whether as humane, or holy, will be in its full
perfection. Now does the soul take up its stated dwelling in Love, even in God
who is Love; and as he is Love; it is now enclosed with Love, encompas'd with
Love, it is conversant in the proper region, and element of Love. The Love of
God is now perfected in it: That Love which is not only participated from him
but terminated in him, 1 John 4.
That perfect Love casts out tormenting Fear. So that here is pleasure without
mixture. How naturally will the blessed soul now dissolve and melt into
pleasure! It is new framed on purpose for Love-imbraces, and enjoyments. It
shall now love like God, as one composed of Love. It shall no longer be its
complaint and burden that it cannot retaliate in this kind; that being beloved
it cannot love.

4. Purity. Herein also, must the blessed soul resemble God, and delight it
self. Every one that has this hope (viz. of being hereafter l^ke God, and
seeing him as he is) purifieth himself as he is pure. A God-like purity is
intimately connext with the expectation of future blessedness, much more with
the fruition. Blessed are the pure in heart; besides the reason there annexed
[for they shall see God] (which is to be considered under the other head, the
pleasure unto which this likeness disposes) that proposition carries its own
reason in it self. It is an incomparable pleasure that purity carries in its
own nature; As sin has in its very nature (besides its consequent guilt and
sorrow) trouble and torment beyond expression. Whose Doctrine, as to this
matter of pleasure, is not so much to be blamed as his practice, if both
rightly represented to us.
Whatsoever defiles does also disturb. Nor do any but pure pleasures deserve
the name. An Epicurus himself will tell us, there cannot be pleasure without
wisdom, honesty, and righteousness. It Is least of all possible there should,
when once a person shall have a right knowledge of himself, and (which is moral
impurity whereof we speak) the filthiness of sin. (...). Ex Cicer. 1. de sin.
I doubt not but much of the torment of Hell, will consist, in those too-late,
and despairing self-loathings, those sickly resentments, the impure wretches
will be possessed with, when they see what hideous deformed monsters their own
wickedness has made them. Here the gratifications of sense that attend it,
bribe and seduce their judgments into another estimate of sin; but then, it
shall be no longer thought of under the more favorable notion of a (...), they
shall taste nothing but the gall and wormwood.

It Is certainly no improbable thing, but that reason, being now so fully
rectified, and undeceived, vizors torn off, and things now appearing in their
own likeness; so much will be seen, and apprehended of the intrinsique evil and
malignity of their viliated natures, as will serve for the matter of further
torment; while yet such a sight can do no more to a change of their temper than
the Devils faith does to theirs; Such sights, being accompanied with their no
hope of ever attaining a better state, do therefore no way tend to mollify, or
demulce their Spirits, but to increase their rage and torment.

It is however out of question, that the purity of heaven will infinitely
inhance the pleasure of it; For it is more certain the intrinsical goodness of
holiness (which term I need not among these instances, in as much as the thing
admits not of one entire notion, but lies partly under this head, partly under
the second, that of devotedness to God) will be fully understood in Heaven,
than the intrinsecal evil of s^n in Hell: And when it is understood, will it
not affect? will it not please? Even here, how pleasing are things to the pure
(but in degree so) that participate of the divine purity. Ps. 119. 140.
Thy word is very pure (says the Psalmist) therefore thy servant loves it.
Under this notion do holy ones take pleasure each in other, because they see
somewhat of the divine likeness, their Fathers image, in one another; will it
not be much more pleasing to find it each one perfect in himself? to feel the
ease, and peace, and rest, that naturally goes with it. A man that has any
love of cleanliness, if casually plunged into the mire, he knows not what to
do with himself; he phansies his own clothes to abhor him (as Job rhetorically
speaks) so does as natural a pleasure attend p^rity: Jo^ 9.
It has it even in it self. The words of the pure (says the Wiseman) are
pleasant words, Prove. 15 26.
(words of pleasantnesses it might be read.) That pure breath that goes from
him, i^ not without a certain pleasurableness accompanying it. And if so to
another, much more to himself, especially when every thing corresponds; and (as
the expression is) he finds himself clear throughout.

5. Liberty; (Another part of the Divine likeness, wherein we are to imitate
God) cannot but be an unspeakable satisfaction. Supposing such a state of the
notion of liberty as may render it really a perfection. Which otherwise it
would be a wickedness to impute to God, and an impossibility to partake from
him.

I here speak of the moral liberty of a Saint as such, not of the natural
liberty of a man, as a man: and of the liberty consummate of Saints in glory;
not of the inchoate, imperfect liberty of Saints on earth.

And therefore the intricate controversies about the liberty of the humane
will, lie out of our way, and need not give us any trouble.

It Is out of question that this Liberty consists not (what ever may be said of
any other) in an equal propension to good or evil, nor in the wills
independency on the practical understanding; nor in a various, uncertain
mutability, or inconstancy; nor is it such as is opposed to all necessity, it is
not a liberty from the government of God Which is a no more desirable state
than that which I remember the Historian tells us was the condition of the
Armenians, who having cast off the government that was over them, became
Incerti, se^utique and ^agis sine domino quam in liber^ate Tacit. An. l. 2.
nor from a determination to the simply best, and most eligible Objects.

But it is a liberty from the servitude of sin; from the seduction of a
misguided Judgment; and the allurement of any insnaring, forbidden Objects,
consisting in an unbounded amplitude and inlargedness of soul toward God, an
indetermination to any inferior good, resulting L^b^rtas nostra no^ est
subjectio ad Deum formaliter sed amplitudo coasequ^ns came.
from an entire subjection to the divine will; a submission to the order of
God; and steady adherence to him. And unto which the many descriptions and
elogies agree most indisputably, which from sundry Authors are congested
together by Gibieuf, Gibieuf.
* in that ingenious Tractate of Liberty. De libert. dei and creaturae. lib. 1.
c. 32.


As that he is free that lives as he will (from Cicero, insisted on by S. Aug.
de Civit. Dei lib. 14. c. 25.) that is, who neither wishes any thing, nor fears
any thing; who in all things acquiesces in the will of God; who minds nothing
but his own things, and accounts nothing his own but God, who savors nothing
but God, who is moved only by the will of God.

Again; Id. ibid.
he is free, that he cannot be hindered being willing, nor forced being
unwilling (from Epictetus) i. e. who has always his will; as having perfectly
subjected it to the will of God (as the same Author explains himself.

Again; He is free that is master of himself (from the Cilians) i. e. (as that
liberty respects the spirit of a man) that has a mind independent on any thing
foreign, and alien to himself.

That only follows God (from Phi^o Judaeus) That lives according to his own
reason (from Aristotle) with many more of like import; that alone, do fully,
and perfectly suit that state of liberty the blessed soul shall hereafter
eternally enjoy; as that Author often acknowledges.

This is the glorious Liberty of the Children of God. The Liberty wherewith the
Son makes free. Liberty indeed, measured, and regulated by the royal Law of
Liberty, and which is perfected only in a perfect conformity thereto. There is
a most servile Quam invexere sibi adjuvant servitutem. Et sunt, quodamodo
propria Lib^rtate captivi. Boeth. ex Gib. Nect^t qu^ valcat tr^hi catena^. Sen.
T^ag.
Liberty, a being Romans 6 20*
free from righteousness, which, under that specious name and show 2 Pet. 2.
inslaves a man to corruption; and there is as free a service, by which a man
is still the more free by how much the more he serves, and is subject to his
superiors will, and governing influences: and by how much the less possible
it is, he should swerve therefrom Libertor quo divinae gratiae subjectior
Primum Liberum arbitrium quod homini datum est quando primum creatus est
rectus, potuit non peccare; sed potuit and peccare. Hoc autem novissimum e^
potentius erit, quo peccare noa potuit. Aug de Civitat. Dei lib. 22. c. 30.
.

The nearest approaches therefore of the soul to God; Its most intimate union
with him, and entire subjection to him, in its glorified state, makes its
liberty consummate. Now is its deliverance complete, its bands are fallen off,
it is perfectly disentangled from all the snares of death, in which it was
formerly held; it is under no restraints, oppressed by no weights, held down by no
cloggs. It has the free exercise of all its powers; has every faculty and
affection at command. How unconceivable a pleasure is this! With what delight
does the poor prisoner entertain himself, when his manacles and fetters are
knocked off! when he is enlarged from his loathsome dungeon, and the house of his
bondage, breaths in a free air! can dispose of himself, and walk at liberty
whither he will. The bird escaped from his Cage; or freed from his Line, and
Stone, that resisted its ruin and too feeble struglings before, how pleasantly
does it range, (with what joy does it clap its wings, and take its slight! A
faint Emblem of the joy, wherewith that pleasant cheerful note shall, one day,
be sung and chanted forth. Our soul is escaped, as a bird out of the snare of
the Fowler, the snare is broken, and we are escaped. There is now no place for
such a complaint. I would, but I cannot, I would turn my thoughts to glorious
objects, but I cannot. The blessed soul feels it self free from all
confinement; nothing resists its will; as its will does never resist the will
of God. It knows no limits, no restraints; is not tied up to this or that
particular good, but expatiates freely, in the immense universal all
comprehending goodness of God himself.

And this liberty, Libertas n^st^a inhaer^t divina, ut exemplari, and in
p^^p^lua ejus imitat^one versatur, sive ortum, sive p^^gressum, sive
con^^mm^tionem ejus intue (...), libertas nostra, in o^tu, est capacitas Dei.
In progressu libertas res est long c^ar^or; progress ^senim at^^nditur p^nes
access^m hominis ad D^^m; q^i quidem (...) sed imitatione and ^ss^^latione
c^nst^t and e^t utiquc, im^^atio^e, and assi^il itio^, secuadum quam si^ut Deus
est sablimis, and excelsus seipso; ita homo est sublimis, and excelsus Deo, and
altitudo ejus Deus est ut inquit D, Augustinu^. Consummatio denique libertatis
est, cum homo in Deum, felicissimo gloriae coelestis statu, transformatur; and
deus omnia illi esse incipit? Qui quidem postremus status, co dissert a priore
-- quippe homo tum non modo inalligatus est creaturis, sed nec circaillas
negotiatur, etiam referendo in finem -- nec in creaturis se insundit, nec per
illas procedit, ut faci^bat cum esset viator; sed in solo Deo, and conquiescit
and effundit se placidissime, and motits ejus, cum sit ad presentissimum, and
conjunctissimum bonum, similior est quieti, quam m^tui, Gib. l. 2. c. 14.
is the perfect Image and likeness of the liberty of God, especially, in its
consummate state. In its progress toward it, it increases as the Soul draws
nearer to God: which nearer approach is not in respect of place, or local
nearness, but likeness, and conformity to him; in respect whereof, as God is
most sublime and excellent in himself, so is it in him.

Its consummate liberty is; when it is so fully transformed into the likeness
of God, as that he is all to it, as to himself. So that as he is an infinite
satisfaction to himself; his likeness in this respect, is the very satisfaction
it self, of the blessed soul.

6. Tranquillity. This also is an eminent part of that assimilation to God,
wherein the blessedness of the holy Soul must be understood to lie: a perfect
composure, a perpetual and everlasting calm, an eternal vacancy from all
unquietness or perturbation. Nothing can be supposed more inseparably agreeing
to the nature of God than this: Whom Scripture witnesses to be without
variablness or shadow of change. There can be no commotion without mutation,
nor can the least mutation have place in a perfectly simple, and uncompounded
nature: Whence even Pagan reason has been wont to attribute the most
undisturbed and unalterable tranquillity to the nature of God. Balaam knew it
was incompatible to him to lie, or repent. And (supposing him to speak this
from a present inspiration) it is their common Doctrine concerning God. Omnes
turbulae tempestates quae procul a Deo^rum coelestium tranquilitate exulant,
etc. Apuleius de Deis S^c^atis.
Any the least troubles and tempests (says one) are far exiled from the
tranquillity of God for all the inhabitants of heaven do ever enjoy the same
stable tenor, even an eternal quality of mind. And a little after speaking of
God, says he, it is neither p^ssible he should be moved by the force of
another, for nothing is stronger than God; nor of his own accord, for nothing
is perfecter than God.

And whereas there is somewhat that is mutable, -- (...), etc. Max. Ty^.
disser. 1.
and subject to change, somewhat that is stable and fixed, in which of those
natures ( says another) shall we please God; must we not in that which is more
stable and fixed, and free from this fluidness and mutability? for what is there
am^ng all beings, that can be stable or consist, if God do not by his own
touch, stay and sustain the nature of it?

Hence is it made a piece of deformity, of likeness to God, by another, who
tells his friend; It is an high and great thing which thou desire: and even
bordering upon a Deity, not to be moved. Quod desideras aut^m, mag^^m, summum
(...), Deoque vicinum, noa concuti. S^n. de tr^nquil. Animi.


Yea, so has this Doctine been insisted on by them, that, (while other Divine
perfections have been less understood) it has occasioned the Stoical ^ssertion
of fatality, to be introduced, on the one hand, and the ^picurian n^g^tion of
providence on the other; least any thing should be admitted that might seem
rep^gnant to the tranquillity of their Num^^^.

But we know that our God does whatsoever pleases him both in heaven and
earth; and that he does all according to the wise counsel of his holy will;
freely, not fatally upon the eternal prevision, and foresight of all
circumstances and events, so that nothing can occur that is new to him; nothing
that he knows not how to improve to good; or that can therefore infer any
alteration of his counsels; or occasion to him the least perturbation, or
disquiet in reference to them.

Holy souls begin, herein, to imitate him; as soon as they first give
themselves up to his wise and gracious conduct. It Is enough that he is wise for
himself and them. Their hearts safely trust in him. They commit themselves with
unsollicitous confidence, to his guidance, knowing he cannot himself be
misled, and that he will not mis-lead them. As Abraham folled him, not knowing
whether he went: and thus by faith, they enter into his rest.

They do, now, in their present state, only enter into it; or hover about the
borders. Their future assimilation to God in this; gives them a stated
settlement of Spirit in this rest. They before did owe their tranquillity to
their faith, now to their actual fruition. Their former acquiescency, and
sedate temper was hence, that they believed God would deal well with them at
last; their present, for that he has done so. Those words have now their
fullest sense (both as to the rest it self, which they mention; and the season
of it) Return to thy rest, Psalm. 116.
O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. The occasions of
trouble, and a passive temper of Spirit, are ceased together. There is now no
fear without, nor terror within. The rage of the world is now allayed, it
storms no longer. Reproach and persecution have found a period. There is no
more dragging before Tribunals, nor haling into Prisons; no more running into
dens, and deserts; or wandering to and fro in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins. And
with the cessation of the external occasions of trouble, the inward
dispositions thereto are also ceased: All infirmities of Spirit, tumultuating
passions, unmortified corruptions, doubts, or imperfect knowledge of the love
of God, are altogether vanished and done away for ever.

And indeed, that perfect cure, wrought within, is the souls great security,
from all future disquiet. A well tempered Spirit has been wont strangely to
preserve its own peace in this unquiet world. Philosophy has boasted much in
this kind; and Christianity performed more.

The Philosophical ((...), or) calmness of mind, is not without its excellency
and praise; Sen. de tranquil* anim.
That stable settlement and fixedness of Spirit; that (...) (as the moralist
tells us it was wont to be termed among the Grecians, and which he calls
Tranquillity;) when the mind is always equal, and goes a smooth even course,
is propitious to it self, and beholds the things that concern it with pleasure,
and interrupts not this joy, but remains in a placid state, never at any time
exalting or depressing it self. But how far does the Christian peace surpass
it, that peace which passes all understanding; Phil. 4. 7.
that amidst surrounding dangers enables the holy soul to say (without a proud
boast) none of all these things move me. Act. 20. 24.
The peace that immediately results from that faith which unites the soul with
God, and fixes it upon him as its firm basis; when it is kept in perfect peace,
Isa. 26. 3.
by being stayed upon him, Psalm. 112. 7.
because it trusts in him. Romans 15. 13.
When the heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, filled full of joy, and peace,
or of joyous peace (by an (...)) in believing.

And if Philosophy and (which far transcends it) Christianity, Reason and Faith
have that statique power, can so compose the soul and reduce it to so quiet a
consistency, in the midst of storms and tempests: how perfect and contentful a
repose, will the immediate vision, and enjoyment of God afford it, in that
serene and peaceful region, where it shall dwell for ever, free from any
molestation from without, or principle of dis-rest within!

CHAP. IX.
The Pleasure arising from knowing or considering our selves to be like God:
from considering it, 1. Absolutely. 2. Comparatively, or respectively to the
former state of the soul. To the state of lost souls. To its pattern. To the
way of accomplishment. To the souls own expectations. To what it secures. The
Pleasure whereto it disposes, of union, communion. A comparison of this
Righteousness, with this Blessedness.

2. HEre is also to be considered, the pleasure and satisfaction involved in
this assimilation to God, as it is known, or refl^cted on, or that arises from
the cognosci of this likeness.

We have hitherto discoursed of the pleasure of being like God, as that is
apprehended, by a spiritual sensation, a feeling of that inward rectitude, that
happy pleasure of souls now perfectly restored? We have yet to consider a
further pleasure, which acrews from the souls animadversion upon it self; its
contemplating its self thus happily transformed. And though that very sensation
be not without some animadversion (as indeed no sensible perception can be
performed without it) yet we must conceive a consequent animadversion, which is
much more explicit, and distinct; and which therefore yields a very great
addition of Satisfaction and delight. As when the blessed soul shall turn its
eye upon it self, and designedly compose, and set it self to consider its
present state and frame, the consideration it shall now have of it self, and
this likeness impressed upon it, may be either Absolute, or Comparative and
respective.


1. Absolute. How pleasing a spectacle will this be, when the glorified soul
shall now intentively behold its own glorious frame? When it shall dwell in the
contemplation of it self? view it self round on every part, turn its eye from
glory to glory, from beauty to beauty, from one excellency to another; and
trace over the whole draught of this image; this so exquisite piece of divine
workmanship, drawn out in its full perfection, upon it self. When the glorified
eye, and divinely enlightened, and inspirited mind shall apply it self to
criticize, and make a judgment upon every several lineament, every touch and
stroke, shall stay it self, and scrupulously insist upon every part? view at
leisure every character of glory the blessed God has instamp't upon it; how
will this likeness now satisfy! And that expression of the blessed Apostle
(taken notice of upon some other occasion formerly) [The glory to be revealed
in us] seems to import in it a reference to such a self intuition. What serves
revelation for, but in order to vision? What is it but an exposing things to
view? and what is revealed in us, is chiefly exposed to our own view.

All the time from the the Souls first conversion till now, God has been as it
were at work upon it. 2 Cor. 5. 5.
( -- He that wrought us to, etc.) has been laboring it, shaping it,
polishing it, spreading his own glory upon it, inlaying, inameling it with
glory; now at last the whole work is revealed, the Curtain is drawn aside; the
blessed Soul awakes. Come now says God, behold my work; see what I have done
upon thee; Let my work now see the light, I dare expose it to the censure of
the most curious eye, let thine own have the pleasure of beholding it. It was a
work carried on in a Mystery secretly wrought (as in the lower parts of the
earth, as we alluded before) by a Spirit that came, and went no man could tell
how. Besides, that in the general only, we knew we should be like him, it did
not yet appear what we should be, now it appears. There is a revelation of this
glory. O the ravishing pleasure of its first appearance! and it will be a glory
always fresh and flourishing (as Job's expression is, my glory was fresh in me)
and will afford a fresh, undecaying pleasure for ever.

2. The blessed soul may also be supposed to have a comparative and respective
consideration of this impressed glory. That is, so as to compare it with, and
refer it to several* things that may come into consideration with it: and may
so heighten its own delight in the contemplation thereof.

1. If we consider this impression of glory in reference to its former
loaths^me deformities that were upon it; and which are now vanished and gone.
How unconceivable a pleasure will arise from this comparison? when the soul
shall consider at once what it is, and what once it was, and thus bethink it
self. I that did sometimes bear the accursed image of the Prince of darkness,
do now represent and partake of the holy pure nature of the Father of lights. I
was a mere Chaos, an hideous heap of Deformity, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Confusion and Darkness; But he that made light to shine out of darkness,
shined into me to give the knowledge of the light of his own glory in the face
of Jesus Christ, and since, made my way as the shining light shining brighter
and brighter unto this perfect day. Prove. 4* 18.
I was an habitation of Dragons, a Cage of noisome lusts; that as Serpents, and
Vipers were winding to and fro through all my faculties and powers; and preying
upon my very vitals. Then was I hateful to God, and an hater of him; sin, and
vanity had all my heart. The charming invitations, and allurements of grace
were as music to a dead man; to think a serious thought of God, or breath
forth an affectionate desire after him, was as much against my heart, as to
pluck out mine own eyes, or offer violence to mine own life.

After I began to live the Spiritual new life; how slow, and faint was my
progress and tendency toward perfection? how indisposed did I find my self to
the proper actions of that life? To go about any holy spiritual work, was, too
often, as to climb an Hill, or strive against the stream; or as an attempt to
fly without wings. I have sometime said to my heart; Come now lets go pray,
love God, think of heaven; but O how listless to these things! how lifeless in
them! Impressions made, how quickly lost! gracious frames, how soon wrought of
and gone! characters of glory rac'd out, and overspread with earth and dirt!
Divine comeliness has now at length made me perfect. The glory of God does now
incloath me, they are his ornaments I now wear. He has made me, that, lately,
lay among the pots, as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her
feathers with yellow gold, he has put another nature into me; the true
likeness of his own holy divine nature; He has now perfectly mastered and
wrought out the enmity of my heart against him. Now to be with God is my very
element. Loving, admiring, praising him are as natural, as breathing once was.
I am all Spirit and life, I feel my self disburthened, and unclogg'd of all the
heavy oppressive weights that hung upon me. No body of death does now incumber
me, no deadness of heart, no coldness of love, no drowsy sloth, no aversness
from God, no earthly mind, no sensual inclinations or affections, no sinful
devisions o^ heart between God and Creatures. He has now the whole of me. I
enjoy and delight in none but him, O blessed change! O happy day!

2. If in contemplating it self, clothed with this likeness it respect the
state of damned souls. What transpor^s must that occasion! What ravishing
resentments! When it compares humane nature in its highest perfection, with the
same nature in its utmost depravation? An unspeakably more unequal comparison
than that would be of the most amiable lovely person, flourishing in the prime
of youthful strength and beauty, with a putrified rotten carcass, deformed by
the corruption of a loathsome grave. When glorified Spirits shall make such a
reflection as this. Lo here we shine in the glorious brightness of the divine
Image; and behold yonder deformed accursed souls. They were as capable of this
glory as we. Had the same nature with us; the same reason, the same
intellectual faculties and powers; but what monsters are they now become? They
eternally hate the eternal excellency. Sin and death are finished upon them.
They have each of them an hell of horror and wickedness in it self. Whence is
this amazing difference! Though this cannot but be an awful wonder, it cannot
also, but be tempered with pleasure and joy.

3. We may suppose this likeness to be considered in reference to its pattern;
and in comparison therewith, which will then be another way of heightning the
pleasure that shall arise thence. Such a frame and constitution of Spirit is
full of delights in it self: but when it shall be referred to its original, and
the correspondency between the one, and the other be observed and viewed; how
exactly they accord, and answer each other as face does face in the water; this
cannot, still, but add pleasure to pleasure, one delight to another. When the
blessed soul shall, interchangeably turn its eye to God, and it self; and
consider the agreement of glory, to glory; the several derived excellencies to
the original. He is wise, and so am I, holy and so am I. I am now made perfect
as my heavenly Father is; this gives a new relish to the former pleasure. How
will this likeness please under that notion, as it is his; a likeness to him. O
the accent that will be put upon those appropriative words to be made partakers
of [His] holiness, and of the [divine] nature. Personal excellencies, in
themselves considered, cannot be reflected on but with some pleasure; but to
the ingenuity of a child, how especially, grateful will it be, to observe in it
self, such and such graceful deportments, wherein it naturally imitates its
father. So he was wont to speak, and act, and demean himself: how natural is it
unto love, to affect, and aim at the imitation of the person loved: So natural
it must be, to take complacency therein; when we have hit our mark, and
achieved our design. The pursuits and seize of love are proportionable,
and correspondent each to other.

And what heart can compass the greatness of this thought, to be made like God!
Lord, was there no lower pattern than thy self, thy glorious blessed self
according to which to form a worm! This cannot want its due resentments in a
glorified state.

4. This transformation of the blessed soul into the likeness of God, may be
viewed by it, in reference to the way of accomplishment; as an end, brought
about by so amazing stupendous means; which will certainly be a pleasing
contemplation. When it reflects on the method and course insisted on, for
bringing this matter to pass, views over the work of redemption, in its
tendency to this end, Phil. 2* 7.
The restoring Gods Image in souls; Considers Christ manifested to us, in order
to his being revealed and formed in us. That God was made in the likeness man,
to make men after the likeness of God. That he partook with us of the humane
nature, that we might with him partake of the divine; that he assumed our
flesh, in order to impart to us his Spirit. When it shall be considered for
this end had we so many great and precious promises; for this end did the glory
of the Lord shine upon us through the glass of the Gospel; 2 Pet. 1. 4.
that we might be made partakers, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
etc. That we might be changed, etc. Yea, when it shall be called to mind,
(though it be far from following hence, that this is the only or principal way
wherein the life and death of Christ have influence in order to our eternal
happiness) that our Lord Jesus lived for this end, that we might learn so to
walk, as he also walked, that he dyed that we mught be conformed to his death;
that he rose again, that we might with him attain the resurrection of the dead;
that he was in us the hope of glory, that he might be in us (that is, that same
Image that bears his Name) our final consummate glory it self also. With what
pleasure will these harmonious congruities, these apt correspondencies, be
looked into at last!

Now may the glorified Saint say, I here see the end the Lord Jesus came into
the world for. I see for what he was lift up, made a spectacle; that he might
be a transforming one. What the effusions of his Spirit were for; why it so
earnestly strove with my way-ward heart. I now behold in my own soul, the fruit
of the travel of his Soul. This was the project of redeeming love, the design
of all-powerful Gospel grace. Glorious achievement! blessed end of that great,
and notable undertaking! happy issue of that high desin!

5. With reference to all their own expectations and endeavors. When it shall
be considered by a Saint in glory; the attainment of this perfect likeness to
God, was the utmost mark of all my designs, and aims; the term of all my hopes
and desires. This is that I longed, and labored for, that which I prayed and
waited for; which I so earnestly breathed after, and restlestly pursued. It was
but to recover the defaced image of God. To be again made like him, as once I
was. Now I have attained my end; I have the fruit of all my labor and travels;
I see now the truth of those (often) encouraging words, Blessed are they that
hunger, and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Be not weary
of well doing, for ye shall reap, if ye faint not. What would I once have given
for a steady abiding frame of holiness, for an heart constantly bent and
biassed toward God; constantly serious, constantly tender, lively, watchful,
heavenly, spiritual, meek, humble, cheerful, self-denying. How have I cried and
striven for this to get such an heart! such a temper of spirit! how have I
pleaded with God, and my own soul in order hereto. How often over have I spread
this desire before the Searcher and Judge of hearts; Turn me out of all my
worldly comforts, so thou give me but such an heart; Let me spend my days in a
Prison, or a Desert, so I have but such a heart; I refuse no reproaches, no
losses, no tortures, may I but have such a heart. How has my soul been
sometimes ravished with the very thoughts of such a temper of Spirit, as has
appeared amiable in my eye, but I could not attain? and what a torture again
has it been that I could not? What grievance in all the world, in all the
days of my vanity; did I ever find comparable to this; To be able to frame my
self by Scripture, and rational light and rules, the Notion and Idea of an
excellent temper of spirit, and then to behold it, to have it in view, and not
be able to reach it, to possess my soul of it? What indignation have I
sometimes conceived against mine own soul, when I have found it wandering and
could not reduce it; hovering, and could not fix it; dead, and could not
quicken it; low, and could not raise it! How earnestly have I expected this
blessed day, when all those distempers should be perfectly healed, and my Soul
recover an healthy, lively spiritual frame? What fresh ebullitions of joy will
here be, when all former desires, hopes, endeavors, are crowned with success
and fruit! This joy is the joy of Harvest. They that have sown in tears, Psalm
126. 6.
do now reap in joy. They that went out weeping, bearing precious seed; now
with rejoicing bring their sheaves with them.

6. In reference to what this impressed, likeness shall for ever secure to it: an
everlasting amity and friendship with God, that it shall never sin, nor he ever
frown more. 1. That it shall sin no more. The perfected image of God in it, is
its security for this; for it is holy throughout; in every point conformed to
his nature and will. There remains in it nothing contrary to him. It may
therefore certainly conclude it shall never be liable to the danger of doing
any thing but what is good in his sight; and what solace will the blessed soul
find in this! If now an Angel from Heaven should assure it, that from such an
hour it should sin no more, the world would not be big enough to hold such a
soul. It has now escaped the deadliest of dangers, the worst of deaths (and
which even in its present state, upon more deliberate calmer thoughts it
accounts so) the sting of death, the very deadly head of death; the Hell of
Hell it self. The deliverance is now complete which cannot but end in delight
and praise.

2. That God can never frame more. This it is hence also assured of: How can he
but take perfect everlasting complaceny in his own perfect likeness and image;
and behold with pleasure, his glorious workmanship, now never liable to
impairment, or decay? how pleasant a thought is this! The blessed God never
beholds me but with delight. I shall always behold his serene countenance; his
amiable face, never covered with any clouds, never darkened with any frown. I
shall now have cause to complain no more; my God is a stranger to me, he
conceals himself, I cannot see his face, lo he is incompast with Clouds and
darkness, or with flames and terrors. These occasions are for ever ceased. God
sees no cause either to behold the blessed soul with displeasure, or with
displeasure to avert from it, and turn off his eye. And will not this eternally
satisfy! when God himself is so well pleased, shall not we!

2. The pleasure it disposes to. Besides that the inbeing, and knowledge of
this likeness, are so satisfying: It disposes, and is the souls qualification
for a yet further pleasure. That of closest union, and most inward communion
with the blessed God.

1. Union. Which (what it is more then relation) is not till now complete.
Besides relation it must needs import presence; not Physical, or Local, for so
nothing can be nearer God, then it is but moral, and cordial, by which the holy
soul with will and affections, guided by rectified reason, and judgment, closes
with, and embraces him, and he also upon wise forelaid counsel, and with
infinite delight, and love imbraceth it: so friends are said to be one (besides
their relation as friends) by an union of hearts. An union between God and the
creature, as to kind and nature higher than this, and lower than Hypostatical
or personal union I understand not, and therefore say nothing of it I would
fain know what the Tertium shall be, resulting from the Physical union some
speak of.
.

But as to the union here mentioned; as, till the image of God be perfected, it
is not completed; so it cannot but be perfect then; When the soul is perfectly
formed according to Gods own heart; and fully participates the divine likeness,
is perfectly like him; that likeness cannot but infer the most intimate union
that two such natures can admit. That is (for nature) a love-union; such as
that which our Savior mentions, and prays to the Father to perfect between
themselves, and all believers, and among believers mutually, with one another.
Joh. 17. 11.
Many much trouble themselves about this Scripture; ver. 11.
but sure that can be no other then a love-union: For, (1.) It Is such an union
as Christians are capable of among themselves, Ver. 21.
(for surely he would never pray that they might be one with an union whereof
they are not capable.) (2.) It Is such an union as may be made visible to the
world. Whence it is an obvious corollary, that the union between the Father and
the Son, there spoken of, as the pattern of this, is not their union or oneness
in essence, (though it be a most acknowledged thing, that there is such an
essential union between them) for who can conceive that Saints should be one
among themselves, and with the Father, and the Son, with such an union as the
Father, and the Son are one themselves, if the essential union between Father
and Son were the union here spoken of? But the exemplary or pattern-union, here
mentioned, between Father and Son, is but an union in mind, in love, in design,
and interest; wherein he prays* that Saints on earth might visibly be one with
them also, that the world might believe, etc.

It Is yet a rich pleasure that springs up to glorified Saints from that
love-union (now perfected) between the blessed God and them. It Is mentioned and
shadowed in Scripture, under the name and notion of marriage-union; in which
the greatest mutual complacency is always supposed a necessary ingredient. 1
Cor. 6. 16.
To be thus joined to the Lord, and made, as it were, one Spirit with him; For
the eternal God to cleave in love to a nothing creature, as his likeness upon
it ingages him to do, is this no pleasure, or a mean one?

2. Communion, unto which that union is fundamental, and introductive; and
which follows it upon the same ground, from a natural propensity of like to
like: There is nothing now to hinder God, and the holy soul of the most inward
fruitions and enjoyments; no animosity, no strangeness, no unsutableness on
either part. Here the glorified Spirits of the just have liberty to so^^ce
themselves, amidst the rivers of pleasure at Gods own right hand, without check
or restraint. They are pure, and these pure. They touch nothing that can
defile, they defile nothing they can touch. They are not now forbidden the
nearest approaches to the ( once) inaccessible Majesty, there is no Holy of
Holies into which they may not enter, no door locked up against them: They may
have free admission into the innermost secret of the divine presence, and pour
forth themselves in the most liberal effasions of love and joy, as they must be
the eternal subjects of those infinitely richer communications from God, even
of immense and boundless love and goodness.

Do not debase this pleasure by low thoughts; nor frame too daring positive
apprehensions of it. It Is yet a secret to us. The eternal converses of the King
of glory, with glorified Spirits, are only known to himself and them. That
expression (which we so often meet in our way) It does not yet appear what we
shall be; seems left, on purpose, to check a too curious and prying
inquisitiveness into these unrevealed things. The great God will have his
reserves of glory, of love, of pleasure for that future state. Let him alone a
while, with those who are already received into those mansions of glory, those
everlasting habitations. He will find a time for those that are yet pilgrims
and wandering exiles to ascend and enter too.

In the mean time what we know of this communion may be gathered up into this
general account, The reciprocation of loves; the flowing and reflowing of
everlasting love, between the blessed soul and its infinitely blessed God; Its
egress toward him, his illapses into it.

Unto such pleasure does this likeness dispose and qualify: You can no way
consider it, but it appears a most pleasurable satisfying thing.

Thus far have we shown the qualification for this blessedness, and the nature
of it, What it prerequires, and wherein it lies, and how highly congruous it is
that the former of these should be made a prerequisite to the latter, will
sufficiently appear to any one, that shall, in his own thoughts, compare this
righteousness and this blessedness together. He will indeed plainly see, that
the natural state of the case, and habitude of these each to other, makes this
connection unalterable, and eternal; so as that it must needs be simply
impossible to be thus blessed, without being thus righteous.

For what is this righteousness other than this blessedness begun, the seed and
principle of it? And that with as exact proportion (or rather sameness of
Nature) as is between the grain sown, and reaped, which is more than intimated
in that of the Apostle, Gal. 6* 7* 8.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
also reap: For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
(there is the same proportion too) but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit, reap life everlasting: Which though it be spoken to a particular
case, is yet spoken from a general rule and reason applicable a great deal
further.

And as some conceive (and is undertaken to be demonstrated) that the seeds of
things are, Dr. H^rv. de. Ovo.
not vertually only, but actually, and formally the very things themselves: so
is it here also. The very parts of this blessedness are discernable in this
righteousness. The future vision of God, in present knowledge of him; for this
knowledge, is a real, initial part of righteousness. The rectitude of the mind,
and apprehensions concerning God, consisting in conformity to his revelation of
himself.

Present holiness, including also the future ^ssimilation to God. And the
contentment, and peace that attends it, the consequent satisfaction in glory.

But as in glory, the impression of the divine likeness, is that which vision
subserves; and whence satisfaction results; so is it here (visibly) the main
thing also. The end, and design of the Gospel revelation, (...).
of whole Christianity (I mean Systematically considered) of all Evangelical
Doctrines, and knowledge, is to restore Gods likeness, and image; from whence
joy and peace result of course, when once the Gospel is believed. The Gospel is
the instrument of impressing Gods likeness, in order whereunto it must be
understood, and received into the mind. Being so, the impression upon the
heart, and life, are Christianity ha^itual and practical, Romans 15. 13.
whereupon joy and pleasure (the belief or thorough reception of the Gospel
thus enterveining) do necessarily ensue. G^^^. (...) in Christa ^^^^^mus
hom^^^^, etc. Orat. 1


So Aptly is the only way, or method of seeing Gods face, so as to be satisfied
with his likeness; said to be, in or through righteousness.

CHAP. X.
The season of this satisfaction, which is twofold; at Death. Resurrection.
The former spoken to, wherein is shown, That this life is to the soul (even of
a Saint) but as a sleep. That at death it awakes. As to the latter, that there
is a considerable accession to its happiness at the resurrection.

3. THe season of this blessedness, comes next to be considered, which (as the
words [when I awake] have been concluded here to import) must in the general be
stated beyond the time of this present life.

Holy souls are here truly blessed, not perfectly, or their present blessedness
is perfect only in nature and kind, not in degree. It Is in this respect, as far
short of perfection, as their holiness is. Their hunger and thirst are present,
their being filled is yet future. The experience of Saints in their best state
on earth, their desires, their hopes, their sighs, and groans do sufficiently
witness they are not satisfied, or if they be, in point of security, they are
not in point of enjoyment. The completion of this blessedness is reserved to a
better state, as its being the end, of their way, their rest, Matthew. 5. 6.
from their labors, the reward of their work does import, and require.
Therefore many Scriptures, that speak of their present rest, peace, repose,
satisfaction, must be understood in a comparative, not the absolute highest
sense.

More particularly in that other state; the season of their blessedness is
twofold, or there are two terms from whence (in respect of some gradual, or
modal diversifications) it may be said severally to commence, or bear date. Viz.

The time Of their entrance upon a blessed immortality, when they shall have
laid down their earthly bodies in death. Of their consummation therein, when
they receive their bodies glorified, in the general resurrection.


Both these may not unfitly be signified by the Phrase in the Text [when I
awake] For, though Scripture does more directly apply the term of [awaking] to
the latter; there will be no violence done to the Metaphor, if we extend its
signification to the former also. To which purpose, it is to be noted, that it
is not Death, formally, or the disanimating of the body, we would have here to
be understood by it (which indeed sleeping would more aptly signify than
awaking) but (what is co-incident therewith in the same period) the
exuscitation, and revival of the soul. When the body falls asleep, then does
the Spirit awake, and the eyelids of the morning, even of an eternal day do
now first open upon it.

1. Therefore we shall not exclude from this season the introductive state of
blessedness, which takes its beginning from the blessed souls first entrance
into the invisible state. And the fitness of admitting it will appear by
clearing these two things.

1. That its condition in this life, even at the best, is in some sort but a
sleep.

2. That when it passes out of it into the invisible Regions, it is truly said
to awake.

1. Its abode in this mortal body, is but a continual sleep; its senses are
bound up, a drowsy slumber possesses, and suspends all its faculties and
powers.

Before the renovating change, how frequently does the Scripture speak of
sinners as men a sleep? 1 These. 5* 6.
Let not us sleep as do others. Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians 5. 14.
and stand up from the dead, etc. They are in a dead sleep, under the sleep of
death. They apprehend things as men asleep. How slight, obscure, hovering
notions have they of the most momentous things? and which it most concerns them
to have thorough, real apprehensions of. All their thoughts of God, Christ,
Heaven, Hell, of Sin, of Holiness, are but uncertain, wild guesses, blind
hallucinations, incoherent phansies; the absurdity, and inconcinnity whereof,
they no more reflect upon then men asleep. They know not these things, but only
dream of them. They put darkness for light, and light for darkness, have no
senses exercised to discern between good and evil. The most substantial
realities are with them mere shadows, and chemaera's, Phansied, and imagined
dangers startle them (as it is wont to be with men in a dream) real ones, though
never so near them, they as little fear, as they. The creature of their own
imagination, the Lion in the way, which they dream of in their slothful
slumber, affrights them; but the real roaring Lion that is ready to devour
them, they are not afraid of.

And conversion does but relax, and intermit; it does not totally break of this
sleep; It, as it were, attenuates the consopiting fumes, does not utterly
dispel them. What a difficulty is it to watch but one hour? There are some
lucid, and vivid intervals, but of how short continuance? how soon does the
awakened soul close its heavy eyes, and fall asleep again? how often do
temptations surprise even such, in their slumbring fits, while no sense of
their danger can prevail with them to watch and pray (with due care and
constancy) least they enter thereinto.

So well does the Apostles watchword suit our case, awake to righteousness and
sin not, etc.
Hither are most of the sins of our lives to be imputed and referred, not to
mere ignorance, that we know not sin from duty; or what will please God, and
what displease him; but to a drowsy inadvertency, that we keep not our spirits
in a watchful, considering posture. Our eyes that should be ever toward the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15* 34.
will not be kept open, and though we resolve, we forget our selves; before we
are aware we find our selves overtaken: Sleep comes on upon us, like an armed
man, and we cannot avert it. How often do we hear, and read, and pray, and
meditate as persons asleep? as if we knew not what we were about? How
remarkable, useful providence escape either our notice, or due improvement,
amidst our secure slumbers? How many Visits from heaven are lost to us, when we
are (as it were) between sleeping and waking ( I sleep, Cant. 5 2.
but my heart waketh) and hardly own the voice that calls upon us, till our
beloved has withdrawn himself. Indeed, what is the whole of our life here but
a dream? The entire scene of this sensible world, but a vision of the night?
where every man walks but in a vain show: where we are mocked with shadows and
our credulous sense abused by* impostures, Psalm. 39 6.
and delusive appearances; nor are we ever secure from the most destructive,
mischievous deception, further than as our souls are possessed with the
apprehensions that this is the very truth of our case, and thence instructed,
to consider: and not to prefer the shadows of time, before the great realities
of eternity.

Nor is this sleep casual, but even connatural to our present state, the
necessary result of so strict an union, and commerce with the body, which is,
to the in-dwelling Spirit, as a dormitory or charnel-house, rather than a
mansion. A soul drench't in sensuality (a Le^^e that has too little of fiction
in it) and immured in a sloathful putid slesh, sleeps, as it were, by fate* not
by chance; and is only capable of full relief, by suffering a Dissolution;
which it has reason to welcome as a jubilee, and in the instant of departure
to sacrifice as he did Viz. (...). Who at the time of his death sprinkled water
upon the servants about him, addita vo^e se liquorem ill^m libare Jo^i
l^beratori. Tacit* Annal.
(with that easy and warrantable change, to make a Heathen expression
Scriptural, Jehovae liberatori) to adore and praise its great Deliverer. At
least (accounts being once made up, and a meetness in any measure attained for
the heavenly inheritance, etc.) has no reason to regret, or dread the
approaches of the eternal day, more than we do the return of the Sun after a
dark and long-some night. But, as the sluggard does nothing more unwillingly
than forsake his bed, nor bears any thing with more regret, than to be awak't
out of his sweet sleep, though you should entice him, with the pleasures of a
Paradise, to quit a smoky loathsome Cottage; so fares it with the sluggish
soul, as if it were lodged in an enchanted Bed; it is so fast held by the charms
of the body, all the glory of the other world is little enough to tempt it out,
than which there is not a more deplorable Symptom of this sluggish slumbring
state. So deep an oblivion (which you know is also naturally incident to sleep)
has seized it of its own Country, of its alliances above, its relation to the
Father and world of Spirits, It takes this earth for its home, where it is both
in exile and captivity at once. And (as a Prince, stolen away in his infancy,
and bred up in a beggars shed) so little seeks, that it declines a better
state. This is the degenerous torpid disposition of a soul lost in flesh, and
inwrapt in stupifying clay; which has been deeply resented by some Heathens.
So one brings in Socrates pathetically bewailing this oblivious dreaming temper
of his soul which (says he) had seen that pulchritude (you must pardon him,
here, the conceit of its pre-existence) that neither. humane voice could utter,
nor eye behold But that now, in this life, it had only some little remembrance
thereof, as in a dream, being both in respect of place, and condition, far
removed from so pleasant sights, pressed down into an earthly station, and there
encompast with all manner of dirt and filthiness, etc.

And to the same purpose Plato often speaks in the name of the same person: and
particularly, (...).
of the winged stati, of the good soul In Phaedro.
, when apart from the body, carried in its triumphant flying Chariot (of which
he gives a large description, Cant. 6. 12*
somewhat resembling Solomon's rapturous Metaphor: Before I was aware, my soul
made me as the Chariots of Aminnadib.) But being in the body, it is with it, as
with a Bird that has lost its wings, it falls a sluggish weight to the earth.

Which indeed is the state even of the best, in a degree, within this
Tabernacle. A sleepy torpose stops their flight. They can fall, but not ascend;
the remains of such a drowsiness do still hang even about Saints themselves.
The Apostle therefore calls upon such to awake out of sleep; from that
consideration (as we know men are not wont to sleep so intensely toward
morning) that now their salvation was nearer then when they believed, Romans 13
11.
i. e. (as some judicious Interpreters understand that place) for that they
were nearer death, Arelius* Beza, etc.
and eternity than when they first became Christians (though this passage be
also otherwise (and not improbably interpreted.) However,

2. The holy souls release and dismission, from its earthly body (which is that
we propounded next to be considered) will excusse and shake off this drowsy
sleep. Now is the happy Season of its awaking into the heavenly vital light of
God. The blessed morning of that long desired day is now dawned upon it; the
cumbersome night-vail is laid aside, and the garments of salvation and immortal
glory are now put on. It has past through the trouble and darkness of a
wearisome night, and now is joy arrived with the morning (as we may be
permitted to allude to those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 30. 5.
though that be not supposed to be the peculiar sense.)

I conceive my self here not concerned, operously to insist in proving that the
souls of Saints sleep not in the interval, between death and the general
resurrection; but enjoy present blessedness. It being besides the design of a
practical discourse, which rather intends the propounding and improvement of
things acknowledged, and agreed for the advantage and benefit of them with
whom they are so; then the discussing of things dubious and controversible. And
what I here propound in order to a consequent improvement and application,
should methinks pass for an acknowledged truth among them that professedly
believe, and seriously read and consider the Bible. For mere Philosophers, that
do not come into this account, 'twere impertinent to discourse with them from a
Text of Scripture; and where my design only obliges me to intend the handling
of that; and to deliver it from what may fitly be supposed to have its ground
there, unless their allegations did carry with them the Species of
demonstrating the simple impossibility of what is asserted thence to the power
of that God whose word we take it to be; which I have not found any thing they
say to amount to. That we have reason to presume it an acknowledged thing among
them that will be concluded by Scripture; That the Soul does not sleep when it
ceases to animate its earthly body, many plain Texts do evince, which are
amassed together, by the reverend Mr. Baxter, In his Saints rest, p. 2. c. 10*
some of the principal whereof I would invite any that waver in this matter
seriously to consider. As the words of our Savior to the Thief on the Cross.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke 23. 43.
That of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5 8.
We are willing rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord.
And that, Phil. 1. 23.
I am in a straight, having a desire to depart, Heb. 12. 23.
and to be with Christ. That passage, The Spirits of just men made perfect,
etc. Which are expressions so clear, It Is true that diverse of the Fathers, and
others, have spoken some dubiously, some very diminishingly, of the blessedness
of separate souls; many of whose words may be seen together in that elaborate
Tractate of the learned Parker, de descens. lib sec^n^ p. 77. Yea, and his own
assertion in that very page (be it spoken with reverence to the memory of so
worthy a person) argues something gross, and I conceive, unwarrantable thoughts
of the souls dependence on a body of Earth. His words are, Tertium vulnus
(speaking of the prejudices the Soul receives by its separation from the body)
omnes operationes etiam suas quae sunt praesertim ad extra extinguit. Where he
makes it a difficulty to allow it any operations at all, as apears by the
praesertim inserted. He first indeed denies it all operations, and then more
confidently, and especially those ad extra. And if he would be understood to
exclude it only from its operations ad extra (if he take operations ad extra,
as that Phrase is wont to be taken) he must then mean by it all such operations
as have their objects; not only those that have their terms to which without
the Agent, i. e. not only all transient, but all immanent acts that have their
object, without them. As when we say, all Gods acts ad extra are free; we mean
it even of his immanent acts that have their objects without him, though they
do not po^^re terminum extra deum: as his election, his love of the elect. And
so he must be understood to deny the separate souls (and that with a praesertim
too) the operations of knowing God, of loving him, and delighting in him; which
are all operations ad extra, as having their objects extra animam, though their
terminus ad qu^m be not so; which makes the condition of the separate souls of
Saints unspeakably inferior to what it was in the body, and what should
occasion to dismal thoughts of that state of separation, I see not. Scripture
gives no ground for them, but evidently enough speaks the contrary. Reason and
Philosophy offers nothing that can ^ender the sense we put upon the
forementioned plain Scriptures, self contrad^ctions or impossible. Yea such as
had no other light, or guide have thought the facility of the souls operations,
being separate from its earthly body, much greater by that very separation. And
upon this score does Saint Augustine, with great indignation inveigh against
the P^ilosophers ( Pla^o more especially) because they judged the separation of
the Soul from the body necessary to its blessedness. [Quia videlicct ejus
perfect^m beatitudinem tunc illi fieri ex^stim^at cum omni prorsus corpore
exuta, ad Deum s^n^ lex, and sol^ and quodommodo nuda redierit. De civit. Dei
l. 13 c. 16.] unto which purpose the words of Philol^us Pyth^goricus, of Plato,
of Porphyrius are cited by Ludovicus vives in his Comment upon that
bovementioned passage. The first speaking thus -- Deposito corpore hominem Deum
immortalem fieri. The second thus, -- Trahi nos, a corpore, ad ima, and a
cogitatione superarum rerum subinde revocari: ideo relinquendum corpus, and hic
quantum possumus, and in altera vita vita prorsum, ut liberi, and expediti
verum ipsi videamus, and optimum amemus. The third denies -- Aliter fieri
b^atum quenquam posse, nisi relinquat corpus and affigatur Deo. I conceive it
by the way not improbable, that the severity of that Pious Father against that
Dogma of the Philosophers, might proceed upon this ground, that what they said
of the impossibility of being happy in an earthly body, he understood meant by
them of an impossibility to be happy in any body at all; when it is evidently
the common opinion of the Platonists, that the soul is always united with some
body or other; and that even the Dae^o^s have bodies (aereal or etherial ones)
which Plato himself is observed by St. Augustine to affirm whence he would
fasten a contradiction on him, ibid. not considering ('it is likely) that he
would much less have made a difficulty to concede such bodies also to humane
souls, after they had lost their terrestial ones; as his sectators do not, who
hold they then presently become Demons.

In the mean time it is evident enough the doctrine of the separate souls
present blessedness is not destitute of the patronage and suffrage of
Philosophers. And it is indeed the known opinion of as many of them as ever held
its immortality (which all of all Ages and nations have done, a very few
excepted, for in as much as they knew nothing of the resurrection of the body,
they could not dream of a sl^epi^g interval.

And it is, at least, a shrewd presumption that nothing in reason lies against
it, when no one instance can be given among them that professedly, gave up
themselves to its only guidance, of any one that, granting the immortality of
the soul, and its separableness from its terrestrial body, ever denied the
immediate blessedness of good souls in that state of separation. Nor (if we
look into the thing it self) is it at all more unapprehensible that the soul
should be independent on the body in its operations then in its exist (...)?

If it be possible enough to form an unexceptionable notion of a spiritual
being, distinct, and separable from any corporeal substance (which the learned
Doctor More has sufficiently demonstrated in his Treatise of the immortality
of the Soul) with its proper attributes, and powers peculiar to it self; what
can reasonablely withold me from assenting, that, being separate from the
body, it may as well operate alone (I mean exert such operations as are p^oper
to such a being) as exist alone? That we find it here, de facto, in its present
state, acting only with dependence on a body, will no more infer that it can
act no otherwise, then its present existence in a body will, that it can never
exist out of it neither whereof amounts to more then the trifling exploded
argument a non esse ad non posse, and would be as good sense as to say such a
one walks in his clothes: therefore out of them he cannot move a foot.

Yea and the very use it self, which the soul now makes of corporeal organs,
and instruments, plainly ^vinces that it does exert some action, wherein they
assist it not. For it supposes an operation upon them, antecedent to any
operation by them. Nothing can be the instrument which is not first the subject
of my action; as when I use a pen, I act upon, in order to my acting by it, i.
e. I impress a motion upon it in order whereunto I use not that, or any other
such instrument; And, though I cannot produce the designed effect, leave such
characters so and so figured without it, my hand can yet, without it, perform
its own action, proper to it self, and produce many nobler effects. When
therefore the soul makes use of a bodily organ; its action upon it, must needs,
at last, ^e without the ministry of any organ, unless you multiply to it body
upon body in infini^um.

And if possibly it perform not some meaner, and grosser pieces of drudgerie;
when out of the body, wherein it made use of its help, and service before; that
is no mo^e a disparagement, or dimunution; then its to the Magistrate, that law
and decency permit him not to apprehend, or execute a Malefactor with his own
hand. It may yet perform those operations, which are proper to it self; that
is, such as are more noble, and excellent, and immediately conducive to its own
felicity.

Which sort of actions, as Cogitation, for instance, and Dilection, though,
being done in the body, there is conjunct with them an agitation of the Spirits
in the brain and heart; It yet seems to me more reasonable, that, as to those
acts, the Spirits are rather subjects then instruments at all of them, that the
whole essence of these Acts is antecedent to the motion of the Spirits; and
that motion certainly (but accidentally) consequent, only by reason of the
present, but soluble union the soul has with the body. And that the purity and
refinedness of those Spirits does only remove what would hinder such acts,
rather than contribute positively thereto. And so little is the alliance
between a thought, and any bodily thing, even those very finest Spirits
themselves; that I dare say whoever sets himself closely and strictly to
consider, and debate the matter with his own faculties, will find it much more
easily apprehensible, how the acts of intellection, and volition may be
performed without those very corporeal Spirits then by them. However suppose
them never so indispensably necessary to those more noble operations of the
soul, it may easily be furnished with them, and in greater plenty, and purity
from the ambient air (or ether) than from a dull torpid body; with some part
of which air, if we suppose it to contract a vital union; I know no rational
principle that is wronged by the supposition (though neither do I know any that
can necessarily infer it.)

As therefore the doctrine of the souls activitie out of this earthly body,
has favor and friendship enough from Philosophers; so I doubt not but upon
the most strict and rigid disquisition, it would be as much befriended (or
rather righted) by Philosophy it self; And that their reason would afford it
as direct, and more considerable defense then their Authority.

In the mean time, it deserves to be considered with some resentment, that this
Doctrine should find the generality of Learned Pagans more forward Advocates,
then some learned, and worthy Patrons of the Christian Faith; which is only
imputable to the undue measure and excess of an otherwise j^st, zeal, in th^se
latter, for the resurrection of the body, so far transporting them, that they
became willing to let go one Truth, that they might hold (...) the ^^ster; and
to ransom this, at the too dear (and unnecessary) expense of the former.
Accounting they could never make sure enough the resurrection of the body;
without making the souls dependence on it so absolute, and necessary, that it
should be able to do nothing but sleep in the mean while. Whereas it seems a
great deal more unconceiveable, how such a being as the soul is, once quit of
the entanglements and encumbrances of the body, should sleep at all, then how
it should act without the body.


that it is hard for an industrious Caviller to find what to except to them;
and indeed the very exceptions that are put in, are so frivolous, that they
carry a plain confession, there is nothing colorable to be said.

Yea and most evident it is from those Texts; not only that holy souls sleep
not, in that state of separation; but that they are awaked by it (as out of a
former sleep) into a much more lively, and vigorous activity, than they enjoyed
before: And translated into a state, as much better then their former, as the
tortures of a Cross, are more ungrateful, then the pleasures of a Paradise;
these joys fuller of vitalitie, then those sickly dying faintings. As the
immediate presence, and close embraces of the Lord of life; are more delectable
then a mournful disconsolate absence from him (which the Apostle therefore
tells us he desired, as far better (and with an Emphasis which our English too
faintly expresses; for he uses a double comparative [(...)] by much more
better, and as a perfected, i. e, a crowned triumphant Spirit, that has
attained the end of its race (as the words import in the agonistical notion See
Dr. Hammonds annot. in loc.
) is now in a more vivid, joyous state then, when, lately toyling in a tiresome
way, it languished under many imperfections. And it is observable, that in the
three former Scriptures, that phrase of being with Christ, or being present
with him, is the same which is used by the Apostle, 1 These. 4. 17. to express
the state of blessedness after the resurrection, intimating plainly the
sameness of the blessedness before, and after. And though this phrase be also
used to signi^ie the present enjoyment saints have of Gods gracious presence in
this life (which is also in nature, and kind the same) yet it is plainly used
in these Scriptures (the two latter more especially) to set out to us such a
degree of that blessedness, that in comparison thereof our present being with
Christ, is a not being with him; our presence with him, now, an absence from
him. While we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; and I am in
a strait betwixt two, desiring to depart (or having a desire unto desolution)
and to be with Christ, etc. How strangely mistaken, and disappointed had the
blessed Apostle been, had his absence from the body, his dissolution, his
release, set him further off from Christ, or made him less capable of converse
with him, then before he was! And how absurd would it be; to say the spirits of
the just are perfected, by being cast into a stupifying sleep; yea, or being
put into any state, not better then they were in before? But their state is
evidently far better. The body of death is now laid aside, and the wights of
sin, that did so easily beset, are shaken off; flesh and sin are laid down
together; the soul is rid of its burdensome bands, and shackles; has quitted
its filthy darksome prison (the usual place of lasiness, and sloth, is come
forth of it is drowsy dormitory, and the glory of God is risen upon it. It Is
now come into the world of realities; where things appear as they are, no
longer as in a drean, or vision of the night. The vital quickening beams of
divine light, are darting in upon it, on every side, and turning it into their
own likeness. The shadows of the evening are vanished, and fled away. It
converses with no other objects but what are full themselves, and most apt to
replenish it with energy and life. This cannot be but a joyful awakning; a
blessed season of satisfaction and delight, indeed, to the enlightened, revived
soul. But

2. It must be acknowledged the further, and more eminent season of this
blessedness will be, the general resurrection day, which is more expressly
signified in Scripture, by this term of [awaying] as is manifest in many plain
Texts, Dan 12 2
where it is either expressly thus used, Joh. 14 12.
or employed to have this meaning in the opposite sense of the word sleep. 2
Cor. 15.
2 These. 4. etc.


What addition shall then be made to the Saints blessedness, lies more remote
from our apprehension; in as much as Scripture states not the degree of that
blessedness which shall intervene. We know, by a too sad instructive
experience, the calamities of our present state, and can therefore more easily
conceive, wherein it is capable of betterment, by the deposition of a sluggish,
cumbersome body, where those calamities mostly have their spring: but then we
know less where to fix our foot, or whence to take our rise, in estimating the
additional felicities of that future state, when both the states to be compared
are so unknown to us.

But that there will be great additions is plain enough. The full recompense of
obedience, and devotedness to Christ, of foregoing all for him, is affixed by
his promise, to the resurrection of the just; The judgment day gives every one
his portion according to his work^. Then must the holy, obedient Christian hear
from its Redeemers mouth, Come ye-blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom,
etc. Till then, the Devils think their torment to be before their time. It Is
when he shall appear, we shall be like him* and see him as he is. That noted
day is the day of being presented faultless with exceeding joy.

And diverse things there are, obviously enough to be reflected on, which cannot
but be understood to contribute much to the increase and improvement of this
inchoate blessedness.

The acquisition of a glorified body. For our vile bodies shall be so far
transfigured, (...).
as to be made like [conform to] the glorious body of the Savior, Phil 3. 20,
21.
the Lord Jesus Christ. And this shall be when he shall appear from heaven,
where Saints here below, are required to have their commerce as the
infranchised Citizens thereof, and from whence they are to continue looking for
him, in the mean time. When he terminates and puts a period to that expectation
of his Saints on earth, then shall that great change be made, i. e. when he
actually appears, at which time the trumpet s^unds, and even sleeping dust it
self awakes; 1 These. 4. 14, 15* 16.
the hallowed dust of them that slept in Jesus first, who are then to come with
him. This change may well be conceived to add, considerably, to their felicity.
A natural congruity, and appetite is now answered, and satisfied, which did
either lie dormant, or was under somewhat an anxious, restless expectation
before; neither of which could well consist with a state of blessedness every
way, already perfect. And that there is a real desire, and expectation of this
change, seems to be plainly intimated in those words of Job, Chap. 14. 14.
All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come: Where he
must rather be understood to speak of the resurrection, than of death (as his
words are commonly mistaken, and misapplyed) as will appear by setting down the
Context from the seventh verse. For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down
that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch, thereof will not cease.
Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof dye in the
ground: yet through the sent of water, it will bud and bring forth boughs like
a plant. But man dies and wastes away; yea man gives up the Ghost, and where
is he? As the waters fail from the Sea, and the flood decays, and dries up;
so man lies down, and rises not till the heavens be no more: they shall not
be awaked nor raised out of their sleep. O that thou would hide me in the
grave, that thou would keep me secret till thy ^rath be p^st, that thou
would appoint me a set time, and remember me! If a man dye, shall he live
again? All the days of my appointed time, will I wait till my change come.
Thou shall call, and I will answer thee; thou will have a desire to the work of
thy hands. He first speaks according to common apprehension, and sensible
appearance touching the hopeless state of man in death, as though it were less
capable of reparation, then that of some inferior creatures unto the end of
ver. 10. And then, gradually, discovers his better hope; bewrayes his Faith, as
it were obliquely, touching this point; lets it breaking out, first, in some
obscure glimmerings, ver. 11, 12. giving us in his Protasis, a similitude not
fully expressive of his seeming meaning, for waters, and floods, that fail may
be renewed; and in his Apodosis more openly intimating man's sleep, should be
only till the heavens were no more. Which [till] might be supposed to signi^ie
[never] were it not for what follows, ver. 13. where he expressly speaks his
confidence by way of petition, that at a set and appointed time, God would
remember him, so as to recall him out of the Grave, and at last being now
minded to speak out more fully* puts the question to himself, if a man dye,
shall he live again? and answers it; all the days of my appointed time (i. e.
of that appointed time which he mentioned before, when God should revive him
out of the dust) will I wait till my change come, i. e. that glorious change,
when the corruption of a loathsome grave, should be exchanged for immortal
glory, which he amplifies, and utters more expressly, ver. 15. Thou shall call,
and I will answer, thou shall have a desire to the work ^f thy hands. Thou will
not always forget to restore, and perfect thy own creature.

And surely that waiting is not the act of his inanimate, sleeping dust, but,
though it be spoken of the person totally gone into H^des, into the invisible
state; it is to be understood of that part, that should be capable of such an
action, q. d. I, in that part, that shall be still alive, shall patiently await
thy appointed time of reviving me in that part also, which Death, and the Grave
shall insult over (in a temporary triumph) in the mean time; And so will the
words carry a facile, commodious sense, without the unnecessary help of an
imagined Rhetorical Scheme of Speech. And then, that this waiting carries in it
a desirous expectation of some additional good, is evident at first sight,
which therefore must needs add to the satisfaction and blessedness, of the
expecting soul. And wherein it may do so, is not altogether unapprehensible.
Admit that a Spirit, had it never been imbodied, might be as well without a
body, or that it might be as well provided of a body out of other materials;
it is no unreasonable supposition, that a connate aptitude to a body, should
render humane souls more happy in a body sufficiently attempered to their most
noble operations. And how much does relation and propriety endear things,
otherwise mean* and inconsiderable? or why should it be thought strange, that a
soul connaturallized t^ matter should be more particularly inclined to a
particular portion thereof? So as that it should appropriate such a part, and
say it is mine* And will it not be a pleasure to have a vitalit^ diffused
through what even more remotely appertains to me, to have every thing belonging
to the Supposition perfectly vindicated from the Tyrannous dominion of death?
The return^ing of the Spirits into a benumbed or sleeping toe or finger, adds a
contentment to a man which he wanted before. Nor is it hence ne^cessary the
Soul should covet a reunion wi^^ every effluvious particle of its former body.
A desire implanted by God in a reasonable soul will aim at what is convenient,
not wh^ shall be cumbersome, or monstrous.

And how pleasant will it be to comtemplat^ and admire the wisdom and power of
the great Creator in this so glorious a change when I shall find a Clod of
Earth, an Hea^ of D^st refined into a Celestial purity an^ brightness; when
what was sown in corrupti^^ shall be raised in incorruption; what was sown
(...) dishonor, 1 Cor. 15.
is raised in glory; what was sown in weakness, is raised in power; what was
sown a natural body, is raised a Spiritual body. When this corruptible shall
have put on incorruption, and this mortal an immortality; and death be wholly
swallowed up in victory. So that this awaking may well be understood to carry
that in it, which may bespeak it the proper season of the Saints consummate
satisfaction and blessedness. But besides what it carries in it self: there are
other (more extrinsical) concurrents that do further signalize this season, and
import a great increase of blessedness, then to Gods holy ones.

The body of Christ is now completed, the fullness of him, that fills all in
all, and all the so nearly related parts cannot but partake in perfection, and
reflected glory of the whole. There is joy in Heaven at the conversion of one
sinner; though he have a troublesome Scene yet to pass over; afterward, in a
tempting, wicked, unquiet world, how much more when the many sons shall be all
brought to glory together?

The designs are all now accomplished, and wound up into the most glorious
result and issue; whereof the Divine Providence had been, as in travel, for so
many thousand years. It Is now seen how exquisite wisdom governed the world, and
how steady a tendency the most intricate, and perplexed Methods of Providence
had, to one stated and most worthy end.

Specially the constitution, administration, and ends of the Mediators
Kingdom, are now beheld, in the exact aptitudes, order, and conspicuous glory;
when so blessed an issue and success shall commend, and crown the whole
undertaking.

The Divine Authority is now universally acknowledged, and adored; his Justice
is vindicated, and satisfied; his Grace demonstrated and magnified to the
uttermost. The whole assembly of Saints solemnly acquitted by public
sentence, presented spotless, and without blemish to God, and adjudged to
eternal blessedness. It Is the day of solemn triumph, and jubilation, upon the
finishing of all Gods works, from the creation of the world, wherein the Lord
Jesus appears to be glorified in his Saints, 2 These 1.
and admired in all that believe: Upon which ensues the resignation of the
Mediators Kingdom (all the ends being now attained) that the Father himself
may be immediately all in all. 1 Cor. 15.
How aptly then are the fuller manifestations of God, the more glorious display
of all his Attributes, the larger and more abundant Effusions of himself,
reserved, (as the best Wine to the last) unto this joyful day? Created
perfections couldnot have been before so absolute, but they might admit of
improvement; Their capacities not so large, but they might be extended further;
and then who can doubt but that divine communications may also have a
proportionable increase, and that upon the concourse of so many great occasions
they shall have so?

CHAP. XI.
An Introduction to the use of the Doctrine hitherto proposed. The Use divided
into Inferences of Truth. Rules of Duty. 1. Inference, That Blessedness
consists not in any sensual enjoyment. 2. Inference, The Spirit of man (since
it is capable of so high a Blessedness) a Being of high excellency.

AND now is our greatest work yet behind; Use.
the improvement of so momentous a truth to the affecting and transforming of
hearts. That (if the Lord shall so far vouchsafe his assistance and blessing)
they may taste the sweetness, feel the power, and bear the impresse and image
of it. This is the work both of greatest necessity, difficulty, and excellency,
and unto which all that has been done hitherto is but subservient, and
introductive. Give me leave therefore, Reader, to stop thee here, and demand of
thee ere thou go further, have thou any design in turning over these leaves of
bettering thy Spirit? of getting a more refined, heavenly temper of soul, art
thou weary of thy dross, and earth, and longing for the first fruits the
beginnings of glory? do thou wish for a soul meet for the blessedness
hitherto described! What is here written, is designed for thy help, and
furtherance. But if thou art looking on these pages, with a wanton, rolling
eye, hunting for novelties, or what may gratify a prurient wit, a coy and
squeamish fancy; Go, read a Romance, or some piece of Drollery; know here is
nothing for thy turn; and dread to meddle with matters of everlasting
concernment without a serious Spirit; Dissoluti est hominis in rebus s^riis
quaerere voluptatem. Arnob.
read not another line till thou have sighed out this request, Lord keep me
from trifling with the things of Eternity. Charge thy soul to consider, that
what thou art now reading must be added to thy account against the great day.
It Is amazing to think with what vanity of mind the most weighty things of
Religion are entertained amongst Christians. Things that should swallow up our
souls, drink up our Spirits, are heard as a tale that is told, disregarded by
most, scorned by too many. What can be spoken so important, or of so tremendous
consequence, or of so confessed truth, or with so awful solemnity, and premised
mention of the sacred name of the Lord, as not to find either a very slight
entertainment or contemptuous rejection? and this by persons avowing themselves
Christians! We seem to have little or no advantage in urging men upon their own
principles, and with things they most readily and professedly assent to. Their
hearts are as much untouched, and void of impression by the Christian Doctrine,
as if they were of another Religion. How unlike is the Christian world to the
Christian Doctrine! The seal is fair and excellent, but the impression is
languid or not visible. Where is that serious godliness, that heavenliness,
that purity, that spirituality, that righteousness, that peace unto which the
Christian Religion is most aptly designed to work and form the Spirits of men?
we think to be saved by an empty name, and glory in the show and appearance of
that, the life and power whereof we hate and deride. It Is a reproach with us
not to be called a Christian, and a greater reproach to be one. If such and
such Doctrines obtain not, in our professed Belief, we are Heretics or
Infidels: if they do, in our practice, we are precisians, and fools. To be so
serious, and circumspect, and strict, and holy, to make the practice of
godliness so much our business, as the known and avowed principles of our
Religion do plainly exact from us (yea though we come, as we cannot but do,
unspeakably short of that required measure) is to make ones self a common
derision and scorn. Not to be professedly religious is barbarous, to be so in
good earnest ridiculous. In other things men are wont to act and practice
according to the known Rules of their several Callings, and Professions; and he
would be reckoned the common fool of the neighborhood, that should not do so.
The Husbandman that should sow when others reap, or contrive his Harvest into
the depth of Winter, or sow Fitches, and expect to reap Wheat; The Merchant
that should venture abroad his most precious Commodities in a leaky bottom,
without Pilot, or Compass; or to places not likely to afford him any valuable
return. In Religion only it must be counted absurd to be, and do according to
its known agreed Principles, and he a fool that shall but practice as all about
him profess to believe. Lord! whence is this apprehended inconsistency between
the profession and practice of Religion! what has thus stupify'd, and unmanned
the world! that seriousness in Religion should be thought the character of a
fool! that men must visibly make a mockery of the most Fundamental Articles of
Faith, only to save their reputation, and be afraid to be serious least they
should be thought mad! Were the Doctrine here opened, believed in earnest,
^cientiam qui ^idicit, and fa^enda and vi^nda percepit, ^^dum sapiens (...)
nisi in ea quae ^dicit transfi^ratus est ani^^s. Sen. Ep. ^4.
were the due proper impresse of it upon our Spirits, or (as the Pagan
Moralists expression is) were our mind transfigured into it; what manner of
persons should we be, in all holy conversation and godliness!

But it is thought enough to have it in our Creed though never in our hearts,
and such as will not deride the holiness it should produce, yet endeavor it
not; nor go about to apply and urge truths upon their own souls to any such
purpose. What should turn into Grace, and Spirit, and Life, turns all into
Notion and Talk; and men think all is well, if their head be filled, and their
tongues tipped, with what should transform their souls and govern their lives.
How are the most awful Truths and that should have greatest power upon men's
Spirits, trifled with as matters only of speculation, and discourse! They are
heard but as empty airy words, and presently evaporate, pass away into words
again; Non prodest cibus, nec corpori accedit, qui statim sumptus emittitur.
Sen Epist. (...) Epitlet.
like food (as Seneca speaks) that comes up presently, the same that it was
taken in; which (as he says) profits not, nor makes any accession to the body
at all. A like case (as another ingeniously speaks) as if sheep when they have
been feeding should present their Shepherds with the very grass it self which
they have cropped, and show how much they had eaten. No says he, they concoct
it, and so yield them Wool and Milk. And so (says he) do not you ( viz. when
you have been instructed) presently go and utter words among the more ignorant
(meaning they should not do so in a way of ostentation to show how much they
knew more than others) but works that follow, upon the concoction of what has
been by words made known to them. (Let Christians be ashamed that they need
this instruction from heathen Teachers.)

Thy words were found and I did eat them (says the Prophet) and thy word was
to me the joy, and rejoicing of my heart. Divine truth is only so far at
present grateful, or useful for future, as it is received by faith and
consideration, and in the love thereof into the very heart, and there turned
(in succum and sanguinem) into real nutriment to the soul: So shall man live by
the word of God. Hence is the application of it (both personal and ministerial)
of so great necessity.

If the Truths of the Gospel were of the same alloy, with some parts of
Philosophy, whose end is attained as soon as they are known* If the Scripture
Doctrine (the whole entire System of it) were not a Doctrine after godliness,
if it were not designed to sanctify and make men holy, or if the hearts of men
did not reluctate, were easily receptive of its impressions, our work were as
soon done, as such a Doctrine were nakedly proposed. But the state of the case
in these respects is known and evident. The tenor and aspect of Gospel truth
speaks its end; and experience too plainly speaks the oppositeness of men's
Spirits. All (therefore) we read and hear is lost if it be not urgently
applied. (The Lord grant it be not then too.)

Therefore, Reader, let thy mind and heart concur in the following improvement
of this Doctrine which will be wholly comprehended under these Two heads
Inferences of Truth Rules of Duty.
that are consequent and connatural thereto.

1. Inferences of Truth educible from it.

True Blessedness consists not in any sensual enjoyment. The blessedness of a
man can be but one; Most only one. He can have but one highest and best good.
And its proper character is that it finally satisfies and gives rest to his
Spirit. This the face and likeness of God does; his glory beheld and
participated. Here then alone his full blessedness must be understood to lie.

Therefore as this might many other ways be evinced to be true, so it
evidently appears to be the proper issue of the present truth; and is plainly
proved by it. But alas! it needs a great deal more to be pressed than proved. O
that it were but as much considered, as it is known. The experience of almost
6000. years has (one would think sufficiently) testified the incompetency of
every worldly thing to make men happy, that the present pleasing of our senses,
and the gratification of our animal part is not blessedness* that men are still
left unsatisfied notwithstanding. But the practice and course of the world is
such, as if this were some late, and rare experiment: which (for curiosity)
every one must be trying over again. Every age renews the inquiry after an
earthly felicity; the design is entailed (as the Spanish designs are said to
be) and reinforced with as great a confidence, and vigor from age to age, as if
none had been baffled, or defeated in it before; or that it were very likely to
take at last. Had this been the alone folly of the first age, it had admitted
some excuse, but that the world should still be cheated by the same so
oft-defeated impostures, presents us with a sad prospect, of the deplorable
state of mankind. Psalm. 49.
This their way is their folly, yet their posterity approve, etc. The wearied
wits and wasted estates, laid out upon the Philosophers stone, afford but a
faint defective representation of this case. What Chemistry can extract heaven
out of a clod of clay? What art can make blessedness spring and grow out of
this cold earth? If all created nature be vexed and tortured never so long, who
can expect this Elixir? Yet after so many frustrated attempts so much time, and
strength, and labor lost, men are still as eagerly and vainly busy as ever.
Are perpetually tossed by unsatisfied desires; laboring in the ^ire, wearying
themselves for very vanity, distracted by the uncertain (and often contrary)
motions of a ravenous appetite, and a blind mind; that would be happy, and
knows not how. With what sounding bowels, with what compassionate tears, should
the state of mankind be lamented, by all that understand the worth of a soul?
What serious heart does not melt, and bleed for miserable men, that are
(through a just nemesis Ira d^i est ista vita mortalis ubi homo vanitati
similis factus est and dies ejus velut umbra pretereunt, etc. Aug. de Civ. Dei
l. 21. c. 24.
) so perpetually mocked with shadows, cheated with false delusive appearances,
infatuated and betrayed by their own senses. They walk but in a vain show,
disquieting themselves in vain; their days flee away as a shadow, their
strength is only labor and sorrow; while they rise up early, and lie down
late, to seek rest in trouble, and life in death. They run away from
blessedness while they pretend to pursue it, and suffer themselves to be led
down without regret to perdition; as an ox to the slaughter, and a fool to the
correction of the stocks, till a dart strike through their liver. Descend
patiently the chambers of death, not so much as once thinking, whether are we
going? dream of nothing but an earthly paradise, till they find themselves
amidst the infernal regions.

2. The Spirit of man (in as much as it is capable of such a blessedness)
appears an excellent creature. 2. Inference. Not that this blessedness can be
attained by mere humane endeavors (more whereof see under the next Inference)
but there is an inclination, a certain po^du^ naturae (as some Schoolmen speak)
by which it propends toward it; or there is the radix, or ^und^m^ntum, or
capacitas (as some others) i. e. that it not only may receive it; but that it
may be elevated by grace, actively, to concur, by its natural powers, as vital
principles, towa^ds the attainment of it, according to that known saying of
Saint Aug. P^sse credero naturae est hominis, etc.
Its natural capacity is supposed; for the Psalmist speaks of his own numerical
person the same that then writ; I shall behold; shall be satisfied take away
this supposition: and it could not be so said; or, as in J^b's words; I shall
behold him, and not another for me; It would certainly be another not the same.
Judge hence the excellency of an humane soul (the principal subject of this
blessedness) without addition of any new natural powers, it is capable of the
vision of God; of partaking, unto satisfaction, the divine likeness. And is not
that an excellent creature, that is capable, not only of surveying the
creation of God, passing through the several ranks, and orders of created
Beings; but of ascending to the Being of beings, of contemplating the divine
excellencies, of beholding the bright and glorious face of the blessed God
himself; till it have looked it self into His very likeness, and have his entire
image inwrought into it.

The dignity, then, of the Spirit of man is not to be estimated by the
circumstances of its present state; as it is, here, clad with a ^ordid flesh,
inwrapt in darkness, and gravelling in the dust of the earth; but consider the
improveableness of its natural powers, and faculties; the high perfections it
may attain, and the foundations of how glorious a state are laid in its very
nature. And then who can tell whether its possible advancement is more to be
admired, or its present calamity deplored. Might this consideration be
permitted to settle, and fix it self in the hearts of men; could any thing be
so grievious to them, as their so vast distance from such an attainable
blessedness: or any thing so industriously avoided so earnestly abhorred, as
that viler dejection and abasement of themselves, when they are so low already
by Divine disposition, to descend lower by their own wickedness; When they are
already fallen as low as Earth, to precipitate themselves as low as Hell. How
generous a disdain should that thought raise in men's spirits, of that vile
servitude to which they have subjected themselves, a servitude to brutal lusts,
to sensual inclinations, and desires; as if the highest happiness they did
project to themselves were the satisfaction of these! Would they not with an
heroic scorn, turn away their eyes from beholding vanity, did they consider
their own capacity of beholding the divine glory? could they satisfy
themselves to become Voluptas bonu^ (...) est -- H^^c tu (no^ dico ^^ter vi^os
s^d) inter homines numeras? cujus (...) bonum (...), ac (...), ac (...) cons^^?
exced^t ex hoc anima^^um numero pulch crim^, ac dus secu^do; (...) Sen. Ep. 91.
like the beasts that perish. did they think of being satisfied with the
likeness of God. And who can conceive unto what degree this aggravates the sin
of man, that he so little minds (as it will their misery, that shall fall short
of) this blessedness! They had spirits capable of it. Consider thou sensual man
whose happiness lies in Colors, and Tastes, and Sounds (as the Moralist
ingeniously speaks) that herd'st thy self with bruit creatures, and aimest no
higher then they; as little look up, and art as much a stranger to the
thoughts and desires of Heaven; thy Creation did not set thee so low; they are
where they were; but thou art fallen from thy excellency. God did not make thee
a brute Creature, but thou thy self. Thou have yet a spirit about thee, that
might understand its own originals, and alliance to the Father of Spirits; that
has a designation in its nature to higher converses, and employments. Many
myriads of such spirits, of no higher (original) excellency then thy own, are
now in the presence of the Highest Majesty; are prying into the eternal glory,
contemplating the perfections of the Divine Nature, beholding the^ unvailed
face of God, which transfuses upon them its own satisfying likeness. Thou art
not so low-born, but thou might attain this state also. That Sovereign Lord,
and Author of all things, calls thee to it; his goodness invites thee, his
authority enjoins thee, to turn thy thoughts, and designs this way. Fear not to
be thought immodest or presumptuous; Hic Deos aeq^a^, illo tendit, originis sua
memor. Nemo, impro e eo co^atur ascendere unde desc^nderat -- soc^i eis sumus
and memb^a, etc. Sen Ep. 92.
it is but a dutiful ambition; an obedient aspiring. Thou art under a Law to be
thus happy; nor does it bind thee to any natural impossibility; it designs
instruction to thee, not delusion; guidance, not mockery. When thou art
required to apply, and turn thy Soul to this blessedness; it is not the same
thing, as if thou were bidden to remove a Mountain, to pluck down a Star, or
create a World. Thou art here, put upon nothing but what is agreeable to the
primaeval nature of man; and though it be to a vast height, thou must ascend;
it is by so easy, and familiar Methods, by so apt Gradations, that thou will be
sensible of no violence done to thy nature, in all thy way. Do but make some
trials with thy self; thou will soon find, nothing is thy hindrance, ^ut an
unwilling heart. Try however (which will suffice to let thee discern thy own
capacity, and will be a likely means to make thee willing) how far thou can
understand, and trace the way (complying with it, at least as reasonable) that
leads to this blessedness. Retire a little into thy self; forget a while thy
relation to this sensible world. Summon in thy self^reflecting and considering
powers. Thou will presently perceive thou art not already happy, thou art in
some part unsatisfied; and thence will easily understand, in as much as thou
art not happy in thy self, that it must be something, as yet, without thee,
must make thee so; and nothing can make thee happy, but what is, in that
respect, better then thy self; or has some perfection in it, which thou
find wanting to thy self. A little further discourse or reasoning with thy
self, will easily persuade thee, thou have something better about thee, then
that luggage of flesh thou go with to and fro; for thou well know, that
(...). Plotin. Ennead. 4. lib. 3.
is not capable of reason, and discourse; and that the power of doing so is an
higher perfection then any thou can entitle it to; and that therefore besides
thy bulkie material part, thou must have such a thing as a spirit, or soul
belonging to thee; to which, that, and thy other perfections (not competible to
gross matter) may agree. Thou will readily assent; that thou can never be
happy, while thy better, and more noble part is unsatisfied; and that it can
only be satisfied with something suitable and connatural to it. That therefore
thy happiness must lie in something more excellent then this material, or
sensible world, otherwise it cannot be grateful and suitable to thy soul, yea in
something that may be better, and more excellent then thy soul it self,
otherwise how can it better, and perfect that Sicut noa est a carne, sed lupe^
carn^m, q^od carnem fac^t v^vert: sic non est (...), sed super homi^^m q^u^
hominem sacit (...) v^v^re. D. Aug de Civit. Dei lib 19. c. 25.
. As thou can not but acknowledge thy soul to be spiritual, and immaterial,
so, if thou attend, thou will soon see cause to acknowledge a spiritual, or
immaterial being, better and more perfect then thy own soul. For its
perfections were not self-original, they were therefore derived from something,
for that reason, confessedly, more excellent, whence at last also thou will
find it unavoidably imposed upon thee, to apprehend, and adore a being
a^s^lutely perfect; and then which, there cannot be a more perfect; the first
subject, and common fountain of all perfections; which has them, underived in
himself, and can derive them unto inferior created beings Ut in ord^ne
causarum ^ffici^ntium, ita and in gradi us virtut^s and pe^f^ctionis, non datur
prog^ess^s ^a infi^i^um: sed oportet sit aliqua p^^m^ and summa perfectio. P.
Molin. de cognitione Dei. Not to insist upon what has been much urged by
learned men of former, and latter (yea and of the present) time [that whosoever
denies the existence of an absolute perfect being, contradicts himself in the
denial, inasmuch as n^cessity of existence is included in the very subject of
the neg^tion.] some accounting it a Sophisme, and it being unseasonable here to
discuss it.)
. Upon this eternal, and self-essential being, the infinitely blessed God; thou
necessarily dependest and owe, therefore, constant subjection, and obedience
to him. Thou have indeed offended him; and art thereby cut off from all
interest in him, and intercourse with him; but he has proclaimed in his
Gospel, his willingness to be reconciled, and that, through the sufferings,
righteousness, and intercession of his only begotten Son, thy merciful
Redeemer, the way is open for thy restitution, and recovery; that thou may
partake from him what ever perfection is wanting to thy blessedness. Nothing is
required from thee in order hereunto, but that relying on, and submitting to
thy Redeemers gracious conduct, thou turn thy mind and heart toward thy God,
to know him, and conform to him; to view, and imitate the Divine perfections;
the faithful endeavor, and inchoation whereof, will have this issue, and
reward; the clear vision, and full participation of them. So that thy way, and
work differ not, in nature, and kind, from thy end, and reward; thy duty from
thy blessedness. Nor are either repugnant to the natural constitution of thy
own soul. What violence is there done to reasonable nature in all this? or what
can hinder thee herein, but a most culpable averse, and wicked heart. Did thy
reason ever turn off thy soul from God? was it not thy corruption only? What
vile images do thou receive from earthly objects, which deform thy soul,
while thou industrio^sly avertest thy Makers likeness, that would perfect it?
How full is thy mind, and heart of vanity? how empty of God? were this through
natural incapacity, thou were an innocent creature; it were thy infelicity
(negative I mean) not thy crime; and must be resolved into the Sovereign will
of thy Creator, not thy own disobedient will. But when this shall appear, the
true state of thy case, and thou shall hear it from the mouth of thy Judge.

Thou did not like to retain me in thy knowledge or love; thou had reason
and will, to use about meaner objects, but none for me; thou could sometimes
have spared me a glance, a cast of thine eye at least, when thou did rather
choose it should be in the ends of the Earth. A thought of me had cost thee as
little, might as soon have been thought, as of this or that vanity; but thy
heart was not with me. I banish thee, therefore, that presence which thou never
loved'st. I deny thee the vision thou did always shun, and the impressions of
my likeness which thou did ever hate. I eternally abandon thee to the
darkness, and deformities which were ever grateful to thee. Thine is a self
created hell; the fruit of thy own choice; no invitations or persuasions on
mine could keep thee from it. How will thou excuse thy fault, or avert thy
doom! what Arguments or Apologies, shall defend thy cause, against these
pleadings. Nay what Armor shall defend thy Soul, against its own wounding
self-reflections hereupon? When every thought shall be a Dart; and a convicted
Conscience, an ever gnawing Worm; a fiery Serpent; with endless involutions,
ever winding about thy heart?

It will now be sadly thought on, how often thou saw thy way, and declin'dst
it, know thy duty, and did wave it; understood'st thy interest, and
did flight it; approvd'st the things that were more excellent, and did
reject them. How often thou did prevaricate with thy light, and run counter
to thy own eyes; while things, confessedly, most worthy of thy thoughts, and
pursuits, were overlook't; and empty shadows eagerly pursued. Thy own heart
will now feelingly tell thee, it was not want of capacity, but inclination that
cut thee off from blessedness. Thou will now bethink thy self, that when life,
and immortality were brought to light before thy eyes, in the Gospel; and thou
wast told of this future blessedness of the Saints, and pressed to follow
holiness, as without which thou could not see God; it was a reasonable man
was spoken to, that had a power to understand, and judge, and choose; not a
stone or a brute, Thy capacity of this blessedness makes thee capable also of
the most exquisite torment, and re^lected on, actually infers it. How
passionately (but vainly) will thou then cry out, O that I had filled up the
place of any the meanest Creature throughout the whole Creation of God, that I
had been a G^at, or a Fly, or had never been rather, then to have so noble,
abused powers eternally to reckon for* Yea and thou must reckon for not only
the actual light, and good impressions thou had, but even all thou wast
capable of, and might have attained. Thou shall now recount with anguish, and
horror (and rend thy own Soul with the thoughts) what thou might now have
been; how excellent and glorious a creature! had thou not contrived thy own
misery and conspired with the Devil, against thy self, how to deform, and
destroy thy own Soul. While this remembrance shall always a fresh return, that
nothing was enjoined thee as a duty; or propounded, as thy blessedness; but
what thou wast made capable of, and that it was not fatal necessity, but a
wilful choice made thee miserable.

CHAP. XII.
Inference. 3. That a change of heart is necessary to this blessedness. The
pretenses of ungodly men whereby they would avoid the necessity of this change.
Five considerations proposed in order to the detecting the vanity of such
pretenses. A particular discussion and refutation of those pretenses.

3. It Is a mighty change must p^sse upon the Souls of men in order to their
enjoyment of this Blessedness. 3. Inference.
This equally follows from the consideration of the Nature and substantial
parts of it, as of the qualifying righteousness prerequired to it. A little
reflection upon the common state and temper of men's spirits, will soon enforce
an acknowledgement that the Vision of God, and conformity to him are things
above their reach, and which they are never likely to take satisfaction in, or
at all to savor; till they become otherwise disposed then, before the
renovating change, they are. The text expresses no more in stating the
qualified subject of this blessedness [in righteousness] then it evidently
implies in the account it gives of this blessedness it self, that it lies [in
seeing God and being satisfied with his likeness.] As Soon as it is considered
that the blessedness of Souls is stated here, what can be a more obvious
reflection then this, Lord! then how great a change must they undergo! what!
such Souls be blessed in seeing and pertaking the Divine likeness that never
loved it? were so much his enemies? It Is true they are naturally capable of it,
which speaks their original excellency, but they are morally incapable. i. e.
indisposed and averse which as truly, and most sadly speaks their present
vileness; and the sordid object temper they now are of. They are destitute of
no natural Powers necessary to the attainment of this blessedness; but in the
mean time have them so depraved, Capax est noster (...) p^^fectur illo, si
(...) dep^ima^t.
by impure, and vicious tinctures; that they cannot relish it or the means to
it. They have reasonable Soul's, furnished with intellective, and elective
faculties; Sen. Epist 92.
but laboring under a manifold distemper and disaffection; that they cannot
receive, 1 Cor 2. 14.
they cannot savor, the things of God, R^m* 8. ^.
or what is Spiritual. They want the (...) (as we may express it,) the well
disposedness for the Kingdom of God intimated Luke 9. 62. the (...), the
meetness, the aptitude, or idoneity for the inheritance of the Saints in light.
Col. 1. 12.

A settled aversion from God has fastened its roots in the very spirit of their
minds (for that is stated as the prime subject of the change to be made) and
how can they take pleasure, Ephesians. 4 23.
then, in the vision and participation of his glory? whereas, by beholding the
glory of the Lord, they should be changed into the same image; a vail is upon
the heart till it turn to the Lord, as was said concerning the Jews. 2 Cor. 3.
The God of this world has blinded their minds least (that transforming light)
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should
shine unto them. Chap. 4. 4. They are alienated from the Life of God through
their ignorance, Ephesians. 4 18.
and blindness of heart. The life they choose is to be (...), Atheists, or
without God in the world. Chap. 2. 12.
They like not to retain God in their knowledge, Rom 1 28.
are willingly ignorant of him. 2 Pet. 3.
Say to him depart from us we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Job 21. 14.
The Lord looks down from Heaven upon the children of men to see if any will
understand, Psalm 53.
if any will seek after God, and the result of the inquiry is, there is none
that does good no not one. Joh. 15.
They are haters of God, as our Savior accused the Jews, Romans 1.
and Saint Paul the Gentiles. Are lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God.
Their understandings are dark, their minds vain, their wills obstinate, their
Consciences seared, their hearts hard and dead, their lives one continued
Rebellion against God and a defiance to Heaven. At how vast distance are such
Souls from such blessedness! The notion and nature of blessedness must sure be
changed, or the temper of their Spirits. Either they must have new hearts
created, or a new Heaven, if ever they be happy. And such is the stupid dotage
of vain man, he can more easily persuade himself to believe, that the Sun it
self should be transformed into a dunghill, that the Holy God should lay aside
his Nature, and turn Heaven into a place of impure darkness; then that he
himself should need to undergo a change. O ye powerful infatuation of self
love, that men in the gall of bitterness should think it is well with their
spirits, and fancy themselves in a case good enough, to enjoy Divine
pleasures; that (as the Toads venom offends not it self) their loathsome
wickedness, which all good men detest, is a pleasure to them, and while it is as
the poison of Asps under their lips, they call it as a dainty bit, revolve it
in their thoughts with delight. Their wickedness speaks it self out to the
very hearts of others, while it never affects their own; Psalm. 36. 1, ^.
and is found out to be hateful while they still continue slattering
themselves. And because they are without spot in their own eyes; they adventure
so high, as to presume themselves so, in the pure eyes of God too; and instead
of designing to be like God, they already imagine him suc^ a one as themselves.
Hence their allotment of time (in the whole of it, Psalm. 50*
the Lord knows, little enough) for the working out of their salvation, spends
a pace; while they do not so much as understand their business. Their measured
hour is almost out; an immense Eternity is coming on upon them; and lo they
stand as men that cannot find their hands. Urge them to the speedy serious
endeavor of an heart-change; earnestly to intend the business of regeneration,
of becoming new creatures; they seem to understand it as little, as if they
were spoken to in an unknown tongue; and are in the like posture with the
confounded builders of Babel, they know not what we mean, or would put them
upon. They wonder what we would have them do. They are (say they) Orthodox
Christians. They believe all the Articles of the Christian Creed. They detest
all Heresy, and false Doctrine; They are no strangers to the house of God, but
diligently attend the enjoined Solemnities of Public Worship: Some possibly
can say they are sober, just, Charitable, Peaceable; and others that can boast
less of their Virtues yet, say they, are sorry for their sins, and pray God to
forgive them; And if we urge them concerning their Translation from the state
of Nature, to that of Grace; their becoming new creatures, their implantation
into Christ. They say they have been Baptized, and therein regenerate, and what
would we have more?

But to how little purpose is it to equivocate with God? to go about to put a
fallacy upon the Judge of Spirits? or escape the animadversion of his fiery
flaming eye, or elude his determinations, and pervert the true intent and
meaning of his most established Constitutions and Laws.

Dare thou venture thy soul upon it? that this is all God means, Psalm. 51.
by having a new heart created, a right Spirit renewed in us, by being made
Gods workmanship, Ephesians. 2. 10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works: 2 Cor. 5. 17.
by becoming new creatures, old things being done away, all things made new: by
so learning the truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24.
to the putting off the old man -- and putting on the new; which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness; Jam 1. 18.
by being begotten of Gods own will by the word of truth, to be (the (...)) the
chief excellency, the prime glory (as certainly his new creature is his best
creature) the first fruits, or the devoted part, of all his creatures; by
having Christ formed in us; Gal. 4. 19.
by partaking the divine nature, the incorruptible seed; the seed of God, 2
Pet. 1 4.
by being born of God, Spirit of Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.
as of earthly parents we are born flesh of flesh. John 3. 6.
When my eternal blessedness lies upon it, had I not need to be sure, that I
hit the true meaning of these Scriptures? especially that, at least, I fall not
below it, and rest not in any thing short of what Scripture makes indispensably
necessary to my entering into the Kingdom of God?

I professedly wave controversies, and it is pity so practical a business, as
this I am now upon, and upon which Salvation so much depends, should ever have
been encumbered with any controversy. And therefore (though I shall not degress
so far as to undertake a particular and distinct handling, here, of this work
of God upon the soul, yet) I shall propound something in general, touching the
change necessarily previous to this blessedness, (wherein that necessity is
evidenceable from the nature of this blessedness, which is the business I have
in hand) that, I hope, will pass among Christians for acknowledged truth, not
liable to dispute, though the Lord knows it be little considered. My design
being rather to awaken souls to the consideration of known and agreed things,
than to perplex them about unknown. Consider therefore.

First; that the holy Scriptures, in the forementioned and other like passages,
do plainly hold forth the necessity of a real change, to be made in the inward
temper, and dispositions of the soul; and not a relative only, respecting its
state. This cannot be doubted by any, that acknowledge a real, inherent
depravation, propagated in the nature of man. No, nor denied by them that grant
such a corruption to be general, and continued among men; whether by imitation
only, or what way soever. And willing I am, to meet men upon their own
principles, and concessions, however erroneous, or short of the truth they may
be, while they are yet improvable to their own advantage. Admit that
regeneration, or the new birth includes a change of our relation and state
Godward; does it therefore exclude an intrinsique subjective change of the
inclinations and tendencies of the Soul? And if it did yet other terms, are
more peculiarly, appropriate to, and most expressly point out, this very change
alone; As that of conversion, or of turning to God; of being renewed in the
spirit of the mind; of putting off the old man that is corrupt by etc. and
putting on the new man which is created in righteousness, and true holiness
etc. of partaking the Divine nature; It matters not if this or that expression
be understood, by some, more principally in another sense, the thing it self,
of which we speak, is as clearly expressed, and as urgently pressed (as there
was cause) as any other matter whatsoever throughout the whole Book of God. But
men are slower of belief, as to the great Article of the Christian Doctrine,
then to most (I might say, any) other. This Truth more directly assaults the
strong holds of the Devil, in the hearts of men; and is of more immediate
tendency to subvert his Kingdom; Therefore they are most unwilling to have it
true, and most hardly believe it. Here they are so madly bold, as to give the
lie to all Divine Revelations; and though they: are never so plainly told
without holiness none shall see God, they will yet maintain the contrary
belief, and hope; till, go ye cursed, vindicate the Truth of God, and the
flames of Hell be their Eternal confutation. Lord! that so plain a thing will
not enter into the hearts of men; that so urgent inculcations will not yet make
them apprehend, that their Souls must be renewed, or perish! That they will
still go dreaming on, with that mad conceit that (whatever the Word of God says
to the contrary) they may yet with unsanctified hearts get to Heaven! How
deplorable is the case, that when men have no other hope left them, but that
the God of truth will prove false, and belie his word; yea, and overturn the
nature of things, to save them in their sins! Thou that live under the
Gospel, have thou any pretense for thy (seeming) ignorance in this matter?
could thou ever look one quarter of an hour into the Bible, and not meet with
some intimation of this truth? What was the ground of thy mistake? What has
beguiled thee into so mischievous a delusion: How could such an imagination
have place in thy soul; that a Child of wrath by nature, could become a Child
of God without receiving a new nature? That so vast a change could be made in
thy state, without any at all in the temper of thy Spirit?

Secondly, consider, That this change is, in its own nature, and the design of
God, who works it, dispositive of the soul for blessedness. It Is sufficiently
evident, from the consideration of the state it self, of the unrenewed soul,
that a change is necessary for this end; such a soul in which it is not wrought
when once its drowsy, stupifying slumber is shaken off, and its reflecting
power awakened, must needs be a perpetual torment to it self. So far it is
removed from blessedness, it is its own Hell, and can fly from misery and
death no faster then from it self. Blessedness composes the soul, reduces it to
a consistancie; it infers (or rather is) a self-satisfaction; a
well-pleasedness and contentment with one self; in rich't, and filled with the
divinefulness. (...).
Hence it is at rest; not as being pent in, but contentedly dwelling with it
self; and keeping within its own bounds of its own accord. The unrenewed soul
can no more contain it self within its own terms, or limits; is as little self
consistent, as a raging flame, or an impetuous tempest. Indeed its own lusts
perpetually (as so many vultures) rend and tear it; and the more, when they
want external objects. Then (as hunger) their fury is all turned inward; and
they prey upon intestines; upon their own subject; but unto endless torment,
not satisfaction. In what posture is this soul for rest and blessedness.

The nature of this change, sufficiently speaks its own design. It Is an
introduction of (the primordia) the very principles of blessedness.

And Scripture as plainly speaks the design of God. He regenerates to the
undefiled inheritance. Makes meet for it; 1 Pet. 1^ 4.
works, forms, or fashions the soul unto that self same thing, Col 1. 12.
viz. to desire and groan after that blessed state; 2 Cor. 5 5.
and consequently to acquiesce and rest therein. Therefore, vain man, that
dreamest of being happy without undergoing such a change; how art thou trying
thy skill to abstract a thing from it self. For the prerequired righteousness
whereunto thou must be changed, and this blessedness are in kind, and nature
the same thing; as much as a Child, and a man. Thou pretendest thou would
have that perfected, which thou can not endure, should ever be begun: Thou
set thy self to prevent and suppress what, in its own nature, and by
Divine Ordination tends to the accomplishment of thy own pretended desires.
Thou would have the Tree, without ever admitting the Seed, or Plant. thou
would have heat, and can not endure the least warmth; so besotted a thing
is a carnal heart!

Thirdly, That, in as much as this blessedness consists in the satisfactory
sight, and participation of Gods own likeness, unto whom the soul is habitually
averse, This change must chiefly stand in its becoming holy or godly, or in the
alteration of its dispositions and inclinations, as to God. Otherwise the
design, and end of it is not attained. We are required to follow peace with all
men (but here the accent is put) and holiness, Heb. 12 14.
without which no man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. It Is therefore a vain thing,
in reference to what we have now under consideration, viz. the possibility of
attaining this blessedness; to speak of any other changes that fall short of,
or are of another kind from, the right disposition of heart Godward. This
change, we are now considering, is no other then the proper adequate impress of
the Gospel-discovery, upon men's spirits, (as we have largely shown the
righteousness is, in which it terminates.) The sum of that discovery is* [That
God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself] The proper impress of it,
2 Cor. 5 18 19.
therefore, is the actual reconciliation of the soul to God, through Christ; a
friendly well affected posture of Spirit toward God our last end, and highest
good; and toward Christ, our only way (since the Apostasy) of attaining and
enjoying it. To rest therefore in any other good dispositions, or indowments of
mind, is as much besides the business, as impertinent to the present purpose,
as if one designed to the Government of a City, should satisfy himself that he
has the skill to play well on a Lute; or he that intends Physic, that he is
well seen in Architecture. The general Scope and Tenor of the Gospel tells
thee, O man, plainly enough, what the business is thou must intend (if thou
wilfully overlook it not) in order to thy blessedness. It Is written to draw
thee into fellowship with the Father and the Son, that thy joy may be full. 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
It aims at the bringing of thee into a state of blessedness in God through
Christ; and is therefore the instrument by which God would form thy heart
thereto. The seal by which to make the first impression of his image upon thee.
Which will then as steadily incline, and determine thy soul toward him; as the
magnetique touch ascertains the posture of the Needle; wherefore does he, there
discover his own heart; but to melt and win, and transform thine. The w^rd of
grace is the seed of the new Creature. Through the exceeding great and precious
promises, he makes souls partake of the divine nature. Grace is, firstly,
revealed, to teach the denial of ungodliness, etc. Turn thy thoughts hither
then, and consider, what is there done upon thy soul, by the Gospel, to
attemper and conform it to God? wherein has thy heart answered this its
visible design; and intendment? Thou art but in a delirious dream till thou
seriously bethinkest thy self of this. For, otherwise, how can the aversion of
thy heart from him escape thy daily observation; thou can not be without
evidences of it; what pleasure do thou take in retiring thy self with God?
what care to redeem time only for converse with him? had thou not rather be
any where else? In a time of vacancy from business, and company; when thou have
so great a variety of things before thee, among which to choose an object for
thy thoughts, do they not naturally fall upon any thing rather then God! Nor do
thou think to shift off this, by assigning the mear natural cause; for if there
were not somewhat more in the matter, why is it not so with all? He, upon whom
this change had passed, Psalm. 36. 5, 6.
could say; My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; Psalm. 104 34.
and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lip^, when I remember thee upon my
bed, Psalm. 139 17, 18.
and meditate on thee in the night watches. My meditation of him shall be
(...); I will be glad in the Lord. Isa. 16. 8, 9.
How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God, how great is the sunt of them?
If I should count them, they are more in number then the sand; when I wake, I
am still with thee. Yea, in the way of thy judgment, O God, have we waited for
thee, the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.
With my Soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me
will I s^ck thee early, etc. Therefore, plain it is, there is a sinful
distemper to be wrought out, an ungodly disposition of heart; which it concerns
thee not to rest, till thou see removed.

Fourthly, Consider, that to become godly; or this change of inclinations, and
dispositi^ns toward God, is that which of all other, the soul does most
strongly reluctate and strive against; and which therefore it undergoes with
greatest difficulty and reget. It Is an horrid and amazing thing it should be
so, but Scripture, and experience leave it undoubted that so it is. What! that
the highest Excellency, the most perfect Beauty, Loveliness, and Love it self
should so little attract a reasonable Spiritual being that issued thence? His
own offspring so unkind! what more then monstrous unnaturalness is this, so to
disaffect ones own Original! 'Twere easy to accumulate, and heap up
considerations that would render this astonishingly strange. So things are
reckoned upon several accounts, either as they are more rare, and unfrequent
(which is the vulgar way of estimating wonders) or as their causes, are of more
difficult investigation; or (if they are moral wonders) as they are more
unreasonable, or causeless; upon this last account, Christ marvelled at the
Jews unbelief; And so is this hatred justly mavelous; Mark 6. 6.
as being altogether without a cause. Joh 15. 25.


But thence to infer there is no such thing, were to dispute against the Sun.
No truth has more of light and evidence in it, though none more of ^^rr^ur and
prodigy. To how many thousand objects is the mind of man indifferent? can turn
it self to this or that; run with facility all points of the Compass, among the
whole universe of beings; but assay, only, to draw it to God, and it recoiles:
Thoughts, and affections revolt, and decline all converse with that blessed
object! Toward other objects it freely opens, and dilates it self, as under the
benign beams of a warm Sun: there are placid, complacential emotions; amicable
sprightly converses and embraces. Toward God only, it is presently contracted,
and shut up. Life retires, and it becomes as a stone, cold ^rigid, and
impenetrable. The quite contrary to what is required (which also those very
precepts do plainly imply) it is alive to sin, to the world, Romans 6. 11.
to vanity, but crucified, mortified, dead to God, and Jesus Christ.

The natures of many men that are harsh, fierce, and savage, admit of various
cultivations, and refinings; and by moral precept, the exercise, and
improvement of reason, with a severe animadversion, and observance of
themselves, they become mild, tractable, gentle, meek. (The story of the
Physiognamists guess at the temper of Socrates is known) but of all other, the
disaffected soul is least inclinable ever to become good natured toward God,
wherein grace, or holiness does consist. Here it is most unperswadable, never
facile to this change. One would have thought no affection should have been so
natural, so deeply inwrought into the spirit of man, as an affection toward
the Father of Spirits; but here, he most of all discovers himself to be without
natural ^ffection, surely here is a sad proof, that such affection does not
ascend.

The whole duty of man as to the principle of it, resolves into love. That is
the fulfilling of the Law. As to its object; the two Tables devide it between
God, and our neighbor. And accordingly divide that love. Upon those two
Branches whereof; love to God, and love to our neighbor, hang all the Law and
the Prophets.

The wickedness of the world has killed this love at the very root; and
indisposed the nature of man to all exercises of it, either way, whether
toward God, or his neighbor. It has not only rendered man unmeet for holy
communion with God; but in a great measure for civil society with one another.
It has destroyed good nature; made men false, envious, barbarous; turned the
world (especially the dark places of the Earth, where the light of the Gospel
shines not) into habitations of cruelty. But who sees not the enmity, and
disaffection of men's hearts toward God is the more deeply rooted, and less
superable evil?

The beloved Apostle gives us a plain and sad intimation how the case is, as to
this; when he reasons thus. He that loves not his brother whom he has seen;
how can he love God, whom he has not seen?

He argues from the less to the greater; and this is the ground upon which his
argument is built: That the loving of God is a matter of greater difficulty,
and from which the Spirit of m^n is more remote, then the loving of his
neighbor. And he withal insinuates an account why it is so; Gods remoteness
from our sense, which is indeed a cause, but no excuse. For is our so gross
sensuality no sin? that nothing should affect our hearts but what we can see
with our eyes? as if our sense were the only measure or judge of excellencies.
We are not all flesh, what have we done with our souls? if we cannot see God
with our eyes, why do we not with our minds? at least so much of him we might,
as to discern his excellency above all things else: How come our souls to lose
their dominion, and to be so slavishly subject to a ruling sense? But the
reason less concerns our present purpose; that whereof it is the reason; that
employed assertion, that men are in a less disposition to the love of God then
their neighbor, is the sad truth we are now considering. There are certain
homilitical virtues, that much adorn and polish the nature of man; Urbanity,
Fidelity, Justice, Patience of Injuries, Compassion toward the Miserable, etc.
and, indeed, without these, the world would break up, and all civil societies
disband; if, at least, they did not in some degree obtain. But in the mean time
men are at the greatest distance imaginable from any disposition to society
with God. They have some love for one another; but none for him. And yet it
must be remembered that love to our neighbor, and all the consequent exertions
of it, becoming duty by the Divine Law; ought to be performed as acts of
obedience to God; and therefore ought to grow from the stock and root of a
Divine Love; I mean love to God. They are otherwise but Spurious Virtues,
Bastard Fruits ( men gather not Grapes of Thorns, etc.) they grow from a Tree
of another kind, and what ever semblance they may have of the true, they want
their constituent form, their life and soul. 1 John 3. 14.
Though love to the brethren, is made a character of the regenerate state, of
having past from death to life; It Is yet but a more remote, and is it self
brought to trial by this higher, and more immediate one, and which is more
intimately connatural to the new creature, Chap. 5* 2.
even the Love of God; By this we know we love the children of God, when we
love God, and keep his Commandments. A respect to God Proinde virtutes quas
sibi videtur habere, nisi ad Deum retulerit, etiam ipsa vitia sunt potius quam
virtutes. Aug* de Civit. Dei l. 19. c* 25.
specifies every Virtue, and Duty. What ever is loved, and served, and not in
him, and for him ( servato ordine fini^, as the School-phrase is) becomes an
Idol, and that love and service is Idolatry. And what a discovery is here of
disaffection to God; that in the exercise of such the above mentioned virtues,
one single act, shall be torn from it self, from its specifying moral ^orm,
only to leave out him. A promise shall be kept, but without any respect to God
-- (for even the promises made to him are broken without any scruple.) That
which is another, shall be rendered to him; but God shall not be regarded in
the business. An alms given, for the Lords sake, left out. That which concerns
my neighbor often done, but what concerns God therein, as it were studiously
omitted. This is what he that runs may read; that though the hearts of men are
not to one another as they should; they are much more ^verse toward God.

Men are easier of acquaintance toward one another, they slide insensibly into
each others bosoms; even the most churlish, morose natures are wrought upon by
assiduous repeated kindnesses ( gutta cavat lapidem, etc.) as often falling
drops at length wear and work into very stones. Toward God their hearts are
more impenetrable then Rocks, harder then Adamants. He is seeking with some, an
acquaintance all their days: They live their whole age, under the Gospel, and
yet are never won. They hearken to one another, but are utterly unperswadable
toward God; as the deaf Adder that hears not the voice of the Charmer, though
charming never so wisely. The clearest Reason, the most powerful Arguments,
move them not, no nor the most insinuative allurements, the sweetest breathings
of love. Matthew. 13* 37. See Psalm. 81. 8. to 13.
How often would I have gathered thee, as the Hen her Chickens under her wings,
and ye would not. Pro. 1. 20. to 24, etc.
God draws with the cords of a man, with the bends of love; but they still
perversely keep at an unkind distance. Hos. 11. 4.


Men use to believe one another (were there no credit given to each others
words, and some mutual confidence in one another, there could be no humane
converse, all must affect solitude, and dwell in Dens, and Deserts as wild
beasts) but how incredulous are they of all Divine Revelations? though
testified with never so convincing evidence. ^ho has believed our report! The
word of the eternal God is regarded (O amazing wickedness) as we would the word
of a Child or a Fool. No sober rational man, but his Narrations, Promises, or
Threatenings are more reckoned of.

Men are more reconcilable to one another, when enemies; more constant, when
friends. How often does the power of a conquering enemy, and the distress of
the conquered, work a submission on this part, and a remission on that. How
often are haughty spirits stoopt, by a series of calamities, and made ductile;
proud arrogants formed, by necessity and misery, into humble supplicants, so as
to lie prostrate at the feet of a man, that may help, or hurt them; while still
the same persons retain indomitable, unyielding spirits toward God, under
their most afflictive pressures. Though his gracious Nature, and Infinite
fullness promise the most certain, and liberal relief, it is the remotest thing
from their thoughts to make any address to him. They cry because of the
oppression of the mighty, Job. 35*
but none says where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night. Rather
perish under their burdens, then look toward God, when his own visible hand is
against them, or upon them, and their lives at his mercy; they stand it out to
the last breath; and are more hardly humbled then consumed: Sooner burn, then
weep, shrivel'd up into ashes, sooner then melted into tears. Scorched with
great heat, Rev. 16.
yet repent not to give glory to God: Gnaw their tongues for pain, and yet
still more disposed to blaspheme, then pray or sue for mercy. Dreadful thought!
As to one another, Reconciliations among men are not impossible, or unfrequent;
even of mortal enemies, but they are utterly implacable toward God! yet they
often wrong one another, but they cannot pretend God ever did them the least
wrong, yea they have lived by his bounty all their days. They say to God,
depart from us, yet he fills their houses with good things. So true is the
Historians Tacitus speaking of the hatred of Tiberius, and Augusta, against
Germanicus, the causes whereof, says he, were acriores, quia iniquae.
observation. Hatred is sharpest where most unjust.

Yea, when there seems at least to have been a reconciliation wrought, are
treacheries, Covenant-breakings, revolts, strangeness, so frequent among men
toward one another, as from them toward God? How inconsistent with friendship
is it, according to common estimate, to be always promising, never performing:
upon any, or no occasion to break off intercourses, by unkind alienations, or
mutual hostilities; to be morose, reserved each toward other. To decline* or
disaffect each others converse. To shut out one another from their hearts, and
thoughts. But how common, and unregretted are these carriages toward the
blessed God? It were easy to expatiate on this Argument, and multiply
Instances of this greater disaffection. But in a word, what observing person
may not see, what serious person would not grieve to see, the barbarous sooner
putting on civility; the riotous, sobriety; the treacherous, fidelity; the
morose, urbanity; the injurious, equity; the churlish, and covetous; benignity,
and charity; then the ungodly man piety, and sincere devotedness unto God. Here
is the principal wound and distemper sin has infected the nature of man with:
Though he have suffered a universal impairment, he is chiefly prejudiced in
regard of his habitude, and tendency toward God; and what concerns the duties
of the first Table. Here the breach is greatest, and here is greatest need of
repair. True it is an inoffensive winning deportment toward men, is not
without its excellency, and necessity too. And it does indeed, unsufferably
reproach Christianity, and unbecome a Disciple of Christ; yea it discovers a
man not to be led by his Spirit, and so to be none of his, to indulge himself
in immoral deportments toward men; to be undutiful toward Superiors;
unconversable toward equals; oppressive toward Inferiors; unjust toward any.
Yet is an holy disposition of heart toward God, most earnestly, and in the
first place to be endeavored (which will then draw on the rest) as having in
it highest equity and excellency; and being of most immediate necessity to our
blessedness.

That there may be some gradual tendencies, or fainter essays toward
godliness, that fall short of real godliness, or come not up to that thorough
change, and determination of heart Godward, that is necessary to the
blessedness. There may be a returning, but not to the most high, Hos. 7* 16.
and wherein men may be (as the Prophet immediately subjoyns) like a deceitful
Bow, not fully bent, that will not reach the mark; They come not home to God.
Many may be almost persuaded; and even within reach of Heaven, not far from the
Kingdom of God; may seek to enter, and not be able; their hearts being somewhat
inclinable, but more averse; for they can only be unable as they are unwilling.
The soul is in no possibility of taking up a complacential rest in God, till it
be brought to this, to move toward him Spontaneously, and with (as it were) a
se^f motion. And then is it self moved toward God, when its preponderating
bent is toward him. As a massy stone that one attempts to displace, if it be
heaved at till it preponderate, it then moves out, by its own weight, otherwise
it reverts, and lies where, and as it did before. So it is with many men's
hearts, all our lifting at them is but the rolling of the returning stone, they
are moved, but not removed: sometimes they are lifted at, in the public
Ministry of the Word, sometimes by a private seasonable admonition, sometimes
God makes an affliction his Minister: a danger startles them, a sickness shakes
them, and they think to change their course; but how soon do they change those
thoughts, and are where they were? what inlightnings and correctio^s; what
awakenings, and terrors; what remorses, what purposes, what tastes, and
relishes do some find in their own hearts, that yet are blasted and come to
nothing? How many miserable abortions after travailing pangs and throws, and
fair hopes of an happy birth of the new Creature? Often somewhat is produced
that much resembles it, but is not it. No gracious principle, but may have its
counterfeit in an ungracious heart; whence they deceive not others only, but
themselves, and think verily they are true converts, while they are yet in
their sins. How many wretched souls that lie dubiously struggling a long time,
under the contrary alternate impressions of the Gospel on the one hand, and the
present evil world on the other; and give the day to their own sensual
inclinations at last. In some degree, escape the corruptions of the world, 2
Pet. 1,
by the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but are again
entangled, and overcome, so as their latter end is worse then their beginning.
Such a man is so far from being advantaged by his former faint inclinations
toward God, that he will be found, at last, under this aggravated wickedness
beyond all other men: that when others wandered from God through inadvertency,
and inconsideration; this man will be found to have been his enemy upon
deliberation, and again the various strivings of his convinced heart to the
contrary. This is more eminently victorious and reigning enmity, such a one
takes great pains to perish. Alas! it is not a slight touch, an overly
superficial tincture, some evaned sentiments of piety, a few good thoughts or
wishes, that bespeak a new man, a new creature. It Is a thorough prevailing
change, that quite alters the habitual posture of a man's soul; and determines
it toward God; so as that the after course of this life may be capable of that
denomination, a living to God; a living after the Spirit. That exalts the love
of God into that Supremacy in him, that it becomes the governing principle of
his life; and the reason and measure of his actions; that as he loves him above
all things else, better then his own life; so he can truly (though possibly
sometimes with a doubtful trembling heart) resolve the ordinary course of his
daily walking, and practice into that love, as the directive principle of it. I
pray, I read, I hear, because I love God. I desire to be just, sober,
charitable, meek, patient, because I love God. This is the perfection, and end
of the love of God, therefore that must needs be the principle hereof)
obedience to his will* Herein appears that power of godliness, (...) (...)
(...) Chap. 1. 7.
denied (God knows) by too many that have the form: The Spirit of love, power,
and of a sound mind. That only is a sound mind, in which such love rules in
such power. Is not love to God often pretended by such, that when ever it comes
to an actual competitio^ discover they love their own flesh a great deal more;
that seldom ever cross their own wills to do his; or hazard their own fleshly
interest, to promote his interest? we may justly say (as the Apostle, in a case
fitly enough reducible hi^her) how dwells the love of God (...) that man?
Notwithstanding such a subdued; ineffectual love to God, such a one shall be
denominated, and dealt with as an enemy. It Is not likely any man on earth,
hates God so perfectly, as those in Hell. And is not every quality not yet
perfect in its kind, and that is yet growing more, and more intense; in the
mean time allayed by some degree of its contrary? Yet that over-mastered degree
denominates not its subject, nor ought a man from such a supposed love to God,
have the name of a ^over of him. That principle only is capable of denominating
the man, that is prevalent and practical, that has a governing influence on
his heart, and life. He in whom the love of God has not such power and rule,
whatever his fainter inclinations may be, is an ungodly man.

And now, methinks these several considerations compared, and weighed together,
should contribute something to the settling of right thoughts in the minds of
secure sinners, touching the nature and necessity of this heart-change; and do
surely leave no place for the forementioned vain pretenses that occasioned them.

For (to give you a summary view of what has been propounded in those
foregoing considerations) It now plainly appears, that the holy Scripture
requires in him that shall enjoy this blessedness; a mighty change of the very
temper of his soul, as that which must dispose him thereto; and which must
therefore chiefly consist, i^ the right framing of his heart toward God;
toward whom it is most fixed averse, and therefore not easily susceptible of
such a change. And that any slighter, or more feeble inclination toward God,
will not serve the turn; but such only whereby the soul is prevalently, and
habitually turned to him.

And then what can be more absurd, or unsavory? what more contrary to Christian
Doctrine, or common Reason? then instead of this necessary heart-change to
insist upon so poor a Plea, as that mentioned above, as the only ground of so
great a hope. How empty and frivolous will it appear in comparison of this
great Soul-transforming change, if we severally consider the particulars of it.

As for Orthodoxie indoctrinals, it is in its self an highly laudible thing, and
in respect of the Fundamentals (for therefore are they so called) indispensibly
necessary to the blessedness. As that cannot be without holiness, Joh. 17. 17.
so nor holiness without truth. But (Besides that this is that which every one
pretends to) is every thing which is necessary, sufficient? As to natural
necessity (which is that we now speak to) reason, an intellectual nature, are
also necessary; shall therefore all men, yea, and Devils too be saved?

Besides, are you sure you believe the grand Articles of the Christian
Religion? consider a little, The Grounds Effects
of that petended Faith.

First, its grounds, every assent is as the grounds of it are. Deal truly here
with thy soul. Can you tell wherefore you are a Christian? what are thy
inducements, to be of this Religion? are they not such as are common to thee
with them that are of a false Religion? (I am here happily prevented by a
worthy Author Mr. (...) Trial of sincere love to Christ.
, to which I recommend thee, but at the present, a little bethink thy self) Is
it not possible thou may be a Christian for the same reasons, for which one
may be a Jew, or a Mohammedan, or a mere P^g^^? as viz. Education, Custom, Law,
Example, Outward advantage, etc. Now consider, if thou ^ind this, upon enquiry
to be thy case; the Motives of thy being a Christian, admit of being cast
together into this form of reasoning.

That Religion which a Man's Forefathers were of, which is established by Law,
or generally obtains in the Country where he lives: The Profession whereof,
most conduces to, or best consists with his credit, and other outward
advantages, that Religion he is to embrace as the true Religion. But such I
find the Christian Religion to be to me. Therefore, etc.

The Proposition, here, is manifestly false; for it contains grounds common to
all Religions, publicly owned, and professed throughout the world; and sure all
cannot be true: And hence the conclusion: (though materially considered it be
true yet) form^lly considered, as a conclusion issuing from such premises, must
needs be false; and what then is become of thy Orthodoxie; when as to the
formal object of thy Faith thou believe, but as M hometan^, and P^gans do?
when thou art of this Faith, by Fate, or Chance only, not Choice, or rational
Inducement?

Next, as to the effects of thy Faith: Let them be inquired into also, and they
will certainly bear proportion to the grounds of it. The Gospel is the power of
God to salvation to every one that (...); Romans 1. 16.
to them that believe it no^, it ^^gnifies nothing. 1 These. 2* 3.
The Word of God received with a Divine Faith, as the Word of God (...) works
^^^ttually upon all that so receive (...), i. e. all that believe what such
efficacio^s workings of it have thou felt upon thy soul? Certainly its most
connaturural effect is that very change of heart, and inclinations Godward, of
which we have been speaking. What is so suitable to the Gospel Revelation, as a
good temper of heart Godward? and how absurd it is to introduce the cause, on
purpose to exclude its genuine inseparable effect? But evident it is (though
true Faith cannot) that superficial irrational ^ssent, in which alone, many
glory; may too well consist with a disaffected heart toward God; and can it
then signify any thing toward thy blessedness? sure to be so a solifidian, is
to be a null^fidian. Faith not working by love, is not Faith: at least profits
nothing.

For thy outward conformity in the solemnities of worship, it is imputable to so
corrup^^ mot^ves, and principles; that the thing it self, ab^^actively
considered, can never be thought characteristical, and distinguishing of the
heirs of blessedness. The worst of men, (...) perform the best of outward
duties.

Thy most glorious, loasted virtues, if they grow not from the proper root,
love to (...), they are but splendid sins, as above appears, and has been
truly said of old.

Thy repentance is either true, or false, if true, it is that very change of
mind and heart, I speak of, and is therefore eminently signalized by that note
it is repentance [towards God] If false, Heb 6.
God will not be mocked.

For thy Regeneration in (...); what can it avail thee, as to this blessedness,
if the present All worldly evils are willingly endured, and all (such) good
things quitted and forsaken for Christ's sake, and his Elects. And if the
question be ask't (as it was once of Alexander, when so frankly distributing
his treasures among his followers) what do you reserve for your self? The
resolved Christian makes (with him) that short and brave reply, HOPE. He lives
upon things future and unseen. The objects any one converses with most, and in
which his life is, as it were, bound up, are suitable to the ruling principle
of life in him. They that are after the flesh, do savor the things of the
flesh; they that are after the Spirit, Rev. 9. 5.
the things of the Spirit. The Principle of the fleshly life, is Sense; The
principle of the Spiritual life, is Faith. Sense is a mean, low, narrow,
incomprehensive principle, limited to a point. This Center of Earth; and (...)
(this now) of time. It can reach no higher then terrene things; nor further
then present things. So brutish is the life of him that is led by it; wholly
confined to matter and time.

But the righteous live by Faith. Their Faith governs, and maintains the life.
They stear not their course according to what they see; but according to what
they believe. And their daily sustenance is by the same kind of things. Their
Faith influences, not their actions only, but their comforts, and enjoyments.
They subsist by the things they believe; even invisible, and eternal things.
But it is by the intervening exercise of hope, whose object is the same. The
Apostle having told us from the Prophet, Hab. 2. 4.
that the just shall live by Faith, presently subjoyns a description' of that
Faith they live by; Heb. 10. ^7.
viz. that it is the sustance of things hoped for, Chap. 11. 1.
and the evidence of things not seen; it substantiates, and reallizes,
evidences, and demonstrates those glorious objects so far above the reach, and
Sphere of sense. It is constantly sent out to forage in the invisible Regions,
for the maintenance of this life. And thence fetches in the provisions upon
which hope feeds, to the strengthening of the heart, the renewing of life, and
spirits. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 8.
Our inward man (says the Apostle) is renewed day by day; while we look, or
take aim (which is next in the series of the discourse for the intervening
verse is manifestly parenthetical) not at the things that are seen, but at the
things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are temporal, but the
things that are not seen, (...)
are eternal. And the word here rendered [look] does plainly signify the act of
hope, as well as that of faith; for it does not import a mere intuition, or
beholding; a taking notice, or assenting only that there is such things, but a
designing, or scoping at them (which is the very word) with an appropriative
eye; as things that notwithstanding their distance, or whatsoever imaginable
difficulty, are hoped to be attained to, and enjoyed. And here are evidenly
the distinct parts of Faith and Hope in this business; Faith, upon the
Authority, and credit of the Divine Word, and Promise, persuades the heart that
there is such a glorious state of

Nor is that aversation the less culpable for that it is so hardly overcome,
but the more. It Is an aversation of will; and who sees not that every man is
more wicked, acaccording as his will is more wickedly bent? Hence his
impotencie or inability to turn to God, is not such as that he cannot turn if
he would; but it consists in this, that he is not willing. He affects a
distance from God.

Which shows therefore the necessity still of this change. For the possibility
of it, and the encouragement (according to the Methods wherein God is wont to
dispense his Grace) the Sinner has to hope, and endeavor it; will more ^itly
fall into consideration else where.

CHAP. XIII.
Fourth Inference. That the Soul in which such a change is wrought, restlesly
pursues it till it be attained. Fifth Inference. That the knowing of God, and
conformity to him, are satisfying things, and do now in a degree satisfy
according to the measure wherein they are attained. Sixth Inference. That the
love of God toward his people is great, that has designed for them so great,
and even a satisfying good.

4. It Is further to be inferred, that a soul wherein such a change is wrought,
pursues this blessedness with restless supreme desire, till it attain to the
fullness thereof. We have here a plainly-implyed description of the posture and
tendencies of such a soul (even of a sanctified, holy Soul; which had therefore
undergone this blessed change) toward this state of blessedness. I shall
(says he) be satisfied with thy likeness, q. d. I cannot be satisfied
otherwise. We have seen how great a change is necessary to dispose the Soul to
this blessedness, which being once wrought, nothing else can now satisfy it.
Such a thing is this blessedness (I speak now of so much of it as is previous,
and conducing to satisfaction, or of blessedness materially considered, the
Divine Glory to be beheld, and participated.) It Is of that nature it makes the
Soul restless, it lets it not be quiet, after it has got some apprehension of
it, till it attain the full enjoyment. The whole life of such a one, is a
continual seeking Gods face. So attractive is this glory of a subject rightly
disposed to it. While others crave Corn and Wine, this is the sum of the holy
Souls desires, Psalm. 4.
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance, etc. The same thing is the
object of its present desires that shall be of its eternal satisfaction and
enjoyment. Psalm. 27.
This is now its one thing, the request insisted on, to behold the beauty of
the Lord, etc. and while in any measure it does so, yet it is still looking for
this blessed hope, still hoping to be like him, see him as he is; the
expectation of satisfaction in this state implies the restless working of
desire till then, for what is this satisfaction, but the fulfilling of our
desires; the perfecting of the souls motions, in a complacential rest. Motion,
and rest do exactly correspond each to other. Nothing can naturally rest in any
place, to which it was not before naturally inclined to move; and the rest is
proportionably more composed, and steady, according as the motion was stronger,
and more vigorous. By how much the heavier any body is, so much the stronger
and less resistible is its motion downward, and then accordingly, it is less
moveable, when it has attained its resting place. It Is therefore a vanity, and
contradiction to speak of the Souls being satisfied, in that which it was not
before desirous of Aptitudinally (I mean) and Exhypothesi, i. e. supposing the
knowledge of the object: Otherwise, as to actual explicit desires God does
give us beyond what we can ask or think. But it is impossible the soul should
rest satisfied in that which upon knowledge it is undesi^ous of, and does, or
would reject.
. And that state which it shall ultimately and eternally acquiesse in (with a
rest that must therefore be understood to be most composed and sedate) toward
it must it needs move with the strongest and most unsatisfied desire, a desire
that is supreme, prevalent, and triumphant over all other desires, and over all
obstructions to it self, least capable of diversion, or of pitching upon any
thing short of the term aimed at. Ask therefore the holy Soul, What is thy
Supreme desire? and so far as it understands it self, it must answer; to see,
and partake the divine glory; to behold the blessed face of God; till his
likeness be transfused through all my powers, and his entire image be perfectly
formed in me; present to my view what else you will, I can be satisfied in
nothing else but this.

Therefore this leaves a black note upon those wretched souls, that are wholly
strangers to such desires; that would be better satisfied to dwell always in
dust; that shun the blessed face of God as Hell it self; and to whom the most
despicable vanity is a more desirable sight, then that of divine glory.
Miserable souls! consider your state, can that be your blessedness which you
desire not? or do you think God will receive any into his blessed presence, to
whom it shall be a burden? methinks, upon the reading of this, you should
presently doom your selves, and see your sentence written in your breasts,
compare your hearts with his holy man's: See if there be any thing like this, in
the temper of your Spirits; and never think well of your selves till you find
it so.

5. The knowledge of God, Inference.
and conformity to him, are, in their own nature, apt to satisfy the desires
of the soul, and even no^ actually do so, in the measure wherein they are
attained. Some things are not of a satisfying nature; there is nothing tending
to satisfaction in them. And then the continual heaping together of such
things, does no more toward satisfaction, then the accumulating of
Mathematical Points would toward the compacting of a solid body; or the
multiplication of Ciphers only to the making of a sum. But what shall one
day, satisfi, has in it self a Power, and aptitude thereto. The act (when ever
it is) supposes the power. Therefore the hungry craving soul, that would sain
be h^ppy, but knows not how; needs not spend its days in making uncertain
guesses, and fruitless attempts, and trials. It man (...) ^ts hovering
thoughts, and upon af^^^^ (...) given, say I have now found at (...)
satisfaction may be had; and have (...) this to do; to bend all my powers
hither, and intend this one thing, the possessing my self of this blessed rest;
earnestly to in^e (...), and patiently to wait for it.

Happy discovery! welcome tidings! I now know which wa^ to turn my eye, and
direct my pursuit. I shall no longer spend my ^^if in dubious toilsome
wanderings, in anxious, va^n inquiries. I have found* I have found! blessedness
is here. If I can but get a lively, efficacious sight of God, I have enough --
Show me the Father, and it suffices.

Let the weary wandering soul bethink it self, and retire to God; he will not
mock thee with shadows, as the world has done. This is eternal life to know
him the only true God, and Jes^^ Christ whom he has sent. A part, from Christ
thou can not know, nor see him, with fruit and comfort, but the Gospel
revelation (which is the Revelation of God in Christ) gives thee a lovely
prospect of him. His Glory shines in the face of Jesus Christ, and when, by
beholding it, thou art changed into the same likeness, and find thy self
gradually changing more and more, from glory to glory, thou will find thy self
accordingly in a gradual tendency toward satisfaction, and blessedness. That
is, do but seriously set thy self to study, and contemplate the Being, and
Attributes of God; and then look upon him, as, through the Mediator, he is
willing to be reconciled to thee, and become thy God; and so long let thine eye
fix, and dwell here, till it affect thy heart; and the proper impress of the
Gospel be by the Spirit of the Lord instamp't upon it; till thou find thy self
wrought to a compliance with his holy will, and his image formed in thee; and
thou have soon experience thou art entering into his est; and wilt relish a more
satisfying (...) in this blessed change; then all thy (...) sensual enjoyments,
did ever afford thee before.

Surely, if the perfect vision, and perception of his glorious likeness will
yield a complete satisfaction at last; the initial, and progressive tendencies
toward the former, will, proportionably, infer the latter.

It Is obvious hence, to collect who are in this world (ordinarily and, caeteris
paribus, where more unusual violent temptations hinder not) the most satisfied,
and contented persons; even those that have most of the clarifying sights of
God, and that thence partake most of his image (indeed Scripture only
vouchsafes the name to such sights of God, he that does evil has not seen God)
Such as have most of a godly frame wrought into their spirits, 1 John 3. 6.
and that have hearts most attempered, 3 John 11.
and conformed to God. 1 Timothy 6. 6.
These are the most contented persons in the world. Content is part of the gain
that attends godliness; it concurring, renders the other a great gain. [ --
godliness with contentment] the form of expression discovers how connatural
contentment is to godliness; as if they were not to be mentioned apart.
Godliness, as if he had said, is a very gainful thing, but if you would
comprehend the gainfulness of it fully, do not abstract too curiously, take in
with it, that which is of so near an alliance, that you will hardly know how to
consider them apart; let its inseparable adjunct contentment, go along with it;
and you will find it againful thing indeed.

The true knowledge of God so directly tends to holiness, and that to
contentation, that it may be too evidently concluded, that a discontented
person, has little of the one or the other, not much knowledge, and less
grace; he is so far from being like God, that in the Apostles language above we
may say, he has not seen him. Does that person know God, or has ever seen
him, that falls not into the dust, admiring so glorious a Majesty? that
subjects not himself to him, with Loyal affections, accounting it his only
grand concernment to please, and serve him? But the discontented person takes
upon him, as if he were God alone, and as if he expected every creature to do
him homage, and thought the creation were made for the pleasure and service of
none but him. Has that person ever seen God, that acknowledges him not a
sufficient portion? a full, all-comprehending good. Has he seen him, that sees
not reason to trust him; to commit all his concernments to him. Has he seen
him that loves him not, and delights not in his love? Has he seen him that
quits not all for him, and abandons not every private interest to espouse his;
and how evidently do these things tend to quiet and compose the soul?
Discontent proceeds from idolizing thoughts of our selves; it is rooted in
self-conceit, in self-dependence, self-love, self-seeking, all which despicable
Idols (or that one great Idol, Self, thus variously served, and Idolized) one
sight of the Divine Glory would confound and bring to nothing. The sights of
God melt the heart, break it under a sense of sin, and hence compose it to a
meek, peaceful humility; but the discontented spirit is an unbroken, proud,
imperious spirit. The sights of God purify the soul, refine it from the dross
of this vile world, make it daily aspire to a conformity unto the pure and
Spiritual nature of God. But a discontented spirit, is a sensual, terrene
spirit (for what, but such objects are the usual matter of most men's
discontents?) taking sensuality in its just latitude, it is a low, D^nghil
spirit; fit for nothing but to rake, and scrabble in the dirt.

I insist upon this apprehending (what deserves more lamentation then it has
observation) that too many annex a profession of eminent godliness, and
spirituality into an indulged, querulous, impatient temper of spirit, join a
splendid appearance of piety to an unreformed perverse frowardness (which agree
as well as a Jewel of Gold to a Swines ^nout) nothing pleases them; their
mercies are not worth the acknowledging; their afflictions intolerable, not to
be born. They fall out and quarrel with all occurrences, actions, events;
neither Man, nor God, does any thing good in their sight. The world is not well
governed, nothing falls out well as to themselves. What can possibly be thought
on more repugnant to the knowledge of God. The g^and design, of all Religion,
and the very Spirit of the Gospel; than this temper? which way do these tend
and aim but to lead souls to blessedness; to bring them into a peaceful happy
satisfied state and frame? and must we, because that end cannot be attained
here, therefore go the quite contrary way? or pretend we are going to heaven
with our backs turned upon it? Sure the discoveries God now makes of himself to
us, and by which he impresses his likeness upon his own; though they ultimately
design our satisfaction and blessedness in heaven; as intermediate there unto,
they aim at the bringing us into an Heaven upon Earth, to form us unto a life
agreeable, and has analogy with that of heaven; unto which nothing is more
analogous in our prepresent state then that peace, and serenity which result
from Divine Knowledge, and holiness: nothing more inconsistent, then a peevish,
fretful, turbulent Spirit. The one is a participation of a bright, and mild
light from heaven; the other of a dark, and raging fire from Hell? It Is only
Gods face, his glorious likeness reflected on our souls, that shall satisfy
hereafter, and make heaven, heaven. He does not now wholly conceal himself from
us, nor altogether hide his face. The shining of the same face (in what degree
he now vouchsafes them) will make this Earth an Heaven too. One glance toward
him may transmit a lively, pleasant luster upon our spirits ( They looked to
him and were lightened. Psalm. 34. ^^
) And we live in the expectation of clearer, and more impressive, eternal
visions. It will become us to express a present satisfiedness, proportionable
to our present sights, and expectations; and to endeavor daily to see more,
and to be more like God, that we may be daily more and more satisfied. While me
cannot yet attain to be making gradual approaches toward that blessed state.
By how much any have more of the vision and likeness of God in their present
state: so much they approach nearer unto satisfaction.

6. We infer; The love of God to his people is great, which has designed for
them so great, and even a satisfying good. We cannot overlook the occasion this
Doctrine gives us, to consider, and contemplate a while the love of God. I^
this shall be the blessedness of his Saints, it is a great love that shall be
the Spring and source of it.

Two things, here before our eyes, discover the greatness of this love. That it
designs satisfact on to the persons meant; and that they shall be satisfied
with the Divine vision and likeness.

1. It designs their s^tisfacti^n. This is as far as love can go. It Is love to
the uttermost: I^ does not satisfy itself, till it satisfy them. It Is love to
spare an enemy, to relieve a stranger; but to satisfy for ever, them that were
both; this s^^e exceeds all the wonted measures of love. Much love is shown in
the forgiveness of sin, in the s^pply of necessities, but herein (as the
Apostle speaks in another case) is the love of God perfected (as to its
exercise) it has now perfectly attained its end; when it has not left so much
as a craving desire, not a wish unsatisfied; the soul cannot say, I wish it
were better; O that I h^d ^ut this one thing more to (...) my h^ppi^^ss. It
has neither pretense, nor inclination to think such a thought. Divine Love is
now at rest; It was travailing (big with gracious designs) before it has now
delivered it self. It would rather create new heavens every moment, then not
satisfy: but it has now done it to the full, the utmost capacity of the soul
is filled up; it can be no happier then it is. This is loves triumph over all
the miseries, wants, and desires, of a languishing soul. The appropriate,
peculiar glory of D^v^ne love. If all the excellencies of their whole creation
besides, were contracted into one glorious creature, it would never be capable
of this boast; I have satisfied one soul. The love of God leaves none
unsatisfied, but the proud despisers of it. Now is the eternal Sabbath of love.
Now it enters into rest, having finished all its works, it views them over now
with delight, for ^o, they are all Good. its works of Pardon, of Justification,
and Adoption. Its works of Regeneration, of Conversion, and Sanctification; its
establishing, quickening, comforting works; they are all good, good in
themselves, and in this their end; the satisfaction and repos^ of blessed
souls. Now divine love puts on the Crown, ascends the Throne, and the many
Miriads of glorified Spirits fall down about it, and adore. All profess to owe
to it the satisfying pleasures they all enjoy. Who can consider the unspeakable
satisfaction of those blessed Spirits, and not also reflect upon this exalted
greatness of divine love!

2. It Is again great love, if we consider wherewith they shall be satisfied.
The sight, and participation of the Divine glory, his face, his likeness, his
represented and impressed glory. There may be great love that never undertakes,
nor studies to satisfy all the desires of the persons we cast our love upon;
especially where nothing will satisfy but high, and great matters. The love of
God knows no difficulties; nor can be overset. The greater the performance, or
vouchsafement; the more suitable to Divine Love. It has resolved to give the
soul a plenary satisfaction, perfectly to content all its desires; and ^nce
nothing else can do it, but an eternal beholding of the glorious face of the
Divine Majesty, and a transformation into his own likeness; that shall not be
withheld. Yea it has created, refined, enlarged its capacity on purpose, that
it might be satisfied with nothing less. Great love may sometimes be signified
by a glance; the offered view of a willing face. Thus our Lord Jesus invites
his Church to discover her own love, and answer his, Let me see thy face, etc.
Cant. ^. 14. Love is not more becomingly expressed, or gratified then by mutual
looks, [ubi amor, (...) oculus] How great is that love that purposely lays
aside the vail; that never turns away its own, nor permits the aversion of the
beholders eye, throughout eternity. Now we see in a glass; then face, to face;
as if never weary of beholding on either part, but on that part the
condiscention lies, is the transcendent, admirable love. That a generous,
beneficent (the other till it be satisfied here) a craving indigent love. And
how inexpressible a condiscension is this? poor wretches! many of whom,
possibly, were once so low, that a strutting Grandee, would have thought
himself affronted by their look; and have met with threatening rebukes their
overdaring venturous eye; lo now they are permitted (to stand before Princes?
that is a mean thing) to feed their eyes with Divine glory, to view the face of
God. He sets them before his face for ever.

And that eternal vision begets in them an eternal likeness, they behold and
partake glory at once, that their joy may be full. They behold not a glorious
God, with deformed souls; that would render them a perpetual abomination, and
torment to themselves. Love cannot permit that Heaven should be their
affliction; that they should have cause to loath and be weary of themselves in
that presence. It satisfies them by clothing, and filling them with glory; by
making them partake of the Divine likeness, as well as behold it. It Is reckoned
a great expression of a complying love, but to give a Picture; when the parties
loved only permit themselves to view in a mute representation, a vicarious
face. This is much more, a vital image (as before) Gods one living likeness
propagated in the soul, the inchoation of it (is called the Divine Nature, the
seed of God; what amazing love is this, of the great God to a worm? not to give
over till he have assimilated it to his own glory; till it appear as a ray of
light begotten of the Father of Lights. 1 John 2. ult. Chap. 3. 1.
Every one* says the Apostle, that does righteousness, is ^orn of him and then
it follows; Behold, what manner of love -- to be ^he sons of God; to be lik^
him, to see him as he is, etc. How great a word is that (spoken in reference to
our present state) -- to make us partakers of [his] holiness. H^b. 12.
And (as well it might) it is instanc't as an effect, and arg^ment of love (for
sure chastening it self abstracted from that end of it, does not import love.)
Wh^m the Lord loves, he chesteneth -- and then by and by, in the same series
and line of discourse is added- to make n^ partakers of his his holiness. Love
always either supposes similitude, or intends it, and is sufficiently argued by
it either way. And sure the love of God cannot be more directly expressed, then
in his first intending to make a poor soul like him, while he loves it with
compassion; and then imprinting and perfecting that likeness, that he may love
it with eternal delight: Love is here the first and the last, the beginning and
end in all this business.

CHAP. XIV.
The 7th Inference. That since this blessedness is limited to a qualified
subject [I in righteousness] the unrighteous are necessarily lest exclud^d. The
8th Inference. That righteousness is no vain thing, in as much as it has so
happy an issue, and ends so well.

7. COnsidering this blessedness is not common, but limited ^o a qualified
subject [I in righteousness] person clothed in righte^usness. I^ evidently
follows. The unrighteous are nec^ss^^ily excluded, and shut out; can have no
p^r^ nor p^rtion in this blessedness. The same thing that the Apostle tells us
without an inference; Know ye not that the unrighteouss shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.
etc. Intimating that to be a most confessed known thing. Know ye not? is it
possible ye can be ignorant of this?

The natural necessity of what has been here infe^'d, has been argued already
from the consideration of the nature of this blessedness. The legal necessity
of it, arising from the Divine will, and Law, is that I mainly intend at
present. By such a necessity also, they are excluded: who by Gods rule
(according to which the supreme judgment must be managed) shall be found
unrighteous. Those that come not up to the terms of the Gospel Covenant; never
accepted the offers, nor submitted to the commands of it. And that hence
consequently are unrelated to Christ, and ununited to him; no way capable of
advantage by his most perfect and all-sufficient righteousness, that alone
fully answers all the ex^ctions, and demands of the Covenant of Works: and so,
who are at last found unrighteous by the Old Law, and the New; the Law both of
the Creator, and Redeemer too.

There is the same necessity these should be excluded, as that God should be
just and true. The word is gone forth of his mouth in righteousness and cannot
return. He did not d^lly with sinners, when he settled those constitutions,
whence this necessity results. He is not a man, that he should lie, nor the Son
of m^n, that he should repent. An Heathen understood so much of the nature of
God.

I have thought sometimes, with much wonder, of the stupid folly of
unsanctified hearts, they are even confounded in their own wishes; and would
have (in order to their security) they know not what. Were the question
faithfully put to the very heart of such a one, what would thou have done in
order to thy eternal safety from divine wrath and vengeance? would not the
answer be, O that God would recall those severe constitutions he has made, and
not insist ^o strictly, on what be has required in the Gospel, in order to the
salvation on of sinners. But foolish wretch, do thou know what thou say?
would thou have God repeal the Gospel that thou may be the more secure? in
what a case art thou then? Have thou no hope if the Gospel stand in force? what
hope will thou have if it do not? Must the hopes of all the world be ruined to
establish thine? and yet leave them involved in the common ruin too? What, but
the Gospel gives the least hope to Apostate sinners? There is now hope for thee
in the Gospel promise, if thou return to God. Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts; Isa. 55.
and let him turn to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God,
and he will abundantly pardon. But take away the Gospel and where art thou?
Were it possible for thee to repent, and become a new man, what settles the
connection between Repentance, and Salvation but the Gospel-promise? Will the
violated Law of works accept thy Repentance instead of Obedience? Does it not
expressly preclude any such expectation? Does it give any ground to look for any
thing but death after sin? Thou must therefore fly to the Gospel or yield thy
self lost; and know it contains none but faithful and true sayings, that have
more stability in them, than the foundations of heaven and earth. Therefore
expect nothing to be altered for thy sake. The Gospel-constitution was settled
long before thou wast born; Thou come too late with thy Exceptions (if thou
had any) against it. Remember, therefore, this is one of the unalterable
determinations of this Gospel, without holiness thou shall never see God, or
(which amounts to the same) thou can not behold his face but in
righteousness. There is no word in all the Bible of more certain truth than
this. In this also how apt are sinners foolishly to entangle themselves. The
Gospel is true and to be believed, till they meet with something that crosses
them, and goes against the hair, and then, they hope it is not so But vain man!
if once thou shake the truth of God, what will thou stay thy self upon? Is God
true when he promises? and is he not as true when he threatens? if that be a
true saying: S^y to the righteous it shall be well with him -- is not that as
much to be regarded; woe to the wicked it shall be ill with him. The
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon him. Are not these of equal authority? If thou had any
reason to hope, thou may be happy though thou never be righteous; is there
not as much reason to fear thou might be miserable though thou be; since the
one is as much against the slat express word of God as the other? Let not thy
love to sin betray thee out of all Religion, and thy wits together. Wherein
will thou believe one upon the bare value of his word, that will lie to thee in
any thing? Yea, and as it is the same authority that is affronted in every
command, whence disobedience to one is a breach of all; so is the same veracity
denied in every truth; and the disbelief of one belies all, and will thou
believe him in any thing, thou have proclaimed a lier in every thing? Therefore
so little have thou gained by disbelieving the divine revelation in this thing;
that thou have brought thy self to this miserable Dilemma; if the word of God
be false thou have no foundation of any Faith left thee; if it be true, it
dooms thee to eternal banishment from his blessed face, while thou remainest in
thy unrighteousness. It will not be thy advantage then to disbelieve this
Gospel record, but to consider it, and take it to heart, 'twill prove never the
less true, at last for that thou will not believe it, shall thy unbelief make
the truth of God of none effect? And if thou would but reasonably consider
the case; methinks thou should soon be convinced. Since thou acknowledgest
(as I suppose thee to do) that there are two states of men in the other World,
a state of blessedness, and a state of misery; and two sorts of men in this
World, the righteous, and the unrighteous. Let thy reason and conscience now
judge, who shall be allotted to the one state, and who to the other. Sure if
thou acknowledge a righteous Judge of all the world, thou can non think he
will turn men, promiscuously into Heaven, or Hell at random, without
distinction: Much less can thou be so absurd, and mad, as to think all the
unrighteous shall be saved, and the righteous perish; and then what is le^t
thee to judge, but that which I am now urging upon thee, that when the
righteous shall be admitted to the vision of Gods blessed face; the unrighteous
shall be driven forth into outer darkness?

It may be some here will be ready to say, but to what purpose is all this,
they were of the same mind before; and cannot think that any one would ever say
the contrary.

Nor do I think so either; but it is one thing not to believe a conclusion to be
true, and another to prosess a contrary belief. And one thing to believe a
conclusion, another to think we believe it. Men often know not their own minds.
In practical matters it is best seen what a man's belief is, by his practice. For
when any profess to believe this or that practical truth, relating to their
salvation, if they believe is not practically, i. e. with such a belief as will
command their suitable practice, it matters not what belief they are of, or
whether they were of that judgment or no. Yea it will prove in the issue,
better for them they had been of another, when their own professed belief shall
be urged against them. But let us consider a little how in practical matters of
less concernment we would estimate a man's belief. You meet a Traveller upon the
way who tells you, the Bridge over such an unpass^ble River is broken down, and
that if you venture, you perish; if you believe him you return; if you hold on,
he reasonably concludes you believe him not; and will therefore be apt to say
to you, if you will not believe me, you may make trial. Your Physician tells
you a disease is growing upon you, that in a short time will prove incurable,
and mortal; but if you presently use means, he shall prescribe, 't^s capable of
an easy remedy. How would you your self have your belief of your Physician
judged of in this case; would you expect to be believed, if you should say, you
do not at all distrust your Physicians integrity, and judgment, but yet you
resolve not to follow his directions? unless you would have us believe too,
that you are weary of your life, and would fain be rid of it. There is no
Riddle or Mystery in this. How ridiculous would men make themselves if in
matters of common concernment they should daily practice directly contrary to
their professed belief? how few would believe them serious, or in their wits?
But however, call this believing, or what you will, we contend not about the
name, the belief of such a thing can no further do you good, you can be nothing
the better for it, further then as it ingages you to take a course suitable and
consequent to such a belief. To believe that there is a Hell, and run into it,
that unrighteousness persisted in will damn you; and yet live in it. To what
purpose is it to make your boasts of this Faith?

But since you are willing to call this believing; all the foregoing reasoning
is to engage you to consider what you believe. Do you believe that
unrighteousness will be the death of your soul? will eternally separate you
from God, and the pres^nce of his glory? and when you have reasoned the matter
with your self, you find it to be certainly so; should not such a thing be more
deeply pondered? The bare proposal of an evident truth commands present assent;
but if I further bend my mind to reason out the same thing to my self. I am
occasioned to take notice of the grounds, dependencies, the habitudes of it,
what it rests upon, and whither it tends, and thence more discern its
importance, and of what moment it is; then I should have done if upon first
view I had assented only, and dismissed it my thoughts. And yet is it possible
you should think this to be true, and not think it a most important truth? Is
it a small matter in your account, whither you shall be blessed, or miserable
for ever? whether you be saved, or perish eternally? Or is it considered by you
according as the weight of the matter requires, that as you are found
righteous, or unrighteous, so will it everlastingly fare with you?

You may possibly say, you already conclude your self righteous, therefore no
further employ your thoughts about it.

But methinks you should hardly be able how ever to put such a thing out of
your thoughts; while as yet the final determination is not given in the case.
If a man have a question yet depending concerning his life or estate: though
his business be never so clear, he will hardly forget it, the trial not being
yet past. And though in this matter, you have no reason to suspect error, or
corruption in your Judge (through which many honest causes may miscarry in an
humane Judicature) yet have you no reason to suspect your self? If the holy
Spirit has assured you it has not stupefied you, but as you have then the
less of fear, you have the more of love, and joy. Therefore you will not thence
mind such a concernment the less, but with the more delight; and therefore
also, most probably, with the more frequency, and intention. What a pleasure
will it be to review evidences, and say, ^o here are the Mediums by which I
make out my title to the Eternal Inheritance. Such, and such characters give me
the confidence, to number my self among Gods righteous ones. And do you lead
that heavenly raised life? do you live in those sweet and ravishing comforts of
the Holy Ghost, that may bespeak you one whom he has sealed up to the day of
redemption?

If you pretend not to any such certainty, but rely upon your own judgment of
your case; are you sure you are neither mistaken in the notion of the
righteousness required, nor in the application of it to your own souls?

Possibly you may think your self, because in your ordinary dealings you wrong
no man (your self being judge) a very righteous person. But evident it is, when
the Scripture uses this term as discriptive of Gods own people, and to
distinguish betweeen them that shall be saved, and perish, it takes it in that
comprehensive sense, before explained. And however, it requires, at least, much
more of thee under other expressions, as thou can hardly be so ignorant, but
to know. And do but use thy reason here a little, and demand of thy self. Is he
to be accounted a righteous person that thinks it fit to avoid wronging a man,
but makes no conscience at all of wronging God? More particularly. Is it
righteous to live all thy days in a willing ignorance of the Author of thy
being, never once to enquire where is God my Maker? Job 35.
Is it righteous to forget him, days without number, not to have him from day
to day in all thy thoughts? Is it righteous to estrange thy self from him, and
live as without him in the world? while thou liv'st, mov'st, and have thy being
in him? not to glorify him in whose hands thy breath is? to be a lover of
pleasure more then God? a worshipper, in thy very soul, of the creature, more
then of the Creator? Is it righteous to harden thy heart against his fear and
love? to live under his power, and never reverence it, his goodness, and never
acknowledge it? to affront his Authority, to belie his Truth, abuse his Mercy,
impose upon his Patience, desie his Justice? to exalt thy own interest against
his, the trifling petite interest of a silly worm, against the great all
comprehending interest of the common Lord of all the world? to cross his will,
to do thy own? to please thy self, to the displeasing of him? whence had thou
thy measures of Justice, if this be just?

Again, is it righteous to deny the Lord that bought thee, to neglect that
great salvation which he is the Author of? And whereas he came to bless thee
in turning thee from thine iniquities, wilfully to remain still in an accursed
servitude to sin? when he was made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil,
still to yield thy self a captive at his will? whereas he died that thou
might not any longer live to thy self, but to him that died for thee, and
rose again; and that he might redeem thee from thy vain conversation, and that
thou art so expressly told that such as still lead sensual lives, mind earthly
things, have not their conversation in heaven, are enemies to the Cross of
Christ; Is it no unrighteousness that in these respects thy whole life, should
be nothing else but a constant contradiction to the very design of his dying? a
perpetual Hostility, a very Tilting at his Cross? Is there no unrighteousness
in thy obstinate infidelity, that wickedly denies belief to his glorious
Truths, acceptance of his gracious Offers, subjection to his holy Laws? no
unrighteousness in thy obstinate, remorsless, impenitency? thy heart that
cannot repent? that melts not while a crucified Jesus amid'st his agonies, and
dying pangs, cries to thee from the Cross, O sinner enough, thy hard heart
breaks mine! yield at last, and turn to God. Is it righteous to live as no way
under Law to Christ? to persist in actual rebellion against his just
Government, which he died, and revived, and rose again to establish, over the
living and the dead? yea, and that while thou pretendest thy self a Christian?
In a word; Is it righteous to tread under foot the Son of God, to vilify his
Blood, and despise his Spirit? Is this the righteousness that thou talkest of?
are these thy qualifications for the everlast-blessedness?

If thou say, thou confessest thou art in thy self, in these several respects,
altogether unrighteous; but thou hopest the righteousness of Christ, will be
sufficient to answer for all.

No doubt Christ's Righteousness is abundantly available to all the ends for
which it was intended by the Father and Him; but it shall never answer all the
ends that a foolish wicked heart will fondly imagine to it self.

In short, it serves to excuse thy non performance of, and stands instead of
thy perfect sinless obedience to the Law of works; but it serves not instead of
thy performance of what is required of thee, as the condition of the Gospel
Covenant. That is, It shall never supply the room of Faith, Repentance,
Regeneration, Holiness, the loving of Christ above all, and God in him; so as
to render these unnecessary, or salvation possible without them. There is not
one iota, or tittle in the Bible, that so much as intimates, an unregenerate
person, an unbeliever, an impenitent, or unholy person, shall be saved by
Christ's righteousness; but enough to the contrary, every one knows, that has
the least acquaintance with the Scriptures.

Vain Man what? is Christ divided, and divided against himself; Christ without,
against Christ within? His suffering on the Cross, and foregoing obedience,
against his Spirit and Government in the Soul? Did Christ die, to take away the
necessity of our being Christians? And must his death serve, not to destroy sin
out of the world, but Christianity? who has taught thee so wickedly to
misunderstand the design of Christ's dying? And when the Scripture so plainly
tells thee, Joh 3. 16.
That God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Heb
5. 9.
And, That he became the Author of eternal salvation to them that obey him,
yea, and that he will come in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that know,
and obey him not. What should induce thee to think thou may be saved by him,
whether thou believe, and obeyest or no?

No, if ever thou think to see God, and be happy in him; thou must have a
righteousness in thee, resembling his: the very product the thing wrought in
the work of regeneration. If ye know that he is righteous, 1 John 2. 29.
ye know that every one that does righteousness is born of him. Whereupon
follows the description of the blessedness of such righteous ones in the
beginning of the next Chapter. -- They are sons -- they shall be like etc. So
that in a word, without some sight of God here, there is no seeing him
hereafter; without some likeness to him now, none hereafter. And such as are
destitute of that heart-conformity to the Gospel, wherein the Evangelical
Righteousness stands; are so far from it, that we may say to them, Joh. 5. 37.
as our Savior to the Jews, Ye have neither heard his voice, nor seen his
shape, i. e. you have never had right notion, or any the least true glimpse of
him; your hearts are wholly destitute of all Divine Impressions whatsoever.

8. We may further infer, from this qualification of the subject of
blessedness. That righteousness is no vain thing. That is not in vain that ends
so well, and has so happy an issue at last. Scripture tells us, that the
labor of the righteous tends to life: Pro. 10. 16.
and that we may understand it of their labor, as they are righteous: we are
more plainly told that righteousness tends to life; Chap. 11 14:
and that to them that sow righteousness shall be a sure reward. Ver. 18.
That the righteous shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father. Mat.
13. 43.
-- The righteous into eternal life. Chap. 25. 46.
And we here see that righteousness ends in the blessed sight of Gods glorious
face, Isa. 55 2.
in being satisfied with the Divine likeness: Foolish sinners as justly
upbraided that they spend their labor for that which satisfies not; takes much
pains to no purpose; such are all the works of sin, Romans 6. 20, 21.
toilsome, fruitless; what fruit had ye of those things (viz. which ye wrought
when you were free from righteousness) whereof ye are now ashamed; for the end
of th^se things is death. But (it follows) being now made free from sin, and
bec^me servants to God (which is paraphrased above by servants to
righteousness) ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.
The fruit is a continual increase of holiness, a growing more and more like
God, till at last everlasting life, satisfaction with his likeness, do Crown
and consummate all.

You have now what to answer to the Atheists profane Querie; what profit is it
to serve God? to what purpose to lead so strict, and precise a life? you may
now see to what purpose it is; and whereunto godliness (which righteousness
here includes) is profitable (as having besides what it intitles to here) the
promise of that life which is to come.

There needs no more to discover any thing not to be vain (in as much as
nothing can be said to be but in reference to an end, as being good for
nothing) then the eviction of these two things.

That it aims at a truly worthy, and valuable end; and that its tendencie
thereto is direct, and certain.

In the present case both these are obvious enough at the first view.

For as to the former of them, all the world will agree without disputing the
matter, that the last end of man ( i. e. which he ultimately propounds to
himself) is his best good; and that he can design no further good to himself,
then satisfaction; nothing after or beyond that; and what can afford it, if the
vision and participation of the Divine Glory do not?

As to the latter, besides all that assurance given by Scripture-constitution
to the righteous man, concerning his future reward; let the Consciences be
consulted of the most besotted sinners, in any lucid interval, and they will
give their suffrage ( Balaam that so earnestly followed the reward of
unrighteousness not excepted) that the way of righteousness, is that only
likely way to happiness, and would therefore desire to die, at least, the
righteous man's death, and that their latter end should be like his. So is
wisdom (I might call it righteousness too, the wicked man is the
Scripture-Fool; and the righteous the wise man) justified not by her children
only, but by her enemies also.

And sure it is meet that she should be more openly justified by her Children,
and that they learn to silence, and repress those misgiving thoughts; Surely, I
have washed my hands in vain, Psalm. 73. ^^. 15.
etc. And be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
for as much as they know their labor is not in vain in the Lord.

CHAP. XV.
Two other Inferences from the Consideration of the season of this blessedness.
The former, That in as much as this blessedness is not attained in this life.
The present happiness of Saints must in a great part consist in hope. The
latter, That great is the wisdom and sagacity of the righteous man, which waves
a present temporary happiness, and chooses that which is distant and future.

IN as much as the season of this blessedness is not on this side the Grave;
nor expected by Saints till they awake, we may further infer;

That their happiness in the mean time does very much consist in hope. Or that
hope must needs be of very great necessity, and use to them, in their present
state for their comfort, and support. It were not, otherwise, possible to
subsist in the absence, and want of their highest good, while nothing in this
lower world is, as to kind and nature, suitable to their desires, or makes any
colorable overture to them of satisfaction, and happiness. Others (as the
Psalmist observes) have their portion in this life; that good, which as to the
species and kind of it, is most grateful to them, is present, under view,
within sight; And (as the Apostle) Hope that is seen is not hope, Romans 8. 24.
for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for it. But those whose more
refined spirits (having received the first fruits of the holy Spirit of God)
prompt them to groan after something beyond time, and above this Sublunarie
Sphere; of them, the Apostle there tell us, that they are saved by hope. They
(as if he should say) subsist by it; they were never able to hold out, were it
not for their hope. And that an hope too, beyond this life, as is the hope of a
christian; 1 Cor. 15. 19.
if in this life only we had hope in Christ, 1 Pet. 13.
etc. the hope of a Christian as such is suitable to its productive cause; the
resurrection of Christ from the dead; begotten to a lively hope by the
resurrection, etc. Thence is it, the hope of a renewed, never dying life; the
hope of a blessed immortality; whereof Christ's resurrection was a certain
argument and pledge.

Indeed the new creature is, ab origin, and all along an hoping creature both
in its primum, and its porro esse. It Is conceived, and formed, and nursed up in
hope. In its production, and in its progress toward perfection, it is
mani^^^^ly influenc't thereby. In the first return of the soul to God, hope
being then planted as a part of the holy gracious Nature, now manifestly
discovers it self, when the soul begins to act, (as turning, after the
reception of the Divine influence, is its act) hope insinuates it self into (or
induces rather) that very act. Returning is not the act of a despairing, but
hoping soul. It Is God apprehended as reconcilable, that attracts and wins it:
while he is looked upon as an implacable enemy, the soul naturally shuns him,
and comes not nigh, Hos. 11.
till drawn with those cords of a man, the bands of love. Jer. 2.
While it says, there is no h^pe, it says with all (desperately enough) I have
loved strangers, and after them will I go. But if there be any hope in Israel
concerning this thing. If it can yet apprehend God willing to forgive, Ezra 10.
2, 3.
then Let us make a covenant, etc. This presently draws the hovering soul into
a closure, Psalm. 78. 7, 13.
and league with him. And thus is the union continued; unsteadf^stness in the
Covenant of God, is resolved into this not setting, or fixing of hope in him,
or (which amounts to the same, setting of hope in God is directed as
steadfastness of spirit with him, and a keeping of his Covenant. Jer. 3 2^, 23.
R^volting souls are encouraged to return to the Lord, upon this con^^^^,
(...), that salvation is h^^ed for, in vain, ^^om any other. The case being
indeed the some, in all after conversions as in the first. God, ^s multiplying
(...) p^rd^n; and still retaining the same name, Exodus 23. 2^.
the Lord, the Lord gr^ci^^^, (...) (which name in all the se^^rails that
compose and make it up, is in his Christ) invites back to him the backsliding
sinner, and renews its thoughts of returning. And so is he afterward under the
teachings of grace led on by hope, thorough the whole course of Religion
toward the future glory. Grace appears, teaching sinners to deny ungoodliness,
Titus 2. 11* 12.
etc. in the looking for the blessed hope, the glorious appearing of the great
God, etc. So do they keep themselves in the love of God; Looking for the mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Thus is the new creature formed in
hope, and nourisht in hope. And if its eye were upon pardon at first, it is more
upon the promised glory afterward. And yet that last end has in a degree, its
attractive influence upon it, from the first formation of it, it is even then
taught to design for glory. It Is begotten to the lively hope (where though hope
be taken objectively, as the apposition shows of the following words, to an
inheritance, yet the act is evidently connoted, for the thing hoped for, is
meant under that notion, as hoped for.) And its whose following course is an
aiming at glory; a seeking glory, hon^ur, immortality, etc. R^ 2. 7.
Thus is the work of Sanctification carried on. 1 John 3. 3.
He that has this hope ^urisieth himself. Heb 1^. 34.
Thus are losses sustained; The spoiling of goods taken joyfully, through the
expectation of the better and enduring substance. The most hazardous services
undertaken, even an Apostleship to a despised Christ. Tit 1^ 1, 2.
-- In the hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie has promised. All
difficulties encountered, and overcome, while the he^met is the h^pe of
salv^tion. 1 These 5, ^.
things reserved for Saints in general (Faith can go no further, for the Word
of Promise goes no further) and so serves instead of eyes, in the Divine Light,
to view those glories; or it presents them (as so many substantial realities)
demonstrates them, submits them to view; whence Hope reaches forth to them,
contends against, and triumphs over all attending difficulties? and possesses
them; gives the soul an early, anticipated fruition of them, for its present
support, Romans 5 2.
and relief. So that it rejoices in the hope of the glory of God. Chap. 12. 12.
It might well therefore be said, I had fainted, if I had not believed (or who
can express how sad my case had been, Psalm. 27. 13, 14.
if I had not believed? for there is an elegant Aposiopesis in the Hebrew Text,
the words [I had fainted] being supplied in the translation. If I had not
believed, what had become of me then? q. d.) In as much as faith feeds, as it
were, those hopes which more immediately, the Lord makes use of, for the
strengthening his peoples hearts, as it is intimated in the following words,
compared with Psalm. 31. 24. In the present case; Faith ascertains the heart, of
the truth of the Promises: so that thus the Soul states the case to it self;
Though I have not walked to and fro in (...) upper regions, nor taken a view of
the heavenly (...), though I have not been in the third (...) us, and seen the
ineffable glory; yet the (...) which has brought life, and immortality to
light, the word of the eternal God, who has (...) me this is the state of
things, in the other world; cannot but be true; my faith may therefore be to me
instead of eyes, and the Divine testimony must supply the place of light; both
together give, methinks, a fair prospect of those far distant glorious objects,
which I have now in view. Now this awakens hope, and makes it revive, and run
to embrace what Faith has discovered in the Promise. Tit. 1. 2.
-- In hope of eternal life, Psalm. 119. 49.
which God that cannot lie has promised. It Is the Word of God that causes the
soul to hope, (i. e. believed for disbelieved, it signifies nothing with it)
and that, not only as it contains a narration, but a promise, concerning the
future estate. I may without much emotion of heart, hear from a Traveller the
description of a pleasant Country, where I have not been; but if the Lord of
that Country give me, besides the account of it, an assurance of enjoying rich,
and ample possessions there; this presently begets an hope; the pleasure
whereof would much relieve a present distressed estate; and which nothing, but
that of actual possession can exceed. That it is not more so with us here,
admits of no excuse. Is God less to be believed then a man? will we deny him
the privilege of being able to discover his mind, and the truth of things
credibly? which we ordinarily allow to any one that is not a convicted Lier?
Christ expects his Disciples should very confidently assure themselves, of the
preparations made for them in another world, upon that very ground, alone, that
he had not told them the contrary. Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe
in God, believe also in me. In my Fathers House are many mansions, Joh. 14. 1,
2.
if it were not, so I would have told you. I go to prepare, etc. Intimating to
them, they ought to have that opinion of his plainness, and sincerity, as never
to imagine he would have proselyted them to a Religion, that should undo them
in this world; if there were not a sufficient recompense awaiting them in the
other; but he would have certainly have let them know, the worst of their case;
much more, might he expect they should be confident, upon his so often, and
expressly telling them that so it is.

If his silence might he a ground of hope, much more his word. And surely so
grounded an hope, cannot but be consolatory; and relieving in this sad
interval, till the awaking hour.

Lastly, Inseren. 10.
Since this blessedness of the righteous, is as to the season of it, future,
not expected till they awake, we may infer. That it is great wisdom, and
sagacitie, that guides the righteous man's choice; while he waves a present, and
temporary, and chooses this future expected blessedness.

It Is true, that Philosophy has been wont to teach us, that choice or
election, has no place about the end, because that is but one; and choice
always implies a competition. But that very reason evinces that in our present
state, and case; choice must have place about the end. That Philosophy might
have suited better the state of innocent Adam; when there was nothing to blind,
and bribe a man's judgment, or occasion it to deliberate, about the supreme end
(then it might be truly said, deliberation it self, was a defection) nor to
pervert, and misincline his will; and so its action, in proposing its end,
would be simple intention, not choice.

But so has the Apostasy, and sin of man, blinded and befooled him, that he
is at a loss about nothing more, then what is the chief good. And though S.
Augustine reduce Varro's 288. De Civit. Dei. lib. 19.
differing Sects about it to 12. that is enough to prove (but daily experience
does it more convincingly, and sadly) a real, though most unjust competition.
Therefore a sinner can never be blessed, without choosing his blessedness; and
therein, it highly concern's him to choose aright; and that a Spirit of Wisdom,
and Counsel guide his choice. While Man had not as yet fallen to deliberate
whether he should adhere to God, or no; was a gradual declension, the very
inchoation of his fall; but having fallen; necessity makes that a virtue, which
was a wick^n^s^ before. There Is no returning to God, without considering our
ways. The so much altered state of the case, quite alters the nature of the
things. It was a consulting to do evil, before; now, to do go^d. And hence also
choosing the Lord to be our God, Josh. 24.
becomes a necessary duty. Which is to make choice of this very blessedness,
that consists in the knowledge, likeness, and enjoyment of him. And now, in as
much as this blessedness is not fully attained by the longing soul, till time
expire, and its eternity commence; here is a great discovery of that Wisdom
which guides this happy choice. There is great wisdom in prospection; in taking
care of the future; and at how much the further distance, one can provide; so
much the greater reputation of wisdom it justly acquired to him; Yea, we seem
to place the sum of practical wisdom, in this one thing, while we agree to
call it providence, under the contracted name of prudence. Prove. 22. 3.
The wise man makes it at least an evidence, or part of wisdom, when he tells
us the prudent foreseeth, etc. The righteous man so far excells in this
faculty; as that his eye looks through all the periods of time; and penetrates
into eternity, recommends to the Soul a blessedness of that same stamp, and
alloy; that will endure, and last for ever. It will not content him to be happy
for an hour, or for any Space, that can have an end; after which it shall be
possible to him, to look back, and recount with himself how happy he was once.
Nor is he much solicitous, what his present state be; if he can but find he is
upon safe terms, as to his future, and eternal state. As for me, says the
Psalmist (he, herein, sorts, and severs himself from them, whose portion was in
this life) I [shall] behold -- I [shall] be satisfied, Est been non potuit
dicere dixit erit.
when I awake; he could not say it was well with him; but it shall be q. d. Let
the purblind, short-sighted Sensualist, embrace this present world; who can see
no further; Let me have my portion in the world to come; may my soul always lie
open to the impression of the powers of the coming world; and, in this; so use
every thing, as to be under the power of nothing. What are the pleasures of sin
that are but for a season; or what the sufferings of this now; this moment of
affliction, to the glory that shall be revealed; to the exceeding, and eternal
glory. He considers patient, afflicted godliness will triumph at last; when
riotous, raging wickedness shall lament for ever. He may for a time weep, and
mourn, while the world rejoices; he may be sorrowful, Joh. 16. 20, 2^.
but his sorrow shall be turned into joy; and his joy none shall take from him.
Surely, here is wisdom; this is the wisdom that is from above, and tends
thither. This is to be wise unto salvation. The righteous man is a judicious
man; he has, in a measure, that judgment (wherein the Apostle prays the
Philippians might abound) to approve the things that are excellent, Phil. 1. 9,
1^^^
and accordingly to make his choice. This is a sense (little thought of by the
Author) wherein that sober Speech of the voluptuous Philosopher is most
certainly true. Epicurus.
A man cannot live happily, without living wisely. No man shall ever enjoy the
eternal pleasures hereafter, that in this acquits not himself wisely here; even
in this choosing the better part, that shall never be taken from him. In this
the plain righteous man, out-vies the greatest Sophies, the Scribe, the
disputer, the Politician, the prudent Mamonist, the facete Wit; who in their
several kinds, all think themselves highly to have merited to be accounted
wise. And that this point of wisdom should escape their notice; and be the
principal thing with him, can be resolved into nothing else but the Divine good
pleasure. In this contemplation, our Lord Jesus Christ is said to have rejoiced
in Spirit (it even put his great comprehensive soul into an ecstasy) Father, I
thank thee, Lord of heaven and earth, Luke 10. 21.
that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them
to babes: Even so Father, because it pleased thee. Here was a thing fit to be
reflected on, as a piece of Divine Royalty? a part, worthy the Lord of heaven
and earth. And what serious spirit would it not amaze, to weigh, and ponder
this case awhile; to see men excelling in all other kinds of knowledge, so far
excelled by those they most contemn, in the highest point of wisdom; such as
know how to search into the abstrusest Mysteries of Nature; that can unravel,
or see through the most perplexed intrigues of State; that know how to save
their own Stake, and secure their private Interests, in whatsoever times; yet
so little seen ( often; for not many wise) in the matters that concern an
eternal felicity! It puts me in mind of (what I find observed by some) the
particular madness (adementia quoad hoc) as it is called; when persons, in every
thing else, capable of sober, rational discourse; when you bring them to some
one thing (that in reference to which they became distempered at first) they
rave, and are perfectly mad. How many that can manage a discourse with great
reason, and judgment, about other matters, who when you come to discourse with
them about the affairs of practical godliness, and which most directly tend to
that future state of blessedness, they are (...) at their wits end; know not
what to say. They savor not those things. These are things not understood, but
by such to whom it is given. And surely that given wisdom is the most excellent
wisdom. Sometimes God does, as it were, so far gratify the world, as to speak
their own language; and call them wise that affect to be called so, and that
wisdom which they would fain have go under that name; Moses it is said was
skilled in all the wisdom of Egypt, Act. 7. 22.
etc. but at other times he expressly calls those wise men fools; and their
wisdom, folly, and madness; or annexes some disgraceful adject, for distinction
sake; or applies those appellatives Ironically, and in manifest derision. No
doubt, but any such person as was represented in the parable would have thought
himself to have done the part of a very wise man in entertaining such
deliberation and resolvs, Luke 12.
as we find he had there with himself. How strange was that to his ears, Thou
fool, this night shall they require thy soul, etc. Their wisdom is sometimes
said to be foolish, or else called the wisdom of the flesh, or fleshly wisdom,
said to be earthly, sensual, devilish, they are said to be wise to do evil;
while to do good, they have no understanding; they are brought sometimes, as it
were, upon the stage with their wisdom, to be the matter of divine triumph;
where is the wise? and that which they account foolishness is made to confound
their wisdom. And indeed do they deserve to be thought wise; that are so busily
intent upon momentary trifles; and trifle with eternal concernments; that
prefer vanishing shadows to the everlasting glory? that follow lying vanities,
and forsake their own mercies? Yea, will they not cease to be wise in their own
eyes also; when they see the issue, and reap the fruits of their foolish
choice? when they find the happiness they preferred before this eternal one is
quite over; and nothing remains to them of it, but an afflictive remembrance.
That the torment they were told would follow, is but now beginning; and without
end: when they hear from the mouth of their impartial Judge; Remember you in
your life time had your good things, and my faithful servants their evil; now
they must be comforted, and you tormented. When they are told you have received
the consolation; you were full, ye did laugh, Luke 6. 14. 25.
now you must pine, and mourn, and weep. Will they not then be as ready to
befool themselves, and say as they; be those (righteous ones) are they whom we
sometimes had in derision, Wisd. 53. etc.
and for a proverb of reproach; we fools counted their life madness, and that
their end was without honor, but now how are they numbered among the sons of
God, and their lot is among the Saints. They that were too wise before, to mind
so mean a thing as Religion (the world through w^sd^m knew not God, 1 Co^. 1.
strange wisdom! that could so wisely baffle Conscience; and put fallacies upon
their own souls; that had so ingenious shifts to elude a conviction; and direct
any serious thought, from fastening upon their spirits, that were wont so slily
to jeere holiness; seemed as they meant to laugh Religion out of countenance,
Folly is (...)
they will now know that a circumspect walking, Prove, 15 21.
a faithful redeeming of time, and improving it in order to eternity, was to
do, not as fools, but as wise; and begin to think of themselves, now as lost,
as all wise, and sober men thought of them before.

CHAP. XVI.
The second general Head of the improvement or use of the Doctrine propounded
from the Text, containing certain Rules or prescriptions of duty connatural
thereto. Rule 1. That we settle in our minds the true notion of this
blessedness. Rule 2. That we compare the temper of our own spirits with it, and
labor thence to discern whether we may lay claim to it or no.

THus far we have the the account of the Truths to be considered, and weighed,
that have dependence on the Doctrine of the Text.

Next follows the duties to be practiced, and done in reference thereto, which
I shall lay down in the ensuing Rules or Prescriptions.

That we admit, and settle, the distinct notion of this blessedness in our
minds, and judgments. That we fix in our own souls apprehensions agreeable to
the account this Scripture has given us of it. This is a counsel, leading, and
introductive to the rest; and which if it obtain with us, will have a general
influence upon the whole course of that practice, which the Doctrine already
opened, calls for. As our apprehensions of this blessedness are more distinct,
and clear; it may be expected more powerfully to command our hearts, and lives.
Hence it is in great part, the Spirits, and conversations of Christians have so
little savor, and appearance of heaven in them. We rest in some general, and
confused notion of it; in which there is little either of efficacy, or
pleasure; we descend not into a particular inquiry, and consideration what it
is. Our thoughts of it, are gloomy, and obscure; and hence is our Spirit
naturally listless, and indifferent toward it: and rather contents it self to
sit still in a Region all lightsome round about, and among objects it has some
present acquaintance with, then venture it self forth as into a new world which
it knows but little of. And hence our lives are low and carnal: they look not
as though we were seeking the heavenly Country; and indeed, who can be in good
earnest in seeking after an unknown state? This is owing to our negligence, an
infidelity. The blessed God has not been shy, and reserved; has not hidden,
or concealed from us the glory of the other world; nor locked up Heaven to us;
nor left us to the uncertain guesses of our own imagination: the wild fictions
of an unguided fancy; which would have created us a poetical heaven only, and
have mocked us with false Elysiums. But, though much be yet within the vail, he
has been liberal in his discoveries to us. Life and Immortality are brought to
light in the Gospel. The future blessedness (though some refined Heathens have
had near guesses at it) is certainly apprehensible by the measure only of Gods
revelation of it. For who can determine, with certainty, of the effects of
Divine good pleasure ('It Is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom.)
Who can tell, before hand, what so free and boundless goodness will do; further
then as he himself discovers it? The discover^ is as free as the donation. 1
Cor. 2. 9.
The things that eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which h^ve not
entered into the heart of man, God has revealed to us by his Spirit: and it
follows, v. 12. We h^ve received the Spirit of God, that we might know the
things freely given us of God: The Spirit is both the principle of the external
revelation, as having inspired the Scriptures which foreshew this glory, and of
the internal revelation, also to enlighten blind minds that would otherwise
((...)) never be able to discover things at so great a distance, see af^r off.
Therefore called the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, by which the eyes of the
understanding are enlightened to know the hope of that calling, Ephesians. 1. 17.
and the riches of the glory of his inheritance [among] the Saints (as the
(...) there is most fitly to be rendered.)

But this internal discovery is made by the mediation, and interveniencie of
the external: Therefore having that before our eyes we are to apply our minds
to the study, and consideration of it; and in that way, to expect the free
illumination of the holy Spirit. In the mean time we must charge our ignorance,
and the darkness of our cloudy thoughts, touching these things, upon our
carelessness, that we do not attend, or our incredulity, that we will not
believe what God has revealed concerning them: it is therefore a dutiful
attention, and reverential Faith that must settle and fix the notion of this
blessedness. If we will not regard, nor give credit to what God has discovered
concerning it, we may sit still in a torpid, disconsolate darkness, which we
our selves are the authors of, or (which is no less pernicious) compass our
selves with sparks beaten out of our own Forge; walk in the light of our own
fire, cheat our souls with the fond dream of an imagined Heaven, no where to be
found, till we at length lie down in sorrow. How perverse are the imaginations
of men in this (as in reference to the way, so) in respect of the end also:
For, as they take upon them to fancy another way to happ^ness quite besides,
and against the plain word of God; so do they imagine to themselves another
kind of happiness; such as shall grat^fie only the sensual desires; a
Mahomet^n (indeed a Fools) Paradise; or, at best, it is but a negative Heaven;
they many times en^ertain in their thoughts (of which their sense too is the
only measure) a state wherein nothing shall offend, or incommodate the flesh;
in which they shall not hunger, or (...), or feel want; and when they have thus
stated the matter in their own thoughts; we cannot beat them out of it, but
that they desire to go to heaven (viz. the heaven of their own making) when did
they conceive it truly, and fully, they would find their hearts to abhor from
it, even as hell it self.

Therefore here we should exercise an authority over our selves; and awaken
conscience to its proper work and business; and demand of it, Is it not
reasonable these divine discoveries should take place with me? has not God
spoken plainly enough? why should my heart any longer hang in doubt within me,
or look wishly toward future glory, as if it were an uncouth thing? or is it
reasonable to confront my own imaginations to his discoveries? Charge
conscience with the duty it owes to God in such a case; and let his revelations
be received with the reverence and resignation which they challenge; and in
them study and contemplate the blessedness of awakened souls; till you have
agreed with your self fully how to conceive it. Run over every part of it in
your thoughts, view the several divine excellencies, which you are, hereafter,
to see, and imitate; and think what every thing will contribute to the
satisfaction and contentment of your Spirits. This is a matter of unspeakable
consequence.

Therefore, to be as clear as is possible, you may digest what is recommended
to you in this Rule, into these more particular directions.

1. Resolve with your selves to make the divine revelation of this blessedness
the prime measure, and reason of all your apprehensions concerning it; Fix that
purpose in your own hearts, so to order all your conceptions about it, that
when you demand of your selves, What do I conceive of the future blessedness?
and why do I conceive so? the divine revelation may answer both the questions.
I apprehend what God has revealed, and because he has so revealed. The Lord
of heaven sure best understands it; and can best help us to the understanding
of it. If it be said of the origin of this world (...), Heb. 11. 3.
it may much more be said of the st^^e of the other, we understand it by faith.
That must inform, and perfect our intellectuals in this matter.

2. Therefore, reject and sever from the notion of this blessedness, whatsoever
is alien to the account Scripture gives us of it. Think not that sensual
pleasure, that a liberty of sinning, that an exemption from the divine
dominion, distance and estrangedness from God (which by nature you wickedl^
affect) can have any ingrediency into (or consistency with) this state of
blessedness.

3. Gather up into it whatsoever you can find by the Scripture-discovery to
appertain or belong thereto. Let your notion of it be to your uttermost, not
only true, but comprehensive, and full; and as particular and positive, as Gods
revelation will warrant: Especially remember, it is a spiritual blessedness;
that consists in the refining, and perfecting of your Spirits, by the vision
and likeness of the holy God; and the satisfying of them thereby for ever.

4. Get the notion of this blessedness deeply imprinted in your minds; so as to
abide with you, that you may not be always at a loss; and change you
apprehensions every time you come to think of it: Let a once-well formed Idaea,
a clear full state of it be preserved entire: and be (as a lively image)
always before your eyes; which you may readily view upon all occasions.

2. That having well fixed the notion of this blessedness in your minds, 2 Rule.
you seriously reflect upon yourself, and compare the temper of your Spirit
with it: that you may find out how it is affected thereto; and thence judge in
what likelihood you are of enjoying it.

The general aversion of men's Spirits to this so necessary work of
self-reflection is one of the most deplorable Symptoms of lapsed, degenerate
humanity. The wickedness that has overspread the nature of man, and a secret
consciousness, and misgiving, has made men afraid of themselves, and
studiously to decline all acquaintance with their own souls; to shun themselves
as Ghosts and Spectives; they cannot endure to appear to themselves. You can
hardly impose a severer task upon a wicked man, than to go retire an hour or
two, and commune with himself, he knows not how to face his own thoughts: His
own soul is a Devil to him (as indeed it will be in hell, the most frightful,
tormenting Devil) Yet what power is there, in man, more excellent, more
appropriate to reasonable nature, than that of reflecting, of turning his
thoughts upon himself. Sense must here confess it self out done. The eye that
sees other objects cannot see it self. But the mind, a rational Sun, can, not
only project its beams, but revert them; make its thoughts turn inward. It can
see its own face, contemplate it self. And how useful an indowment is this to
the nature of man? If he err he might perpetuate his error, and wander
infinitely, if he had not this self-reflecting power, and, if he do well never
know, without it, the comfort of a rational self-approbation. Which comfort
Paganish morality has valued so highly, as to account it did associate a man
with the inhabitants of heaven; (...), etc. (...).
and make him lead his life as among the gods (as their Pagan language is)
Though the name of this reflecting power [Conscience] they were less acquainted
with; the thing it self they reckoned as a kind of indwelling Deity, (as may be
seen at large in those Discourses of Maximus Tyrius, and Apuleius both upon the
same subject concerning the god of Socrates) And another giving this precept,
Familiarize thy self with the gods; adds, and this shall thou do, if thou bear
thy mind becomingly toward them; being well pleased with the things they give,
and doing the things that may please thy Demon or Genius, whom (says he) the
most high God (which they mean by Jupiter) has put into every man as as a
derivation or extraction from himself ((...)) to be his president and guide,
Mar. Antonin. Lib. 5.
viz. every ones own mind and reason.

And this mind or reason in that notion of it, as we approve our selves to it,
and study to please it; is the same thing we intend by the name of Conscience.

And how high account they had of this work of self-reflection, may appear in
that they entitled the Oracle to that document Know thy self, Ecoelo descendit
(...).
esteeming it above humane discovery, and that it could have no lower than a
divine Original; therefore consecrating and writing it up in golden Characters
in their Delphick Temple (as Pliny informs Hist. Mundi The wisdom and
significancy of which Dedication Plato also (in Alcibiad. 1.) takes notice of.
us) for an heavenly-inspired dictate.

Among Christians that enjoy the benefit of the Gospel-revelation, in which men
may behold themselves, as one may his natural face in a glass, how highly
should this self-knowledge be prized, and how fully attained? The Gospel
discovers, at the same time, the ugly deformities of a man's soul, and the means
of attaining a true spiritual comeliness; Yea it is it self the instrument of
impressing the divine image, and glory upon men's Spirits; which when it is in
any measure done they become most sociable, and conversable with themselves;
and when it is but in doing, it so convincingly and with so piercing energy,
lays open the very thoughts of men's hearts, so thoroughly rips up and diffects
the soul, Heb. 4. 12.
so directly turns and strictly holds a man's eye, intent upon himself; so
powerfully urges, and obliges the sinner to mind and study his own soul; that,
where it has affected any thing, been any way operative upon men's spirits,
they are certainly supposed to be in a good measure acquainted with themselves,
whatever others are. Therefore the Apostle bids the Corinthians if they desire
a proof of the power and truth of his ministry; to consult themselves,
[examine your selves] and presently subjoyns know ye not your own selves? 2
Cor. 13. 5.
intimating it was an unsupposeable thing they should be ignorant; What?
Christians, and not know your selves? Can you have been under the Gospel so
long, and be strangers to yourselves? none can think it. Sure it is a most
reproachful thing; a thing full of ignonimy, and scandal, that a man should
name himself a Christian; and yet be under gross ignorance touching the
temper, and bent of his own soul. It signifies that such a one understands
little of the design and tendency of the very religion he pretends to be of;
Yet he was a Christian by mere chance, that he took up, and continues his
profession in a dream. Christianity aims at nothing; it gets a man nothing; if
it do not procure him a better Spirit? it is an empty insignificant thing, it
has no design in it at all, if it do not design this. It pretends to nothing
else. It does not offer men secular advantages, emoluments, honors, it has no
such aim to make men in that sense, rich, or great, or honorable, but to make
them holy, and fit them for God. He therefore loses all his labor, and reward,
and shows himself a vain trifler in the matters of Religion, that makes not
this the scope and mark of his Christian profession, and practice, and herein
he can do nothing without a constant self-inspection. As it therefore highly
concerns, it well becomes a Christian under the Gospel, to be in a continual
observation, and study of himself; that he may know to what purpose he is a
Christian; and take notice what (or whether any) good impressions be yet made
upon his Spirit; whether he gain any thing by his Religion. And if a man enter
upon an inquiry into himself; what more important question can he put then
this; In what posture am I as to my last and chief end? how is my Spirit framed
toward it? This is the intendment and business of the Gospel, To fit souls for
blessedness: and therefore if I would enquire, what am I the better for the
Gospel? this is the sense and meaning of that very question, is my soul wrought
by it to any better disposition for blessedness? Upon which the resolution of
this depends; am I ever likely to enjoy it, yea or no? That which may make any
heart, not deplorably stupid, shake, and tremble; that such a thing should be
drawn into question; but the case, with the most, requires it, and it must be
so. It Is that therefore, I would fain here, awaken souls to, and assist them
in; that is, propound something (in pursuance of the present direction) which
might both awaken them to move this great question, and help them in discussing
it. Both which will be done in showing the importance of this latter ultimate
question in it self, and then the subserviencie of the former subordinate one,
toward the deciding it. These two things therefore I shall a little stay upon.

1. To show and urge the requisiteness of debating with ourselves, the
likelihood, or hopefulnesse of our enjoying this blessedness.

2. To discover that the present habitude, or disposedness of our Spirits to
it, is a very proper apt medium, whereby to judge thereof.

First, As to the former of these; methinks our business should do it self, and
that the very mention of such a blessedness, should naturally prompt souls to
bethink themselves, does it belong to me? have I any thing to do with it?
Methinks every one that hears of it should be beforehand with me; and prevent
me here. Where is that stupid soul that reckons it an indifferent thing to
attain this blessed state, or fall short of it? When thou hear this is the
common expectation of Saints, to behold the face of God, and be satisfied with
his likeness, when they awake; Can thou forbear to say with thy self, and
what shall become of me when I awake! what kind of awaking shall I have! shall
I awake amid'st the beams of glory, or flames of wrath? If thou can be
persuaded to think this no matter of indifferency; then stir up thy drowsy
soul to a serious inquiry, how it is likely to fare with thee for ever; and to
that purpose put thy conscience to it, to give a free, sincere answer to these
few Queries.

1. Can thou say, thou art already certain of thy eternal blessedness? Art
thou so sure, that thou need'st not enquire. I know not who thou art that now
read these lines, and therefore cannot judge of thy confidence, whether it be
right or wrong; only that thou may not answer too hastily, consider a
little; that certainty of salvation is no common thing: Phil. 2. 12.
not among (I speak you see of subjective certainty) the heirs of salvation
themselves. How many of Gods holy ones, that cannot say they are certain, yea
how few, that can say they are? That exhortation to a Church of Saints, Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling (they of whom he expresses such
confidence, Chap. 1. 6. over whom he so glories, Chap. 4. 1.) implies this to
be no common thing. So does Christ's advice to his Disciples, Strive to enter in
at the strait gate; and St. Peter's to the scattered Jews (that he says had
obtained like precious faith, etc.) give diligence to make your calling and
election sure, with many more passages of like import. Yea, how full is the
Scripture of the complaints of such crying out of broken bones, of festering
wounds, of distraction by divine terrors. Now what shall we say in this case,
when so eminent Saints have left us Records of the distresses and agonies of
their Spirits, under the apprehended displeasure of God; may it not occasion us
to suspend a while, and consider; have we much more reason to be confident then
they? And do we know none that lead stricter, and more holy lives then we,
that, are yet in the dark, and at a loss in judging their Spiritual states? I
will not say that we must therefore think our selves bound to doubt, because
another possibly ter then we does so. Unknown accidents may much vary the
cases. But, who would not think that reason, and modesty had quite forsaken the
world, to hear (where the odds is so vastly great) the vain boasts of the loose
generality, compared with the humble, solicitous doubts of many serious knowing
Christians? To see such trembling about their soul concernments, who have
walked with God, and served him long in prayers, and tears; when multitudes
that have nothing whereon to bottom a confidence, but Pride, and Ignorance;
shall pretend themselves certain! If, drawing breath a while, thou will suspect
thou have reason not to be peremptory in thy confidence; thou will sure think
thy self concerned to inquire further. Urge thy Soul then with this question
again and again, art thou yet certain, yea or no.

2. Is it a comfortable state to be uncertain, or to have before thee apparent
grounds of a rational, and just doubt? For causeless doubts may sooner vanish,
when their causelesness is once discovered; and so they are less likely to keep
a person that is capable of understanding his own case, under a stated
discomfort. But I suppose thee, in order to the answering the foregoing Querie,
to have in some measure considered thy case; and that, with a preponderating
apprehension of danger in it, thou returnest it uncertain. Uncertain man! and
what, will thou remain uncertain? will thou sit still so, till thou perish?
shall thy life hang in doubt, and thy soul be in jeopardy every hour, till the
everlasting flames resolve the doubt; and put the matter out of question with
thee? What course can thou apply thy self to, but to inquire, and search
further into thy own state, to avoid the torture of thy own fears, the pangs,
and dreadful expectations of a palpitating misgiving heart; it is true, that
inquisitive, diligent doubtfulness, has hope, and comfort in it. But
doubtfulness, joined with a resolution of casting off all further care, is
utterly desperate, and disconsolate; what remains to thee in that case, but a
fearful, looking for a fiery indignation? how can thou pass an hour in peace,
while thou apprehendest it unlikely, thou see the face, and be satisfied with
the image of God, do not thy own thoughts represent to thee the amazing sights,
the horrid images which shall for ever entertain, and possess thy soul? Art
thou not daily haunted with Divine Horrors? when thou say at night, thy bed
shall refresh thee, art thou not terrified with dreams, and affrighted with
visions? Do thou not say in the morning, would to God it were evening, and in
the evening say, would to God it were morning: And while thou know not what
else to do, meditate only changes instead of remedies. Or if thou find no such
trouble invading thy mind, let me further ask.

3. Is it reasonable to be secure in such a state of uncertainty! Debate this
matter a little while, with thy self. Is it thy reason, or thy sloth that makes
thee sit still; and forbear to look into thy Spiritual affairs? Is it any
rational consideration, or not rather the mere indisposition of a Soul, afraid
to know its own state, that suspends thee from inquiring? what have thou to say
that looks like a reason? Is it that it will disturb thy thoughts, interrupt
thy pleasures, fill thee with anxious cares and fears, which thou art as loath
to admit, as burning coals into thy bosom? Is it that thou can not endure to
look upon so dreadful an object, as the appearing danger, or possibility of thy
being miserable to eternity? And art thou therefore resolved to shut thine
eyes, and cry peace, peace? This is to avoid a present inconvenience by an
eternal mischief (a gross overstraining of the Paradox! for avoiding the
present fear of Hell, to run into it; as if because a man cannot bear the
thoughts of dying, he should presently cut his own throat. Vain man! can thou
not bear the thoughts of eternal misery, how will thou bear the thing? And how
long-lived do thou think that peace shall be that thou purchasest upon so
dear, and hard terms? can thou promise thy self an hour? may thou not
lose thy purchase, and price together the next moment? can thou defer thy
misery by forgetting it? or will thy judgment linger, and thy damnation
slumber, while thou securely lingerest, and slumberest? can thou wink Hell
into nothing; and put it out of being, by putting it out of thy thoughts? Alas
man! open thy eyes, when thou will, thou shall find thou have not bettered thy
case by having kept them ^^st closed. The bitterness of death is not yet past.
The horrid image is still before thee. This is not a phansied evil, which a man
may dream himself into, and ( eadem opera) with as little difficulty, dream
himself out of it again: no, thy case is miserable and dangerous when thou
composest thy self to sleep; if thou awakest, thou will find it still the same;
only thou did not apprehend it before, for then thou would not have
slept. As the Drunkard that kills a man, and after falls asleep in his drunken
fit; he awakes and understands his wretched case. Would his sleeping on, till
the Officers arrest had awak't him, have mended the matter with him?

But thou will possibly say, is it not better, here, to have a little quiet
now, then to be miserable by sad thoughts here, and miserable by actual
suffering hereafter too? Is not one death enough? why should one kill himself
so often over? and hasten misery as if it came on too slowly?

Better, man? an hard choice. Supposing thou art to be eternally miserable; If
thou understand'st that word eternity; The good or evil of this little inch of
time, will signify so little with thee, as hardly to weigh any thing in the
Scale of a rational judgment. But what, art thou now dreaming, while thou thus
reasonest? Do thou yet no better understand thy case? Art thou not under the
Gospel? Is it not the day of thy hope, and of the Lords grace, and patience
toward thee? It was said that sleeping would not better thy case; but it was
not said, that awaking would not; but all that is here said, is designed to the
awakening of thee, that thou may know thy case, and endeavor a redress.
Do thou think any man in his sober wits, would take all this pains thus to
reason with thee, if that were the acknowledged, and agreed state of thy case;
that it were already taken for granted thou must perish? We might as well go
preach to Devils, and carry down the Gospel into Hell. But do thou think the
holy merciful God sent his Son, and his Ministers to mock men; and to treat
with them about their eternal concernments, when there is no hope? Were that
thy case, thou had as good a pretense as the Devil had, to complain of being
tormented before thy ^im; But if thou be not wilfully perverse, in mistaking
the matter we are reasoning about, thou may understand, Thy reason is here
appealed to in this; whether having so fair hopes before thee, as the Gospel
gives of this blessedness, we are discoursing of; it be not reasonable from the
apprehension of a mere possibility of miscarrying, (which can only be through
thy wilful security, and neglect) to give up thy self to a supine negligence,
and indulge that security, which is so sure to ruin thee, and exchange
possible h^ped heaven, for a certain Hell; or whether rather it be not
reasonable, to stir up thy soul to consider in what posture thou art, toward
the attainment of this blessedness; that thou may accordingly steer thy
course in order to it? If an Accusation, or a Disease do threaten thy life; or
a suspected slaw, thy Title, to thy Estate, would thou not think it
reasonable to inquire into thy case? and is it not much more desirable, in a
matter of this consequence to be at some certainty? and prudent to endeavor
it, if it may possibly be attained? Whence let me further ask.

Fourthly, Can thou pretend it to be impossible? Has God left thee under a
necessitated ignorance, in this matter? or denied thee sufficient means of
knowing how it is with thee in respect of thy Spiritual Estate? Though he have
not given thee a List, or told thee the Number, or Names of his Sanctified
ones; yet has he not sufficiently described the persons, and given thee
characters by which they may be known? And has he not furnished thee with a
self reflecting power, by which thou art enabled to look into thy self? and
discern whether thou be of them or no? Does he not offer, and afford to
serious, diligent souls, the assisting light of his blessed Spirit to guide,
and succeed the inquiry? And if thou find it difficult, to come to a speedy,
clear issue, to make a present, certain judgment of thy case; ought not that to
engage thee to a patient, continued diligence, rather then a rash, despairing
madness, to desist, and cast off all? In as much as the difficulty, though
great, is not insuperable, and the necessity, and advantage incomparably
greater? And (though diverse other things do confessedly fall in) the principal
difficulty lies in thy aversation, and unwillingness. Thou art not put to
traverse the Creation, to climb Heaven, or dig through the Earth; but thy work
lies nigh thee, in thy own heart, and Spirit, and what is so nigh, or should be
so familiar to thee, as thy self? It Is but casting thy eye upon thy own soul,
to discern which way it is inclined, and bent, thou art urged to. Which is that
we propounded next to discover. Viz.

2. That we are to judge of the hopefulness of our enjoying this blessedness,
by the present habitude, or disposedness of our spirits thereto. For what is
that righteousness which qualifies for it, but the impress of the Gospel upon
the minds and hearts of men? The Gospel-revelation is the only Rule, and
Measure of that righteousness. It must therefore consist in conformity thereto.
And look to the frame, and design of the Gospel-revelation; and what does so
directly correspond to it, as that very habitude, and disposedness of spirit
for this blessedness whereof we speak? Nothing so answers, the Gospel, as a
propension of heart toward God (gratified in part, now, and increasing, till
it find a full satisfaction) a desire of knowing him, and of being like him.
It Is the whole design of the Gospel, which reveals his glory in the face of
Jesus Christ, to work and form the spirits of men to this. They therefore whose
spirits are thus wrought, and framed, are righteous by the Gospel-measure, and
by that righteousness are evidently entitled, and fitted for this blessedness.
Yea that righteousness has in it (or rather is) the elements, the first
Principles, the seed of this blessedness. There can therefore be no surer Rule,
or Mark, whereby to judge our states, whether we have to do with this
blessedness, may expect it yea or no, than this.

How stand we affected toward it, in what disposition are our hearts thereto?
Those fruits of righteousness, by which the soul is qualified to appear
without offense in the day of Christ; the several graces of the Sanctifying
Spirit; are nothing else but so many holy Principles, all disposing the soul
toward this blessedness, and the way to it, Mortification, Self-denial, and
godly sorrow, take it off from other objects, the World, Self, and Sin,
Repentance (^that part of it which respects God) turns the course of its motion
toward God, the end. Faith directs it, through Christ the way. Love makes it
more freely; desire, earnestly; joy, pleasantly; hope, confidently; humility,
evenly; fear, circumspectly; patience, constantly, and perseveringly. All
conspire to give the Soul aright disposition toward this blessedness. The
result of them all is heavenliness; an heavenly temper of spirit. For they all
(one way, or other) as so many Lines, and Rays, have respect to a blessedness
in God (which is heaven) as the point, at which they aim; and (the cuspis) the
point in which they meet, in order to the touching of that objective point is
heavenliness. This is the ultemate, and immediate disposition of heart, for
this blessedness; the result (the terminus productus) of the whole work of
righteousness, in the Soul; by which it is said to be as it were, gnota ad
gloriam, begotten to the eternal inheritance, Concerning this therefore,
chiefly institute thy inquiry. Demand of thy self, is my soul yet made
heavenly? bent upon eternal blessedness or no? And here thou may easily
apprehend of how great concernment it is, to have the right notion of heaven;
or future blessedness, as was urged under the foregoing Rule. For if thou take
for it, another thing; thou missest thy mark, and art quite beside thy
business. But if thou retain a right, and scriptural state and notion of it;
the Rule thou art to judge by, is sure; They shall have heaven whose hearts are
intent upon it, and framed to it. Scripture is every where pregnant, and full
of this.

The Apostle plainly intimates; this will be the rule of Gods final judgment.
Certainly it cannot be unsafe for us, to judge our selves by the same Rule. He
tells us, when God shall judge every one according to his works (the great
business of the judgment day) eternal life, Rev. 2. 6, 7.
shall be the portion of them, who, by patient continuance in well doing,
sought glory, and honor, and immortality, (which are but other expressions of
the same thing) what can be more plain. They shall have eternal life, and glory
that seek it; whose hearts are toward it. Again, speaking of true Christians,
(...) ( i. e. in a way of contradiction from Pseudo-Christians, such, as, he
says, were enemies of the Cross) he gives us (among other) this brand of
these latter; that they did mind earthly things, and tells us their end would
be destruction, but gives us this opposite character of the other; Phil. 3. 18,
19, 20.
our conversation is in heaven; our trade and business, our daily negotiations
(as well as the privileges of our Citizen-ship) lie there (as his expression
imports) and thence intimates the opposite end of such; whence we look for a
[Saviour] not destruction, but salvation. And in the same Context of Scripture
where, Col. 3. 1. 2, 3, 4.
they that are risen with Christ, and who shall appear with him in glory, are
required to fet their [mind] on things above, not on things on the earth. That
we may understand this, not to be their duty only; but their character; we are
immediately told; they who do not so mortify, not their earthly members (those
lusts that dispose men toward the earth, and to grovel in the dust, as the
graces of the Spirit dispose them heavenward, and to converse with glory) are
the children of disobedience, upon whom the wrath of God comes. Heb. 11. 1*
13. 16.
The Faith, the just live by, is the substance of things hoped for, etc. Such
believers, are confessed, avowed strangers on earth, and seekers of the better,
the heavenly Country, whence it is said, God will not be ashamed to be called
their God: plainly implying, that as for low, terrene spirits; that love to
creep on the earth, and embrace Dunghills, God will be ashamed of them; he will
for ever disdain a relation to them, while, and as such. And if we will be
determined by the express word of our great Redeemer, to whom we owe all the
hopes of this blessedness. When he had been advising not to lay up treasure on
earth, Matthew. 5* 19, 20, 21.
but in heaven; he presently adds, where your treasure is, there will your
hearts be also. If thy treasure, thy great interests, thy precious, and most
valuable good, be above; that will attract thy heart, it will certainly be
disposed thitherward.

Yet here it must carefully be considered; that, in as much as this
blessedness is thy end, i. e. thy Supreme good (as the notion of treasure,
also imports) Thy heart must be set upon it above any other enjoyment; else all
is to no purpose. It Is not a faint, slight, overmastered inclination that will
serve the turn; but (as all the forementioned Scriptures import) such as will
bespeak it a man's business to seek heaven, his main work; and give ground to
say of him, his heart is there. If two lovers solicit the same person, and,
speaking of them in comparisons she say, this has my heart; is it tolerable to
understand her, as meaning him she loves less? so absurd would it be to
understand Scriptures, that speak of such an intention of heart heavenward; as
if the faintest desire, or coldest wish, or most lazy, inconstant endeavor
were all they meant. No, it is a steady prevalent, victorious direction of heart
toward the future glory, in comparison whereof, thou despisest all things else
(all temporal, terrene things) that must be the ( evidential) ground of thy
hope to enjoy it. And therefore in this, deal faithfully with thy own soul, and
demand of it; Do thou esteem this blessedness above all things else? Do the
thoughts of it continually return upon thee? and thy mind and heart, as it were
naturally, run out to it? Are thy chie^est solicitudes, and cares taken up
about it, least thou should fall short, and suffer a disappointment? Do
thou savor it with pleasure? has it a sweet and grateful relish to thy Soul?
do thou bend all thy powers to pursue, and press on toward it? Urge thy
self to give answer truly to such enquiries; and to consider them seriously,
that thou may do so.

Such whose Spirits are either most highly raised, and lift up to heaven, or
most deeply deprest, and sunk into the earth, may make the clearest judgment of
themselves. With them that are of a middle temper, the trial will be more
difficult; yet, not fruitless, if it be managed with serious diligence; though
no certain conclusion or judgment be made thereupon.

For the true design, and use of all such enquiries, and reflections upon our
selves (which let it be duly considered) is, not to bring us into a state of
cessation from further endeavors; as if we had nothing more to do, (suppose we
judge the best of our state that can be thought) but to keep us in a wakeful
temper of Spirit; that we may not forget our selves in the great business we
have yet before us; but go on with renewed vigor, through the whole course of
renewed endeavors, wherein we are to be still conversant, till we have
attained our utmost mark, and end. Therefore is this present enquiry directed,
as introductive to the further duty, that, in the following Rules, is yet to be
recommended.

CHAP. XVII.
Rule 3d. Directing such as upon inquiry find, or see cause to suspect a total
aversation in themselves to this blessedness, to be speedy, and restless in
their endeavors, to have the temper of their Spirits altered, and made
suitable to it. Doubts and Objections conconcerning the use of such endeavors,
in such a case, answered. Some Considerations to enforce this Direction
propounded and pressed.

3. Rule. 3.
THat if, upon such reflection, we find, or suspect our selves, wholly
diseffected, and unsuitable to this blessedness, we apply our selves to speedy,
incessant endeavors to get the temper of our Spirits changed, and fitted
thereto.

The state of the case speaks it self, that there is no sitting still here.
This is no condition, (Soul) to be rested in; unless thou art provided to
encounter the terrors of eternal darkness, and endure the torture of
everlasting burnings. Yet am I not unapprehensive how great a difficulty a
carnal heart will make of it, to bestir itself in order to any redress of so
deplorable a case. And how real a difficulty it is to say any thing, that will
be thought regardable to such a one. Our sad experience tells us, that our most
efficacious words are commonly wont to be entertained, as neglected puffs of
wind; our most convictive reasonings, and persuasive exhortations lost (yea,
and though they are managed too in the name of the great God) as upon the deaf,
and dead. Which is too often apt to tempt into that resolution, of speaking no
more in that name. And were it not that the dread of that great Majesty retains
us; how hard were it to forbear such expostulations; Lord, why are we commonly
sent upon so vain an errand? Why are we required to speak to them that will not
hear? and expose thy sacred truths and counsels, to the contempt of sinful
worms? to labor day by day in vain, and spend our strength for naught. Yea; we
cannot forbear to complain. None so labor in vain as we. Of all men, none so
generally, improsperous, and unsuccessful. Others are wont to see the fruit of
their labors, in proportion to the expense of strength in them. But our
strength is labor, and sorrow, (for the most part) without the return of a
joyful fruit. The Husbandman ploughs in hope, and sowes in hope, and is,
commonly, partaker of his hope; we are sent to plough, and sow among Rocks, and
Thorns, and in the high Way; how seldom fall we upon good ground! where we have
any increase. Yea Lord! how often are men the harder for all our labors with
them, the deader for all endeavors to quicken them. Our breath kills them,
whom thou sendest us to speak life to, and we often become to them a a deadly
savor. Sometime, when we think somewhat is done to purpose, our labor, all
returns, and we are to begin again; and when the duties we persuade to come
directly to cross men's interests, and carnal inclinations, they revolt and
start back, as if we were urging them upon flames, or the swords point, and
their own souls, and the eternal glory are regarded as a thing of naught. Then
Heaven and Hell become with them Phancies and Dreams, and all that we have said
to them false and fabulous. We are to the most, as men that mock, in our most
serious warnings, and counsels, and the word of the Lord is a reproach. We
sometimes fill our mouths with Arguments, and our hearts with Hope, and think,
sure, they will now yield, but they esteem our strongest reasonings (as
Leviathan does Iron, and Brass) but as Straw, and rotten Wood, and laugh at
Divine threatenings; as he does at the shaking of the Spear. Yea, and when we
have convinced them, yet we have done nothing; though we have got their
Judgments and Consciences on our side, and their own; their Lusts, only,
reluctate, and carry all. They will now have their way, though they perish. We
see them perishing under our very eye, and we cry to them (in thy name, O Lord)
to turn, and live, but they regard us not. For these things sometimes we weep
in secret, and our eyes trickle down with tears, yea we cry to thee, O Lord!
and thou hear us not; thy hand seems shortened, that it cannot save; it puts
not on strength as in the days of old. It has snatched souls by thousands, as
firebrands out of the fire, but now thou hidest and drawest it back. Who has
believed our report, to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed. Mean while even
the Devils instruments prosper more than we. And he that makes it his business
to tempt, and entice down souls to hell, succeeds more then we that would
allure them to heaven.

But we must speak, whether men will hear, or forbear, though it concerns us to
do it with fear and trembling. Oh how solemn a business is it to treat with
souls! and how much to be dreaded least they miscarry through our imprudence,
or neglect! I write with solicitude what shall become of these lines; with
what effect they will be read (if they fall into such hands) by them, whom they
most concern; Yea, and with some doubt, whether it were best to write on, or
forbear. Sometimes one would incline to think it, a merciful omission^ lest we
add to the account, and torment of many at last, but sense of duty toward
all; and hope of doing good to some must oversway. Considering therefore the
state of such souls I am now dealing with, I apprehend there may be
obstructions to the entertainment of the counsel here recommended, of two
sorts; partly in their minds, partly in their hearts, something of appearing
reason; but more of re^^ perverse will. That which I shall do in persuance of
it, will fall under two answerable heads, 1. A reply to certain doubts and
objections wherein to meet with the former. 2. The proposal of some
considerations, wherein to contend against the latter.


As to the first, It appears men are grown ingeniously wicked; and have learned
how to dispute themselves into hell; and to neglect what concerns their eternal
blessedness, with some color, and pretense of reason. It will therefore be
worth the while to discuss a little their more specious pretenses; and
consider their more obvious (supposeable) scruples, which will be found to
concern, either the possibility, lawfulness, advantage, or necessity of the
endeavors we persuade to.

Is it a possible undertaking you put us upon? Doubt. 1.
or is there any thing we can do in order to the change of our own hearts? We
find our selves altogether, undesirous of those things wherein you state
blessedness, and they are without savor to us. If therefore the notion you
give us of blessedness be right, all the work necessary to quallifie us for it,
is yet to be done; we yet remain wholly destitute of any principle of life,
that may dispose us to such relishes and enjoyments. If the new Creature, (as
you say) consist in a suitable temper of Spirit unto such a state as this, it is
as yet wholly unformed in us. And is there any thing to be done by a dead man
in order to life? Can a Child contribute any thing to its first formation? or a
Creature to its coming into being?

If you were serious in what you say; Reply.
methinks you should have little mind to play the Sophisters, and put fallacies
upon yourselves in a matter that concerns the life of your souls. And what else
are you now doing? For sure, otherwise one would think it were no such
difficulty to understood the difference between (the esse simpliciter) the mere
being of any thing, and (the esse tale) its being such, or such; by the
addition of somewhat afterward to that being, Though nothing could contribute
to its one being simply. Yet sure, when it is in being, it may contribute to
the bettering, or perfecting of it self (as even the unreasonable creatures
themselves do) And if it be a creature naturally capable of acting with design,
It may act designedly in order to its becoming so or so quallified, or the
attaining of somewhat yet wanting to its perfection. You cannot be thought so
ignorant, but that you know the new Creature is only an additional to your
former being. And though it be true, that it can do no more to its own
production, than the unconceived Child (as nothing can act before it is) does
it therefore follow, that your reasonable soul, in which it is to be formed,
cannot use Gods prescribed means in order to that blessed change? You cannot
act holily, as a Saint; but therefore can you not act rationally, as a man! I
appeal to your reason and conscience in some particulars.

Is it impossible to you to attend upon the dispensation of that Gospel, which
is Gods power unto salvation? the seal by which he impresses his image, the
glass through which his glory shines to the changing of souls into the same
likeness, are you not as able to go to Church, as to the Tavern; and to sit in
the assembly of Saints, as of Mockers?

Is it Imp^ssible to you to consult the written word of God, and thence* learn
what you must be and do in order to blessedness? will not your eyes serve you
to read the Bible as well as a Gazett or Play-book?

Is it impossible to inquire of your Minister, or an understanding Christian
neighbor concerning the way and terms of blessedness! Cannot your tongue
pronounce these words, what shall I do to be saved? as well as those, pray what
do you to think of the weather? or what news is there going! Yet further,

Is it impossibly to apply your thoughts to what you meet with suitable to your
case, in your attendance upon preaching, reading, or discourse? Have all such
words a barbaro^s sound, in your ear, can you not consider what sense is
carried under them? What they import and signify? can you not bethink yourself;
do the doctrines of God, and Christ, and the life to come, signify something
or nothing? or do they signify any thing worth the considering, or that it is
fit for me to take notice of?

And yet to proceed a little further with you,

I pray you once more demand of yourselves, and put your consciences clossely
to it; whether, when they have told you (as no doubt they will) that such
things deserve your consideration, it be impossible to you, to use your
considering power thus, and employ it even about these things. Do but make this
easy trial, and then say, whether it be impossible; See if you cannot select
one hour on purpose, wherein to it down by yourselves alone, with this
resolution. Well, I will now spend this hour in considering my eternal
concernments. When you have obtained so much of your self: set your thoughts on
work (you will find them voluble and unfixt, very apt to revolt, and fly off
from things you have no mind to) but use your authority with your self. Tell
your soul (or let it tell it self) these things concern thy life. At least,
taking this prepared matter along with thee (that ^hou may not have this
pretense thou know not what to think of) try if thou can not think of
these things, now actually suggested, and offered to thy thoughts; as namely,

Consider, that thou have a reasonable immortal soul, which, as it is liable to
eternal misery, ^o it is capable of eternal blessedness.

That this blessedness thou do understand to consist only in the vision of
the blessed God, in being made like to him, and in the satisfaction that ^s
thence to result and acrue to thee.

Consider (what thy very objection supposes) that thou find the temper of
thy Spirit to be altogether indisposed, and averse to such a blessedness. Is it
not so? is not this thy very case? feel now again thy heart, try is it not at
least coldly affected toward this blessed state?

Is it not then obvious to thee to consider that the temper of thy Spirit must
be changed, or thou art undone? That, inasmuch as thy blessedness lies in God,
this change mustly in the alteration of thy dispositions and the posture of thy
Spirit toward him. Further,

Can thou not consider the power, and fixedness of thy aversation from God?
and with how mighty a weight thy heart is carried, and held down from him? Try,
lift at thy heart, see if it will be raised Godward, and Heavenward? do
thou not find it is as if thou were lifting at a Mountain, that it lies as a
dead weight, and stirs not? ponder thy case in this respect. And then,

Is it not to be considered, that thy time is passing away apace? that if thou
let thy self alone, it is likely to be as bad with thee to morrow, as this day,
and as bad next day, as to morrow? And if thy time expire, and thou be snatched
away in this state, what will become of thee? And do thou not therefore, see
a necessity of considering what ever may be most moving, and most likely to
incline thy heart Godward, of pleading yet more lowdly, and importunately with
thy self?

And can thou not consider, and reason the matter thus? O my soul, what is the
reason that thou so drawest back, and hangest off from thy God? that thou art
so unwilling to be blessed in him? that thou should venture to run thy self
upon eternal perdition rather? what cause has he ever given thee to disaffect
him? what is the ground of thy so mighty prejudice? Has he ever done thee
hurt? Do thou think he will not accept a returning soul? that is to give the
lie to his Gospel, and it becomes not a perishing wretch so to provoke him in
whom is all its hope. Is the eternal glory an undesirable thing? or the
everlasting burnings tolerable? can thou find a way of being for ever blessed
without God, or whether he will or no? or is there a sufficient, present
pleasure in thy sinful distance from God, to outweigh Heaven and Hell? Dare
thou venture upon a resolution of giving God and Christ their last refusal? or
say, thou will never hearken to, or have to do with them more? or dare thou
venture to do, what thou dare not resolve? and act the wickedness thou can
not think of? scorn eternal Majesty and love? spurn and trample a bleeding
Savior.

Commune thus awhile with thy self, but if yet thou find thy heart relent
nothing. Thou can yet further consider, that it lies not in thy power to turn
thy own heart (or else how come thou thus to object?) And hence,

Can thou avoid considering, this is a distressed case? that thou art in
great straits; liable to perish (yea sure to do so, if thou continue in that
ill temper of Spirit) and wholly unable to help thy self. Surely thou can not
but see this to be a most distressed case.

I put it now to thy conscience; whether, being thus led on, thou can not go
thus far. See whether upon trial, thy Conscience give thee leave to say; I am
not able thus to do, or think: and be not here so foolish, as to separate the
action of the first cause, and the second, in judging thy ability: Thou may
say no, I cannot think a good thought without God; true, so I know thou can
not move thy finger without God; but my meaning in this appeal to thy
Conscience, is, whether upon trial, thou find not an assistance sufficient
to carry thee thus far?

Possibly thou will say yea; but what am I the better: I am only brought to
see my self in a dristressed, perishing condition, and can get no further.

I answer, it is well thou art got so far; if thou do indeed see thy self
perishing, and thy drowsy soul awake, into any sense of the sadness of thy
case. But I intend not thus to leave thee here. Therefore let me, furthermore,
demand of me. What course would thou take in any other distress, wherein
thou know not what to do to help thy self? would not such an exigencie, when
thou find thy self pinch't, and urged on every side, and every way is shut
up to thee, that thou art beset with calamities, and can no way turn thy self
to avoid them; ^udio v^l^us cum ad coe^u^ (...) nihil aliud quam Deum (...),
v^lgi naturalis (...) est s^rmo. Min. F^l. Oct^^.
would not such an exigencie force thee down on thy knees? and set thee a
crying to the God of mercy for relief and help? would not Nature it self prompt
to this. Is it not Natural to lift up* Hands, and Eyes to Heaven, when we know
not what to do?

Therefore having thus far reasoned with thee about thy considering power. Let
me demand of thee, if thou can not yet go somewhat further then considering?
that is, in short,

Is it impossible to thee to obey this dictate of nature? I mean, represent the
deplorable case of thy soul before him that made it? and crave his merciful
relief? Do not dispute the matter, thou can not but see this is a possible,
and a rational course as thy case is. Should not a people seek unto their God?
Fall down therefore low before him, prostrate thy self at the footstool of his
mercy-seat. Tell him thou understandest him to be the Father of Spirits, and
the Father of Merci^s, that thou have heard of his great mercy, and pity
toward the spirits of men, in their forlorn lapsed state. What a blessedness
he has designed for them, what means he has designed to bring them to it.
Tell him thou only need a temper of Spirit, suitable to this blessedness he
invites thee to. That thou can not master, and change thy sensual, earthly
heart, thou know he easily can; thou art come to implore his help, that his
blessed, and holy Spirit may descend, and breath upon thy stupid, dead Soul;
and may sweetly incline, and move it toward him, that it may eternally rest in
him; and that thou may not perish, after so much done, in order to thy
blessedness; only for want of a heart to entertain it. Tell him thou come
upon his gracious encouragement, having heard he is as ready to give his
Spirit, to them that ask him, as Parents bread to their craving Children,
rather then a stone. That it is for life thou beggest. That it is not so easy to
thee to think of perishing for ever, that thou can not desist, and give up
all thy hopes; that thou shall be in Hell shortly, if he hear and help thee not.

Lastly, If thus thou obtain any communication of that holy blessed Spirit, and
thou find it gently moving thy dead heart, let me once more demand of thee; Is
it impossible to forbear this or that external act of sin at this time, when
thou art tempted to it, sure thou can not say, it is impossible. What
necessitates thee to it? and then certainly thou may as well, ordinarily,
withold thy self from running into such customary sensualities, as tend to
grieve the Spirit, debauch Conscience, stupifie thy Soul, and hide God from
thee.

And if thou can do all this, do not fool thy slothful soul with as idle a
conceit, that thou have nothing to do, but to sit still, expecting till thou
drop into Hell.

2. But have I not reason to fear I shall but add sin to sin, Doubt 2.
in all this? and so increase the burden of guilt upon my own soul, and by
endeavoring to better my case, make it far worse.

Two things I consider, that suggest to me this fear. The Manner, End,
of the duties you put me upon, as they will be done by me in the case wherein
I apprehend my self yet to lie.

1. Manner. (As to the positive actions you advise to) I have heard the best
actions of an unregenerate person, are sins through the sinfulness of their
manner of doing them, though as to matter of the thing done, they be enjoined,
and good. And though it be true, that the regenerate cannot perform a sinless
duty, neither yet their persons, and works being covered over with the
righteousness of Christ, are looked upon as having no sin in them, which I
apprehend to be none of my case.

2. End. You put me upon these things in order to the attaining of blessedness:
and to do such things with intuition to a reward, is to be (as may be doubted)
unwarrantably, mercenary, and ^ervile.

1. First, Reply.
as to this former reason of your doubt, methinks the proposal of it answers
it. For as much as you acknowledge the matter of these actions to be good, and
duty (and plain it is they are Moral duties, of common, perpetual concernment
to all persons, and times) dare you decline, or dispute against your duty.

Sure, if we compare the evil of what is so substantially in itself, and what
is so circumstantially, only by the adherence of some undue modus, or manner;
it cannot be hard to determine which is the greater, and more dreadful evil. As
to the present case, should thou, when the great God sends abroad his
Proclamation of pardon and peace, refuse to attend it; to consider the contents
of it, and thy own case in reference thereto; and there upon to sue to him for
the life of thy own soul. Do thou not plainly see thy refusal must needs be
more provoking then thy defective performance. This speaks disability, but that
rebellion, and contempt Therefore as to that form of expression [that such acts
of unregenerate men are sins] that is a Catechrestical piece of Rhetoric which
being so understood, is harmless, but to use it in property of speech, and
thence to go about to make men believe that it is a sin to do their duty, is
void both of truth and sense, and full of danger unto the souls of men.
. Besides, do thou not see that thy objection lies as much against every
other action of thy life; the wise man tells us, the ploughing of the wicked is
sin, (i^ that be literally to be understood. Prove. 21. 4.
) And what would thou therefore sit still and do nothing; Then how soon
would that Idleness draw on gross wickedness? and would not that be a dreadful
confutation of thy self, if thou who did pretend a scruple, that thou
might not pray, read, hear, meditate, shall not scruple to play the glutton,
the drunkard, the wanton, and indulge thy self in all riot, and excess. Yea, if
thou do not break out into such exorbitances, would any one think him serious,
that should say it were against his Conscience to be working out his salvation,
and striving to enter in at the strait gate. Seeking first the Kingdom of God,
etc. would not this sound strangely? and especially that, in the mean time, it
should never be against his Conscience, to trifle away his time, and live in
perpetual neglects of God, in persevering Atheism, Infidelity, Hardness of
heart, never regretted or striving against; as if these were more innocent?

And what thou say of the different case of the regenerate, is impertinent;
for as to this matter, the case is not different, they that taken themselves to
be such, must not think that by their supposed interests in the righteousness
of Christ, their real sins cease to be such, they only become pardoned sins;
and shall they therefore sin more boldly then other men, because they are surer
of pardon?

Secondly. As to the other Ground of this Doubt, there can only be a fear of
sinning, upon this account, to them, that make more sins and duties then God
has made. The doubt supposes Religion inconsistent with Humanity, and that God
were about to raze out of the nature of man, one of the most radical, and
fundamental Laws written there, A desire of blessedness. And supposes it,
against the express scope, and tenor of his whole Gospel-revelation. For what
does that design, but to bring men to blessedness? and how is it a means to
compass that design, but as it tends to engage men's spirits to design it too?
unless we would imagine they should go to heaven blindfold; or be rolled
thither as stones, that know not whether they are moved; in which case the
Gospel, that reveals the eternal glory, and the way to it, were an useless
thing. If so express words had not been in the Bible, as that Moses had respect
to the recompense of reward; yea, that our Lord Jesus himself for the joy set
before him, endured the Cross, etc. this had been a little more colorable, or
more modest.

And what, do not all men in all the ordinary actions of their lives act,
allowable enough, with intuition to much lower ends? even those particular
ends, which the works of their several callings tend to, else they should act
as bruites in every thing they do. And would such a one scruple, if he were
pining for want of bread, to beg, or labor for it, for this end, to be
relieved. It Is the mistaking of the notion of Heaven, that has also an
ingrediency into this doubt (if it be really a doubt) what is it a low thing to
be filled with the Divine fullness? to have his Glory replenishing our souls? to
be perfectly freed from sin? in every thing conformed unto this holy nature and
will? That our minding our interest in this, or any affairs, should be the
principal thing with us, is not to be thought; our Supreme end must be the same
with his, who made all things for himself, of whom, through whom, and to whom
all things are, that he alone might have the glory. But subordinates need not
quarrel. A lower end does not exclude, the higher but serves it; and is, as to
it, a means. God is our end, as he is to glorified, and enjoyed by us: our
glorifying him is but the agnition of his glory; which we do most in beholding,
and partaking it, which is therefore in direct subordination thereto.

3. But it may further be doubted, Doubt. 3.
what if it be acknowledged that these are both things possible and lawful; yet
to what purpose will it be to attempt any thing in this kind? O! what assurance
have I of success? is there any word of promise for the encouragement of one in
my case? or is God under any obligation to reward the endeavors of nature with
special grace? wherefore, when I have done all I can, he may withold his
influence, and then I am but where I were, and may perish notwithstanding.

And suppose thou perish notwithstanding. Reply.
Do but yet consult a little with thy own thoughts, which is more tolerable and
easy to them to perish, as not attaining what thy fainter struglings could not
reach; or for the most direct, wilful rebellion; doing wickedly as thou
could? Or who shall have, think thou, the more fearful condemnation. He
that shall truly say when his Master comes to judgment; I never had indeed
(Lord) an heart so fully changed, and turned to thee, as should denote me to be
the subject of thy saving, pardoning mercy; but thou know (who know all
things) I long (and with some earnestness) did endeavor it. Thou have been
privy to my secret desires, and moanes, to the weak strivings of a listless,
distempered spirit, not pleased with it self; aiming at a better temper toward
thee. I neglected not thy prescribed means, only that grace which I could not
challenge thou wast pleased not to give; thou did require what I must confess
my self to have owed thee; thou did withold only what thou owedst me not;
therefore must I yield my self a convicted guilty wretch, and have nothing to
say why thy sentence should not pass. Or he that shall as truly hear from the
mouth of his Judge; Sinner, thou wast often forewarned of this approaching day,
and called upon to provide for it. Thou had Precept, upon Precept, and Line,
upon Line. The counsels of life, and peace were, with frequent importunity
pressed upon thee, but thou rejectedst all with proud contempt, did despise,
with the same profane scorn, the offers, commands, and threats of him that made
thee; hardenest thy heart to the most obstinate rebellion against his known
Laws, did all the wickedness to which thy heart prompted thee, without
restraint, declinedst every thing of duty which his Authority, and the exigency
of thy own case did oblige thee to; did avoid, as much as thou could, to
hear or know any thing of my will, could not find one serious considering
hour in ^ whole life time, to bethink thy self wha^ was likely to become of
thee, when thy place on earth should know thee no more. Thou might know thou
wast at my mercy, thy breath in my hand, and that I could easily have cut thee
off, any moment of that large space of time, my patience allowed thee in the
world. Yet thou never thought it worthy the while to sue to me for thy life.
Destruction from the Lord was never a terror to thee. Thou would never be
brought upon thy knees, I had none of thy addresses, never did thou sigh out
a serious request for mercy: Thy soul was not worth so much in thy account. Thy
blood, wretch be upon thy guilty head; Depart accursed into everlasting flames,
etc.

Come now, use thy reason a while; employ a few sober thoughts about this
matter; remember, thou will have a long eternity, wherein to recognize the
passages of thy life, and the state of thy case in the last judgment. Were it
supposeable, that one who had done as the former, should be left finally
destitute of Divine Grace, and perish. Yet, in which of these cases would
thou choose to be found at last?

But why yet should thou imagine so sad an issue as that after thine utmost
endeavors* grace should be withheld, and leave thee to perish; because God
has not bound himself by promise to thee? what promise have the Ravens to be
heard when they cry? But thou art a sinner. True, otherwise thou were not
without promise; the promises of the first Covenant would, at least, belong to
thee. Yet experience tells the world his unpromised mercies freely flow every
where; The whole earth is full of his goodness; yea, but his special grace is
conveyed by promise only; and that only through Christ; and how can it be
communicated [thr^ugh him] to any but those that are in him? What then is the
first inbeing in Christ no special grace? or is there any being in him before
the first, that should be the ground of that graci^us communication? things are
plain enough, if we make them not intricate, or entangle our selves by foolish
subtilties. God promises sinners indefinitely pardon, and eternal life for the
sake of Christ, on condition that they believe on him. He gives of his good
pleasure that grace whereby he draws any to Christ, without promise directly
made to them, whether absolute, or conditional; though he give it for the sake
of Christ also. His discovery of his purpose to give such grace to some*
indifinitely, amounts not to a promise claimable by any, for if it be said to
be an absolute promise, to particular persons, who are they? whose duty is it
to believe it made to him? If conditional, what are the conditions upon which
the first grace is certainly promised? who can be able to assign them?

But poor soul! thou need'st not stay to puzzle thy self about this matter. God
binds himself to do what he promises; but has he any where bound himself to do
no more? Did he promise thee thy being; or that thou should live to this
day? did he promise thee the bread that sustains thee, the daily comforts of
thy life? Yea, (what is nearer the present purpose) did he promise thee a
station under the Gospel? or that thou should ever hear the name of Christ?
if ever his Spirit have in any degree moved upon thy heart, inclined thee at
all seriously to consider thy eternal concernments, did he beforehand make thee
any promise of that?

A promise would give thee a full certainty of the issue, if it were absolute
out of hand? if conditional, as soon as thou find the condition performed.
But what, can thou act upon no lower rate then a foregoing certainty, a
preassurance of the event?

My friend, consider a little, (what thou can not but know already) that it is
HOPE (built with those that are rational, upon rational probabilities, with
many, oftentimes, upon none at all) is the great Engine that moves the World,
that keeps all sorts of men in action. Does the Husbandman foreknow when he
Ploughs, and Sows; that the Crop will answer his cost, and pains. Does the
Merchant foreknow, when he Imbarques his goods, he shall have a safe, and
gainful return? Do thou foreknow, when thou eatest, it shall refresh thee?
when thou take Physic, that it shall recover thy health? and save thy life?
Yea further, can the c^^tous man pretend a promise, that his unjust practices
shall enrich him? the malicious, that he shall prosper in his design of
revenge? the ambitions, that he shall be great and honorable? the voluptuous,
that his pleasures shall be always unmixt with gall, and wormwood? Can any say,
they ever had a promise to ascertain them that profaneness and sensuality would
bring them to Heaven? that an ungodly dissolute life would end in blessedness?
Here the Lord knows men can be confident, and active enough without a promise,
and against many an express threatening. Will thou not upon the hope thou have
before thee, do as much for thy soul, for eternal blessedness, as men do for
uncertain riches, short pleasures, an airie soon-blasted name? yea as much as
men desperately do to damn themselves, and purchase their own swift destruction.

Or can thou pretend, though thou have no preassuming promise, thou have no
hope? Is it nothing to have heard so much of Gods gracious Nature? Is it
suitable to the reports, and discoveries he has made of himself, to let a poor
wretch perish at his feet, that lies prostrate there expecting his mercy?
Did thou ever hear he was so little a lover of souls? Do his giving his Son,
his earnest, unwearied strivings with sinners, his long patience, the clear
beams of Gospel Light, the amiable appearances of his Grace, give gro^nd for no
better, no kinder thoughts of him? yea, has he not expressly styled himself the
God hearing prayers, taken a name on purpose to encourage all flesh to come to
him. Will thou dare then to adopt those profane words, Psalm. 65. 2.
what profit is it to pray to him? Job 21. 15.
and say, it is better sit still, resolving to perish, then address to him, or
seek his favor, because he has not by promise assured thee of the issue, and
that, if he suspends his grace, all thou do, will be in vain?

How would thou judge of the like resolution? If the Husbandman should say,
when I have spent my pains, and cost in breaking up, and preparing the Earth,
and casting in my Seed; if the Sun shine not, and the rain fall not in season;
if the influences of Heaven be suspended, if God withhold his blessing: or if
an evading enemy anticipate my Harvest; all I do, and expend, is to no purpose;
and God has not ascertained me of the contrary, by express promise; it is as
good therefore sit still. Censure, and answer him, and thy self both together.

But thou will yet, 4. Doubt.
it may be, say, that though all this may be possibly true; yet thou can not,
all this while, be convinced of any need, so earnestly to ^u^ie thy self about
this affair. For God is wont to surprise soul by preventing acts of Grace, to
be found of them that sought him not, to break in by an irristible power, which
he least thought of. And to goal to anticipate his grace, were to detract from
the (...), and so from the glory of it.

But art thou not in all this afraid of charging God foolishly? Reply.
When the merciful God, in compassion to the souls o^ men, has given his
Gospel, constituted, and settled a standing Office to be perpetuated through
all ages for the publication of it; Invited the world therein to a treaty with
him, touching the concernments of their eternal peace; required so strictly
their attendance to, and most serious consideration of his proposals, and
offers; encouraged, and commanded their addresses to him, set up a Throne of
Grace on purpose, will thou dare to say all this is needless?

When God speaks to thee, is it needless for thee to hear him? or regard what
he says? or when he commannds thee to pour forth thy soul to him, will thou
say, it is a needless thing?

Do thou not plainly see, that the peculiar, appropriate aptitude of the
things pressed upon thee, Necessitas medii.
speaks them necessary as means to their designed end; whence also they are
sitly called, means of Grace? Is not the Word of God the Immortal Seed? 1 Pet.
1. 23.
are not Souls begotten by that Word to be the first fruits of his creatures?
Jam. 1* 18.
Is it not the Type, Romans 6. 17.
the Mould, or Print, by which Divine Impressions are put upon the Soul. Joh.
17. 17.
The Instrument by which he sanctifies. Are not the exceeding great and
precious promises the Ve^icula, 2 Pet. 1.
the conveighances of the Divine Nature. And what can be the means to mollify,
and melt the obdurate heart of a sinner, to assuage its enmity, to overcome it
into the love of God, to transform it into his image, but the Gospel-discovery
of Gods own gracious, and holy nature? and can it operate to this purpose,
without being heard, or read, and understood, and considered, and taken to
heart? Do but compare this means God works by, with the Subject to be wrought
upon, and the Effect to be wrought, and nothing can be conceived more adequate,
and sitly corresponding.

But in as much as there has been an enmity between God and sinners, and that
therefore the whole entire means of reconciliation must be a Treaty. And that a
Treaty cannot be managed, or conceived without mutual interlocuti^n; therefore
must the sinner have a way of expressing its own sense to God; as well as he
speaks his mind to it; which shows the necessity of Pr^yer too; and therefore,
because the Peace begins on his part (though the War began on ours) he calls
upon sinners to open themselves to him; Is^. 1 Chap. 55
Come now, let us reason together* he invites and addresses; Seek the Lord,
while he may be f^und, and call upon him, while he is nigh, etc. And does not
the natural relation it self between the Creator and a Creature, require this
besides the exigencie of our present case? Every Creature is a supplicant; Its
necessary dependence, is a natural Prayer. The eyes of all things look up, etc.
It Is the proper glory of a Deity to be depended on, and addressed to. (...)
Should not a people seek unto their God? it is an appeal to reason, is it not a
congruous thing!

Further, (...)
do thou not know thy Makers will made kn^^^, in^ers upon thee a necessity
of obeying; unless thou think the ^re^ch between God and thee, is better to be
healed by Rebellion: And that the only way to expiate wickedness, were to
continue, and multiply them. Is it a needless thing to comply with the will of
him that gave thee breath and being? and whose power is so absolute over thee,
as to all thy concernments, both of time, and eternity?

Again, while thou pretendest these things are needless; come now, speak out
freely; what are the more necessary affairs wherein thou art so deeply engaged,
that thou can not suffer a diversion? what is the service, and gratification
of thy flesh and sense so important a business? that thou can be at no
leisure for that more needless work of saving thy soul? where is thy reason and
thy modesty; Do thou mind none other from day to day, but necessary affairs?
Do thou use when thou art tempted to vain dalliances, empty discourses,
intemperate indulgence to thy appetite, so to answer the temptation. It is not
necessary? or art thou so destitute of all Conscience, and shame, to think it
unnecessary to work out thy salvation, to strive to enter in at the strait gate
that leads to life? but most indispensably necessary to be very critically
curious, about what thou shall eat, and drink, and put on; and how to spend thy
time with greatest ease and pleasure to thy flesh, that it may not have the
least cause to complain it is neglected?

Thy pretense, That God is wont to be found of them that sought him not; Isa.
65. 1.
to the purpose thou intendest it, is a most ignorant, or malicious abuse of
Scripture. The Prophet is in that Text foretelling the calling of the Gentiles;
who, while they remained such, did not ('it is true) enquire after God, but then
he expressly first tells us (personating God) I am sought of them that asked not
for me (that is after the Gospel came among them) and then it is added I am
found (upon this seeking, plainly) of (...) that sought me not (i. e. who once
in their former darkness, before I revealed my self in the Gospel Dispensation,
to them that sought me not) q. d. I am now sought of a people, that lately
sought me not, nor asked after me, and I am found of them. But what is this to
thy case? whom God has been in Gospel earnestly inviting to seek after him,
and thou all this while refusest to comply with the invitation?

And suppose thou hear of some rare instances of persons, suddenly snatched by
the hand of Grace, out of the midst of their wickedness, as firebrarnds out of
the fire. Is it therefore the safest course to go on in a manifest rebellion
against God, till possibly he may do so by thee also? how many thousand may
have dropped into Hell since thou heard'st of such an instance (as a worthy
person speaks to that purpose Mr. Baxter.
) If thou have heard of one Elijah fed by Ravens, and of some thousands by our
Saviors miracles, can thou thence plead a repeal of that law to the world;
they that will not labor, shall not eat; or is it a safer or wiser course to
wait till food drop into thy mouth from Heaven, then to use a prudent care for
the maintenance of thy life? If thou say thou hear but of few that are
wrought upon in this way, of their own foregoing expectation and endeavor;
Remember (and let the thought of ^t startle thee) that there are but few that
are ^aved. And therefore are so few wrought upon in this way, because so few
will be persuaded to it. But can thou say (though God has not bound himself
to the mere natural endeavors of his creature neither) that ever any took this
course, and persisted with faithful diligence, but they suceeded in it?

What thou talkest of the freeness of Gods grace, looks like an hypocritical
pretense. Is there no way to honor his grace, but by affronting his
authourity? but to sin, that grace may abound? Sure grace will be better
pleased by obedience, than by such sacrifice. For a miserable perishing wretch
to use Gods means to help it self, does that look like merit? Is the Beggar
afraid thou should interpret his coming to thy door, and seeking thy alms,
to signify, as if he thought he had deserved them? I hope thou will
acknowledge thy self less then the least of all Gods mercies, and that thou
can not deserve from him a morsel of bread, may thou not therefore, in thy
necessity, labor for thy living? least thou should entrench upon the
freeness of Divine bounty? With as much wisdom, and reason, might thou
decline the use of all other means, to preserve thy life (which thou must owe
always to free mercy) to eat when thou art hungry, to take physic when thou
art sick, least thou should intimate thy self to have merited the strength,
and health sought thereby.

Nor can I think of any rational pretense that can more plausibly be insisted
on, then these that have been thus briefly discust. And it must needs be
difficult to bring any appearance of reason for the patronage of so ill a
cause, as the careless giving up of a man's soul to perish eternally, that is
visibly capable of eternal blessedness. And certainly were we once apprehensive
of the case, the attempt of disputing a man into such a resolution, would
appear much more ridiculous, then, if one should gravely urge arguments to all
the neighborhood, to persuade them to burn their houses, to put out their
eyes, to kill their children, or cut their own Throats. And sure, let all
imaginable pretenses be debated to the uttermost, and it will appear that
nothing withholds men from putting forth all their might in the endeavor of
getting a Spirit Suitable to this blessedness, but an obstinately perverse, and
sluggish heart, dispoil'd, and naked of all show of reason, and excuse. And
though that be a hard task to reason against mere will, yet that being the way
to make men willing: and the latter part of the work proposed, in pursuance of
this direction: I shall recommend only some such considerations as the Text it
self will suggest, for the stirring up, and persuading of slothful reluctant
hearts (choosing those as the most proper limits, and not being willing to be
infinite, herein, as amidst so great a variety of considerations to that
purpose, one might.)

That, in general, which I shall propose, shall be only the misery of the
unrighteous? whereof we may take a view in the opposite blessedness here
described. Poena Damni. Sensus.



The contradictories whereto will afford a Negative. The Contraries apositive
description of this misery. So that each consideration will be double, which I
shall now (rather glance at then) insist upon.

1. Consider then; if thou be found at last blessed face of God? There will be
those that shall behold that face in righteousness, so shall not thou. The
wicked is driven away in his wickedness, with a never more see my face.

Again, what amazing Visions will thou have? what gashly, frightful objects to
converse with, amidst those horrors of eternal darkness: when the Devil, and
his Angels shall be thy everlasting associates! What direful images shall those
accursed, enraged Spirits, and thy own fruitful parturient imagination for ever
entertain thee with, and present to thy view?

2. Is it a small thing with thee, to be destitute of all those inherent
excellencies, which the perfected Image of God, whereof thou wast capable,
comprehends? view them over in that (too defective) account, some of the former
pages gave thee of them. Thou art none of those bright stars, those sons of the
morning, those blessed glorified Spirits: Thou might have been. But

Consider, what art thou? what shall thou for ever be? what image or likeness
shall thou bear; alas! poor wretch thou art now a Fiend! conformed to thy
hellish partners; thou bear their accursed likeness. Death is now finished
in thee, and as thou sowedst to the flesh, thou reapest corruption. Thou art
become a loathsome Carcass; the Worms that never die, abound in thy putrified,
filthy soul. Thou have an Hell in thee. Thy venomous lusts are now mature, are
in their full grown state. If a world of iniquity, a fullness of deadly poison,
tempered by Hell fire, is here sometimes, to be found in a little member, Jam.
3. 6.
what will there then be in all thy parts and powers;

3. Consider, how blessed a satisfaction do thou lose? how pleasant, and
delightful a rest, arising both from the sight of so much glory, and so
peaceful a temper, and constitution of Spirit? Here thou might have enjoyed
an eternal undisturbed rest.

But for rest, and satisfaction thou have vexation; and endless torment, both
by what thou beholdest, and what thou feel within thee. Thy dreadful visions
will not let thee rest; but the chief matter of thy disquiet, and torment, is
in the very temper, and composition of thy soul. Thy horrid lusts are fuller of
poisonous energie, and are destitute of their wonted objects, whence they turn
all their power, and fury upon thy miserable self. Thy enraged passions would
fly in the face of God, but they spend themselves in tormenting the soul that
bred them. Thy curses, and blasphemies, the envenomed Darts, pointed at Heaven,
are reverberated, and driven back into thy own heart. And therefore,

4. Consider what awaking have thou? Thou awakest not into the mild, and
cheerful light of that blessed day, wherein the Saints of the most High, hold
their solemn, joyful triumph.

But thou awakest into that great and terrible day of the Lord (do thou
desire it for what end is it to thee?) a day of darkness, and not light; a
gloomy, and a stormy day. The day of thy birth is not a more hateful* then this
is a dreadful day. Thou awakest, and art beset with terrors, presently
apprehended, and dragged before thy glorious, severe Judge: and thence into
eternal torments. O happy thou, might thou never awake, might the grave
conceal, and its more silent darkness cover thee for ever. But since thou must
awake, then, how much more happy were thou, if thou would suffer thy self to
be awakened now. What, to lose, and endure so much, because thou will not now a
little bestir thy self, and look about thee? Sure thy Conscience tells thee,
thou art urged but to what is possible, and lawful, and hopeful, and necessary,
methinks, if thou be a man, and not a stone; if thou have a reasonable Soul
about thee, thou shall presently fall to work, and rather spend thy days in
serious thoughts, and prayers, and tears, than run the hazard of losing
sotranscendent a glory, and of suffering misery, which, as now thou art little
able to conceive, thou will then be less able to endure.

CHAP. XVIII.
Rule 4. Directing to the endeavor of a gradual improvement in such a
disposedness of Spirit (as shall be found in any measure already attained)
toward this blessedness. That it is blessedness begun which disposes to the
Consummate state of it. That we are therefore to endeavor the daily increase
of our present knowledge of God, conformity to him, and the satisfiednesse of
our spirits therein.

THat when we find our selves in any disposition toward this blessedness; 4.
Rule.
we endeavor a gradual improvement therein; to get the habitual temper of our
spirits made daily more suitable to it.

We must still remember, we have not yet attained, and must therefore continue
pressing forward to this mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. Phil. 3. 14.
That prize (not price, (...).
as we commonly misread it in our Bibles) of which the Apostle here speaks is
(as may be seen by looking back to v. 8, 9, etc.) the same with the blessedness
in the Text. Such a knowledge of Christ, as should infer at last his
participation with him in his state of glory, or of the resurrection of the
dead. This is the ultimate term, the scope or end, of that high calling of God
in Christ, 1* Pet. 5 10.
so it is also stated elsewhere, who has called us into his eternal glory by
Christ Jesus.

Now we should therefore frequently recount how far short we are of this glory,
and stir up our souls to more vigorous endeavors in order to it.

Our suitableness to this blessedness stands in our having the elements and
first principles of it in us; it is glory only that fits for glory, some
previous sights, and impressions of it, and a pleasant complacential relish
thereof, that frame and attemper us, by degrees, to the full consummate state
of it. This is that therefore we must endeavor.

A growing Knowledge of God, Conformity to him, and Satisfiedness of Spirit
therein.
What we expect should be one day perfect, we must labor may be, in the mean
time, always growing.

1. Our knowledge of God. The knowledge of him I here principally intend is not
notional, and speculative, but (which is more ingredient to our blessedness,
both inchoate and perfect) that of converse, that familiar knowledge, which we
usually express by the name of acquaintance. See that this knowledge of him be
increased daily; Let us now use our selves much with God: Our knowledge of him
must aim at conformity to him, and how powerful a thing is converse in order
hereto? How insensibly is it wont to transform men, and mould anew their
Spirits, Language, Garb, Deportment? To be removed from the solitude, or
rudeness of the Country, to a City, or University; What an alteration does it
make? How is such a person divested by degrees of his rusticitio of his more
uncomely and agrest manners? Objects we converse with beget their Image upon
us. Jer. 2. 5.
They walked after vanity, and became vain, says Jeremiah. Prove. 13* 20.
And Solomon, He that walks with the wise shall be wise. Walking is an usual
expression of converse. So to converse with the holy, is the way to be holy,
with heaven the way to be heavenly, with God the way to be God-like.

Let us therefore make this our present business much to acquaint our selves
with God. We count upon seeing him face to face, of being always in his
presence, beholding his glory that speaks very intimate acquaintance indeed.
How shall we reach that pitch? what to live now as strangers to him? Is that
the way? Prove. 4. 18.
The path of the righteous is as the shining light, that shines more and more
unto perfect day. The text shows us the righteous man's end, to behold the glory
of Gods face, etc. it is easy to apprehend, then his way must needs have in it
a growing brightness, as he comes still nearer this end. Every nearer approach
to a lucid thing infers (to us) an increase of light from it. We should
therefore be following on to know the Lord; and we shall see his going forth
will ^e before us as the morning. Hos. 6. 3.
He will be still visiting us with renewed increasing light, (for such is
morning light, fresh and growing light) and ere long it will be perfect da^.
Labor we to improve our knowledge of God to such a degree of acquaintance, as
our present state can admit of. To be as inward with him as we can, to
familiarzie our selves to him. His Gospel aims at this to make those that were
afar off nigh. Far-distant objects we can have no distinct view of. He can give
us little account of a person that has only seen him afar off; so God beholds
the proud afar off. That is, he will have no acquaintance with them. Whereas
with the humble he will be familiar, Isa. 57. 1^.
he will dwell, (as in a family) with them. So the ungodly behold God till he
brings them in, and make them nigh: then they are no longer strangers but of
his family, and household, now thoroughly acquainted. Several notes there are of
a through acquaintance which we should endeavor may concur, in our
acquaintance with God, in that analogy which the case will bear.

To know his nature, or (as we would speak of a man) what will please and
displease him, so as to be able in the whole course of our daily conversation
to approve our selves to him. To have the skill so to manage our conversation,
as to continue a correspondence, not interrupted by an^ of our offensive
unpleasing demeanours: To walk worthy of God unto all well-pleasing. It
concerns us most to study and endeavor this practical knowledge of the nature
of God; what trust, and love, and fear, and purity, etc. his faithfulness, and
greatness, his goodness, and holiness, etc. do challenge from us; What may in
our daily walking be ag^eeable, what repugnant to the several Attributes of his
being.

To know his secrets; to be as it were of the Cabinet-councel Psalm. 25 14. (...)
(the word used by the Psalmist has a peculiar significancy to that purpose;
to signify, not only counsel, but a council, or the concessus of persons that
consult together.) This is his gracious vouchsafement, to humble, reverential
souls. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; such acquaintance
with him is to be sought to know the (communicable) secrets both of his mind
and heart. Of his mind, his truths, Gospel-mysteries, that were kept secret
from ages, and generations. We have the mind of Christ. This is great
inwardness of his heart. His love his good will, his kind bosome-thoughts
toward our souls.

To know his methods, and the course of his dispensations toward the World,
his Church, and specially our own Spirits. This is great knowledge of God, to
have the skill to trace his footsteps, and observe by comparing times with
times, that such a course he more usually holds; and accordingly, with great
probability, collect, from what we have seen, and observed, what we may expect.
What order and succession there is of storms of wrath, to clouds of sin, and
again of peaceful, lucid intervals, when such storms have inferred penitential
tears. In what exigences, and distresses humble mourners may expect Gods
visits, and consolations. To recount in how great extremities, former
experience has taught us not to despair, and from such experiences still to
argue our selves into fresh reviving hopes when the state of things (whether
public or private, outward or spiritual) seems forlorn.

To know the proper seasons of address to him; and how to behave our selves
most acceptably in his presence. In what dispositions and postures of Spirit,
we are fittest for his converse, so as to be able to come to him in a good
hour, in a time when he may be found. Psalm. 32. 6.


To know his voice: This discovers acquaintance. Job 14 35.
The ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meats. Gods righteous ones that are
filled with the fruits of righteousness, do proportionably abound in knowledge
and in all sense. Phil. 1. 9.
They have quick, (...).
naked, unvitiated senses to discern between good and evil; Heb. 5. ^l.
Yea and can have the suffrage of several senses concerning the same Object.
Heb. 6.
They have a kind of taste in their ear. They taste the good word of God even
in his previous workings on them. Being-born they are intimated to have tasted
in the word how gracious the Lord is. As they grow up thereby they have still a
more judicious sense, 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3.
and can more certainly distinguish, when God speaks to them, John 10.
and when a stranger goes about to counterfeit his voice. They can tell, at
first hearing, what is grateful, and nutritive, what offensive, and hurtful to
the divine life: what is harmonious and agreeable, what dissonant to the Gospel
already receiv^d, so that an Angel from heaven must expect no welcome if he
bring another.

To know his inward in^ti^ns and impulses; When his hand touches our hearts,
to be able to say, this is the ^i^ge of God, there is something divine in this
touch. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, Cant. 5. 3.
and my bowels were moved. This speaks acquaintance when the soul can say, I
know his very touch, the least impression from him, I can distinguish it from
thousands of objects that daily beat upon my heart.

To understand his looks; So we apprehend God proportionably more clearly as
the Idea we have of a person is more distinct that we have of him by the sight
of his picture or face through a glass, beyond that which we have by hearing a
reported description of him though by himself unseen. This is acquaintance with
God.
to know the meaning of his aspects, and glances, of the various casts, as it
were of his eye. Such things intimate friends can, in a sort, talk by with one
another; I will guide thee by mine eye; that implies an intelligent teachable
subject. We have now no full-ey'd appearances of God; he shows himself, looks
in upon us through the lattess, through a vail, or shadow, or a glass, That
measure of acquaintance with him to be able to discern and own him in his
appearances, is a great participation of heaven. Utter unacquaintance with God
is expressed by the denial of these two, ye have neither heard his voice, nor
seen his shape, John 5.

Finally which brings us home to the text, to keep our eye intentively fixed on
him not to understand his looks only as before but to return our own intimate
acquaintance; when such friends meet, it is much expressed, and improved by the
eye, by a reciprocation of glances, or (which speaks more inwardness) more
fixed views; when their eyes do even feed and feast upon each other. This we
should endeavor to be as in a continual interview with God.

How frequent mention have we of the fixed posture of his eye toward Saints.
To this man will I look; I have found out, q. d. that which shall be ever the
delight of mine eye, do not divert me. Toward him I will look. What he speaks
of the material Temple is ultimately to be referred to that which is typified,
his Church, 1 King. 9. 3^
his Saints, united with his Christ, mine eyes and my heart shall be there
perpetually, Job 6. 37.
and elsewhere, Psalm. 33. 18* 34. 15.
He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, He cannot (admirable grace)
allow himself to look off, to turn aside his eye. And he seems impatient of the
aversion of theirs, Cant.
Let me see thy countenance (says he) for it is comely.

Is it not much more reasonable it should be thus with us toward him? that we
should be more delighted to behold real comeliness than he with what is so
only by his gracious vouchsafement and estimation? how careful should we be
that our eye may at every turn meet his? that he never look toward us, and
find it in the ends of the earth, carelessly wandering from him? Psalm. 16. 8
How well does it become us to set the Lord always before us? Psalm. 25.
to have our eye ever toward the Lord?

This you see is the initial leading thing in this blessedness of heaven. So it
must have also a prime ingrediency into our heaven on earth. It is a part of
celestial blessedness; but it is not peculiar to it. The present blessedness
the righteous enjoy here is a participation of heaven. It has something in it
of every thing that is ingredient into that perfect blessedness. Our present
knowledge of God is often expressed by vision, or sight, as we have had occasion
to observe in many passages of Scripture. He has given us such a visive power
and made it connatural to that heavenly creature begotten of him in all the
true subjects of this blessedness. 1 John 5. 19, 20.
We know that we are of God, and presently it follows, he has g^ven us an
understanding to know him, that is true. This new man is not born blind. The
blessed God himself is become liable to the view of his regenerate intellectual
eye, clarified and filled with vigor and Spirit from himself. He therefore
that has made (that has new formed) this eye shall not he be seen by it?
shall not we turn it upon him? Why do we not more frequently bless our eye,
with that sight? This Object (though of so high excellency and glory) will not
hurt but perfect, and strengthen it. They are refreshing vital beams that issue
from it. Sure we have no excuse that we eye God so little, i. e. that we mind
him no more. Why have we so few thoughts of him in a day? What, to let so much
time pass, and not spare him a look? a thought? Do we intend to employ our
selves on eternity in the visions of God, and is our present aversion from him,
and intention upon vanity, our best preparation thereto? This loudly calls for
redress. Shall God be waiting all the day as on purpose to catch our eye? to
intercept a look? and we studiously decline him, and still look another way, as
of choice? and what is it but choice? can we pretend a necessity to forget him
all the day? How cheap is the expense of a look? how little would it cost us,
and yet how much of duty might it express, how much of comfort and joy might it
bring into us?

How great is our offense and loss that we live not in such more constant views
of God? Herein we sin and suffer both at once (things both very unsuitable to
heaven.) Mindfulness of God is the living Spring of all holy and pleasant
affections and deportments toward him; sets all the wheels agoing, makes the
soul as the Chariots of Aminadab. These wheels have their eyes also, are guided
by a mind, by an intellectual principle. Knowing intelligent beings (as we also
are by participation, and according to our measure) so act mutually toward one
another. We cannot move toward God but with an open eye seeing him, and our
way toward him. If we close our eyes, we stand still, or blindly run another
course, we know not whither. All sin is darkness, whether it be neglect of
good, or doing of evil. Its way is a way of darkness; as a course of holy
motion is walking in the light. Our shutting our eyes toward God creates that
darkness; surrounds us with a darkness comprehensive of all sin. Now is every
thing of enjoined duty waved, and any evil done, that sinful nature prompts us
to. Well might it be said, John 3. 11.
He that sins has not seen God. When we have made our selves this darkness,
we fall of course under Satan's Empire, and are presently within his Dominions.
He is the Prince of darkness; and can rule us now at his will. Perishing lost
souls are such as in them the God of this world has blinded their minds. -- To
open their eyes and turn them from darkness to light, is to turn them also from
the power of Satan unto God. What an hell of wickedness are we brought into in
the twinkling of an eye! We are without God* in the world, as if a man wink,
though at noonday, he has as it were put out the Sun, it is with him as if
there were no such thing. When we have banished God out of our sight, and
forgotten him, it is with us as if there were no God. If such a state grow
habitual to us, (as we know every sinful aversion of our eye from God tends
thereto) what wickedness is there that will not lurk in this darkness? How
often in Scripture is forgetting God used as a character, yea as paraphrase, a
full (though summary) expression of sin in general? As if the wickedness, the
malignity, the very hell it self of sin, were wholly included (and not connated
only) here. Now consider this (after so dreadful an ennumeration, so black a
Catalogue) all that forget God. Psalm. 50.
And (as deep calls to deep, one hell to another) The wicked shall be turned
into hell, Psalm. 9.
and all the people that forget God. That keep that mass of wickedness, of
pride, of persecution, cursing, blasphemy, deceit, and mischief, all meet with
one that has not God in all his thoughts.

But who is so hardy to look the holy God in the face and sin against him? what
an astonishment is it when he watches over present sin; or brings forth former
sins out of secret darkness and sets them in the light of his countenance? Who
that understands any thing of the Nature, and Majesty of God, dare call him for
a witness of his sinning? The worst of men would find themselves under some
restraint, could they but abtain of themselves to sit down sometimes and
solemnly think of God. Much more would it prove an advantage, (them whom I most
intend) to such as sin within the nearer call, and reach of mercy; that sin not
to the utmost latitude. Even such as lead the strictest lives, and are seldom
found to transgress, are not their sins found to begin with forgetting God? Did
they eye God more, would they not sin less frequently and with greater regret?
You his Saints that have made a Covenant with him by Sacrifice, that profess
the greatest love and devotedness to him, and seem willing your selves to
become sacrifices, and lay down your lives for his sake; what is it a harder
thing to give him a look, a thought? or is it not too common a thing, without
necessity (and then not without injury) to withhold these from him? Let us
bethink our selves, are not the principal distempers of our Spirits, and
disorders yet observable in our lives to be referred hither? As to enjoined
services, what; should we venture on omissions, if we had God in our eye? or
serve him with so declining backward hearts? Should we dare to let pass a day,
in the Even whereof we might write down nothing done for God this day? Or
should we serve him as an hard Master, with sluggish, despondent Spirits? The
Apostle forbids servants to serve with eye^ service, as men-pleasers, meaning
they should eye men less, and God more. Sure, as to him, our service is not
enough eye-service. We probably, eye men more than we should, but we do not eye
Him enough. Hence such hanging of hands, such feebleness of knees, such
laziness, and indifferency, so little of an active zeal, and laborious
diligence, so little fervency of Spirit in serving the Lord. Hence also such an
aversion to hazardous services, such fear of attempting any thing (though never
so apparent important Duty) that may prove costly, or has danger in it. We
look not to him that is invisible.

And as to forbidden things, should we be so proud, so passionate, so earthly,
so sensual, if we had God more in view? Should we so much seek our selves, and
indulge our own wills, and humors, drive a design with such solicitude, and
intention of mind, for our private interests? should we walk at such a
latitude, and more consult our own inclination than our rule, allow our selves
in so much vanity of conversation, did we mind God as we ought?

And do we not sensibly punish our selves in this neglect? what a dismal Chaos
is this world while we see not God in it. To live destitute of a divine
presence, to discern no beam of the heavenly glory. To go up and down day by
day, and perceive nothing of God, no glimmering, no appearance; this is
disconsolate, as well as sinful darkness. What can we make of Creatures, what
of the daily events of Providence, if we see not in them the glory of a Deity;
if we do not contemplate, and adore the divine wisdom, power, and goodness,
diffused every where. Our practical Atheism, and inobservance of God makes the
World become to us the region and shadow of death, states us as among Ghosts,
and Specter, makes all things look with a ghastly face, imprints death upon
every thing we see, encircles us with gloomy dreadful shades, and with
uncomfortable apparitions. To behold the tragical Spectacles always in view,
the violent lusts, the rapine and rage of some, the calamitous sufferings, the
miseries, and ruins of others, to hear every corner resounding with the
insultations of the Oppressor, and the mournful groans of the oppressed, what a
painful continuing death were it to be in the world without God! At the best
all things were but a vanishing scheme, an Image seen in the dark. The
Creation, a thing, the fashion whereof were passing away. The whole Contexture,
and System of Providence were mere confusion, without the least concinnity or
order. Religion an acknowledged tri^le, a mere mockery? What, to wink our
selves into so much darkness, and desolation? And by sealing up our eyes
against the divine light and glory, to confirm so formidable miseries upon our
own souls? how dreadfully, shall we, herein, revenge our own folly in
nullifying him to our selves, who is the All in All? Sure there is little of
Heaven in all this?

But if now we open our eyes upon that all-comprehending glory, apply them to a
steady intuition of God; how heavenly a life shall we then live in the world!
To have God always in view as the director and end of all our actions. To make
our eye crave leave of God; to consult him ere we adventure upon any thing, and
implore his guidance, and blessing. Upon all occasions to direct our prayers to
him and look up. To make our eye await his commanding look, ready to receive
all intimations of his will; this is an angelical life. To be as those
ministers of his that are always ready to do his pleasure. To make our eye do
him homage and express our dependence, and trust. To approve our selves in
every thing to him, and act as always in his presence, observing still how his
eye observes us; and exposing our selves willingly to its inspection and
search; contented always he should see through and through us. Surely there is
much of heaven in this life, so we should endeavor to live here: (I cannot
omit to give you this instruction in the words of an Heathen) we ought (says
he) so to live as always within view, Sic certe ^^vendum est tanqua^ (...)
consp ciu viv^mus, etc. Sen. Epist. 83.
order our cogitations as if some one might, or can look into the very inwards
of our breast. For, to what purpose is it to hide any thing from man? from God
nothing can be hid, he is continually present to our Spirits, and comes amidst
our inmost thoughts, etc.

This is to walk in the light amidst a serene placid mild light, that infuses
no unquiet thoughts, amidst no guilty fears, nothing that can disturb or annoy
us.

To eye God in all our comforts and observe the smiling aspect of his face,
when he dispenses them to us.

To eye Him in all our afflictions, and consider the paternal wisdom that
instructs us in them; how would this increase our mercies, and mitigate our
troubles?

To eye Him in all his Creatures, and observe the various prints of the
Creators glory instampt upon them. With how lively a luster would it cloth the
world? and make every thing look with a pleasant face! what an heaven were it
to look upon God, as filling all in all, and how sweetly would it, ere-while,
raise our souls into some such sweet seraphick strains holy, Isa. 6. 2, 3.
holy, -- the whole earth is full of his glory.

To eye Him in his Providence, and consider how all events are with infinite
wisdom disposed into an apt subserviency to his holy Will, and Ends. What
difficulties would hence be solved? what seeming inconsistencies reconciled?
and how much would it contribute to the ease and quiet of our minds?

To eye Him in his Christ, the express Image of his person, the brightness of
his glory, and in the Christian Economy the Gospel-revelation and Ordinances
through which he manifest himself.

To behold Him in the posture wherein he saves souls, clad with the garments of
Salvation, girt with power and apparelled with love, traveling in the
greatness of his strength, mighty to save.

To view Him addressing himself to allure and win to him the hearts of sinners,
when he discovers himself in Christ, upon that reconciling design, make grace
that brings salvation appear, teaching to deny ungodliness, etc.

To behold Him entering into humane flesh, pitching his Tabernacle among men,
hanging out his Ensigns of peace, laying his trains, spreading his nets, the
cords of a man, the bands of love.

To see Him in his Christ-ascending the Cross, lifted up to draw all men to
him; and consider that mighty love, of justice and of souls, both so eminently
conspicuous in that stupendous sacrifice. Here to fix our eyes looking to
Jesus and behold him whom we have pierced.

To see His power and glory, as they are wont t^ be seen in his sanctuaries; to
observe him in the solemnities of his worship, and the graceful^ postures,
wherein he holds communion with his Saints, when he seats himself amidst them
on the Throne of grace, receives their addresses, dispenses the tokens and
pledges of his love. Into what transports might these visions put us every day!

Let us then stir up our drowsy souls, open our heavy eyes, and turn them upon
God, inure^ and habituate them to a constant view of his (yet veiled) face,
that we may not see him only by casual glances, but as those that see^ his
face, and make it our business to gain ^ thorough knowledge of him.

But let us remember that all our present Visions of God, must aim at a further
Conformity to him, they must design imitation, not the satisfying of curiosity,
our looking must not therefore be an inquisitive busy prying into the
unrevealed things of God. Carefully abstain from such over-bold, presumptuous
looks* But remember we are to eye God as our pattern. Wherein he is to be so,
he has plainly enough revealed and proposed himself to us. And consider this
in the pattern both to which we ought, and to which we shall be conformed (if
we make it our business) so will sense of duty, and hope of success concur to
fix our eye and keep it steady.

Especially let us endeavor to manage and guide our eye aright, in beholding
him, that our sight of him may most effectually subserve this design of being
like him, and herein nothing will be more conducible than that our looks be
qualified with Reverence and Love.

1. Let them be reverential looks. We shall never be careful to imitate a
despised pattern; or that we think meanly of, when this is the intimate sense
of our souls; Who is a God like unto thee glorious in holiness! There is none
holy as the lord; this will set all our powers on work, such sights will
command, and overawe our souls into a conformity to him. Subjects have
sometimes affected to imitate the very imperfections and deformities of their
adored Prince. Let us greaten our thoughts of God. Look to him with a
submissive adoring eye. Let every look import worship and subjection. Who can
stand before apprehended sovereign Majesty, with such a temper of soul ^ shall
signify an affront to it? This will mak^ every thing in us unsuitable to God,
yield, an^ vanish, and render our souls susceptible of al^ divine and holy
impressions.

2. Let them be friendly, and (as far as may consist with that reverence)
amorous look^ It Is natural to affect and endeavor likeness t^ them we love.
Let love always sit in our eye and inspirit it; this will represent God alway^
amiable, will infinitely commend to us his nature, and attributes, and even
ravish us into his li^eness. The loving Spouse often glorie^ to wear her
beloved Husbands picture on her breast. The love of God will much more make^ us
affect to bear his image in our hearts. His Law is a true representation of
him, and Love is the fulfilling of that Law, an exemplification of it in our
selves. Love will never enter a quarrel, nor admit of any disagreement with
God. His more terrible appearances will be commendable in the eye of Love. It
thinks no evil. But so interprets and comments upon his severer aspects,
whether through his Law or Providence, as judge all amiable, and frame the soul
to an answerable deportment.

let us endeavor a growing conformity unto God. It has been much (and not
unnecessarily) inculcated already, that the blessedness of the righteous
hereafter, does not consist* merely, in beholding an external objective glory,
but in being also glorified. They are happy by a participated glory, by being
made like God, as well as seeing his glorious likeness, whereby the
constitution of their Spirits, is changed, and reduced to that excellent
harmonious agreeable temper, that holy composure, and peaceful state from which
blessedness is inseparable.

As far as we are capable of blessedness in this world, it must be so with us
here. Glory without us will not make us happy in Heaven, much less will any
thing without us make us happy on earth. It Is an idle dream of sickly crazie
minds, that their blessedness consists in some external good, that is
separable, and distant from them; which therefore as they blindly guess, they
uncertainly pursue; never aiming to become good, without which they can never
know what it is to be blessed. What ^elicity are men wont to imagine to
themselves in this or that change of their outward condition? were their state
such, or such, then they were happy, and should desire no more. As the child's
fancy suggests to it, if it were on the top of such a Hill, it could touch
the Heavens, but when with much toil it has got thither, it finds it self as
far off as before. We have a shorter, and more compendious way to it, would we
allow our selves to understand it. A right temper of mind involves blessedness
in it self; it is this only change we need to endeavor. We wear out our days in
vanity, and misery, while we neglect this work, and busy our selves to catch a
fugitive shadow, that hovers about us. It can never be well till our own souls
be an Heaven to us, and blessedness be a domestique, an home-dwelling
inhabitant there. 'Till we get a settled principle of holy quietude into our
own breasts; and become the son^ of peace, with whom the peace of God may find
entrance and abode: Till we have that treasure within us, that may render us in
sensible of any dependence on a foreign good, or fear of a foreign evil*
Shall that be the boast and glory of ^ Philosopher only? I carry all my goods
with ^ where ever I go. And that a virtuous good man i^ liable to no hurt?
Seneca thinks they discove^ a low Spirit, that say, externals can add any
thing (though but a very little) to the felicity of an honest mind, Epist. 92.
as if (says he) me^ could not be content with the light of the Sun without
the help of a candle, or a spark* and speaking of the constancy of the virtuous
man (says he) They do ill that say, such an evil i^ tolerable to him, such a
one intolerable, an^ that confine the greatness of his mind within certain
bounds and limits. Adversity (he tells us) overcomes us, if it be not wholly
overcome. Epicurus (says he) the very patron of your sloth, acknowledges yet,
thi^ unhappy events can seldom disturb the min^ of a virtuous person (and he
adds) how ha^ he almost uttered the voice of a man! pray says he, (...). T^r.
dis. (...). 2. who (...), For a (...).
speak out a little more boldly, and say he is above them altogether Such
apprehensions the more virtuous Heathen have had of the efficacy and
defensative power of Moral goodness (however defective their notion might be of
the thing it self.) Henc^ S^crates the P^gan Martyr is reported to have cried
out (when those persons were perse^cuting him to death) Anytus and Meletus can
kill me, but they cannot hurt me. And Anaxarchus the Philosopher having sharply
reproved Nicoerean, and being by him ordered to be beaten to death with iron
Malets, Diogen L^ert. bq. Anaxarchus.
bids strike on, strike on, thou may (says he) break in pieces this vessel
of Anaxarchus, but Anaxarchus himself thou can not touch.

Shall Christianity here confess it self outvy'd? shall we to the reproach of
our Religion yield the day to Pagan-morality, and renew the occasion of the
ancient complaint, That the Faith of Christians is outdone by the Heathen
infidelity? Non prae^^a^ fides quod praestitit infidelitas.
It is, I remember the challenge of Cecilius in Minucius. There is Socrates
(says he) the Prince of Wisdom, whosoever of you Christians is great enough to
attempt it, let him imitate him if he can. Methinks we should be ambitious to
tell the world in our lives (for Christians should live great things, not speak
As this Authors expression is.
them) that a greater then Socrates is here; to let them see in us, our
represented pattern; to show forth higher virtues then those of Socrates; even
his, who has called us out of darkness, into his glorious and mavelous light.

Certain it is, that the Sacred Oracles of the Gospel set before us a more
excellent pattern, and speak things not less magnificent, but much more modest,
and perspicuous. With less pomp of words, they give us a much clearer account
of a far more excellent temper of mind, and prescribe the direct, and certain
way of attaining it (Do but view over the many passages of Scripture
occasionally glanc't at Chap. 7.)

But we grope as in the dark for blessedness, we stumble at noon day, as in the
night, and wander as if we had no eyes; we mistake our business, and lay the
Scene of an happy state at a great distance from us, in things which we cannot
reach, and which if we could, it were to little purpose.

Not to speak of grosser sensualists (whom at present I have less in my eye.)
Is there not a more refined sort of persons, that neglecting the great business
of inspecting, and laboring to better, and improve their spirits; are wholly
taken up about the affairs of another Sphere? that are more solicitous for
better times, for a better world, then better spirits. That seem to think all
the happiness they are capable of on earth, is bound up in this, or that
external state of things. Not that the care of all public concernments should
be laid aside. Least of all a just solicitude for the Churches welfare; but
that should not be pretended, when our own interest is the one thing with us.
And when we are really solicitous about the Churches interests, we should state
them aright. God designs the afflictions of his people for their Spiritual
good, therefore that is a much greater good, then their exemption from
suffering these evils; otherwise, his means should eat up his end, and be more
expensive then that will countervail; which were an imprudence, no man of
tolerable discretion would be guilty of. We should desire the outward
prosperity of Sion for, it is a real good; but in as much as it has in it the
goodness, not of an end, but only (and that but sometimes neither) of a means;
not a constant, but a mutable goodness; not a principal, but a lesser
subordinate goodness; we must not desire it absolutely, nor chiefly, but with
submissive, limited desires. If our hearts are grieved to hear of the
sufferings of the Church of God in the world, but not of their sins; If we more
sensibly regret at any time, the persecutions, and opressions they undergo,
than their spiritual distempers, their earthliness, pride, cold love to God,
fervent animosities toward each other; It speaks an uninstructed carnal mind.
We take no right measure of the interests of Religion, or the Churches welfare,
and do most probably mistake our selves, as much in judging of our own; and
measure theirs by our own mistaken model.

And this is the mischievous cheat many put upon their own souls, and would
obtrude (too often) upon others too; that overlooking the great design of the
Gospel to transform men's spirits, and change them into the Divine likeness,
they think it is Religion enough to espouse a party, and adopt an Opinion; and
then vogue themselves friends to Religion, according to the measure of their
zeal for their own party or Opinion. And give a very pregnant proof of that
zeal by magnifying, or inveighing against the times, according as they favor,
or frown upon their empty, unspirited Religion. It being indeed such (a secret
consciousness whereof they herein bewray) as has no other life in it, then
what it owes to external favor, and countenance. And therefore all public
rebukes are justly apprehended mortal to it: whereas that substantial Religion
that adequately answers the design, and is animated by the Spirit of the
Gospel, possesses the Souls of them that own it, with a secure confidence that
it can live in any times, and hold their Souls in life also. Hence they go on
their way with a free, unsolicitous cheerfulness; enjoying silently in their
own bosoms that repose, and rest which naturally results from a sound, and
well composed temper of Spirit. They know their happiness depends upon nothing
without them (...). Epict.
. That they hold it by a better tenure then that of the worlds courtesy. They
can be quiet in the midst of storms, and abound in the want of all things. They
can, in patience possess their own sou^, and in them a vital spring of true
pleasure, when they are driven out of all other possessions. They know the
living sense of these words; that the good man is satisfied from himself; that
to be Spiritually minded is life and peace; that nothing can harm them that are
followers of the good. That the way to see good days, is to keep their tongue
from evil, and their lips from speaking g^^le, to depart from evil, and do
good, to seek peace, and pursue it.

They cannot live in bad times. They carry that about them that will make the
worst days good to them. Surely they can never be happy in the best times, that
cannot be so in any. Outward prosperity is quite besides the purpose to a
distempered Soul, when nothing else troubles, it will torment it self. Besides,
we cannot command at pleasure, the benign aspects of the world, the smiles of
the times; we may wait a life's time, and still find the same adverse posture of
things toward us from without. What dotage is it to place our blessedness in
something to us impossible, that lies wholly out of our power: nd in order
whereto we have nothing to do, but sit down and wish; and either faintly hope,
or ragingly despair! We cannot change times, and seasons; nor alter the course
of the world, create new Heavens, and new Earth. Would we not think our selves
mocked, if God should command us these things, in order to our being happy?
It Is not our business, these are not the affairs of our own Province (blessed
be God it is not so large) further then as our bettering our selves may conduce
thereto; and this is that which we may do, and ought it is our proper work, in
obedience, and subordination to God, as his instruments, to govern, and
cultivate our own spirits, to intend the affairs of that his Kingdom in us
(where we are his Authorized Vice-Royes) that consists in righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. We can be benign to our selves, if the world
be not so to us; cherish, and adorn our inward man; that though the outward man
be exposed daily to perish (which we cannot help, and therefore it concerns us
not to take thought about it) the inward may be renewed day by day. We can take
care that our souls may prosper, that, through our o^citant neglect, they be
not left to languish, and pine away in their own iniquities. They may be daily
fed with the Heavenly hidden Manna, and with the Fruits of the Paradise of God,
they may enjoy at home a continual feast, and with an holy freedom luxuriate in
Divine Pleasures, the joys wherewith the strangers intermeddles not, if we be
not unpropitious, and unkind to our selves.

And would we know wherein that sound, and happy complexion of Spirit lies,
that has so much of Heaven in it. It Is a present gradual participation of the
Divine likeness. It consists in being conformed to God; it is (as the Moralists
tells us) (...) S^n. Epist.
If one would give a short compendious Module of it, Such a temper of mind as
becomes God; or to give an account of it, in his own words, who prescribes it,
and who is himself the highest Pattern of this blessed Frame. Romans 12 2
It Is to be transformed in the renewing of our minds, so as to be able to prove
what is the good, and perfect, and acceptable will of God; That is
experimentally to find it in our selves, impressed, and wrought into our own
spirits, so as to have the complacential relish, and savor of its Goodness,
Excellency, and Pleasantness diffused through our souls. Where, remember, this
was written to such as were supposed Saints; whence it must be understood of a
continued, progressive transformation, a renewing of the inward man day by day
(as is the Apostles expression elsewhere.) It Is a more perfect reception of the
impress of God, revealing himself in the Gospel; the growth and tendency of the
New Creature, begotten unto the eternal blessedness, toward its mature, and
most perfect state, and stature in the fruition thereof.

And it is this I am now pressing, in as much as some account has been already
given (according as we can now imperfectly guess at it, and spell it out) what
the constitution of the holy soul is, in its glorified state, when it perfectly
partakes the Divine likeness; that when we find in our selves any principles,
and first elements of that blessed frame, we would endeavor the gradual
improvement thereof; and be making toward that perfection. This therefore
being our present work; let it be remembered wherein that participated likeness
of God has been said to consist; and labor now the nearest approach to that
pitch and state. Your measures must be taken from what is most perfect, come
now as near it as you can, Epictet.
and as that Pagans advice is; If yet thou art not Socrates, however, live as
one that would fain be Socrates. Though yet thou art not perfect, live as one
that aims at it, and would be so.

Only, it must be considered, that the conformity to God, of our present
state, is in extent larger, and more comprehensive, then that of our future;
though it be unspeakably less perfect in degree. For there is no Moral
Excellency (that we have any present knowledge of) belonging to our glorified
state, which is not in some degree, necessarily, to be found in Saints on
earth; But there are some things which the exigency of our present state makes
necessary to us, here, which will not be so in the state of glory. Repentance,
Faith, as it respects the Mediator; patience of injuries, pity to the
distressed, etc. These things, and whatsoever else, whose objects cease, must
be understood to cease with them. In short, here is requisite all that Moral
good, which concerns both our end, and way; there, what concerns our end only.

Yet is the whole compass of that gracious frame of spirit, requisite in this
our present state, all comprehended in conformity to God. Partly, in as much as
some of these graces which will cease hereafter, in their exercise, as not
having objects to draw them forth into act; have their pattern in some
communicable Attributes of God, which will cease also, as to their denomination
and exercise; their objects then ceasing too; as his patience toward sinners;
his mercy to the miserable: Partly, in as much as other of those graces now
required in us, though they correspond to nothing in God that is capable of the
same name, as Faith in a Savior, Repentance of sin (which can have no place in
God.) They yet answer to something in this nature, that goes under other names;
and is the reason wherefore he requires such things in us. He has in his
nature that faithfulness, and All sufficient fullness that challenges our faith;
and that hatred of sin, which challenges our repentance for it, having been
guilty of it. His very nature obliges him to require those things from us, the
state of our case being considered. So that the sum even of our present duty
lies in receiving this entire impression of the Divine likeness (in some part
invariably, and eternally necessary to us, in some part necessary with respect
to our present state) And herein is our present blessedness also involved. If
therefore we have any design to better our condition in point of blessedness,
it must be our business to endeavor after a fuller participation of all that
likeness, in all the particulars it comprehends. You can pitch your thoughts
upon no part of it, which has not an evident, direct tendency to the repose
and rest of your spirits. I shall recommend only some few instances; that you
may see how little reason, or inducement a soul conformed to the holy will of
God, has to seek its comforts and content elsewhere.

Faith corresponds to the Truth of God; as it respects Divine Revelations: How
pleasant is to give up our understandings to the conduct of so safe a guide! to
the view of so admirable things as he reveals.

It corresponds to his goodness; as it respects his offers; How delectible is
it to be filling an empty Soul from the Divine fullness! What pleasure attends
the exercise of this Faith toward the Person of the Mediator, viewing him in
all his Glorious Excellencies, receiving him in all his gracious Communications
by this Eye, and Hand.

How pleasant is it to exercife it in reference to another world! living, by
it, in a daily prospect of eternity; in reference to this world, to live
without care in a cheerful dependence on him, that has undertaken to care for
us!

Repentance is that by which we become like the holy God; to whom our sin had
made us most unlike before; how sweet are kindly relentings? penetential tears?
and the return of the Soul to its God? and to a right mind!

And who can conceive the Ravishing Pleasures of love to God! wherein we not
only imitate, but intimately unite with him, who is Love it self. How pleasant
to let our Souls dissolve here! and slow into the Ocean, the element of love!

Our Fear corresponds to his Excellent Greatness; and is not (as it is a part
of the New Creature in us) a tormenting servile passion; but a due
respectfulness, and observance of God; and there is no mean pleasure in that
holy, awful seriousness, unto which it composes, and forms our Spirits.

Our Humility, as it respects him, answers his high excellency, as it respects
our own inferiors, his gracious condescension. How pleasant is it to fall
before him! And how connatural, and agreeable to a good Spirit to stoop low,
upon any occasion, to do good!

Sincerity is a most Godlike excellency; an imitation of his Truth, as grounded
in his All Sufficiency; which sets him above the necessity, or possibility of
any advantage by collusion, or deceit; and corresponds to his Omnisciency, and
heart-searching eye. It heightens a man's spirit to a holy, and generous
boldness; makes him apprehend it beneath him to do an unworthy, dishonest
action that should need a palliation, or a concealment. As that noble Roman
whom his architect (about to build him an house) promised to contrive it free
from all his neighbors inspection, he replies, nay if thou have any art in
thee, build my house so that all may see what I do. Vell. Pat* p. 3^*
And gives him the continual pleasure of self approbation to God, whom he
chiefly studies, and desires to please.

Patience, a prime Glory of the Divine Majesty continues a man's possession of
his own Soul, his Liberty, his Dominion of himself. He is (if he can suffer
nothing) a Slave to his vilest and most sordid passions at home; his own base
fear, and brutish anger, and effeminate grief, and to any man's lusts, and
humors besides, that he apprehends* can do him hurt. It keeps a man's Soul in a
peaceful calm, delivers him from (that most unnatural) self-torment, defeats
the impotent malice of his most implacable enemy, who fain would vex him but
cannot.

Justice, the Great Attribute of the Judge of all the Earth, as such; so far
as the imppression of it takes place among men* preserves the Common Peace of
(...) World, and the Private Peace of each (...) in his own bosom, so that the
former be not disturbed by doing of mutual injuries, nor the latter by the
conscience of having done them.

The brotherly love of fellow Christians, the impression of that special love,
which God bears to them all; admits them into one another bosoms, and to all
the indearments, and pleasures of a mutual communion.

Love to enemies, the express image of our heavenly Father, by which we appear
his children, begotten of him; overcomes evil by goodness, blunts the double
edge of revenge; at least, the sharper edge, (which is always toward the
Author of it) secures our selves from wounding impressions, and resentments;
turns keen anger, into gentle pity; and substitutes mild, pleasant forgiveness,
in the room of the much uneasier thoughts, and study of retaliation.

Mercifulness toward the distressed, as our Father in Heaven is merciful,
heaps blessings upon our Souls, and evidences our Title to what we are to live
by the Divine mercy.

An universal benignity, and propension to d^ good to all; in imitation of the
immense, diffusive goodness of God; is but kindness to our selves: Rewards it
self by that greater pleasure is in giving, then in receiving; and associates
us with God in the blessedness of this work, as well as in the disposition to
it; who exercises loving kindness in the Earth, because delights therein.

Here are some of (the (...), or) the things wherein consists that our
conformity to the divine Nature and Will which is proper to our present state.
And now, who can estimate the blessedness of such a soul? Can (in a word) the
state of that soul be unhappy? that is full of the Holy Ghost, full of Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance,
those blessed fruits of that blessed Spirit. Blessedness is connaturalized unto
this soul: Every thing does its part, and all conspire to make it happy. This
soul is a Temple an habitation of holiness: here dwells a Deity in his glory.
It Is a Paradise, a Garden of God. Here he walks and converses daily, delighted
with its fragrant fruitfulness. He that has those things and abounds is not
barren or unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus: he is the
Sun, and the knowledge of him, the quickening beams that cherish and ripen
these fruits.

But the soul that lacks these things is a Desert, a habitation of Devils.
Here is stupid, disconsolate infidelity, inflexible obstinacy, and resolvedness
for Hell; Hatred and contempt of the Sovereign Majesty; whom yet, its secret
misgiving thoughts tell it, will be too hard for it at last. Here is swollen
pride, and giddy vainglory, disguised hypocrisy, and pining envy, raging
wrath, and ravenous avarice, with what you can imagine besides, leading to
misery and desolation.

You have then some prospect of a happy temper of Spirit. Philosophia dividitur
in haec Scientiam, and habitum animi, unam illam qui didicit and facienda ac
vitanda percepit nondum sapiens est, nisi in ea quae didicit animus ejus
transfiguratus est. Sen. (ex Agrippa) Ep. 94.
It can now be no difficulty to you, to frame an Idea of it in your thoughts,
to get a notional image, (or this likeness, in the notion of it) into your
minds: but that will avail you little, if you have not the real image also:
that is, your Spirits really fashioned and formed according thereto. If having
the knowledge of these things (as the Pagan morallists expression before
mentioned is of virtuous Rules and Precepts) they become not habitual to you,
and your Spirits be not transfigured into them.

But now, I treat with such as are supposed to have some such real impressions,
that they may be stirred up to endeavor a further perfecting of them. In order
whereto I shall add but this twofold advice.

1. Be very careful that this living Image (such you have been formerly told it
is) may grow equally, in every part. See that the impression of this likeness
be entire; that it be not a maimed thing, if it be, God will never own it as
his production. Integrity is the glory of a Christian: To be entire lacking
nothing. This is the soundness of heart that excludes a blushing consciousness,
and misgiving; exempts it from the fear of a shameful discovery. Psalm. 119. 6.
80.
Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; is paraphrased, by having respect to
all Gods commandments; To which is opposite, that being partial in the Law
spoken of by the Prophet Mal. 2. 9.
by way of complaint concerning the Priests of that time. A thing hateful in
the eye of God; and as uncomfortable to our selves, as to be without a leg, or
an Arm.

And see that it be preserved entire by a proportional, and uniform growth,
that fresh life and motion may daily appear in every Limb of this heavenly new
Creature. How odious a deformity is it, when a show of moral virtues excludes
Godliness? And how much more odious (in as much as there is more impudent
falsehood in it, and more of dishonorable reflection upon God) when under an
high pre^ence of Godliness, any shall allow themselves in visible immorality?
What, to be oppressive, envious, contentious, deceitful, proud, turbulent,
wrathful, morose, malicious, fretful, and peevish, and yet a Christian? What
serious Person, that shall have no fairer representation of Christianity, than
such do give, would not be ready to say rather, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis;
If this be Christian Religion, give me honest Paganism. A Christian that has
received the proper, uniform, entire impresse of the Gospel of Christ, is the
most meek, mild, calm, harmless, quiet thing in the world. Never mention so
venerable a name, if you will not be very jealous of the honor of it; will you
give God occasion to charge you? Wretch I never had had this dishonor, if thou
h^dst never been called a Christian; thou art a Christian to no purpose, or to
very bad; it does thee no good, and it injures me?

But (which is more directly considerable as to our present purpose) the
neglect and consequent decay, of any gracious principle, infers a languor, a
consumption, and enfeeblement of all. Any such perverse disposition does not
affect that part only; is not only an impairment to the contrary gracious
principle, but (as a Cancer in some exterior part of the body) it gradually
creeps up till it invade vitals. Can the love of God live and grow in an
unquiet, angry, uncharitable breast? Consider Jam. 1. 26. 1 John 3. 17.

2. Be constantly intent upon this business of spiritual growth. Mind it as a
design, make a solemn purposed business of it, your great daily business; you
do not till your ground by chance, as a casual thing; but you do it
industriously, and of set purpose. The Apostle speaking of his own method of
pursuing conformity to Christ, Phil. 3.
tells us, he did first, in comparison, count all things else loss and dogs
meat; he threw every thing else aside. 8, 9, 10.
Then next he recounts with himself how far short he was. Not as if I had
already attained, etc. (where, by the way he intimates, that to stand still and
give over further endeavors, implies that gross absurdity, as if we thought
our selves to have attained already, to be already perfect; are we not ashamed
to seem so conceited of our selves?) V. 12, 13.
and then still, as he did attain in this pursuit, he forgot it not; but held
on his course with fresh and constant vigor, still reaching forth, and pressing
onwards toward his designed mark.

In this great business we (alas) seem to dream. He that has been observed ten
or twenty years ago to be proud, and covetous, or passionate, still remains so,
and we apprehend not the incongruity of it. What always learning, and yet
never come to the knowledge of the truth? as it is in Jesus to the putting off
the old man, and putting on the new? who would meddle with any profession upon
such terms to be always doing, and yet to do nothing? Surely it must be
imputed to this, we design not; we do not seriously intend the perfecting of
holiness, to make a real progress in our way and work, and to get still nearer
heaven, as we draw nearer to the end of our days here on earth. We too
contentedly confine our selves within certain limits, and aim not as we should,
at a spiritual excellency. This is the temper of many that have long trodden the
path of (at least an external) Religion; they will go but their own pace, and
that within a self-prescribed round or circle. They perform their stated task
of Religious exercises, and shun the grosser vices of the time: and resolve
never to go higher: Much like the character that was once given of a great man
Tiberius Neque enim eminentes virtutes seclabatur, and rursum vitiae oderat.
Tacit. Annal.
that he followed not the more eminent virtues, and yet that he hated vice. And
it is a true censure that a Barbarian T^^sp^cion. (...). Philostr. in vit.
Apollon. Tyan.
is said to have given of that middle temper, that dull indifferency. What is
equally distant from being the matter, either of praise or punishments is upon
no terms to be accounted Virtue.

At least we drive not on a design of growth, and self improvement in our
spiritual states with that constancy we ought; we are off, and on; our Spirits
are not steadily intent. We are unstable as water, Genesis 49. 4.
how can we excel? God has not put us, sure, upon so fruitless a task, wherein
our utmost labor and diligence shall profit nothing. Therefore strive more
vigorously, and pray with more earnest importunity. Consider, and plead it with
God, that he has set before thee the hope of such a state, when thou art to be
perfectly like him; and shall thou (that must hereafter be like God) be now
like a clod of earth. Thou art now a Child begotten of him, and though thou art
yet in thy minority, yet may not somewhat be spared out of so fair an estate,
hereafter designed for thee; as that thou may now live worthy of such a
Father, and suitably to thy expected inheritance?

3. And now, a contented satisfied temper of Spirit, as I have told you,
results from the other two; and will therefore follow of course, upon growing
knowledge of God, and conformity to Him, as the latter of these also does, upon
the former. Yea, it is a part of our conformity to God; but a part consequent to
the impression of the things mentioned under the former head (as knowledge also
is a part previous and antecedent thereto) It Is in the state of glory, we see
something superadded. The likeness impressed, is presupposed; Satisfaction
follows thereupon. The case is so too in our present state, Contentment is
spoken of as a thing consequent and superadded. Godliness with Contentment; a
satisfied, contented Spirit, when it is the result of Godliness (of the divine
image impressed) is indeed great gain. Yet

As to this I shall only say these two things.

1. Be distinct and explicit in the proposal of it as an end. Religion does
not brutify men but make them more rational. Its business is to guide them to
blessedness. It must therefore pitch their eyes upon it, as the mark and (...)
they are to aim at, and hold them intent there. It Is ingenuous, and honorable
to God that we should expressly avow it, we come to Him for satisfaction to our
Spirits, not knowing whether else to apply our selves. We turn our eyes upon
Him, we lay open our souls to receive impressions from Him, for this very end.
This is an explicit acknowledment of Him as God; our highest, Sovereign good.

2. Actually apply and accommodate divine visions and communications to this
purpose. Say, O my Soul; now come solace thy self in this appearance of God;
come take thy allowed pleasure in such exertions of God as thou do now
experience in thy self. Recount thy happiness; think how great it is; how rich
thou art, on purpose that thy Spirit may grow more, daily, into a satisfied
contented frame. Often bethink thy self, What is the great God doing for me!
that he thus reveals, and imparts himself to my soul; O how great things do
those present pledges presignisie to me! That thou may still more and more
like thy portion, and account it fallen in pleasant places, so as never to seek
satisfaction in things of another kind; though thou must still continue
expecting and desiring more of the same kind.

And remember to this purpose there cannot be a greater participation of the
misery of hell beforehand, than a discontented Spirit perpetually restless,
and weary of it self; nor of the blessedness of heaven, than in a well-pleased,
satisfied, contented frame of Spirit.

CHAP. XIX.
Rule 5. Directing to raise our desires above the actual or possible
seize of this our present; and terminate them upon the future consummate
state of Blessedness. The Rule explained and pressed by sundry considerations.
Rule 6. That we add to a desirous pursuit, a joyful expectation of this
blessedness; which is pursued in certain subordinate directions.

5. THat notwithstanding all our present or possible seize in this
imperfect state on earth; Rule 5.
We direct fervent vigorous desires toward the perfect, and consummate state
of glory it self; Not designing to our selves a plenary satisfaction, and rest
in any thing on this side of it.

That is; that forgetting what is behind, we reach forth not only to what is
immediately before us; the next step to be taken; but that our eye and desire,
aim forward at the ultimate period of our race terminate upon the eternal glory
it self; and that not only as a measure; according to which we would some way
proportion our present seize, but at the very mark, which (it self) we
would fain hit and reach home to.

And that this be not only the habitual bent, and tendency of our Spirits; but
that we keep up such desires, in frequent (and as much as is possible)
continual exercise.

Yea, and that such actual desires be not only faint, and sluggish wishes, but
full of lively efficacy, and vigor; in some measure proportionable to our last
end, and highest good; beyond, and above which we neither esteem, nor expect
any other enjoyment.

Whatsoever we may possibly attain to here, we should still be far from
projecting to our selves a state of rest on this side consummate glory; but
still urge our selves to a continual ascent; so as to mount above, not only
all enjoyments of any other kind, but all degrees of enjoyment in this kind,
that are beneath perfection.

Still it must be remembered, this is not the state of our final rest. The Mass
of Glory is yet in reserve, we are not yet so high as the highest Heavens.

If we gain but the top of Mount Tabor, we are apt to say, it is good to be
here, and forget the longer journey yet before us; loath to think of a further
advance; when, were our spirits right, how far so ever we may suppose our
selves to have attained, it would be matter of continual joy to us to think
high perfections are still attainable; that we are yet capable of greater
things, then what we have hitherto compast; our souls can yet comprehend more.
Nature intends what is most perfect in every Creature; methinks the Divine
Nature in the New Creature, should not design lower, or cease aspiring, till it
have attained its ultimate perfection, its culminating point; till Grace turn
into Glory.

Let us therefore Christians bestir our selves, let us open, and turn our eyes
upon the eternal glory. Lets view it well, and then demand of our own souls,
why are our desires so faint and slothful? why do they so seldom pierce through
the interveining distance, and reach home to what they prefessedly level at? so
rarely touch this blessed mark? How can we forbear to be angry with our selves,
that so glorious an end should not more powerfully attract? that our hearts
should not more sensibly find themselves drawn? and all the powers of the soul
beset on work, by the attractive power of that glory?

It certainly concerns us not to sit still, under so manifest a distemper. But
if the proposal of the object; the discourse (all this while) of this blessed
state, do not move us to make some further trials with our selves, see what
urging and reasoning with our souls; what rubbing and chasing our hearts will
do. And there is a two fold trial we may in this kind make upon our spirits.
What the sense of shame will work with us, whether our hearts cannot be made
sensible to suppose how vile, and wretched a temper it is to be undesirous of
glory. And then what sense of praise can effect, or what impression it may make
upon us to consider the excellency, and worth, the high reasonableness of that
temper, and posture of soul, which I am now persuading to [a continual
desirousness of that blessed glorious state.]

1. As to the former. Let us bethink our selves, can we answer it to God, or to
our own souls; that we should indulge our selves in a continual negligence of
our eternal blessedness? A blessedness, consisting in the Vision, and
Participation of the Divine Glory?

Have we been dreaming all this while, that God has been revealing to us this
glorious state? and setting this lovely prospect before our eyes? Did it become
us not to open our eyes, while he was opening Heaven to us, and representing
the state which he designed to bring us to? or will we say we have seen it, and
yet desire it not? Have we been deaf and dead, while he has been calling us
into eternal glory? have all our senses been bound up all this while? Has he
been speaking all along to senseless Statues, to Stocks, and Stones, while he
expected reasonable, living souls should have received the voice, and have
returned an obedient, complying answer? And what answer could be expected to
such a call, (a call to his Glory) below this. We desire it Lord, we would fain
be there.

And if, we say we have not been all this while a sleep, we saw the light that
shone upon us, we heard the voice that called to us; wherewith shall we then
excuse our selves, that our desires were not moved? that our Souls were not
presently in a flame? was it then that we thought all a mere fixion? that we
durst not give credit to his word, when it brought us the report of the
everlasting Glory? will we avow this? Is this that we will stand by? or what
else have we left to say? have we a more plausible reason to allege, that the
discovery of such a glory moved us not to desire it; then that we believed it
not? sure this is the truth of our case. We should feel this heavenly fire
always burning in our breasts, If our Infidelity did not quench the coal. If
we did believe, we could not but desire. But does not the thoughts of this
shake our very souls, and fill us with horror, and trembling? We that should
be turned into indignation, and ready to burn our selves with our own flame,
and all about us, if one should give us the lie; that we should dare to put the
lie upon the Eternal Truth! upon him whose Word gave stability, and being to
the world, who made and sustains all things by it. That awful Word! That Word
that shivers Rocks, and melts down Mountains, that make the inanimate Creation
tremble, that cna in a moment blast all things, and dissolve the frame of
Heaven and Earth, (which in the mean time it upholds) is that become with us
fabulous, lying breath? Those God-breath'd Oracles, those Heavenly Records,
which discover, and describe this blessed state, are they false and foolish
Legends; must that be pretended at last (if men durst) that is so totally void
of all pretense? what should be the gain or advantage accrewing to that
Eternal, All-sufficient being. What accession should be made to that infinite
self-fulness by deluding a Worm? Were it consistent with his Nature, what could
be his design to put a cheat upon poor mortal dust? If thou dare not impute it
to him; such a deception had a beginning, but what Author can thou imagine of
it? or what end? did it proceed from a good mind, or a bad? could a good and
honest mind form so horribly wicked a design, to impose an universal delusion,
and lie upon the world, in the name of the true and holy God? or could a wicked
mind frame a design so directly levelled against wickedness? or is there any
thing so aptly and naturally tending to form the World to sobriety, holiness,
purity of conversation, as the discovery of this future state of glory? and
since the belief of future felicity, is known to obtain universally among men;
who could be the Author of so common a deception. If thou had the mind to
impose a lie upon all the world, what course would thou take? how would
thou lay the design? or why do thou in this case imagine, what thou know
not how to imagine? And do thou not without scruple believe many things of
which thou never had so unquestionable evidence? or must that Faith which is
the foundation of thy Religion, and eternal hopes be the most suspected shaking
thing with thee? and have of all other the least stability, and rootedness in
thy soul; If thou can not excuse thy infidelity, be ashamed of thy so cold,
and sluggish desires of this glorious state.

And does it not argue a low, sordid Spirit* not to desire and aim at the
perfection thou art capable of? not to desire that blessedness which alone is
suitable and satisfying to a reasonable and spiritual being? Bethink thy* self
a little, how low art thou sunk into the dirt of the earth? how art thou
plunged into the mity Ditch? that even thine own clothes might adhor thee? Is
the Father of Spirits thy Father* Is the world of Spirits thy Country? Have
thou any relation to that Heavenly Progeny? Art thou allied to that blessed
Family? and yet undesirous of the same blessedness? Can thou savor nothing,
but what smells of the Earth? Is nothing grateful to thy Soul, but what is
corrupted by so vicious, and impure a tincture? are all thy delights centred in
a Dunghill? and the polluted pleasures of a filthy world better to thee then
the eternal visions and enjoyments of Heaven? what, art thou all made of Earth?
Is thy soul stupifi'd into a Clod? have thou no sense with thee of any thing
better and more excellent? can thou look upon no glorious thing with a
pleased eye? Are things only desirable and lovely to thee, as they are
deformed? O consider the corrupted distempered state of thy Spirit; and how
vile a disposition it has contracted to it self. Thine looks too like the
Mundan^ Spirit. 1 Cor. 2. 12. (...).
The Spirit of the World. The Apostle speaks of it ((...)) by way of
distinction; we have not received the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit that
is from God, that we might know, or see (and no doubt it is desire that animates
that eye; it is not bare speculative intuition, and no more) the things freely
given us of God. Surely he whose desire does not guide his eye to the beholding
of those things, has received the Spirit of the world only. A Spirit that
conforms him to this world, makes him think only thoughts of this world, and
drive the designs of this world, and speak the language of this world. A Spirit
that connaturalizes him to the world, makes him of a temper suitable to it. He
breathes only worldly breath, carries a worldly aspect, is of a worldly
conversation. O poor low spirit! that such a world should withold thee from
the desire, and pursuit of such glory! Art thou not ashamed to think what thy
desires are wont to pitch upon, while they decline and wave this blessedness?
Methinks thy very shame should compel thee to quit the name of a Saint, or a
Man. To forbear numbering thy self with any that pretend to immortality; and go
seek Pasture among the Beasts of the Field, with them that live that low animal
life, that thou do, and expect no other.

And while thou so fallest in with the world, how highly do thou gratify the
pretending, and usurping God of it? The great fomentor of the sensual worldy
genius; The Spirit it self that works in the children of disobedienence, Ephesians.
2. 2, 3.
and makes them follow the course of the world; hold them fast bound in worldly
lusts, and leaves them captive at his will; causes them (after his own
Serpentine manner) to creep, and crawl in the dust of the Earth. He is most
intimate to this apostate world, informs it (as it were) and actuates it in
every part; 1 John 5. 19.
i^ even one great soul to it. The whole world lies in that wicked one (as the
body, by best Philosophers, is said to be in the Soul.) The world is said to be
convicted, Joh. 16.
when he is judged. He having fallen from a state of blessedness in God, has
involved the world with himself in the same Apostasy and Condemnation; and
labors to keep them fast in the bands of death. The great Redeemer of Souls
makes this his business, 1 John 3. 8.
to lose, and dissolve the work of the Devil. With that wicked one thou
complyest against thy own Soul, and the Redeemer of it; while thou neglectest
to desire and pursue this blessedness. This is thy debasement, and his triumph;
thy vile succumbency gives him the day, and his will upon thee. He desires no
more, then that he may suppress in thee all heavenly desires; and keep thee
thus a slave, and a prisoner (confined in thy Spirit to this low, dark dungeon)
by thy own consent. While thou remainest without desire after Heaven, he is
secure of thee, as knowing then thou will take no other way, but what will
bring thee unto the same eternal state with himself in the end. He is jealous
over thee, that thou direct not a desire, nor glance an eye Heavenward: while
thou do not so, thou art entirely subject, and give as full obedience to
him; as thy God requires to himself, in order to thy blessedness. But is it a
thing tolerable to thy thoughts, that thou should yield that heart
obedience to the Devil against God?

And this being the state of thy case, what more significant expression can
thou make of thy contempt of Divine goodness? O the love that thou neglectest,
while the most glorious issue, and product of it, is with thee an undesired
thing! Yea, this the thing it self speaks, were there no such competition.
What? that when eternal love have conceived, and is traveling to bring forth
such a birth? that when it invites thee to an expectation of such glory shortly
to be revealed, the result of so deep counsels, and wonderful works, this
should be the return from thee, I desire it not? Is this thy gratitude to the
Father of Glory? the requital of the kindness, yea, and of the blood of thy
Redeemer? If this blessedness were not desirable for it self; methinks the
offerers hand should be a sufficient endearment. But thou can not so deride
or abstract, it consists in beholding, and bearing his Glorious likeness, who
invites thee to it, and therefore in the neglect of it, thou most highly
affrontest him.

Yea further, is it not a monstrous unnaturalness toward thy self, as well as
impiety toward God, not to desire that perfect, final blessedness? Does not
every thing naturally tend to its ultimate perfection and proper end? what
creature would not witness against thee, if thou neglect, in thy own capacity
and kind, to aim at thine? Surely thou can not allow thy self to think any
thing beneath this, worthy to be owned by thee, under that notion, of thy
highest good, and thy last end. But that thy Spirit should labor under an
aversion toward thy highest good, toward thy blessedness it self, is not that
a dismal token upon thee? If thou did disaffect, and nauseate the things in
which thy present life is bound up, and without which thou can not live,
would thou not think thy case deplorate? what do thou think will become of
thy soul? whose everlasting life is bound up in that very good, which thou
desire not. Which cannot live that life without that good, nor with it, if
thou have no desire to it. O the Eternal Resentments, thy Soul will have of
this cruelty. To be withheld from that, wherein its life lies? would thou
not judge him unnatural, that should kill his Brother, assassine his Father,
starve his Child? what shall be said of him that destroys himself? How may that
soul lament, that ever it was thine; and say, O that I had rather been of any
such lower kind, to have animated a Fly, to have inspirited a vile Worm, rather
then to have served a reasonable beast, that, by me, knew the good it would
never follow, and did not desire! But if thou have any such desires, in a low
degree, after this blessedness; as thou think may entitle thee to the name
thou bear, of a Saint, a Christian. Is it not still very unnatural to pursue
a good approved, by thy stated judgment, as ^ast in it self, and for thee, with
so unproportionable, so slothful desires? For the same reason thou do desire
it at all; thou should desire it much, yea, and still more, and more, till
thou attain it, and be swallowed up into it. Thy best, and last good, thou
can never desire too much.

And let it be considered by thee, that the temper thou think thy self
innocent of [an habitual prevalent disaffection to the true blesedness of
Saints] may, for ought thou know, be upon thee; while it appears, thou art
so very near the borders of it; and it appears not, with such certainty, that
thou partakest not in it. It is not so easy a matter, critically to
distinguish, and conclude of the lowest degree ( in Hypothesi, or with
application to thy own case) of that desire, which is necessary to qualify
thee for the enjoyment of this blessedness. And is it not a matter both of
shame, and terror, that thou should desire thy blessedness so faintly, as
not to know, whether thou truly desire it at all? It Is true, that a certainty,
amongst such as may be sincere, is very little common; but whence proceeds it,
but from their too common induldulged sloth; out of which all this is designed
to awaken thee. And the commonness whereof does as little detract from the
reproach, and sinfulness, as from the danger of it? it is but a poor defense,
for what is intrinsically evil in it self, that it is common.

But further, as the case is, this is so reproachful a thing, even in common
estimate, [not to desire Heaven, and Eternal Glory, or to desire it with very
cold and careless desires] that there are few will profess it, or own it to be
their temper, much fewer that will undertake to excuse, or justify it. It Is so
evilly thought of, that among merely sober and rational men, it can never find
an advocate, or any that will afford it Patronage. The generality pretend a
desire of going to Heaven, and being with God. If any be so observant of
themselves, as to know, and so ingenious, as to confess it, otherwise with
them, they complain of it as their fault, and say, they would fain have it
redrest, but are far from assuming that confidence to defend, or plead for it.
Consider then, will thou persist in such a temper and disposition of mind, as
all men condemn? and be guilty of so odious a thing, as shall be censured and
blamed by the common concurrent vote and judgment of mankind? Thou would be
ashamed to stand forth, and profess openly to men, that thou desire an
earthly felicity more then a blessedness in Heaven: or at least, that thou art
so indifferent, and the scales hang even with thee, that thou can hardly tell
which way they incline most. And art thou not ashamed that this should be thy
usual temper, how much soever thou conceal it from the notice, and observation
of the world?

Moreover, how can it escape thy serious reflection? that if thou pretend it
otherwise with thee, it is but to add one sin to another, and cover thy
Carnality with Hypocrisy, and Dissimulation? yea, while thou continuest in
that temper of Spirit, not to desire this blessedness as thy Supreme end, the
whole of thy Religion is but an empty show, an artificial disguise; it carries
an appearance and pretense, as if thou wast aiming at God and Glory, while thy
heart is set another way, and the bent of thy soul secretly carries thee a
counter-course. Has not Religion an aspect toward Blessedness? what mean thy
Praying, thy Hearing, thy Sacramental Communion; if thou have not a design for
Eternal Glory? what make thou in this way, if thou have not thy heart set
toward this end?

Nor is it more dishonest and unjust; then it is foolish and absurd, that the
disposition, and tendency of thy soul, should be directly contrary to the only
design of the Religion thou professest, and do externally practice. Thy
profession and practice are nothing but self-contradiction. Thou art
continually running counter to thy self; outwardly pursuing what thou inwardly
declinest. Thy real end (which can be no other then what thou really desire,
and set thy heart upon) and thy visibly way are quite contrary. So that
while thou continuest the course of Religion, in which thou art engaged, having
taken down from before thine eyes, the end which thou should be aiming at,
and which alone Religion can aptly subserve; Thy Religion has no design, or
end at all (none at least which thou would not be ashamed to profess and
own.) Indeed this temper of heart I am now pleading against, an undesirousness,
or indifferency of Spirit toward the eternal glory, renders Religion the
vainest thing in the world. For whereas all the other actions of our lives have
their stated proper ends; Religion has in this case none at all; none to which
it has any designation in its nature, or any aptness to subserve. This
monstrous absurdity it infers (and how strange is it, that it should not be
reflected on?) That, whereas, if you ask any man of common understanding what
he does this or that action for? especially, if they be stated actions done by
him in an ordinary course, he can readily tell you for such and such an end.
But ask him why he continues any practice of Religion; he cannot say (in this
case) for what.

For can any man imagine what other end Religion naturally serves for, but to
bring men to blessedness? which being no other thing then what has been here
described, such, as are found not to desire it really, and Supremely, as their
end, can have no real attainable end of their being religious at all. To drive
on a continued course, and series of actions, in a visible pursuit of that
which they desire not; and have no mind to, is such a piece of folly, so fond
and vain a trifling; that, as I remember, Cicero reports, Cato to have said
concerning the South-sayers of his time, he did wonder they could look in one
another faces, and not laugh (being conscious to each others impostures, and
the vanity of their profession) so one would as justly wander, that the
generality of carnal men (who may shrewdly guess at the temper of one another
minds) do not laugh at each other, that they are jointly engaged in such
exercises of Religion, to the design whereof the common and agreed temper of
their Spirits do so little correspond. As if all were in very good earnest for
Heaven, when each one knows for himself, and may (possibly with more Truth then
Charity) suppose of the rest, that if they might always continue in their
earthly stations, they had rather never come there. And therefore that they
desire it not Supremely, and so not as their end at all; consider it then, that
thy no-desire of this blessed state quite dispirits thy Religion, utterly
ravishes away its Soul, leaves it a dead, foolish, vain thing, renders it an
idle impertinency, not a mean to a valuable end. This desire is that life of
Religion, all duties and exercises of piety are without it, but empty
Formalities, Solemn pieces of Pageantrie. Every service done to God, but the
Sacrifice of a Fool, if not animated by the desire of final blessedness in him
and be not part of our way thither, a means designed to the attainment of it.
Which nothing can be, that we are not put upon by the virtue of the desired
end. Without this, Religion is not it self. A continuance in well doing, is as
it were the body of it; and therein, a seeking honor, glory, and immortality,
the Soul and Spirit. The desire of an Heavenly Country, must run through the
whole course of our Earthly Pilgrimage: It were otherwise a continued error,
an uncertain wandering; no steady tending toward our end. So that thou art a
mere Vagrant, if this desire do not direct thy course toward thy Fathers
house* And methinks all this should make thee even ashamed of thy self, if thou
can not find this desire to have a settled residence and a ruling power in
thy Soul. then.

2. Sense of praise should signify something too, as the Apostle, Whatsoever
things are -- pure, lovely, etc. if there be any virtue, -- any praise, think
of these things. And has not the eternal glory those characters upon it of
purity, and loveliness beyond all things? Is it not a laudable, and
praiseworthy thing to have a mind and heart set upon that?

The blessed God puts a note of excellency upon this temper of Spirit. Heb. 11.
16.
But they desire a better Country, that is, an Heavenly, Wherefore God is not
ashamed to be called their God, etc. This renders them a people worthy of him,
1 These. 2. 12.
who has called them to his kingdom and glory; fit for him to own a relation
to. Had they been of low, terrene Spirits, he would have accounted it a shame
to him, to have gone under the name and cognizance of their God. But in as much
as they desire the Heavenly Country, have learned to trample this terrestrial
world, cannot be contained within this lower Sphere; nor satisfy themselves in
earthly things; they now discover a certain excellency of Spirit, in respect
whereof God is not ashamed to own a relation to them before all the world to be
called their God; to let men see what account he makes of such a Spirit.

Yea, this is the proper genuine Spirit, and temper of a Saint, which agrees to
him as he is such. He is begotten to the eternal inheritance. A disposition
(and therein a desire) to it, is in his very nature (the new nature he has
received) implanted there, from his original. He is born Spirit of Spirit, and
by that birth, is not entitled only, but adopted, and suited also to that
pure and Spiritual state of blessedness. That grace by the appearance whereof
men are made Christians teaches, also instructs, unto this very thing, to look
for this blessed hope the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ.. That which you know consummates that blessedness. For when
Christ, who i^ their life shall appear then shall they also appear with him in
glory, by the participation of the divine nature their Spirits escape and get
up above this corrupt impure world. That new nature is a holy flame that
carries the^r hearts upwards toward heaven.

Further such desires appear hence to be of divine original an infusion from
the blessed God himself. 2 Cor. 5* 4*
That nature is from him immediately in which they are implanted. The Apostle
speaking of his earnest panting desire to have mortality swallowed up of life
presently add's. He that wrought us to the self same thing is God.

They are obedient desires, Heb. 31.
The souls present answer to the heavenly call, 1 These. 7. 12.
by which God calls it to his kingdom and glory. This glory is (as has been
formerly noted) the very term of that calling. 1 Pet. 5. 1^*
The God of all grace has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus.
Phil. 3* 14.
The glori^ied state is the mark, 2 These. 2. 14*
the price of the high calling of God in Christ. It Is the matter of the Apostles
thanksgiving unto God, on the behalf of the Thessalonians, that they were
called by his Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ
when the soul desires this glory, it obediently answers this call. This is a
compliance and subjection of heart to it. How Lovely and becoming a thing is
this, when God touches the heart with a stamp and impress of glory, and it
forthwith turns it self to that very point, and stands directly bent toward
the state of glory, if not wayward or perverse, but here in yield it self to
God, and complyes with the divine pleasure.

Such desires have much in them of a childlike ingenuity. To desire the sight
of a Fathers face; when this is this intimate sense of the soul show me the
Father and it suffices; To desire the fullest conformity to his nature and
will, to be perfect as that heavenly Father is perfect, what does better become
a child?

They are generous desires, they aim at perfection, the highest that created
nature is capable of, not contented to have had some glances of divine glory,
some strokes and lines of his image, but aspiring to full-eyd visions a perfect
likeness.

They are victorious desires, they (as it were) ride in triumph over the world
and every sublunarie thing, they must be supposed to have conquered sensual
inclinations to have got the mastery over terrene dispositions and affections.
With what holy contempt and scorn of every earthly thing does that lofty soul
quit thi^ dirty world and ascend, that is powerfully carried by its own desire
toward the blessed state? The desire of such a knowledge of Christ, as might
transform into his Likeness; and pass the soul through all degrees of
conformity to him, till it attain the resurrection of the dead, and become like
a risen glorified Jesus; Such a desire I say, if it make all things seem as
loss and dung in comparison (even a formal Spirit less religion it self) will
it not render this world the most despicable dunghill of all the rest. Try such
a soul if you can, tempt it down to enjoy a flattering kind world, or to please
it when angry and unkind. When desires after this glory are once awakn'd, into
an active lively vigor, when the fire is kindled, and the flame ascends and
this refined Spirit is joyfully ascending therein; see if you can draw it back
and make it believe this world a more regardable thing. Why should not all
those considerations make thee in love with this blessed frame of Spirit, and
restless till thou find thy self incapable of being satisfied with any thing
but divine likeness,

6. That while we cannot as yet attain the mark and end of our desires, Rule 6.
we yield not to a comfortless despondency in the way, but maintain in our
hearts a lively joy, in the hope that hereafter we shall attain it.

We are not all this while persuading to the desire and pursuit of an
unattainable good. Spiritual desires are also rational and do therefore involve
hope with them; and that hope ought to infer and cherish joy. Hopeless desire
is full of torment, and must needs banish joy from that breast which it has
not the possession of. It Is a disconsolate thing to desire what we must never
expect to enjoy, and are utterly unlikely ever to compass. But these desires
are part of the new creature, which is not of such a composition, as to have a
principle of endless trouble, and disquiet in it self, The Father of mercies is
not so little merciful to his own child; to lay it under a necessity from its
very natural constitution, of being for ever miserable by the desire of that
which it can never have. It had been very unlike the workmanship of God, to
make a creature to which it should be necessary to desire, and empossible to
enjoy the same thing.

Not but as he has given holy souls (as to the present case) great incentives
of desire, so does he afford them proportionable encouragements of hope also,
and that hope intervening, can very well reconcile desire and joy and lodge
them together in the same bosom. So that as it is a thing capable of no
excuse, to hear of this blessedness, and not desire it, so it would be to
desire, and not expect it, to expect it, and not rejoice in it, even while we
are under that expectation. And it must be a very raised joy that shall answer
to the expectation of so great things. If one should give a stranger to
Christianity an account of the Christian hopes, and tell him what they expect
to be and enjoy erelong; he would sure promise himself to find so many angels
dwelling in humane flesh, and reckon, when he came among them, he should be as
amidst heavenly Quire: every one full of joy and praise. He would expect to find
us living on earth, as the inhabitants of heaven, also many pieces of immortal
glory lately dropped down from above, and shortly again returning thither. He
would look to find, every where, in the Christian world incarnate glory,
sparkling through the overshaddowing vail, and wonder how this earthly sphere
should be able to contain so many great souls.

But when he draws nearer to us, and observes the course and carriage of our
lives; when he sees us walk as other men, and considers the strange
disagreement of our daily conversation, to our so great avowed hopes, and how
little sense of joy, and pleasure we discover our selves to conceive in them:
would he not be ready to say, sure some or other (willing only to amuse the
world with the noise of strange things) have composed a Religion for these men,
which they themselves understand nothing of. If they do adopt, and own it for
theirs, they understand not their own pretenses; they are taught to speak some
big words, or to give a faint, or seeming assent to such as speak them in the
names; but it is impossible they should be in good earnest, or believe themselves
in what they say, and profess.

And what reply then should we be able to make? for who can think that any who
acknowledge a God; and understand at all what that name imports, should value
at so low a rate, as we (visibly) do; the eternal fruition of his glory, and a
present Sonship to him, the pledge of so great an hope.

He that is born Heir to great Honors, and Possessions, though he be upon
great uncertainties, as to the enjoyment of them (for how many interveniencies
may prevent him?) yet when he comes to understand his possibilities, and
expectancies; how big does he look and speak? what grandieur does he put on?
His hopes form his Spirit and Deportment; But is it Proportionably so with us?
Do our hopes fill our hearts with joy, our mouths with praise, and clothe our
faces with a cheerful aspect, and make an holy alacrity appear in all our
conversations?

But let not the design of this discourse be mistaken. It Is ^o^ a presumptuous
confidence I would encourage, nor a vain ostentation, nor a disdainful
overlooking of others when we fancy our selves to excel. Such things hold no
proportion with a Christian Spirit. His is a modest, humble exaltation, a
serious severe joy; suitable to his solid, stable hope. His Spirit is not puffed
up, and swol'n with air, it is not big by an inflation, or a light and windy
humor; but it is really filled with effectual pre-apprehensions of a weighty
glory. His joy accordingly exerts it self with a steady lively vigor, equally
removed from vain lightness, and stupidity from conceitedness, and
insensibleness of his blessed state. He forgets not that he is less then the
least of Gods mercies, but disowns not his title to the greatest of them. He
abases himself to the dust, in the sense of his own vileness; but in the
admiration of Divine Grace, he rises as high as Heaven. In his humiliation he
affects to equal himself with worms, in his joy and praise with angels. He is
never unwilling to diminish himself, but afraid of detracting any thing from
the love of God, or the issues of that love.

But most of all he magnifies (as he has cause) this its last and most perfect
issue. And by how much he apprehends his own unworthiness, he is the more rapt
up into a wondering joy; that such blessedness should be his designed portion.

But now how little do we find in our selves of this blessed frame of spirit?
How remote are we from it? Let us but enquire a little into our own Souls. Are
there not too apparent Symptoms with us of the little joy we take in the
forethoughts of future blessedness? For,

First, How few thoughts have we of it? what any delight in, they remember
often. It Is said of the same person, Psalm. 1. 2.
that his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and that in his Law he does
meditate day and night. And when the Psalmist professes his own delight in Gods
statutes, Psalm. 119. 16.
he adds, I will not forget thy Word. Should we not be as unapt to forget
Heaven, if our delight were there? But do not days pass with us, wherein we
can allow our selves no leisure to mind the eternal glory? when yet vanities
throng in upon us, without any obstruction, or check?

And (what is consequent hereupon) How seldom is this blessed state the subject
of our discourse? How often do Christians meet, and not a word of Heaven? O
heavy carnal hearts! Our home and eternal blessedness, in this, appears to be
forgotten among us. How often may a person converse with us e're he understand
our relation to the Heavenly Country? If Exiles meet in a Foreign Land, what
pleasant discourse have they of home? They suffer not one another to forget it.
Such was their remembrance of Sion, who sat together bemoaning themselves by
the Rivers of Babylon, a making mention of it (as the Phrase is often used.)
And methinks (even as to this remembrance) it should be our common resolution
too, If we forget thee, O Jerusalem; If we forget to make mention of thee, O
thou City of the living God; Let our right hand forget her cunning, our tongue
shall sooner cleave to the roof of our mouth; and so it would be, did we prefer
that Heavenly Jerusalem above our chief joy.

Again, how little does it weigh with us? It serves not to outweigh the
smallest trouble, if we have not our eternal desire in every thing gratified,
if any thing fall out cross to our inclinations, this glory goes for nothing
with us. Our discontents swallow up our hopes, and joys, and heaven is
reckoned as a thing of naught. If when outward troubles afflict, or threaten
us, we could have the certain prospect of better days; that would sensibly
revive, and please us. Yea, can we not please our selves with very uncertain
groundless hopes of this kind, without promise or valuable reason? But to be
told of a recompense, at the resurrection of the just, of a day when we shall
see the face of God, and be satisfied, with his Likeness; this is insipid and
without favor to us; and affords us but cold comfort. The uncertain things of
time signify more with us, then the certain things of eternity. Can we think
it is all this while well with us? can we think this a tolerable evil, or
suffer, with patience, such a distemper of Spirit? Methinks it should make us
ever weary of our selves, and solicitous for an effectual speedy redress.

The redress must be more in our own doing (striving with our souls and with
God for them) then in what any man can say. Most of the considerations under
the foregoing rule are with little variation applicable to this present
purpose. I shall here annex only some few subordinate directions; which may
lead us into this blessed state of life, and give us some joyful foretasts of
the future blessedness, according as our spirits shall comply with them. But
expect not to be cured by prescriptions without using them: or that heavenly
joy can be the creature of mortal unregarded breath; we can only prescribe
means, and methods through which God may be pleased to descend, and in which
thou art diligently to insist and wait. And because I cannot well suppose the
ignorant where much is said to this purpose; I shall therefore say little.

1. Possess thy soul with the apprehension that thou art not at liberty in this
matter; but that there is a certain spiritual delectation, which is incumbent
on thee as indispensable duty. Some whose moroser tempers do more estrange them
from delights, think themselves more especially concerned, to banish every
thing of that kind from their religion and fancy it only to consist in sour
and rigorous severities. Others seem to think it arbitrary and indifferent; or
that, if they live in a continual sadness and dejection of spirit, it is only
their infelicity not their fault, and apprehend not the obligation that is upon
them, by a divine Law otherwise to manage and order their spirits. But what
then? are such words thought to be spoken at random, Prove. 3. 17.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness. The Lord is the portion of mine
Inheritance. The Lines are fallen to me in pleasant places (or in the midst of
pleasantnesses, as the expression has been noted to signify) Do such precepts
carry no sense with them; Delight thy self in the Lord. -- Rejoice in the Lord
always and again I say rejoice, Psalm. 34. 7.
with many more? Do all passages of this kind in Scripture stand for ciphers or
were they put in them by chance? Phil. 4 4.
Is there such a thing as an aptitude to delectation in our natures, Sal. 5. 22.
and does the Sanctification thereof entitle the joy of Saints to a place among
the fruits of the Spirit, and yet is the exercise of it to have no place in
their hearts and practice? Do not think you are permitted so to extinguish or
frustrate so considerable a principle of the Divine Life. Know that the due
exercise of it, is a part of the order and discipline of Gods Family. That it
is a constitution of the divine Goodness and Wisdom both to cherish his own,
and invite in strangers to him, yea that is the scope and aim of the whole
Gospel-revelation, that the word of life was purposely written to draw souls
into fellowship with the Father and the Son that their joy might be full. 2
Cor. 4.
That the M^nisters of this Gospel are therefore styled the helpers of their
joy. Therefore though here it be not required nor allowed, that you should
indulge a vain trifling levity or a sensual joy, or that you should rejoice you
know not why (imitating the laughter of a fool) or inopportunely, why your
State admits it not, or when the Lord calls to mourning; yet settle however
this persuasion in your hearts, that the serious, rational, regular, seasonable
exercise of delight and joy is matter of duty, to be charged upon conscience,
from the authority of God; and is an integral part in the religion of
Christians. And then sure you will not think any object more proper and
suitable for it to be exercised upon, than the foreseen state of blessedness,
Psalm. 16.
which is, in it self, Mat. 25.
a fullness of joy; The joy of our Lord. and is in the pre-apprehensions of it a
more considerable matter of joy than our present state affords us besides; and
without relation whereto we have no matter of rational joy at all.

2. Keep Faith in exercise; Both in that act of it, which p^rswades the soul of
the truth of the Gospel-revelation, and that act of it which unites it to God,
through the mediator. The Apostle prays on the behalf of his Roman Christians
that they might be filled with joy and peace, Romans ^5 1^.
in believing; and we are told how effectually (as to this) it supplied the
place of sight. Such as had not seen Christ (which was the privilege of many
other Christians of that time) yet believing did rejoice, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
with joy unspeakable and glorious.

Faith directly tends, in that double office before mentioned, to excite and
foment this joy. As it assents to the truth of the Gospel-revelation it
reallizes the object, Heb. 11. 1.
is the substance and evidence of the invisible glory. As it unites the soul
with God through Christ in a siducial and obediential closure, it ascertains
our interest therein, and is our actual acceptance of our blessedness it self;
for when we take God through Christ to be our God, what is it? but to accept
him as our eternal and satisfying portion, whom we are after fully to enjoy in
the vision and participation of his glorious excellencies, and infinite
fullness. Which two acts of faith we have mentioned together in one text. --
They were persuaded of the promises and embraced them; the former respecting
the truth of the promise, the latter the goodness of the thing promised. And
hereupon they confessed themselves (as it follows) Pilgrims and Strangers on
earth which abdication of the earth, as none of their country could not be, but
that, through their faith, they had a joyous pre-apprehension of that better
state. That confession did manifestly involve in it a lively joy, springing
from the sight and embrace of that more taking distant good; which the promise
presented them with; whence they could not think it enough to be such to
themselves in their own thoughts, and the temper of their minds; but they
cannot forbear (so overcoming were their sights and tastes) to give it out, to
speak, and look, and live, as those that were carried up in their spirits above
this earth; and who did even disdain to own themselves in any other relation to
it, then that of Forraigners and Strangers.

Set thy Faith on work Soul, and keep it a work, and thou will find this no
riddle; it will be so with thee too, we have much talk of Faith among us, and
have the name often in our mouths, but how few are the real lively believers?
Is it to be thought that such blessedness should not more affect our hearts,
nay would it not ravish away our very souls, did we thoroughly believe it? And
were it our present daily work to renew the bonds of a vital union with the
blessed God, in whom we expect to be blessed forever, could that be without
previous gusts of pleasure? It Is not talking of faith but living by it, that
will give us the experience of heavenly delights and joys.

3. Take heed of going, in thy practice, against thy light, of persisting in a
course of known, or suspected sin, that states thee in a direct hostility and
rebellion against heaven; and can never suffer thee to think of eternity and
the other world with comfort, will fill thy mind with frightful apprehensions
of God, render the sight of his face, the most terrible thing to thy thoughts,
thou can imagine; and satisfaction with his likeness the most impossible
thing. Let a good understanding and correspondence be continued between God and
thee (which is not possible, if thou disobeyest the dictates of thy conscience
and take the liberty to do what thou judge God has forbidden thee) that
this may be thy rejoicing the testimony of a good conscience; that in
simplicity, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
and godly sincerity, not according to fleshly wisdom, but the grace of God
thou have had thy conversation --. Take God for a witness of thy ways and
walking; approve thy self to his jealous eye, study to carry thy self
acceptably toward him; and unto all well pleasing. Let that be thy ambition to
stand right in his thoughts to appear gracious in his eyes. Hold fast thine
integrity, that thy heart may not reproach thee as long as thou live, If
iniquity be in thy hand put it away, then shall thou lift up thy face without
spot and without fear. Be a faithful subject of that kingdom of God (and here
conscience rules under him) which consists first in righteousness, and then in
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Thou will so daily behold the face of God in
righteousness, and with pleasure, but wilt most of all please thy self to think
of thy final appearance before him, and the blessedness that shall ensue.

4. Watch and arm thy self against the too forcible strokes and impressions of
sensible objects Let not the favor of such low vile things corrupt the palate
of thy soul. A sensual earthly mind, and heart, cannot taste. heavenly delights.
They that are after the flesh do savor the things of the Flesh, they that are
after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. Labor to be thoroughly mortified
toward this world, 1 Cor. 73 1.
and the present state of things. 1 John 2. 17.
Look upon this scheme and pageant as passing away, keep natural appetites
under restraint (the world and the lusts of it pass away together) sensuality
is an impure thing. Heavenly refined joy cannot live amid'st so much filth.
Yea, and if thou give thy flesh liberty too far in things that are ( in
specie;) lawful; it will soon get advantage to domineer, and keep thy soul in a
depressing servitude. Abridge it then, and cut it short; That thy mind may be
enlarged, and at liberty; may not be thronged, and prepossest with carnal
imaginations and affections. Let thy soul (if thou will take this instruction
from a Heathen) look with a constant erect mind into the undefiled light, Max.
Tyr. in dissert.
neither darkened, (...).
nor born down toward the Earth; but stopping its Ears, and turning its Eyes,
and all other Senses back upon it self; and quite abolishing out of it self,
all Earthly Sighs, and Groans, and Pleasures, and Glories, and Honors, and
disgrace; and having forsaken all these; choose for the Guides of its way, true
Reason, and strong Love, the one whereof will show it the way, the other make
it easy, and pleasant.

5. Having voided thy mind of what is earthly, and carnal, apply and turn it to
this blessed Theme. The most excellent and the vilest objects are alike to
thee, while thou mindest them not. Thy thoughts possibly bring thee in nothing
but vexation and trouble, which would bring in as soon joy, and pleasure, did
thou turn them to proper objects. A thought, of the heavenly glory is as soon
thought as of an earthly Cross. We complain the world troubles us, then what do
we there? why get we not up in our spirits into the quieter Region? what
trouble would the thoughts of future glory be to us? How are the thoughts and
wits set on work for this flesh? but we would have our Souls flourish, as the
Lilies, without any thing of their own care. Yea, we make them toil for
torture, and not for joy, revolve an affliction a thousand times, before, and
after it comes; and have never done with it, when eternal blessedness gains not
a thought.

6. Plead earnestly with God for his Spirit. This is joy in the Holy Ghost; or
whereof he is the Author. Many Christians (as they must be called) are such
strangers to this work of imploring, and calling in the blessed Spirit, as if
they were capable of adopting these words, We have not so much as heard whether
there be an Holy Ghost. That name is with them as an empty sound. How hardly
are we convinced of our necessary dependence, on that free Spirit, as to all
our truly Spiritual operations? This Spirit is the very earnest of our
inheritance. The foretasts, and first fruits we have here of the future
blessedness; The joy and pleasure, the complacential relishes, we have of it
before hand, are by the gracious vouchsafement and work of this blessed Spirit.
The things that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, and which have not entered
into the heart of man, are revealed by this Spirit. Therefore does the Apostle
direct his Prayer on the behalf of the Ephesians, to the Father of this glory,
that he would give them this Spirit of wisdom and revelation, -- to enlighten
the eyes of their understanding, that they might know the hope of his calling,
and the riches of the glory of his inheritance in (or among) the Saints. And
its revelation is such as begets an impression; in respect whereof it is said
also to seal up to the day of redemption. Therefore pray earnestly for this
Spirit; not in idle dreaming words of course, but as being really apprehensive
of the necessity of prevailing. And give not over till thou find that sacred
fire diffusing it self through thy mind and heart, to enlighten the one, and
refine the other, and so prepossess both, of this glory; that thy soul may be
all turned into joy and praise. And then let me add here (without the
formality of a distinct head.) That it concerns thee to take heed of quenching
that Spirit, by either resisting, or neglecting its holy dictates, or as the
same precept is otherwise given of grieving the Spirit; he is, by Name and
Office, the Comforter. The Primitive Christians, it is said, walked in the fear
of God, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. Is it equal dealing to grieve
him, whose business it is to comfort thee? or can thou expect joy, where thou
causest grief? Walk in the Spirit, adore its power. Let thy Soul do it homage
within thee. Wait for its holy influences, and yield thy self to its ducture
and guidance; so will thou go as the redeemed of the Lord, with everlasting joy
upon thy head, till thou enter that presence, where is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore.

Nor do thou think it improper, or strange, that thou should be called upon
to rejoice in what thou do not yet possess. Thy hope is in stead of fruition;
it is an anticipated enjoyment. Romans 1^. 12.
We are commanded to rejoice in hope, and Saints have professed to do so; to
rejoice even in the hope, Romans 5. 2.
the hope of the glory of God. Nor is it unreasonable that should be thy
present highest joy. For though yet it be a distinct thing, and indistinctly
revealed, the excellency of the object makes compensation for both, with an
abundant surplusage. As any one would much more rejoice to be assured by a
great person, of ample possessions, he would make him his heir to, (though he
knew not distinctly what they should be) then to see a shilling, already his
own, with his own eyes.

CHAP. XXX.
The addition of two Rules that more specially respect the yet future season of
this blessedness; after this life, viz. Rule 7. That we patiently wait for it
until death. Rule 8. That we love not too much this present life.

THere are yet two more Rules to be superadded, that respect the season of this
blessedness: [when we awake] i. e. not till we go out of time, into eternity;
not till we pass out of the drowsy darkness of our present state, till the
night be over with us, and the vigorous light of the everlasting day do shine
upon us. Hence therefore it will be further necessary.

7. That while the appointed proper season of this blessedness is not yet come
( i. e. till God shall vouchsafe to translate us from our present earthly
state) we compose our Spirits to a patient expectation of it. Rule 7.


Upon a twofold account, the exercise of patience is very requite in the
present case, viz. both in respect of this very expectation it self, and also
in respect of the concomitant miseries of this expecting state. In the former
respect, an absent good, is the matter of our patience; in the latter, present
and incumbent evil. It falls more directly, in our way to speak to the exercise
of patience upon the former account, yet as to the latter (though it be more
collateral as to our present purpose) it cannot be unseasonable, briefly to
consider that also.

First, Therefore, the very expectation it self of this blessedness, renders
patience very requisite to our present state. Patience has as proper and
necessary an exercise, in expecting the good we want and desire, as in enduring
the evil, that is actually upon us. The direction (it must be remembered)
intends such only, as apprehend, and desire this blessedness as their greatest
good, whose souls are transported with earnest longings, fully to enjoy what
they have foretasted. I am apprehensive enough that others need it not. There
is no use of patience in expecting what we desire not.

But as to those who desire it most, and who therefore are most concerned in
this advice; It may possibly become a doubt; how, since there is sin in our
present ignorance of God, and unlikeness to him, this can be the matter of any
patience.

We must therefore know, that as our knowledge of God, and conformity to him
are both our duty, and blessedness; the matter both of our endeavor, and of
Gods vouchsafement. So our ignorance of him, and unlikeness to him, are both
our sin, and our misery; which misery, though God have graciously removed it in
part, yet also he continues it upon us in part (as our sad experience tells us)
by his just, and wise dispensation, which we cannot except against.

Now therefore, looking upon the defect of our knowledge of God, and likeness
to him, under the former notion; Though we are to reflect upon our selves with
greater displeasure and indignation; yet looking on them, in the latter notion,
we are to submit to the righteous dispensation of God, with a meek, unrepining
patience.

By this patience, therefore, I mean; not a stupid succumbencie under the
remaining disease, and distemper of our Spirits, in this our present state; a
senseless indifferency, and oscitant cessation from continual endeavors of
further redress; but a silent and submissive veneration of Divine Wisdom, and
Justice, and Goodness, that are sweetly complicated in this procedure with us;
with a quiet peaceful expectation of the blessed issue of it.

This being premised, I shall briely show.

That we have need of patience That we have reason for it
in this present case.

1. That we have need of it (supposing our souls are intent upon glory; that we
are in earnest in this pursuit) will appear upon sundry accounts.

First, The greatness of the thing we expect. To behold the face of God, to be
satisfied with his likeness. What serious heart, apprehensive of its own
concerns, can without much patience, hold out under such an expectation? How do
Lovers, that expect the marriage day, tell the hours, and chide the Sun that it
makes no more have? But how can that soul contain it self, that expects the
most intimate fruition of the Lord of glory!

Again, consider, the continued representation, and frequent inculcations of
this glory. Its vigorous powerful beams are, by often repealed pulsations,
continually beating upon such souls, as are intent toward it. Life and
Immortality are brought to light in the Gospel; and they are obliged, by
command, and inclination, to attend its discoveries. The eye that is once
smitten, looks again, and again, it is not satisfied with seeing; and every
renewed look meets with, still, fresh rays of glory; They have frequent
foretasts, and prelivations, which still give life to new desires. To lie under
the direct stroke of the power of the world to come, this requires much
patience, to sustain the burden of such an expectation. Life it self were
otherwise a bitter, and a wearisome thing. Canerem tibi angelica voce throno^um
quam mi^ifica, semper in patria dulcedine reple^mur; nisi vererer, ne forte,
postha^ tantae d^lcedinis hujus comparatione; tota tibi in terris vita non
solum amarissima verum etiam amaritudo ipso penitus vide^tur. M. Ficin. Epist.
And the want of such foretasts (for alas they are not constant) makes desire
sometimes more restless, and expectation more bitter and grievous.

Moreover consider the nature and Spring of these desires, that work in
heavenly souls toward this glory. They are of a Divine Nature, and Original;
He that has wrought us to this self same thing is God, 2 Cor. 5. 5.

Observe the tenor of this Proposition, God is not the subject of predication,
but the predicate. The action is not predicated of God; as it would in this
form of words, God has wrought us, etc. but God is predicated of this agent,
q. d. This is the work of a Deity; none but God could be the Author of such
desires. That a Soul should be acted toward glory by the alone power of an
Almighty hand! here needs a Divine Patience to sustain it, and make it strong,
and able to endure such a motion; where there is Divine Power to act and move
it forward. The Frame could not hold it else, it must desolve. The Apostle
therefore praying for the Thessalonians, 2 These. 3. 5.
That God would direct their hearts into the love of himself (which could not
but inflame their souls with a desire of a perfect vision, and enjoyment)
presently adds, and into the patient waiting for of Christ. Where we cannot by
the way but reflect upon the admirable constitution, and equal temper of the
new Creature, as to the principles, that are ingredient into the composition of
it, fervent desire; allayed with meek submission, mighty love, with strong
patience. If we consider it in actu signato, or in its abstract, Idea, this is
its temperament; and of these there is a gradual participation, where ever you
find it actually existing. God had otherwise formed a creature (the prime of
his creatures) so as by its most intrinsecal constituent principles to be a
torment to it self.

Lastly, The tires^me nature of expectation in it self, is not least
considerable. It carries ('it is true) pleasure (if it be hoping expectation)
with it; but not without a great admixture of pain. It brings a kind of torture
to the mind, as a continued exertion or stretching forth of the neck (by which
it is expressed) does to the body. Romans 8. 19.
Therefore it (...) most significantly said by the wise man, Prove. 12. 12.
Hope deferred, makes the heart sick. All these, I say, together discover the
truth of what the Apostle tells us. Heb. 10.
We have need of patience, that when we etc. we may inherit the Promise.

2. And as we have need of it, so we have also reason for it, upon many
accounts. It Is no piece of rigorous severity to be put upon the exercise of
some patience, to be kept awhile in a waiting posture for the completion of
this blessedness. For

First, The thing you expect is sure. You have not to do in this matter with
one who is inconstant, or likely to change. If such a one should make us large
promises, we should have some cause, never to think our selves secure, till we
had them made good to us. But since we live in the hope of eternal life, Tit.
1. 2.
which God who cannot lie, Heb. 10. 23.
and who, we know, is faithful, has promised, we may be confident, and this
confidence should quiet our hearts. What a faithful friend keeps for us, we
reckon as safe in his hands, as in our own. He that believes makes not have.
And impatient haste argues an unbelieving jealousy and distrust. Surely, there
is an end, and thy expectation will be cut off.

And then, it is an happiness that will recompense the most wearisome
expectation. 'Twere good sometimes to consider with our selves, what is the
object of our hope? are our expectations pitc^'t upon a valuable good? that
will be worth while to expect, so the Psalmist, what wait I for? Ps. 39. 7.
and he answers himself, my hope is in thee, Sure then that hope will not make
ashamed. Twere a confounding thing to have been a long time full of great
hopes, that at last dwindle into some petty trifle; but when we know before
hand the business is such as will defray it self, bear its own charges, who
would not be contented to wait?

Nor will the time of expectation be long, when I shall aw^ke, when he shall
appear. Put it to the longest term, 'twas said, 1600 years ago, to be but a
little while, three times over in the shutting up of the Bible, he tells us I
come quickly. He seems to foresee he should be something impatiently expected:
Jame^ 5.
And at last Surely I come quickly. q. d. What will you not believe me? Be
patient says the Apostle to the coming of the Lord; and presently he adds be
patient stablish your hearts for the coming of the Lord draws nigh.

Yea, and amidst the many troubles of that short time of expectation, many
present comforts are intermixed. Heaven is open to us. We have constant liberty
of access to God. He disdains not our present converse; We may have the
constant pleasure of the exercise of grace, the heavenly delights of
meditation. The joy of the public Solemnities, of worship. The communion, and
encouragement of fellow Christians. The light of that countenance whereof we
expect the eternal vision. The comforts of the Holy Ghost. The continual
prospect of glory all the way thither. What cause have we of impatience or
complaint?

Further, Saints of all ages have had their expecting time. We are required to
be followers of them, who through faith and patience have inherited the
promises. Our Savior himself waited a life's time for his glorification. I have
(says he) glorified thee on earth; I have finished the work thou gave me to
do. And now further glorify me with thine own self etc.

And while we are waiting (if it be not our fault) our glory will be
increasing; we may be glorifying God in the mean time, which is the end of our
beings, we need not live here to no purpose.

Again, We were well enough content till God more clearly revealed that other
state to live always as we do. It Is not now ingenuous to be impatiently
querulous about the time of our entering into it. It Is his free vouchsafement we
never merited such a thing at his hands. It Is not commendable among men, to be
over quick in exacting doubts; even where there was an antecedent right, much
less where the right only shall accrue by promise, not yet suitable, would it
not shame us to have God say to us. Have patience with me and I will pay you
all?

And our former state should be often reflected on. If you had promised great
things to a wretch lately taken off the dunghill, and he is every day
impatiently urging you ^o an untimely accomplisheut, would you not check his
over bold have, by minding him of his original? It becomes not base and low
born persons to be transported with a preposterous over hasty expectation of
high and and great things.

And if God bear with the sinfulness of our present state, James 1. 4.
is it not reasonable we should bear with the infelicitie of it to his
appointed time?

Besides that, we should much injure our selves by our impatiency; imbitter our
present condition, increase our own burden, dissipate our strength, retard our
progress toward the perfection we profess to aim at; for patience must have
its perfect work, that we may be perfect.

And others that have had as clear apprehensions and vigorous desires (at
least) of the future state of glory as we can (with modesty) pretend to; have
yet herein moderated themselves so, as to intend their present work with
composed spirits. Take that one instance of the blessed Apostle; who, whilst,
in this earthly tabernacle, he groaned, being burdened to be clothed, with
glory, and to have mortality swallowed up of life being sensible enough, that
during his abode, or presence in the body, he was absent from the Lord; yet
notwithstanding the fervor and vehemence of these longings, with the greatest
calmness, and resignation imaginable, ( as to the termination, 2 Cor. 1. 9.
(...).
or continuance of his present state) he adds, that (though he had rather be
absent from the body to be present with the Lord) it was yet his chief ambition
(as the word, he uses signifies) whether present or absent (as, if in
comparison of that, to be present, or absent were indifferent though otherwise
out of that comparison, (...)
he had told us he would be absent rather) to be accepted to appear grateful,
and well pleasing in the eye of God; such that he might delight, and take
content in (as his expression imports.) As if he had said; though I am not
unapprehensive of the state of my case, I know well, I am kept out of a far
more desirable condition, while I remain in this tabernacle; yet, may I but
please and appear acceptable in the sight of God, whether I be sooner dismissed
from this thraldom, or longer, continued in it, I contend not. His burden here,
that so sensibly pressed him, was not a present evil so much as an a^sent good.
He was not so burdened by what he felt, and could not remove, as by what he
saw, and could not enjoy. His groans accordingly were not brutal; as those of a
beast under a too heavy load; but rational, the groans of an apprehensive
spirit panting after an alluring, inviting glory; which he had got the prospect
of, but could not yet attain. And hence the same spiritual reason which did
exercise, did also at once moderate his desires, so that as he saw there was
reason to desire, so he saw there was reason his desi^es should be allayd by a
submissive ingen^ous patience, till they might have a due (...) seasonable
accomplishment. And that s^^e emper of mind we find him in, when he professes
to be in a strait ^etween two, having a desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, which he thought to be far better, Phil.
and yet apprehended his longer abode in the world, to be needful for the
service of the Church; whereupon he expresses his confidence, that he should
abide longer, and therein discovers how well contented he was, it should be so.

Therefore, as in reference to this very expectation it self, there is great
need of patience; so the exercise of it in this case has nothing harsh, or
unreasonable in it, or which the spirit of a Saint may not well comport with.

And for the exercise of patience upon the latter account; the concomitant
miseries of this our present expecting state. I need not insist to show how
needful it is, this being that which our own sense will sufficiently instruct
us in. We are not to expect the future state of blessedness in a state of
present ease and rest, in a quiet friendly world; in a calm and peaceful region
under placide and benign insluences from men, and times; but amidst storms,
and tempests, and trouble on every side, under frowns and displeasures, threats
and dangers, harsh and rough severities, ill and ungentle usages, flouts and
scorns, wrongs and injurious dealings, wants and pressures in many kinds. When
the world is once forsaken by us, it grows angry; If we disclaim it, and avow
our selves not to be of it, becomes confessed strange and pilgrims in it, set
our selves seriously, and visibly to mind and design something above and beyond
it, discover our selves to be of them, that are called out of it, from the same
principle that it loves its own, it will hate us; 1 John. 3. 1.
when once God calls us his sons, the world well not know us. We see in this
context we are discoursing from what the Psalm mist condition was, whilst, as
yet he remained under this blessed expectation. He found the men of time, whose
portion was in this life, to be deadly enemies, wicked oppressors, proud
insulters? They were to him as greedy lions, as a blood thirsty sword. His
cries to be delivered from them, show what he met with at their hands, or
thought he had reason to fear. Nor can so raging enmity and hate ever cease to
meditate mischiefs and cruelties. The same principle still remains in all the
Serpents brood, and will still be putting forth it self in suitable practices,
which cannot but infer to the contrary Seed, continual trouble and matter of
complaint.

And (in short) whatever is here the matter of your complaint, ought to be the
matter of your patience. Whence it cannot be doubted the matter of it will be
very copious; Col 1. 11.
so as to require the Fall of patience (as the Apostle speaks) which his
addressing this solemn request to God on the behalf of these Colossian
Christians plainly intimates. He prays that they may be strengthened with all
might according to the glorious power of God unto all patience, etc. Patience
is the Christians suffering ^^wer, it is Passive fortitude, an ability to
suffer; and so apprehensive he is of their great need of a full, and ample
supply of this power; that* he prays, that they might be strengthened in this
kind with might, with all might, that they might be even almighty sufferers;
strengthed with a might according and corresponding to the glorious power of
God himself; Such as might appear the proper impress and image of divine power,
whereof the divine power mightbe both the principle, and the pattern (for the
patience whereby God bears the wrongs done to him is called power too; Let the
power of the Lord be great as thou have spoken, saying, the Lord is long
suffering forgiving etc.) And this unto all patience, where patience is put for
an act of this power, or must be understood of patience in exercise, actual
bearing.

Nor are we to look upon the expressions of this prayer as so many hyperbolical
strains, or Rhetorical schemes of Speech. He prays according to the
apprehension he had of the necessity of suffering Christians.

And yet how much soever the need is, the reason is not less, It Is a thing as
possible as it is necessary; yea there is a deal more in the power of the
cause; then to work this single effect. I mean it not only of the efficient
cause mentioned before, but of the objection, or final (as having such a
superabundant sufficiency in its kind also) hinted in the close of the
following verse. He does not utter vain and groundless wishes, when he prays,
that to that all of patience they might add joyfulness too, and giving of
thank; no the matter (as if he had said) will bear it, even the inheritance of
the Saints in light (the very expectation objective, I am speaking of) It has
enough in it to induce, not only patitience, but joy, not a contented bearing
only, but giving of thanks too, V^r. 12.
to him that has made you meet for that inheritance.

True it is indeed, that the very need we have of patience, and the gain that
would accrue by it, is it self a reason, why we should labor to frame our
spirits to it, for if such evils must be undergone, how much better is it to
bear them alone, then to have the disease of a wounded impatient spirit, to
bear also, as an additional burden. The law of patience, is, certainly, a most
indulgent, merciful Law, a gracious provision (as much as can be made by a Law,
for the quiet, and ease of our spirits, under the sharpest, and most affl^ctive
sufferings. As might at large be shown, were it suitable to fall into a
discourse of patience in it self considered; and to treat of that rest, and
pleasure, that liberty of Spirit, that possession and dominion of ones own
soul, which it carries in it. But that were two much a digression. It only
falls directly here in out way to consider, that as we have many grievances and
pressures to undergo, while we are expecting the future blessedness, which
render the exercise of patience very requisite, so that there is enough of
weight, and worth, in that very expectation (i. e. in what we expect) to
outweigh them all; and to render the exercise thereof highly reasonable upon
that acount. I reckon (says the Apostle) that the sufferings of this present
time, are not worthy to be comp^red with the glory that shall be revealed in
us. Ro^ 8 18.
Thus (says he) I reckon, i. e. it is my stated, settled judgment, not a
sudden rash thought. When I have reasoned the matter with my self, weighed it
well, considered the case, turned it round, viewed it exactly on every side;
balanced advantages, and disadvantages, pondered all things, which are fit to
come into consideration about it; this is the result, the final determination;
that which I conclude and judge at last (judgment is the last product, and
issue of the most exquisite enquiry, and debate; the ultimate, and most perfect
act of reason) that the sufferings of this now of time are of no value; things
not fit, as it were, to be mentioned the same day, with the glory to be
revealed, etc. It can therefore be no hard Law, no unreasonable imposition,
that shall oblige us to the exercise of patience, under such sufferings, in the
expectation of so transcendent glory. For, consider,

First, These sufferings are but from men; (For the sufferings, of which the
Apostle here speaks, are such as wherein we suffer together with Christ, i. e.
for his Name, and Interest, on behalf of the Christian cause.) But this glory
is from God. How disproportionable must the effects be of a created, and
increated cause.

Again, These sufferings reach no further then the bone and flesh. ( Fear not
them that kill the body, and, after they have done that, can do no more, etc.)
But this glory reaches unto, and transforms the soul. How little can a clod of
earth suffer, in comparison of what an immortal Spirit may enjoy?

And further, There is much mixture in our present sufferings. The present
state of suffering Saints is not a state of total misery. There are, as it were
Rays of Glory interlac't with their present afflictions; but there will be
nothing of Affliction mingled with their future Glory.

Yea, and (what may not only convince, but even transport us too) these
sufferings are but temporary (nay, but momentary.) This glory eternal. 2 Cor 4.
17.
What heart is big enough to comprehend the full sense of these words. Our
light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. How might I dwell here upon every syllable, light
affliction, weighty glory [exceeding weight] affliction for a moment, eternal
weight of glory*

O then, how unworthy is it of the Christian name, and hopes, that we should
have an impatient resentment of this Method God follows with us (as he did with
our great Redeemer, and Lord) that we should suffer first, and then enter into
glory! Heaven were a poor Heaven, if it would not make us savers. It were high
time for us to give over the Christian profession, if we do not really account
that it^ reward, and hope do surmount its reproach, and trouble; or do think
its Cross more weighty, then its Crown. Is the price, and worth of eternal
glory fallen? It has been counted worth suffering for. There have been those in
the world, that would not accept deliverance from these sufferings, that they
might obtain the better resurrection. Are we grown wiser? or would we indeed
wish God should turn the Tables, and assign us our good things here, and
hereafter evil things? ungrateful souls! How severe should we be to our selves?
that we should be so apt to complain, for what we should admire and give
thanks. What because purer, and more refined Christianity in our time, and in
this part of the world, has had public favor and countenance, can we
therefore not tell how to frame our minds to the thoughts of suffering? Are
Tribulation and Patience antiquated names? quite out of date, and use with us?
and more ungrateful to our ears and hearts, then heaven and eternal glory are
acceptable? And had we rather (if we were in danger of suffering on the
Christian account) run a hazard, as to the latter, then adventure on the
former? Or do we think it impossible, we should ever come to the trial, or be
concerned to busy our selves with such thoughts? Is the world become so
stable, and so unacquainted with vicissitudes, that a state of things less
favorable to our profession can never revolve upon us? It were however not
unuseful to put such a case by way of supposition to our selves. For every
sincere Christian is in affection, and preparation of his mind a Martyr. He
that loves not Christ better then his own life, cannot be his Disciple. We
should, at least inure our thoughts more to a suffering state; that we may
thence take some occasion to reflect, and judge of the temper of our hearts
toward the Name and Cause of Christ. It Is easy suffering indeed, in Idaea,
and contemplation, but something may be collected from the observation, how we
can relish and comport with such thoughts. It Is as training in order to sight;
which is done, often, upon every remote supposition, that such occasions may
possible fall out.

Therefore what now do we think of it? If our way, into the Kingdom of God,
shall be through many tribulations. If, before we behold the smiles of ^is
blessed ^ace, we must be entertained with the less pleasing sight of the
frowning aspect, and visage of an angry world. If we first bear the image of a
crucified Christ, e're we partake of the likeness of a glorious God? what, do
we regret the thoughts of it? Do we account we shall be ill dealt with, and
have an hard bargain of it? O how tender are we grown in comparison of the
hardiness and magnanimity of Primitive Christians? we have not the patience to
think of what they had the patience to endure. We should not yet forget our
selves, that such a thing belongs to our profession, even in this way to
testify our fidelity to Christ, and our value of the inheritance, purchased by
his blood, if he call us thereunto. We must know it is a thing inserted into
the Religion of Christians; and with respect to their condition in this world)
made an essential thereto. He cannot be a Christian, that does not deny
himself, and take up the Cross. How, often, when the active part of a
Christians duty is spoken of, is the passive part studiously, H^b. 12. 1.
and expressly annexed? Let us run [with patience] the race that is set before
us. The good ground brought forth fruit [with patience] eternal life is for
them that by [a patient] continuance in well doing, Mar.
seek after it. Rom
Yea, Rev.
and hence the Word of Christ is called the Word of his [patience. Chap
] And the style wherein the beloved Disciple speaks of himself, and his
profession is this; I John, a companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and
[patience] of Jesus Christ. Do we mean to plead the prescription against all
this? or have we got an express exemption? Have we a discharge to show? a
manumission from all the suffering part of a Christians duty? and is it not a
discharge also from being Christians as much? Will we disavow our selves to
belong to that noble Society of them that through Faith and Patience inherit
the promises? Surely we are highly conceited of our selves, if we think we are
too good to be numbered among them, of whom the world was not worthy. Or we
design to our selves along abode here, while we so much value the Wor^ds
favor, and a freedom from worldly trouble: Or Eternity is with us an empty
sound, and the future blessedness of Saints, an aerie thing, that we should
reckon it insufficient to counterpoise the sufferings of a few hasty days, that
will so soon have an end. It Is a sad Symptom of the declining state of
Religion, when the powers of the world to come are so overmastered, by the
powers of this present world; and objects of sense so much outweigh those of
Faith. And is not this apparently the case with the Christians of the present
age. Do not your thoughts run the same course with theirs, that meditated
nothing but sitting on the right and left hand of Christ, in an earthly
dominion? while they never dreamed of drinking of his Cup, or being baptized,
with his Baptism? How many vain dreamers have we of golden mountains and (I
know not what) earthly felicity? whose pretended Prophesies about a (supposed)
near approaching prosperity to the Church on earth, gain easier belief, or are
more savory, and taking with too many; then all that the Sacred Oracles
discover about its glorious state in heaven? Hence are our shoulders so
unfitted to Christ's yoke (like the unaccustomed Heifer) and the business of
suffering will not enter into our hearts. Methinks the belief, and expectation
of such a state hereafter, should make us even regardless of what we see, or
suffer here; and render the good, or evil things of time, as indifferent to us.
Yet neither plead I for an absolute Stoical Apathy, but for patience. S^n. le
Constant. sapientis.
A great follower of that Sect acknowledges, It is not a virtue to bear what we
feel not, or have no sense of. Stupidity under Providence is not a Christian
temper; as that Moralist says of the wise man. It Is not the hardness of stone
or iron that is to be ascribed to him.

But least any should run into that more dangerous mistake, to think, that by
the patience we have been all this while persuading to (in the expectation of
the blessedness yet to come) is meant a love of this present world, and a
complacential adherence of heart to the earth, (which extreme the terrene
temper of many souls, may much incline them to.) It will be necessary upon that
account to add (in reference also to the yet future expected season of this
blessedness (this further, and concluding instruction, viz.

That (however we are not to repine at our being held so long in this world in
an expecting state: Rule 8.
yet) we let not our souls cleave too close to their terrestrial stations, nor
be too much in love with the body, and this present, low state of life on earth.

For evident it is, that notwithstanding all the miseries of this expecting
state; the most are yet loath to leave the world, and have hearts sordidly
hankering after present things. And surely there is much difference between
being patient of an abode on earth, and being fond of it. Therefore since the
true blessedness of Saints consists in such things as we have shown, and cannot
be enjoyed till we awake, not within the compass of time, and this lower world.
It will be very requisite to insist here a while in the prosecution of this
last Rule. And what I shall say to it, shall be by way of Caution. Inforcement.


1. For Caution^s; that we misapprehend not that temper and disposition of
Spirit, we are in this thing to endeavor and aim at. And it especially
concerns us to be cautious about the Inducements. Degree.


Of that desire of leaving this world, or concontempt of this present life,
which we either aspire to, or allow our selves in.

First, Inducements. Some are desirous, others at least content, to quit the
world upon very insufficient, or indeed, wicked considerations.

1. There are, who desire it, merely to be out of the way of present troubles,
whereof they have either too impatient a sense, or an unworthy, and impotent
fear.

Many times the urgency and anguish of incumbent trouble impresses such a
sense, and utters it self in such a language as that, John 4. 3.
Now, O Lord, Joh. 7. 15.
take, I beseech thee, my life from me. for it is better for me to die, then to
live; Or that, My soul chooses strangling and death rather then life: Makes men
long for death, and dig for it, as for hid treasures; rejoice and be exceeding
glad when they can find the grave.

Yea, and the very fear of troubles that are but impendent, and threatening,
make some wish the Grave a Sanctuary, and render the Clods of the Valley sweet
unto their thoughts. They lay possibly so humoursom and phansiful stress, upon
the mere circumstances of dying, that they are earnest to dye out of hand,
De^^ite (...)
to avoid dying so, and so; as the Poet would fain persuade himself it was not
Death he feared, but Shipwreck. It would not trouble them to dye, but to dye by
a violent hand, or to be made a public spectacle; they cannot endure the
thoughts of dying so. Here is nothing commendable or worthy of a Christian in
all this. It were a piece of Christian bravery to dare to live in such a case,
even when there is a visible likelihood, of dying, a sacrifice in the midst of
flames. How much this glory was affected in the earlier days of Christianity is
sufficiently known. Though, I confess, there were excesses in that kind
altogether unimitable. But if God call a man forth to be his Champion, and
witness, to lay down a life, in it self little desirable, in a truly, worthy
cause; The call of his Providence, should be as the sound of the Trumpet, to a
truly Martial Spirit; it should fill his soul with a joyful courage, and sense
of honor; and be complied with cheerfully, with that apprehension, and
resentment, a stout Soldier would have of his Generals putting him upon some
very hazardous piece of service, viz. Imperator de me non mali meruit sed been
judic^rit, S^nec.
he would say, My General has not (as the Morallist expresses his sense for
him) deserved ill of me, but it appears he judged well. It should be counted
all joy to [fall into] such trials; that is, when they become our lot by a
providential disposition; Jam. 1. 2.
not by a rash precipitation of our selves. And as it is a wickedness
inconsistent with Christianity, to be of that habitual temper, to choose to
desert such a cause for the saving of life; so it is a weakness very
reproachful to it; to lay down ones life in such a case, with regret as
unwilling in this kind, to glorify him who laid down his for us. we are no
more to dye to our selves; then to live to our selves* Our Lord Jesus has
purchased to himself a Dominion over both states of the living and dead, Romans
15. 7, 8.
and whether we live we must live to him, or dye we must dye to him. It Is the
glory of a Christian to live so much above the world, 9.
that nothing in it may make him either fond of life, or weary of it.

2. There are others who are (at least) indifferent, and careless how soon they
dye, out of either a worse than paganish infidelity, disbelieving the
concernments of another world, or a brutish stupidity not apprehending them,
or a gross conceited ignorance, misunderdanding the terms of the Gospel, and
thinking themselves to be in a good condition, as to eternity when the case is
much otherwise with them.

Take heed thy willingness to dye be from no such inducements; but a mere
desire of being with God, and of attaining his perfection and blessedness,
which he has engaged thee in the pursuit and expectation of. And then, having
made sure it be right as to the rise and principle. Be careful, It be not under
in point of degree. i. e. a cold intermittent velleity is too little on the one
hand. And a peremptory precipitant hasting is too much on the other. The middle
and desirable temper here is a complacential submission to the Divine will in
that affair, with a preponderating inclination on our part, toward our eternal
home, if the Lord see good. For we have two things to attend in this business,
and by which our Spirits may be swayed this way or that. i. e. the goodnss of
the object to be chosen, and the will of God which must guide and overruled our
choice; the former whereof we are permitted to eye in subordination to the
Latter, and not otherwise.

Now our apprehension of the desirableness and intrinsique goodness of the
object ought to be such (we are Infidels else, if we have not that account of
it) that nothing we can eye under the notion of a good to us, may be reckoned
so eligible as that. viz. our final and complete blessedness in the other
world, which because, we know, we cannot enjoy without dying, death also must
be judged more eligible then Life, that is, Our Blessedness must be judged,
eligible for it self, and Death as requisite to make it present. So that the
entire object we are discoursing of, being present Blessedness, Consider it in
comparison with any thing else, that can be looked upon by us, as a good which
we our selves are to enj^y, it ought to be preferred and chosen out of hand, in
as much as nothing can be so great a present good to us, as that. And this
ought to be the proper habitual inclination of our Spirits, their constant
frame and bent, as they respect only our own interest and welfare.

But considering Gods Dominion over us, and interest in our Lives and Beings;
and that as well ingenuity, as necessity binds us to be Subject to his
pleasure, we should herein patiently suffer our selves to be overruled
thereby, and not so abstractly mind our own interest and contentment in this
matter; as if we were altogether our own; and had no Lord over us. Plato who
abounds in discourses of the desirableness of dying, and of the blessed change
it makes with them that are good. Yet has this apt expression of the
subjection we ^^ght to be into the Divine pleasure as to this matter. That the
soul is in the body as soldiers in a garrison, In Phaedone. Vid. and N^lin.
(...). Aenead. 1.
from whence they may not withdraw themselves without his order and direction
who placed them there? And expostulates thus. If (says he) a slave of yours
should destroy his own Life, without your consent would you not be displeased;
and, if there had been any place left for revenge been apt enough to that too?
So he brings in Socrates discoursing, and discovers himself, herein to have had
more Light in this matter touching that subordinate interest only, men have in
their own lives, and the unlawfulness of self murder (as he had in other
things too) then most heathens of the more refined Sect ever arrived to.

If therefore God would give us leave to dye, we should, upon our own account,
be much more inclined to choose it; but, while he thinks fit to have it deferred,
should yield to his will, with an unrepining submission. Only it ought not to
rest at all, on our part, or that, as to our selves we find any thing more
grateful to us in this world, that we are willing to stay a day longer in it.
That for our own sakes, we should affect a continuance here; would argue a
terrene sordid Spirit. But then such should be our dutiful filial Love to the
Father of our Spirits, that in pure devotedness to his interests; we would be
content to dwell (if he would have it so) a Methuselahs age in an earthly
tabernacle for his service; that is, that we may help to preserve his memorial
in a elapsed world (overrun with Atheism, and ignorance of its Maker) and win
him hearts and love (to our uttermost) among his apostate disloyal creatures;
and in our capacities be helpful to the encouragement of such as he continues
in the world, for the same purposes. This is the very temper the Apostle
expresses, when in that strait, Phil. 1.
which way the poise of his own Spirit inclined him, in the consideration of
his own interest; and what was simply more eligible to him. He expresses with
High Emphasis; to be with Christ, says, he is more desirable to me (for there
are two comparatives in the Greek Text) and therefore he professes his own
desire in order thereto, to be dissolved; but that private desire was not so
peremptory, and absolute, but he could make it yield, and give place to his
duty toward God, and his Church, as it follows. So we know it is possible that,
respects to a friend may oversway a man's own particular inclination; and the
inclination remain notwithstanding; but is subdued only; otherwise had any
reason or argument, that did respect my self persuaded me to change it; I
should then follow but my own proper inclination still; and so my friend has
nothing to thank me for.

So it ought to be with us here; our inclination should preponderate toward a
present change of our state, only our devotedness to his interest and
pleasure, whose we are, should easily overruled it. This is the Lovely temper
of a gracious Spirit, as to this thing, that to dye might be our choice, and to
live, in the mean time, submitted to as our duty.

As an ingenuous son whom his father has employed abroad in a foreign Country,
though duty did bind him cheerfully therein, to comply with his fathers will
and the necessity of his affairs, yet, when his Father shall signify to him,
that now he understands no necessity of his longer continuance there, and
therefore he may, if he please, return but he shall have leave to follow his
own inclination, It Is not hard to conjecture that the desire of seeing a Fathers
face, would soon determine the choice of such a son that way.

But how remote are the generality of them that profess themselves God's
Children from that pious ingenuity. We have taken root in the earth and
forgotten our heavenly originals and alliances. We are as inhabitants here, not
pilgrims; hardly persuaded to entertain with any patience the thoughts of
leaving our places on earth; which yet, do we what we can, shall shortly know
us no more.

In short then; that vile temper of Spirit against which I professedly bend my
self in the following discourse is; when men, not out of any sense of duty
toward God, or solicitude for their own Souls, but of a mere sordid love to
the body, and affixedness of heart to the Earth, and terrene things, cannot
endure the thoughts of dying. And that, which I persuade to, is, That having
the true prospect of the future blessedness before our eyes, and our hearts
possessed with the comfortable hope of attaining to it, we shake off our earthly
inclinations; and expect with desire and joy the time of our dismission hence,
that we may enjoy it, which is the design of what was promised in the next
place. Viz.

2. The inforcement of this instruction; Suffer we therefore our selves to be
reasoned with about this matter. And let us consider whether we can in good
earnest think such an aversation, as we discover, to our blessed translation
hence, an excusable, a tolerable temper; or whether it be not highly
reasonable, that we should entertain the thoughts, at least, with more content,
and patience (if not with more fervent desire) of our departure hence, and
introduction into that other state.

Let me demand of thee; do thou this regret the thoughts of death, as being
unwilling to dye at all, or as being unwilling to dye as yet? is it the thing
it self, or only the circumstance of time, that thou exceptest against? It Is
likely thou will say that which will seem more plausible, and so fix only on
the latter; and that thou will not profess to desire an eternity on earth, but
only more time. Well, let that for present be supposed as it is a more modest,
so to be a true account of thy desires; Yet what is the reason of this
moderation with thee herein? and that thou so limitest thy self? Is it that
thou believe the blessedness of the other state will prove better then any
thing thou can enjoy here? and that thou art not willing eternally to be
deprived of? but do thou not think it is now better also? And what can thou
pretend, why, what is now the best, and most desirable good, should not be now
chosen, and desired out of hand? or is it that thou think it unbecomes thee
to cross the Supreme will of him that made thee, who has determined, that all
men once shall die? And then, how know thou but he has also determined
concerning thee, that thou shall die the next day or hour? and it is only a
present willingness to die in subordination to the Divine Will, or upon
supposition of it, thou art persuaded to. Why art thou not afraid, lest thy
present unwillingness, should cross his present will? Do thou not think that
Sovereign power is as sufficient to determine of the circumstance, as the thing
it self? And art thou not ashamed to pretend an agreement with God about the
thing it self, and yet d^ffer with him about a circumstance? shall that be a
ground of quarrel between him and thee?

But while thou only professest that more modest desire of more time in the
world, what security can thou give that when that desire has been liberally
gratified, it shall at length be laid down, and tumultuate no more? What bo^nds
will thou fix to it, which thou dare undertake it shall not pass? Art thou
sure when thou shall have lain at the Worlds Breast ten or twenty years longer,
thou will then imagine thy self to have drawn it dry? or that then thou shall
begin to nauseate the World, and wish for Heaven? Or have thou not reason from
thy former experience to suspect that the longer thou dwell on Earth, the
more terrene thou will grow; and that if thou be indisposed to leave it this
day, or year, thou will be more so the next; and so thy desire be-become
boundless and infinite, which is to desire to be here always, the thing which
thou seem'dst so unwilling to own.

And if that prove at last, the true state of thy case, art thou then a
Christian, or art thou a Man, that thou harbourest in thy breast so
irreligious, and irrational, yea, so sordid a wish?

What, wish eternally to be affixt to a Clod of Earth? Is that at length become
thy God? Or will thou say he is thy God, whom thou never desire to enjoy? or
that thou have already enough of him, but not of the world? And yet that he is
thy God? or would thou overturn the Laws of Nature; and subvert the most
Sacred, Divine Constitutions, abortive the designs of Eternal Wisdom, and
Love, evacuate, and nullify the great Achievements of thy merciful, and
mighty Redeemer? only to gratify a Sensual, Brutish Humor?

But evident it is, thou do only in vain disquiet thy self* thou can not
disturb the settled order of things. Eternal Laws are not repealable by a fond
wish. Thou set'st that dreadful thing Death, at nothing the further distance,
by thine abhorrency of it. It will overtake thee whether thou will or no; and
methinks thine own reason should instruct thee to a temper and form thy self
to what thou can not avoid, and possess thee with such thoughts and desires,
as those of that discreet Pagan, Lead me, O God, (says he) whether thou will,
Epictet
and I will follow thee willingly, but, if I be rebellious, and refuse, I shall
follow thee notwithstanding. What we cannot decline, it is better to bear
willingly, then with a regret, that shall be both vain, and afflictive.

And what have thou hitherto met with in the world, that should so highly
endear it to thee? Examine, and search more narrowly into thy earthly comforts,
what is there in them to make them self-desirable, or to be so for their own
sakes? what is it to have thy flesh indulged and pleased; to have thy sense
gratified? thy fancy tickled? what so great good, worthy of an immortal
reasonable Spirit, can thou find in Meats, and Drinks, in full Barns, and
Coffers, in vulgar Fame, and Applause, that should render these things
desirable for themselves?

And if there were any real felicity in these things for the present, whilst
thou art permitted enjoy them, yet do thou not know that what thou enjoyest
to day, thou may lose to morrow, and that such other unthought of evils may
be^all thee; as may infuse a bitterness into all thou enjoyest, which causes,
immediately, the enjoyment to cease, while the things themselves remain, and
will be equal to a total loss of all?

And thus (as the Morallist ingeniously speaks) thou will continually need
another happiness to defend the former, Sen. de brevvit.
and new wishes must still be made on the behalf of those which have already
succeeded.

But can thou indeed think it worth the while, that the Maker of the Universe
should create a Soul, and send it down into the world on purpose, to
superintend these trivial affairs, to keep alive a silly piece of well figured
earth, while it eats, and drinks; to move it to and fro in chase of shadows; to
hold it up, while others bow the knee, and do it homage, if it had not some
higher work to mind in reference to another state? Art thou contented to live
long in the world, to such purposes? what low worthless Spirit is this, that
had rather be so employed, then in the visions of this Makers face? that chooses
thus to entertain it self on earth, rather then partake the effusions of Divine
glory above. That had rather creep with Worms, then soar with Angels, associate
with Bruits, then with the Spirits of just men made perfect, who can solve the
Phenomenon, or give a rational account why there should be such a Creature as
man upon the Earth, abstructing from the hopes of another world? who can think
it the effect of an infinite wisdom? or account it a more worthy design, then
the representing of such a Scene of actions and affairs by Puppets on a Stage?
for my part, upon the strictest enquiry; I see nothing in the life of man upon
earth, that should render it for it self, more the matter of a rational
election (supposing the free option given him in the first moment of his being)
then presently again to cease to be the next moment.

Yea, and is there not enough obvious in every man's experience, to incline him
rather to the contrary choice; and, supposing a future blessedness in another
world, to make him passionately desirous (with submission to the Divine
pleasure) of a speedy dismission into it? Do not the burdens that press us in
this earthly ta^ernacle, teach our very sense, and urge oppressed nature, into
involuntary groans, while as yet our consideration does intervene? And if we do
consider, is not every thought, a sting? making a much deeper impression, then
what only touches our flesh and bones? Who can reflect upon his present state,
and not presently be in pangs? The troubles that follow humanity are many and
great; those that follow Christianity, more numerous, and grievous. The
sickness, pains, losses, disappointments, and whatsoever afflictions that are
in the Apostles language, humane, or common to men (as are all the external
sufferings of Christians in nature, 1 Cor. 10.
and kind, though they are liable to them upon an account peculiar to
themselves, which there the Apostle intimates) are none of our greatest evils;
yet even upon the account of them; have we any reason to be so much in love
with so unkind ^ world? Is it not strange our very Bridewel, should be such a
Heaven to us? But these things are little considerable in comparison of the
more Spiritual grievances of Christians as such, that is, those that afflict
our Souls, while we are (under the conduct of Christ) designing for a blessed
eternity; if we indeed make that our business, and do seriously intend our
spirits in order thereto. The darkness of our beclouded minds! The glimmering,
ineffectual apprehension we have of the most important things! the
inconsistency of our shattered thoughts, when we would apply them to Spiritual
Objects. The great difficulty of working off an ill frame of heart, and the no
less difficulty of retaining a good! our being so frequently tossed as between
Heaven and Hell; when we sometimes think our selves to have even attained, and
hope to descend no more; and are, all on a sudden plunged in the Ditch, so as
that our own Clothes might abhor us, fall so low into an earthly temper that we
can like nothing Heavenly, or Divine; and because we cannot, are enforced
justly, most of all to dislike our selves. Are these things little with us? How
can we forbear to cry out of the depths, to the Father of our Spirits, that he
would pity, and relieve his own Offspring? yea are we not weary of our crying?
and yet more weary of holding in? How do repelled Temptations return again? and
vanquished Corruptions, recover strength? We know not when our work is done. We
are miserable that we need to be always watching, and more miserable, that we
cannot watch, but are so often surprised and overcome of evil. We say sometimes
with our selves we will seek relief in retirement; but we cannot retire from
our selves, or in converse with Godly friends, but they sometimes prove snares
to us, and we to them. Or we hear, but our own miseries repeated in their
complaints, would we pray? How faint is the breath we utter? How long is it ere
we can get our Souls possessed, with any becoming apprehensions of God, or lively
sense of our own concernments? Would we meditate? We sometimes go about to
compose our thoughts, but we may as well assay to hold the Winds in our fist.
If we venture forth into the world, how do our Senses betray us? How are we
mocked with their impostures? Their nearer objects become with us, the only
realities, and eternal things are all vanished into airie shadows. Reason and
Faith are laid asleep, and our Sense dictates to us what we are to believe, and
do, as if it were our only guide, and Lord. And what are we not yet weary? Is
it reasonable to continue in this State of our own choice? Is misery become so
natural to us, so much our element, that we cannot affect to live out of it? Is
the darkness and dirt of a dungeon more grateful to us then a free open air and
sun. Is this Flesh of ours so lovely a thing that we had rather suffer so many
deaths in it; then one in putting it off and mortality with it? While we carry
it about us, our Souls impart a kind of life to it, and it gives them death in
exchange. Why do we not cry out more feelingly, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this Body of Death? Is it not grievous to us to have so
cumbersome a yoke fellow, to be tied (as Mezentius is said to have done) the
living and the dead together.

Do not we find the Distempers of our Spirits are mostly from these bodies we
are so in love with, either as the proper Springs, or as the occasion of them.
From what cause is our drowsy sloth, our eager passions, our aversion to
Spiritual objects but from this impure Flesh, or what else is the Subject about
which our vexatious cares, or torturing fears, our bitter griefs are taken up
day by day.

And why do we not consider that it is only our love to it that gives strength
and vigor to the most of our temptations as wherein it is more immediately
concerned, and which makes them so often victorious, and thence to become our
after-afflictions. He that has learned to mortify the inordinate love of the
Body, will he make it the business of his life to purvey for it? Will he offer
violence to his own Soul, to secure it from violence? will he comply with men's
Lusts and humors for its advantage, and accommodation? or yield himself to the
tyranny of his own avarice for its future, or of his more-sensual Lusts? for
its present content? Will it not rather be pleasing to him that his outward man
be exposed to perish while his inward man is renewed day by day? He to whom the
thoughts are grateful of laying it down, will not (though he neglect not duty
toward it) spend his days in its continual Service, and make his Soul an hell,
by a continual provision for the flesh, and the Lusts of it. That is cruel Love
that shall enslave a man and subject him to so vile and ignoble a servitude.
And it discovers a sordid temper to be so imposed upon. How low are our Spirits
sunk that we disdain not so base a vassalage? God and nature have obliged us to
live in bodies for a time, but they have not obliged us to measure our selves
by them, to confine our desires and designs to their compass, to look no
further then their concernments, to entertain no previous joys in the hope of
being one day delivered from them. No such hard law is laid upon us. But how
apt are we to become herein, a most oppressive Law to our selves; and not only
to lodge in filthy earthen cottage but to love them, and confine our selves to
them, loath so much as to peep out. It Is the apt expression of a Philosopher
upbraiding hat base low temper. (...), etc. M^x. Tyr. Diss. 41.
The degenerous Soul (says he) buried in the Body is as a slothful creeping
thing, that loves its hole, and is loath to come forth.

And, methinks if we have no love for our better and more noble self, we should
not be altogether unapprehensive of an obligation upon us, to express a dutiful
love to the Author of our beings does it consist with the love we owe to him,
to desire always to lurk in the dark, and never come into his blessed presence?
Is that our love that we never care to come nigh him? Do we not know that while
we are present in the body, we are absent from the Lord? should we not
therefore be willing rather to be present with the Lord, and absent from the
body? should we not put on a confidence, an holy fortitude (as it is there
expressed we are confident, or of good courage, and thence willing, etc.) that
might carry us through the Grave to him. As is the brave Speech of that last
mentioned Philosopher. 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8.
God will call thee ere long, expect his call. (...), etc.
Old age will come upon thee, and show thee the way thither, and death which he
that is possessed with a base fear, Item. diss. 1.
laments and dreads as it draws on; but he that is a lover of God, expects it
with joy, and with courage, meets it when it comes.

Is our love to God so faint and weak, that it dares not encounter Death, nor
venture upon the imaginary terrors of the Grave to go to him? Can. 8.
How unsuitable is this to the character which is given of a Saints love? And
how expressly are we told, that he who loves his life better then Christ, or
that even hates it not for his sake (as certainly he cannot be said to do, that
is not willing to part with it to enjoy him) cannot be his Disciple? If our
love to God be not Supreme, it is none; or not such as can denominate us lovers
of him; and will we pretend to be so, when we love a putide flesh, and this
base earth better then him? And have we not professedly, as a fruit of our
avowed love to him, surrendered our selves? Are we not his devoted ones? will we
be his, and yet our own? or pretend our selves dedicated to his holy pleasure,
M. Aurel. Aut. de vit. su^. 1. 12.
and will yet be at our own dispose, and so dispose of our selves too, as that
we may be most ungrateful to him? and most incapable of converse with him?
(...).
How does this love of a perishing life and of a little animated clay stop all
the effusions of the Love of God, suspends its sweet and pleasant fruits, which
should be always exerting themselves toward him? Where is their fear,
obedience joy, and praise, who are through the fear of death all their lives
subject to bondage? And kept under a continual dismal expectation of an
unavoidable dissolution! But must the great God lose his due acknowledgements
because we will not understand wherein he deals well with us? Is his mercy
therefore no mercy? As we cannot nullify his truth by our unbelief, so nor his
goodness by our disesteem. But yet consider does it not better become thee to
be grateful, then repine that God will one day unbind thy Soul and set thee
free? Knock of thy Letters and deliver thee out of the house of thy bondage?
Could thou upon deliberate thoughts judge it tolerable, should he doom thee
to this earth forever? He has however judged otherwise (as the Pagan Emperor
and and Philosopher excellently speaks) who is the Author both of the first
composition of thy present being, and now of the dissolution of it; thou were
the cause of neither, therefore depart and be thankful for he that dismisseth
thee, deals kindly with thee. If yet thou understandest it not yet remember.
It is thy Father that disposes thus of thee, how unworthy is it to distrust his
Love? What child would be afraid to compose it self to sleep in the Parents
bosom? It expresses nothing of the duty and ingenuity, but much of the
frowardness and folly of a child. They sometimes cry vehemently in the
undressing; but should their cries be regarded by the most indulgent Parent? or
are they fit to be imitated by us?

We have no excuse for this our frowardness. The Blessed God has told us his
gracious purpose concerning us; and we are capable of understanding him. What
if he had totally hidden from us our future state; and that we know nothing,
but of going into an eternal silent-darkness? The Authority of a Creator ought
to have awed us into a silent submission; But when we are told of such a glory;
that it is but drawing aside this fleshly veil, and we presently behold it,
methinks the Blessed hour should be expected not with patience only but with
ravishing joy.

Did we hear of a country in this world, where we might live in continual
felicity, without toil, or sickness, or grief, or fear, who would not wish to
be there; though the passage were troublesome? have we not heard enough of
Heaven to allure us thither? Or is the eternal truth of suspected credit with
us? Are Gods own reports of the future glory unworthy our belief or regard?

How many, upon the credit of his word are gone already triumphantly into
glory? That only seeing the promises afar off, were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and never after owned themselves under any other notion, then of
Pilgrims on earth, Heb. 12 13, 16.
longing to be at home in their most desirable Heavenly Country. We are not the
first that are to open Heaven. The main Body of Saints is already there, it is
in comparison of their number, but a scattering remnant, that are now alive
upon the earth. How should we long to be associated to that glorious Assembly?
Methinks we should much more regret our being so long left behind.

But if we should desire still to be so, why may not all others as well as we?
And as much expect to be gratified as we? And then we should agree in desiring,
that our Redeemers triumph might be deferred, that his Body might yet remain
incomplete, that he might still be debarred of the long expected fruit of the
travail of his Soul. that the name of God might be still subjected to the
blasphemy and and reproach of an Atheistical world, who have long ago said,
with derision, where is the promise of his coming? Would we have all his
Designs to be still unfinisht? and so mighty wheels stand still for us? while
we sport our selves in the dust of the earth? And indulge our sensual
inclination; which sure this bold desire must argue to be very predominant in
us, and take heed it argue not its habitual prevalency.

At least if it discover not our present sensuality, it discovers our former
Sloth, and Idleness. It may be, we may excuse our aversness to dye, by our
unpreparedness, that is one fault with another (though that be besides the case
I am speaking of) what then have we been doing all this while? What were the
affairs of thy Soul not thought of till now? Take then thy repro of from a
Heathen, that it may convince thee the more. No one, says he divides away his
money from himself, but yet men divide away their very life -- but does it not
shame thee (he after adds) to reserve only the relics of thy life to thy
self, and to devote that time only to a good mind, which thou can employ upon
no other thing? How late is it to begin to live when we should make an end? and
deser all good thoughts to such an Age as possible few do ever reach to. The
truth is (as he speaks) we have not little time but we lose much we have time
enough were it well employed therefore we cannot say we receive a short life
but we make it so, we are not indigent of time, but prodigal, what a pretty
contradiction is it to complain of the shortness of time, and yet do what we
can to precipitate its course? to hasten it by that we call pastime. If it have
been so with thee art thou to be trusted with more time?

But as thy case is I cannot wonder that the thoughts of death be most
unwellcome to thee, who art thou that thou should desire the day of the Lord?
I can only say to thee hasten thy preparation, have recourse to Rule 2. and
3d. and accordingly guide thy self till thou find thy Spirit made more suitable
to this blessedness; that it become savory and grateful to thy soul, and thy
heart be set upon it. Hence thou may be reconciled to the grave, and the
thoughts of death may cease to be a terror to thee.

And when thou art attained so far, consider thy great advantage in being
willing and desirous to dye upon this further account, that thy desire shall
now be pitched upon a thing so certain. Thine other desires have met with many
a disappointment. Thou have set thy heart upon other things, and they have
deceived thy most earnest, thirsty expectations. Death will not do so. Thou will now have one certain hope. One thing in reference whereto thou may say,
I am sure. Wait a while, this peaceful sleep will shortly seize thy body, and
awaken thy soul. It will calmly period all thy troubles, and bring thee to a
blessed rest.

But now, if only the mere terror and gloominess of dying, trouble thy
thoughts, this of all other, seems the most inconsiderable pretense against a
willing surrender of our selves to death. Reason has overcome it, natural
courage, yea, some men's Atheism, shall not Faith? Are we not ashamed to
consider what confidence, and desire of death, some Heathens have expressed? some
that have had no preapprehension, or belief of another state, (though there
were very few of them) and so no hope of a consequent blessedness to relieve
them, have yet thought it unreasonable to disgust the thoughts of death. What
would thou think if thou had nothing but the Sophisms of such to oppose
to all thy dismal thoughts? I have met with Epicurus in Gassend. Syntag.
one arguing thus; -- Death which is accounted the most dreadful of all evils,
is nothing to us (says he) because while we are in being, Death is not yet
present, and when Death is present, we are not in being; so that it neither
concerns us, as living, nor dead; for while we are alive, it has not touched
us, when we are dead, we are not --. Moreover (says he) the exquisite
knowledge of this, that Death belongs not to us, makes us enjoy this mortal
life with comfort, not by adding any thing to our uncertain time, but by taking
away the desire of immortality. Shall they comfort themselves upon so wretched
a ground, with a little Sophistry, and the hope of extinguishing all desire of
immortality? and shall not we, by cherishing the blessed hope of enjoying
shortly an immortal glory?

Others of them have spoken magnificently of a certain contempt of this bodily
life, and a not only not fearing, but desiring to dye, upon a sixed
apprehension of the distinct, and, purer and immortal nature of the soul; and
the preconcieved hope of a consequent felicity. I shall set down some of their
words, added to what have been occasionally mentioned (amongst that plentiful
variety wherewith one might fill a volume) purposely to shame the more terrene
temper of many Christians.

The Soul, (says one of them Plato in Phae^one, (...) whom I adjoy^ what (to
them that understand it) is more elegant in his (...) language, (...). Ibid.
) is an invisible thing, and is going into another place, suitable to it self,
that is noble, and pure, and invisible, even into Hades, indeed to the good and
wise God, whether also my Soul shall shortly go if he see good. But this (he
says in what follows) belongs only to such a Soul as goes out of the body
pure, that draws nothing corporal along with it, did not willingly communicate
with the body in life, but did even fly from it, and gather up it self into it
self, always meditating this one thing.

A soul so affected, shall it not go to something like it self, divine, (and
what is divine, is immo^tal and wise) whether, (...).
when it comes, it becomes blessed, free from error, ignorance, fears, and
wild (or enormous) loves, and all other evils incident to men.

Porphyrius. Plotinus Ennead. 7. Lib. 6. (whom though a just admire^ of him
would fain have men r^ckon to have been a Christian, because he writes much
against the Pseudo Christian, Gno^^icks, nothing against Christiani^y, yet it
appears not he ever made prof^ssion of it. Ennead. 1. l. b. 7.
One writing the life of that rare person Plotinus says, that he seemed, as if
he were in some sort ashamed, that he was in body, which (however it would less
become a Christian; yet) in one that knew nothing of an incarnate Redeemer, it
discovered a refined, noble Spirit.

The same person speaks almost the language of the Apostle, concerning his
being rapt up into the third heaven, and tells of such an alienation of the
soul from the body.

That when once it finds God (whom he had before been speaking of under the
name of the (...) or the beauty) shining in upon it, it now no longer feels its
body, or takes notice of its being in the body, but even forgets its own being,
that it is a man, or a living creature, or any thing else whatsoever, for it is
not at leisure to mind any thing else, nor does it desire to be: Yea, and
having sought him out, he immediately meets it, presenting its self to him. It
only views him instead of it self, -- and would not now change its state for
any thing, not if one could give it the whole heaven in exchange.

And, else where, discussing, whether life in the body be good and desirable
yea or no, he concludes it to be good, not as it is an union of the soul and
body; but as it may have that virtue annex't to it, by which, what is really
evil may be kept off. But yet, that that death is a greater good. That life in
the body is in it self evil, but the soul is by virtue stated in goodness; not
as enlivening the body, with which it is compounded, but as it severs, and so
joins it self from it; meaning so, as to have as little communion as possible
it can with it. To which purpose is the expression of another; That the soul of
an happy man so collects and gathers up it self out from all things into it
self, that it has as it were, separated it self from the body, while it is yet
contained in it -- And that it was possessed of that fortitude, In his Marin.
Proclus.
as not to dread its departure from it.

Another gives this character of a good man, that as he lived in simplicity,
tranquillity, purity, not being offended at any that they believed him not to
live so, he also comes to the end of his life, pure, quiet, and easy (...) M.
A^r. A^t.
to be dissolved, disposing himself, without any constraint to his lot.

Another is brought in, speaking thus. If God should grant me to become a Child
again, Cato in Cicerone de Senect.
to send forth my renewed infant-cries from my Cradle, and, having even run out
my race, to begin it again; I should most earnestly refuse it; for what profit
has this life? and how much toil? -- Yet I do not repent that I have lived,
because, I hope, I have not lived in vain. And I now go out of this life, not
as out of my dwelling house, but my Inn. O blessed day, when I shall enter into
that Council and Assembly of souls, and depart from this rude, and disorderly
rout, and crew, etc.

I shall add another (of a not much unlike strain Philo Judaeus.
and rank) that discoursing who is the Heir of Divine things, (as being either
not an open or no constant friend to Christianity) Says, he cannot be, who is
in love with this animal, sensitive life; but only that purest mind, that is
inspired from above, that partake of an Heavenly, and Divine portion; that
only despises the body, etc. with much more of like import.

Yea, so have some been transported with the desire of immortality, that (being
wholly ignorant of the sin of self-murder) they could not forbear doing
violence to themselves.

Among the Indians, C^^^t. lib. 8.
two thousand years ago, were a sort of wise men, as they were called, that
held it a reproach to dye of age, or a disease, and were wont to burn
themselves alive, thinking the flames were polluted, if they came amidst them
dead.

The story of Cleombrotus is famous, Cicer. Quae Tuscul.
who hearing Plato discourse of the immortality of the soul, by the Sea side,
leapt from him into the Sea, that he might presently be in that state. And it is
storied that Scil. Domitianus aliquoties sic dictas.
Nero refused to put Apollonius to death, though he were very much incenst
against him, Philostr. in vit. Apoll. Tyanaei.
only upon the apprehension he had, that he was very desirous to dye, because
he would not so far gratify him.

I only make this improvement of all this, Christian Principles, Rule do
neither hurry, nor misguide men; but the end (as we have it revealed) should
much more powerfully, and constantly attract us. Nothing is more unsuitable to
Christianity our way, nor to that blessedness, the end of it, then a terrene
Spirit. They have nothing of the true light, and impress of the Gospel, now;
nor are they ever like to attain the Vision of the blessed face of God, and the
impress of his likeness hereafter, that desire it not above all things; and are
not willing to quit all things else for it.

And is it not a just exprobration of our earthliness, and carnality, if mere
Philosophers, and Pagans, shall give better proof then we, of a spirit erected
above the world, and alienated from what is temporary, and terrene? Shall their
Gentilism outvy our Christianity? Methinks a generous indignation of this
reproach should inflame our souls, and contribute somewhat to the refining of
them to a better and more Spiritual temper.

Now therefore, O all you that name your selves by that worthy name of
Christians; that profess the Religion taught by him, that was not of the earth,
earthly, but the Lord from heaven; you that are partakers of the heavenly
calling. Consider the great Apostle and High Priest of your profession; who
only took our flesh, that we might partake of his Spirit; bare our earthly,
that we might bare his heavenly Image; descended, that he might cause us to
ascend. Seriously bethink your selves of the Scope and end of his Apostleship
and Priesthood. He was sent out from God to invite and conduct you to him, to
bring you into the Communion of his glory and blessedness. He came upon a
Message and Treaty of peace. To discover his Fathers love and win yours. To let
you know how kind thoughts the God of love had conceived to you-wards. And
that, however you had hated him without cause, and were bent to do so without
end; he was not so affected toward you. To settle a friendship and to admit
you to the participation of his eternal glory. Yea he came to give an instance,
and exemplify to the world in his own Person how much of heaven he could make
to dwell in mortal flesh: how possible he could render it to live in this
world, as unrelated to it, How gloriously the divine life could triumph over
all the infirmities of frail humanity. And so leave men a certain proof and
pledge, to what perfections humane nature should be improved by his grace and
Spirit, in all them that should resign themselves to his conduct, and follow
his steps. That heaven and earth were not so far asunder, but he knew how to
settle a commerce and intercourse between them. That an heavenly life was
possible to be transacted here, and certain to be gloriously rewarded hereafter.

And having testified these things, he seals the Testimony; and opens the way
for the accomplishment of all by his death. Your heavenly Apostle, becomes a
Priest, and a Sacrifice at once. That no doubt might remain among men of his
sincerity, in what, even dying he ceased not to profess, and avow. And that by
his own propitiatory blood a mutual reconciliation might be wrought between God
and you; that your hearts might be won to him, and possessed with an ingenuous
shame of your ever having been his enemies. And that his displeasure might for
ever cease toward you, and be turned into everlasting friendship and love.
That eternal redemption being obtained, heaven might be opened to you, and you
finally, be received to the glory of God. Your hearts being bent thitherward
and made willing to run through whatsoever difficulties of life or death to
attain it. Do not think that Christ came into the world, and dyed to procure
the pardon of your sins; and so translate you to heaven; while your hearts
should still remain cleaving to the earth. He came, and returned to prepare a
way for you? and then call, not drag you thither. That by his Precepts, and
Promises, and Example and Spirit, he might form and fashion your Souls to that
glorious state. And make you willing to abandon all things for it. And low now
the God of all grace is calling you by Jesus Christ unto his eternal Glory.
Direct then your eyes and hearts to that mark, the Prise of the High calling
of God in Christ Jesus. It Is ignominious by the common suffrage of the
civilized world not to intend the proper business of our Callings. To your
Calling to forsake this world, and mind the other, make have then to quit your
selves of your entanglements, of all earthly dispositions and affections. Learn
to live in this world as those that are not of it; that expect, every day and
wish to leave it whose hearts are gone already.

It Is dreadful to dye with pain and regret; To be forced out of the Body; To
dye a violent death and go away with an unwilling refluctant heart. The wicked
is driven away in his wickedness. Fain he would stay longer, but cannot. He
has not power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit nor has he power in
death. He must away whether he will or no. And indeed much against his will. So
it cannot but be where there is not a previous knowledge and love of a better
state, where the Soul understands it not, and is not effectually attempered and
framed to it.

O get then the lovely Image of the future glory into your minds, keep it ever
before your eyes. Make it familiar to your thoughts. Imprint daily there these
words. I shall behold thy face, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. And see
that your souls be inrich't with that righteousness, Have inwrought into them
that holy rectitude, that may dispose them to that blessed state. Then will you
dye with your own consent, and go away, not driven, but allured, and drawn. You
will go, as the redeemed of the Lord, with everlasting joy upon their heads. As
those that know whether you go, even to a state infinitely worthy of your
desires, and choice, and where it is best for you to be. You will part with your
souls, not by a forcible separation, but a joyful surrender and resignation.
They will dislodge from this earthly Tabernnacle, rather as putting it off,
then having it rent and torn away.

Loosen your selves from this body by degrees, as we do any thing we would
remove from a place where it sticks fast. Gather up your spirits into
themselves. Teach them to look upon themselves, as distinct thing. Inure them
to the thoughts of a dissolution. Be continually as taking leave. Cross, and
disprove the common maxim; and let your hearts, which they use to say, are
wont to dye last, dye first. Prevent death, and be mortified toward every
earthly thing beforehand; that death mave have nothing to kill but your body.
And that you may not die a double death in one hour; and suffer the death of
your body, and of your love to it, both at once. Much less that this should
survive, to your greater (and even incurable) misery.

Shake off your Bands and Fetters, the terrene affections, that so closely
confine you to the house of your bondage. And lift up your heads in expectation
of the approaching Jubilee, the day of your redemption; when you are to go out
free, and enter into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. When you shall
serve, and groan, and complain no longer. Let it be your continual song, and
the matter of your daily praise; that the time of your happy deliverance is
hastening on; that ete long you shall be absent from the body, and present with
the Lord. That he has not doomed you to an everlasting imprisonment within
those closs and clayie walls; wherein you have been so long shut up from the
beholding of his sight and glory. In the thoughts of this, while the outward
man is sensibly perishing, let the inward revive, and be renewed day by day.
Max. Tyr. D^ssert. 41.
What Prisoner would be sorry to see the walls of his Prison House (so an
Heathen speaks) mouldering down, and the hopes arriving to him of being
delivered out of that darkness that had buried him, of recovering his liberty,
and enjoying the free air, and light. What Champion inured to hardship, would
stick to throw off rotten rags? and rather expose a naked, placid, free body,
to naked, placid, free air? The truly generous soul (to be a little above)
never leaves the body against its will.

Rejoice that it is the gracious pleasure of thy good God, thou shall not
always inhabit a Dungeon, nor lie amid'st so impure and disconsolate darkness;
that he will shortly exchange thy filthy Garments, for those of Salvation and
Praise. The end approaches. As you turn over these leaves, so are your days
turned over. And as you are now arrived to the end of this Book, God will
shortly write Finis, to the Book of your Life on Earth; and show you your names
written in Heaven, in the Book of that Life which shall never end.

FINIS.

