Aurifontina Chymica: OR, A COLLECTION Of Fourteen small TREATISES Concerning
the First Matter OF Philosophers, For the discovery of their (hitherto so much
concealed) MERCURY.

Which many have studiously endeavored to Hide, but these to make Manifest,
for the benefit of Mankind in general.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little-Britain* 1680.

Aurifontina Chymica, or a Collection of 14 Pieces concerning the First Matter
of the Philosophers Mercury.

Five Treatises of the Philosophers Stone.

Boyle's Effluviums of Flame and Air.

-- his Discourse of Gems and precious Stones.

-- his Tracts of the Growth of Metals in their Ore.

Starkey's Pyrotechny.

-- his Liquor Alchahest.

The Art of Metals, how to find, know and refine them from their Ore.

Godfrey's Abuses of Physicians, in giving Preventative Physic before that
People be sick.

Geber the Arabian his Chemical Works, in English.

St. Dunstan of the Philosophers Stone.

Burgravius his Vital or Astral Philosophy, in English.

Thompson's Chemical Method.

-- his Epilogismi Chymica.

Willis his Search of the Causes of Transmutation.

Salmon 's Synopsis Medicinae.

Crollius his Admonitory Preface, or Introdection to his Basilica Chymica: but
not printed with the Folio.

Aula Lucis, or House of Light, by Th. Vaughan.

Shirley's Discourse of Petrefication.

Paracelsus his Archidoxes, discovering the way of making Quintessences,
Arcan^ms, Magisteries, Elixirs, etc.

-- his Aurora, and Treasure of the Philosophers; together with the Water-Stone
of the Wisemen.

Jac. Behm^n his Aurora, or the Root of Philosophy.

-- his Remains of his Works.

-- his Forty Questions of the Soul.

A Vindication of the Doctrine of the State of Souls departed.

Spencer's View of Ireland, fol.

A Caveat for the Protestant Clergy, if Popery be restored.

The End.
To the most High and Mighty Monarch CHARLES the II. By the Grace of God, King
of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
THis Treatise prompting us with the very Key, which alone is able to unlock
the Philosophers Enchanted Castle, I thought it most fit, that the same should
be presented to Your most Excellent Majesty, as the greatest Patron of all
Learning and Ingenuity. The Philosophers Stone, or Elixir, has been always
counted, and is the highest Secret in Nature, which by that great Philosopher
Michael Sendivogius is defined, Aurum in Supremum gradum digestum: the chief
and only means to perform that digestion, is its appropriate Water extracted
out of that Subject, which is next of Kin unto that King of Metals. Concerning
which Subject, how it is brought to light, and how reduced into such a
wonderful Water, which has both power to kill that King, and to raise him
again to life, yea perfectly to regenerate and promote him to an endless life
and increase, the Philosophers have written very obscurely, and strove rather
to hide the Secret, than to reveal it. Only Bernhard Sendivow, and this present
Treatise, seem the most candid, to trace us out the way for to travel through
that Labyrinth of Parabolical expressions. Here is the place set down where to
find the Philosophers Water, here is the Fire unriddled, which according to
Artephius and Pontanus is the first Agent, yea the carrier on and perfecter of
the whole Work. Here are clearer hints given, concerning the manner of
preparing this great Secret, than any where else. Here are the most charitable
Caveats for avoiding of wracks in this Philosophical Navigation; which to the
end those of this Nation, that are studious in this Learning, may take notice
of, I thought good to fix the same on Your most Excellent Majesty's Throne, as
the highest, eminentest and most conspicuous place for all beholders of this
peculiar World: for which presumption I hope Your Majesty will most graciously
pardon him, who most humbly commends himself and his Studies to Your Royal
Majesty's most gracious Patronage and Protection, and shall ever pray for Your
Majesty's health, happy continuance of Your glorious Government, and all other
felicities both here and hereafter.

Your Majesty's most Loyally and most Humbly devoted, John Frederick Houpreght

THE CONTENTS of this BOOK.
1. HYdropyrographum Hermeticum, or the Metallic Water -- Fire. page 1. 2. The
Privy Seal of Secrets, plainly discovering the First Matter of the
Philosophers. 41. 3. A strange Letter concerning an Adept his curious Learning
and vaster Treasure. 53. 4. Sir George Ripley's Treatise of Mercury, and the
Philosophers Stone. 69. 5. Colors to be observed in the operation of the Great
Work of Philosophers. 93. 6. A plain and true Description of the Treasure of
Treasures, or the Golden Medicine. 97. 7. A Treatise of the Philosophers Stone,
the Blessed Manna, etc. with its wondrous Virtues and Use, both for the curing
the Body of Man, and making of precious Stones. 107. 8. Nic. Flammell his
Summary of Philosophy, or short Treatise of the Philosophers Stone. 145. 9.
Raym. Lullie's Clavicula, Apertorium, or little Key explaining all the rest of
his Works. 163. 10. Secrets disclosed of the Philosophers Stone. 180. 11. A
Philosophical Riddle of Gold, in Verse. 185. 12. Bern. Trevisan's Epistle to
Thomas of Bononia, concerning the secret workings of Nature in the product of
things. 187. 13. -- his short Epistle Dedicatory before his Works, to the same
man. 269. 14. A brief Preparation of the Philosophers Stone, for the conclusion
of this Book. 271.
Hydropyrographum Hermeticum: OR, A Choice and most Excellent TREATISE
CONCERNING The True (...) or Fiery Water of the Philosophers, Which Artephius
and Pontanu^ call, their Fire which brings the Matter into being in the
beginning, second and third Work; yea, which perfecteth the whole Work from the
beginning to the ending.

Written in the German Tongue, by an Author Anonymus; and now published in
English by John Frederick Houpreght, a Student of, and Searcher into the
wonderful Secrets of Hermes.

Est in Hermete quidquid quaerunt Sapientes: ille scilic^ solus in regno
Naturae Trismegistus, imo apex and culmen, imo promus-condus mirabilium Natrur^

TO THE READER.
THere are many, which being not well grounded, do always hunt, and also lie in
wait for Processes, supposing that by trying a multitude of them, they shall
chance at length to bait the Avicula Hermetis into their Net. But the grand
Masters of this Art are clean of another mind; one whereof speaks home,
saying, Scito pro certo, quod haec Scientia non in fortuna, neque casuali
inventione, sed in reali Scientia locata est: Know for a truth, that this
Knowledge is not founded on chance, or casual invention, but in the real
Science. And again, Multi quaerunt novam naturam, novamque^ materiam, propterea
etiam inveniunt novum recensque NIHIL, quia non ad possibilitatem naturae, sed
ad syllabam scripta Philosophorum interpretantur. Sine principio finem qu^runt*
and hoc i^de fit, quod non ex fundamentis, sed ex auditu and receptis
circumforaneis artem assequi conantur. Many hunt after new Nature, new Matter,
and find in lieu thereof some fresh new Nothing; because they interpret the
Philosophers according to the extent of the Letter, not the possibility of
Nature: They aim at the end, without the beginning; and hence it is that they
acquire their Art not out of Fundamentals, but by Hearsay, and common
Receipts. Yea he goes further; Etiamsi (sicut multoties accidit) casu ab
aliquo tractatur materia Argenti vivi nostri, tunc ubi incipere debet, opus
suum finit; and sic sicut cas^ invenitur, casu amittitur, qui^ nescit s^per
quid suam intentionem fundare ^ebeat. So (as it often happens) if by any chance
the matter of our Quicksilver be touched, there the Work ends where it should
begin; and so a^ it is found, it is lost, by chance because he knows not upon
what principle to ground his intention. Therefore let none in again, that ever
any true Philosopher that knew the Secret, betrayed the same into a Receipt,
just so as how to make Butter or Cheese out of Milk; for it is not lawful for
them so to do. Vetuit enim Deus (says another of the great Sages) omnibus
palam fieri, quod val^e paucis notum esse bonum est. God denies the knowledge
of that to every one, that is communicable only to a few. And if any should
prove so presumptuous, as to prostitut^ the Virgin-Nature without a Veil,
Anathema fieret Artis. Yea supposed, but not granted, that a man by unwearied
Angling for Receipts, should at length catch all the necessary requisites and
circumstances of the Secret, yet not going in by the right door of obtaining
Grace and true Knowledge from above, but climbing and breaking in by the
furtive side-entry of Processes, let him be sure, that all his endea^our^ will
prove addle, that he will be struck blind, and for ever be thrown out and
banished from the Royal Palace. Clavigera seras non aperit foris, nisi intus
janitor pessulum subduxerit; quod non tentat, nisi signo a throni lumine sibi
dato, says one of our late great Masters: The Keybearer without opens not the
door, unless the Porter within remove the Bolt, which cannot be without a sign
given him from the Throne of Light. Therefore he that is wise, will make his
Address unto the giver of all Wisdom, and by fervent Prayers, and deep
Meditations make his way into this mysterious Science, and flee Processes, as
being but Recesses from truth. Recipes are no other but mere Decipes; and
Processes make no Philosophers, but only Mountebanks in Chymia. Process-mongers
are in the same proportion to Philosophers, as pitiful Fiddlers, that got a few
Tunes by rote, are in respect of perfect Musicians, who can set Tunes by
immovable Mathematical grounds. Let none think himself a Philosopher, unless he
have first accurately and thoroughly acquainted himself with Philosophy; else
let him avoid the Hermetick Hel^con. Etenim sine cognitione rerum naturalium
instar coeci ambulabis; and qui principia naturalia in se ipso ignoraverit,
ille jam multum remotus est ab hac Art: For without the knowledge of natural
things, you walk in the dark; and he that is ignorant of the principles of
Nature in himself, is far to seek in this Mystery. Nature is not so easily
courted, as some fancy: Chymia est castissima Virgo, plurimos procos habet,
quos nunquam in penetralia sua admittit: Chemistry is a most chaste Virgin, she
has many Rivals, but few admitted into her Bedchamber. She has many
Waiting-women, and inferior Attendants, which she deludeth such Suitors with,
as are unworthy of her: Multas hab^t pedissequus, quarum illecebris irretiti,
negligunt Reginam: She has many Handmaids, ensnared by whose allurements they
neglect their Mistress. There are some that are persuaded, that because they
are great Politicians, and have a great measure of the Serpents subtilty and
wisdom from beneath, for compassing of Worldly Interests, that therefore this
Science must not escape them, but that they may easily make it their own: But
let them know, that this Art is Sacred, and that the Serpents wit has no share
in it, there being a great Gulf betwixt them; and that none has access unto
it, but by the wisdom from above, as holy David says, In thy light we shall
see light. There are others that think, that because they have great acuteness
in comprehending all Humane learnings, that therefore the sharpness of their
wit must needs reach this also: But let them hear what one of our great Leaders
says; Verum qui Idem est, si instudio Chymico requieretur subtilis ingenii
perspicaci^as, and res ejusmodi esset, ut ab ^culis v^lgi posset conspici,
satis ^pta vidi illorum ingenia ad inda^anda talia: sed deprehendi illos
Philosophorum scripta long subti^ius explicare, quam Natura, quae ^^mplex est,
requirebat: imo omnia dicta mea veridica, ipsis semper alta sapientibus,
videbantur nimium vilia and incredibilia. Propterea vobis dico, ut sitis
simplices and non nimium prudentes. It Is very true, if in the study of
Chemistry a great perspicuity of wit were requisite, and the thing were of that
nature, that it were perceptible to Vulgar Eyes, I have known their fancies
very ripe for apprehending such things; but I have discovered them to interpret
the meaning of the Philosophers much more subtly, than Nature, which is
simple, requires: nay all my Truths to them that are so wise, are'but mean and
incredible; therefore I advise you to be simple, and not over-wise. Hence says
Job, The is a w^y which the Vulture's ^ has not seen. Some sober Phy^cians,
though they have the Science in esteem, yet suppose needless for themselves to
lo^ any further, but only for go^ Medicines; and therefore, the they ought not
to trouble the^^selves about the Philosophe^ Elixir. But by their leav^s, I ^
not conceive that one can be pe^fectus Medicus, absqu^ perfecta si^ summa
Medicina. Et cum prim^ in unoquoque genere sit mensura (...) liquorum, qui
subordinata sua M^^dicamenta debite mensurare poss^^ absque prima illa Norma?
imo q^ vigor and vita inesse possit praetent suis Medicaminibus, nisi ab
insfluentia Solis illius Philosophorum None can be an absolute Phys^^cian,
without the most perfe^^ and highest knowledge. An^ whereas the first in every
kind, ^ the measure of the rest, how ca^ their subordinate Medicines b^ duly
measured without this first Rule? Nay how can he expect life and vigor in his
Applications, but from the influence of this Sun of the Philosophers? In regno
ejus (says a great Adept) est speculum, in quo totus inundus videtur. Ex illo
qui virtutes herbarum ac omnium rerum cogn^verunt, optimi Medici facti sunt. Et
certe nisi Medicus talis sit, ut sciat cur haec herba talis vel talis, cur in
hoc gradu calida aut sicca, cur humida sit, non ex libris Galeni aut Avicennae,
sed ex font Naturae, fundamentalis Medicus esse non potest. In his Kingdom is
a Glass, in which all the World is seen: out of this those that know the virtue
of Herbs, and all things, make the best Physicia^s; and indeed if the Doctor be
not such as to understand perfectly why this Herb is such and such, why in this
and this degree cold or hot, moist or dry, he is no Doctor: Not out of the
Libraries of Galen or Avicenna, but out of the fountain of Nature, the
fundamental Physician is to be established* As for this Hydropyrographum
Her^meticum, which I have stripped of the German, and put into an Englis^ dress,
I know that some will fin^ fault with it, for finding no Pr^^cess in it; others
will be offende^ at the simpleness and homeline^ of its garb; others because ^
speaks not quite out, and dot^ not betray the Mystery to ever^ capacity. But
let them weigh a that has been said in this Addre^ to the Reader, and I am
confide^^ all these fumes will vanish to no^thing. So Farewell.

Hydropyrographum Hermeticum.
DEar Son, to point out unto thee succinctly a Memorandum, as it were,
concerning the understanding of the true and genuine Stone of the Philosophers,
and the manner of proceeding in its preparation, I give thee this information,
that the said Stone is compounded and engendered of two things, Lapis ex duobus,
corpore and spiritu.
viz. Body and Spirit, or of Masculine and Feminine Seed, that is, of the Water
of Mercury, and of the Body of Sol; whereof we find sufficient proofs and
attestations in all true Writings of the Philosophers, and therefore I count it
needless to enlarge my self by quoting of them. The upshot of all therefore is,
Mercurius resolvendus in aquam.
that first of all Mercury be dissolved and reduced into a spiritual Water,
which is termed by the Philosophers, the first Matter of Metals, the juice of
Lune, Aqua Vitae, Quintessence, a fiery ardent Water or Brandy; by which Water
or prime Matter, Cum aqua Mercurii metalla resolvenda in primam materiam.
Metals are unlocked or untyed, and freed from their hard and stiff bonds, and
reduced into their first and uniform nature, such as the Water of Mercury it
self is. Upon this account the Philosophers presented unto us in their Books,
the example of Ice, or frozen Water, which by heat is reduced into Water,
because before its coagulation it has been Water. Qualibet res redigitur in
primam materiam per principia unde ^rta fuit.
Also telling us, that by the very same principles, from which each thing has
its rise it may be reduced o^ brought back to what it was in the beginning. And
thence they infer, that it is impossible to transmute Metals into Gold or
Silver, without reducing them first into their prima materia. Concerning
therefore the bringing about this Regeneration of Metals, Reductio Metallorum
in primam materiam quomodo fiat.
thou must diligently heed and observe, my beloved Son, that the same is to be
performed only by the means of the prime Matter of Metals, that is, the Water
of Mercury, and by nothing besides in the whole World. For this Water is next
of Kin unto the Metallic nature, Aqua Mercurii metallis amica.
in so much that after their mutual and uniform commixture, they can never be
any more parted asunder. This the Philosophers in the Turba and other Books
signify unto us, saying, Nature rejoices in its Nature; Nature sustaineth
Nature; ^t amendeth Nature; it reduces Nature; Nature overcomes Nature.
Consequently it is necessary to know this blessed Water, and its preparation,
which Water is a hot, Aqua Mercurii est vapor igneus.
fiery, piercing Spirit, the Philosophical Water, and the hidden Key of this
Art. For without this all the labor and work of Alchymy is fruitless and
frustraneous. Observe therefore, my Son, and mark, that all the groundwork of
the Philosophers Stone, Fundamentum Lapidis.
consists in this, that by means of the prima materia metallorum, that is
with the Water of Mercury, we reduce and bring back the perfect body of S^ to a
new birth, that it be bor^ again by Water and Spirit, according to our
Savior's Doctrine Except a man be born again of W^^ter and of the Spirit, he
cannot s^ the Kingdom of God. So likewise i^ this Art, I tell thee, my Son,
u^^less the Body of Sol be sowed in i^ proper soil, your labor is in va^ and
it produces no fruit; as Christ our Savior says, Unless a grain of wheat
fall into the ground, and dye, and rot, it brings no fruit. So when the Body
of Sol is regenerated by Water and Spirit, Corpus per aquam Mercurii fit
astrale.
there grows and comes forth a clarified, astral, eternal, immortal Body,
bringing forth much fruit, and able to multiply it self like unto Vegetables.
And to this purpose the Philosopher Roger Bacon speaks, I do assure you, that
if the Astrum do cast and impress its inclination into such a clarified Body of
Gold, that it will not lose its power and virtue to the very last assay or
judgment: For the Body is perfect, and agreeing to all Elements. But if it be
not regenerated, no new, nor greater, Regeneratione^ metallorum ignorantes
abstineant a Ch^mia,
nor purer, nor higher, nor better thing can come of it. He that does not know
nor understand this Regeneration of Metals, wrought in nature by the Water and
Spirit of the prima materia, ought not to meddle at all with this Art: For in
truth, without this, all is but falsities, lies, unprofitable and to no
purpose; yea it is impossible to effect it otherways. Hence is that excellent
saying of the Philosophers, That every thing brings forth its like, and what
a man sows, the same he shall also reap, and no other. And to the same
purpose the Philosopher Richardus Anglicus says, Sow Gold and Silver, that by
the means of Nature they may bring Fruit. Corpus Solis eligendum ad Chemiam.
Consequently, my Son, thou ought to choose no other Body for thy Work but
Gold, because that all other Bodies are rank and imperfect. And therefore also
the Philosophers made choice of Gold before all other Bodies, because it is of
all things in the World the most perfect, illuminating all other Bodies and
infusing life into them; an^ because it is of a fixated incombustible nature,
of a constant or abiding root, and Fire proof; also, because (as Roger Bacon
says) the corporal Gold, as to its nobility and perfection, cannot be changed,
and is the utmost bound and term of all Natural generation, and there is no
perfecter thing in the whole World. The like teaches also the Philosopher
Isaacus Hollandus, saying, Our Stone cannot be extracted from any other but a
perfect Body, yea the most perfect in the World. And if it were not a perfect
Body, A corpore perfecto res perfecta extrahitur.
what Stone could be extracted thence? in regard that it must have power to
quicken all dead Bodies, to purify the unclean, to mollify those that are
hard, and harden those that are soft: And in truth, it would be impossible to
extract so powerful a Stone out of an imperfect and crasie Body, for a good
perfect thing is not to be got from that which is imperfect and unclean: and
although many do fancy, that such an extraction may be brought to pass, yet
they err grossly, and are very unwise. Therefore, my Son, observe, Sulphur
rubeum est in auro.
that the red Philosophical Sulphur is in the Gold, as Richardus testifies,
and King Calid says: Our Sulphur is no common Sulphur, but is of a Mercurial
nature, fixated, and not flying from the Fire. The same all other Philosophers
also do witness, that their red Sulphur is Gold.

It is true, my Son, that the Philosophers do say in their Books that the
common Gold or Silver is none o^ their Gold or Silver, Aurum vulgi non est
aurum Philosophorum, and quomodo hoc intelligendum.
i^ regard that their Gold and Silver is quick o^ living, but the common are
dead, and therefore not capable to brin^ imperfect Bodies to perfection, no^ to
communicate unto them the least of their perfection. For i^ they should bestow
some of their perfection upon others, they themselves would be then imperfect,
in regard they have no more perfection, than what is needful for themselves.
These words of the Philosophers, my Son, are true, and spoken upon very good
ground; for it is impossible for common Gold and Silver, to perfect other
Bodies that are imperfect, unless, as before taught, that the Body of Sol and
Lune be born anew, or regenerated by the Water and Spirit of the prima materia,
and thereby a glorious, spiritual, clarified, eternal, fixated, subtle,
penetrant Body do grow forth, which afterward has power to perfect other
Bodies which are imperfect. And therefore the Philosophers also said presently
after, that those labors are to this end undertaken about their Stone, Auri
tinctura multiplicatur per aquam Mercurii.
that its tincture may be advanced and exalted; for it is requisite, that the
Stone be digested and carried on to a far greater degree of subtlety and
excellency, than the common Gold and Silver possesses. To this purpose the
Philosopher Bernhard speaks in his Book, in the words following: Though we
take this Body just as Nature has produced it; for all that it is necessary,
that by Art, which in this point must imitate Nature, the same be highly
exalted in its perfection, to the end that by the means of that superlative
accomplishment, and its superabundant rays, it may be able to perfect and
complete the imperfect Bodies, as to weight, color, substance, yea as to their
Mineral root and principles. But if it should have remained in that degree,
wherein Nature left it, viz. in its simple perfection, and not rendered more
perfect or exalted, what should the time of nine months and a half we spend
about it serve for? Aurum Phi osophorum potentiale and ^irtuale.
Arnoldus in his Epistle speaks home, saying, Gold and Silver is in our Stone
potentially and virtually, after a powerful, invisible and natural way; for if
it were not so, no Gold nor Silver could come of it: but the Gold and Silver
existing in our Stone, is better than the common, because it is living, but the
common is dead. And for this very reason the Philosophers called it their Gold
and their Silver, because it is powerful in their Stone, active in its essence,
but not visible common Gold and Silver; which is also confirmed by Euclides in
the great Rosary, saying, Nothing comes of a perfect thing, in regard it is
already perfect and complete, being so made by Nature. Whereof we have an
example in Bread; which being fermented and baked, is perfect in its degree or
being, having attained to its intended end, so that it can be brought to no
further fermentation, to make other Bread of it. Ex corpore Solis perfect^
nihil fit, nisi reducatur ad primam materiam.
The case is the same with the Gold, which through length of time has been
deduced by Nature to a fixated and perfect condition: and so consequently it is
impossible by the means of the simple Gold to perfect other Bodies, unless the
perfect Body be first dissolved and reduced to its first Matter; which done, it
is introverted by our labor and Art, and reduced into a true ferment and
tincture. Moreover the Philosophers do say, that there is no coming to a good
end, until Gold and Silver be joined together in one Body. Here, my Son, Luna
metaphorica.
thou must understand Lune metaphorically, and not according to the letter,
because the Philosophers say in their Writings, that Lune is of a cold and
moist nature, which description they attribute also unto Mercury: and therefore
by Lune is understood Mercury, or the prime Matter, which is the Philosophers
Lune, or juice of Lune, as is made plain by that excellent and deeply-fathoming
piece, the Clangor buccinae.

And thus, my Son, thou art instructed briefly, that no profit is to be got by
this Art, unless the perfect Bodies by means of the Philosophers Fire, or Water
of Mercury, be reduced into their primum Ens, which is a Sulphurous Water, and
not Mercury vive, as the Sophisters suppose. Prima materia quid?
For the first matter of Metals is not Mercury vive, but a clammy Sulphurous
Vapor, and a viscous Water, wherein the three principles, viz. Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercury, are coexistent. Consequently it is necessary to know the true
blessed Water of Mercury, or the Heavenly supernatural Fire, whereby the Bodies
are dissolved and melted like Ice. For the knowledge of this, Cognitio aqua
Mercurii su^^mum est secretum.
is the greatest secret of all, and is wholly and only in the power of God, and
is not to be obtained otherways, but by f^rvent prayer unto him. Concerning
this the Philosopher Rogerius says; God has created Man, and placed him over
Nature and all Creatures, though himself be natural, and nothing else but
Nature, except the Breath which God breathed into him: The very same is to be
the judge of the Works, and their nature. This divine Spirit represents unto
the senses and thoughts, in a true Vision as it were, the first principles of
Nature, especially since the natural inbred Spirit discovers some such
grounds, whereupon he may surely rely, and in this Work and earnestness of the
Spirit, which is of the natural Creation, the divine Adam represents in us
the dissolution of the whole World. Vt macrocosmus corrumpetur per ignem, ita
etiam microcosmus Philosophicus*
And St. Peter by the kindled and burning fiery Spirit of the inbreathed Breath
of God, declares the same very clearly, saying: That the Element^ shall melt
with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the Works that are therein, shall be
burnt up, and that there will be a new World, very glorious, excellent and
good, as in Apocalypsi is described. And hereupon the Philosopher concludes,
according to what has been alleged out of St. Peter, that there shall happen
a destruction of the Elementary World by Fire. Observe in this Art, that the
Fire must perform the like in its type in Nature. Therefore, my Son, set thy
thoughts upon this Water, Corpus Solis corrumpendum per aquam Mercurii.
wherewith the Body of Sol (which, as Rogerius witnesses, is a perfect created
World) is burnt up, and destroyed and dissolved, that it is not a common Fire,
in regard the common is not able to burn or destroy the Gold: but it is a
supernatural incombustible Fire, the strongest of all Fires, yea a Hellish
Fire, which only has power to burn the Gold, and to set the same free from its
stiff and hard bonds. This supernatural Fire, which has such a power over the
Gold and other Metallic Bodies, is nothing else but the spiritual sulphurous
fiery Water of Mercury, wherein the Body of Sol is dissolved and burnt up, and
of this dissolved and destroyed Body, a new World likewise is created and born,
and the Heavenly Jerusalem, that is an eternal, clarified, subtle, penetrant,
fixated Body, which is able to penetrate and perfect all other Bodies. Hence
Rogerius says, As that is to be a supernatural Fire, which is to break and
melt into one another the Elements of the whole World; and as out of the broken
corruptible Work of the dissolved Elements, a new Work will be born, which will
be an everlasting Work; even so the Holy Trinity has showed and signified unto
us likewise, a supernatural Fire in the Heavenly Stone. This supernatural Fire,
my Son, the Philosophers have hidden in their Books in parabolical expressions,
naming the same by innumerable names, and especially they term it Balneum
Mariae, Nimina aqua Mercurii.
a moist Horse-dung, Menstruum, Urine, Milk, Blood, Aqua vitae, and the like.
Of this Fire, says Bernhardus, make a vaporous Fire, Ignis Bernhardi.
continual, digesting, not violent, subtle, airy, clear, close, incombustible,
penetrant and vital: and thereupon he speaks further, Truly, I have told thee
all the manner and circumstances of the Fire, which only performs all, and
therefore he bids the Reader, to consider well and often the words he said
concerning the Fire. Consequently, he that is wise will easily perceive thence,
that those words are not to be understood of a common, but of a supernatural
Fire; which also Mary the Prophetess does hint, saying, that the Element of
Water does dissolve the Bodies, and make them white. And concerning this Fire
(which he calls Menstruum) and its preparation, Raymund Lullie speaks in
his Testamentum novissimum, Loci Lullii de aqua Mercurii.
in Codice, in Anima Metallorum, Luce Mercuriorum, Libr^ Mercuriorum, de
secretis Naturae, de Quinta Essentia and in Elucidario Testamenti, c. 4.
saying, that it is not Humane but Angelical to reveal this Celestial Fire, and
that it is the greatest secret of all, how to attain to the knowledge of it.
And moreover he says in figurative expressions, that this Fire is composed of
Horse-dung and Calx vive. But what is prefigured by Calx vive, I will expound
in another place. And what is signified by Horse-dung, I mentioned before,
Venture equinus Philosophorum est aqua Mercurii.
viz. that by Horse-dung is meant the Water of the prima materia, for it is
warm and moist like Horse-dung; but it is no common Horse-dung, as many
ignorant persons do suppose and understand. Hence says the Philosopher Alanus,
the Philosophers called the moist Fire Horse-dung, in which moisture is kept
the occult heat, because it is the property of the Fire existing in the Horse
belly, not to destroy Gold, but by reason of its moisture to increase it. To
the like purpose speaks Alchidonius: Our Medicine must be hidden in moist
Horse-dung, which is the Philosophers Fire. And Alanus: Dear Son, be careful in
the work of Putrefaction or Destruction, which is to be performed in a gentle
heat, that is, in moist Horse-dung. Arnoldus de Villa nova, in the 9th. chap.
says, that the heat of Horse-dung is their Fire. So likewise Alphidius: it is
digested and buried in the heat of Horse-dung. And Aristotle: the Earth or Body
will enjoy no virtue, unless it be sublimed by the means of Horse-dung. And
therefore, says Hermes, roast and cook it in the heat of Horse-dung. And
Morienus: if thou do not find in Horse-dung what thou look for, thou had
best to save thy charges. With these agrees Arnoldus, saying: Aqua Mercurii
est Ignis Philosophorum.
Let none seek for any other Fire besides this, for it is the Fire of the Wise,
the melting Furnace of the Wise, and their Furnace for calcining, subliming,
reverberating, dissolving, and performing of Coagulation and Fixation; for this
Water dissolveth all Metals, and calcineth them, and melts it self together
with them, both into red and white. In like manner also the Turba and Senior
speaks: Our Water is a Fire, and our Water is stronger than any Fire, for it
reduces the Body of Gold into a mere Spirit, which the natural Fire is not
able to do, though the natural Fire must likewise be had. For then our Water
enters into the natural Bodies, and changes it self into the primigenial
Water, and afterward into Earth or Powder, which does more forcibly burn the
Gold than the natural Fire; and accordingly Calid says, ^t is truly a Fire,
which burns and grindeth all things.

But the manner of preparing this Philosophic Water or Fire, Aqua Mercurii
quomodo praeparanda.
that is, the Aqua Mercurii, the Philosophers have concealed; however Raymund
Lullie of all has written best of it, though in dark expressions. Accordingly,
first of all it will be requisite, to purge Mercury from its extraneous
humidity and terrene terrestriety, yet so, as not by means of corruptible
things; for by such its noble, fruitful, viridescent and generating Nature
would be marred. Avicen, Arnoldus, Geber, Raymundus, in Codicillo, and other
Philosophers besides, say, that Mercury is best cleansed by subliming it from
common Salt, which done, the sublimate to be thrown into warm Water, which will
dissolve and sever the Spirit of Salt from it; afterward the sublimate being
dried and mixed with Salt of Tartar, and forced through a Retort, it will
revive again, and this to be done diverse times, and by this proceeding Mercury
will be freed somewhat from its extraneous moisture and feculency; and
Bernhardus toward the end of his Epistle says, that this purgation does not
hurt Mercury, in regard that the hot Water and Salt do not penetrate into its
substance. But it is to be noted here, my Son, Praparatio aqua Mercurii
difficilis.
that in regard that Mercury is of an uniform indivisible substance, it cannot
be truly and perfectly cleansed by such an extraneous means, especially because
its terrestrial impurity lies hid in its inmost center, which by no Sublimation
is to be s^vered thence, as many ignorant men, though in vain, attempt. And
therefore other means must be used to free Mercury vive from those bonds,
wherewith Nature has tied him uniformly in the bowels of the Earth, and to
reduce him into its primum Ens, Mercurius in aquam Sulphuream reducendus absque
heterogeneis.
which is a Sulphurous spiritual Water, which must be done without addition of
any heterogeneous thing, as Rogerius Bacon under the title of Mercury
testifies; and Raymundus in the Theorica of his Testament says, that if it be
not putrefied and opened after the foresaid manner, the Menstruum will not be
worth a Fig. But when the quick Mercury without any extraneous thing is set
free from its bonds, and dissolved into the primogeneal Water, Mercurius
solutus potest purgari.
then and but then we are capable to cleanse his inside, and by distillation to
sever the Spirit from the Water, and terrene terrestriety; concerning which
Separation the Philosophers have writ in an occult style, such as no conceited
person will easily apprehend, but especially they described it figuratively in
the distillation of Wine. Exemplum de vini distillatione.
For in the distillation of Wine appears evidently, that the Spirit of Wine
is mixed with a great deal of Water, and terrene terrestriety: but by means of
an artificial distillation, the dry Spirit of Wine may be severed from all the
phlegmatic humidity and terrene terrestriety, in so much that all the Spirit
is severed from the Water existent in Wine, and the Water from the Earth, and
then remain the Lees, out of which a white Salt is extracted, and joined again
with the Spirit, and then the Spirit is distilled and cohobated diverse times,
until all the Salt be gone over with it, whereby the Spirit is hugely fortified
and acuated. And in truth, this is a notable typical description represented
unto us by the Philosophers, which in the preparation of the Water of Mercury
we ought to imitate; for after its dissolution we ought in like manner (as has
been taught of the Wine) by Sublimation sever the Water or Phlegm from the
Spirit, and the Spirit from the Earth, and to rectify the Earth, and join and
distill it together with the Spirit, until all together come over the Helm. Of
which preparation of this Water, none of all the Philosophers has written more
clearly nor better than Raymund Lullie, Lullius peritissimus est in
praeparatione aquae Mercurii.
viz. in Testamento novissimo, as also in the first Testament, in libro
Mercuriorum, libro Q. Essentiae, etc. where he does plainly enough declare,
that after the Putrefaction, Separation, Distillation of the Philosophical
Spirit of Wine, the Spiritual Water is to be mixed again and distilled with its
own Earth, that it come over with it; he declares also, how this Philosophical
Wine or Menstruum is fortified and acuated with its own Salt. And further it is
to be noted, Mercurius solutus solvit suum cor^us.
that this Water, Menstruum, or Philosophical Spirit of Wine, being thus
prepared, does dissolve or open its own Body, or Mercury vive, into the primum
Ens, or primogenial Water, whereby it is multiplied without end, by means of
Putrefaction and Distillation. But what is said of the Extraction of this
Water, is confirmed by Arnoldus de Villa nova, saying: It is a substance full
of Vapors, which contains in it self a fat humidity, whereof the Artist
severeth the Philosophers humidity, such as is fit for the Work, and is as
clear as the tears of eyes; wherein dwells the Quintessence in a Metallic
Nature, very proper for the Metals, and therein is the Tincture to bring forth
an entire Metal: for it contains the nature both of Argent vive, and also of
Sulphur. Rosarius Philosophorum says concerning the distillation of this
Menstruum or Water, Vasa been claudenda inpraparatione aqua Mircurii.
that great industry and care must be had, and that the Vessels to be used for
the cleansing of this Spirit, must be of Glass, and exactly closed, to the end
that the Spirit may find no vent nor place to fly through, it being very
forward to make its way through any hole it finds: And if the red Spirit
should be gone, the Artist will lose his labor: the Philosophers call the red
Spirit Blood, and Menstruum; therefore be very careful to have good Vessels,
and to have the joints well luted, that you may get the dry Spirit with its
Blood into the Receiver by it self, without evaporation of its Virtue, and keep
it, until thou have occasion to work with it. But concerning this distillation,
the ocular inspection goes beyond writing, and none can be a Master, before he
have been a Scholar or Apprentice. Be provident therefore and discreet in thy
Work, Processus in distillatione aqua.
lay on a Receiver, and first distill by a gentle Fire the Element of Water,
which being over, put it aside, and lay on another Receiver, and close the
joints exactly, that the Spirit may not vapor away, increase the Fire a
little, and there will rise in the Helm a dry yellow Spirit: Continue the same
degree of Fire, so long as the Spirit comes yellow. But when the Alembick
begins to be red, then increase the Fire very gently, and keep it going on
thus, until the red Spirit and Blood be quite come over, which in its ascending
and going through the Helm will appear in the form of Clouds in the Air: And so
soon as the red Spirit is distilled over, the Helm will be white, and then
cease quickly; and thus you have in the Receiver the two Elements of Air and
Fire, having extracted the true dry Spirit, and severed the pure from the
impure. Lo now you have the prima materia Metallorum, wherein the Bodies are
reduced. For all the Metals have their rise from Water, Omnia metalla ex aqua.
which is a ^oot of all Metals. And therefore they are reduced into Water, like
as the frozen Ice by heat is reduced into Water, because it has been Water
before. Do not marvel at it, for all things upon Earth have their root and rise
from Water. O how many there are that work and never think upon the root, which
is the Key to the whole Work: it dissolveth the Bodies readily; Effectus aqua.
it is Father and Mother; it opens and shuts, and reduces Metals into
what they have been in the beginning. It dissolveth the Bodies, and coagulateth
it self together with them; the Spirit is carried upon the Water, that is, the
Power of the Spirit is seen there operating, which is done when the Body is put
into the Water. Whereupon the Philosopher says: Look upon that despicable
thing, whereby our Secret is opened. For it is a thing which all know well, and
he that knows it not, will hardly or never find it: the wise man keeps it,
and the fool throws it away, and the reduction is easy to him that knows it.
Resolutio Mercurii maximum secretum.
But, my Son, it is the greatest secret to free this Stone, or Mercury vive,
from its natural bonds, wherewith he is tied by Nature, that is, to dissolve
and reduce it into its primigenial Water; for without this be done, all will
prove but labor lost: for else we should not be able to sever and extract the
true Spirit or Watery substance, which dissolveth the Bodies. Omnes Philosophi
occultarunt confectionem aqu^.
And this Solution has been concealed by all the Philosophers, who left it
unto God Almighty's disposing, anathematizing that man that should openly
reveal it. And therefore they spoke very subtly and concisely concerning the
solution of this crude Body, to the end that it may remain occult unto the
unwise. Resolutio Mercurii non fit absque medi^.
But, my Son, thou art to take notice, that the solution of Mercury vive will
hardly be performed without a means, but none such are to be used as are
Sophistical, as many rude, unwise and ignorant fools use to do, who by strange
extravagant ways reduce Mercury into Water, supposing that to be the right
Water. They sublime Mercury with Corrosives, Modi fals^ resolutionis Mercurii.
with all sorts of Salts and Vitriols, from which the sublimed Mercury
attracteth the Salty Spirits, and then afterward they dissolve the sublimate
into Water in Balneo, or in the Cellar, or diverse other ways. Item, they reduce
it into Water by Salt-Armoniack, by Herbs, Soap, Aquafort, by means of strange
kinds of Vessels, and many the like Sophistical proceedings, all which are but
gross fancies, foolish and frustraneous labors: Some also conceive to sever
those things afterward from the Water of Mercury, and that then it shall be
the true Water, which the Philosophers do desire. The reason of their Errors
is, Causa errorum in confectione aquae.
that they consider not the words of the Philosophers, who plainly do say, that
it ought not to be mixed with any heterogeneous thing in the whole World. And
Bernhardus says in his Epistle, that so soon as Mercury is dried up by the
Salts, Aquafort, and other things, that thenceforward it is unfit for the
Philosophic work; for being dried up by the Salts, Allums, Aquaforts, it is
not able to dissolve. But, my dear Son, observe what now I tell thee, and what
information concerning this point the Philosophers left behind them in their
Books; viz. that this Water is not to be prepared by any heterogeneous means
whatever in the whole World, Haec optime notan^a.
but only by Nature, with Nature, and out of Nature. These words are all plain
to the understanding, which I will not now openly unfold, but reserve the same
for a peculiar Treatise; however for a Memorandum, I will set down these
following Rhimes.

Take fresh, pure, quick, white and clear,
Tie him hands and heels so near,
With a most puissant cord and yoke,
That he may be mortified and choakt.
Reduce him by his like homogeneous Nature,
To his first Being, or primigeneous feature,
Within the close Chamber or House of Putrefaction,
According to Dame Nature's indication:
Then you will have a living spiritual Fountain,
Flowing bright and clear from Heaven's Mountain,
Feeding on its proper flesh and blood,
Therewithal increasing to an endless Flood.
Let him, that by Divine assistance obtains his blessed Water, render thanks
unto God, ^or he has the Key in his hands, Aqua clavi^ artis.
wherewith he may open the fast Locks of all Metallic Chests, out of which
Gold, Silver, Gems, Honor, Power, and Health are to be had. This blessed Water
is by the Philosophers called, the Daughter of Pluto, having all the Treasures
in her Power. It is also termed the white, pure, delicate, undefiled Virgin
Beja, without which no generation nor increase can be effected. And therefore
the Philosophers espoused this delicious pure Virgin unto Gabricius, to the end
they may raise up Fruit: and when Gabricius lay with her, he dyed, and Beja out
of excessive love swallowed and consumed him, as Arisieus in Turba
Philosophorum speaks of it. And Bernhard in his Practica says: the Fountain
is as a Mother unto the King, for she does attract him, and causes him to dye,
but the King by her means rises again, and uniteth himself so firmly unto her,
that no man can hurt him. And therefore the Philosophers say, although
Gabricius be costlier, dearer, and more esteemed by the World than Beja, yet he
alone can bring no Fruit. This Virgin and blessed Water the Philosophers named
in their Books with many thousand names; Varia appellationes aqua Mercurii.
they call it Heaven, Celestial Water, Celestial Rain, the dew of Heaven,
May-dew, Water of Paradise, parting Water, Aqua Regis, a corrosive Aquafort,
sharp Vinegar, Brandy, Quintessence of Wine, growthful green Juice, a growing
Mercury, a viridescent Water, and Leo Viridis, Quicksilver, Menstruum, Blood,
Urine, Horse-piss, Milk, and Virgins Milk, white Arsnick, Silver, Lune, and
juice of Lune, a Women, Feminine Seed, a sulphurous vapouring Water and Smoke,
a fiery burning Spirit, a deadly piercing poison, and Basilisk that kills
all, a venomous Worm, a venomous Serpent, a Dragon, a Scorpion devouring his
Children, a hellish Fire of Horse-dung, a sharp Salt, and Salt-Armoniack, a
common Salt, sharp Soap, Lie, a viscous Oil, Estrich's Stomach which does
devour and concoct all, an Eagle, Vulture, Bird of Hermes, a Vessel and Seal of
Hermes, a melting and calcining Furnace, and innumerable other names of Beasts,
Birds, Herbs, Waters, Juices, Milk, Bloods, etc. And they writ figuratively in
their Books of this Water, to be made of such things, whereas all the unwise,
which sought it in such like things, have not found the true desired Water.
Know therefore, my dear Son, that it is only made of Mercury vive, Aqua
Mercurii unde fiat.
and of no other heterogeneous thing in the World; and that the Philosophers
therefore gave it so many Names, that it might not be known to the unwise. And
with this Item I will conclude this Treatise, whereby thou may understand and
learn, that without this Fire all the labor of the whole World is merely lost,
all Chemical processes false, lying and useless. The great Rosary says, there
is no more but one Receipt, and with this one Lock all the Philosophers Books
both particularly and universally are locked up, and walled about, and fenced
as it were with a strong Wall; and he that knows not the Key, nor has it in
possession, is not able to open the Lock, nor to obtain Fruit. For this Water
is the only Key for to open the Metallic Walls and Gardens. And this Water is
the strong Aquafort, of which Isaacus in his particular Work is to be
understood, wherewithal he dissolveth and spiritualizeth the Bodies. And
therefore it is very diligently to be noted, Absque aqua nihil fit in Chemia.
that without this Water nothing can be effected in Chemia, and without it all
are but falsities and lies, both in Metals and Minerals, as also in Vegetables
and Animals. Whether they dissolve, sublime, distill, calcine, extract, mix or
compound with any other thing whatsoever; whether they dissolve per deliquium,
in Balneo, in Horse-dung, in Aquafort, and all sorts of strong Liquors, which
seem to promise some probability, and according as the pretended processes of
Alchymists do teach or may be invented: whether there be made Oil, Water, Calx,
Powder, black, white, yellow and red; whether it be burnt, melted, or done any
thing about it, which the Alchymists Receipts do teach and vent for true,
whereby to make Gold and Silver, all proves but false and a cheat in the
event. For my self with my own hand have experimented all such things to my
damage and loss, not believing them to be false before I tried them. Therefore
be exhorted, Sophista in Chemia vitandi.
my Son, to shun such Sophisters, Cheats and Impostors, as much as the grand
Impostor the Devil, and avoid them as carefully as a terrible burning Fire, and
Poison; for by such Sophistry, and sweetly insinuating false Alchymy, a man
runs the hazard of Body and Soul, Reputation and Wealth, yea this Imposture is
worse than the Devil himself. For though a man should spend a whole Province or
Kingdom upon such deceitful processes, yet all would be consumed in vain, and
no firm truth thereby be obtained. Wherefore open thy eyes, own and acknowledge
the only Key, and flee from all falsity; for it is impossible else to speed, or
do any good.

FINIS.
THE PRIVY SEAL OF SECRETS, WHICH Upon pain of Damnation is not unadvisedly to
be broken up, nor Revealed to any but with great Care, and many Cautions.

THE PRIVY SEAL OF SECRETS.
TO omit circumstances, the first Matter out of which the Philosophers Stone i^
to be had and taken, is a subject common and poor in outward appearance, and
therefore it is called a little thing, and it is in every Mine, yet is nearer
in some things than in others, and in a word in the Mineral Kingdom you must
have it, in the most excellent work of the Mineral Hierarchy; therefore not
Animals or Vegetals. Know ye then, (although I deny not Raymonds Canons to be
true) that the lively Nature being constrained with the strength of Gold, in
the most subtle heat, the Tincture may be made well easily, and in a short
time, which will convert all Metals into perfect Gold; but the way of the
Philosophers in the Universal Work, was out of the Mineral Kingdom: leaving
therefore Animals and Vegetals, I will acquaint you with the Universal Subject.
Know that all Philosophers affirm, that the Matter is but one thing, and a vile
thing which costeth nothing, cast in Highways and trodden upon, which is the
hope of Metals, or a thing containing all things needful for the Work within it
self; and albeit curious Wits hold all these to be Aenigma's, yet are they true
according to the letter. Briefly, to manifest the truth, you shall know that in
all Mines whatsoever there does lie certain Beds, of a lutinous or clayish
substance, under the Earth, which in some places is harder than in others, the
deeper the Mine is, the more unctuous is the Clay; and this Clay is the Mother
of the Metals, the feeder of the Mines, for in it lies hid the Spirits, or the
three Principles of Metals, (viz) Salt the Body, Sulphur the Soul, and Mercury
the Spirit, not common nor running, but a white Vapor which resolves it self
into a white Water; I say, invisibly in this confused lump of Clay, lies hid
the aforesaid Principles.

And this is the true Matter or Subject of the Philosophers, and mark how that
it agrees with that I said before: First, that it is one thing, which yet
contains three; Secondly, that it is a vile thing, and yet is not so, for it
is a lump of Clay; Thirdly, that it is so vile and common, that Workmen throw
it out of their Mines, and tread on it, as a thing of no value: I have seen
Highways paved with it in Hungary, and it is no other in other Countries. And
is not this a Chaos or confused Matter? is not this the hope of Metals? be you
judge. I took my Matter in Hungary out of the Mines of Sol, an^ so I was
taught, because more decocted, and riper or hotter Spirit^ are there, than in
any other Mines. Paracelsus out of it wrought his Elixir, but the Philosophers
generally took their Matter (which is the same in show and substance, but not
so ripe) out of the Mines of Saturn, and that is their Saturn so often
mentioned in their Books; not Ore of Saturn, nor Mercury of Saturn but the
Sperm, where the Vegetable Spirits are not specificated to Lead, but lie hid in
the lutinous lump of Clay.

Now the difference between that which is taken out of the Mine of Sol, and
that which is had out of the Mine of Saturn, is this; in Sol the Matter is so
prepared, you shall have need but of one Putrefaction, but in that taken out of
the Mine of Saturn, you must have three Putrefactions, which indeed is the
great and universal Work. And thus I have fully and plainly revealed the
Matter, the Work is easy, viz.

The Practice.
TAke this lutinous Clay out of Sol or Saturn, (for the working in either the
Preparation is alike) I say, take that which is ^rost clammy or unctuous, and
when you gather it, keep it from the Air, as close as you can in a Glass or
Earthen Vessel, for it will (which I have admired) in an instant indurate and
harden^: But put it in a Glass Vessel, and in that digest it, being well
stopped in B. M. or in a Blind Head which is better; but let three parts of the
Vessel be empty, and let the heat of your Balneum be such, as you may easily
hold your hand in it. Some Philosophers digested this a Philosophical month,
which is six weeks, but then their Matter was not fresh; for if it be fresh,
then sixteen or twenty days is sufficient. After Digestion alter the head, and
distill, and you shall have the Philosophers Oil; which being come, your it on
the Matter again, and this till you have so much Vinegar as will swim four
fingers over the Matter; then let it stand twenty four hours, and it will be
tinged yellow; pour that gently off, and distill away your Vinegar till it come
to a gummy substance; then pour this Vinegar on the Matter again, and it will
be tinged yellow: distill and reiterate this until your Vinegar be no more
tinged yellow, then has it sucked out all the Spirits out of the Clay: then
from the yellow Liquor distill away all the Vinegar, and you shall have a gummy
substance like Saccarum Suturni: digest this two days, then distill away all
the Phlegm in Balneo, then let it cool, and put it in a Retort, with a great
Receiver well luted to it as can be; put it into an Ash Furnace, and distill it
again, and by degrees you shall have all your Receiver become as white as Milk,
which is crude Mercury of Philosophers, or the Virgin Milk: continue
Distillation, and a blood red Oil shall ascend, which is Sulphur of
Philosophers incombustible and unctuous: continue till no more will come over,
with so violent a heat for twelve hours, that you do almost melt the Glass;
then let it cool, and take off that Receiver, and stop it up very close break
the Retort, and the Feces will be as black as Pitch, and hard, which grind
small on a Marble, then Reverberate it in an Earthen Calcining-pan, close
covered for three days, (but make not the Matter red-hot) and lay it two
fingers thick in the Pan: then take it out, and either with your Vinegar
rectified from its Feces, or with Rainwater distilled, I have tried and found
it being well Reverberated, that it will take up the Salt, but I held the
Vinegar the best and most proper; digest it therefore with Vinegar twenty
hours, then philter and distill it in B. M. till it be dry; dissolve it again
in that Vinegar, but first rectify it: let it settle, philter and distill, and
reiterate until the Salt be Crystalline and white, then put it in a white glass
Body, pour thereon this red Oil which is the Sulphur, and also the white Water
which is incorporated therewith: lute on close and well a Blind Head, and
digest in Balneo three days, and it will be all one thing or pap: but then
distill away all the humidity that will arise, and then put it in an Egg-glass
with a short neck, nip it up without heating the Matter, let the Egg be but a
fourth part full.

This is the gross Conjunction and Preparation, without adding any more than
Natures proportion: put the Glass in an Athanor, in a gentle heat, and the
Matter shall dissolve, putrify, and perform all the Work by virtue of Count
Trevisan's Fire, which is the Spirit ever working within the Glass, beginning
visibly before the Matter begins to putrify, for then it continually ascends
and descends until Congelation. Be not too curious, only pray to God, and he
will direct your Work, and bring it to a period, which I judge to be sixteen
months, a bloud-red Powder impalpable in the conclusion of the Work, be patient
and you cannot err. Note, I was never taught to multiply, but by increasing
with his own Oil and Salt, that is, with ten parts of Oil and one of Salt
depurated, and so increasing the Medicine you shall bring it as high as you
will. I know not any more than this, neither can any more large or more
plainly. Serve God, and you cannot err.

Know also, that you may with this Fire-Stone, which is the red Oil, and this
Salt prepared from the white Water, increase Precipitate of Sol and Mercury,
elevated together and then mixed, or upon a subtle Calx of Sol alone, but not
so suddenly. The manner is, to pour on the Calx the red Oil, till it be like
pap; then lute it, and ^^t it in Ashes to circulate in a Circulatory, that if
any Mercurial Spirit should remain, it may still arise and not hinder the
fixation of the Matter: continue the Fire till it be a dry Powder, then
increase more and more, till it be in an Oily substance fixed, which turns Luna
into perfect Sol with great profit. And thus you may increase with the Oil of
Antimony, as I have showed you.

FINIS.
A LETTER Communicated by the most Serene Prince FREDERICK Duke of Holsatia and
Sleswick, Concerning an Adept, AND Relates things strange and unheard of.

The following Letter was communicated by the most Serene Prince Frederick Duke
of Holsatia and Sleswick, and relates things strange and unheard of.
My Friend,
YOU have desired of me an account of the Life and Death, Inheritance and Heirs
of my Master B. J. of happy memory: I return you this Answer in Latin, as
yours to me was, though I be not exactly skilled in it.

He was by Nation a Jew, by Religion a Christian, for he believed in Christ the
Savior, and openly made profession of the same: He was a man of great Honesty,
and gave great Alms in secret: He lived chastely a Bachelor, and took me when I
was about twenty years of Age, out of the House where Orphans are maintained by
the Public, and caused me to be instructed in the Latin, French, and Italian
Tongues; to which I afterward by use added the Jewish or Hebrew. He made use
of me, so far as I was capable, in his Laboratory, for he had great skill in
Physic, and cured most desperate Diseases. When I was twenty five years of
Age, he called me into his Parlour, and made me swear to him, that I would
never marry without his consent and knowledge; which I promised, and have
religiously kept.

When I was thirty years of Age, on a morning he sends for me into his Parlour,
and said very lovingly to me, My Son, I perceive that the Balsom of my Life, by
reason of extreme old Age coming on, (for he was eighty eight years of Age) is
well-nigh wasted, and that consequently my Death is at the door: wherefore I
have writ my last Will and Testament, for the use and benefit of my Brothers
Sons, and of you, and have laid it upon the Table of my Closet, whither neither
you nor any mortal ever entered; for you durst not so much as knock at the door,
during the hours set apart for my Devotion. Having said this, he went to the
double door of his Closet, and daubed over the joynings thereof with a certain
transparent and Crystalline Matter, which he wrought with his fingers till it
became soft and yielding like Wax, and imprinted his Golden Seal upon it; the
said Matter was immediately hardened by the cold Air, so that without defacing
the Seal, the door could no way be opened.

Then he took the Keys of the Closet, and shut them up in a small Cabinet, and
sealed the same as before with the said Crystalline Matter, and delivered the
said Cabinet, after he had sealed it, into my hands, and charged me to deliver
the same to none but his Brothers Sons, Mr. Jesse, Abrah, and Solomon Joelha,
who at that time lived in Switzerland, the eldest of them being a Bachelor.

After this he returned with me into the Parlour, and in my presence dropped
the Golden Seal he had made use of, into a Glass of clear Water, in which the
said Seal was immediately dissolved, like Ice in hot Water, a white Powder
settling to the bottom, and the Liquor was tinged with the pale red of a
Provence Rose. Then he closed the said Glass Vial, with the abovementioned
transparent Matter, and charged me to deliver the said Vial, together with the
Keys, to Mr. Jesse.

This being done, he repeated upon his bended knees some of David's Psalms in
Hebrew, and betook himself to his Couch, where he was used to sleep after
Dinner, and commanded me to bring him a Glass of Malaga, which now and then he
sparingly made use of: As soon as he had drank off his Wine, he bid me come to
him, and leaning his head upon my shoulders, he fell into a quiet sleep, and
after half an hours time fetched a very deep sigh, and so yielded his Soul to
God, to my great astonishment.

Upon this I according to my promise writ into Switzerland, to give notice of
his death to his Nephews; and to my great wonder, the very day after my blessed
Master died, I received a Letter from Mr. Jesse, wherein he enquired whether my
Master were dead or alive, as if he had known every thing that had passed; as
indeed he did, by means of a certain Instrument, of which hereafter I shall
make mention.

A little after his Nephews came, to whom I gave an account of what had passed:
all which Mr. Jesse heard with a smile, but the other Brother not without
astonishment and wonder. I gave him the Keys, together with the Glass in which
was the aforesaid Golden Solution; but they refused then to meddle with any
thing that day, being tired with their Journey, but on the morrow, after I had
carefully shut all the doors of the house, and none but they and I being
present, Mr. Jesse took the Glass Vial, and broke it over a China-dish, which
might receive the enclosed Liquor, and took some of the said Liquor and put it
upon the transparent Matter, with which the Cabinet was sealed, and immediately
the Matter which before was hard as Crystal, was resolved into a thickish
Water; so he opened the Cabinet, and took thence the Keys of the Closet.

Then we came to the door of the Closet, where Mr. Jesse having seen the Seal,
he wetted it as formerly with the forementioned Liquor, which immediately gave
way; and so he opened the said double door, but shut it again, and falling down
upon his knees, prayed, as we also did* then we ^^^red, and shut the doors upon
us. Here I saw great Miracles.

In the midst of the Closet stood a Table, whose Frame was of Ebony, the Table
it self was round, and of the same Wood, but covered with Plates of beaten
Gold: before the Table was placed a low Footstool, for to kneel upon; in the
midst of the Table stood an Instrument of a strange and wonderful contrivance,
the lower part of it or Pedestal was of pure Gold, the middle part was of most
transparent Crystal, in which was enclosed an incombustible and
perpetually-shining Fire; the upper part of it was likewise of pure Gold, made
in the form of a small Cup, or Vial.

Just above this Instrument hung down a Chain of Gold, to which was fastened an
artificial Crystal, of an Oval form, filled with the aforesaid perpetual Fire.

On the right side of the Table we took notice of a Golden Box, and upon the
same a little Spoon: this Box contained a Balsom of a Scarlet color.

On the left side we saw a little Desk of massy Gold, upon which was laid a
Book containing twelve leaves of pure beaten Gold, being tractable and flexible
as Paper; in the midst of the leaves were several Characters engraved, as
likewise in the Corners of the said leaves, but in the space between the Center
and Corners of the leaves, were filled with Holy Prayers.

Under the Desk we found the last Will of my deceased Master; whilst we were in
the Closet, Mr. Jesse kneeled down, leaning upon the Desk, and with most humble
devotion repeated some of the forementioned Prayers, and then with the little
Spoon took up a small quantity of the aforesaid Balsom, and put it into the top
of the Instrument which was in the midst of the Table, and instantly a most
grateful Fume ascending, which with its most pleasing odor did most sensibly
refresh us: but that which to me seemed miraculous was, that the said Fume
ascending, caused the perpetual Fire enclosed in the hanging Crystal, to flash
and blaze terribly, like some great Star or Lightning.

After this, Mr. Jesse read the Will, wherein he bequeathed to Mr. Jesse all
his Instruments and Books of Wisdom, and the rest of his Goods to be equally
divided between him and his Brother; besides he left me a Legacy of 6000 Golden
Ducatoons, as an acknowledgment of my fidelity.

And accordingly first enquiry was made for the Instruments and Books of
Wisdom; of those that were on and about the Table, I have spoke already: in the
right side of the Closet stood a Chest of Ebony, whose inside was all covered
with Plates of beaten Gold, and contained twelve. Characters engraven upon them.

From thence we went to view a large Chest, containing twelve Looking-glasses
not made of Glass, but of a certain wonderful unknown Matter; the Center of the
said Looking-glasses were filled with wonderful Characters, the Brims of them
were enclosed in pure Gold, and between the said Brims and Center they were
polished, Looking-glasses receiving all opposite Images.

After this we opened a very large Chest, or Case, in which we found a most
capacious Looking-glass, which Mr. Jesse told us was Solomon's Looking-glass,
and the Miracle of the whole World; in which the Characterisms of the whole
Universe were united.

We saw also in a Box of Ebony, a Globe made of a wonderful Matter; Mr. Jesse
told us, that in the said Globe was shut up the Fire and Soul of the World, and
that therefore the said Globe of it self performed all its motions, in an exact
Harmony and Agreementt with those of the Universe.

Upon this Box forementioned stood another, which contained an Instrument See
this Instrument described in a Book called Ars Notoria, Printed in Latin or
English, page 136.
resembling a Clock-Dial, but instead of the Figures of the 12 hours, the
Letters of the Alphabet were placed around this, with a Hand or Index turning
and pointing at them. Mr. Jesse told us, that this Instrument would move of it
self, upon the motion of a Corresponding and Sympathetick Instrument which he
had at home, and that by means of this Instrument, my happy Master had
signified to him his approaching death; and that after this signification,
finding that his Instrument remained without motion, he concluded my Master was
dead.

Last of all we came to the Books of Wisdom, which he opened not: near the said
Books was placed a Box of Gold, full of a most ponderous Powder of a deep
Scarlet color, which Mr. Jesse smiling took and put up.

Near to the Closet where we were, was another Closet adjoining, which we
entered into, and there found four large Chests full of small Ingots of most
pure Gold, out of which they gave me my Legacy of 6000 Golden Ducatoons in a
double proportion. But Mr. Jesse refused to take for himself any of the said
Gold; for he said, that those things which were before bequeathed to him, did
fully content him, for he was skilled in my Masters Art, and therefore ordered
his part of the Gold to be bestowed upon several poor Virgins, of kin to them,
to make up their Portions. I my self married one of these, and had with her a
good Portion out of the said Gold; she embraced the Christian Religion, and is
yet alive.

Mr. Jesse packed up all his things, and carried them home with him into
Switzerland, though since that he has chose himself a quiet and well-tempered
place in the East Indies, from whence he writ to me last year, offering me to
adopt my eldest Son, whom I have accordingly sent to him.

During the time we were in the Closet, I saw strange Miracles effected by the
motions of the said Instruments of Wisdom, which I neither can nor dare set
down in writing. Thus much, my intimate Friend, I was willing you should know,
more I cannot add.

Farewell.
FINIS.
A TREATISE OF MERCURY And the Philosophers Stone. BY Sir GEORGE RIPLEY.

A TREATISE OF MERCVRY And the Philosophers Stone.
I Will, my dearest Son, instruct thee in this Blessed Science, which was hid
from the Wise of old, to whom God was pleased to show so much favor. Know
therefore, that our Matter is the chiefest of all things in the Earth, and of
least estimation and account, as will hereafter more plainly appear. For if
Water incorporate it self with Earth, the Water will be lowest of all, and will
(if it be not kept down) with Fire, ascend higher; and thus it may be seen, how
Water will be highest and lowest. Yet true it is, that it is of least
estimation, for in our Earth and Water, and in that drossie Earth, you may find
some very pure and clear, which is our Seed and fifth Essence, and then that
foul and drossie Earth is good for nothing else, and of no estimation. But that
Water, as I said, is the chiefest, will appear many ways: Know, Son, that
without Water we cannot make Bread, nor any thing else, which God has created
in Nature; and hence you may easily perceive, that Water is the first Matter of
all things which are born or generated in the World: for certainly it is
manifest unto thee, that nothing grows or receives increase without the four
Elements; therefore whatsoever is Elementated by the virtue of the four
Elements, it must of necessity be, that the original of all things that are
born or grow, should be of Water: Yet ought you not to understand, this before
spoken of Water, but of that Water which is the Matter of all things, out of
which all Natural things are produced in their kind. Know therefore, that first
of all Air is engendered of Water; of Air, Fire; of Fire, Earth. Now will I more
familiarly and friendly discourse with thee; I Will further manifest this Mystery
unto thee by degrees, l^^t by too much have it happen to us according to the
Proverb, That he that makes too much have, oftentimes comes home too late. Now
therefore that I may satisfy thy desire, I will discourse of the first Matter,
which Philosophers call, the fifth Essence, and many other Names they have for
it, by which they may the more obscure it. In it for certain are four Elements,
pure in their Exaltation: Know therefore, that if you would have the fifth
Essence, Man, you must first have Man, and you must have nothing else of that
Matter; and see that you observe this well. This I say, that if you desire to
have the Philosophers Stone, you must of necessity first have the fifth Essence
of that same Stone, whether it be Mineral or Vegetative; join therefore species
with species, and Gems with Gems, and not the one without the other, nor any
thing contrary, which may be other than the species or proper Gems; beware
therefore of all that is not Essential: For of Bone^, Stones cannot be made,
neither do Cranes beget Ge^se; which if you will consider, you will find the
profit of it, by the help of Divine Grace; by the assistance whereof let us
f^rther proceed to speak of this blessed Water, which is called the Water of
the Sun and Moon, hidden in the concavity of our Earth. Concerning which Earth
know, that all that is generated must of necessity have Male and Female, from
which action and passion arise, without which Generation never is. But you will
certainly never receive profit from things differing in kinds. Notwithstanding,
if you have this Water of the Sun and Moon, it will draw other Bodies and
Humors to its own kind, by the help of the virtue and heat of the Sun and
Moon, and will make them perfect. As an Infant in the womb of its Mother,
decoction of temperate heat helping it, turns the Flowers into its nature and
kind, that is, into Flesh; Blood, Bones, and Life, with the other properties of
a living Body* of which it is needless to say any more. And hence you may
understand, that our Water changes it self into a perfect kind, with things of
its own kind: For first it will congeal it self into a substance like Oil; then
it will change that Oil, by the means of temperate heat* into Gum; and lastly,
by the help of the perfect heat of the Sun* into a Stone. Now therefore know,
that out of one thing you have three, that is, Oil, Gum, and a Stone. Know
also, that when the Water is turned into Oil, then you have a perfect Spirit;
when the Oil is turned into hard Gum, then you have a perfect Spirit and Soul;
and when the Spirit and Soul are turned into a Stone, then you have a perfect
Body, Soul and Spirit together: which as it is called the Philosophers Stone
and Elixir, and a perfect Medicine of man's Body; so also that which is leavened
with its genus, and the fifth Essenc^ Know, Son, that fifth Essences are
diverse, one whereof is to. Humane Bodies, another to Elixir, and to the
imperfect Bodies of Metals* For you must consider, that the generation and
growth of Metals, is not as the growth of man's Body; for a genus agrees with
its genus, and a species with its species. Moreover, know that the first Matter
of man, which begets the Flesh* Blood, Bones and Life, is a Spermatick
Humor, which causes generation, through a vital Spirit included therein: And
when the Matter is generated and congealed into a Body, extract thence the
fifth Essence of that Body, wherewith you may nourish the Body. Yet Son, will I
tell thee moreover, that Water, or Matter* or Seed whereof Man is begot, is not
the augmenter of the Body. Know, Son, that if the Body be fed with its natural
food, then its first Matter will be increased, and also the Body, (viz.) the
first Matter in quality, and the Body in quantity; the first Matter is that
which is called the fifth Essence. Yet know, Son, that the fifth Essence is one
thing* and the Matter of augmentation is another: and, as I said before, the
increase of Metals, is not like the increase of man's Body. Although the fifth
Essence, which causes the augmentation of Metals, may be a fit Medicine for
Humane Bodies; as also the fifth Essence, which causes the augmentation of
man's Body, may be a fit Medicine for the Bodies of Metals: and therefore, as
before is said, the fifth Essence is one thing, and augmentation another. You
see therefore for what reason our Water is called, the first Matter and Seed of
Metals, viz. because of it all Metals are generated. Therefore you will have
need of it in the beginning, middle, and end, for as much as it is the cause of
all generation, because by its Congelation it is turned into all sorts of
Metals, to wit, into the first Matter of the sorts. Thence it is called, the
Seed of Metals, and the So it is in the Latin, though perhaps the words should
be Vita Metallica, that is, the Water of Metallic Life, that is, of the Life
of Metals.
Metallic Water of Life: because it affords Life and Blood to sick and dead
Metals, and joyneth in Matrimony the Red man with the White woman, that is, the
Sun and the Moon. It is called also Virgins Milk; for as long as it is not
joined with the Sun and the Moon, nor with any thing else, except only those
which are of its own ^ind, so long it may be called a Virgin. But when it is
joined with a Male and Female, and marries with them, then is it no longer a
Virgin, because it adhereth to them, and becomes one with them to whom it is
joined, that is, with the Sun and Moon, whom it joins and is joined with to
generation. But as long as it remains a Virgin, it is called Virgins Milk, the
Blessed Water, and the Water of Life, and by many other Names.

And now, my Son, that I may say something of the Philosophers Mercury, know
that when thou have put thy Water of Life to the Red man, who is our Magnesia,
and to the White woman, whose name is Albifica, and they shall all have been
gathered together into one, then you have the true Philosophers Mercury. For
after that in this manner all is joined with a Male and Female, then it is
called the Philosophers Mercury, the Philosophers Water of Life, the Blood of
Man, his red Flesh, his Body and Bones. Know therefore, that there are many
sorts of Milk, (viz.) Virgins Milk, Woman's Milk, and also Man's Milk: For when
first they are joined in one, and she is big, having conceived, then the Infant
must be nourished with Milk: But then you may know, that this Milk is not
Virgins Milk, but rather the man and the woman's Milk, wherewith it is always to
be nourished, till it is grow^ to that strength, that it may be brought up with
stronger and fuller food. That food which I mean is the leavening of it, which
gives it form, that it may perform Virile work: For until the Infant, that is,
this our Stone, be formed and leavened with its like, the Blood of the green
Dragon, and the red Blood of the red Dragon, whether it be the white Stone or
the red, it will never do a perfect work. Know therefore, Son, that the first
Water is that Water Rebar, which God made of Nature, and it is the cause of
Generation, as I said before; but when after the conjunction which arises from
the Marriage, it begets the Water of Life, and the Philosophers Milk, with one
of which, or both, you must augment and feed your Stone perpetually.

Much more could I say to thee* Son, concerning this first Matter, but let this
suffice, that setting aside impertinencies of words, we may now, Divine Grace
favoring of us, proceed to the practice it self of the Philosophic Stone. See
therefore, my Son, that thou diligently put all these Matters (which though
they are three things, yet are they but one only) in a Glass Vessel; and
let them quietly putrefie: then put an Alembick upon your Vessel, and by
distillation draw out all the Water, which may be thence distilled. Try this
first in Mary's Bath. Then place the Vessel in Ashes, and make a gentle Fire
for 12 hours: then take the Matter out of the Vessel, grind it well by it self,
without the foresaid Water, then ^ut it again into the Vessel with Water, and
stop the Vessel close. Put it in the Bath for three days, and then distill the
Water as before in the Bath, and the Matter will be more black than before. Do
thus three times over, and then grind it no more; but afterward^ as often as
you distill it, so often pour Water on the top: but between each distillation
give it so much Fire for six hours or more, till it become indifferent dry;
then pour Water on the top again, and dissolve it again in the Bath under a
blind Alembick. Also in every distillation separate the Phlegm, by casting away
six or seven drops of Water in the beginning of each distillation And observing
this order, cause it to drink its proper Water, till it has drank of it seven
times its weight which it had at the first. But then it will be of a white
color, and so much the whiter, by how much the more of its own Water it has
drank. This is white Elixir.

Moreover, this our Water is called Homogeneal, and by many other names.
Besides, know that this Water and Matter generate as well the Red Stone, as the
White: Know also, when this first Matter is brought to its complete whiteness,
then the end of one, is the beginning of the other; that is, of the Red Stone,
which is our Red Magnesia, and Virgins Brass, as we said at first: Son, see
thou well understand these words. Our Virgins Brass, is our Gold; yet I do not
say, that all Brass is Gold: also our Brass, is our live Brimstone; but all
live Brimstone, is not our live Brimstone: also Quicksilver, is Mercury; but I
do not say, that common Quicksilver, is our Silver: as I said before, that
Water of Life which is our Seed and first Matter, is our Mercury and our Spirit
of Life, which is extracted out of the blessed Land of Aethiopia, which is
called Magnesia, and by many other names. Besides, my Son, know that there is
no perfect generation, without corruption; for corruption causes cleanliness,
and cleanliness corruption. Consider therefore, Son, our dying poison, which
dies and is dyed perpetually; and this is our Body, our Soul, and our Spirit,
when they are joined together in one, and become one thing, which with its
parts arises also out of one thing, besides which there is not any other,
neither ever shall be. Wherefore, my Son, great folly it is for any one to
believe, that any other Medicine can be turned into Gold or Silver; which
Medicine will little profit thee of it self, except it be mingled with a Body,
for then shall it perfect its work according to its form to which it is born:
For it is never born that it may of it self become a Body, Moreover, know that
there is as much difference between the first Matter, which is called the Seed
of Metals, and the Medicine, as is between the Medicine and Gold: For the Seed
will never be the Medicine without a Body, neither will the Medicine ever be a
Metal without a Body. Much difference also there: is between Elixir and the
Medicine, as between Masculine and Feminine Seed, and also an Infant which is
generated of those in the Matrice. Now you may see, that the Seed is one thing,
and the Infant another; though they be one and the same in kind, one thing, one
operation, the Vessel finally one, though it be called by diverse names: For of
a Man and Woman, is an Infant born, when as yet the Man is one thing, and the
Woman another, though they be one and the same in kind: which you ought to
understand in our Stone. But what I said before, that corruption is the cause
of generation, and of cleanliness, is true* For, you must know, that every
thing in its first Master is corrupt and bitter, which corruption and
bitterness is called dying poison, which is the cause of Life in all things, as
will be sufficiently manifest, if you with right reason do weigh the Natures of
things. Consider well, O Son, that when Lucifer the Angel of Pride, first
rebelled against God, and prevaricated the Command of the most High, be assured
that this was made corrupt, bitter, and harsh to him: No less was the fall and,
prevarication of our first Parents Adam and Eve, whom death and condemnation
followed, made to them corruption and bitterness, and likewise to us in whom
the same corruption is propagated. Many more like examples I could recite, if
need were: But setting aside these, to come to what is proper to our discourse;
consider well, that of all precious Fruits which grow out of the Earth, their
First Matter is bitter and harsh, as still retaining some footstep of the
former corruption and putrefaction; which bitterness, by the means of continual
action of natural heat: is with great virtue turned into sweetness. Now
therefore, Son, if thou wi^^ be ingenious, this little will suffice whereby to
find out much more, and to perceive my meaning: Consider therefore well, Son,
that according to the old Proverb, He sweet deserves not, who n^ bitter tastes.

But now to speak something more of our Brass; know, that Brass signifies
continuance, or continuing Water: But what is farther to be considered in the
nature, of the name of Brass, you may easily gather from its English
Tetragrammate name, that is, its name consisting of four letters, to wit, B. R.
A. S. First therefore, by B. is signified the Body of ou^ Work, which is sweet
and bitter, our Olive and our Brass continuing in its form: by R. is signified
the Root of our Work, and the Spring of continuing Radical Humors, which is
our Red Tincture, and Red Rose which puri^ie^h all in its kind: A. signifies
our F^ther Adam, who was the first man, out of whom was born the first woman
Eve; whence you may understand, that therein is Male and Female. Know
therefore, that our Brass is the beginning of our Work, our Gold and Olive, for
it is the first Matter of Metals, as Man is the first of Man and Woman. S.
signifies the Soul of our Life, and Spirit of Life, which God breathed into
Adam, and all the Creatures; which Spirit is called the fifth Essence.
Moreover, Son, by these four Letters, we may understand the four Elements,
without which nothing is generated in Nature. They also signify Sol and Lune,
which are the causes of all Life, Generation, and augmentation of all things
born in the World. In this name therefore of four Letters, consists our whole
Work: For our Brass is Male and Female, of which arises he who is called
begot. Therefore, Son, take good notice what is signified by our sweet Brass,
what is called our Sandiver, or the Salt of our Nitre, or Nitre; what also by
the Blood of the Dragon, what Sol and Lune, our Mercury, and our Water of Life,
and many other things, concerning which Philosophers have spoken darkly, and in
Riddles. Know therefore, Son, that our first Matter is neither Gold, nor common
Silver, nor is it of corrosives, or such like outward things, which Denigrators
groping in the dark nowadays do use. Take heed therefore, Son, that by no
means you admit any thing contrary in kind; for be assured, that what a man
shall have sowed, the same shall he reap. Moreover, know that when our Stone is
completed in its proper kind, then it will be a hard Stone, which will not
easily be dissolved; yet if you add his Wife to him, he will be dissolved into
Oil, which is called the Philosophers Oil, incombustible Oil, and by many other
names. Know therefore, Son, that there are diverse leavenings, as well Corporal
as Spiritual, (viz.) Corporal in quantity, and Spiritual in quality: Corporal
leavening increases the weight and quantity of the Medicine, yet is not of so
great power as the Medicine it self, as is Spiritual leavening; for it only
increases the Medicine in quantity, not in virtue: but Spiritual leavening
increases it in both; and where the Corporal rules above an hundred, the
Spiritual above a thousand. Moreover, as long as the Medicine is leavened by
Spiritual qualities, so long it is called the Medicine; but when it is leavened
with the Corporal substance, it is called Elixir. There is therefore a diverse
manner of leavening, and a difference between the Medicine, and the Elixir; for
the Spiritual is one thing, the Corporal another. Know also, that as long as it
is Spiritual leavening, it is liquid Oil and Gum* which cannot conveniently be
carried about from one place to another; but when it is Corporal, then it will
be a^Stone which you may car^y about in your Pocket. Now therefore you see what
is the difference between the Medicine, and the Elixir; nor is the difference
lessbetween Elixir, and Gold and Silver, for Gold and Silver are difficult to
melt, but Elixir not so, for it easily dissolves at the flame of a Candle:
thence you may easily perceive, how various the differences of our composition
and temperament are. Lastly, that we may say something concerning their food
and drink, know that their food is of airy Stones, and their drink is drawn out
of two perfect Bodies, namely, out of the Sun and Moon; the drink that is drawn
out of the Sun, is called liquid Gold, (or Potable, that is, that may be
drank;) but that out of the Moon, is called Virgins Milk. Now, Son, we have
discoursed plainly enough with thee, if Divine Grace be not wanting to thee;
for that drink that is drawn out of the Sun, is red, but that out of the Moon,
is white; and therefore one is called liquid Gold, but the other Virgins Milk;
one is Masculine, the other Feminine, though both arises out of one Image, and
one kind. Son, ponder my words, otherwise if thou wanderest in the dark, that
evil befalls thee from defect of light: See therefore that thou be diligent
in turning the Philosophic Wheel, that thou may make Water out of Earth, Air
out of Water, Fire out of Air, and Earth out of Fire, and all this out of one
Image and Root, that is, out of its own proper kind, and natural food wherewith
its Life may be cherished without end. He who has understanding, let him
understand.

Glory to God Omnipotent.
FINIS.
Colors to be observed in the Operation of the Great Work.
YOU must expect to have it exceeding Black, within 40 days after you have put
your Composition into the Glass over the ^ire; if it be not black, proceed no
further, for it is unrecoverable: it must be as black as the Ravens Head, and
must continue a long time, and not utterly to lose it during five months.

If it be Orange color, or half Red, within some small time after you have
begun your Work, without doubt your Fire is too hot; for these are tokens that
you have burnt the Radical humor and vivacity of the Stone.

Know ye not, that you may have Black of any thing mixed or compounded together
with moisture: But you must have Black which must come and proceed of perfect
Metalline Bodies, by a real Putrefaction, and to continue a long time.

As for the colors of Blew and Yellow, they signify that the Solution and
Putrefaction is not yet perfectly finished, and that the colors of our Mercury
are not yet well mingled with the rest.

The Black aforesaid is an evident sign, that in the beginning the Matter and
Composition does begin to purge it self, and to dissolve into small Powder,
less than the Motes in the Sun; or a glutinous Water, which feeling the heat,
will ascend and descend in the Glass: at length it will thicken and congeal,
and become like Pitch, exceeding Black; in the end it will become a Body, and
Earth, which some call Terra faetida; for then by reason of the perfect
Putrefaction, it will have a scent or stink like unto Graves newly opened,
wherein the Bodies are not thoroughly consumed. Hermes does call it Terra foliis,
but the proper name is Leton, which must be blanched and made white.

This blackness does manifest a Conjunction of the Male and Female, or rather
of the four Elements.

Orange color then does show that the Body has not yet had sufficient
digestion, and that the humidity (whereof the colors of Black, Blew, and Azure
do come) is but half overcome by the dryness.

When dryness does predominate, then all will be white Powder: It first
begins to whiten round about the outward sides of the Glass; the Ludus
Philosophorum does say, that the first sign of perfect whiteness, is the
appearing of a little hoary circle passing upon the Head, showing it self round
about the Matter on the outward sides of the Glass, in a kind of Citrine color.

THESAVRVS, Sive Medicina Aurea: A plain and true DESCRIPTION OF THE Treasure
of Treasures, OR THE Golden Medicine.

THESAVRVS, Sive Medicina Aurea.
MAny and great are the Secrets of Nature, and concerning them and the way to
attain them, the wise Philosophers have writ much, but in a very dark and
Aenigmatical style, so that very few are those that attain to any thing of
their desires by them; but on the contrary, after much time, labor, and cost
in vain expended in the search of them, are forced to give over at last, and
surcease their further inquiry, and instead of the desired satisfaction,
conclude from their lost labors, that the Books of the Philosophers are only
fabulous, and writ to deceive the unwary, and those that thirst after so great
a Treasure. But I vow unto thee by Almighty God, that what they have wrote is a
real Truth, though delivered in so dark and dubious a way, that few are able to
understand and receive benefit from them. I do therefore attest the truth of
their Medicines, as well for the transmutation of the baser and imperfect
Metals into Gold and Silver, as for the benefit of Humane Bodies, and healing
all Bodily Diseases, till God calls for the Soul; and this above all the
Medicines of Galen and Hippocrates. But because many great lovers of Knowledge,
and this Science, have so often failed of obtaining the end of their desires in
these Mysteries of Nature, and not only failed as to the Accomplishment of
their desires in full, but also came short of knowing the principal subject,
and ground of Philosophical Secrets: I have therefore thought fit to help them
by this small Script, as much as I may, and save them the troubles of that
search; and by telling them in plain terms and words the true Matter, enlighten
and encourage their dubious minds to the farther search after what they desire:
for let them assure themselves, it is no small advantage to be assured of the
true Matter and groundwork, or Basis of so great Arcana's, and hereon great
and innumerable blessings do depend. I do therefore most faithfully assure
thee, that the true Subject of this Art is Quicksilver, in a double manner,
viz. either Quicksilver Natural, or Quicksilver of Bodies, viz. the Bodies of
Sol or Luna, reduced to Mercury vive; for many and strange things may be
performed by either, singly of themselves, or else conjoined. The conjunction
of the Mercury of Gold or Silver, with the common Mercury; or the Bodies, or
the Oil of Gold and Silver, dissolved in the Aqua Mercurii, does much hasten
the operation of Medicines for Metals: But we need not (as absolutely
necessary) any more than the common Mercury or Quicksilver, dissolved lightly,
either for Elixirs or precious Stones; only small Natural Stones must be
dissolved in the Mercurial Water, so shall you have such Stones again as you
dissolve, and those of what bigness you please, far exceeding Natural ones.

The next great Secret of Philosophers, is the preparation of common
Quicksilver or Mercury; for common Mercury, as Nature produces it, is not fit
for such operations, nor can they any way be performed by it: for our Mercury
is not the common Mercury or Quicksilver, but is made of it, by a true
Philosophical skill; it is not the white Mercury or Quicksilver, but its
subtle, spiritual, airie and fiery parts, the earthy and watery being prudently
separated. For the manifestation of our Mercury, the true Mercury of
Philosophers, first prepare the common Mercury by a due Philosophical
preparation, until thou have separated and purged him from his two extremes or
excrements, Earth and Water: dissolve it then, after its purification, into a
Milkie, Crystalline, and Silver Liquor or Water, which in three or four months
is to be done: being once dissolved, thou may ever after dissolve more and
more Mercury in fully forty days, for Mercury once dissolved, dissolveth it
self ever after infinitely. And having dissolved it, distill it perfectly,
until it have no Faeces in the Cornuae; after Distillation, bring it again to
Putrefaction, and when it is blackish, distill it again: so shall thou have two
Oils, a white Silver Oil, and thickish, and at last a very red or Bloud-like
Oil, which is the Element of Fire. The white Oil serves for Multiplication, or
multiplying the white Elixir, and for the making of all precious Stones, by
dissolving of small precious Stones in it, for it will presently dissolve them:
then in a gentle heat of Ashes congeal them again, and they far exceed any
Natural ones, both in luster, and virtue, and hardness. The red Oil is for the
multiplying the red Elixir, even to an infinite height in projection; which
when it is by often multiplying or multiplication, brought to a fixed Oil, then
thou may do several Magical, yet Natural and strange Operations by it.

To make the Elixirs thou must proceed thus: When thou have dissolved rightly
the common Mercury, which cannot be done before it be duly prepared for such a
Philosophical dissolution, when it is dissolved into a Milkie, Silver,
Crystalline Liquor, it will in the distillation leave some Faeces, in which
remains its more fixed part or Salt, which thou must warily and wisely, after a
gentle and Philosophical Calcination, extract and purify to the highest
Purification, by which means it will be very white and clean: then take seven
ounces of the white Mercurial Oil, and dissolve in it as much of this Salt as
it will dissolve, until it will dissolve no more: having so done, put thy
Liquor into a Philosophical Egg, sealing it Hermetically, and by due degrees of
Fire congeal and fix it: being fixed, it is the white Medicine, which fermented
with Silver, may be cast upon purged Venus, which it will transmute into most
fine Silver: multiply it with the white Oil, etc. If thou would have it be a
red Elixir, put to it some of the red Oil, and by requisite degrees of heat
congeal and fix it as before: ferment it with Gold; multiply it by the red Oil,
and the aforesaid white Salt dissolve in it: dissolve it, congeal and fix it
often, until it will congeal no more, so will it remain an Oil, which in its
projection is almost infinite. Endeavor not to multiply it any farther, for
fear thou losest it; it is then so fiery, that it will vanish out through the
Glass reddish, or Rubie-like. Make projection with it on what Metal thou will,
and thou shall have most fine Gold, better than the Natural Gold. Laus Deo, etc.

Mercurius albus and rubeus ex Mercurio vulgi (per se) soluto fieri potest
tanquam ex Mercurio Universally: Age Deo and mihi gratias.

E. B. etc.

TRACTATUS DE LAPIDE, Manna Benedicto, etc.

Tractatus de Lapide, Manna benedicto, etc.
IN this Book thou have a most faithful and plain Manuduction to the greatest
and most noble Secret of Nature: Enjoy them in silence; bless God, and do good
unto thy Neighbor and Successor, as I do hereby to thee, thou finder of this
Book.

I have resolved with my self to write this short Treatise, having been not
only an eyewitness, but also an actor of such high Mysteries of Nature, as the
World is not worthy of, and the Wise of the World do scarce believe. Which
discourse may be of singular use to such as God shall please (out of his
infinite mercy) to bestow the knowledge of this Stone upon, to make the Stone
of the Wise men so called, or the Philosophers Stone; which shall be of much
use and benefit to those who are not yet capable of making the Stone it self,
for it shall illuminate the understanding of all that read it, more than all
the Books they shall read: For it shall set down the Basis and Foundation
wherein the wisdom of all the Philosophers does lie, (I except none;) yet not
so as to name that (which no man durst) in so plain words, that every fool or
lewd fellow may understand it, as he may his A. B. C. when he reads it, for
that were to make my self accursed. Whosoever thou be that read this, let me
advise thee rather to fix thy mind and Soul on God, in keeping his
Commandments, than upon the love of this Art; which although it be the only,
nay all the wisdom of the World, yet does it come short of the Divine wisdom of
the Soul, which is the love of God in keeping his Commandments. Yet let me tell
thee, he that shall have the blessing to make the Stone, and find this Writing,
he shall see such Mysteries in Nature, as shall make him of a wicked, a good
man, or else a very Devil incarnate. But I am persuaded it shall never be
permitted to come to the hands of any but whom God knows fit for it, and such
as shall never abuse it. Have thou been covetous, profane? be meek and holy,
and serve in all humility thy most glorious Creator; if thou resolve not to do
this, thou do but wash an Aethiopia^ white, and shall waste an Earthly
Estate, hoping to attain this Science. There is no Humane Art or Wit can snatch
it from the Almighty's hand; nor was it ever, nor I am persuaded ever shall be,
given but to such as shall be of upright hearts. Remember what King David
says, The fear of the Lord, is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding
have they that do thereafter: and so if thou think to attain this wisdom, which
is the top of all wisdom, and indeed Angelical wisdom, and yet do not fear
the Lord, thou do give King David, and in him the Holy Spirit the Lie, which
be far from every Christian heart. But let me conclude my Preface with this; If
God bless thee with the Stone, and thou have the enjoyment of this little
Script, and do make that use of it that here is set down, thou shall see that
which is not fit to be written, yet I have set down in part what thou shall see
hereafter: as thou shall read, pray and study; pray with a faithful and earnest
heart, study with an honest heart, and leave the issue to God, to whom be
Glory. Amen.

The folly of the Students in this Noble Science and Art, is this; they set
their minds and intentions on nothing but making of Gold and Silver, and so
they fall into this error, that Gold and Silver must be the groundwork of
this goodly piece; but that is false: yet will I not now stand to disprove it,
for that were tedious; it is sufficient that I vow upon my Soul, it is not so,
nor any such matter: yet it is true, that it has a true Golden and Metalline
Nature. But to proceed, briefly know, that the changing of imperfect Metals
into Gold and Silver, as it is the chief intent of the Alchymists, so it was
scarce any intent at all of the Ancient Philosophers; and although it be to be
done by this Art, yet it is but a part, and indeed the least part of the
benefit that comes by the Art: yet I deny not but the possession of Gold and
Silver is a great blessing, especially got in this way, because it freeth a man
from want, and being beholden to others; as also that a man may do good to
others, to the poor and oppressed; nay it is a happiness in this World to
possess much, but yet I affirm it the least happiness that comes by the
Philosophers Stone, if the full use thereof be known. Gold and Silver are
goodly things, and the enjoyment of them very delightful to covetous and
wicked-minded men, who do not trust in God, and know him as they ought; but a
true searcher of this Wisdom, is content, as the Apostle says, with meat,
drink, and clothes, viz. a competency. I have a little exceeded in my
exclamation against Riches, because I know it befits not a wise man to love
them: when thou have read all that I have set down, thou will not value Wealth,
as thou will other Knowledge herein set down and contained; for by the full
knowledge of it, the whole wisdom of Nature is to be grasped and embraced; yea
not only infinite Wealth, and perfect Health, (a far greater blessing than
Wealth) but also the knowledge of all Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, the Radix
and Root of all which, is the true Root of all Philosophy; nay more, of all the
seven Liberal Sciences, which in their full perfection are to be known by the
knowledge of this Art, and without it not one can be perfected; nay more, the
artificial making of all precious Stones, better than the Natural, and of what
greatness you please, as Rubies, Carbuncles, Diamonds, Jacinths, Pearls,
Topases, Saphirs, Emeralds, etc. But this is not all, for by the perfection of
this Art, which very few have attained unto, all Natural Magic may be known,
all that Spirits can do (except velocity) may be performed by a true
Philosopher, though to ignorant men it seems supernatural; all that is
natural may be done by this Art, wicked Spirits may be commanded and driven
away; in a word, whatever is sublunary may be done by it. All these things were
known to Adam in his Innocence, who had this Art in the highest perfection.
This man, our first Father, was in his inward parts, or internal man, made
according to the similitude of God; and to tell the plain truth, (which when
thou have tried what is here set down, thou will know it to be so) was of the
same Substance and Matter, that the Angels were made of, I mean the blessed
Angels. The Soul of man is an Angel, and so was called the Son of God; but for
his Body and Spirit, whence that came, and what they are, I will set down by
and by that which concerns that. Man was the Son of the great World, or
Macrocosm, and participateth of all the influences and virtues of the superior
and inferior Worlds, yea of all Creatures good and bad, and that for this
cause, because he was made of that very Matter and Chaos whereof all the World
was made, and all the Creatures in it: which is a most high Mystery to
understand, and must, nay is altogether necessary to be known of him that
expects good from this Art, being the ground of the wisdom thereof. Foolish
men, nay they that the World holds for great Doctors, say and tell it for
truth, that God made Man of a piece of Mud, or Clay, or Dust of the Earth;
which is false, it was no such Matter, but a Quintessential Matter which is
called Earth, but is no Earth. The Fall of Man depraved all things, yea all the
Creatures suffered in it, and himself most of all; for as soon as he had sinned
himself, and his Wife, his Wife first, both of them turned into Monsters in
respect of what they were in their Innocence. Adam had another Body before his
Fall, than what he had after; and so far different, that if we should behold
Adam as he was in his Innocence, we should admire the glory of him, and tremble
at the sight of him, as at the sight of an Angel. I say nothing of the Body of
our blessed Savior, save only this; such a Body as he brought from Heaven with
him, such a Body shall we arise with, and with such Bodies shall our Souls be
endowed with flesh and blood; otherwise men should not differ from Angels, for
this flesh and blood is put upon us by the Holy Ghost, that is, by
Regeneration: nor does this cross Sacred Writ, if it were rightly understood. I
speak nothing likewise of our blessed Lady, what Body she had; but when thou
shall have examined what I shall set down, then will thou find what I say is
true, and understand them in a plain manner: but I forbear to speak of those
Mysteries, known to so few; he that lives according to the written Word of
God, shall be saved; but he that lives to be blessed with this Art, shall
glorify his Creator, and know him more than any man can do; but before the end
of the World, all will be known. But to my former purpose: Man, the Microcosm,
or little World, from the Astres or Stars received Spirit, from the great World
his Body, and from God immediately his Soul, so here is an illucidation of the
blessed Trinity; of these three Man consists, of these he is compounded, thus
he had his production from the World. For what concerns his Body, or Humane
part, let us now (as fully as we may) say something of the production of the
great World out of nothing: when there was neither time nor place, did God
create a certain Chaos, invisible, intangible, which the Philosophers called
Hyle, or the most remote Matter; out of this he made an Extract, or second
Matter or Chaos, which the Philosophers know, not by speculation, but by sense:
that Matter was and is visible and tangible, in which were and are all the
Seeds and Forms of all the Creatures, superior and inferior, that ever were
made: from this God divided the four Elements; in a word, did make all things
celestial and terrestrial, the Angels, Sun, Moon, and Stars. The knowledge and
practice of the Philosophers upon this Chaos, brought them to the knowledge of
all wisdom, and from hence (next God) seek thou and find all wisdom. This is
not a fancy or conceit that I tell thee, but what I know and have proved; it is
such a thing and substance, as with the bare knowledge of it, makes thee know
the generation and preservation of all things, and yet this Chaos is since the
Fall likewise corrupted. Thus briefly have I discoursed of such things as
perhaps thou do not believe, or never heardst of before; but if thou be'st
ordained to know this Science, I have trod the path for thee, but I fear thou
understandest me not: yet have I said more than wisdom would I should, but I
know it shall be to his good only, to whom God appoints it. My intent is, for
certain reasons that I have, not to prate too much of the Matter, which yet is
but only one thing, already too plainly described; nor of the Preparation, by
what means it is to be done, which is the second and greatest Secret: But I
have constituted these lines for the good of him that shall make the Stone, if
it fall into the hands of such a one; for to him it shall show and set down in
plain terms, as plain as possibly my Pen can write to the very letter, such
Magical and Natural uses of it, as many that have had it never knew nor heard
of; and such as when I beheld them, made my knees to tremble, and my heart to
shake, and I to stand amazed at the sight of them. I do therefore charge thee,
whosoever thou be that shall be blessed with the enjoyment of this Treatise,
that as thou will answer the contrary at the great day, thou let no man see it,
but him that has the Stone perfect; for if thou shall meet with such a one,
(which is hard to do) and that he has brought it to the full perfection, thou
by imparting such Magical and Physical things, and other rare Secrets which are
here set down, and by the Stone to be done, he shall not only give thee Gold
sufficient, but also shall show thee the true and right way, and the Matter
with all things belonging to it, to make it full and perfect: for let me assure
thee, I have known many that have had it, that never knew more than the bare
transmutation of Metals; and by the Books of the Philosophers it appears; that
some of them, (nay more than that) many of them have killed themselves by
taking it; for the want of the knowledge of the use of it. Never doubt
therefore, but thou shall obtain what thou will of him that has i^, by
demonstrating the truth of what I here write; therefore again and again I
charge thee, not to part with it, nor to tell any man of it, although none can
make use of it; but he that has the Stone in the highest degree of perfection.
And I will now show thee the several uses of it: The first, for Health, and the
manner how to use it; the second is for Multiplication, which cannot be done
without a Master; Thirdly, the making of all manner of precious Stones
artificially, better than the Natural; Fourthly, to turn all Metals into
running; Quicksilver; Fifthly, several Magical Operations of several kinds,
which are past belief, till thou see them, and which indeed are above all the
rest. And here I promise, that I will in such plain words set down what I have
intended, that thou can not in doing err, or do amiss, provided thou have the
Stone both red and white, although there be more works out of it than I dare
set down; and indeed Angelical wisdom is attained by it. But I proceed.

For Health, the use of it thu^.
IN the use of this Medicine, many great Philosophers themselves, after they
had obtained this wonderful blessing, desiring to have perfect Health, have
been so bold as to take a certain quantity of it, some no more than a quarter
of a grain, some less, some more, but all that did so with it; instead of
Health, took Death it self; for there is no small skill to use it for Medicine,
though every fool think if he had it, he could cure all diseases, and himself
too, and set the Elements at unity, which few men have known, neither is there
but one way to it with safety; if this be not known, more hurt than good may be
received by it. For the method of Health, it is thus: Take the quantity of four
grains, I do not mean the grains of Wheat, or Barley grains or corns, but four
grains of Gold weight, and dissolve them in a pint of White or Rhenish Wine,
but in no hot Wine, as Sack; etc* put it into a great clean Glass, and
instantly it will color all the Wine almost as red as it self was, which is
the highest red in the World: let it stand so, close covered from dust, four
days, for in respect it is an Oily substance, it will not presently dissolve
in Wine; then add to this a pint more by degrees, until it be not so red,
stirring it with a clean stick of Wood, not of Metal, nor Glass, and so
continue the pouring on of fresh Wine, until it be just of the color of Gold,
which is a shining yellow. Beware there be no redness in it; for so long as
there is any redness in it, it is not sufficiently dilated, but will fire the
Body, and exhaust the Spirits: neither is it sufficiently brought to yellow,
until the Wine have round about the sides a ring like Hair, of a whitish film,
which will show it self plain when well dissolved, if it stand but four hours
quiet. As soon as you see that whitish film, then let it run through a clean
linen Cloth, or Paper, so the white film will stay behind and look like a Pearl
on the Paper, and all the rest will be yellow like Gold. This is the token of
truth, that you cannot wrong your self by this Liquor; and without this token,
it will be either too weak, or so strong that it will fire the Body. Know this
to be a rare Secret. Of this Golden Water, let the party (of what disease
soever he be sick of) take each morning a good large spoonful, and it shall
expel the disease whatsoever it be, by a gentle sweat; for it purges not, nor
vomiteth, nor sweateth so much as to make faint, but to corroborate: I say, it
strengthens the party; and if the disease be of many years continuance, or a
Chronical disease, it will then be perhaps twelve days, otherwise but twenty
four hours, or two or three days at most. Thus it must be used for all diseases
internal: But for all external diseases, as Ulcers, Scabs, Botches, Sores,
Fistula's, Noli me t^ngere's, etc. the place must be anointed with the Oil of
the Stone it self, not dilated in Wine; and after this manner it must be done
nine or ten days, and be it whatsoever it will, it will cure all outward and
inward diseases. And more than this, whosoever carries this Stone about him, no
evil Spirit can or will stay in the place; nay bringing or giving it to a party
possessed, it drives away and expels the evil Spirits: for it is a
Quintessence, and there is no corruptible thing in it; and where the Elements
are not corrupt, no Devil can stay or abide, for he is the corruption of the
Elements. This Medici^e taken nine days as aforesaid, and the Temples of the
Head anointed with the Oil of the Stone each day in the morning, it will make a
man as light* as if he could fly, and his Body so aireal it is not to be
credited, but by him that has experienced it. These most admirable qualities
it has, perfect health it gives, till God calls for the Soul; and perfe^^
knowledge it gives, (if the use be known:) but even this part has been known
but to a few that have made it, for it is a Divine, and as it were an Angelical
Medicine. The white is not to be used for any disease but Madness, in the same
proportion, and way or preparation that the red Stone was: And so I proceed to
the second, which is Multiplication.

The way to Multiply.
MAny have made the Stone both white and red, that never knew how to multiply
it, for the white Stone will be red, by continuing it in the external natural
Fire; but never make projection higher than one upon ten, neither white, nor
the red: few have known this, for if they be not armed rightly, it will kill
them; but do thus, and thou shall multiply it infinitely, that it shall not
congeal to Powder any more. When thou have made the Mercury of the
Philosophers, (which in 40 days is to be done) a Water it is, and no Water,
clear as the Heavens, then as thou did make it, reduce it back again into
Putrefaction, E. F. which it will quickly do in a Body with a blind Head, and
never put into it above twelve ounces, and lute it with such lut^ as I will
direct here-under, for in a Glass nipt up it will not work. When it is like
Pitch, take out thy Glass* and remove it to a common fire of Ashes in a
Furnace, and when thy Glass has stood cold 24 hours, arm thy self thus: Make
thee a Case for thy head and face with Hog-skin, lined with Cotton, and before
thy face have Spectacles of Glass, and from thy mouth let go a large Tunnel of
Glass, covered with Leather, and let it be tied under thy Girdle and touch thy
Ancles; let the bore of the Glass be as big as a Walnut, and tie the Hyde of
Hog-skin fast about thy Neck under thy Chin, but so as thou be sure no Air come
in there, to which purpose lap it over with more Hog-skin, basted with Laten:
and thus art thou well armed, for otherwise it would kill thee. Thus armed,
take off thy blind Head, and put on a distilling Head, and a Receiver long and
large; lute the Receiver and joints of the Head with this lute, (viz.) to one
ounce of Powder of Egg-shels, calcined 24 hours, and ground like Meal, take two
ounces of Enamel, such as the Goldsmiths use; grind that with the Eggshels, and
add the white of an Egg to make it into paste, but the white must be well
beaten first: then smear this upon Bladders made supple, and herewith anoint
the joints of the Receiver three times double; let it dry 24 hours. Put thy
Glass in Ashes but six fingers above the Matter thus putrified, and let the
head of the Glass be very cold, and with a gentle heat you shall see a white
fume arise, and make all the head of the Receiver like Milk; increase easily
that Fire, till no more will come, then let all cool, and these white fumes
settle to a white Water thickish; this is that white Mercury to multiply the
white Stone: then put a new Receiver, luted as before; put in as many Coals as
the Furnace will hold or bear, till the Pot be red hot, then shall you see the
yellowish fume arise, and instantly will it increase redder and redder.
Continue the Fire until an Oil come redder than Blood into the Receiver, and it
will be also thickish; this is the red Mercury, wherewith the red Stone must be
multiplied: each of these must be new rectified, in a new Body and Head, till
they let no Faeces, which will be in seven times, and then stop them close with
the same lute till you use them; and when they are cold, they are white and red
Oil flowing in the bottom, which will melt with an easy Fire, and being cold,
be as a Salt: these are the three principles of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, a
plain Elucidation of the blessed Trinity. Now when the white Stone is made, it
will not melt, but is like white Sand, but impalpable, and will tinge no Body
but Venus into Luna. To three parts of the white Stone, take one part of white
Mercury rectified, but first dissolve in that white Mercury one third part of
white Salt; then imbibe the white Stone, which will presently take it, and be
like Pap; then close your Egg (for so is your Glass Multiplier) with the
aforesaid ^ute, and set it in your first Fire, H. E. I. E. F. and it will in 40
days putrify, and pass all the colors, and be white fixed, and project one
part upon an hundred: repeat that with more white Mercury, as before, keeping
the same proportion and the same Fire, and it will multiply each time ten, at
the third time it will be a thousand, then ten thousand, then a hundred
thousand, so you may bring it to a white Oil, like the Moon pale in the dark;
then it will multiply no more, neither will any Glass hold it. If you make
projection with the white Stone, then melt fine Silver a tenth part, then cast
in the Stone; keep it 24 hours melting, and this is Fermentation. The first
time the white goes only upon Venus, the second time upon all Bodies, the
third time upon common Mercury, and then it is Elixir of Spirits. As you did
with the white, so do with he red exactly; but take the red Mercury, and white
Salt, and so that goes one upon ten on Luna the first time, the second upon an
hundred, and so to an infinity; and so it will be a red Oil like a Carbuncle,
and will shine in the darkest night with admirable splendour, and from it will
fly all evil Spirits. And this they must have, before they cure all diseases,
and give that exaltation to man, to make such Magical works as I shall set down.

To make Stones.
HAving made Mercury of the Philosophers, and out of it the two Mercuries white
and red, if thou will of small Pearls make great and Oriental ones, do thus:
Take white Seed Pearls, and dissolve them in the white Water, which will
instantly of it self dissolve them: when it is like Pap, that thou may work
them with thy hand, make it into Pearls; and have a round mould of pure Silver,
put thy Pap into the mould, but first anoint thy mould with the white Stone,
which is an Oil: when they have layn three or four days, open it, and lay the
Pearls in the Sun, but not too hot, and they will grow hard, and more Orient
than any Natural ones.

To make Diamonds.
TAke the whitest Flint Stone you can get, beat off the out^ide, and dissolve
the rest, as much as thou will, in the white Water: when it is dissolved to
clear Water, not to Pap, put it into a little Vial, stop it close, and set it
in warm Ashes, and in twelve days it will congeal to a hard gray Stone: then
increase the Fire, that the Glass may be red hot, then let it cool; take it
out, and it will be like a Flint; but polish it, and thou never sawst such a
sparkling Diamond, nor so hard: but it will be better if thou dissolve little
Diamonds. All Stones that you dissolve in the white Water, the same color they
were of, the same will they be of; but for Rubies and Carbuncles, and all red
Stones, they are made of the red Mercury, and of Crystal; and for a Carbuncle,
you must add to ten parts of Crystal, dissolved in the white Mercury, one part
of the red Stone brought to the highest, and so as before congeal it with Fire,
and being polished it shines in the dark beyond all whatever.

To turn Metals into Quicksilver.
DO thus in the operation of the Stone white and red: when the white Stone
first is made, never after thou shall perceive lie under the glistering Powder*
but thou can not perceive it, till thou take out the Glass; a grayish light
subtle Powder, and the proportion is about -- of the Matter put in. Put any
Metal what thou will into a Silver Basin, (except Gold or Silver) and make a
Plate as thick as you will, and in the middle a hole like a Barley corn, and in
that hole put the Powder; to each pound of the Metal, six grains of the Powder,
and no more; and as soon as it is hot, the Powder will eat into the Metal, and
turn it all into Quicksilver: then pour it into Water, and the scurst-will
remain behind. For Gold and Silver, hold them so used over the Fire, till they
turn to Quicksilver, then hold them over a wooden dish; this Powder is the
Terra damnata of the Stone. Now I will show thee that which is above all,
certain Magical operations with the Stone, such as thou will wonder at, and
bless thy Creator, when thou shall see them: Wonders above wonders, nor will thou believe till thou have done it.

The Creation.
TAke Ordinary Rainwater a good quantity* ten gallons it the least, stop it up
close in Glasses forty days at least, and it will stink, and set a Faeces at
the bottom; pour off the clear, and set it in a Vessel of Wood, made round like
a Ball, cut off in the midst, and fill the Vessel one third part full of it,
and set it in the Sun at Noonday, in a private place: that done, take one drop
of the red blessed Stone, and let it fall into the midst of the Water, and
presently thou shall see a mist and thick darkness upon the face of the Water,
as it was in the first Creation: then put into it two drops more, and thou
shall see the second light come out of the first darkness, or rather light come
out darkness; and then by degrees each half quarter of an hour put in three,
four, five, six drops, and then no more, and thou shall see appear before thy
face on the surface of the Water, by degrees one thing after another, all
things that God did create in six days, and the manner of it, and Secrets not
to be spoken of or revealed; which to reveal I have no power, nor strength, nor
dare set down. Be on the knees from the beginning of this operation, let thine
eyes be judge, for thus was the World created: You cannot but tremble when you
shall see it: let all alone, it will vanish away in half an hour after it
begins. By this you shall know and see plainly those Mysteries of Divinity,
which now you are ignorant of as a Child, although you thought your self a wise
man, and that you did understand Moses his Writings of the Creation; but I say
no more. You will now see what Body Adam and Eve had before their Fall, and
what after their Fall; what the Serpent was, what the Tree was, and what Fruit
they did eat; where and what Paradise is, and what it was, you will know: What
Bodies the Just shall rise in, not these we received from. Adam, but that flesh
and blood which is born and begotten in us by the Holy Ghost and Water, such as
our blessed Lord brought from Heaven. But I have done.

The Heavens.
YOu shall take seven pieces of Metals, of each of the Metal^ named after the
Planets, and on every one of them you shall stamp the sign or character of the
Planets, in the House of the Planet, and let each piece be as big as a
Rose-noble, only let Mercury be of a quarter of an ounce, and no impression on
it: Then put them (as they stand in order in the Firmament) into a Crucible,
and close all the windows in the Chamber, and let it be dark, and in the midst
of the Chamber; then melt them all together, and drop in seven drops of the
blessed Stone, and presently (out of the Crucible will come a fiery flame, and
spread it self round about the whole Chamber; fear it not, it will not hurt
you) the whole Chamber will shine brighter than the Sun and Moon, and you shall
see over your head the whole Firmament, as it is above the Starrie Sky; and
the Sun, Moon and Planets will go all round in their course, just as it is in
the Heavens. Let it cease of it self; in a quarter of an hour it is gone to its
proper place.

Fellowship.
MOre then this, if thou take the Stone each Full Moon, when it is over the
Horizon where thou art, and go apart in a Garden, and take some of the clear
Rainwater, as thou did in the first operation, and drop of thy white Stone
as thou did of thy red, and there shall presently even to the Orb of the Moon
ascend Exhalations in a strange manner; and if thou observe this every month at
the due time, there is no Philosopher in the Horizon where thou live, that
has the knowledge of the Stone, with the use of it, but at the same time goes
out and looks East and West, North and South, and finding such an Apparition,
(as he soon sees it) he knows it is done by some Artist or other, that
desires acquaintance with those that have the same Art, and will presently in
the same manner answer thee, when thine is done: thus shall thou know all that
have the use of the Stone. To meet with thy fellow Philosophers, do thus;
anoint thy temples with the white Stone that night, and earnesily pray to know
what that party is; lay under thy head three Bay Leaves newly gathered, and fix
thy Imagination upon thy desire to know him, so repose thy self to sleep; and
when thou do awake. thou will presently remember thy Vision, as the Person,
his Name, and the place of his abode: if thou go not to him, he will come to
thee, for perhaps he thinks thou do not know this Secret. The reason why this
should be thus, is this; the universal Spirit of the Air, which is enclosed in
the Stone, causes it. Thus may thou accompany thy self with all the wise men
in the World, who shall appear unto thee rather Beggars, than Rich men, and
perhaps can teach thee more than I can, or have done by this; for indeed all
things that are Natural are done by it, a Volume would hardly contain them: As
to command and converse with Spirits, which I forbear to set down, I mean good
Spirits, is not this Angelical wisdom to know these things? Astronomy,
Astrology, and all the Arts of the Mathematics, are easily known in their
perfection, this being done that I have told thee; nor is Scholarship required,
it is the gift of God* You must know, before you do these things, you must take
the Stone nine days, as I prescribed first, and it will make thee have an
Angelical understanding; thou will despise the World, and all in it: then thou will know how to serve God, and understand the Scriptures.

I have written that which was never writ before; think whether they be not
Secrets and Arcana's and whether thou ought to show this or not to any man,
but to him that has the Stone. I have now done, charging thee to have a care
of this Writing, commanding thee to serve God; for without thou do that, thou will never have good of this Art: serve him in Spirit and Truth, and so to God
I leave thee, to direct thee in his ways.

Glory to God in the Highest. Amen.
Nicolas Flammell's SUMMARY OF Philosophy.

Nicolas Flammell's Summary of Philosophy.
HE that desires to know how Metals are transmuted, he must know from what
Matter they are, and how they be formed in their Minerals; and lest herein we
err, we must see and observe the transmutations as in the Veins of the Earth*
Minerals out of the Earth may be changed, if they be before spiritualized, that
they may come into their Sulphur and Argent viv^ Nature; these are the two
Sperms, the one Masculine, the other Feminine complexions, and these are
composed of the Elements: the Male Sulphur, is nothing but Fire and Air; and
true Sulphur is as a Fire, but not the Vulgar, which is of no Metallic
substance; the Feminine Sperm, called Argent vive, is nothing but Earth and
Water. These two Sperms, old wise men called two Dragons, or Serpents, the one
is winged, the other not; Sulphur not flying the Fire, is without wings; the
winged Serpent, is Argent vive born up by the Wind, therefore in her certain
hour she flies from the Fire, being unconstant in it; but if these two Sperms,
separated from themselves, be united again by triumphing Nature in the Book of
Mercury, which is the Fire Metalline, then united it is called of Philosophers
the flying Dragon, because the Dragon kindled by his Fire, while he flies, by
little and little spreads his Fire and poisonous Vapors into the Air: the
same thing does Mercury, which placed upon an exterior Fire, being in his
place in a Vessel, sets on fire his inside, which is hidden in his
profundity; and then may any one see how the external Fire does inflame the
natural of Mercury, and shall see a poisonous Vapor to break out into the Air,
which shall be of such a stinking and pernicious poison, which is nothing else
but the Head of the Dragon, which speedily went out of Babylon. But other
Philosophers having compared this Mercury with the flying Lion, because a Lion
devoureth many Creatures, and recreates himself with his voracity, these things
excepted that resist his violent fury; so also does Mercury, which has in
himself such an operation, that it spoileth a Metal of his form, and devoureth
it: Mercury too much inflamed, devoureth and hides Metals in his belly; but
which of them soever it be, it is certain it is not consumed in his belly, for
in their Nature they are perfect, and more than he indurate: but Mercury has
in him a substance of perfecting Sol and Lune, and all imperfect Metals come
from Mercury, therefore the Ancients called it the Mother of Metals; thence it
follows, where he is formed to any thing, he has in him a double Metallic
substance.

And first the substance of the interior, then of the Sun, which is not like
the other Metals; of these two substances Mercury is formed, which in his Body
is spiritually nourished: so soon therefore as Nature has formed Mercury of
the two mentioned Spirits, then it labors to make them perfect and
corporeal; but when the Spirits are of growth, and the two Sperms awakned, then
they desire to assume their own Bodies: which done, Mercury the Mother must
dye, which being thus naturally mortified, cannot quicken itself again as
before.

Some arrogant Chemists endeavor in obscure words to affirm, that we ought to
transmute perfect and imperfect Bodies into running Mercury; but a Serpent
lies in the Herbs: its true, that Mercury may transmute an imperfect Body, as
Lead, or Tin, and may without labor multiply in a quantity, but thereby it
loses its own perfection, and may no more for this reason be Mercury; but if
by Art it might be mortified, that it might no more vivifie it self, then it
would be changed into any thing, as in Cinabar or Sublimate is done; for when
it is by Art coagulated, whether sooner or later it be done, then his two
Bodies assume not a fixed Body, neither are like to conserve it, as we may see
in the pores of the Earth. But lest any one should err, there are in the Veins
of Lead some fixed grains of Sol or Lune, in substance or nourishment: the
first coagulation of Mercury, is the Mine of Lead, and most fit and commodious
it is to bring him unto perfection and fixation; for the Mine of Lead is not
without a fixed grain of Gold, and which grain Nature did impart: so in it self
it may be multiplied, whereby it may come to perfection and plenary virtue, as
I have tried and may affirm.

Also so long as it is not separated from his Mine, that is, his Mercury, but
well kept, for every Metal that is in his Mine, the same is a Mercury, then may
it multiply it self, so it may have substance from his Mercury; then will it be
like some green immature Fruit on a Tree, which the Blossom being past, is made
into Fruit, and then the Apple: but if any should crop away the immature Fruit;
then his first forming would be corrupted, because man knows not how to give
substance or maturity, as internal Nature, while the Fruit yet hangs on the
Tree, and may have substance and nourishment from Nature; for so long as
maturity is expected, so long the Fruit draws sap or liquor, and that by
augmentation and nourishment, till it comes to perfect maturity. So is it with
Sol, for if by Nature a grain be made, and it is reduced to his Mercury, then
also by the same it is daily after an (...) manner sustained and reduced into
his place, Mercury as he is in himself; and then must you expect till he shall
obtain some substance from his Mercury, as it happens in Fruits of Trees: for
as the Mercury of both perfect and imperfect Bodies is a Tree, so they can have
no more nourishment, otherwise than from their own Mercury: If therefore thou
would gather from Mercury Fruit, which is shining Sol and Lune, if it be that
they be not far disjoined, so that it be without long delay, then think not you
as Nature did in the beginning, you will again conjoyn and multiply, and may
without change augment them.

For if Metals be separated from their Mine, then they (like the Fruit of Trees
too soon gathered) never come to their perfection; as Nature and Experience
makes it appear, that if a Pear or Apple be once plucked from the Tree, it
would then be a great folly, if any should again fasten it to the Tr^^, and
thence expect maturity; for Experience witnesses, the more it is handled, the
more it withers. And so it is with Metals, for if any would take Vulgar Sol
and Lune, and endeavor to reduce them into Mercury, he would altogether play
the Fool, for no subtle Art is there to be found, whereby he might not deceive
him; although many Waters and Coments, or infinite things of that kind he
should use, he would daily err, and that would happen to him, that does them
who would tie unripe Fruits to their Trees. Although some Philosophers have
said well and truly, if Sol and Lune by a right Mercury be rightly conjoined,
that then they will make all imperfect Metals perfect; yet in this most men
have failed, who having these three, Vegetables, Animals and Minerals, which in
one thing are conjoined; for they regard not, that Philosophers speak not of
Vulgar Sol, Lune, and Mercury, which are all dead, and receive no more
substance from Nature, but remain in their own Essence, and can help none other
into perfection: they are Fruits plucked off from their Trees before their
time, and are therefore of no account, they having nothing more than what they
want. Therefore seek the Fruit in the Tree that leads you straight unto them,
whose Fruit is daily made greater with increase, so long as the Tree holds it
forth; and this work seen, is great joy; by this means any may transplant this
Tree, without gathering his Fruit, and then transport him into moister, better,
and more fruitful places, which in one day may give more nourishment to the
Fruit, than it received otherwise in an hundred years.

In this therefore it is understood, that Mercury the much commended Tree must
be taken, who has in his power indissolvably Sol and Lune, and then transplant
him into another Soil nearer the Su^, that thence he may gain amicable utility,
in which thing Dew does abundantly suffice; for where he was placed before, he
was so weakened by wind and cold, that little Fruit was expected from him, where
he long stood and brought forth no Fruit at all.

For indeed* the Philosophers have a Garden, where the Sun as well morning as
evening remains with a most sweet Dew without ceasing; with which it is
sprinkled and moistened; whose Earth brings forth Trees and Fruits, which from
thence are planted; who also receive descent and nourishment from the pleasant
Meads. And this is done daily, and there they be both corroborated and
quickened, and do not fade; and this more in one year, than in a thousand where
the cold infects them.

Take them therefore, and night and day cherish them in a Stilla^ory upon the
Fire; but not with a Wood Fire, or Coal ^^re, but in a clear transparent Fire,
not unlike the Sun, which is never hotter than is requisite, but should be
always alike; for a Vapor is the Dew and the Seed of Metals, which ought not
to be altered.

We see Fruits if they be too hot with no Dew, they abide on the boughs without
perfection; but if heat and moderate moisture sustain them on their Trees, then
they prove elegant and fruitful: for heat and moisture are the Elements of all
Earthly things, Animals, Vegetables and Minerals.

Therefore Coal Fires and Wood Fires help not Metals; those are violent Fires,
that nourish not as the heat of the Sun does, which also conserveth all
corporal things, because it is natural which they follow.

But a Philosopher does not what Nature does, for Nature has created all
Vegetables, Animals and Minerals in their own degree, where Nature reigns: I
will not say that men, after the same sort, by Art make Natural things; when
Nature has finished these things, then by Humane Art they are made more
perfect. After this sort old Philosophers, for our information, labored with
Lune, and Mercury her true Mother, of which they made the Mercury of the
Philosophers, which in his operation is much more strong than Natural Mercury;
for this is serviceable only to the simple, perfect, imperfect, cold and hot
Metals; but the Philosophers Stone is useful to the more than perfect and
imperfect Metals. Also that the Sun may perfect and refresh them, without
diminution, addition or immutation, as they were created of Nature, so he
leaves them; neither does he neglect any thing. I will not now say the
Philosophers conjoyn the Tree, for the better perfecting their Mercury, as some
unskilful of things and unlearned Chemists do, who take common Sol and Lune and
Mercury, and so ill-favour'dly handle them, till they pass away into Smoke: and
they endeavor to make the Philosophers Mercury, but they never attained to
that; that is, the first Matter of the Stone, and the first Minera of the
Stone. If they will come thither, and find any good, then to the Hill of the
seven, where there is no Plain, they would betake themselves, and from the
highest they have need to look downwards to the sixth, which they shall see afar
off.

In the height of this Mountain, they shall find a Royal Herb triumphing, which
some have called Mineral, some Vegetable and Saturnal; but let the Bones be
left, and let a pure clean Broth be taken from, and thus the better part of thy
work is done. And this is the right and subtle Mercury of the Philosophers, and
is to be taken of thee, and first the white work he will make, and after the
red: if thou have well understood me, both of them are nothing else, as they
call them, but the Practic^^, which is so light and so simple, that a Woman
sitting by her Distaff may perfect it; as if she would in Winter put her Eggs
under a Hen and not wash them, because Eggs are put under a Hen to sit upon
without washing them, and no more labor is required about them, than that they
should be every day turned, that the Chickens may be the better and sooner
hatched; to the which enough and more than enough is said. But that I may
follow the example, first wash not the Mercury, but take it and with its like
which is Fire) place him in the Ashes, which is Straw, and in one Glass, which
is the Nest, without any other thing, in a convenient Alimbeck, which is the
House, and then thence will come forth a Chicken, which with his Blood shall
free thee from all Diseases, and with his Flesh shall nourish thee, and with
his Feathers shall cloth thee, and keep thee warm from cold.

Therefore have I written unto you this present Treatise, that you may search
with the greater desire, and walk in the right way; and I have comprehended
this small Work in a Summary, that you might the better comprehend the sayings
of the Philosophers, which I persuade my self you will better understand
hereafter.

FINIS.
CLAVICULA, OR, A little Key of Raymond Lullie Majoriaane; Which is also called
APERTORIVM, (the Opener) In which all that is required in the Work of ALCHYMY
Is plainly declared.

CLAVICULA, OR, A little Key of Raymond Lullie Majoricane.
WE have called this our Work Clavicula, or the Little Key, for without this
Work none is able to understand what we have wrote in our other Books, in which
we have fully declared the whole Art, although with obscure words, by reason of
the Ignorant. I have written many and large Books, under diverse Sections and
obscure terms, as appears in our Testament, where we have handled of the
Natural Principle, where all things are set down that belong to this Art, yet
under the Hammer in the proper phrase of Philosophe^s. Item, in our Chapter in
the Philosophers Argent vive, and in the second part of the Testament of the
Exuberation of Physical Mines, and in our Book of the First Essence, of the
Quintessence of Gold and Silver; afterward in other Books also made by me,
where^ the whole Art is completely set down, but we have hidden the Secret as
much as we could. But seeing that no man without this Secret can enter the
Mines of the Philosophers, nor make any thing that can profit him; therefore by
the help of the Almighty, whom it has pleased to reveal unto me this Secret, I
will declare this whole Art without any fiction: And therefore see that you do
not reveal this Secret unto the wicked, but unto your entire Friends; though
you ought not to give it to men, being it is the gift of God, who will give it
to whom he pleases, and whosoever shall have it, shall have an everlasting
Treasure. Although Luna receives her clearness from Sol, of these two the
whole Mastery depends; but seeing Metals cannot be transmuted (as Avicen
witnesses) in the Minerals, unless they be reduced into their first Matter,
which is true, viz. that unless you reduce them into Argent vive; not Vulgar,
that is, not volatile, but fixed; for the Vulgar is volatile, and full of
phlegmatic coldness, and therefore it needs to be reduced by Argent vive
fixed, more hot and dry, in qualities contrary to Argent vive Vulgar. Therefore
I counsel you, O my Friends, that you do not work but about Sol and Luna,
reducing them into the first Matter, our Sulphur and Argent vive: therefore,
Son, you are to use this venerable Matter; and I swear unto you and promise,
that unless you take the Argent vive of these two, you go on to the Practick as
blind men without eyes and sense; therefore, Sons, I beseech you walk in the
light, with open eyes, and fall not into the ditch of Perdition as blind men.

CHAP. I. Of the difference between Argent vive Vulgar, and Argent vive Natural.
WE say, that Argent vive Vulgar cannot be the Argent vive of the Philosophers,
whatever Art it be prepared with, for the Vulgar cannot be detained in the
Fire, but by another Argent vive corporeal, which is hot and dry, and more
digested there: I say, that our Nature is of a more fixed and hotter Nature,
than the Vulgar, and that therefore because our Argent vive corporeal, is
turned into Argent vive current, not teyning the fingers; and when it is mixed
with the Vulgar, they are joined, and embrace one another with the bond of
Love, so that they never part from one another, as Water mixed with Water, for
THUS is pleases Nature: But our Argent vive does enter and mix it self
actually with the other Vulgar, drying up its phlegmatic humidity, and taking
away the coldness from the Body, making it black as a Coal, which afterward it
turns into Powder. Note therefore, that Argent vive cannot show forth such
Operations, as our Physical or Natural, which in all its qualities has the
heat of Nature, and of true temperature, and therefore it turns the Vulgar
into its temperate Nature; nay it does moreover somewhat else, for after its
transmutation, it turns it into pure Metal, that is, into Sol or Lune,
according as it is extended; or from Sol and Lune, as is showed in the second
Chapter or Part of our Practick: Besides this, it has somewhat greater, for it
changes and converteth Vulgar Mercury into Medicine, which Medicine can
transmute the imperfect Metals into perfect: besides it turns the Vulgar into
true Sol and Lune, better than those of the Mine. Mark again, that one ounce of
our Vulgar Natural Mercury, can make an hundred Marks, and so until infinity,
with Argent vive, so that the Mine shall never fail. Besides this, I will have
you know another thing, that Vulgar Mercury is not rightly nor perfectly mixed
with the Bodies; for the Spirit cannot be mixed with the Bodies perfectly,
unless they be reduced into the kind of Nature: And therefore when thou will
mingle Lune and Sol in Mercury Vulgar, then these Bodies must be reduced into
the kind of Nature, which is called Argent vive Vulgar, through the bond of
natural Love, and then the Male is joined with the Female; for our Argent vive
is hot and dry actually, Argent vive Vulgar is cold and moist passively, as a
Female which is kept in her houses with temperate heat until the Eclipsis, and
then are made black as Coals, which is the Secret of our true Dissolution:
after they are at last truly knit together one with another, so that they never
part from one another, and they become a most white Powder, which are the Males
and Females engendered by true bond of Love; but the Children will multiply
their kinds to infinity, for of one ounce of this Powder, thou shall make
infinite Sol, and reduce to Lune, better than any Metal of the Mine.

CHAP. II. The extraction of Mercury out of the Perfect Body.
. TAke one ounce of Calx of Luna, let it be calcined in that manner as is said
in the end of the Work of our Mastery; which Calx or Slime must be ground into
subtle Powder upon a Porphyr, which Powder ye shall imbibe twice, thrice, or
four times in a day* with the best Oil of Tart^r, made in that manner as shall
be said in the end of our Mastery, drying it in the Sun until the said Calx
shall drink up of the said Oil, four or five parts more than the Calx it self
was, grinding it always upon the Porphyrie, as is said: And in the end, let the
Calx be dried up well, that it may well be reduced into Powder; and when it is
well pulverized, let it be put into a Boults-head with a long neck: put of our
stinking Menstrual made of two parts of Red Vitriol, and one part of
Saltpeter, and let the said Menstruum first be distilled seven times, and let
it be well rectified, by separating the Earthly Faeces, in so much that the
said Menstrual be altogether Essential. Afterward let the Boults-head be well
luted, and put to the Fire of Ashes, with a little Fire of Coals, until you see
the said Matter boil and be dissolved: afterward distill it upon Ashes, until
it loses the Menstruum, and the Matter be altogether cold; and when it is
cold, let the Vessel be opened, and the Matter which is cold be put into
another Vessel that is very clean, with its Cap or Head on, well luted to a
Furnace upon Ashes; and when the lute is well dried, let the Fire be made by
degrees in the beginning, until you get all its Waters: afterward augment the
Fire until the Matter be dried, and the stinking Spirits exalted to the Cap or
Head, and in the Receiver; and when you shall see such a sign, let the Vessel
be cooled by diminishing the Fire: And after the Vessel is cooled, let the
Matter be taken out and made into subtle Powder upon the Porphyrie, so that the
Powder may be impalpable, which must be set in an Earthen Vessel well luted and
well glazed: afterward put upon thi^ said Powder common Water boiling, stirring
always the Matter with a clean Stick, until the Matter become thick as Mustard;
and stir the said Saltish Matters with a Stick, until you see appear grains of
Mercury from the Body, and that a great quantity of the said quick Mercury
appear, according as you have put in of the perfect Body, that is of Luna; and
until you shall have a great quantity, pour upon it boiling Water, and at
length stirring it until all the Matter be resolved into a Matter like unto
Argent vive Vulgar: let the terrestriety be taken away with cold Water, and
dried up by a cloth; afterward let it give through a Leather, and you shall
see wonders.

CHAP. III. Of the Multiplication of our Argent vive.
In the Name of God, Amen.

. OF pure Silver three grostes, made into thin Pla^^ and make Amalgama with
four grostes of Argent vive Vulgar, well washed; and when the Amalgama is made,
then let it be put into a little Boults-head, with a neck one foot and a half
long. Afterward. three groste of our Argent vive, formerly extracted and
reserved from the Lunary Body, and let it be put upon the Amalgama, made of the
Body and Argen^ vive Vulgar: let the Vessel be luted very well with the best
lute, and let it be dried, when this is done, stirring the Vessel exceeding
well, that the Amalgama may be well mingled; and thus the Argent vive may be
well mixed with the Body. Afterward put the Vessel in which the Matter is* in
a little Furnace, to a little Fire of Coals, and let its heat not exceed the
heat of the Sun, when Sol is in the Sign of Leo, for another heat exceeding
that would destroy the Matter, and the one would fly from the other: and let
such a Fi^^ be continued, until the Matter become black as Coals, and thick as
Pultis; and let the Fire continue in this degree, until the Matter be changed
into a gray brown color; and when the gray appears, increase the Fire in one
point or degree, and let this second degree continue until the Matter begin to
become white, to the most purest whiteness; afterward augment the Fire to the
third degree, continuing it until the Matter become whiter than Snow, and be
converted into pure Powder, whiter than Ashes: and then you have Calx vive, or
the quick Slime of the Philosophers, and its Sulphury Mine, which the
Philosophers have so much hidden.

CHAP. IV. The Property of the said Calx, or Slime.
THe said Calx converteth Mercury Vulgar into most white Powder infinitely,
which can be reduced into true Silver, with some of the Bodies of Luna.

CHAP. V. Multiplication of the Calx.
. THe Vessel with the Matter, wherein put two ounces of Argent vive Vulgar,
well washed and dried; afterward lute the Vessel well, and put it where it was
before, governing and administering to it the Fire of the first, second, and
third degrees, as before, until the Matter be reduced into a most white Powder,
and so you may multiply to infinity.

CHAP. VI. The Reduction of this Calx viva, into Luna.
WHen thou thus have gotten a great quantity of our Calx viva, or of our Mine,
take a Crucible not covered, in which put one ounce of pure Lune, and when it
i^ melted, put thereupon four ounces of thy Powder in small Pills, let thy
Pills be the weight of the fourth part of an ounce: let them be put upon the
middle Luna by degrees, always continuing the Fire strong, until all the Pills
be projected and melted, together with the Lune, and in the end make a strong
Fire, until it be incorporated: afterward project it in an Ingot, and thou
shall have five ounces of Silver more pure than the Natural: and thus thou
may multiply thy Philosophical Mine as thou please.

CHAP. VII. Of our great Work to the White, and to the Red.
REduce the Calx viva, as is said before of Luna, into Argent vive, which is
our Secret: Take therefore four ounces of our Calx, and reduce them into Argent
vive, as thou did with Luna, of which Argent vive thou may have at least
three ounces: put this in a little Boult-head with a long neck, as thou did
before; afterward make Amalgama with one ounce of true Sol, with three ounces
of Argent vive Vulgar, and put upon it Argent vive of Lune, moving it strongly
with thy hands, that all may be mingled together: afterward put the Vessel,
well luted as before, in the Furnace, making the Fire of the first, second, and
third degree: in the first degree thy Matter will become black, like to a Coal,
which then is called the Eclipsis of Luna and Sol, and there will be a true
commixtion, whereby is begotten the Sun and Sulphur, which is full of temperate
blood; after the appearing of his color, continue the Fire of the second
degree, until the Matter become gray, then continue the third degree until the
Matter appear most white; afterward augment the Fire to the fourth degree,
continuing so that the Matter may appear red as Cinnabar, and the Ashes become
red: this Calx you may reduce into the finest Sol, as is said before of Lune.

FINIS.
SECRETS DISCLOSED.
One Friend to another, as Bloomfield suppose,
The Philosophers Stone the Secrets does disclose.
I Shall tell it to you openly: Our Medicine is a Stone, that is no Stone; and
it is one thing in kind, and not diverse things, of whom all Metals be made; and
so it is no Salts, nor Waters, nor Oil combustible, nor man's Hair, nor ma^^
Blood, nor Iron, nor Goats horns, nor Herbs, nor none such things that discord
from Metals, as many Fools devise: But he is two things, for he is Water and
Earth; not Water of Clouds, nor of Corrosives, nor Water of Salts, but Water of
the Sun and the Moon, that burns our Earth more than any Fire. And it is three
things, that is, Body, Spirit, and Soul; and it is four things, Earth, and
Water, and Air, and Fire; and therefore he is found in every place, and in
every time. And he is also unstable in color, as a shame-fac'd Woman that
changes her color for dread of her Love, that reproves her of untruth; for
now she is pale, now green, now red: so our Stone is turned to all colors, for
he is black, and white, and pale, and blew, and green, and red; of this Matter
our Medicine is made that we call Ixir, and Elixir, that is, the Philosophers
Stone. Take this Stone, and put him in a well-closed clear Vessel, that thou
may see his working; and when thou have Water of Air, and Air of Fire, and
Fire of Earth, then it is done, for the Spirit is departed from the Body, and
leaves the Body dead and black* But if the Sepulcher be well closed, he will
come in again to the Body, and make him rise again to life, and then the Body
and the Soul shall ever be together.

And therefore take a Red man, and a White woman, and w^^ them together, and
let them go to Chamber both, and look that the door and the windows be fast
sparr'd, for else the Woman will be gone away from her Husband: And if she lie
with him right warm on Bed, then beware that she go no where out, for if she
do, he shall never overtake her, if he were as swift as a Faulcon; for if she
may no where out, she will come to him again, and lie with him on Bed; and then
she shall conceive and bear a Son, that shall worship all his Kin, and then
will she never after go away from her Husband.

For this Man and this Woman gets our Stone: But the Man must be fell and
quaint to make her to abide with him with meekness, and not with sturdiness;
for if he be boisterous to her in the beginning, she will flee away from him,
and if he be easy with her in the beginning, she will he his Master a good
while. This is a hard marriage, nevertheless one comfort this is, after that
she has born a Child, and known somewhat of disease, she will be the more
sober, and never leave him after. But shortly, all our working is no more but
take our Stone, and make him rotten in Horse-dung, and then sees him in his
own Water, and afterward fry him in his own Grease, and then roast him till
his Grease and his Water be all dried up, and then burn him all to Powder, and
then bake him on an Oven till he will me^^^^^ Wax, and then thou have an end.
And then thank God that this Work is so easy, for thy Stone is but one thing,
and all one V^ssel, and all one working, from the beginning to the ending: but
look that thy Fire be easy and soft in the Putrefaction, and in the Solution,
and the Distillation, till it be black; but then strengthen it always till in
the Desiccation, and the Imbibition, and in the Sublimation, and in the
Coagulation, and the Congelation, and fixing of the Spirits, and in the
Calcination, and in the Incineration; but in the Citrination, and Rubification,
and Inceration, and Liquefaction, is all their strength. But if thou understand
not this, Friend, meddle thou not of this Art, until thou have gone better to
School; and hold this in Counsel for my love, as I shall trust to you hereafter.

Farewell.
A Philosophical Riddle.
A Strife late rose in Heaven, yet undecided,

And the chief Deities were by pairs divided:

Saturn and Luna one Opinion held, Which Jove and Mercury (combined) refell'd:

Venus and Mars, that still have loved either,

Gainsaid them all, and would assent with neither.

In this dire brawl, 'tween these three pairs begun,

To Judge and Umpire, they all chose the Sun:

Therefore amidst them all, his place is still,

With power to advance and grace which part he will,

By all their joint assents; for as his might

Great is, so clearest is of all his Light;

And those with whom he holds must needs as best

And worthiest, bear the Glory from the rest:

And since he needs must join with one (for odds)

Cannot remain long amongst agreeing Gods.

Show me (some man that can) with which of these

Three pairs the God consents, and best agrees;

And (on the New Lights word) I that before

Knew naught, will rest and ask no Question more.

THE ANSWER OF Bernardus Trevisanus, TO THE EPISTLE OF Thomas of Bononia,
Physician to K. CHARLES THE 8th.

The Answer of Bernardus Trevisanus, to the Epistle of Thomas of Bononia,
Physician to King Charles the Eighth.
Reverend Doctor, and Honored Sir,
WIth the tender of all possible Respects and Services be pleased to
understand, that I have received your very large and copious Letter by Mr.
Awdry, together with the Stone of your most secret Work; which truly is a
remarkable argument of your Friendship, by which the confidence you put in me
appears manifest and very great, and with how great and piercing a Wit also you
are illustrated. Now then I shall very willingly Answer unto your Epistle: Some
things I shall approve, which you have written learnedly and ingeniously, other
things I shall briefly touch, and refute strictly and Philosophically, but not
arrogantly, and thoroughly discuss them with submission and respect unto your
Honor, and request: For in this sacred and secret Art, as in others, the truth
of the Theory ought to be confirmed by Practical experience. Now therefore,
Reverend Doctor, let us visit one another with such Returns and Treatises,
since we may not be bodily united. But it is your wisdom (as you very well
know) to know and inspect things by their Causes, for Experience is deceitful
when not guided by a previous understanding. There is necessary to the Students
in Philosophy, a strong and discreet meditation, that the Work they undertake
may be conveniently brought on to its utmost perfection: For contingent errors
happen unto them who will fall to work, omitting or neglecting the judgment of
a mental practice, which the Theory frames in the mind before the operations
proceed to the composure of any Work: For Work must attend Nature, and not
Nature follow Work. He then that would effect any thing, must prepare his mind
with the knowledge of the Natures and eventual Accidents of things, and
afterward he may safely put his hands to the Work. And indeed I clearly
perceive your mind to be highly instructed in these things, by your Experiment
set down fully in your Epistle: For as Water which is cold and moist, if it be
well mixed with Vegetables, assumes another quality, and in decoction takes to
it and puts on it the quality of the thing wherewith it is thoroughly mixed; so
also Quicksilver assumes different natures and qualities in things familiar
unto it, and thoroughly mixed with it: as if it be joined to the Sun, the
qualities of the Sun; if to the Moon, those of the Moon; if to Venus, of Venus:
and so in other kinds of Metals. Their kinds therefore ought to be decocters
therein, and Mercury is their Water, in which by a mutual alteration it assumes
in a convertible manner their mutations. And this Water contracts unto it self
from them a Nature in a resemblance to Vegetables, decocted in simple Water:
though these kinds are not altered in their color outwardly, under the form of
fluidity, in respect of the thickness of the Matter and Earth immersed in, and
united proportionably to the Water of Mercury; but we find it otherwise in
other diaphanous humidities: For this altered, Nature is altered, and its
color outwardly is hid under the appearanc^ of Mercury, and is not manifest to
the sight. And this you at large discuss and show, how simple River Water is
the first Matter and nourishment of Vegetables, and consequently of all living
and sensitive Creatures: therefore if any of them all be decocted in it, it
assumes and puts on it self the virtue and propriety of their Nature: wherefore
being in it self cold in the highest degree, yet by means of things decocted in
it, it works in us the effect of a thing hot in the first degree, that I may
use your words. Moreover, there is nothing that nourishes more than the Broth
or decoction of good Flesh; and if the Water in which Flesh and Herbs are
boiled, or the things boiled in Water, be eaten moist, or the simple Water
after boiling be taken or drank, it hurts not at all, yea it will profit and
help much, although before in its simplicity and nature it would have been
hurtful. Now this comes to pass because that Water is not such, as it was
before. In lik^ manner Quicksilver is the Matter of all Metals, and is as it
were Water, (in the Analogy betwixt it, and Vegetables or Animals) and receives
into it the virtue of those things which in decoction adhere to it, and are
thoroughly mingled with it; which being most cold, may yet in a short time be
made most hot: and in the same manner with temperate things may be made
temperate, by a most subtl^ artificial invention. And no Meta^ adheres better
to it than Gold, as you say, and therefore as some think Gold is nothing but
Quicksilver, coagulated by the power o^ Sulphur, etc. And thence you would
conclude, as I think, and well, that if Gold be decocted and dissolved rightly
in the natural way of Art, Quicksilver it self will obtain the natural
properties of that Gold. But the way of this decoction and solution of Metals,
is known to very few, and it manifestly appears: for the cause o^ this Solution
is the moistness o^ Mercury, restrained by the compactness of an Homogeneal
Earth; and contrariwise, the coldness of the Earth, restrained by a Wate^
^omogeneal to it self, the Homogeneousness of qualities remaining: So that
there is in it a single dryness, and double coldness, a simple moistness, but
under a disproportion of immaturity to the anatical proportion of the ripe
digested Sun. The dissolver therefore differs from the dissolvend in proportion
and digestion, and not in matter: because Nature might make this of that,
without any additional mixture, as Nature does wonderfully and simply produce
Gold of Quicksilver, as you have learnedly discoursed in your Epistle. For in
Vegetables, the moisture of simple Water is taken for an intrinsic
dissolution, that things congealed by Art, might diffuse into it their effects;
and the dissolution of things come about with the coagulation of Water, and the
coagulation of Water with the dissolution of things, and contrariwise: and so
it is likewise in the Mineral Water, and things of its kind. He therefore that
knows the Art and Secret of Dissolution, has attained the secret point of Art,
which is to mingle thoroughly the kinds, and out of Natures to extract Natures,
which are effectually hid in them. How has he then found the truth, who
destroys the moist nature of Quicksilver? as those Fools who deform its kind
from its Metallic disposition or dissolution, and by dissolving its radical
moisture, corrupt it, and disproportion Quicksilver from its first Mineral
quality, which needs nothing but purity and simple decoction. For example, they
who defile it with Salts, Vitriols, and aluminous things, destroy it, and
change it into some other thing, than is the nature of Quicksilver: For that
Seed which Nature by its sagacity and clemency o^ ^osed, they endeavor to
perfect by violating and destroying it, which undoubtedly is destructive to it,
as far as concerns the effect of our Work. For the Seed in humane and sensitive
things, is formed by Nature, and not by Art, but it is joined by Art, and well
mixed; but nothing is to be taken from it, nor added to it, if the same specie^
must be renovated by the procreation of its own kind: so the same Matter must
abide and continue, that the same Form may follow, which it does not otherwise.
Wherefore, excellent Doctor, false and vain is all their doctrine, which
alters Mercury, which is the Seed, before the Metallic species be joined
with it: For if it be dried up, it dissolves not. What then can it do in the
solution of things of own species? For if it be heated beyond its natural
digestion, it will not cause nor generate in the Metalline species a Feverish
heat as it were, and will impertinently turn cold into hot, and passive into
active; and the error from thence will be incorrigible, and labor lost. For
example, Fools draw corrosive Waters out of inferior Minerals, into which they
cast the species of Metals, and corrode them: For they think that they are
therefore dissolved with a natural Solution, which Solution truly requires a
permanency of the dissolver and dissolved together, that a new species might
result from both the Masculine and Feminine Seed: I tell you assuredly, that no
Water dissolves any Metallic species by a natural Solution, save that which
abides with them in matter and form, and which the Metals themselves being
dissolved, can recongeal: which thing happens not in Aquafortis, but rather is
a defilement of the Compound, that is, of the Body to be dissolved, Neither is
that Water proper for Solutions of Bodies, which abides not with them in their
Coagulations; and finally Mercury is of this sort, and not Aquafortis, nor that
which Fools imagine to be, a lympid and diaphanous Mercurial Water: For if they
divide or obstruct the homogeneity of Mercury, how can the first proportion of
the Feminine Seed consist and be preserved? Because Mercury cannot receive
Congelation with the dissolved Body, neither will the true kind be ^^novated
afterward in the administration of the Art, nay but some other filthy and
unprofitable thing. Yet thus they think they ^issolve, mistaking Nature, but
dissolve not: For the Aquafortis being ^bstracted, the Body becomes ^eltable
as before, and that Water abides not with, nor subsists in the Body, as its
radical moisture. The Bodies indeed are corroded, but not dissolved; and by how
much more they are corroded* they are so much more estranged from a Metallic
kind. These Solutions therefore are not the foundation of the Art of
Transmutation, but the impostures rather of Soph^^tical Alchymists, who think
that this Sacred Art is hid in them. They say indeed, that they make Solutions,
but they cannot make perfect Metallic species, because they do not naturally
remain under the first proportion or kind, which Mercury the Water allows in
Metallic species. For Mercury is corrupted with Metals by way of alteration,
not dissipation: because Bodies dissolved therein are never separated from it,
as in Aquafortis and other corrosives, but one kind puts on and hides another,
retaining it secretly and perfectly: so Sol and Lune dissolved, are secretly
retained in it. For their nature is hid in Mercury, even unto its condensation,
of which they lying hid are the cause, in as much as they are latent in it: and
as Mercury dissolves them, and hides them in its belly, so they also congeal
it, and what was hard is made soft, what was soft, hard; and yet the kind, that
is, Metals and Quicksilver, abide still. He therefore who thus dissolves,
congeals rather, and the corrupted species conjoined, receive their old-form by
an artificial decoction: Notwithstanding this dissolution makes several colors
appear, because the species remain as it were dead, yet their intrinsical
proportion is permanent and entire. So the Lord in the Gospel speaks by way of
similitude of Vegetables, Unless a grain of corn fallen on the earth do dye, it
abides alone; but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit: Therefore this
alterative corruption hides forms, perfects natures, keeps proportions, and
changes colors from the beginning to the end: For when the Water begins to
cover the Earth, the black color begins to be hid under the white; when the
Air covers the Water and the Earth, the citrine color appears; which is turned
to red, when the Fire covers the Air, or the other three Elements. And these
last colors abide hiddenly and intrinsically, and appear under the show of a
white Spirit in liquid Mercury, until it be recondensed in the Powder which is
in the Bodies: because the Soul lies hid in the Spirit, as in the condensation
the Spirit and the Soul lie hid in the Powder or Body. For there is a
corruption in the things to be altered, but no dissipation of parts, unless
some superfluous parts be to be rejected as unprofitable for generation,
whereupon the Artificer purifies his Work, that digestion may succeed better.
This is manifest by example in Grain, for of two grains of Wheat, if the one be
cast into good ground, there it putrifies, dies, and loses its external form,
but nothing thereof is dissipated, yea in its time it increases into a
multiplicity of Fruit, and there is indeed made a corruption only of the form,
and not any dissipation of the matter: But if the other grain be cast into the
Fire, then both matter and form are corrupted, and the whole is dissipated, and
that corruption is unprofitable for generation. Wherefore Water dissolves not
Bodies, but those only of its own kind, and by which it may be condensed* nor
can Bodies be at all nourished to generation, but by their like, which can
preserve the species destroyed by that transmuting Body, through the artifice
of the Work: though Vegetables are nourished by things of different kinds, yet
before they nourish them, they are assimilated (the dissolution of them being
first made) according to the proportion of the things which suck and draw them
to them. It must be noted therefore, that the Solution of Metals may be made by
different ways: one, which Fools know, as is abovesaid, with Foreign things,
which abide not with the dissolved Metals, which is rather to be called a
corrosive destruction and defilement of the Compound. The second Solution is
made by the power and force of Fire, which is no true Solution, but a melting
rather of the colligated* Elementary parts: for the outward heat of the Fire,
in dissolving the Compound, finds out its intrinsical, natural or native Fire
within, which internal and proportional Fire dwells in the Air, therefore it
dissolves the Air it self. But that dissolved Air resides and dwells in the
Water, and the Water in the Earth, and the Water it self dissolves the Earth,
so that it melts both the active and passive; but this melting is no true
Solution, yea it is a dissipation, because the Elements there being homogeneous
to one another, and proportionably fixed, by digestion are mixed, and one of
them educed out of the power of another generally: And therefore this falls out
even in pure Bodies, in which the Elemental natures are fixed. Wherefore in
them the flame of Fire causes melting, and dissolves that whole Body to
fluidity, and not to a separation; because Fire cannot flow, unless the Air
consubstantial to it flow; neither does the A^ flow, unless the Water be
dissolved; nor does the Water flow, unless the Earth flow: and contrariwise, as
the Earth is dissolved by the Water, so on the contrary side the Water
retains the Air, and congealeth it: and in the same manner ascending upwards,
the Air retains the Fire in Congelation, because the more fixed and fixing
Elements cause fixation, by acting together on one another; as Earth and Water,
and in a contrary manner Fire and Air, act together each on other unto
Solution. But this Solution is called a melting of the Compound, and not
properly a Solution of it, because the parts separable from one another in the
generation of the Compound, are not dissolved, as is done in the third and
truly Philosophic Solution, when the Compound is dissolved in the manner
aforesaid, and yet the parts abide unseparated, though separable; so that the
virtue of the most digested Elements may be extracted from things to be
dissolved by the dissolver, that is, Quicksilver, and the grosser parts in
such a dissolution acquire some latitude of subtilty, because the Body is
turned into Spirit, and contrariwise the Spirit into Body; fixed things are
turned into volatiles, and volatiles to fixed. For this Solution is possible
and natural, that is, by Art of Nature subserving thereto; and this is sole and
necessary Solution, in the Work of the Philosophers, which can be done by no
other thing than Quicksilver only, with a prudent proportion: so as a good
Artificer knowing from within the natures and proportions, ought to make the
proportion from his first entrance upon the Work. For these two, Sir, are
sufficient for this Work, and nothing else enters it, nor generates and
multiplies, as we have said. Besides, you say that Gold, as most think, is
nothing else than Quicksilver coagulated naturally by the force of Sulphur;
yet so, that nothing o^ the Sulphur which generated the Gold, does remain in
the substance of the Gold: as in an humane Embryo, when it is conceived in the
Womb, there remains nothing of the Father's Seed, according to Aristotle's
opinion, but the Seed of the Man does only coagulate the menstrual blood of the
Woman: in the same manner you say* that after Quicksilver is so coagulated,
the form of Gold is perfected in it, by virtue of the Heavenly Bodies, and
especially of the Sun. But by your good leave, and with respect I must tell
you, we must not think so: For being we are Philosophically persuaded, that
Gold is nothing but Mercury anatized, that is, equally digested in the bowels
of a Mineral Earth; and the Philosophers have signified, that this very thing
is done by the contact of Sulphur coagulating the Mercury, and by reason of its
operation, that is, from Mercury being digested and thickened by a proportionate
heat. Wherefore we must know, that Gold is Sulphur and Mercury together, that
is, the coagulant and the coagulated in one: and nothing added from without
thereto, but only a pure digestion or maturation, which multiplies qualities,
and excites one Element from another out of their pure possibility into act, no
other thing whatsoever being superadded. But this digestion or matutarion is
produced actively, from the superior Elements, that is, the Fire and Air,
which are not actually but potentially in Mercury; which yet being excited and
assisted by an external heat, and by the proper and natural digesting heat, the
passive Elements in Mercury are by them subtilized, being not only potentially
existent, but actually, toward Water it self, and the Water is subtilized
toward Air, and Air follows to Fire; and in this proportionable action of
Nature, and digestion of Mercury, the Male and Femal^ abide together in closed
Natures; the Female truly as it were Earth and Water, the Male as Air and Fire:
which Earth and Water the Philosophers do mingle in Gold, but called the Air
and Fire a Sulphur as it were therein: neither is there any other Foreign
addition in the bowels of the Earth. And therefore in Art above ground neither
is there found and Foreign addition, to digest or condense Mercury into the
nature of Gold, or other species of Metals. Therefore the Philosophers have
said, that Sulphur and Mercury make Sol, that is, its corporeity and
permanency: And therefore it is not hence concluded, that the external
artificial heat, stirring up and assisting the proportional intrinsic heat, to
digest and ripen the other two less digested and immature Elements in Mercury,
namely its Water and Earth, is of the substance of the Compound. For the
external heat is not permanent within, with the quantity and weight of the
Matter, nor adds any thing thereto: But the intrinsic proportionate natural
and simple heat is permanent, with the quantity and weight of the Mercury
digested by it; because that heat is an intrinsic and essential part of
Mercury it self, to wit, the two more active Elements in it, namely Air and
Fire. Therefore Fools do ill and absurdly understand that saying of the
Philosophers, that Sulphur and Mercury beget Sol; because, as is sufficiently
known, as neither Air nor Fire in the first Mercurial composition, nor
afterward in the natural Metallic digestion, depart nor are severed from
Water and Earth, so neither does Sulphur (which is no other than Air and Fire)
depart nor is separated from Mercury, which is the same with Water and Earth.
And he is not a natural Philosopher who imagines or asserts the contrary: for
the digestion of Gold happens and is made of the first Mercurial proportion,
without any addition made thereto by Nature under, or Art above ground, as is
said. Neither is that repugnant to what we have said, that a pure Sol and clean
Mercury must in this Art be conjoined, because this is not done to that intent
to affirm, that there is one Sulphur in Sol, and another in Mercury, or that
there is one Mercury in Sol, and another in Mercury, but because the digestion
is more mature and perfect in Sol, than Mercury. And also in the Sun the
Sulphur is more mature and digested, and therefore more active than in Mercury:
whence the Philosophers have affirmed Sol to be nothing else but Quicksilver
matured^ For in Mercury there are only two actual Elements, to wit, Water and
Earth, which are passive; but the active Elements, Air and Fire, are only
potentially therein. But (as it is known) when those Air and Fire in a pure
Mercury, are deduced from possibility into act, that is, to a due digestion and
proportionable concoction, then ^t becomes Gold. Wherefore in Gold there are
four Elements conjoined in equal and anatical proportion, in which therefore
there is actually a more ripe and active Sulphur, that is, Air and Fire, than
in Mercury: Wherefore Gold is by Art dissolved with Mercury, that the unripe
may be helped by the ripe, and so Art decocting, and Nature perfecting, the
Composition is ripened by the favor of Christ. Whence the cause may be
derived, why by the help of the Philosophic Art, more perfect, noble, and by
many degrees more elevated Gold is made, sooner and in less time, than by the
work of Nature. Because Nature does act and work this by boiling and digesting
Mercury alone in the bowels of the Earth, without any assistant: which cannot
be brought on to the due proportion of Gold, or any other Metal, in a little
time. But our Art helps the work of Nature, by mingling with Mercury ripe Gold,
in which is a Sulphur excellently digested, and therefore maturing and quickly
digesting Mercury it self, to the anatick proportion of Gold, by subtilizing
its Elements: whereupon there follows by Art a wonderful abbreviation of this
natural Work. Wherefore, my Doctor, I return to the former points; we must not
imagine, according to their mistake, who say, that the Male Agent himself
approaches the Female in the coagulation, and departs afterward; because, as
is known in every generation, the conception is active and passive: Both the
active and passive, that is, all the four Elements, must always abide together,
otherwise there would be no mixture, and the hope of generating an offspring
would be extinguished. For in every man, the Masculine Seed to the end of his
life is called in him the Agent, when it is first mingled with the Feminine;
and whether it be shed out, or consumed in him, Nature for its sake does
vegetate, and is wonderfully increased and nourished, and makes to it self in
the same man's loins the like specific Seed. The like is to be judged of the
Feminine Seed in the Women; wherefore both these Seeds abide always, and are to
be esteemed for original Agents, and first Patients. Yet there is a various or
different nativity or generation of Mixts and Vegetables: For they are called
Simple Mixts, which grow under ground, out of our sight, or about the surface
thereof, by the commixture of the Elements alone compounded one with another:
or from their first Solution; because they grow not as Vegetables, but how much
soever of matter was compact and mixed in them, so much of their first weight is
reserved in the same Compounds. For example sake: how much soever at first a
mass of some Mercurial substance does weigh in its Mineral disposition in the
bowels of the Earth, so much weight of Gold will abide digested therefrom: and
the Scoriae and Faeces rejected from it, will rather be diminished than
multiplied, because they receive no nourishment. But there are manifold degrees
of this first and simple natural mixture: The first is, the naked concretion
and composition of the four Elements, and that immediate, in which there is not
yet any change made, or exaltation of one Element into another: but a simple
union of a symbolizing composition of them, persevering and abiding; of which
sort Stones are. The second degree follows upon the first, because from the
aforesaid Stones, Minerals* (about which we discourse) are generated, and the
more noble subterraneous species emerge and arise from hence: because in these
begin the action of Elements, and their mutual transmutation, though their
action is not in so great vivacity and virtue as in Vegetables and Sensitives,
because they have neither growth nor sense, as we have said before. The third
degree is that which comprehends precious Stones and Gems, because in them is
found a perfect and complete action, from the virtue of the Elements compacted
and acting mutually, as I have declared more largely in my Philosophy: where I
have perspicuously manifested this third degree, together with the second, to
be a mean betwixt the first and second composition of Natural things. Then
another nativity or generation is that which is not accounted to be of Simple
Mixts, but Compound Vegetables: which are truly divisible into four kinds, or
Classes, as I have discoursed more largely in my other Book which I sent you.
For there are Vegetables, but Sensitives more especially, which for the most
part beget their like, by the Seeds of the Male and Female for the most part
concurring and commixt by copulation; which work of Nature the Philosophic Art
imitates in the generation of Gold. No man can artificially perfect any humane
Seed, but we can by Art dispose a man to a productive generation of his like:
For the vital Seeds are only digested in a vegetable manner by Nature, in the
loins of both Parents; but we can by coition mix the Parents Seeds in natural
Vessels, which copulation is as it were an Art disposing and mingling those
natural Seeds, to the begetting of Man. For example sake; the Seed of the Man,
as more ripe, perfect and active, is by this artifice joined with the Seed of
the Woman, more immature and in a sort passive; which Seed of the Man, because
it actually contains in it the working Elements, to wit, the Air and Fire, is
therefore more ripe and active for digestion. But the Female Seed does more
actually contain the undigested and passive Elements, and which therefore are
to be digested, as the Earth and Water, which being shed out and mingled
together in the natural Vessels of the Female, no Foreign thing being added
thereto, (but the external heat of the Woman exciting and helping the
proportionable inward heat of the Man's Seed) the active Elements of the Man's
Seed, digest and ripen the Feminine Seed, and thence a Man is generated,
complete and perfect according to his Nature. So it is in our Philosophic Art,
which is like this procreation of Man; for a^ in Mercury (of which Gold is by
Nature generated in Mineral* Vessels) a natural conjunction is made of both the
Seeds, Male and Female, so by our artifice, an artificial and like conjunction
is made of Agents and Patients. For the active Elements which obtain the name
of the Masculine Seed, are naturally conjoined with the passive Elements, which
are as it were the Feminine Seed; but herein the due natural proportion is
always to be observed. Now this first Mercurial digestion is called
Conjunction, in which the act rises out of the possibility, that is, the
Masculine from the Feminine, namely the Air and Fire, from the Earth and Water,
by means of a pure digestion and subtilization of them. But the Philosophers
and ingenious Artificers imitating Nature, besides this natural digestion of
the Seeds in Mercury, have by a most subtle invention made another conjunction
and digestion, whence they have not generated simple Gold only, but some other
far more noble and perfect thing. For they commanded Gold (in which the
Elements are more active) as the Male Seed, to be joined with Mercury, (in
which the passive Elements are existent) that it might be duly dissolved,
excluding all Foreign things, save that they used an outward heat, which by
helping does excite the internal natural heat of Gold, to digest actively and
ripen Mercury. And so as a Man is generate by Nature, so Gold by Art: Although
notwithstanding their Sperm and Seed cannot be generated by Art, because Art
knows not proportion of the mixture necessary to procreate Seed; and in Man it
knows neither composition, nor mixtion or first proportion, nor the causes of
subterraneous things, which flow out from the Earth, where is the proper and
natural place of their generation. But those Seeds produced by Nature are
artificially conjoined, that out of them in a way of composition, that which is
to be generated may be produced, in which both the Seeds abide together well
mingled, although Aristotle, as you write, seem to think otherwise. Wherefore
the Masculine Seed of Mercury, or our Sulph^r, goes not away after coagulation,
as some falsely affirm; and that this falls out in Mercury, by the force of the
Sun especially, and that by its heat chiefly the form of Gold is perfected, as
some think in subterraneous places: Yea rather by the force of the motion of
its Globe, or of its ^^b, and of the whole Heaven universally, because the
Solar Rays do only heat the surface of the Earth, and not inwardly those its
deep places, in which the generation of several kinds of Metals is brought
about; and neither do the influences of Heaven, brought down by the Rays, reach
unto those lowermost parts, although the subterraneous motion of the Elements
proceed first from the motion of the Heavens, and not from its Rays of light,
nor from their heat, nor other influence save motion: but how this comes about,
and what is the cause of this motion of subterraneous things, I believe your
Reverence is not ignorant, and therefore I forbear it at present. Therefore the
Sun is not the principal cause of Gold, or of its form, though there be a
resemblance in names betwixt them; because as the Sun is hotter than the rest
of the Planets, so Gold is hotter than any of the Metals, with the like
difference of proprieties. The rest of the Planets also have obtained like
names, whence this error of Fools does arise: For they believe that every one
of the seven Planets, generally and specially by its influence does beget one
special kind of Metal, whereunto by a certain propriety it agrees, and is in
its nature resembled. But it happens otherwise in subterraneous things, than in
Vegetables, in which Heaven or the Sun is the cause of their generation or
augmentation, not only* by its motion, but also by reason of the heat of its
Rays: For the Sun heats the Vegetables themselves, and the superficies of the
Earth, the Elements being very strongly reflected by its Rays to the surface of
the Earth, because that its Rays can proceed so far. To instance: for that from
the twelfth Heaven which obtains the utmost degree of height, proceeding to
descend lower, there follow always thicker or less subtle Orbs, till you come
to the concave of the Orb of the Moon, where alterable things have their place,
or the mixed Elements begin, and are terminated under the Hemisphere of things
generable and corruptible. And therefore the more subtle and simple Fire is
there found, though not altogether pure: because a simple pure Fire cannot be
found apart amongst, the alterable sorts of things, nor any one of the other
Elements, albeit in every Compound thing simple Fire may be found, mixed with
other simple Elements, else there would not be many Elements, but one only.
Therefore the Rays of the Stars of Heaven, of the Sun especially, pass through
the foresaid Regions unrefracted, until they descending farther downwards, are
reflected in the Fire by reason of its thickness; afterward descending farther
through the Sphere of the Fire, they by moving it reflect the Fire it self into
the Air which is thicker. And in like manner the Rays proceeding
perpendicularly to lower things, through the Sphere of Air, into the Water
thicker than the Air, from which they are reflected back into the Air. And so
after its manner they are reflected back by the Water moved by them, which also
is much better perceived in the Earth, with its thickness above other Elements.
By this decoction and reflection the Elements are moved invisibly, though not
unperceivably: because we perceive heat by the motion of the Heavens, and it is
always reflected from the superior and subtles Element, into the inferior and
thicker, unto the surface of the Earth, by means of the Rays of the Stars
descending perpendicularly from aloft to the lowest things; and things thus
reflected being moved, and by the Rays of the Sun reflected, accidental heat is
produced in the medium, though sometimes by the Rays of other Stars, other
qualities are produced here below, as dryness and coldness, as is manifest in
Astronomy; not that the Rays are in themselves hot, but that they are the cause
of heat in such manner as we have said. Now that these things are true, is
manifestly known from Astronomy and Perspective, whence it is understood how
generations happen in Vegetatives and Sensitives, thus much therefore may
suffice. But vain Astrologers have other conceits, and think that the
influences of Heaven are from the virtue of its activity, and not from the
virtue of its motion: which is false, because the Rays of Heaven produce or
effect nothing in the superior Orbs. For such Rays cannot be reflected on the
aforesaid Orbs, nor be mixed with them, as they are reflected in the Elements
and mingled with them* not by composition, but by a moving reflection and
mixture of the same Elements, as has been said: but in the supercelestials
there is no capacity to receive new qualities, or Foreign impression, although
the Rays themselves produce wonderful qualities in the Elements, moved by their
reflection. Wherefore, my Doctor, the Sun in particular is not the cause of the
generation of Gold, nor yet is it by means of its heat the cause of Vegetables
either above the Earth, or of Mi^ts about its superficies, which namely we know
to be heated by the Rays of the Sun, as we have said, which is also agreeable
to Astronomy. But the knowledge of these things, need not any longer
disputation, wherefore I pass on to what remains; for if you apply your mind to
those things which we have said, you will understand and you will find it true,
that by the activity of Sulphur digesting and coagulating Mercury, its form
from Gold is specially perfected: but yet you must not think that from any
other Metal, or any Star; this may be done, as you have written in your
Epistle. That which we have said, is also to be understood of other Metals, in
their kind and manner; but with difference, because in other Metals there is a
double Sulphur: One which is superfluous, and may be separated* the form of the
Metal still remaining: Another Sulphur is an essential part of the Metal, but
united to its Quicksilver, and not separable, so that the form of the Metal
continues: yet that imperfect and Sulphur^ous Metal may be perfected by a
Medicine corrupting the form of that Metal; and introducing another. But what
we are to think of the duplicity of this Sulphur, which you assert in this
Philosophic Art* I pray you, my renowned Doctor, without violating the Law of
our Friendship, or your Authority, that you would be pleased to consider. This
duplicity of Sulphur is not so distinct in Mercury coagulated into diver^
Metals, that one of them should intrinsically and essentially appertain to the
generation of the Metal, and be esteemed an essential part thereof, and the
other be ascribed to corruption. But there is in every Metallic species,
equally as in Gold and Silver, a simple and single Sulphur; which is termed
Quicksilver, from the first Mercurial composition, as has been declared in
the generation of Gold* Because Sulphur, and Quick silver are nothing else but
the four Elements in Mercury it self, so or so proportionally disposed, as this
or that Metallic species requires. But that which is reputed a second
Sulphur, and to be rejected, is a certain Scoria and faeculent part in the
Metals, contracted in the coagulation of the Mercury; or a certain superfluity,
which being unclean and impure, would not in the digestion of the Mercury,
endure a congelation to the form of a Metal: because it was not of an
homogeneal and proportionable Nature of Mercury, apt to be congealed and
digested into a Metal. But some Philosophers have called this Scoria, a
combustible Sulphur, because it cannot subsist, but vanishes in the testing of
Metals, or is separated from them into Faeces* And here I may bring this
example: the blood in Sensitives, and sap in Vegetables, in their coagulation
have several and different offices; because some parts of the blood have a
conformity unto Flesh, and therefore may be coagulated and turned into Flesh,
and retain the uniform nature of Flesh, and obtain the name of Flesh. But some
parts thereof residing in the pores, are of a superfluous humor, which can in
no wise be converted into solid Flesh, and therefore are ejected by Sweat and
Medicines, and separated from the true Flesh. But in the Sanguine complexion
there are many fewer superfluities, than in others: So we may conclude by way
of resemblance, that it is in Gold and other kinds of Metals; that the purer or
impurer Mercury, in its first coagulation, contained or contracted more or less
superfluities, or natural impurities. Wherefore the difference is made in the
coagulation of Mercury, which specifies and causes diverse Metals; and whatever
Mercury there is in any sort of Metal, is termed incombustible, and inseparably
permanent, though in fixed Bodies it is made volatile by Art, yet by Nature it
remains inseparable in an Elemental proportion. But what dross soever was
contracted in the Mercury, and mixed with it from the beginning; (that is, in
the congelation of Mercury in its first composition, by heat digesting it to a
Metallic kind; and therefore it is by the test taken away from the Mercury,
that is, the homogeneous Mercurial nature, and separated from the Metallic
kind as rejectaneous and heterogeneal) this is not properly called a Sulphur,
but a dross and certain superfluity: because Sulphur is nothing else but a pure
act of Air and Fire, warming and digesting, or decocting, the Earth and Water
in Mercury, proportionable and homogeneous unto it. But the dross is that which
in the first composition was not pertinent unto the nature of Mercury, nor had
a proportion to any Metallic kind in the composition and digestion of the
first Elements in Mercury. From these things it* is known, that there are not
in other sorts of Metals any distinct or more Sulphurs, than are in Gold and
Silver, but one only and simple Sulphur; though there are in them more and
greater superfluities, than are in Gold. From hence the truth of your saying is
known, that Gold, of all Metals, cleaves most unto Mercury. Now this comes to
pass by reason of the purity of both, because in them is less dross, dregs, or
superfluity, than in others: For every thing does naturally desire, by a
through mixture and union, to be joined to a thing of like nature to it, and
proportionable in homogeneity, rather than with a thing unequal and unlike to
it, as we know; like as Water very easily and without contradiction is quickly
joined to another Water, with an identative and uniting mixture. Now in Gold
there is nothing but Mercury, therefore being there is in it little dross,
(which is not of a Mercurial nature, as we have showed) there is therein no
great resistance, but that a pure Mercury may more easily adhere to Gold and
Silver, than to other Metals, in which many superfluities and dross do forbid
and hinder other Metals, or their congealed Mercury, any contact, or through
mingling with crude Mercury. For those superfluities, as we have already said,
are not of the first composition of Mercury, nor of the same natural or
proportional homogeneity: and if happily they be of its composition, yet they
are not of its proportion; for whatever is of any things proportion, is not
superfluous. Wherefore they cannot be inseparably thoroughly mingled, neither
with Mercury to be coagulated by Art, nor with Mercury coagulated, which in the
nature of its Mineralness is joined with them in the same kind of Metal; being
such dross is combustible by Fire, and therefore separable. What wonder is it
then if in those Metals to which they are accidentally superadded, they hinder
their natural commixtion and permanent union with coagulated Mercury, or other
crude Mercury? For this very cause Gold it self, though never so pure, can far
more difficultly abide with, be joined and adhere to an unclean and drossie
Mercury, coagulated or not coagulated, than with a pure and clean one. Because
a simple Nature does rejoice in the society of, and is perfected by a simple
Nature, that is like to it, and same with it in its first homogeneity and
Elemental proportion: but Gold, as has been said, is nothing else but Mercury
thickened by its proper digestion, and Elemental action: therefore albeit in the
Earth there be a difference betwixt Gold and Mercury in ripeness, (because Gold
is more ripe than Mercury) yet there is no diversity in their Matter. Therefore
whatsoever Gold has acquired by the digestion it has unto maturity, Mercury
may acquire the same without any extraneous thing. But Art to breviate and
contract the Work, joins Gold with Mercury, as is said, and out of two Sperms
it makes and generates artificially that same thing, which Nature does create
in the Mines of one actual Seed, the identity of the Matter being always
everywhere observed, but not the same active power. And therefore as nothing
extraneous to its Nature, does enter this Work in its first composition, so
neither does any thing multiply it, which is not of the first temperament
thereof. Wherefore some men think falsely, that the Philosophers Stone may be
composed of diverse things, or of all things, and be nourished by them, instead
of the aforesaid Sperms, notwithstanding diverse names have been imposed on
them. Neither does his Philosophic Work eat any thing, or convert it into its
own Nature, which is extraneous, because it does not vegetate. Wherefore though
there be in the said Philosophic Stone, a Body and a Soul, or a Spirit, it is
not therefore vegetably animated as Trees and Plants: For this Stone, as all
Minerals, is of the aforesaid first, and not of the second, or any superior
intention or imposition. But Trees and Plants are of the second imposition, as
Vegetables are of the third, fourth, fifth, or last imposition, for mixed things
in those four last impositions, do vegetate. For in them the Elements by many
transmutations, and by being oftener alterated, are more subtle; wherefore they
are more active and perfect, though they are not more durable and permanent in
their permixtion, because the Elements in them are not of a fixed, but
dissolvable composition; wherefore they take in their nourishment vegetably.
But our Stone, as also all the Minerals, is of the first imposition; because it
vegetates not, nor is vegetably nourished, but nourishment befalls it rather by
apposition of a nourishment of a like nature to it, and not by vegetation. For
example sake: because, as is manifest by experience, out of a Feminine Seed, to
wit, out of Mercury put to it unitively, insensibly and by way of composition
this Philosophers Stone is nourished, but by means of a digestive heat. For it
takes and assimilates its like unto it self, to be multiplied by way of
apposition, and not vegetably; wherefore it becomes weightier in quantity, and
more active and perfect in quality: neither does Fire or heat multiply this our
Stone, as its due nourishment, because it is not of its first composition, but
heats it by an extrinsical accident: For how can Flame or Fire multiply the
Stone it self, or make it of it self more weighty, when it cannot be fixedly
and permanently mingled with it, nor is not of its first composition or form?
Nothing therefore nourishes and multiplies the said Stone, to the generation of
the same form, except the Feminine Seed, which nourishes it by means of heat,
and nourishes it not vegetably, but by way of apposition and commixtion. He
therefore who thus multiplies and nourishes it, shall not err, because this
multiplier and nourisher is turned into the same kind. A man may indeed
increase the Stone and its weight by extraneous things; but this must be done
out of its natural kind, not convertible into it: For that weight would be made
besides Nature, that is, not into the same species, nor into the unity of one
species, yea it would be an aggregation of diverse kinds, and an accidental
composition, which might be separated by the Test. But when the Philosophers
said, that the Stone might be made of every thing, truly they understood it
not, (as some perversely interpret them) that the Stone might be made of diverse
things, unlike unto it both in kind and nature; or, which is more absurd, that
it might be multiplied by a Flame ministered to it from without: for this reason
especially, because Fire and its Flame may by a certain production arise out of
every thing: Now the refutation of this opinion is manifest from what has been
said before. But when the Philosophers say, that the Stone is made of every
thing, they mean, that it is made of the four Elements proportionally equalized
to one another by a due and natural digestion; out of which four Elements every
thing that is generable and corruptible is made. Therefore by this similitude
the Philosophers say our Stone is ^^de out of every thing, that is, out of
every Element; because if any one of them were mortified or destroyed, the
whole proportion of the Golden Nature would perish, and its kind: and every
thing in whatsoever latitude and sort of alterables, is generated out of the
four Elements either actually, or potentially mixed: yet it cannot be properly
said of every producible thing, but of our Golden Stone, and other things
equally mixed, that they are made out of every thing: for this reason
especially, because in those things which are not produced by an equal, but by
an adequate proportion of the Elements, all the Elements are not actually
existent, but in their adequate activity and passion: for some of the Elements
are therein either in an active or passive power, and the rest are therein
actually. But in the Philosophers Stone, which is Gold, being it is an uniform
Work of Nature, all the four Elements active and passive are actually therein,
and permanent in an equal proportion. For the Essence or Nature of Gold, is
nothing else but the four Elements equally mixed; not that their form and
matter may be said to be therein equal, but their passive and active power;
that is, they are each alike and equal not in quantity, but in quality: because
that the active does not exceed the passive in its acting; nor on the other
side, the passive does not exceed the active by suffering more: because there
is an equal proportion as to measure in our Gold, or in our Medicine, double
hot, double moist, double cold, double dry, and all these are actually therein,
by actual action and passion; that is, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, as we have
said before. And all these are said to be alike, and equal in quality, not
quantity, because they are equal in actives and passives; and they are
therefore durably permanent in Gold, because the passive in it consists
permanently in its active, and on the other part the passive rises not up
against the active. And they ought not to be alike in quantity; that is, there
ought not be so much matter of Fire, as there is matter of Earth: because then
the Fire by reason of its quality, would be everywhere of an unequal activity
with its passive Earth, and of a far greater. Wherefore there is in Gold, as to
its matter, but not as to its quality, much more of the heavier and more
passive Element, than of the lighter and more active; that ^s, more in
quantity: there is in ^t a greater quantity of Earth, than Water; a greater
quantity of Water, than Air; a greater of Air, than Fire: wherefore it is the
heaviest of all Metals. But in this ^nequal proportion of quantity, there is an
equal and like proportion of quality, of hot, dry, moist, and cold, because
each of these is in Gold, as has been said. The cause of which weight is the
permanency of the solidity of the Earth and Water, and the solution of an
homogeneous Water with the Earth, because Water dissolves an homogeneous Earth.
Also their intrinsical through mixture in their very least particles, is the
cause of the weight; because the Water as well in Gold, as Quicksilver,
suffers not the Earth to have any ^res in it: which is otherwise in other
Metals, in which pores are insensibly made in their congelation, because of the
dross mingled in those Metals all over, rejected by the Mercurial nature and
heterogeneous: whereupon their lightness results, which is nothing else but
want of matter, and porousness of the same, as weight is nothing else but a
solid addition of matter. Wherefore if there were in an equal commensurative
quantity, so much of the solid matter of Fire, as there is of the matter of
Earth, Fire would be as weighty as Earth. But the cause of the weight of
Saturn, is its immature congelation, because it d^^^ not yet reject the dross
of its parts, whence pores are made in it; but the pure and impure abide
through mixed together in it everywhere, as in the first crude Quicksilver, in
which the inspissation and coagulation is weak, for that cause Saturn or Lead
retains the weight of its Quicksilver, not because of the purity of its solid
matter, but because of its immature coagulation or coction. Wherefore if in
this Work you would not destroy the Fire and Air, you must preserve in a
distinct and like proportion the heat of the Compound: But if you would not
destroy the Air and the Water, then in the same Compound you must cherish the
humid: so in the same manner you may preserve the Water and Earth, or the Earth
and the Fire, in the said Work, by preserving rightly, and by the artifice of
the Philosophic skill, both the cold and dry: because if you destroy any one
of them, the proportionab^^ form and kind of Gold is lost. For this cause the
Philosophers say, our Gold is made of every thing, that is, of every Element,
every Element being intrinsically preserved in it, and actually compounding it:
wherefore all the Elements are intrinsically in act or power, the principles of
all compounded alterable things, and for that cause are said to be all things.
Furthermore, my Reverend Doctor, for your credits sake, you must understand the
sayings of the Philosophers according to the possibility of Nature, and not
according to the sound of Words: For they have handled this holy and hidden
Art, and its Secrets, under Similitudes, Fables, Riddles, and obscure words,
and have hid it purposely, that it might not be exposed to the unlearned,
impious, and unworthy. Furthermore, that I may go on to other Heads of your
Epistle, I understand the artifice of your Stone to be a composure from Gold,
but from your writing I cannot apprehend it, because you set not down the first
original of that Composition. Therefore I shall not need to handle it more at
large, till you instruct me fully and more plainly in its Composition and
Operation: For I cannot neither believe that the Elixir, or Philosophers Stone,
can consist of the signs appearing in it, and of the properties of the
nutritive vegetation of the flaming Fire, which you attribute to it, as I have
openly showed in what I have said already. But when I received your Work, and
the gift of so great a Secret sent unto me, I at once understood your unfeigned
love, and free confidence in me. Wherefore for your Friendship sake, I reserve
your Stone with me, and keep it as a most acceptable gift, and shall write unto
you more concerning it, when you shall declare it to me more manifestly. But
whereas you say, that in your Stone there are three, a Body, Spirit, and Soul,
(which is manifest to you by your experience and work) the Philosophers when
they said those three natural things were in their artificial Stone, understood
it by way of resemblance and experiment: For they called the Earth, its Body
and Bones; because it is an astringent Compound, and restrains the fluid
Elements from their raw flexibility, having the Fire also with it symbolically
by its dryness, But they called the Water and Air, its Spirit; because they are
the Elements that moisten and dissolve the Earth. But they called the Air and
Fire, the Soul; because they ripen and digest the whole Compound. And they
named them thus, with resemblance unto Humane nature, because in a
well-constituted Flesh there ought to be Bones to sustain the Body, and
likewise there ought to be in the Flesh a vivacity of vegetable Accidents,
which are called its Spirits: contrary to the errors of the Pagan Philosophers,
who thought the vital Spirits to be something distinct from the Body
compounded, and parts compounding it: so also there must be in Humane Flesh an
informing Soul, digesting in man the brutal acts, and to work in him the
intellectual work. But we must understand it otherwise in our Stone, in which
the Earth has the name of the Body, Air and Water obtain the name of Spirit,
neither is in it a Soul but because it contains the Air and Fire; which I
perceive well, you do perfectly understand. But the Philosophers divided them
in this manner: By a crude Spirit, they extracted a digested Spirit out of the
dissolved Body, and they had remaining a fixed mass of Ashes to be farther
dissolved, in which they found an incombustible and stony oyliness and
gumminess, which they called the Soul; which enlivens, unites, incerates and
produces united Natures; and in the Spirit they disjoined the Natures, so in
the Oil they re-conjoyned them. For our Sto^^ has not an informing nature, as
a Vegetative or a Sensitive, but it has only a formed form, which form is the
very Elements themselves, because it is homogeneous. But man's Body, and that of
other Sensitives, is heterogeneous: For Bones, Flesh, Blood, Marrow, Hair and
Nails, are distinguished differently in it; which is otherwise in Gold, in
which whatsoever there is, is found to be of one kind. Wherefore, my Reverend
Doctor, the Philosophers speak this by way of similitude, by reason of the
administration of Art, and operation of Nature: not because there is a Soul in
the Stone, but metaphorically, (as you well know) nor Spirit, nor Body, (as an
informing form) as it is found in Man, and other Sensitives. Verily I tell you,
that Oil which naturally incerates and unites Natures, and naturally induces
the Medicine into other Bodies that are to be tinged, is not compounded of any
other extraneous thing, but out of the bowels of the Body that is to be
dissolved: which Oil retains the color of its Spirit always, until it be
rethickned, and then first of all it puts on the Royal Ensigns, that is, a
citrineness and Metalline form, which it manifests to all; in Gold, a Golden,
in Silver, a Silver color and form: which Oil if it be Sol, being dissolved,
is perceived to be red inwardly, though outwardly it appear white, under the
form of liquid Quicksilver. Now some think to compound an Oil as generous and
powerful as this Oil is, namely out of Mercury thoroughly dried, or out of the
substance of Tin, or Body of the Sun, commixed with ingredients of diverse
kinds; but for what concerns our Work, their Experiment is fallacious. They can
indeed reduce the species of Metals into a kind of Oil, but they cannot at any
hand reduce them into a Metallic kind, observing and keeping the proportion of
the things to be mixed sound and entire. But that Oil may be profitable for
Medicine to sensitive Creatures, because the nature of Gold is dissolved
therein; but yet impertinently and unprofitably as to our Philosophic Work.
Besides, my Honored Doctor, that I may lightly touch on the remaining Heads of
your Epistle, you must diligently and wisely observe, that Fire and Azor, wash
Laton: But Azor is not raw Quicksilver simply extracted out of the Mine, but
it is that which is extracted by Quicksilver it self, out of the dissolved
Bodies; which is found to be more ripe upon trial. Wherefore if Laton be an
unclean Body, it is depurated by such an Azor, which you write that you have
had formerly; and by this Laton purified by Azor, we make our Medicine for
curing every sick person. Indeed this Azor is made of the Elixir, because
Elixir is nothing else but a Body resolved into a Mercurial Water; after whi^^
resolution, Azor is extracted out of it, that is, an animated Spirit. And it is
called Elixir, from E, which is out of, and Lixis, which is Water, because all
things are made out of this Water: and Elixir is the second part in the
Philosophic Work, as Rebis is the first in the same Work. But the Tincture
constitutes the third Work; for as the matter of this Composition produces
diverse effects, so it obtain^ different names one after another. Thence it
manifestly appears, that Azor is not requisite to the Elixir, because in this
Work the Elixir goes before Azor, and not the contrary; like as Water procedes
the Oil, and the Spirit the Soul: For Azor is drawn and extracted out of the
Elixir, as Oil out of Water, and not contrariwise; as mention is made
elsewhere. For example sake; as in the Art of Physic, pure simple
Fountain Water, by boiling in the first concoction, is joined with the^^ Flesh
of a Chicken, and thence in the first degree of concoction we obtain a Broth, a
good and perfect decoction, the humid, watery and airy parts of the Chicken
being actually dissolved in the aforesaid Water; though there be other Elements
therein also actually. But that it may be made a much more perfect Medicine,
and more generous for restoring man's sick Body unto health, the decocted Body
of the Chick is beaten into a mash, with the said Water already altered into a
boiled Broth, or with part of it, and is distilled by a stronger decoction,
whence a Broth and decoction will be made much more noble and generous,
partaking of the whole nature of the Chicken: Because by this second decoction
not only the moist parts, but the hot parts, that is, its aerial and fiery
parts, being melted into the Broth or decoction, are thoroughly mingled and
dissolved: and therefore the whole virtue of the Chick is in such a decoction
extr^cted into the aforesaid Liquor. So it falls out in the Philosophic Work,
because the crude Mineral Spirit, like Water, is joined with its Body, to
dissolve it in its first decoction: whence it is called Rebis, because it is
compounded of two, or a double thing, to wit, of the Masculine and Feminine
Seed, that is, of the thing to be dissolved, though it be one thing and matter:
whence the Verses, Rebis is two things joined, yet it is but one
Dissolved to their first Seeds, the Sun or Moon.
Now out of these two things dissolved together, the Elixir is compounded, that
is, a tinged Water: whence the Verses, Pure Bodies are of Lixis made by Art;
Hence Greeks Elixir term its second-part.
Out of this Elixir, my Venerable Doctor, as out of the first Broth or B^llion
of a simple decoction, Azor is extracted, to wit, by a stronger and iterated
distillation: which Azor resembles and participates the nature of its Body from
which it was extracted, which is hot, and retains its virtue in it self, namely
an Oily nature, which is hot and moist, because it is actual Fire and Air;
though all the Elements are in it in Essence, and by Composition. Medicines
therefore to cure the Bodies of Sensitives, may be composed out of the said
Metals by several artifices; but they are not pertinent to the Philosophic
Work, as the Elixir is to Azor: that is, the vital Spirit and fugitive Soul are
not diaphanous, nor transparent as the clear tear from the Eye: nor every
dissolving Spirit, though they be each of higher Natures than another,
according to their degrees, as the Soul is higher than the crude Spirit, being
they are not of one form. For as the Soul lies hid under the species of a
dissolved Spirit, before its re-inspissation, (for the Soul being extracted out
of the Body, always appears like Quicksilver) so after its inspislation the
Soul and Body lie hid under the species of a Body. Your Worship has seen an
Experiment thereof, in the Powder sometime sent to that King whose Physician
you are; in which Experiment, Quicksilver was found in the species of
Quicksilver, but if that which remained in the bottom had been coagulated, it
would certainly have assumed the same form of Powder: But that Powder must be
called a Tincture nominally only, not that it is a Medicine for Metals, for it
is not yet perfectly fixed; yet as a Medicine for Men, it is of very good force.
But the fixed Medicine without all doubt exceeds this humane Medicine in all
virtues, both as to Metals, and to Men; which cannot come to pass in a clear
diaphanous and transparent Liquor: Because if the aforesaid Elixir and Azor,
that is, Spirit and Soul, did appear in, and had a transparency, now the Earth
as to its proportion had left the Water, and had been separated from it, which
had thickened and coagulated its parts, causing an opacity in the Elixir and
Azor, and making a congealable Metallic form to consist. For in the condensing
of fixed Metallic species, the condenser must act upon the condensable, and
the coagulating upon the coagulable; which cannot be in the aforesaid
diaphanous and clear Water. But it happens otherwise in Vegetables, in which a
simple and diaphanous Water is thickened by decoction into the Vegetables
themselves: which yet by the Test of the Fire does at length vanish and
evaporate, because it is not permanent and fixed in its composition, because it
had not with it an Earth naturally homogeneal to it in its composition, as
Quicksilver has: which Earth indeed is the cause of permanent fixation in
homogeneous things: wherefore simple Water cannot by coagulation be so fixed
with Vegetables, as Mercury with Metals. If therefore Mercury should be reduced
to a transparency in the Work of the Philosophers, it would by good reason
remain of an uncoagulable substance; nor would it be congealed upon Laton to a
Metallic form, species and proportion, which carries not with, nor in it self
its own congelation, namely Water the Earth: which Earth (as was said) is
Mercurial, and the first cause of Inspissation, Coagulation, and Fixation. If
then this Water abide destitute of Metallic proportion, how should it be
possible that such like species should be produced from this Composition? They
also err who think to extract a limpid transparent Water out of Mercury, and
out of it to work many wonderful things: For be it so that they can perfect
such a Water, that Work would conduce nothing either to Nature or proportion,
nor could it restore or build up any perfect kind of Metal: For so soon as
Mercury is thoroughly changed from his first Nature, so soon he is forbidden
entrance into our Philosophic Work, because he has lost his Spermatick and
Metallic Nature. From these things it is manifest, what truth there is in your
opinion, and in what it is contrary and improper, when you say, there must be
had (as I think) to perfect the highest Elixir, a Gum in which are all things
necessary thereunto, and containing the four Elements, and it is a most clear
Water as a tear from the Eye, made Spiritual, etc. which make Gold to be a mere
Spirit: For a Body penetrates not a Body, but a subtle congealed Spiritual
substance, which penetrates and colors a Body. Let it be so as you say, my
Venerable Doctor, that Natures are not joined but in a Gum or Oily substance,
and equal proportioned, having a Spiritual Nature, the Elements being yet
fixedly shut up in it; un^o which Gumminess the whole Philosophers Stone is at
last reduced by Inceration, under a gentle flux, after the manner of an
Inceration resembling all the Elements, standing like Copper and in the nature
of Copper, existing also in a subtle Spiritual Nature penetrating and coloring
Metallic Bodies. For this Stone in the sublimation of the first crude Body,
has not lost its kind, namely of the same Spirit, neither yet in the perfect
and great Gum does it lose its first Nature: Therefore Gum and Oil belong not
otherwise unto this Work, but as Elements equally proportioned shut up
together, resolvable, united in the Oily viscosity of the Earth, retained,
buried, inseparably mixed. For this Gum or Oil first is extracted out of the
Body, drawn into an incinerated Spirit, till the superfluous humidity of the
Water be turned into Air, and one Element be excited from another Element by
digestion, and what was of an Aqueous form, become of an Oily nature: and so
the whole Stone at last assumes the name of Gum and Sulphur. For Geber teaches
this, when he says, as you have written in your Epistle, If any person know to
join and friendly unite our Sulphur unto Bodies, he has found one of the
greatest Secrets, and one way of perfection: as if he should say, If any man
can reduce a Body to this, that it may be made a Gum which may be thoroughly
mingled with other imperfect Bodies, he has found the greatest Secret of
Nature, etc. because this perfect Stone is a Gum and a Sulphur, as is known by
what we have already said. But you must know, that Geber with highest prudence
and wonderful artifice hides the truth under a Veil, intermingling with it many
obscurities and falsities, which those who are ignorant at first appearance
imagine to be truth: yet he speaking like a Philosopher secretly under this
craft, does openly, learnedly and Philosophically describe the truth: wherefore
the unexperienced and Sophisters, not understanding his mind and wit, nor the
nature of the thing, do perversely turn aside to the vulgar exposition and sound
of the words. For he says, If thou know that, we have said something to
thee; but if thou know not, we have said nothing to thee. Wherefore in
reading Philosophic Books, consider especially the possibility of Nature;
notwithstanding some Writers of this Art have also sometimes erred, and have
happened sometimes to have handled it, as to the natural truth, either ill or
ambiguously. As it may be observed that Arnoldus de Villa Nova has said, in a
Book which he called his Rosary. that raw Mercury, that is, Quicksilver, which
in its own nature is cold and moist, by Sublimation may be made hot and dry;
afterward being revived, it becomes hot and moist like the complexion of Man.
You will say then, what wonder is it if it be joined with the Sun, that it
likewise becomes of the nature of the Sun? For Mercury is of a convertible
nature, as the Heavenly Mercury, which is such as the Planet is with which it
is in Conjunction. For that Arnoldus, though in other Sciences he were a
Reverend and Ingenious Doctor, yet in this Art he handled Experiments only,
without the learning of the Causes. Now when he says, that in the first
Sublimation the crude Spirit is sublimed from the inferior salt Minerals, and
that Mercury it self, which in its own nature is cold and moist, becomes a
Powder of an hot and dry nature, as he says, this yet conduces nothing to our
Work. But let it be so, that he makes of Mercury such a Powder as he speaks of,
that is, thoroughly dried and hot by sublimation from Salts; yet those
Purifications are vain and impertinent to our Work, yea as to the perfecting of
our Work they are hurtful. For though these inferior Minerals communicate with
Metals in their nature, yet not in kind and proportion: For the superior and
inferior Minerals, in their nativity and subterraneous formation, are of one
and the same constitution ^niversally, and therefore of the same nature; but
they differ in proportion, quality, and kind or form. Wherefore if Mercury be
distilled with those inferior Minerals, and thoroughly dried, then his internal
nature is confounded and disproportioned, and is hindered and made unprofitable,
as to the effect of a Feminine Seed, and invalid for our Metallic Work. For so
soon as he is turned into the form of a Powder, (except from his Body of Sol or
Luna) so soon he undergoes a through dryness, unprofitable to the Philosophic
Work. Yet I deny not, but that a drossie and impure Mercury may and ought, by a
simple Salt, be sublimed or purged once or oftener, according to a due
Philosophic experience, to take from it its dro^s and outward Mineral
impurity, so that notwithstanding the fluidity and radical humidity of Mercury
may always remain unaltered: For the Mercurial kind and form in such a Work,
ought to remain uncorrupted, as has been said already. Nor ought its outward
form to be reduced into a thoroughly dried Powder; because its external form
being corrupted, shows its internal nature to be confounded, unless it be in
the way of generation that it be altered, as may be manifestly seen in the
signs which appear in the Work of the natural way. For there are Sublimations
of Mercury from its own proper Bodies, which are conjoined and mingled with it,
by an Amalgamation with it in its most inward parts, from which being
oftentimes raised and reunited, it rejects and loses its superfluities, and is
not confounded in its nature; and afterward it is very agreeable to the
Philosophic Work, and powerful to dissolve Metallic species; yet it is not
greatly altered intrinsically for the Philosophic Work, unless it be altered
by fixed Bodies dissolved in it. But wonderful things may be done in Medicines
for Sensitives from this dried Powder, whether it be reduced into an Oil, or
into Water, or it abide in a Powder; but it is not at all pertinent to the
Philosophic Experiment. And therefore it must be universally noted, that so
soon as Mercury is turned into a Powder, of whatever sort, contrary to the
nature of its Body to be dissolved, so soon will it be unprofitable to the
Philosophic Work. There are certain deceiving Sophisters, who by joining Venus
to it, or adding other species, make a Sophistick Work; that is, they give unto
imperfect Copper a color, but not natural; they induce indeed a kind of an
apparency, but not a true nature, that is, transmutation: like as he that
paints a dead Image, or composes a Statue of Wood, which appears only, but is
not; and as much as a living differs from an Image and Picture, so much differs
their Work from the Philosophic. Hence this mixture perseveres not in the Test
of the Fire, though it be Mineral; because Nature attracts it not from a
proportionable digestion, nor has Art vehemently decocted it to an alteration
of the mixed natures: wherefore that Copper appears to be superficially only,
and not permanently and intrinsically tinged. Wherefore we must not adhere to
the Experiments of deceitful Sophisters, because the truth of the natural Art
confutes this Sophistick Work, and shows it to be false. And if you will
instance farther, and say, that as the said Armaldus by Sublimation purged away
the dross of Mercury, and dried it in its nature; so also (as you say) he by
reviving it, moistened it again, and made the Mercury it self hot and moist, and
in its nature conformable to its Body. This hinders not (my Reverend Doctor)
nor refutes the truth of the Philosophic Art, yea rather an error appears in
the Natural Art: For, as is manifest, Arnaldus does teach, if you regard the
found of his words, that Mercury thus thoroughly dried, is revived by hot water
into which it is cast; and he says that it is made hot and moist, when it was
first sublimed hot and dry. But what true Philosopher would say, that Mercury
or any other Metal, is changed in nature and internal quality by simple Water,
however hot or boiling, or that it could thence acquire its natural humidity,
and so be revived? Therefore Mercury in this revival acquires nothing, because
common Water neither decocts nor alters it, because it neither has entrance
nor ingress into it, and that which neither has entrance nor ingress, alters
not; because every thing to be altered, must first be thoroughly mingled. For
indeed such a Water may wipe away from it some superficial dross swimming upon
it, but cannot infuse into it a new quality: For what nature soever Mercury
reduced into a Powder, and mortified by Sublimations, retained, such nature
altogether it retains revived by Water. Now this I would have to be spoken in
honor and respect unto the said Arnaldus; but I contemplate and defend the
truth of Nature and Experience. Furthermore, honored Doctor, that I may by
this my Answer satisfy your Epistle, and put an end thereto, I humbly entreat
you that you would take in good part, and favorably bear what I have written,
not by way of Confutation, but Disputation: But if I have answered any thing
that offends you, take it yet in good part and favorably, or signify it to me
in writing, and I will satisfy you to my power, as the most true Doctor our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, blessed for ever and ever, shall give and
teach me.

Thanks be to Christ.
The Prefatory Epistle of Bernard Earl of Tresne, to the noble Doctor and most
learned Philosopher Thomas of Bononia.
My Friend,
IF I had any thing more noble, imagine you with what good will I should
dedicate it to thee, for having considered the wonderful virtue of this Science
in its height, which you are not ignorant of, therefore was I willing to
dedicate this my Labor unto thee, entreating thee to accept it with as good a
will as I give it unto thee, and conclude that whilst I give thee this my
Labor, that I have given a greater Treasure than was ever ordained by the good
pleasure of the omnipotent God, according to the course of Nature.

There is a way truly of arriving to an Universal Knowledge, which we commonly
call the Philosophers Stone, and thou shall find it in this my little Book
Bern. Trevisanus de Transmutatione Metallorum, 4 libris, and impressus est cum
Jo. Fr. Pi^i opere de Auro, Ursellis 1598. 80.
, (little, I say, in words, but great and high in substance) also it contains
entirely every Science, that is to say, the beginning and ending. Thou shall
find this my Book divided into four parts, and thou may judge thereof after
thou have well understood it. Farewell.

From Tresne, May 12. 1453.
FINIS.
This Epistle I have caused to be printed, not for the signification thereof
either as to quality or quantity, but only to prevent the mistaking the one
Epistle for the other; and could I have found more Epistles between these two
most excellent Authors, I should not have hesitated their publication, but
conclude that they would have been as welcome to our English Philosophers, as
any either Ancient or Modern Writers.

Vale. W. C. Bibl.

A brief Rehearsal of the Preparation of the Philosophers Stone.
REcipe {sal ammoniac}, and sublime him from his Earthly substance, and then
dissolve him into his former substance: then if it be to the Red Work take Sol,
if it be to the White Work take Luna, and dissolve it in the said Mercury,
until they be both one Mercury, which will not be without Putrefaction; then
separate the Elements, and decoct them according to their due proportion. Note,
this Sulphur Philosophorum is the Earth of the Elements calcined, sublimed and
fixed; then it is colored with either Sol or Luna, according as thy Work is,
the which Sol or Luna is added to fresh or other Mercury after the order of
Amalgama; then fixing the Sulphur and the Elements, and that new Sol which is
called the Earth, according to their due proportion; the which Names of weight
shall not be made mention of here, for the love of him that taught it me, and
lest too common it should be; for if it should be named in two Books, then all
the World would decay in Husbandry and Industry, if not in Honesty, which I
pray God prevent. Amen.

FINIS.
Books sold by Will. Cooper, at the Pelican in Little-Britain.
EIrenaeus Philalethes his Printed Works, in number 15. (viz.)

Introitus apertus ad occlusum Regis Palatium.

-- Idem in English, called Secrets Revealed.

The Marrow of Alchymy, in Two Parts.

Ars Metallorum Metamorphoseos.

Fons Chymicae Philosophiae.

Brevis Manuductio ad Rebinum Coelestem.

Methodica Enarratio trium Gebri Medicinarum.

Vade-mecum Philosophicum, sive breve Manuductorium ad Campum Sophiae.

Experimenta de Praeparatione Mercurii Sophici.

An Exposition upon Sir George Ripley's Epistle to Edward the 4th. King of
England.

-- Idem upon Ripley's Preface to his Compound of Alchymy.

-- Idem upon Ripley's first Six Gates of his Compound.

-- Idem upon Ripley's Vision.

-- Idem upon his Recapitulation.

-- His Experiments for the Preparation of the Sophick Mercury.

The Philosophical Epitaph, with Hieroglyphical Figuress.

Helvetius his Golden Calf, with Figures.

Glauber's Extraction of Gold out of Stones, Gravel, Sand, etc.

Jehi^r the three Principles or Originals of all things.

A Catalogue of Chemical Books in Three Parts.

The Principles of the Chemists of London, in Two Parts.

Simpson's Philosophical Discourse of Fermentation.

Ripley Revived, or a Collection of six several Pieces of the famous Eirenaeus
Philalethes.

Opus Tripartitum de Philosophorum Arcanis.


