A WARNING FROM THE LORD UNTO THE Rulers of Dover.

And so to all men which stand guilty of the like Practices, that all may know
a Day of Repentance before it be too late; for the Night will come whenas no
man can work, in which the Son of man will come as a Thief unto all such the
Workers of Iniquity, and give to every man according to his deeds done in their
body in their lifetime.

Then woe to the Evil-doer, for it will go ill with him. Also, the Christian
man's Plea for his Liberty, as he is so indeed and in truth: And also, as he is
a freeborn Englishman, he lays claim to his Birthright, by way of
Expostulation with the Rulers of DOVER, who rob him and many others of it,
refusing to show us any Order for their so doing.

Together with a true Testimony born to the Light of Jesus, the Power of God,
yea the Power of the endless Life, from everlasting to everlasting: By LUKE
HOWARD.

Isa. 57.20. The wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast up Mire and Dirt.

How ever it be, yet God is good, and his mercies are sure to Israel, yea they
endure for ever.

Prove. 24.15. Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the
righteous, spoil not his resting place.

Prove. 28.10, 11. Whosoever causes the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he
shall fall himself into his own pit; but the upright shall have good things in
possession.

Prove. 10.6. Blessings are upon the head of the just; but violence covers the
mouth of the wicked.

LONDON, Printed For Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at the
Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill in Martins l'Grand, 1661.

A Warning from the Lord unto the Rulers of Dover, and so to all men men which
stand guilty of the like Practices, that all may know a Day of Repentance
before it be too late, etc.
ON the third day of the 8th, Month, 1661. in the night-watch, upon my Bed of
Straw and Chaff Yet I and he rest of my friends did offer the Marshall to give
him as we gave in other Prisons, 8. pence a night for two Beds fitting for men
to lie upon, and that our friends as in other places, might come at us; but he
refused it.
, in the Common-Goal of Dover-Castle; as I lay in a sweet and a comfortable
sleep and rest, the hand of my God fell on me, and his sweet and comfortable
presence awakened me, and so continued with me unto the Morning-Watch; in which
time the living presence of my God was with me, and the comfortable fellowship
of his holy Spirit accompanied me, so that my soul was filled with his living
presence as with a mighty River, which did overflow the Banks, so that nothing
appeared but joy and gladness, and the Streams of his everlasting Virtue run
through me exceeding swift, and as the dew from Heaven refreshes the tender
Grass, so was the Plant of God's Renown refreshed in me, and gave glory to him
that sits on the Throne, the Ancient of Days, and to the Lamb for evermore;
even so faith my soul, and all that is within me; yea, praise ye the Lord, for
he is worthy.

And as I thus lay with my mind staid on his Holiness, and my heart awake in
his Life and Light, the Word of his Eternal Power came to me, and from the God
of Life it run through me in these words, the which I was to write as from the
God of my Life to the Rulers of Dover.

A Spoil, a Spoil, a Spoil is in you; a Spoil, a Spoil, a Spoil is in your
hearts; ye blood-thirsty men, John Golder Mayor, George West, and all which
are agreed with you, whose hearts are filled with envy Envy is the ground of
murder, and it is murder in Gods sight; as says the whole Scripture.
, to destroy a man and his Heritage, yea men and their Families, the judgments
of God are against you, and the righteous vengeance of the Almighty is
gathering together in his heart against you, and the Revelation thereof is near
at hand to be poured forth: As your iniquities ripen to a head, and your envy
against the righteous is fully accomplished, come you forth, and stand up
before the righteous God of my Life, and let the God of Truth be judge in the
matter, and his living Witness For that will plead the cause of the just and
innocent, in secret, between God and your own consciences
in all your Consciences give Answer between us, and this Word of Life run
through my heart from the righteous God, to write unto you in the Word of the
Lord, even the Lord God of Life and Light, of Righteousness and Truth, the God
of Heaven and Earth, whose dreadful presence will make the strong to bow, and
bring the lofty down, and rebuke the wicked devices of the heart of man, and
strike through the Liver of the Oppressor, as with a Dart, and none shall shift
his hand; before whose glorious presence all must appear, and all flesh must be
silenced before him. This is my God, I have waited for him, and his appearance
to me and mine is as as the Morning without clouds, and his beauty has taken
my heart, and his comeliness has ravished my soul, and his exceeding Riches
has he adorned my inward man with The Kings Daughters are all glorious within.
, and his everlasting strength is my salvation, even the Son of his Love, which
was from everlasting to everlasting, the same yesterday, to day and for ever,
by whom he will judge the World in righteousness, and the men thereof in truth,
and no covering VVo be to him who is covered with a covering, and not of the
spirit of the Lord.
of falsehood shall then hide any, but all must stand naked and bare before him
and his holy Angels, and mighty Host of Redeemed ones, the hundred forty and
four thousand Then shall the Lord be admired in his Saints, honored in his
chosen, and glorified in and among his people, his own.
, which he has redeemed from the Earth, who shall sit upon the holy Hill of
Sion with new Songs in their mouths, and everlasting Praises in their hearts,
which has followed the Lamb wheresoever he has gone, and have not loved their
lives unto death. These are the generation of the Just, yea the general
Assembly of the first born, whose names are written in Heaven. The Just men
whose Spirits are made perfect, being washed in the blood of the Lamb, yea the
Lamb of God that has taken away their sins, and carried them into the Land of
forgetfulness, so that they shall never be remembered more against them. A new
song of Salvation is put into their mouths, and joy and gladness is in their
souls, and everlasting praises is under their tongues, and the voice of Melody
is in their inward parts, and the voice or shout of a King is in the midst of
them for evermore; so that great is the shout of the living Host, which gives
all our glory and praises unto the Ancient of Days, and to the Lamb that lives
for evermore; even so Amen, Amen says my soul, and my Spirit sets to its seal
in the presence of my God, who is the everlasting Father, and Prince of Peace,
of whose Dominion and Government there shall never be an end, but he shall
reign for evermore; before whose seat of Justice Where nothing will speak peace
but a Conscience void of offense both to God and man, and no cover hide but the
spirit of Life which has overcome death in all it covers.
, and Tribunal of everlasting Righteousness (I say again, all must stand naked
and bare, and no covering shall be able to hide the least Iniquity; but
Judgment from the righteous God must come on all; and I say again, all flesh
must and shall be silent in his presence, and all tongues confess to his
righteous Judgments, and all knees bend before him, and all hearts fail in his
presence; for strong is the Lord that judges the righteous, and true
altogether is the Lamb that passes sentence, which says, Go ye cursed into
everlasting torments, prepared for the Devil and his Angels for ever; and come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the World; for I was a hungry, and ye fed me; I was sick, and ye
visited me; I was in Prison, and ye came unto me, and you shall not lose your
The Lord takes notice of all men's actions, and will assuredly reward all men
accordingly.
Reward, that have given but a Cup of cold water to a Disciple in the Name of a
Disciple; forasmuch as ye did it unto one of the little ones which believed in
my Name, ye did it unto me: Come ye blessed of my Father, enter into rest, and
partake of my everlasting Life and Love, for ever and for ever, world without
end. And go ye cursed (you that have cast into holes and Prisons) into endless
pains, woe and misery, for ever and for ever, world without end; for you have
been so far from visiting me in my Lambs and Babes, and little ones in prisons,
that you have cast them in, and blasphemed my holy Name, my Power in them,
calling it the power of the Devil, and Delusion, (to wit) This is the
condemnation of the world, that Light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil.
my Light which they make mention of, and speaking all manner of evil against
them falsely for my Names sake, and have made lies your refuge, and under
falsehood have hid your selves among men like unto yourselves; to bring your
wicked purposes to pass against my holy Nation, and chosen people; for though
in your Envy you have falsely charged them, and by so doing, evil entreated
them; yet what have you found against them justly, to deserve such usage from
you as they have had? Yea, are they not clear and innocent? Have not you
searched them again and again, and proved them again and again, and still what
have you found? Even naught in them; but a lying heart Through the whole
Nation, how often even over and ever, have they been falsely charged, and so
much searched and nothing to (...) day can yet be proved, because they are
clear in all matters.
in your selves, and the deceit thereof has turned you aside, so that justice
has been turned backward, and Equity has fallen in the street, and Judgment
has stood afar off, and Truth it could not enter; because the best of you have
been as a bryar, and the most uprightest of you sharper then a Thorn-Hedge;
yea, your Mercies have been but Cruelties to them; for he that departed from
iniquity, you made a prey upon, and eat his flesh as a man should eat bread,
and took not pity upon the needy, but strengthened the hands of the This is the
portion of the servants of the Lord in this world, from the men thereof.
wicked, to turn him out of the way.

This has been your carriage and behavior toward me in them, O ye strong
Oaks and tall Cedars, whose tops I will lop off, yea and whose root I will
pluck up, for the evil you have acted against me in my servants in your
lifetime, when you should have feared my Name, and have met often together
with those which did meet, to wait upon me, and call upon my Name, which is
everlasting Righteousness and Truth, Life and Light, which whosoever walks
therein, walks safely, and is free from harm in a strong Tower of Defense;
but on the contrary, you have broke up their Meetings, and sent them to
Prisons, and cast them in holes, and all has been for obeying me, and walking
in my Light (your condemnation) and assembling They which feared the Lord in
the days past met often together, and a Book of remembrance was written, and
so it is now
themselves together in my fear, to wait upon me, to receive of my fullness,
Life and Love, and to walk therein; yea to their and my Enemies, as is fully
made manifest to such which have sought by the Power of Darkness, to rout out
my Name, and cause it to be forgotten among the Sons of Men, among whom I will
be glorified, by setting of it up, says the jealous God; for I will march
through you, O you briars and thorns Wicked men are unto the Lord as briars and
thorns are unto the fire, and consumed must they be if they repent not.
, and will burn you together, and set up my Name of Everlasting Righteousness;
for by it am I known to my chosen, and so must I be to the sons of men for
evermore: And this is the Name by which they shall know me, and by which they
shall call me, the Lord our Righteousness; for I will be glorified in them, and
they shall sanctify me in their hearts The true israel of God, their fear
toward God is not taught by the Precepts of man, neither do they fear him, but
the Lord, though they be accounted as sheep for the slaughter for it.
, and make me their fear and their dread (and not man) as my Flock of slaughter
has done in the day of their afflictions, when the wicked have made long
furrows on their backs, and accounted them as sheep for the slaughter, even all
the day long. Ah! shall I not visit for these things? Yea assuredly, and my hand
shall be avenged on their oppressors; for Vengeance is in my heart, and the day
of recompense is in my reins, and everlasting contempt is in my bowels, and I
am filled therewith, and I must be eased, and that on my Adversaries, my
Flock-oppressors, that have set themselves against me, to destroy my Heritage,
and scatter the sheep of my Pasture, and have endeavored to make them forget
their resting place in me, so that they should not sanctify me in their
hearts, and make me their fear and their dread; but would have them fear man,
whose breath is in his Nostrils, who I strike down in my own time, and he is
All power is in the hand of the Lord; therefore should men fear him, and take
warning from him ly his witness in them, that they sin not against him, not
afflict his people if they love their eternal peace.
no more; therefore be ye forewarned, O mortal men, and touch not my anointed
ones, and do my Prophets no harm; if you will have me to say to you at your end,
Come ye blessed, enter into your Masters joy, and sit down at my right hand,
and receive of my Love, Life and Joy for evermore, with which I satisfy every
hungry and thirsty soul in his lifetime; by which refreshments my servants, my
sons and my daughters have bore forth their Testimony unto my Life, Power and
Love, the which I have shed abroad in their hearts, and thereby have stood over
the Power of Hell and of Death, and have given their bodies, goods and lives, a
witness for me; the which I will own even for ever, and it stands upon
everlasting Record in my Book of Life, never to be blotted out; for time shall
cease, and Seasons have an end, and man whose life is there (to wit) in Times
and Seasons, shall perish therein, and his Name shall rot; but my Chosen shall
remain on Record in Life everlasting. The Mouth of the living God has spoken
it, and it shall surely be fulfilled, and the eyes of my Heritage shall see it,
and I will be glorified in and amongst them for ever and for ever; and all
sorrow and sighing shall be wiped away from off them, and nothing be heard The
life of the righteous is a life of joy, and it shall be for ever, world without
end.
but joy and gladness, melody and praises on the ten-stringed Instruments,
Hallelujahs for ever and for ever. Then will I be known in the beauty of
Holiness, to be Head of my Family, and Ruler over my Household; yea when my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, and their Enemies languish for sorrow of
heart, and pain of spirit The torment of the wicked is great and endless (...).
Men pleasing Ministers and their glory must fall before the glory of the Lord.
, and anguish of Reins, yea then will I be exalted among the holy Nation, and
set up among the Royal Priesthood; and then shall the Deceivers faces wax pale,
and the false Prophets Spirit sink into the Pit, and the Diviner be made mad,
and all r which have leaned on them [and not repented] go down with them into
the Lake: and then blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of
God for ever and ever; and this is the portion of the Heritage of God, and
their lot for ever, says the righteous God of Jacob, and the Leader of Israel
who never slumbers nor sleeps, but will perform his promise Gods promises to
the Righteous is the ground of a living hope in God, of the truth of it: I am a
witness for the Lord.
to Jacob, and his Covenant to Israel, and not fail in one tittle, says the
Lord of Host, the God of Israel, whose Promise is Yea and Amen to Ages and
Generations, yea for ever and for ever. So be it says my soul, whom the Lord
has reared up in his everlasting Love and Power, to be a witness of his Name
amongst crooked and a perverse generation, yea a seed of evildoers, and
children of falsehood, that are ready to lay and say all manner of evil against
me for righteousness sake, but falsely.

Therefore I say again, Come forth, and stand upon the Trial before my Father,
the righteous God of my Life; and you workers of Iniquity, John Golder, George
West, and all which stand by you in your evil Cause; I say, let us reason
together, and let God's Witness in your Consciences be judge between us in the
cause; for that is my friend Abraham believed in God and it was reckoned to him
for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God; and he which is
Christ's, is Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to promise, who has crucified
the flesh, with the lust and affections thereof, and so is the friend of God.
, and will plead my cause when you are on your Beds, in the Morning-Watch, in
secret it speaks, and justifies the innocent, and now let it be judge between
us in this matter (to wit) our Right and Privileges, as we are men created of
God, to live on the face of the Earth.

Are you born Christians, as men account you? And freeborn Englishmen? So am
I. Are you entitled to live in the Nation of England? So am I. Are you Freemen
of Dover Town? So am I. Have you never forfeited your Freedom? Neither have I.
Have you served the Town in Offices? So have I. Have you lived in good fashion,
even honestly in the Town? So have I. Have you kept men and maidservants? So
have I. Have you Families of W^fe and Children? So have I. Have you provided
for them in honesty by your own Labors, without defrand and guile? So have I.
Have you kept out of all men's Debts, and danger of being cast into prison
therefore? So have I. Can you say you spend not the Creation of God upon your
Lust? So can I. Can you say you are no drunkards, nor Bowlers, nor Evil-livers?
so can I. Can you say such you were, but you are washed, but you are
sanctified? so can I. Can you say you once lived in pleasure, even wantonly on
the earth, spending your days out of God's fear, and so crucifying the Just, as
says the Scripture? so can I. Can you say you have known a day (from the Lord)
of sorrow and bitterness of soul for it? so can I. Can you say you have
hearkened to the Spirit of Truth which reproves the world of sin and all
ungodliness? so can I. Can you say you have believed in the Light which makes
all things manifest that ever you have done against God? so can I. Can you say
you have known repentance from dead works, both in conversation and worship, to
serve the living God in newness of life? so can I. Can you say you have known
the reproof of Instruction to be the way of life? so can I. Can you say the
Judgments of the Lord are sweeter to you then the honey and the honeycomb;
for by them you have learned obedience unto life? so can I. Can you say you
love the Lord your God (that created you) with all your souls, with all your
minds, with all your strength, and your neighbors as your selves? so can I.
Can you say you can forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children, House and
Land, and Gold, for his Name sake that is the Light of the World? so can I. Can
you say you can take it patiently, and rejoice that you are counted worthy to
suffer, and to have your Trades spoiled, and your Families exposed to hardship
for Christ's sake? so can I. Can you give your backs to the smiter, and your
cheeks to him which plucketh off the hairs, for a good Conscience Sake? so can
I. Can you dwell in a Prison all days of your lives, rather then sin against
the God of Righteousness? so can I? Are you true Christians in Nature, and not
in Name only, which can do good against evil, and seek to overcome evil
therewith? so can I. Can you bless them that curse you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, to the fulfilling of the words of Christ, and so render
not evil for evil? so can I. Can you in such a case of Conscience commit your
cause to the righteous God? so can I. Can you as true Christians, bear your
Testimony against persecution for Conscience Sake? so can I. Can you use all
lawful means to keep such out of Prison, who for Conscience sake cannot follow
the multitude to do wickedly against God? so can I. Can you deny your selves so
far, as to visit them that are cast in for Conscience Sake? so can I. Can you
read and believe that Scripture which says, The Devil shall cast some of you
into prison (to wit, the followers of Jesus) and you shall have tribulations
ten days? so can I. Can you besieve the Scripture which says, Forasmuch as you
did it to the least of those which believe in my Name, you did it unto me? so
can I. Can you believe that the everlasting righteousness of God is his Name,
and that it is known in his Light which shines in man's heart, to give him the
light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ, according to the
Scriptures? so can I. Can you believe that they which rebel against the Light
of God nor the conscience, never know the way of true peace in the path
thereof? so can I. Can you believe that he which walks in the Light, as he is
in the Light, has fellowship with God, and one with another? so can I. Can you
believe that he which hates the Light, brings not his deeds unto it, lest it
should reprove him? so can I. Can you believe that he which loves the Light,
brings his deeds to it willingly, that he may know they are wrought in God?
so can I. Can you believe that he which devises an evil device in his heart
against his Neighbor, hates the Light which shines therein, and sins against
God, and is in danger of his curse? so can I. Can you believe that for every
idle word that man shall speak, he must give an account in the day of God's
righteous Judgments, and for every vain thought, and all his deeds done in his
body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil? so can I. Can you believe
that no Drunkard, nor Liar, nor Fornicator, nor Adulterer, nor Idolater, nor
abusers of themselves with mankind, and such like, shall never inherit the
Kingdom of God? so can I. Can you believe that man ought to deny himself of all
these things, and to obey the Spirit of Light which shows and reproves for
these things in secret, or else he is no Christian in nature, but in name
only? so can I. Can you believe that he which does not fear God, and hate
covetousness, and so in God's fear knows how to rule his own body and Family,
is not fit to rule amongst men? so can I. Can you believe that he which does not
love the Light which shines in his heart, nor yields obedience to it, so that he
may know the power of the endless life, that such a man who is a Ruler, and
hates the Light, may turn the Sword of Power upon the back of the righteous,
and so sin against God? so can I. Can you believe, that he which is not first
ruled himself by the power of God in his own heart, can never rule aright for
God? so can I Can you believe that every man which in that state takes the
staff of Justice to sway withal, has cause to take shame to himself, and give
over; and so repent? so can I. Can you believe that he which rules amongst men
should be just, and judge every one's cause without respect of persons, and
upbraid none? so can I. Can you believe that he that sets upon the seat of
Justice, and upbraideth any man, or passes Judgment with respect of persons
to any man, that such a man does greatly sin against God, whose place (as
amongst men) he sits in, and that his evil is exceeding great? so can I. Can
you believe that the Rulers of Towns and Cities have a great weight and burden
to bear, as from God, when they join with the rude people, which hate in their
heart a righteous government, and so set themselves to suppress such as love
Righteousness and its government, against the evildoers? so can I. Can you
believe that the Law was not made for the righteous man (to wit, that Law which
is holy, just and good) but for the lawless and disobedient (to wit) for
Murderers, Swearers, Drunkards, Liars, Revellers, and such like? so can I. Can
you believe that if any man suffer as a Christirn for well-doing, he has cause
to glorify God on that behalf? so can I. Can you believe that he which
believes all these things, and walks in his duty to the Lord, is a true
Christian, and a true Christian Magistrate that so rules over men, and no
otherwise? So can I All this reasoning is according to truth, and to the
witness of God in every man's Conscience, to which I do make my appeal, and let
that answer, as I know it will, in secret, when the mind is still and quiet.
.

And then if these things be by me consented to, and believed and practiced as
well in my place, then you do in your places, then come and let my friend in
your own bosoms, the living Witness of the Lord, speak if I have not as much
right both by the Law of God and Nature, to enjoy my Liberty of Body and
Conscience, as your selves; and if you do stand and abide in this Faith of a
true Christians life, then whether such as can persecute for conscience sake,
are not altogether out of a Christians life, and so enemies to the cross of
Jesus, as I and you have been in the days past; and for you which have had a
hand in it, (to wit, in persecution) to deny your selves, and to take shame to
your selves, even before the Lord, and all men, is but your duty unto the Lord,
and confess and give glory to God, and say, the time past may suffice you to
have wrought the will of the Gentiles or Heathens in persecuting the Seed of
God in the Christians, and now will I repent and abhor (as just cause there is)
my self in dust and ashes, and make it my business (so far as I can) to redeem
the time, and take off the heavy burdens, and set the oppressed free, by
undoing every heavy yoke and unrighteous Decree which my hand has been set to,
and help to lay on; for in this am I now satisfied, and that from the Lord, by
his Witness Gods witness in the conscience teaches all to deny themselves in
evil, that loves it, and is led by it, to wit, the Light.
in my own conscience, that he which does not do even to all, as he would have
another to do to him, is no Christian in nature, whatsoever he is in name,
neither can he fulfill the Law of God, which is to love our enemies, and also
our neighbors as our selves; and unto this state of life must all men come
that ever know true peace with the Lord; and he which is not here, is out of
the life which all the holy men of God were in, in all ages past, and is under
the curse, as says the Law, and denies the Faith, the power of God, as says
the Gospel of Peace, and so is a servant to the power of darkness, which rules
as Lord in the hearts of all men which hates the Light which shines therein,
to show them the desperate wickedness thereof; for all wickedness proceeds
out of the The heart of man is the very seat of all Evil, whilst he hates the
light which shines therein
evil and wickedness of the heart, the seat thereof; and the pure Light of
Jesus, the true Light which lights every man that comes into the world,
shines therein also, as says the Scripture, for to make it manifest to man's
clear understanding, unto which all men shall one day confess to the glory of
God; and that is God's everlasting love even to all men which do receive it in
the love of it, and that is the Grace of God which appears to all men, yea the
same Grace which brings salvation even to as many as believe in it; for he
which believes in the Light wherewith he is in his heart lighted, shall not
abide in the darkness which first ruled in his heart, and is made manifest by
the Light, but he shall have the light of life, yea the same Life which gives
him power over those deeds of darkness and evil which the Light makes manifest
to his clear understanding to be evil; so that he which does well, and takes
good heed to the Light in his own heart, shall have little need to ask another
what is good, and what is evil, he may know it plain enough in his own
Conscience, by the Light, as he watches to it; and this is the same Grace
which the Lord unto Paul (in his doubting estate) gave his full Testimony unto,
saying, My grace is sufficient for thee; and Paul found He which receives the
grace of God, the light which shines in his heart, in the love of it grows into
the knowledge of the Lord, which is life eternal, and to the fulfilling of the
Scriptures.
it so to be, and testifies to it, saying. By the grace of God I am what I am:
And he gives forth the same Testimony of its bringing salvation, in his Letter
to Titus, in these words, saying, The Grace of God which brings salvation,
has appeared to all men, teaching us [Mark that] to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lust, and to live soberly and godly in this present world. So that this
is a true Testimony by the Spirit of the Lord, born unto all men, that all
which loves it as it shines in the heart, from the Lord, the Fountain of Life
and Light, they are taught by it to deny all ungodliness, as Paul and the rest
of the Christians in their days were; and all which hates it, are not taught
by it, neither can they receive it whilst they hate it; for no man's heart can
be joined to the thing which in his heart he hates; but first man must feel a
springing of love to the thing he receives, and something must appear to him to
beget his love to spring: Now Light in it self is lovely All men must love the
thing they receive, aright; therefore love the Light aright, that you may know
its virtue which is life.
to the eye which can behold it; now the eye which can behold the Light of the
glorious Gospel, the God of this World has blinded, or the power of the
creatures has stole away the affections of the heart from the Creator, who is
Light, so darkness comes to rule (as God) in the heart: Now that which
sometimes even (as it were) darts into man's heart in secret, that is Light and
Love, from the God of Light and Love; and as this is taken heed unto, the power
is felt which reaches unto the seed of God, which witnesses to the truth which
the Light and Love declares in the heart; so then a springing begins to be felt
from the Seed of God toward the Light and Love, which is in it self of a
begetting nature, and then as the Light is still taken heed unto, the springing
of the love of the Seed increases; so the eye comes to be open which can see a
beauty in the Light, that it should be desired, for Light is lovely in it self;
and still as the Light is taken heed unto, the love of the Seed increases; and
as the love increases This is a true growing from one degree of Grace to
another in the Lord, who is that Spirit; and as he comes to rule in the heart,
so comes liberty.
strength and power is felt to stand over that which the Light makes manifest
to be evil; and as a measure of power is felt to deny some evil which the Light
reproves, then the power of darkness appears to make war against the Power of
the Light; and this is the true warfare between the flesh and the spirit; and
in this state most men cry out, O wretched man that I am! because sin now
appears out of measure sinful; yea that which man formerly thought to be no
sin, he now sees to be great; and so the ground of sin appears, and the whole
body of iniquity stands up, with which he is now to make war in righteousness;
and now he sees his strength, though it be but small, to stand wholly in the
light and love, which has begun the Work in the Spirit, to war against the
flesh. And this is the time to wait on the Lord He which waits on the Lord
shall not be ashamed, but shall renew his strength in the Lord dai^y.
to feel the living hope to spring; yea the exspectation of the Seed which
loves the Light, to receive power in the Light from the Fountain of Life, to
overccome the whole Body of Death; and he that has this hope, purifieth
himself as God is pure; and although he meet with many encounters with the
power of darkness, yet the hope stands fast in God, the Fountain of Life and
Light, from whom he daily expects a supply of strength to deny the evil, and
so he feels the body of sin to weaken, and this is true purifying of the heart
by faith, and these experiences come to be witnessed of God's power, and the
hope is confirmed, which makes not ashamed, but the shame of the daily cross
begins now to flee away, and here is strength in God known, now to take up the
Cross, and despise the shame; and now the Cross is known and felt to be the
power of God, which crucifies to the world, and the affections that have been
in it, and after it, they now are felt to be wounded Here the Scripture comes
to be fulfilled.
, and the hope stand fast still, as the Anchor of the soul unto God, that in
due time the body of death shall be slain; and now comes the watching to the
light (against fainting) to be known; for still the enemy will seek to persuade
the mind against overcoming Which is the doctrine of the Devil and his
Ministers.
, saying in the heart, The time is long, and the work is tedi^us, and thy
streights are many, and strength is small, and how shall thou get through? will
he in the heart be ready to say, when the watch to the light is neglected; for
then is his time to work The Lord sows the good seed of his word in the field
of the world, which is in man's heart, as says the Scripture; and whilst man
sleeps, the evil ^^^sons ta^es.
in the darkness or night whilst man neglects to watch, and so sleeps.
Therefore I say, watch ye to the light, and when temptations comes in, yea
great and many, look not at all at them, but look to the light which makes them
manifest, and watch to the power, to withstand them, and so the Seed which at
the first loved the light, will now feel its strength increase, and its power
abound over the temptation; and here is the Victory, even that which overcomes,
felt and witnessed, and now the pleasant fruits of Righteousness comes to be
brought forth, and the fruits of the obedience of the Spirit, which are joy and
peace, and now a measure of conquering comes to be witnessed through Jesus
Christ, the Light of men, and the Power of God, by whose Blood and Life Victory
is witnessed; and now all self-righteousness, and self-strength or power, is
denied, and the righteousness of Jesus Christ, the Power of God The Lord is the
strength of the righteous, its he which works all our works for us, and in us.
, alone given glory unto, and honor and everlasting thanksgiving, for ever and
evermore; for he is worthy, who is the Light that was the beginning of the
work, and is the Life and Power of God to bring to the end, and accomplish the
work over the power of Hell, and the Body of Death, and so to give entrance
into the Rest which remains for the people of God, through believing in him
that is the Light and Power of God, to save from all, which by his Light he
condemns; and now comes the peace to be felt which passes the understanding of
all which rebel against the Light which shines in the heart, to give the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, the which all
know and feel which live in the faith which gives the Victory, and keeps in the
same, and serves the Lord in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness
of the Letter, which the first Nature can make a profession of in the enmity,
as Cain the firstborn could do, yea offer outward Sacrifices, with that heart
and mind which he could murder his Brother in, which many can do now, even
profess God, and Christ, and Scripture, and yet live Enemies to the life of
God, and Christ, and Scripture, and Cross, and so in Cain's nature And must
have Cains reward, a Vagabond from God, and so marked until repentance be
witnessed.
, are seldom but angry with such as live in the faith, by which Abel offered a
more acceptable Sacrifice then Cain did. And when the power of their anger
moves in them, then are ready to murder as he he did, and even desire in their
envious hearts for a Law to do it by; being ashamed, and also afraid of their
own lives, to do it without. But let all such know, and that from the living
God, that they stand as Murderers in the account of God For he which in his
heart envies, is a man's slayer.
, and that this is true of that Spirit which cannot live but in sin, and yet
will cover it over with a profession, in the oldness of the Letter. You may
take a view of New England, which have drunk very much of the Blood of the
Faithful of late days; and in Old-England too, many thirst after it, and are in
the plain steps for it, to cast the faithful into Holes and Prisons, as they
do, boasting in the Evil and Pride of their hearts, of a Law (before it be
made) of Banishment, after much other cruelty is used, and cast into Prisons
beforehand, as if it were to be ready for it; but this is our Joy and
Confidence, that we know in whom we have believed, even in him by whom Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice; and for such as will decree unjustice and
cruelty by Law, we fear Christ Jesus our Savior, our Example, our Captain, our
Forerunner, our elder Brother, was put to death by a Law, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps, saying, if they did so to the green
tree, what will they do unto the dry? But remember what befell them; and also
whether such can escape which do it to his Members and Body, the Church, which
is, in God the Father, whereof Christ the Light is the Head. So in this be ye
all warned.
them not, but shall commit our Righteous Cause to the God of our Life; the God
of Justice, and let him plead it for us, which I am assured of, will be too
strong for his and his people Enemies in the end; and this is the Counsel he
has given us, (and we have taken it, blessed be his Name for ever) not to
fear man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, but to fear the Lord alone, and to
sanctify him in our hearts, and to make him our fear, and our dread, for
evermore: Even so be it, says the hearts of all the faithful ones, the
Heritage of God, and sheep of his Pasture, and Lambs of his Fold, and Laborers
in his Vinyard and Garden, into which he is come to ear his pleasant fruits,
and to walk amongst his Lillyes, Praises, Praises be unto him for evermore; yea
everlasting glory, be unto the ancient of days, our God, and our Father, from
everlasting to everlasting, even so Amen, says all the upright in heart, for
ever and for ever.

And thus have I cleared my Conscience in faithfulness to God and man, as the
Lord put it into my heart, and moved me to declare it in writing from the place
of my abode, for the Testimony of a good Conscience unto God, in the House of
Cruelty in Dover-Castle Common-Goal, but a place of Comfort and great Joy unto
us, in and from the Lord, whose Mercies and loving-kindnesses I hope and pray
may never fail unto me his servant.

LUKE HOWARD.

Here is also a small Paper, the which a Necessity fell upon me to write, for
the clearing of my Conscience in the Matter it speaks of.
THis is in my Heart, to clear my Conscience (that the Guilty may bear their
own Burden) unto all sober-minded-people, which have not given over themselves
to work wickedness with greediness, and cannot join themselves with such,
against the Righteous God and his peaceable People, to destroy them and their
Families, by preventing them of providing for them by their Labors, in which
they are willing to abide, in obedience to the Lord, to work and get their own
Bread, their Wives and Childrens, and to be helpful to others, which by reason
of Age, Sickness, or Lameness, are not able to help themselves; And therefore,

O you people of Dover, be ye my witnesses, that have known me from my
Childhood unto this day, that I have lived all along by the sweat of my own
face in honesty, and therein I have, through God's blessing, provided for me
and my Family, which the God of my Life has set me as a Steward over.

Therefore be ye my Witnesses in my last imprisonment in Dover for the
Testimony of a good Conscience, if I did not take all opportunities to labor
and provide for my Family, according to my duty both to God and them; but it
seems that was not punishment bad enough (to be hindered in part) in the eye
of the angry-destroying Spirit, which seeks to destroy honest men, their Wives
and Children all at once; for John Golder the Town Mayor said to us whom he
sent for to his house (the twenty second day of the seventh Month, 1661) in his
angry threatening spirit, That we should not have such imprisonment as we had
the last time; so it seems plain by him, he thought it too good, and why,
except it was because we could work a little, to provide something for our
Families, after small and low Rates, unto which it would be hard for him to
come; but truth teaches us to live so, and content to us is very precious.

Therefore this is wrote to clear my conscience in the sight of God and man,
that if I remain here under this Restraint, for ought I can see, or any man can
show me (and I have well considered of it) that my best way is to let my
Workmen cease from working; for if they continue working, and I continue in
Prison, as I am; that then my damage may be greater, then if they work not, as
men of understanding in our Trade will confess, so for my men to forbear
working, that must I choose, and that in obedience to the Lord, whose fear is
before my eyes in it, and whose presence is with me, and the Word of his
Patience runs through me, to bear all losses for his Name sake with
patience; in the feeling of which, I shall choose rather to part with all
outward things, yea life it self, then sin against the God of my Life, whose
love is great to me, unto whom I shall commit my cause, and the care of my Wife
and little ones (who are dear and near to me) whose care I know is over all
that put their trust in him, and his just hand over their oppressors, to deal
with them in due time, according as they deal with others, to the fulfilling of
the Scriptures of Truth, and so shall every man have from his just hand
according to their deeds done in the body, whether good or evil; and then a
Conscience void of offense to God and man, will be exceeding precious; in which
I rest in peace and love to my Enemies, a Prisoner for Conscience Sake in the
House of Bondage, in Dover-Castle Common-gaol, but a Free man in the Lord in
the freedom of Jesus, which is best of all, and more then all; Even so Amen.

Luke Howard.
Written the 28. of the 7th. Month, 1661.
FINIS.

