The Empress and her Daughter, with the Seven Wise Mistris^^^


THE HISTORY Of the Seven Wise Mistrisses OF ROME.

Whose Names were Halicuja, Mardula, Cicre, Penthisilia, Debora, Dejanara,
Boadicia.


Wherein, the Treachery of Evil Counsel is discovered, the Innocence of
harmless Virgins cleared, and the Wisdom of Seven Wise Women displayed, to the
wonder of their own Nation, and the Admiration of all the World.

London, Printed for M. Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey. 1663.

The Epistle To the READER.
Reader,
WHat thou find written in this small piece, or little Volume, was written
for thy benefit, whereby thou may learn to know what canting, what deceits,
and juggling Devices were commonly used in Ancient Councels, by powerful
Combinations and violent prosecutions, Honor being the subject to make them
ambitious; but the subject of my Discourse is Counsel and Wisdom: that is
rarety not novelty, attended both by Vice and Virtue, to teach thee how to
embrace the one, and to shun the other. And therefore I have labored like unto
the Be to extract and gather a little Honey into a little Hive, being the
first fruits of my Labors between Vice and Virtue, collected into an easy and
small Method for the Benefit of the Seller, the Ease of the Buyer, and the
Pleasure of the Reader. And though it is short, yet it is sweet, and of sundry
Counsels and Consultations, from the subtle Judge on the Bench of Justice, to
the harmless Lady in her Cabinet of Innoceny: and from the Emperor upon his
Throne of Prosperity, to the Beggar in his Cave of poverty; and therefore in
all matters and in all actions thou go about, here is the platform of
Sincerity, Truth, Zeal and Fidelity; whereby Treason is discovered, Truth is
advanced, Treachery is executed, Virtue is exalted, and Vice is confounded. And
for the due observation of these Precepts, and the further encouragement for
thee to read them, mind these four rules.

If thou would be Wise, here are Counsels to advise thee.

If thou would be Virtuous, here are Presidents to give thee.

If thou would be Historical, here are Rules to direct thee.

If thou would be Viceous, here are Examples before thee both Divine and
Humane.

From all which thou will learn, Vanity to contemn it; Death to expect it;
Judgment to avoid it; Hell to escape it; and Heaven to desire it.

It is collected in way of Examples and Declarations to a Moral Sense; and if
thou would ask the Author from whence he gathered all these varieties of
Delights? he does answer, from various sorts of Histories: as, Plato, Virgil,
Ovid, Dares, old Homer, and diverse others, to relate all is needless; and in
their Works have I been grovelling some certain years to find out the
remarkable Demonstrations which I have here exposed to the public view of the
world. For in Histories are to be found numerous Delights pleasing the Fancy,
expelling Melancholy, sharpning the Wit, illuminating the Understanding, and
refining the Tongue to the purity of all Oratory.

The due observation of Histories learns both Carriage and Deportment, and is
able out of the roughness of Barbarism, to raise man to the noblest height of
all Gentilities, Courtships, and Civilities, and to carry on Designs of united
Hearts at greatest distance: and whosoever maintains his Correspondency with
Learning, must of necessity with Historical Humorists; and though their Bodies
are absent, yea, and happily rotten in their graves, or consumed to dust and
ashes many hundred years ago, yet having their Works before us, we do dispute,
confer, and argue, yea, and know their hearts and approbations in matters both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, as absolute as if their persons were alive and in our
presence.

From Histories we learn by way of tradition, to know what was done a thousand
years ago, and ten thousand miles distant from the place, as well, nay and
better then thousands which lived in those very days, and where the actions
were done: Therefore History ought to be praised not contemned; for it does
encourage Youth through the pleasantness of the Story, whereby he does sooner
attain to his English Tongue, and is still more desirous to read further. For
many thousands at School, in their innocence, are more naturally given to learn
first Historical Fables, by which they sooner come to read perfect, then to
begin first in hard Books appertaining to Divine Knowledge; which made that
rare and learned Scholar Aesop, to put forth his Fables in the Schools, which
being composed with such incomparable and acute Wit, Jest and Merriment, that
each Scholar daily strove who should outvie the other in the Dispute and
Rehearsal of them.

To declare any further of what this little Piece do mention and concern, I
need not, lest I should be found faulty in the too much praise of it, or at
least too tedious to the Reader; for I my self do love matters in brief, and
not of too long feigned circumstance: Therefore I desire thee, Reader, as I
have taken the pains in Collecting it, so do thou spend thy labor in Reading
it; and I Will give thee leave to spend thy Verdict. If it be worthy of thy
approbation, and found acceptable to thy Fancy, return the Author but Thanks,
who did endeavor so willingly to serve thee in this:

And he will remain thy Friend, if deserved. Tho. Howard.
But take this Verse with thee.

TO learn to live, to read, to know,
Thou art commanded to:
To live, to learn, to know, to read,
All these things thou must do.
Then learn to read, and read to know,
If thou would learn to live:
And read to learn what I have writ,
which will not thee deceive.


THE HISTORY Of the Seven Wise Mistrisses.
SOmetime in Rome there lived a goodly and renowned Empress, named Lucresius, a
Lady of great Virtue and mavelous Wisdom: she was sol^ heiress born to the
Emperial Crown, and espoused the Son of a King, who was a rich and glorious
Prince, and honored above all others, being gracious to his Empress, loving to
his Subjects, and amiable to all; She conceived by him, and bare him a
Daughter, named Sabrina^ the most fairest in all the world. This Sabrina grew
apace most beautiful, lovely, and comely, and esteemed by all the people in that
same Land, the only Jewel throughout the whole Empire: and it happened that
about the sixth year of her age, there was one Province within the King her
Fathers Dominions, which caused many insurrections, mutinies, and rebellions to
be made against their Sovereign, which required the King to make the more haste
for suppression thereof, lest by their rude inducements they should gather
together a force too inconsiderable for his strength to reduce; thereupon he
beat up hi^ Drums, pitched up his Royal Standard, and summoned all his Lords and
Noble Barrons of his Realm to appear, and with a mighty force hasted away to
suppress the rude multitute which had rebelled; but the weather proving
unconstant and various, and he forced in such full speed, through heat and
cold, he chanced by the way to fall sick of a Fever, and lying in such a
desperate condition, without hopes of recovery, he considered more the
education of his young Daughter, then the state and condition of his whole
Empire, in reference to the innocence and weakness of her age: and therefore it
induced him to write unto his Empress this following Letter.

Dear Lady, my Journey has proved very illsuccessful to me, for by the way I
am taken sick with a most sad and grievous Fever; therefore pray make haste
unto me, that we may provide for the education of our young Daughter Sabrina,
and the State, and settlement of our Empire, for I am without hopes of
recovery, and if you make not great speed you are never like to see me alive.


The messenger posted away to the Empress, and finding her walking in the
Garden, expecting every hour news from her beloved husband, he did reverence
unto her, and delivered the Letter; the Empress broke it up, and reading what
condition her Lord was in, fell in a swound, to the astonishment of all her
Ladies: but as soon as she had recovered life, she caused her Chariot and
Horses to be made ready incontinent, and halted both night and day till she
came to her Lord the King, who she found almost dead, and she fell upon his
breast, and kissed his clay cold lips, he rising half up in his bed with
snowres of fears betwixt each face, he to her spoke thus.



O my dear Lady, it joys me that you are come, where with you I may impart all
my troubled mind I am possessed withal; since I may not escape this infirmity:
the natural love and care I bear unto you, and your young Daughter Sabrina,
makes me sue unto you thus: First, that you cause her to be brought up with the
best experienced and wisest Matron in all the Realm, whereby she might be
tutored and well educated in all Arts and Sciences, befitting a Princess so
nobly descended; and after that she has attained unto all those Virtues, I
will that you take her home to your Royal Palace, and to have recourse to your
honorable Council, whereby she may perfect her self in all State and Temporal
Affairs: And thirdly, that after your decease, she may enjoy the Empire, and
wear the Royal Diadem. And you my dear Lady, considering you are old add well
stricken in years, I will that you choose by the advice of your Honorable
Council a wise and grave Senator to assist your Royal person in all things
appertaining to the affairs of the Empire, and Guardian to your young Daughter
Sabrina, till she come to Maturity. The grieved Empress answered, My dear Lord,
all these things shall be performed, and done according to your will and
request: then kissing each other, the King turned himself upon his Pillow, and
gave up the ghost; afterward conveyed into his own Country, and his doleful
Funeral solemnized, he was honorably interred in his own Chapel.

Chap. 1.
How the Empress and her Council committed the charge of her Daughter Sabrina
to seven Wise Mistrisses, for her Education in all Arts and Sciences.
IT happened upon a time as the Empress was solitary walking in her Garden, she
bethought her sol^ of the death of her late Husband; and musing in her heart of
the words he spoke unto her at his last breath, concerning the State of his
Empire, and especially his young Daughter Sabrina, whose only delight in all
the world she was, muttered in her heart and said, Now my dear Lord and Husband
is dead and gone, there is but one in the world whom I take pleasure in, and
that is my only Daughter Sabrina, the dory stower and glory of all other
Virgins, and but she alive to inherit my Realm after me, it is good whiles she
is young that she be set unto some wise experienced Matron, who is a b^ly and
devout Virgin, to learn understanding, and to resolve Reasons when time might
require her upon the Judgment Seat. Thereupon the Empress assembled all the
Lords of her Council before her, and demanded every one his advice concerning
her young daughter Sabrina; and some of them gave their advice that the Empress
should build a Tower within her own C^stle, and cause to be put in there the
young Lady, with fide devout and wise Virgins to attend her, and two
Philosopers which then lived in Rome, to instruct her in natural Philosophy,
and other arts and scices: but the other Lords of the Council would not agree
thereto, and flood up, and said to the Empress thus; Most Sovereign Lady, this
is not expedient that she should be in such a tower, nor in such a way
instructed, for three things.

First, if she be in such a tower, your Nobles and Ladies that frequent your
Palace, by too often visiting her, will make her mind more the pleasures of
the Court, then to practice in her learning.

Secondly, Men tutors are not meet for such a Princess so incomparable in
beauty as she is, for through too much familiarity and weakness of her tender
years, great injuries may ensue, and her Princely Virtues stained.

Thirdly, for her Attendants being but five weak Ladies, and consequently not
over skilful, might for hopes of future advancement, to please the young Lady,
give her too much liberty in yielding to her fancies, and thereby destroy the
best time of her studience.

But gracious Lady, there is living not far from this City, in a fair and
stately Cloister, seven Wise Mistrisses, most cunning and expert in wisdom,
answering all Reasons and Questions, and for their famous skill and learning
excels all women in the world, the Empress hearing this accorded to their
advice, and sent her Letter of Summons unto them, upon great penalties to
appear before her Majesty: They anon came, and the Empress demanded the cause
of their coming? they answered, we shall resolve you the cause, for we have
seen it in a dream, which was this:

We saw a high and mighty tree, whose branches covered all the Realm, under
whose leaves the beasts of the earth did shelter without number; and in an
instant we sawit fall and dissolve, that nothing but the roots remained
obvious: The Empress said, show me the meaning thereof? they said, the tree
which we saw was our Sovereign Lord the King, the sproading branches signified
his power extending over all his Empire; when the tree falling, it signified
our Lord died, out of whose roots is sprung up a young Cien who shall rule the
Empire with equity and honor, whose learning and education you will commit to
our charge.

You have said right, answered the Empress, for my Lord is dead, and I have but
one only Daughter in all the world who I commit unto you to instruct and
conform in all good ways and virtues learning, so that by your skill and
wisdom she may attain to all good things appertaining to so great and noble a
Patronage, etc.



The first Mistress named Halicuja, said, great Lady, commit the education of
your Daughter to me, and I shall teach her as much wisdom Ecclesiastical and
Civil in seven years, as I and all my fellows can all days of our lives.

Then stood up the second Mistress named Mardula, and said, Great Lady, I have
tutored Emperors daughters, and instructed Queens both at home and abroad in
all arts and sciences; therefore if you please to deliver your Daughter to me,
I shall learn her as much natural Philosophy in six years as I and all my
fellows have.

The third then addressed her self, named Cicre, and said, gracious Lady, I
have been with you in strange Countries, and showed you by my Art and Skill in
the Planets what noble Prince should wed ye, and never asked any reward, only
this, if I may obtain that favor of ye, as to vouchsafe me the tuition and
instruction of your daughter, I will inform her as much in five years as all
the Mistrisses in Rome can.

The fourth Mistress drew near the Empress, who was called Penthisilia, and
said, Great Lady, I have been Governess to many Ladies, and have served you in
your infancy; therefore if you will deliver your Daughter to me, I will train
her up in virtue, and teach her as perfect in all arts and sciences in four
years as I and all my fellows be.

The fifth Mistress named Debora, then addressed her self, and said, O honored
Lady, I have by my skill and wisdom defended the City of Rome from dangerous
and great invasions, and many times called to the Senate house, where they have
profited much by my counsel: yet the greatest thing I desire in the world, is
to have your Daughter to instruct, and I will learn her to do as mavelous
things in three years as I and all my fellow Students.

Then addressed the sixth, named Dejanara, and said, Dread Lady, if you commit
the tuition of your Daughter to me, I will teach her as much as all can do in
two years. And likewise the seventh Mistress said, Glorious Empress, vouchsafe
your Daughter me, and I will learn her as much art and science in one year as
is in all the world.

Then stood up the Empress, and spoke before them all, I render unto you many
thanks; for as much as I am obliged unto you all, but if I should commit the
charge of my only Daughter to one, and not to another for her education, the
event would prove a great discord amongst you; therefore do I commit her to the
charge of you all jointly together, to teach and tutor in all learning, virtue,
and wisdom, as best fits a Princess in such Royal dignity.

The wise and learned Mistrisses hearing the noble and generous expression of
the Empress, knowing it to be but justice, with a full and general accord they
agreed together, and with great joy returned thanks to the Empress, so received
her Daughter, and led her away toward a sumptuous Palace some four miles out
of Rome; and going on their way, Baodicia said to her fellows, if we should now
instruct and teach this child publicly, and grant her recourse to the
pleasant Gardens, it would prove a hinderance to her princely study: Moreover,
the Egyptian Knights hearing of so great a beauty, might by chance, when we
little think of it, steal her away by force. Then answered Mardula, Let us put
her in the brazen tower, on which are seven locks, and let every one of us keep
a key, and we will paint upon all Instruments of Music, The seven liberal
Sciences, that when ever she delights to play upon the Music, she might there
behold her Doctrine thereon, so that it may never be out of memory.

This saying pleased all well, and being done accordingly, the Mistrisses used
their best skill and diligence in attending the young Lady, for the space of
seven years; which being expired, they appointed a day for to prove her
experience, in what she had learnt; thereupon they all consented, and for the
trial thereof proposed three questions to her.

First, what number of stars were fixed in the Firmament?

She answered, that number first created.

Secondly, when do the Planets begin to rise?

She answered, after they go down.

Thirdly, what knowledge made women wisest?

She answered, the knowledge of good and evil.

The wise Mistrisses hearing these wise and accute answers, said among
themselves, doubtless this Lady will be a famous woman, and also will excel all
her Progenitors.

Chap. 2.
How the Empress by the advice of her Lords, chose Radamentus her assistant in
the Government of the Empire, and also Guardian to her Daughter Sabrina.
NOw about this time the Princes of the Land, with all the Barons, assembled
themselves together before the Empress in full Council, for the election of a
grand Consul, expert in the Laws and customs of the Empire, for to assist the
Empress in all Temporal Affairs, according to the will of her late Husband the
King; and they chose one Radamentus, who was Uncle to the late King, a wise and
cunning Politic, and one whom the Empress reposed great confidence in; that
whatsoever he did enact or contrive she was ready to sign: to which the Nobles
of the Land gave their general consent, for the better ease of the Queen, and
their own future trouble. This Radamentus helding the Helm of the Empire in so
great sway, he grew haughty and ambitious to more honor, and thinking to
himself, that the Empress was weak and sickly, and if she did dye, 'twas
probable he may take the sole Government to himself, and rule as Lord and
Emperor.

But understanding the Empress had a young Daughter, and brought up in the
School of the seven Wise Mistrisses, and right heir to the Crown; he thought
when she came to maturity she would out-wit him, and prove more craftier then
himself: therefore from that time he daily sought her destruction. Now there
was a Law at that time, that whosoever was found in Fornication or Adultery,
were to dye by that Law without mercy; so upon a day, as the Empress and
Radamentus were both walking in the Garden, Radamentus seemed to be very
melancholy, and would not speak: the Empress seeing him so heavy, marvelled
greatly, and asked him the cause of his sadness: who answered, Now the Realm is
in full peace and quietness, there is but one thing I request of you; the
Empress said, Ask what you will, it shall be granted to the one half of my
Prerogative.

Then said the Consul, you have but one only Daughter in the world, and
heiress to the Empire, and she you cause to be detained between stone walls,
wherein she spends the flower of her years only in thoughts and
contemplations, that what she (as a Princess) do there imagine within, the
variest wretch in the world do see it actually abroad; therefore sand for her
to Court, that you may have consolation of her, and she may see the practice
thereof, and have recourse to the Council. Then answexed the Empress, I like
your saying, for it is seven years since I have seen her; thereupon she wrote
Letters signed with her privy Signet and Messengers to the seven Wise
Mistrisses, for to hasten away to the Court of Rome again such a day, and bring
Sabrina the young Princess with them.

Chap. 3.
How the seven Wise Mistrisses, after sight of the Empress Letters, by their
powerful skill went to search the Planets; by which they understood the Design
of Radamentus.
WHen the Mistrisses had received the Empress Letter, and understood the
Contents thereof, they fell to their books, and fathomed their skill, directing
their Figures, and marking the Planets, if the cause of their going might be
fortunate or no. And they found a great contageon among the signs from whence
they did predict that when they presented the young Lady, if she should answer
any more words then one, her enemies would have power over her to betray her to
the shamefullest death that may be; so they were very heavy, and mourned all
the day lo^^: about the evening tide, came down the young Lady Sabrina, to
delight her self upon the Music, and seeing all the seven Mistrisses very s^d,
she demanded the cause of their grief; who answere^^, O Lady, this m^rning we
have received Letters from the Empress, that we forthwith to ^aste to Court,
and bring you along with us, and we have seen a Star that your journey will
prove fatal if you speak any more words then one, which is Justice, that you
shall say and no more for the space of seven days; and this is the thing which
grieves us, that since we have nourished you for so many years, should now at
the last be reduced to such a hazard.

Then said the young Lady, being full of virtuous learning, I have viewed the
Firmament my self, and marked the motions of the lesser Stars, and found your
saying true; but if you will hear my counsel, and receive my advice, without
doubt my virtue shall overtop their vice, and my cunning wisdom shall exceed
their crafty treachery: Then said the Mistrisses, speak on your doctrine, we
will hearken to it; and she said, I shall be accused of an evil person, and
unjustly condemned: but if every of you seven can speak to my mother the
Empress, each one her day for seven days together in my behalf, I shall escape
my life: the Mistrisses hearing this, they all accorded in a joyful harmony,
and said among themselves, what joy is come to us, surely she will be an
Empress of great fame and wisdom: so they clothed her (...) cloth of gold and
rich ornaments, and provided a Chariot of Azure color, drawn by four white
Steeds, who gently pac'c the ground like as they trod by some directed steps in
the air; so with a train of pure Virgins she was accompanied to the Empress.

Chap. 4.
How the Empress hearing her Daughter was coming on the way, rode in great
triumph with all her Princes and Barons to meet her.
WHen the Empress heard that the seven wise Mistrisses of Rome were coming with
her young Daughter Sabrina, she caused all her Chariots to be made ready, and
with her Heralds, Trophies, and Banners, accompanied with all her Nobles, rode
on the way to meet them: but said the Mistrisses to Sabrina, it were good for
us to depart and go into the City some other way, and diligently watch the
Planets in their several motions, for the safeguard of your life, and the
preservation of us; to this the young Lady willingly condescended, but remember
me in my necessity, she said: so they departed, and the young Lady rode on her
way: but when the Empress saw her, she took her in her arms and kissed her,
saying, O my dear Daughter, the only delight I have in the world, whom God
does preserve for future blessings, how is it with you? now I hope you will be
to me the flower of my external happiness, being conformed in all virtues
learning, the fitter to sit upon my Judgment Seat after me: the young Lady
bowed and did reverence unto the Empress, but spoke not a word. When the
Empress saw this, for blushed with very fear, some evil had befallen her, that
she spak^ (...); and yet she thought in her self, that being out of the
Country so many years, learning strange Arts she might forget her natural
language, and a thousand other things came in her mind: And anon she asked her
again, what she had learnt so many years with the wise Mistrisses of Rome, she
answered, Justice, so bowed her self, and spoke not one word more. Then the
Empress acquainted her Lords how and in what condidition her daughter was in,
and said, for the evil the Mistrisses had wrought with her, they should dye the
most shameful death that could be thought of; and when she came to the Palace,
she took her by the hand and led her into the great Hall, out of thence into
the Garden, and placed her by her in the Arbor upon her own seat, and said, My
good Daughter, declare unto me the reason by some certain sign why you will not
speak, or else here is a pen and paper, write to me your mind; she took the
pen in her hand and wrote these lines.

Through Learning which does me adorn,
I very plainly see,
The Star where under I was born
proves fatal now to me:
And I in bed have lately dreamed,
what after will ensue;
That I three times shall be condemned
in Judgment Seat by you.
When the Empress saw these lines, she was astonished and wondered greatly, for
she knew not the meaning thereof, how that she should give Judgment three
times on her own Daughter, she wrung her hands, and mourned greatly; then came
Radamentus the great Consul, and said unto the Empress, is this your Daughter
which has been brought up with the seven wise Mistrisses of Rome? the Empress
answered, this is my Daughter and only Heir to the Empire, but she now has no
expression with her tongue: Radamentus stood still and beheld her, and saw her
countenance so pleasant, and of such incomparable beauty, that the like was not
in all the world, he burned inwardly with lust, and deceitfully said to the
Empress, deliver her to me, and by often persuasion without doubt I Will make her
declare to me her whole studience; this did he not only for love and honor he
bore to her, but rather to satisfy his insatiate lustful appetite, and after
conspire her destruction, which was the main thing ho aimed at, but God infused
in the heart of the Princess not to go with him.

Chap. 5.
How Radamentus watched his opportunity how he might surprise the Princess in
the Garden, and how he conspired to take away her life.
RAdamentus after this, being in his chamber window, espied the Princess going
into the Garden to walk under the Sickamore-trees, without any body with her,
and it happened that she left the key in the door on the inside and forgot to
shut it.

The old Consul came down and entered the Garden, locking the door, and taking
the key out, he came to the Lady upon a sudden as she was contemplating under
the tree; who at the presence of Radamentus, she began to blush, that there
appeared in her face such a Crimson dye, that the malice of Radamentus was
reduced into a venial love: and thus he began to court her.

Gentle Lady, give me leave to tell ye, that the first time I saw ye, there was
a fire kindled within my heart, and now your beauty begets another, which
nothing can alay, except you vouchsafe me the favor to let me sl^^p with you
upon this bed of Roses, and repose our selves in the bosom of love: the Royal
Princess turned about, and with a scornful gesture gave a repulse to his
l^scivious demand, which caused his countenance to fall, and his fancy turned
to fury; therefore he ran out of the Garden, and locked the door, and threw the
key in again, and cried out, that he saw the Princess with a man under a
f^g-tree, committing the foul si^ of Fornication, as a breach of the Law, the
shame of her Parents, and the destruction of her own soul. The Empress hearing
this, was st^^ck with horror and amazement, to think that her only daughter
and heir to the Empire should prove so unfor^unate: First, instead of Arts and
Sciences, she should have been perfected with, she was delivered unto me
speechless; where I thought she was adorned with virtues, she is besotted with
vice; I would the day of her birth had been the day of her burial: so the
Empress believed all that the wicked Consul had reported, and the Nobles that
were present asked where he saw her, and he said, under a Sickamore-tree, but
said, the man when he perceived me, ran away, then the Nobles hasted into the
Garden, and found the Princess walking by her self, they asked her what man had
been with her there: she answered nothing. Then the Empress seeing it apparent
that she was in the Garden as Radamentus reported, believed all as was said;
therefore in rage and choler she commanded her to be led away and burnt at a
stake: but the Ladies which came with the Princess and other of the Nobility,
addressed themselves to the Empress, and said, Gracious Lady, she is your only
Daughter, and all you have in the world, it is good, that she have a little
respite, and you better consider of the master, it may chance to prove but a
mistake of the Consul; for if you hastily thus put her to death, it will accrue
to your dishonor, and we shall gain reproach of all Nations; therefore let a
day be appointed, and she appear in judgment, if she deserve death to be found
by twelve men, and fairly condemned by the Law. At this the Empress bethought
her self, being something reconciled of her rashness, and committed her to safe
prison.

Chap. 6.
How Radamentus complained against the young Princess, and how he accused her
of Fornication, being death by the Law.
RAdamentus finding his accusation took effect, no time was omitted for the
prosecution thereof, for his insatiable spirit would not be satisfied till life
and all was gone; therefore he came again to the Empress as a man in great
sorrow and pain: and the Empress said, My grave Lord and Counselor, what
aileth you to be so heavy? O Lady, said Radamentus, how should I otherwise
choose, thinking what stain and defamation will rely upon this our Empire,
because of your graceless Daughter, through her lascivious actions within your
Court, as a common Whore; and if you let her live any longer in this foul sin,
you will be counted no less your self, and rendered odious over all the world,
for the rumor of people will be upon you, saying, what need we fear to break
the Law, since the lawmakers do violate it, the Daughter of the Empress is
both a Whore and a Strumpet; and thus through her means we shall have vice
supported, and virtue oppressed: for what need they care, since they have such
evil precedents. Then said the Empress, to prevent all these evils, to morrow I
shall sit in Judgment, and she shall dye by the Law. Then said Radamentus, see
it be so done, lest it happen to you as it did to a Lady in Capadocia, of whom
an example is mentioned. Relate the example, said the Empress, I shall
incontinent, said Radamentus.

The first Example of Radamentus.
In Capadocia was a Lady who kept a sumptuous Garden, in which was one of the
vertuousest Wells in the world, that whosoever should be bit with any venomous
beast; wash but in that water, they were immediately cured.

It happened on a day as the Lady was walking in her Garden a gathering of
flowers, she espied in a corner of the Garden in the side of a little Rock, a
small prill of water running fair and cristal, abundant more clear then the
virtuous well was, which caused her to imagine, that if the Rock were carved,
there would issue a water more excellent then the well-water, and said unto the
Gardener, get me a workman that he may hew this Rock, whereby I may have a
precious Fountain here; and I give you charge over it, and to see it done. The
Gardener answered, your will shall be fulfilled. But another time the Lady came
into the Garden, and viewed the little Spring; but it appeared not so strong in
running as she thought it would: and she said, wherefore runs it not better?
her man said, the original spring was deep in the earth, and had two ways, the
one to the Weil, and the other to the Rock; but that to the Well is greater,
and by its strength draws more water to the well; and therefore its stream is
so little. Then said the Lady, destroy the well then, for questionless this
spring will prove the better water; so the Gardener damned up the virtuous
water, that there was no more seen. And another day the Lady came again into
the Garden to see her young Spring, and taste the water, and it proved very sad
and bitter; and having its course through a tin mine, whatsoever sick person
did bathe in it, it would putrify their sore, and augment their pain; so that
all people did curse the Counselors that did advise the Lady to destroy the
virtuous well. Then said Radamentus, understand you great Lady what I have
said? yes, right well said the Empress, then said he, I will show you the
meaning thereof.

The Declaration of the Example.
The virtuous Well, great Lady, be tokeneth your self, and how that with your
Virtuous and wise Judgments you govern the people with equity, that whosoever
complains to you should have Justice and their sick cases mitigated; and the
young Spring so fair and cristal, is your graceless luxurious Daughter, who
will cause your Royal name to be blasted, and your virtuous Government
despised, whose actions are bitter, running through a tin mine, that is, ba^e
and inferior carrages, not in Royalty of a Princely parentage; so that quickly
she will break your heart, and reign after you, then all people will curse the
Counselors that advised you to let her live: therefore great Lady I counsel
you while it is time, to cut her off and destroy her, lest the curse of the
Empire follow you. Then said the Empress, all that shall not happen, for to
morrow I shall sit in Judgment, and she shall dye without fail. When the day
was come, the Empress sat in Judgment, and commanded her Officers to lead her
away to be burnt at a stake, and as we was led through the City in a long smock
of Lawn and a branch of Rosemary in her hand, and the Trumpets sounding her
doleful Funeral, all the people ran out and wept, crying, alas, alas, the only
Daughter of the Empress is leading to death. Then came Debora the first Mistress
passing by, as the young Lady saw her, she bowed der head, as if she said,
remember me when you come before my Mother; and when she came to the Empress,
and did reverence, the Empress said unto her with a storn countenance, Thou
ungrateful and vile woman, how have thou tutozed my child's, I delivered her to
thee well and hopeful, and now she is become the viceousest creature that ever
a woman bare, surely thou shall dye as strange a death as may be thought on.
Then said the Mistress, gracious Lady, the cause why she speaks not, the
divine powers know, and without cause it is not; and as for the sin of
Fornication, we all can testify, that for the space of these seven years, we
never saw the least motion, neither in thought, word, nor deed; therefore
gracious Lady, if you do put her to death, only for the accusation of
Radamentus, it will happen to you as it did unto the Queen of Syra, who
poisoned her husband through the perswaston of one wicked person. Then said the
Empress show me that example? Nay, said the Mistress, except you send for your
Daughter back, otherwise, she may be dead before I make an end, then will it be
in vain: upon which words the Empress sent for her Daughter again, and
committed her to prison; then the Mistress began as follows.

The Example of the first Mistress.
In Syra lived a Queen of great renown, and of such excellent beauty, that a
fairer woman was not in all the world, for which many Kings and Princes of
Noble Blood came a suiting to her, each man confident she should be his: This
Queen delighted much in seeing Iusts and Turneys; therefore it was a day
appointed, and they all assembled together to show their valor before the
Queen; amongst whom was Crassus a most valiant Prince, and of such incomparable
features and beauty, that his like was not among men. Upon this Prince the
Queen fixed her eye all that part of the day; in whose sight he did such worthy
acts, that deserved perpetual memory: and to be brief, he had the day of all
the Kings, Princes, and Barons that were there; whereby he came off the Field
with Trumpets souning, and victorious Trophies bore before him. On the morrow
after the Queen sent for him, and when be came he kneeled before her to have
kissed her hand, but she refused, and in a comely deportment tendered her lips:
The Prince being somewhat bashful, the Queen gave him farther encouragement, so
that by little and little they grew in a wonderful familiarity; and soon after
the Queen took him for her Husband, and made him joint King of Syra with her.
He was a wise and gracious Prince, and beloved of all his Subjects, all people
joyed at his presence, the whole land sorrowed in his absence; never no Queen
loved King better, nor never was Queen more beloved of a King: and it came to
pass afterward, that the King of the Parthians lay very sick, whose Son this
King was, and he received a Letter from his Father to make haste unto him, that
after his death he should take possession of the Realm; and after a while he
was gone, an evil Counselor in his Court being in love with the Queen,
intercepted all the Kings Letters that passed between him and his Queen, and
informed the Queen he had married another Lady in his own Country; which
raised such jealousis in the Queen, that she tore the ornaments of her head,
wringing her hands, saying, O my dear Lord, what evil have I done, what word
have I mispla^^, wherein have I offended you, that another should reap the
Consolation of your Love! The King in the mean time wondering be could never
receive any Letter from the Queen, lamented, saying, O my Dear, wherein have I
offended I can never hear how you do, nor how the affairs of our Kingdom
stands! All this while the wicked Counselor intercepted their Letters on
both sides to work the destruction of the King; and at last he indented a
strong Person, and carried the same to the Queen, and told her it was of such a
Virtue, that if the would cause a King to be made hollow, and put a little of
this virtue in it, and sond it to the King as a taken; and as often as ever the
King old lo^^ upon it, ^would cause him to forsake all other women and haste
home unto her: so the Queen believed his wicked counsel, and was very glad, and
without the advice of any other she caused a King to be made as he had said,
and put therein this poison, and sent it away to her Husband: When the
messenger came before him, he did him reverence, and presented the King to him;
the harmless King joyfully put it on, saying, ^was the sweetest present he ever
received: soon after his finger began to swell, and he sent for his Physicians,
who said his finger was venomed with the strongest poison in the world, and
said he must cut it off, else 'twould venom his whole body: Then said the King
cut it off, which accordingly was done; then his arm began to swell, and in
like manner that was cut off to preserve his life: Then the good King groaned
out this complaint, O thou vile woman, why have thou done this to him who thou
were as dear to as his own soul, thou have attempted that by poison which the
stoutest Champion durst not do by arms; I that has won thee the greatest glory
that ever came to Syra, have thou now destroyed with inferior poison, for
which thou will gain reproach of all Nations, and be reviled of all women, for
returning me malicious poison for pure in flamed love; but all as I can say is,
ingratitude is the grandest insolency in the world, O woman why have thou done
this? Thereupon he sunk down in his Chair, and gave up the ghost. The messenger
hasted home, and told the Queen what had happened by the King, and that all the
Counselor had fold her of the King was false: then the Queen fell a weeping
and wringing her hands, saying, O what hade I done, what have I done? I have by
the advice of an evil Counselor slain my dear Husband the King! O cursed
Traitor, would to God I had ne^^e received thy wicked counsel; but since I
embraced thy hellish advice, with this hand that first handled the cursed King
I will be revenged on my self, and so took a knife and thrust it into her
breast, and so ended her life. Then said the Mistress to the Empress, understand
you what I have said? Yes, right well said the Empress, you have showed me a
good example; without doubt this day my Daughter shall not dye: Then said the
Mistress, if you do so, you will do wisely, and I thank you for sparing your
Daughters life this day for my sake.

The second Complaint of Radamentus.
When Radamentus understood the Princess had obtained Pardon through the means
of Hallicuja the wise Mistress, he retired to his Chamber, and seemed to grieve
and lament extraordinary; but alas it was nothing but falsehood and deceit; so
that he refused to come to Council: whereat the Empress was much troubled, and
thereupon sent for him and demanded the cause of his grief, and the reason
wherefore he did not attend to Council? who answered, Great Lady, what greater
pain can there be to a man, then when he is reviled of every vulgar tongue
undeservedly; for all people know I am you assistant in the Empire, and think I
am at the helm of Justice, where I do rather more support wickedness then
equity, and maintain vice where I should tertue; since of late there has been
whoredom and debauchery committed in the very Court, and the Empress own
Daughter did it: what scandal is this that I shall lie under, beside your Royal
Person will be defamed, and the honor of your Kingdom the object of the world;
for you abstain Justice from being executed upon that vile wretch your cursed
Daughter, so that she lives to the ruin of the Empire: therefore it shall
happen to you as it did to the Queen of Pirus and her daughter. The Empress
said, I pray you show me that Example: why, said Radamentus, let me show you
never so many, it avails not; nevertheless I will show you this, which is as
follows.

The second Example of Radamentus.
IN Pirus reigned a virtuous Queen, her Husband being dead, she had one only
Daughter, whom she tendered above her life; this Daughter grew apace crafty and
cunning, and often conversed with Sorcerers, to whom she complained there was
but one Nobleman which hindered her from hading her will and liberty: said the
Sorcerer, I Will teach you a way to betray his life, and then you may do well
enough with your mother. Pray show me that way said she, that I will said the
Sorcerer, that is this: When he is walking in the Garden, go you to him, and if
he sit down, sit you by him, 'twill be a provocation to move his spirit, and as
he does preceed, then give him encouragement; if he refuse you, cry out, he has
ravished you: So this impudent wretch sat by this Nobleman, and smiled upon him
and smute him with the palm of her hand upon the cheek, and said, come let us
solace our selves in the bosom of love until the dark Evening: Then said the
Lord, Great Lady, excuse me, for I am not furnished with so much considence as
to deflower the Pearls of our Land. At which words this Lady tore her locks
down about her shoulders, and cried out, alas, alas, what shall I do! The Queen
her Mother being in the Window heard the cry, and looking out, espied her
Daughter in the Garden crying and wringing her hands; she sent down her Lords
to know the matter; and she said, this man, meaning the harmless Lord, has
constrained me by force under yonder tree, and he has dest wr^d me of my
Virginity: The Queen hearing this said, surely he shall dye: Then said the
Lords, it is good that you hear him before you put him to death: Nay, said the
Queen, I have heard my daughter, what (...) an^ further witness, I will believe
her testimony above all the worlds; and thereupon commanded the Lord to be led
away and put to death, which accordingly was done. This Lord was the uprightest
man and greatest Counselor the Queen had; from this time forth she always
sought the destruction of her mother: and thus she began, Great Princess and
Mother, through my obedience and diligent care I bear to you, I would wish you
to speak not unto every mean subject when they come for justice, but that I
between you and them may deliver their message, for too much familiarity will
breed contempt; therefore the Queen reposing so much confidence in her
daughter, thought all for good whatsoever she did do; and thereupon set forth a
Proclamation, that all persons whatsoever having business at the Court, should
address themselves to her Daughter; who always sitting in an outward Chamber,
as people came to her, she seemed very mild, amiable and courteous, so through
her cunning and dissimulation all people took affections to her, and she would
say to them, my mother is very rash being ancient; but if you will take me for
your Sovereign, I Will do you justice according to the due administration of the
law: at which words they were all very joyful, and promised faithfully to
perform it, but said she, raise your army, stand in your own defense, and plead
your Subsidies and heavy burdens ate too weighty for you to bear; this do till
you hear from me: so the rude multitude did as this Imp had advised them. Then
away she went to her mother, and acqu^inted her there was a factious people had
rebelled, and it were good to prevent them in time least they should grow too
populous; so the Queen gave her the supreme Authority, in granting Commissions
to raise an Army; so when she had got the Seal, she told her mother she must
have a great quantity of Gold to pay them: Then the Queen delivered two hundred
thousand marks of Gold, and having got this money, she hasted with it all away
to her factious Crew; and there paid then: all with her mothers own Treasure,
and gave them Commissions under her own Seal, that all the rest of the Subjects
were in a maze; for seeing their Commissions under the Queens Seal all lay
still, and not one moved for the Queen, thinking it had been no Rebellion: At
last this new Army advanced toward the Court, and being come, this wicked
Wretch the Queens Daughter, hasted to her mother, and told her, that she by her
fair speeches had assuaged the fury of the people, and brought them there to
beg their pardon, which she desired the Queen to grant them; which being
always betrayed through her subtle words, condescended; and as she was going
out to sign their Pardons, and conducted by her daughter, she passed over a
boarded Alloy, where underneath was a Room and Cauldron of boiling Oil, that
this wicked Daughter had provided, with a board whereon her mother was to tread;
tilting up, the Queen sell in, and thereby was destroyed: And after was this
wicked Wretch proclaimed Queen, that through lascivious living and cruel
Tyranny all Nations spighted her, and her own subjects hated her, that as she
was coming through the City of Conbro, a Butchers man dashed out her brains with
his Cleaver: The end of a Tyrant.

And Radamentus said to the Empress, understand ye what I have said? and the
Emprese said right well, you have showed me a good Ex^mple; therefore to
prevent these Evils that they shall not happen to me, this day my Daughter
shall dye: And the second time she sat in Indgement, and commanded bar
Daughter to be led away to the place of Execution; and as she was going, the
second Mistries addressed her self to the Empress, doing her reverence, and
said, O great Lady, if you will thus slay your daughter for the words of
Radamentus, if shall happen worse to you then it did to the Lady of Barbra and
her Lion. The Empress said good Mistress show me that Example, O great Lady, I
shall not do it, except you call your Daughter back again until it be told, and
if it does not turn your mind, your will be fulfilled afterward.

The Example of the second Mistress.
UPon a time there was a Lady and her Husband which designed a long Voyage by
Sea, but the wind and weather proving contrary, they were driven to great
distress, and constrained to lie a tedious while at sea, insomuch that all
their provision was spent; then they continued a whole fortnight without any
kind of food, and when nature could not subsist no longer, they threw dice for
their lives who should be killed first, to make meat for his Fellows, so they
eat one another in order as they began, until all were eat; so this poor Lady
and her Husband with force of nature and pure love hindered from killing each
other: Then they resolved to dye together, and so sowed themselves in one
Carpet, and laid them down upon the Deck, saying, the great God of heaven and
earth holy them, and by that time they were full'd esleep by the rocking of the
waves, there chanced to come upon the Deck a great Griffin, that is hall an
Eagle, and half a Lion, so that it is neither bird nor beast, but a Creature as
strong as a Horse, and took up the Carpet in her claws with the Lady and her
Husband as a prey for her young ones, and carried them in to a strange Island,
inhabited with Lions, Bears, Wolves, and such like Beasts: When the Griffin had
brought them into his nest, he and his young began to peck at the Carpet, with
which they awaked the Lady and her Husband, who being a stout Hero opened the
Carpet, and espied Land; and having his sword with him, came out and fought a
desperate fight with the Griffin, and slaw him and all his young. How to get
off this Island they did not know, but in wandering up and down the man dyed,
and then the poor Lady was alone, and comforted by none but God above; so
wandering about the Wilderness she chanced to meet a mighty he Lion, whose
roaring seemed to her like claps of thunder: then when she saw him she fell to
the ground, saying, O greet Ichovah, who holds the power of all creatures in
thy hands, have mercy upon me. So she drew near unto him, and discovered that
he halted, and the Lion groaned toward her, as thought to have some help: so
she ventered to him, and took up his foot, and therein was a great thorn; and
the Lion patiently holding up his foot, she drew it out; which having done, the
Lion fawned upon her, and lickt her, and in his nature showed as great love and
kindness to her as ever humans nature could: insomuch that he led her to his
Den, where she continued for a long season, feeding upon nothing but what preys
the Lion had brought her, and which may soever she walked, the Lion would
attend upon her, and preserve her from all other savage Beasts. At last as she
was mourning to her self, deploring her condition in living in such obscurity
in a foreign Country, whose daily companion was but a savage Beast, her mind
yening after her own habitation, she thus complained, O how has fortune
frowned on me, that I am driven out from among all humane knowledge, and am
glad to take my living with the Beast of the Field. As she thus complained to
her self, the Devil chanced to appear unto her, and demanded the cause of her
complaint, who told him all as you have heard. Then said be to her, What will thou give and I Will provide a Ship shall carry thee home to thy own Country? she
answered, half her Estate. Nay, said the Devil, if thou will give me thy soul
at the term of twelve years, I Will set thee in thy own Country, and then shall
live and flourish so long? God forbid, said the Lady, I Will first end my
wretched life in this solitary Island. Why then, said the Devil, I Will make this
bargain with ye, that if you can abstain from sleeping all the time of our
Voyage, which shall be but three days, I Will have nothing to do with your soul,
if you sleep I Will hade it, as I have said: and upon this bargain the Lady
ventered, provided she might have her Lion with her; so 'twas concluded, and a
brave ship came and took in the Lady and her Lion: when she lay down the Lion
lay by her, and if she slumbered, the Lion trould touch her with his paw; by
which means he kept her awake all the Voyage, until she landed in her own
Country; and being come to her Fathers house, she knocked at the Gate; then
the Porter coming with all speed, opened the Gate, and saw it was a Beggar,
frowningly he shut it again, saying, Here Is nothing for you: then she bounced
at the Gate again, and asked the Porter if such a Knight lived there, meantng
her Father, and he said, yes; then said she, pray deliver this piece of King
unto him. Now this King was it she brake betwixt her Father and she, at her
departure out of the Land: then the Porter delivered the King to his Master,
saying, The Beggar woman at the Gate willed me to deliver this piece of King
unto you. When the Knight saw the King he fell down in a swound, but when he
was revived be said, call her in, for she is my only Daughter, whom I thought
was dead. Then said the Porter, I dare not call her in, for there is a mighty
he-Lion with her, though it be, said the Knight, call her in, then said the
Porter, you are to come in; but leave your Lion out: no, said the Lady, my Lion
walks where I go, and where he is not, there will I not be; and when she came
to her father, she fell down on her knees and wept: her father took her up in
his arms and kissed her, weeping as fast, and after he clothed her in Purple, and
placed her by him in a chair, and demanded the relation of her Travels, who
declared unto him all that happened, and how the Lion had saved her life, and
was the greatest comfort she had in the Wilderness. It chanced afterward that
as the Knight was going into his Wood to view his young Horses, he met with a
wild Boar, with whom he fell in combat with. The Lion loved the old Knight,
and by accident walking under the pale side, he sented the Boar, and as the
Lion ran toward the place where the Boar was, the Steward espied him, and he
ran into the Palace, and cried out, the Lion is running after my Master to
destroy him. Then the Lady sent after him ten of her servants who met the Lion
with his mouth all bloody, and they ran back and told the Lady the Lion had
destroyad her aged Father. Then said the Lady, O woe is me that ever I was
born, that have brought a Lion from far to destroy my own Father; therefore she
commanded her servants to slay the Lion, which no sooner was done but her
Father come in, and said, O I have met with a wild Boar, with whom I sought,
and there came in the Lion to my aid, and slew the Boar, so saved my life, else
I had dyed by the Boar. When the Lady heard this, O how she wept and wrung her
hands, saying, For the words of a wicked Steward, I have slain my good Lion,
who have saved both my life and my Fathers, cursed be the time I was advised by
him.

Then said the Mistress, understand you what I have said? yes, right well, said
the Empress, you have showed me a good example of a bad advise, which caused
the Lady to slay so good a Lion, surely I Will beware such bad advice, my
Daughter shall not dye this day. The Mistress said, if you do so you will do
well, therefore I commit you to God, and stand obliged to your grace for saving
your-Daughter this day for my sake.

The third Complaint of Radamentus.
WHen Radamentus perceived the young Princess was not dead, he kept his
Chamber, and tore his hair, grieving very much, and saying, the State of the
Empire lies groaning under the scandal of all Nations, and reputed as the very
froth and scum of baseness; and as he was thus complaining, his attendants
hearing him, went and imparted it to the Empress, and she went to him and asked
the cause of his lamentation, who answered, O great Lady, how can I other wise
choose, knowing so great a crime that lies upon the Empire, through the deboist
and lascivious actions of your graceless Daughter, and yet cannot have Justice
executed upon her, whereby we may wash away the stain that rests upon your
honor and my reputation, the world knowing I am your assistant in the
Government; and seeing there is no more respect and observing of the Laws then
there is, I have just cause to leave your Realm, and suffer you to plunge your
self in this deluge of ignorance, but that the love I bear to you, and your
good Subjects, does prohibit me from it; and you know great Lady, if I should
depart and leave you to your self through your weakness in believing old
fabulous stories, it would fend to your utter ruin and destruction. Then said
the Empress, Most grave Lord and Counselor, pass by your sorrow and
lamentation at this time, and I shall never fail you of your request hereafter,
but be advised by you: Then said Radamentus, pray God you may, else I fear it
will happen to you as it did to the Lady and her Cat in the Kingdom of Utergo,
who tendered her Cat as she did her own life, till at last the Cat cut her
Ladies throat. I pray (...), said the Empress, show me that Example, that I
shall gladly do, said Radamentus, for the furtherance of your knowledge, and it
is this as follows.

The third Example of Radamentus.
IN the Kingdom of Utergo there lived a Lady who had but one only Daughter,
whom she loved above her own eyes, and hearing there was a very learned woman,
and one of great repute, lived not far from her own Court, to whom she put her
Daughter to be brought up, and instructed in all Arts and learning, and it
proved that this learned woman was very skilful indeed, for she was the
greatest Magician in all that Land, though unknown to the Lady, so that instead
of teaching the child natural Philosophy, she taught her all the whole art of
Necromancy, and at the end of seven years she learnt her how to transform her
self into the likeness of a Cat; and upon a time the Lady sent for this learned
woman to come to her, and bring her Daughter with her, for to see how she had
improved her self in learning; and being come, the Lady asked her Daughter,
three questions: First, what was most prone to nature when it was satizfied?
she answered, ease, for when the belly is full, the bones destreth rest.
Secondly, how far it was to the bottom of the Sea: she answered, a stones
throw. Thirdly, she ^sked her how long the Sun and Moon were going round the
world? she answered, sower and twenty hours: then said the Lady, you have
answered me well, doubtless thou will prove a cunning woman: then she walked in
her Parlour, and showed the Mistress what a delicate and fine Cat she had, and
the Mistress said of a truth, it is a brave Cat; but after I return home I will
present you with the finest Cat that ever was seen, for she will wait at the
Table, and can interpret Riddles, resolving Answers and Questions, so that
there is not the like of her in all the world, Then said the Lady, pray ye let
me have that Cat? that I shall not do, said she, except you suffer your
Daughter to be with me one seven years more, then shall I present you with the
Cat; the Lady very willingly gave consent thereto, rendering great thanks: so
the learned woman took leave, and away departed with her young Disciple, and
when she came home, she told her, that if she would act her part, she would
teach her how she might enjoy all the pleasure the world did afford, and none
was more ready to learn then she was. Then said the Magician, you must
transform your self to the likeness of a Cat, and I will present you to your
Mother, to which they both accorded: then the Magician took her, and hasted
away to the Lady, and presented her the Cat, being of four distinct colors,
black, red, green, and yellow: Then said the Lady, this is the finest Cat that
ever I saw, and took it into her lap, feeding it with white bread and milk, and
would never sit down to meat but her Cat must be at her elbow; so the Magician
took her leave again, and the Lady gave her great thanks, so departed: soon
after this, the Cat began to play her pranks, for there was a maid living in
the house, whose carriage was civil, and conversation honest, and a faithful
servant all days of her life: this Cat had power to open any lock, and shut it
again, so she would open the Ladies Cabinet, and take out money, and lay it in
the way where the maid should find it, some time in the Garden, some time in
the Street, and the Lady still missing her money, and having no suspicion on
the Maid in the least, wondered what should become of it; at last she lost her
Bracelet out of her Closet, which the Cat had took and laid a mile from the
house where the Maid should come along; so the Maid when she found it, little
thought of her Ladies Bracelet, which oftentimes had been inquired for, she put
it up in her Trunck; and after upon a time, as the Maid was taking out clothes,
her Lady stood by her, and it chanced that the Bracelet fell beside the Trunck,
and the Cat snapt it up in her paws, and leapt upon the Ladies lap: when the
Lady saw it she cried out, O thou graceless creature, I bless the Lord I have
found thee out, have I kept thee for so many years, and entrusted thee with all
I had in the world, and never had the least suspicion of thee; God knows what
thou have robbed me of in thy time. O thou wicked wretch! now thou shall dye
the shamefullest death as may be thought on. Then said the Maid, what have I
done, I never offended you in thought, word, nor deed, neither ever wronged you
in all my life hitherto? O villain, said the Lady, is not this my Bracelet, I
have lost for above this half year, and hoar I have found it in thy Trunk! God
knows what thou have robbed me of besides, for I have lost a great deal of
money; then she called more company in and searched her Trunk further, and
found many pieces of money, which she knew by the marks; and when they saw
that, they apprehended her, and sent her to prison for all days of her life;
so the Lady continued her love toward the Cat, and would never eat of any
dainties at her Table before she had cut her Cat the first bit, at last it
happened that she sat at Dinner and forgot to carve first to her Cat,
wherefore she leapt to the Ladies face and caught her by the throat, that had
it not been for the help of some at the Table, the Cat had killed her: Then
said the Lady, I Will keep this Cat no longer; then it is good said her friends to
destroy her: No, said she, for the sake of the learned Mistress which gave her
me; then she returned her back from whence she came, and destred to have her
Daughter home; when her Daughter came she took her in her arms and kissed her,
and caused her to lie in bed with her every night, and in token of a motherly
love to a child, she gave her a King of her finger out of love to wear, which
King she had kept for many years; and it happened after that this Daughter
proceeded in her wicked art of witchcraft still and could not break from it: So
there was a Mill of the Ladies not far from the house, and every night this
Daughter when her mother was asleep, would go with others of her rabble, and at
dead time of the night set the Mill a going, ripping the bags, and throwing all
the Corn about the flour; at which the Miller wondered greatly, and complained
on the morrow to the Lady and many others, saying, his Mill was haunted by
evil spirits, doing great mischief, that he was like to be undone; and they
counseled him to watch up one night with a good sword and a light to see what
it was; and about midnight there came in at the window a great Cat to his
thinking, by and by another and another, till they were half a dozen, spitting
and wawling like devils, and their eyes shining like coals of fire; then the
Miller struck at them, and they slew at his face, and in short time destroyed
him: On the morrow the Lady sent to the Mill to see how the Miller fared, and
they found him dead, with his face and throat tore all to pieces, the next
night another watched, and on the morrow they went to see how he sped, and they
found him in the same condition; then they all marvelled greatly, so that none
would live in that Mill. At last there came a stout fellow, and he would
undertake to lie in the Mill all night if the Lady would give him the Mill, she
consented, and away goes the fellow, with a great Sword and Candle, and entered
the Mill; so about the old hour he heard the Mill at work to the purpose; so he
took his Sword and Candle in his hand, and went damn out of his Chamber to see
what guests he had got, and when he came into the Mill he saw nothing, but the
Mill stood still, and as soon as he had entered his Chamber, the Mill was at it
again as hard as 'twas before; then he ran back again with his sword drawn, and
there he beheld six great Cats and one little one, with such sparkling eyes
glearing upon him, that he never saw the like before; whereupon he struck at
them, and they leapt at his face, and on every side of him, that he was fain to
lay about him lustily to defend himself; at last he worsted two, and they fled
through the window, and the rest fought so furiously, that they put him almost
out of breath, but in the end they all fled through the window, and he
following close, smote the last and cut off her fore-foot; and so when day
came, he went to look for the foot, and it proved to be a hand with a fair King
upon the finger; when he saw that, then he knew they were Witches, so took on
him little, and went home to the Lady, who asked him how it fared with him? He
said he was never so hard put to it in his life; how so said the Lady? why said
he, there came seven Cats, and set the Mill to work as well as I could, and if
I had not defended my self stoutly, I had been slain by them, but in the end I
made them fly; and as the last went through the window, I cut off her
fore-foot, look here it is: When the Lady saw that, she knew the hand by the
Ring, and she remembered that night, when she awak't she felt her daughter come
in the bed all in a sweat, and very cold; with this thought she was stricken
with a fear, that the drops of sweat trickled down her face; so she went to the
bedside, and asked her daughter how she did? who said, I am not well, pray let
me alone; her mother said, let me feel your hand, how your pulses beat, and she
gave her the right hand, keeping the other arm in the bed, and her mother said,
give me the other hand, and she would not; then her mother went to see by
force, and there was no hand; then her mother knew what Cat she had kept
before, and said thou shall dye by (...) ^^ai^ before thou deest any more
mischief. O graceless Villain, what shame h^st sh^^ brought upon me for having
such a wicked child; so she was sentenced to be burnt at a stake, and as she
was led to execution, she confessed how she had stole the money and bracelet, and
laid it where the maid found it, so to be accused of theft and hanged unjustly;
but at last she was burned to ashes at a stake, and the innocent maid redeemed
out of prison.

Now said Radamentus, understand you what I have said yes right well said the
Empress; then said Radamentus I will show you the declaration thereof.

The Declaration of the Example.
THen Radamentus said to the Empress, Great Lady, I fear this will happen to
you and your daughter as it did to this Lady, who for the love of her only
daughter set her to School to be instructed in virtuous learning, and she was
tutored by a Witch in all the arts of Necromancy; in the first place she robbed
her mother, and caused an innocent maid to father the theft; secondly, in her
filthy transformation, had she not been prevented, she had cut her mothers
throat; thirdly, her horrid murder in the Mill; fourthly, the disgrace and
shame brought upon her mother and family; and fifthly, the utter ruins and
destruction she brought upon her own soul: and in the same manner do you labor
to preserve your daughter, and suffer her to reign, in all her filthy and
detestable ways till such time the truth of all things breaks out, then be
sure you will receive utter shame and disgrace, even to the ruin of your self
and the whole Empire; therefore I advise you to cut her off while she is in the
bud, lest she prove in the end to be a hard tree, and there is no cutting down
of her. The Empress said, you have showed me a good Example, the Lady giving
her Daughter too much liberty, afterward would have cut her mothers throat,
and turned both witch, thief, and murder or; without doubt my Daughter shall
not serve me so, and on the morrow she commanded her officers to le^d her away
to be burnt, who obeyed her command in all haste: As she was led through the
streets, attired in her winding sheet, her Bible under her arm, and the
trumpets sounding out her doleful knell, all the people cried out, alas, alas,
the only Daughter of the Empress is leading to execution: and as they lead
her, the third Mistress named Mardula came riding by; and as the Princess saw
her, she bowed her head to her, as much as to say, remember me; all the people
cried ant, saying, O good Mistress make haste, and by your famous wisdom save
your Disciple: so away she poasted and came before the Empress, doing her
reverence, and the Empress said, O thou ungrateful Traitor, thy coming avails
thee nothing, for thou shall dye as bad a death as my wretched Daughter, and I
long till I be avenged on thee and all thy fellows. Then said the Mistress, I
thought when I came to have been better treated, and not to be upbraided in
this kinds as I am: The Empress said, do you not deserve death, when as I
delivered you my daughter well, to be instructed in virtuous learning, and you
have delivered her again unto me dumb and graceless, whose lascivious actions
sounds all over the Empire: th^^ said the Mistress, in that you say she is dumb,
I commit that to God, for he makes the dumb to speak, and the deaf to hear;
and as you say she is a lascivious creature, I fain would know if the eye of
man ever saw, or tongue can justify any such thing: therefore gracious Lady,
if you put your Daughter to death thus hastily for the words of one man, it
will happen to you as it did to a Knight and his God-son, which is mentioned in
an Example. The Empress said, pray show me that Example, and the Mistress said,
that I shall not do, but if you will cause your Daughter to be brought back
again from death, then shall I gladly show it you, which in time to come you
will say it is a true one. Then the Empress commanded her daughter to be brought
back and put in prison: and the Mistress began as follows.

The Example of the third Mistress.
IT came to pass upon a time, that as a Knight was traveling through a strange
Country, he chanced to lose his way in a Wood, and could neither discover
Churches nor Towns, the night being so dark, and he a stranger, knew not what
to do, nor whither to go; and as he was complaining to himself, a Woodman
issued through the thickets, hearing his complaint. and domanded the cause of
it. O friend, said the Knight, I am a stranger to the Country, and I have lost
my way, and know not whither to go for accommodations for me and my Horse,
which is almost lost in the Brambles of this Wood. The man said, Sir Knight, it
is far to any Inn, and the ways are bad; but if you please to go with me, I
shall bring you to my Cottage, and give you the best accommodation it does
yield. The Knight courteously returned him thanks, and went along with him, and
when he came home, showed the Knight a Chamber, and provided for his Horse: but
the Knight through discontent of his Journey did not go to bed but sat up, and
about midnight he heard a great cry in the house, he being in such a lone house
began to fear some danger might ensue, and so knocked for to know what that cry
did mean; and the Maid answered, that her Mistrisse was in Travail, and the
Midwife was with her. This Knight being skilled in Astrology, went down to see
how the Planets did serve, it being a bright Starlight night, and he saw a bad
Planet going down, and a good one rising; signifying, if the Child was been
under that, his fortune was to be h^nged; therefore he called the Maid and bid
her tell the Midwife to held her hand one quarter of an hour, and the Child
would he born to good fortune: the Maid came out again, and told (...), that i^
could not possibly b^: then (...) again, and tell the Midwife (...) st^^ b^^
(...) half quarter of an hour, and the (...) should be born to go^d fortune.
(...) again, and bren the him word that (...) was delivered of (...) ^^lly
(...) ^^^ver the bad Planet, ^hen (...) and said nothing (...) the Child: but
on the morrow the Father of it came to him, saying, Sir, since you have
vouchsafed to lodge in my house all night, be pleased to honor me so far as to
name my Child, who answered, that I shall gladly do. And when the day was come
he named the Child, and writ in a bit of Parchment his destiny, with a charge
also, that he should pray to God continually to acquit him from that sad
fortune, so he sealed it up in a piece of wax, and tied it about his neck with
a Silk String, charging his Father and all his friends not to untye the string
to read what it was, till such time the Child was able to read it himself,
destring them to keep him at School very carefully, whereby he may attain to
that knowledge as to read the writing perfectly himself; and thanking the
Father for the favor done him, took his leave, and so departed. When the
Child's was grown up and fit to be instructed, he was put to School, and very
carefully attended till he was ten years of age, at which time he was capable
to read the writing that was about his neck: and upon a time as he was by
himself, he took it off his neck, and opened it, and read it, wherein he found
his destiny written in these words, My good Child, serve God, and pray to him
continually to pass this fate over thee, else thy fortune is to be hanged. When
the Child had read this, he listed up his eyes to heaven and begged a blessing
from the Lord, and went home very sad and melancholy, and destred of his
Father to give him one new suit of clothes, and a little money in his pocket,
and his blessing; his Father asked him the reason of his request: then said the
Child, pray give it me, for I will go seek my fortune; his Father did
according as the Child required, so he took leave of his friends, and parted
from his Father. Well, go, said he, and my blessing with thee; so the Boy
traveled into a strange Country, still praying to God to acquit him of that
unhappy fortune to which he was predicted to; and at last he came to a Knights
house, and required a service, the Knight asked him what he could do, he said,
sweep your Hall, draw Beer, and run upon your Arands, and what other service I
am able to do. The Knight saw him a hopeful boy, and very willingly entertained
him, and he proved mavelous careful and diligent in whatsoever he took in
hand, and at all spare times he would be upon his knees at prayers, desiring
God to pass that unhappy fate over him. The Knight observing this, soon after
placed him under Buttler, and there he continued in the same ruse, praying to
God continually, whereby the Knight had a great discerning eye on him. In this
place he had not been many years, but the head Buttler dyed, and he Knight put
him in his place, and being there he was obedient to his Master, courteous to
his fellow servants, and pleasing to all, but the baker and the brewer murmured
greatly, saying, how may this be, yonder fellow was taken up as a poor beggar
boy at the door but the other day, and first he was under Buttler, now he is
head Buttler, what will he come to: but this past on, he grew in favor still,
and being a Scholar, his Master made him under Steward, which place he
discharged with great trust and faithfulness; then his two adversaries murmured
ten times more, yet he grew in favor more still with the Knight, till at last
the head Steward dyed; then he was preferred in that place, and from that time
forwards his adversaries sought his destruction: yet when he was in this place,
he never waxed proud nor ambitious, but always trusty, humble, meek, and
lowly, and when he had served in the place of head Stewardship the space of
five years, he had a mind to go see his own Country, and therefore delivered
up all his accounts just and square, he asked leave of the Knight, who granted
his request very willingly, and lent him a Horse, and gave him great store of
money to go with, saying, Thou have been a just and faithful servant to me, go,
and my best word with thee; and when his horse was tied at the door, and he
ready to depart, there came to him the Baker and the Brewer, deceitfully to
take their leaves of him, saying they must drink with him before parting, and
as he was drinking with one in the Cellar, the other opened his Portmantle, and
put therein a great Gilt Bowl, and so shut it again: then he went and drank
with him, and so departed; but he had not been gone above a mile, but these two
fellows made inquisition for the Bowl, and the Knight asked who should have it,
who should, said they, but your trusty friend and servant, that is newly gone,
who has been as very a thief as ever breathed since he came to you, and has
robbed you daily, though you would not believe it; therefore you will not
believe this except you saw it, therefore pray ride along with us, and we will
bring him back again, and that you shall see he has the Bowl: so the Knight rid
after him, and overtook him, and praid him to come back, for he had a little
business with him; so when he came, they searched his Portmantle, and found the
Bowl: when the Knight saw that, he admired it, and said, O thou wicked wretch,
I have been told how thou have robbed me daily, and impoverished my Estate, but
I would never believe it, now I see it plainly with my eyes, for which fact
thou shall be hanged at the Gallows.

The young man stood up, and said, of this fact I am innocent, and thou eternal
God, who holds the secrets of all men hearts in thy hands, knows that I am
guiltless, send me justice now, O great Lord of heaven and earth, that thy
everlasting truth may take place, and this hidden treachery be brought to
light. And as they were leading him away to prison, he said, Well, now I
perceive that Fortune is a Fortune, let the world go how it will; and his
Master hearing him, said, what mean you by that? and he said, when my Mother
was in Travail of me, there was a strange Knight lodged in tha house, and did
foresee my destiny by his art in the Planets, and at the request of my Father
he was my Godfather, and then writ in a little piece of Parchment my sad fate
in these words following, My good child, serve God, and pray continually that
the sad fate may pass over thee, for thy fortune is to hanged: and he sealed it
up in war, and tied it with a silk String, and put it about my neck, charging
my Father, that no one should read it till I was capable to read it my self;
wherefore I came to travel, and also obeying the words, and praying continually
to God to escape it, I see it does follow me undeserved, as you now see. The
Knight hearing this, demanded to see the piece of writing, which specified his
destiny, and he took the string from obout his neck: and gave it the Knight,
who as soon as he saw it, he said, O the merry of the eternal God of Heaven,
whose love to his servants is incomprehensible, this is my own handwriting; I
writ thy destiny, and I am thy God-farther, O bring him back again, let us
examine the cause better; then ^e called the two false accusers before him, and
strictly examined each of them, threatening sad punishment if they would not
confess, and at last they confessed it were they stole the Cup, and put it in his
P^rtmantle; for which they were both hanged, and the young man saved: And then
said the Mistris^, understand you what I h^ve said? yes, right well, said the
Empress, Now I do perceive that very often the wicked commits the fact, and
the innocent are Condemned. You have shamed me a good example, therefore my
Daughter shall not dye. Great Lady, said the Mistress, if you do so, you will do
well, and I thank yo for sparing your Daughter this day for my sake, and
therefore to God I commend you.

The fourth Complaint of Radamentus
WHen Radamentus heard the young Princess was not dead, but rather pardoned, he
waiked up and down the Garden like a man bereaved of his wits, and made great
lamentation; the noise thereof came to the Empress our, and she went in all
haste to him, and comforted him, saying, My gra^e, Lord and Counselor, why
(...) it is you this m^an? if behooves our a man, especially such as you are, so
rarely well dig, dignified in wisdom and disc^etion, to gr^^^ out such sad
complaints? O Madam, said Radamentus, why should you tell me so, will ^^n^t
make a stone move, or a wall of brass speak, to see that your judgment is so
much s^upified, as not to be advised by my grave Counsel, knowing no man ought
to tell you more then my self, that you suffer such pestilential f^av^rs to
remain not qualified nor oppressed: O that I had dyed before I had been elected
to come into these parts, for what honor or reputation I ever gained formerly,
I shall now receive ten times as much shame and dishonor; but I fear it will
happen to you as it did unto a Lady in Thesaly with her Deer, which is
mentioned in the Example. Then said the Empress, I pray show me that example
for my learning, I may be the better instructed. If I should, said Radamentus,
it would avail nothing, for I showed you one yesterday last, and it came to no
effect; nevertheless I shall show you this, which is as follows.

The fourth Example of Radamentus.
SOmetime in Rome there lived a great Lady which had a famous Park of Deer,
that a worthier was not in all the land; she had also a very gallant Hound,
which was presented to her by the best Huntsman in the world: and this Lady
delighting much in hunting, appointed a day for the trial of this brave Dog;
and when the day was come they rouzed a Buck, and followed the Chase, up the
Hills, down the Dales, through the Thickets, Bracks, and Boggs, the like
hunting ne'r^ was known in that part of the world, for the Dog hunted upon hot
sent seven days together, till all the followers were tired both foot and
horse, and left the whole Game to the Dog; yet still the Buck maintained his
ground, and the Dog his Chase, throughout the Kingdom of Thesaly three hundred
mils an end; the Lady and her Noble Barons gave off all for lost, some of them
cried, we shall never see the Buck again; said the Lady, I shall never have my
Dog again: and when they had yielded all as lost, there came a Letter from the
King of Egypt, he knowing her so delightful in Hunting, and the tenure of it
was, that there came a Buck chased by a Dog, through some part of his
Dominions, and that they were come into the Kingdom of Thesaly: The Lady
hearing this, said, Doubtless, this Dog and this Buck by all description should
be mine, and as she was thus musing, the Keeper brought in word that the Buck
and Dog was come; then the Lady rejoiced and ran into the Park to see the Buck
and Dog, and there they found the Buck leapt just ever the wall, and fell down,
and the dog ran to the wall, and he fell down, only wearied, but not to death:
then said the Keeper, this Buck is the best runner in ^^t Thesaly; and the Lady
said, this Dog is the best in all the world, and therefore all the Nobles and
Barons that ever came there a hunting praised that Dog and loved him
wonderfully. Now there was an observation on this Dog, for he loved the Park
ever after, and the same buck he before chased above all others; so that he was
observed to go every night about midnight, to defend the Deer from any ravenous
beast which should chance to come, as Wolves or such like Creatures, and this
did he constantly upon his own accord, so that such a Dog was never heard of
before. And it chanced after, that the same Huntsman which gave the Lady this
brave Dog, presented her with another wolf-dog, young and tender, and of a most
curious sh^pe and form, which also won the affections of the Lady marvellously,
so that she loved him as she loved her life; and whosoever should tell her that
this wolf-dog would prove the better Courser, she would rejoice, and give them
great rewards; so that her love to the Hound began to decline, for he was wont
to quarrel with her young dog, being of two contrary natures, for which she
would kick him and much reject him; but the young dog grew apace well formed,
fair and comely: Not far from her Court lived seven wise Mistrisses, whom she
sent for to pass their judgments upon this young Dog, what they thought of
him? And the first said, it was the fairest dog that ever she saw, and it would
make a good Courser; then the second said, it was the comeliest Dog that ever
she saw, and he would make a stately keeper; the third said, it was the tallest
Dog that ever she saw, and would be fit for a Princely Game; the fourth said,
it was the strongest Dog that ever she saw, and would be a brave companion in a
forest; the fifth said, it was the furicusest Dog that ever she saw, and was
fit to keep a treasury; the firth said, it was a dog in her judgment exceeded
all others; and the seventh said, it was a Dog, if well taught and preserved,
would parallel the whole world for his equal. Then said the Lady, I thank you
all for your great accommodations you give of my dog; therefore I shall prize
him as I do the greatest Jewel I have, but I have an excellent Hound besides,
which on his own accord does watch my Deer every night, and preserve them from
the Wolves, and the like savage beasts, and they two can never agree. Then said
the first Mistress, the Hound is something ancient, and probable might not live
long; the wolf-dog is young and iusty, and the best of his days are to come;
and since they cannot live both together quietly, it is expedient one should
dye, therefore let the Hound be destroyed: Then the Lady gave command that the
Hound should be hanged immediately; and soon after the Hound was dead, many
Deer were lost out of the Park, therefore they put the Wolf-dog to watch, yet
for all that a Deer in two or three nights was constantly lost, and still the
Lady wondered how this might be, and the Wolf-dog watching too; so she put a
man to watch all night in a tree, to espy out what beast came to vestry her
Deer, and by the light of the Moon he discovered the Wolf-dog upon a lusty
Buck, having tore his throat; when the morning came, the Lady sent for him to
know what he had seen; and be said, I have seen what it is that kills the Deer
now: declare said the Lady what it is, and he said, it is even your own
Wolf-dog, whom you put to watch them; then the Lady looked sad in the face, and
began to complain greatly, saying, Alas, have I destroyed the Shepherd, and
put a Wolf in his stead; have I then through the wicked advice of yonder
foolish women hanged my good and trusty Hound, which looked to my Herd, and
preserved them from the ravenous wolves; the bravest Courser and flower of all
Dogs in Thesaly, and have here put a ravenous murderer of my Deer to keep the
Park: and with these words she struck the Dog three or four blows with her
Cane, and the masterless Cur grumbled as if it had been a Lion; and then said
the Lady, how now Deer-killer, and smote him again, but before she struck the
fifth blow, he reared upon her breast, and slew her before the eyes of her
servants: Then all people cursed the Counselors which advised the Lady to
keep that evil Dog, and to kill the good Hound. Then said Radamentus,
understand you what I have said? yes right well, said the Empress, then said
he, I will show you the Declaration thereof.

The Declaration of the Example.
THe Lady delightful in hunting, signifies your self in all virtuous
recreation, so that all Kings of the Earth do hear of your same, as the King of
Egypt did of her Game; the large and spacious Park is your Empire, and the Deer
therein are your subjects; the good Hound watching them, is your wise and good
discretion, defending them from ravenous wolves, in keeping us in peace and
safety from the bloody hands of cruel Tyrants; the fair and masterlesse
Wolf-dog is your stubborn and graceless Daughter, who by her ill examples and
bad precedents will delude your good Subjects, and in the end destroy them as
the Dog did the Deer; the foolish women that counseled the Lady to kill the
good Hound, and let the Wolf-dog live, is your seven wise Mistrisses, which
daily labor to advise you to suppress your vigilance and wise care of your
Subjects, and let your filthy lascivious Daughter live, whereby she may reign
in bloody tyranny, and glut her self with the flesh of your people: the man in
the Tree that discovered the Dog in killing the Deer, was my self in my Chamber
window, espying your Daughter that shameless wretch in the Garden under a tree
something obscure, with a man committing the foul sin of fornication, and all
other beastly behavior; for which detestable and abominable act she ought to
dye according to the Law; for if she live, she will by her ill ways give base
examples, and destroy many others: if then you correct her for it, she will
like unto the Wolf-dog leap upon your breast, and cut your throat. Then said
the Empress, that Dog the Lady loved so dearly cut her throat at last, but my
Daughter shall not do so: Then she commanded her Officers to lead her away to
the stake; and as she was led through the streets with trumpets sounding her
doleful funeral, all the people ran out making a sad noise, crying, alas, alas,
the Empress only Daughter is led again to the Stake. Then the fourth Mistress
leapt upon her horse, and hasted away to the Empress, and did obeisance to the
Empress, who said, O thou cursed old wretch, little thanks shall thou have for
thy ill instructing my Daughter, and bringing her to what she is now gone to; I
delivered her to you finely taught, modest and well mannered, and you delivered
her again to me ill taught, full of vice and dumb, and a shameless whore, for
which this day she is to dye, to the disparagement of the Empire, and disgrace
of all her lineage; I would the day of her birth had been the day of her
burial. O gracious Lady then said the Mistress, I little thought of this
entertainment, surely I have not deserved the least of this your displeasure;
and for why your Daughter speaks not, I commit the cause to God, and in short
time you shall know the reason, but the time is not come yet: she is accused
she has committed the soul sin of fornication, that is false, and is not to be
proved; therefore you ought not to put your only Daughter to death for the
words of one single person, though it were Justice; and if you pu^ her to death
for one man's saying, it shall be worse to you then to the Queen, who for
putting too much confidence^^ Counselors had her only Daughter cut in pieces
before the Altar, and her self after stoned to death. Then said the Empress,
declare that Example for my learning, that I shall not do, said the Mistress,
unless you send for your Daughter back again, otherwise she may be de^d before
I make an end, then should I talk to you in vain. Then the Empress commanded
her Daughter to be brought back again and pu^ in prison, while the mistress
spoke as follows.

The Example of the fourth Mistress.
SOme time there lived in the Kingdom of Thracia a famous Queen named Hicuba,
who built a strong City of defense, double walled, and moated round; she was a
peaceable Queen, and at variance with none, save only the King of Lycia, being
a quarrelsome Prince; and be came against her with an invincible Army, and
besseged her round; wherefore she called before her in Council her two
Counselors named Anthinor and Eneus; and they assembled all the noble Citizens
to advise how to preserve their City, and give their enemies battle; and when
they had fortified their walls, and planted their Guards, Anthinor issued out
with ten thousand men, and made a great slaughter among his enemies, and so
returned back into the City; then their enemies recruited again, and fell on to
scale the walls, but were driven back by the Citizens: then Eneus went out and
sought with great valor, but lost many men, and so returned into the Town. At
last Anthinor addressed himself to the Queen, and told her it were good to
conclude peace with the enemies, for they had lost many noble persons of
honor, among whom were the Queens two Sons, for which they made great moan;
and therefore he advised the Queen to conclude a peace, that the Enemies may
depart without destroying the City, for they could not maintain it against such
an invincible power, though the City was well fortified, and strength enough to
have beaten twice as many; yet the Queen believed these two evil Counselors,
which proved arrand Traitors; than the harmless Queen asked them who they
should have to go treat for them? Then Eneus stood up and said, if it seems
good to the Queen and to all you Citizens, for the honor of the Queen, the
safeguard of our City, and the preservation of our lives, Anthinor and I being
expert in all Laws and Customs upon so weighty a matter as this, will go forth.
The Queen liked well of what he said, reposing more confidence in them then any
other, and all the Citizens accorded to it: and Anthinor and Eneus went forth
and sounded a parley, and the Enemies Heralds came and fetched them in; and
Anthinor said, we have wrought so about with our Queen, that we have obtained
Irave to come and couclude a league or truce with you; but if you will grant us
two our demands, as we shall ask of you, we will betray the City into your
hands, to do with it as it seems good to you; then they all promised to grant
their demands. Then said Anthinor, you shall give us a thousand marks in Gold,
and withal our Rights and Privileges, and save all the lives of our Friends
and Kindred, with the preservation of all our Houses, Lands, and Possessions;
then said their Enemies, all these things are granted, and we are ready to
swear the confirmation of it, which they immediately did: Then said Anthinor,
we must be very private in this thing, for we must make a counterfeit truce
with ye, and you must send this word in answer to our message, thus:

That you require a hundred thousand marks of gold to pay your Army, and ten
thousand measures of wheat to make them bread, and to set up a brazen horse
within the City in the Temple of Interva; and this ^^^se said Anthinor must be
cast hollow, wherein a thousand men may stand all armed, and when it is in the
Temple, and you have received your gold and wheat which I will order; then you
must draw your Army off the Town, as they may suppose you are going away: then
when the Citizens think all is secure, and are in bed asleep, then shall the
armed men in the brazen Horse come forth, and Eneus and I will give you the
sign by a light off the wall; and when you see that, advance with all your Army
on the back side of the Town, and we will open the Gates again you come; then
do with the City as you see good, only remember Eneus and I of our contract:
and said Anthinor, with those words, we will depart, and acquaint the Queen of
it, and we shall come forth to morrow again to acquaint you of her answer; so
took leaps of them, and departed ho^^ into the City, and fold the Queen what
the Enemies requested, which was one hundred thousand marks of Gold, and ten
thousand measures of Wheat, and they would depart home into their own Country,
only they would leave behind them a brazen Horse, which they had pruvided as
a memorandum or mark of Conquest. Then the Queen sighed deeply, and said, What,
have I lost so many of my dearest friends, and so much of the stately walls of
my City domollished, and now must I be constrained to pay so much Gold and
Wheat unto my very Enemies, and hire them to go home into their Country^ O was
is me that ever I was born (...) but since it must be so, go tell them
Anthinor, I do grant their demands; then Anthinor and Eneus went forth again,
and said to the Enemies, your request is granted all what we have contrived,
and you are to appoint the day to receive it, that we may make it ready; and
after you have that, then we will be for the City: so the day was appointed, and
all was got ready, they receiving it all, then they draw the brazen Horse into
the City, and plat't it in the Temple, though little thought the harmless Queen
what hollish plot lay in the belly of the Horse. On the morrow all the Enemies
drew off from the City toward night, and the poor Citizens supposing they were
all departed toward their own Country, rejoiced all, and through watchfulness
being up very many nights before, went to bed, and at midnight in the dead time
of sleep, Anthinor went to the brazen Horse, and called forth that thousand
armed men, and Eneus went upon the back tower, and held up in his hand a
blazing torch, which gave intelligences to the bloody Enemy; so they came and
entered the Town, that all the streets were full, and then Anthinor and Eneus
the bloody Traitors showed them their ^ouses and Possessions, but for the
harmless Queen in her Palace was no respect at all; and this Queen had a fair
and beautiful Daughter named Palestina, the like was not in all the world; she
wicked Anthinor would have radisht some time before the siege, and she
refusing, caused him to work this their utter destruction; and as the Queen and
her Daughter were at prayers, they heard a woeful cry in the City, then they
were struck with jealousy of wicked Anthinors treachery; so the Queen ran into
the Temple, and Palestina the young Lady poor soul ran and hid her self in an
old Tower, by which time the Enemy had not left alive neither man, woman, nor
child's throughout the whole City. Then Anthinor the Traitor came to the Temple,
and seeing the Queen there, asked where her Daughter was? who replied, O
ungrateful Traitor, is not thy wicked bowels glutted yet with tyranny? Then he
went to the old Tower, and there found her and dragged her out, and gave her to
the Enemy, who led her to the Altar, and before her mothers own eyes they cut
her in four quarters, and threw them about the Temple: the Queen at the horrid
sight fell down in a swound, and when she recovered life again, said, Now
Villains glu^ your selves with tyranny, so fore the hair off her dead, and the
clothes of her bo^^, and went s^ark mad out o^ her senses; wherefore the wicked
Tyrants carried her into a strange Island, and there miserably ^^on'^ her to
death, and after burnt her City to the ground, and retu^n'd home into their own
Country. And then the Mistress said to the Empress, understand you what I have
said? how a Queen by putting too much confidence, and took too much advise of
two evil Counselors, came at last to have her Daugh^er cut in pieces before
her own eyes, herself stoned to death, her Subjects massacred, and her whole
City destroyed; thererefor^ ^e advised, and put not your own D^ug^ter thus to
death for the words of one Counselor, lest it happen to you as it did to the
harmlese Queen. The Empress said, you have shown me a good Example, (...) t^
g^^eves my heart to think of it, for they were the wickedest Counselors that
ever were, surely I will take no such advice; for my Daughter shall not dye.
The Mistress said, if you perform that you will do wisely, and I thank you for
sparing your Daughter this day for my sake, and so I commit you to God.

The fifth Complaint of Radamentus.
RAdamentus hearing the young Princess was not dead, forthwith retired into his
Chamber, sighing and sobbing most bitterly, and caused all his apparel and
necessaries to be made ready, and his Wagons and Horses brought up, as though
he was just going into his own Country: The servants perceiving their Lord was
departing from the Court, acquainted the Empress that Radamentus their Lord was
preparing for his own Country; when the Empress perceived that, she basted to
his Chamber, and said to him, O my grave Lord, I thought you had been more
tender of my safety, and the Government of the Empire, then to go and leave me
thus; to which he answered, It Is true, I tender your welfare as much as I do my
life, and you know I have had a care of your reputation, and the safety of the
Empire, but now I see you are going in the high way to shame me, and dishonor
your self, and ruin^ the whole Realm; the world knowing I am your assistant,
and do think it is all my advice in what you do, supporting Bawdry, and other
vices, and in the very Court it self; had it been Vertus, the world had never
taken notice on it: but being Vice, the tongue of every inferior fellow do
noise it abroad like the breath of a Trumpet, or a Herald at arms, through all
the parts of the world: therefore I go from you, for I had rather hear of your
ruin then see it; you will be ruled by the words of the foolish Mistrisses,
till at last it will happen to you as it did unto a Roman Lady and her
Daughter, which Example is mentioned: and the Empress said, pray show me that
Example for my better understanding: And he said, though I shall show you all
the Examples in the world, and give you all the advice I may imagine, you
though it tend to the preservation of both Life and Kingdom, as indeed it does;
yet you would not be ruled by me, nor follow my counsel: nevertheless I will
show you this Example, provided henceforth, you do not delight nor hear the
Mistrisses, whose id^^ Fables does subvert your wise judgment: the Example is
as follows.

The fifth Example of Radamentus.
SOmetimes in Rome there lived a famous Lady, whose worth and renown was spread
far and near, being beloved of all people, for she was virtuous in
conversation, modest in behavior, gracious to her people, and amiable to all;
and in reference to the poor, she was adorned with a free and bountiful
liberality, so that she had the prayers of all: This Lady had two Daughters,
both of them very beautiful and comely; the eldest she kept at home with her,
and the youngest she put abroad to be taught and instructed, having a motherly
car^, and in process of time, this Lady sent for her Daughter home, expecting
she had learnt much for her edification; but when she came home, alas, she was
ne'^e the better, so she grieved very much for her Daughter, in regard of the
tender love she ^are her; and therefore she would keep her at home, being the
youngest, and set the other abroad: which being done, this young Girl began to
do nothing but play, having what liberty she pleased; at last she grew to
maturity, and then she would not go abroad without money; therefore her Mother
gave her money from time to time: at last she had ways to spend more then her
Mother allowed her if it had been twice as much, for she kept a private lover
in the City which her mother knew not of, and many nights when her Mother was
asleep, she would rise and take the Keys from under the Ladies head, and go
out to her love, and toward break of day come in again, her mother never
perceiving it, but toward morning she wondered how her Daughter came so cold,
and asked her what was the reason she was so cold; she said, the Cramp had
taken her in her leg, and being loath to wake her, she rose and walked about
the Chamber to drive it away, so that excuse past for current. The next night
she awak't, and mist her out of the house, and wondering how she got out, put
up her hand to feel for her Keys, they were gone; so when her Daughter came in
about break of day again, she asked her, O Lord Daughter, where have you been
now? Truly said she, I had a tooth did ache so grievously, that my ^aw I thought
would have broke, and you bring so sound a sleep, I was loath to disturb ye;
therefore I took the Keys and went forth to the Chyrurgion to draw it, but I
could not make him hear me: so this second excuse past as current as the
former, and her Mother said no more of it. Upon another time she espied her
Mothers Key of her Cabinet, and she took it and pressed it in Clay that it made
an impression; and from this impression she got another Key made whereby she
could go to the Cabinet of money when she pleased; and her Mother missing money
so off, little thought of her own Daughter, but sometime fathered the crime
upon the Maid, sometime upon the Man, that the Family was never but in strife
and variance: and upon a time she went to her Mothers Cabinet for more money,
and went away and left her Key behind her in the Cabinet; her-Mother seeing a
key in her Cabinet, and knew she had her own in her Pocket, let it alone, and
watched behinds the Curtain to see who would fetch it out; by and by, in comes
her Daughter, and snatched the Key out, but her Mother caught hold of her, and
said, O thou graceless wrecth, is it thee that have robbed me these two years
together, now I have found thee out, O wicked imp; I have been often cold of
thee, but I would never believe it till now I do see it, for which thou shall
dye a shameful death: but there was living not far off, an old woman, whom this
young imp was wont to take advice of in all her wicked pranks; therefore in
this time of necessity she did send for her to come, and by her craft and
cunning to save her life. When she came she said, O virtuous Lady, let not your
wrath be so ^uriously bent against her, she is your Daughter whom you have bore
of your body, and gave her suck nine months from your breast, for we were all
guilty of faults in our infancy; therefore let her not come to shame for the
first time, the sever^ Law will give reprieve to the veriest Felon for the
first fault, much more a natural Mother ought to do for a Child; and if she
should thus dye, it will acrew great shame to her Family, and you will be
branded with rebuke for tyranny: Upon these words the good Mother was pacified,
and pardoned her. It happened afterward as the Lady was walking in the evening
in her Garden, she espied her Daughter l^^ng with a strange man under a Bush,
then said she, and cried out with a loud voice, O thou ^^scivious creature,
worse then any beast, I have pardoned thee for Theft already, and now thou art
fallen into Whoredom, if I suffer this, all people will curse me, and the Paps
that gave thee suck; therefore thou shall dye, for I had rather see thee hanged
then I should be sound guilty of thy crimes. Then the old woman came again, and
said, O good Lady, save her life, consider she is young, and what she has
done, is through ignorance and foolishness; but remember the old Proverb, A
naughty boy may make a good man, likewise she may amend and become a good
woman; and remember what the Scripture says, He that is without fault, let him
throw the first stone; therefore let her shame be hidden this time, and if ever
she commit the like again do your pleasure upon her: so through these strong
delusions and foolish perswa^ions, the good Lady was again persuaded, and
pardoned her, but said to the old woman, it is very seldom that any who are
addicted to Theft and Whoredom, but commonly are guilty of Murder also, God
grant that I never hear of no such thing by her, though I fear it greatly: to
prevent which, the godly Mother kept her within doors so strict, that she could
not go abroad to her lover to feed him with money as she was wont to do;
therefore he would come so her and speak to her through the window, where she
threw him many of her Mothers pieces of Plats and other things; then the Lady
marvelled greatly ^ow her things should be lost, and her Daughter never go out
of doors, no farther then to the great window, where she did observe, she stood
every night: and it came to pass that one night the Lady her self was standing
under that window late, bearing the pretty Nightingale c^^rping her several
notes; and the Daughter supposing she had been her lover, threw out the great
stiver Goblet; the Lady perceiving out of what window it came, took it up and
came in with it, and asked for her Daughter, and the maid said she was in the
middle window; call her to me, said the Lady, when she came, she bid her go
fetch her some wine in the Goblet, and she said, she had been looking for that
and it could not be found: then the Lady (...) the Goblet and showed her,
saying, W^^t thou never lea^e thy tricks, thou graceless villain, now shall
thou dye surely a shameful death, the just reward of thy dese^t^. Then news
came again to the old woman that the Ladies Daughter was to dye, and she came
in all haste, crying to the Lady to save her li^^ but once more, and she would
undertake to advise her, and bring her to goodness her self: Upon this the Lady
pardoned her once more. Now this Daughter loved a man which was poor, and both
a Thief and Murderer, whom her Mother would not suffer her to marry with him
without her consent; she had nothing to maintain him with, neither had he of
himself; therefore she took counsel of the old woman what to do, who advised
her to take a little of her poisoned ball, and when her Mother called for Beer,
to put in two drams, saying, that will dispatch your Mother, then you may have
all, and take your lover. The wicked ^mp was glad of this advice, and did
execute it; her mother having took it, called for some more drink, the poison
wrought so hot in her guts: when she ^^lled the cup again, she put in more, and
the harmless Lady took it out of the hand of the bloody villain, as from a
friend, so drank it up, and gave up the ghost, being aged ^^^escors and ten:
for which horrid fact the wicked wretch was hurned at a stake. Thus was a
harmless Lady first robb^d of her goods, and after murdered by a wicked
Daughter she best loved. Then said Radamentus, understand ^e what I have said,
yes right well, said the Empress, that was the wickedst Daughter that ever I
heard of; to prevent such mischief, my Daughter shall not live a day langer:
therefore she commanded her Officers to lead her away to be burnt, and as she
was leading through the streets, the people ran out, and cried, alas, alas, the
Empress Daughter is leading again to be burnt; and as she past by, the fifth
Mistress met her, and hasted away to the Empress, doing reverence as the others
were went: then said the Empress, you are come, but it shall be the price of
your life: the Mistress said, O Lady, I have not deserved to dys, for your
Daughter has not committed those crimes which ye say she has done, as
hereafter you shall find; and that she speaks not is of her wisdom, and know
ye she will speak when her time comes: and as for the sin of Fornication,
believe it not, for a wise Virgin as she is, would never attempt so shameful a
deed, and if ye put her to death for the words of one man, it shall happen to
(...) worse then it did the Queen of China. Then said the Empress, pray show me
that Example; that I shall not do, said wise Debora, unless you call your
Daughter back again alse before I make an end your Daughter may be dead: then
the Empress commanded her Daughter to (...) brought b^ck and put in prison;
thea Debora sp^ke as follows.

The Example of the fifth Mistress.
SOmetime in China lived a virtuous Queen, reuo^^ned far and near; for whose
wisdom and good discretion she was e^poused to a great Eastern King, who b^d a
grave Counselor, without whom be would do nothing: this virtuous Queen being
married to this great King, soon after there arose a great Rebellion in his
Country from whence he came, whereby he was constrained to go to suppress the
rude multitude, which soon he did, and to settle the uniformity, staid there
for the space of half a year, by which time his Queen was grown big with
child: and ^^is old Counselor whom the King left at home as Guarding of her,
wrote Letters to the King, that she was very familiar with a Nobleman in (...),
whose name wa^ Palemed^s, and that (...) thought what she wont withal (...)
Thus did he through wicked treachery, thinking to himself, the King was
ancient, and would be the more filled with jealousy, and if he could destroy
the Queen and that she went withal, soon after the King would dye, then said
he. I shall rule the Land; and from that time forth he sought their
destruction. Now when the King had received his Letter he hasted home, and
railed at his Queen, saying, she was a Whore, and what she went withal was a
Bastard, and would not suffer her to come into his company: then this old
Traitor went to the Queen, pretending friendship under a falsehood, and
advised her to go in a merry way and present the King a Bowl of Wine; and she
always thinking he had been a most faithful friend did as he advised her, and
before she brought it, he wrote a Libel and dr^pt it in the King^ Chamber: This
Libel expressed, that if the Queen at such a time did present him with a Bowl
of Wine, he was a dead man, for it was poison; and as the Queen came in, with
innocent love, presented the King with the Bowl of Wine, he took his foot and
kicked it all down, saying, Thou wicked wretch, now I do perceive the vile
actions, thou have defiled my Bed, and defamed my Honor, and art thou now come
to poison me, I swear thou shall dye the cruellest death as may be thought on:
so committed her to prison, and as she lay there she breathed out these
complaints,

O Fortune, why have thou used me thus, I am a Kings Daughter, and was b^^n
Heiress to a fl^urishing Kingdom, and instead of a Palace with rich perfumes, I
am he^e ch^ked up in a dungeon of f^^thy fogs, when I thought to be embraced
within Princely arms, and courted with Royal salutations, I am here accused
with slanderous crimes, that the gods themselves do know I am innocent of; and
thus through grief and sorrow, and her time being near, she sell in travel, and
was delivered of a comely Girl: then news was brought the King, that the Queen
was delivered of a Girl, said he, Take that brat and throw it into the Sea:
when the Messenger came and told the Queen, she wr^ng her Lilly white hands,
and the tears gushed from her Cristal eyes, running down her Rosy che^ks* and
she said, Ah wretched babe, hardly conceived in the Womb before envied, and now
scarcely born before thy death determined, and must the wide Ocean be thy
nursery, and the raging waves thy rocking cradle, and nothing but the Firmament
thy covering cloth or canopy! O, then let the gods of Fortune be thy guide, and
the whistling billows sing thy lullaby, so kissed her tender lips, bathing them
with brinish tears, and so parted: and then they put the babe in a Cock-boat,
covering it with boughs and green leaves, and hoisted it a float the Sea, and
it happened that the waves tossed it ashore in a strange Country, that if lay by
the Seaside among the Segs, and as a Shepherd came that way looking stray
Sheep, he heard the Child cry, and he thinking it had been his stray Sheep
browsing upon the edge of the Rocks, he hasted down for to see, and there he
found the Cock-boat rested upon ^he (...) sand; so he took the Child and br^d
(...), and it grew to be the beautiful'st Gi^l in all the world, and the
Shepherd put her upon the Mountain to keep Sheep; so it chanced, that the King
her Father came a hunting that way, and looking upon her, said, Fact
Shepheardess, what Flock do you belong to, or what may they be that the
Goddesses themselves have made you Guardian to? she answered the King, I am a
poor Shepherds Daughter, and bred up in yonder Cottage: Then said the King,
fair Virgin, will you leave off your Flock and come to Court, there your eyes
shall be ravished with triumphant Shows, and your ears glutted with delightful
Music, you shall drink out of Gold, and be clothed in Purple? and she answered
the King, the greatest Music the delighted in, was the bleating of the Sheep,
and the greatest shows, were their new shor^ Fleeces, a Shepherds weed was
greater content to her thou Purple, and a wooden dish more ^^^ter then Gold.
Then the King marvelled greatly, and went to the old Shepherd, and demanded of
him whose Daughter she was, and he said 'twas his? nay, said the King, that
cannot be, for her beauty shows her to be of Princely race, and said, if he
would not tell him the truth, he should dye a cruel death, and commanded him to
be led to the Gallows. Then the Shepherd fell down upon his knees, and
besought the King that he would spare his life and he would tell him: speak on,
said the King; My Lord (said he) upon a time as I was by the Seaside looking
for stray Sheep, I heard something cry by the Sea side, and I supposing it had
been my stray that I missed; I went to see, and there I found a small Boat the
Waves had cast ashore, and therein a Child wrapped in a Scarlet Mantle, and a
piece of writing in these words.

Who e're thou art this Child does find,
Make much of it to her prove kind,
She mighty honor may thee-bring,
Being only Daughter to a King;
Be tender, loving, then to she,
One day thou shall rewarded be.
When the King heard this, he knew she was his Daughter that he commanded to be
thrown into the Sea, and saiv, sines the Gods and Fortune has favored her, I
have no reason to hate her; therefore he commanded her to be brought home to
the Palace, and clothed her in most rich array, and made her sit at his right
hand, after that, he dispatch'^ four of his Noblemen to the I stand of Delphos,
to inquire of the Oracle of Apollo, whether the Queen was guilty of the charge
laid against her, and when they came in the Temple before the Oracle, they did
their reverence, and the Oracle spoke, and said, Stand here two days, and
speak not one word, and the third day you shall find on the back side of the
Oracle a scroll of Parchment sealed up; that take and haste away to the King,
and break it not up till you come in the Judgment Hall, and before all the
Council, there the King shall find the truth written; then they did their
obeisance, and so departed, and took shipping, and the seventh day they arrived
in their own Country: when they came before the King, they acquainted him what
the Oracle had commanded them to do, and forth with the King assembled all his
Lords into the Judgment Hall, every one expecting a sad doom for the Queen; but
when the Scroll was broke open, and read, it proved thus, saying, The Queen is
innocent, her Child is lawfully begotten, the old Counselor is the Traitor;
and the King shall dye without an Heir, if Equity and Justice takes not place.
When the Counsel heard this, they all rejoiced, and the King sent immediately
for his Queen out of prison, but the messenger brought him word again, that the
Queen was dead; then the King fell a weeping and wringing his hands, saying, O
miserable wretch am I, that believed such an old cursed Caitiff as I have done!
O woe is me that ever I was born, I caused my Child to be drowned in the Sea,
had not the Gods and Fortune preserved her, and now I have slain my virtuous
and innocent Queen by false and bitter imprisonment, through the advice of an
old cursed Villain; surely he shall dye the miserablest death as may be thought
of: and speedily he commanded two wild Horses to be brought, and tied the
Traitors two hands to one tail, and his two legs to the other; so drew him limb
from limb, and threw his quarters to the beasts of the field and the f^wles of
the air, a just reward for such an inhumane Traitor: And then he prepared the
richest Tomb that ever was seen for his Queen, and commanded all the Lords and
Barons of the Land to appear at her great Funeral, which was solemnized in
mighty state, and honorably interred her in his own Chapel, where upon her
Tomb he caused to be engraven these words following.

Through ill advice of evil Traitors, I
Have slain my Queen in woeful misery;
For which advice I ever shall repent,
And to my dying day be discontent:
And whosoever thou art that passes by,
Curse him that caused thy Queen to dye.
Then said the Empress, you have showed me a good Example to beware of had
Counsel; therefore my Daughter shall not dye: And the Mistress departed from her
with a joyful heart.

The sixth Complaint of Radamentus.
WHen Radamentus perceiving by the muttering of the servants that the young
Princess was reprieved again, he grew so impatient, that all thought he would
have run mad; therefore they ran and fold the Empress, that Radamentus was
going best^e himself, for they never saw him before in such a passion: Then the
Empress went to him and said, wherefore my good Lord are you so impatient? he
answered, O Lady, how shall I hide my grief I the great love I bear to you does
prohibit me from leaving you, and if I tray, I see nothing but ruin and
destruction does attend you, in suffering such base and lascivious actions,
committed by your graceless Daughter, and not suppressed according to Law, that
I am ashamed to go out in the sight of the sun; my Counsel which you ought to
receive you slight, and rather believe the old wives fables, then my grave
Counsel: Therefore I fear it will happen to you worse then it did to the Lady,
who tendered her young Lion above all she had, till at the last he fore her
throat, as is mentioned in the Example. O my good Lord said the Empress, show
me that Example; and said gladly that would I do, but it avails nothing, to
morrow you will hear the Mistrisses again, nevertheless I'e show you one
Example more, and began as follows.

The sixth Example of Radamentus.
SOmetime in Asia lived a Lady, who being with child lunged for a young Lion,
so that inquisition was made all over Asia for a young Lion; at last a Nobleman
being a hunting in a wild Fortest, chanced to catch a Lions whel^, and sent it
to the Lady, who no sooner received it, but fell in labor, and was delivered
of a B^y, whom she loved marvellously, and kep^ the Lion always by her,
feeding it with all the dainties she possible could get, and the Lion would
follow her up and down the house, and seemed as tame as a Dog: at last he would
walk abroad, and run among the sheep but meddle with none, that caused the Lady
to love him, and tender him like as she did a Child, seeing he would run after
her so prettily among the sheep, and not touch any; but why should he, when his
belly was s^^^'d with all the Dainties that may be got. But it came to pass
upon a time, the Lady want from home, and committed the charge of her young
Lion to her maid, but alas she gave him not the attendance her Lady did;
wherefore he ran out among the Flock, and slew one of the best sheep therein,
and devouted him; when the Lady came home, the Shepherd complained to her, and
said, the Lion had slain one of the best sheep in the Flock, and the Lady would
not believe it, till the Stoward came, and also verified it; then said the
Lady, alas, if he has slain one of the Flock, it is but through his
foolishness, for he is but a whelp, and tender, and knew not what he did, but
if we catch him again doing such a trick, we will correct him for it; and not
long after he came into the Flock and slew two, and devoured as much as he
could, the rest that was left a Greyhound of the house found and eat it; the
Lion being come home first, and got to his Couch, there was no suspicion of
him, but the poor Greyhound coming home with his chops all bloody, was
apprehended of the Shepherd, and all the blame put upon him; wherefore the
Lady commanded him to be hanged, therefore according to the old Proverb, It is
better for some to steal an horse, then another to look over the hedge: The
third time the Lion went to the Flock, slew three, and glutted himself in their
(...); then the Shepherd complained the (...) time, but could have no redress,
the Lady still pardoning him, hoping he would mend: and the fourth time he fell
among the Flock, slaying and spoiling above twenty; then all people cried shame
upon the Lady, for keeping a ravenous Beast to destroy so good a Flock; yet the
Lady would not kill him, nor hardly give credit to what they said, nevertheless
she kept him in her Chamber close for two or three days, and he lay close by
the Cradle where her young Son was; and it happened one morning one morning,
that his wrath began to rise, and his eyes seemed as red as blood, walking up
and down the Chamber, he smelt to the Cradle where the Infant lay, and at last
jumpt upon him, and fore him all to pieces, and eat him before the mothers
face; then the Lady wrung her hands, and cursed the time she refused to kill
him: but that did not satisfy the savage beast, but after he had dispatched the
Child, he jumpt upon the Lady, and fore her joint from joint; and when the
servants ran up and looked through the key hole, all the Chamber was of a gore
blood.

Then said Radamentus, I fear it will happen to you as it did unto this poor
Lady, in tendering and saving your wicked Daughter so often, that when she comes
to have power, she will destroy your Subjects the good Sheep, and after bring
you to a miserable end. Then said the Empress, surely that shall not be, for to
morrow my Daughter shall dye: then she commanded her Officers to lead her away
to the stake, arrayed all over in a white rove signifying Death: then all the
people cried out, alas, and for evermore! the Empress Daughter is leading again
to dye, and they much lamented her death. Then the sixth Mistress when she heard
of it, mounted on horseback, and hasted to the Empress; who was no sooner come,
but the Empress disdainfully looked upon her, and threatened her sorely that she
should dye with her Daughter, for bringing her up in such horrid actions, that
all the world was ashamed of her: The Mistress said, I have not deserved as you
say; and as for your Daughter you shall know she shall speak within three
days, and all the truth shall come to light; but if you put her to death for
the words of one man, it will surely happen to you as it rid to the Princess of
Burgundy, who for the love of a foreign Prince, and the advice of an evil
Counselor, caused her own precious Daughter to be put to death, for which
after she would have given her own life. For the love of God said the Empress,
show me that Example; that shall I not do said the Mistress, except you send for
your Daughter back again, otherwise she may be dead, and then I should talk to
you in vain: Then the Empress commanded her Daughter to be called back again;
and the Mistress began as follows.

The Example of the sixth Mistress.
SOme time in Burgundy lived a fair Princess of famous worth and great (...);
this Princess took wonderful great delight in seeing Justs and Turnies: where
upon a time there came several brave Princes and Nobles to show their valor
before this great Princess, and there assembled together seventy and three
brave Heroes, and when the Princess baheld them all, she thought the
magnificency of the whole world were that day assembled together: amongst whom
was valiant Brutus, one of the Knights of Malts; and he behad'd himself so
valsantly, that all the honor of the day accrewed to him, that the Princess
was so much enamoured on him, that her eye was fixed all day long upon the
place where he stood; and when the day was over, this valiant Brutus came off
the Field with honor, T^umpets sounding, and victorious Trophies bore before
him: Now the Lady was in the window of her Castl^ all the while, and beheld his
worthy acts, so that her love burned on him, but could not tell how to reveal
it: Yet afterward she invited the Knight to a Banquet, and sent the massage by
her own Steward, for which Brutus returned the Princess many thanks, and
reputed her invitation as a great honor; and when the Day was come, the Knight
appeared before the Princess in such a brave gesture and comely deportment,
that the Princess was ravished to see the excellency of his carriage; so they
went to Dinnex that day, and passed away the time in complemental discouries:
Now this Lady had a Daughter most beaufiful and fair, full of modesty and
virtue, and of comoly seatures, and upon her the Knight had a fixed eye, but
the Princess never minded that, for she thought the Knight was more ambitions
to Court her then her Daughter, being young and of tenver years, therefore she
was clear of any fealonsie of her Daughter: so after they had feasted together
for the space of a week, the Knight most courteously took his leave of the
Princess, and departed home into his own Country, promising to come again soon
after; but failing to come, the Lady wondering the Knight did not come, she
asked her Steward what may be the reason of it? he said, that he perceived the
sight of her little Hound did displease him, therefore he would not come; now
this Princess loved the Hound as she did the greatest Jewel she had,
nevertheless by the Stewards advice she commanded him to be put to death. Now,
said she, I hope I shall please the Knight when he comes; soon after the Knight
came, and courted the Princess very highly, but as he was coming through a dark
room in the Castle, he chanted to stumble; and he said to himself, I Will never
come this way again: the Princess hearing the Knight say so, asked the Steward
why he said so? quoth he, because the Parret was in that room; O said the Lady,
though I prize the Parret as my life, yet go and kill it: So after they had
pessed the time away in all Courtly Delights and Princely Sports for the space
of a whole ^^^^th together, the Knight most courteously took his leave of the
Princess, and went again into his own Country, for his affections were
altogether knit upon the young Lady, though he bid it in obscurity, and the
Princess thought it was upon her self, so the time passed beyond her
expectation in looking for the Knights coming again, and admiring at his
absence so long, asked her Steward what might be the reason of it, of whom she
always took advice? and he said, the Knight has more love for the young Lady
your Daughter, then he has to you; for always when he is here, she is in his
Chamber wantonly playing with him, and she does all what she can to conspire
your Death; and if she live any longer, she will prove to be your utter ruins
and destruction. Then the Princess commanded her to be sac^ifi^ed upon the
Altar to the Oracle of Apollo; then there was an Altar erected before the
Palace Gate, covered all over with black, upon which was placed four great
War-Candles set in sockets of silver, by which was placed a Block of Ebony, a
Chasing-dish of Coals, and a Knite for the Eracutioner: These being ready, the
young Lady was brought upon the Altar, attended by twelve Ladies arrayed all in
white Vestments; then the dying Lady spoke to the Princess as follows: Most
reverend Mother and dread Princess, I am here brought to be sacrificed for
things laid to my Charge I know not of; and if you put me to death, there is a
God of all things who knows the secrets of all men's hearts, that will in one
day bring the truth to light, to the shame and dishonor of the unjust, who are
guilty of this my innocent Death. And thus having ended her Speech, and
preparing for the Block, Brutus the valiant Knight rushed into the Palace pard,
who demanded the cause of the multitude, and the people said, that the Princess
Daughter that day was to be sacrificed; then the Knight spurred his Steed, and
rote among the people, making a lane which way he came, and rescued the Lady
from the Altar, and brought her in before her mother again; and said to the
Princess, Madam, you had but three things in your Palace beside your self,
which I delighted in, and those you would destroy: The Princess asked him which
were those? and the Knight said, Your Daughter, your Hound: and your Parret,
and the Princess said, My Steward informed me the Hermd (...) essend you, and
addised me to kill him, and another time told me the Parret displeased you, and
counseled me to destroy it, and thirdly, my Daughter had most wickedly
conspired my death, for which he advised me to sacrifice her to the Oracle of
Apollo. Then said the Knight, call hither the Steward, who being come, he asked
him, did I tell thee the Hound offended me? he said no: he asked him again, did
I tell thee the Parret displeased me? and he said no: did thou ever see the
Lady in my Chamber? and he answered nothing, but fell down upon his knees, and
begged pardon of the Princess. Then said the Princess, O cursed Traitor, what
have thou made me to de, so slay my Hound I loved so dearly, and the Parret as
I did my life, and to attempt the murder of my only Daughter, through thy
treacherous, base, and wicked Counsel; surely thou shall dys f^r^^, so
commanded him to be led to the Gallows and hanged: Thus was the virtuous Lady
saved, and the unjust Traitor condemned. Now said the Mistress, understand ye
what I have said? yes right well said the Empress, and it rejoices my h^^rt
the young Lady was saved; therefore my Daughter this day shall not dye: Then
said the (...) (...) you do to you will do well; therefore I commend you to
God, and thank you for sparing yo^^ Daughter this day for my sake.

The seventh Complaint of Radamentus.
WHen Radamentus beard the young Lady was pardoned again, he ran up and down
the Garden like a mad man, cr^ing with a loud voice, O unhappy man am I that
should thus come into this Country, pretending to execute justice, and I am
constrained to suffer vice to be supported, to the ruin of the Empress, and
destruction of the Empire, and shame and confusion to my own felf; I wish I ba^
never come here! and the Empress said, leave off such talk, Justice shall be
done. O Lady said Radamentus, it will happen to you as it did to the Queen of
the Vandals, which is mentioned in the Example; good my Lord said the Empress,
show me that Example; that I will gladly do said Radamentus, if you with take
example by it, otherwise it (...) ^^^th me nothing to tell it you, for I have
(...) you six already, and yet you are dis^^^ded from them by six foolish
women; ne^ever ^^^less I will show you this one, though it be the last I eve^
shall do.

The seventh Example of Radamentus.
THere was a Queen (...)? the Vandals upon a time who had a very beautiful
Daughter, who she tendered very much, and loved as she did her own life;
insomuch, that wheresoever she went, her Daughter must go along with her; and
as they were walking upon a time in the fields, the young Lady had a Bird in
her hand, whom she would very fain have to sing and because she could not make
him s^^g, the pecke out his two eyes with her Bookin, and turned it loose, and
the Bird flew back, and by accident lichted in the branch of a Vine which grew
over the Queens window, and there hardented for a while singing very dolefully
every morning at the Queens window: Then said the Queen, O that I knew but what
this poor Bird does so mournfully sing now his eyes be out? And then stood up
an old man whose name was Mimnon, and said, if it may not offend the Queen, I
shall declare the interpretation of the Song: then said the Queen, speak on;
and he said, Gracious Lady, the contents of the song is a warning to you to
beware and to cut off. The interpretation is, to beware that your Daughter peck
not out your eyes as she did his; and that you cut her off before she come to
that maturity, as to sit upon your Throne with the Crown upon her head, when
you are on the pavement on your bare knees. And the Queen answered, these are
but fables, believe them not, my dear child is of no such nature: so past it
over like the old saying, till the time of repentance was too late; for she
tendered her Daughter so much, that she would make her Queen to rule one your,
and her self another, and did ratify and confirm by her own hand and Seal,
that whatsoever her Daughter did enact or do in her Reign, it should stand as
law for ever established; so when her Daughter came to maturity the Queen would
needs see how the Crown would become her, and made her Daughter Queen for that
year, and Crowned her in great pomp: when her Daughter had on the Royal Robe
and Crown, and all the power in her own hands, she thought it became her so
well, that she was loath to part with it; and for to keep it while she had it,
that very year she tart her Mother, the late Queen of high Treason for the
death of her Father, and brought her upon her knees before the Bar of Justice,
and she sat upon the Royal Throne. The Queen perceiving her Daughters tyranny
began to spring alost, the night following she made her escape, thinking to
raise an Army; but her Daughter being too cunning, laid watch and ward round
the City and took her again, and to prevent her future escape, boared both her
eyes out, and then the Queen remembered the singing of the poor blind Bird, and
wept most bitterly, saying, Cursed be the time that I refused to obey the voice
of the Bird; after that this wicked Daughter brought her again to the Bar of
Justice, and sound her guilty for endeavoring her escape, that in one day she
deposed her of Life, Crown, and Kingdom, and after ^eigned a wicked Tyrant,
that all people cust the day she was born: therefore I fear your wicked
Daughter will prove so to you if you let her live. The Empress said, God forbid
it should happen so; but to prevent it, to morrow I shall sit in Judgment, and
she shall surely dye: and on the morrow she commanded her Officers to lead her
again to the stake. When Penthisila the seventh Mistress heard that, away she
hasted to the Empress, and did her obeisance, and the Empress frowningly looked
upon her, and said, O thou cursed Caitif, what have thou done to my child, how
have thou taught her to be a Whore, a Beast, and a Strumpet, and also have cut
the tongue out of her head that she cannot speak? thou shall dye as well as
she, for I long to be avenged on thee and all the fellows. Then said
Penthisila, Most gracious Empress, the accusation against your virtuous
Daughter is fulse, and it is but a small time betwixt this and to morrow noon,
and if you please to spare her till then, with the help of Almighty God she
shall speak unto you in all virtuous learning, and the truth of all things
shall be made manifest; but if you will not, it shall, happen to you as it did
unto a rich widow which is mentioned in the Example. Then show me that Example,
said the Empress, that shall I not do, said the Mistress, except you call your
Daughter gain; then shall you hear such a notable Example, as you shall beware
the advice of one man as long as you live, and so began as follows.

The Example of the seventh Mistress.
UPon a time there was a mighty rich Widow who had a bountiful Estate, and she
had one only Daughter, who was Heiress unto this Estate; but it chanced that
this Widow being not capable altogether to govern it all, she chose a grave
Minister to be her assistant in the government of i^. Now said this old man, if
I could cut off the Heiress, I would quickly iuggle the Widow out of it, and
then rule as chief Lord my self in it: And to begin his treachery, he said to
the Widow, I hold it very convenient, since you are a Widow and I a Bachelor,
to conclude a Marriage and spend our days together, provided that you will cut
off the intail, and disinberit your Daughter, whereby we may enjoy it while we
do live, and after our decease we will give it to her again. The Widow liked
this very well, thinking he had advised her to the best, and thereupon
disinherited her own child: then she asked the old man to be as good as his
promise, who said, I will marry ye if you will assign the whole Estate over to
me, then I will marry ye on May day next, and be careful of your child, loving
to you, and govern it all. Then the Widow hearing that, reposed great
confidence in him, made all her Estate over to him: When this was done, he
neither looked after the Child nor cared for the Widow, which made the
Daughter run distracted, and dyed in the public Field, and at May day the
Widow wondered why he would not come and perform his promise, at last went to
him, and ask't him, Sir, why do you not perform your promise, and marry me?
why, said the old Minister, I am ready to marry ye if you have got a good
Husband: sten said the Widow, Will not you be my Husband? no, said he, I
promised but to marry ye, not to be your Husband; the verier knave you, then,
said the Widow; so the went out and wept bitterly, saying, That band which
signed all my Estate to youder cursed Caitif from my own Child, shall now end
my miserable life, so stab^^ het self. Then said the Mistress, understand ye
Madam what I have said, yes, right well said the Empress: then said the
Mistress, beware, and believe not that old Counselor, for he does but labor
to cut off your only Daughter, and after to ruins you, so 07 that he may reign
as Lord and Emperor. You have showed me a good Example, said the Empress,
though it grieves my heart to hear it proved so fatal to the Widow; therefore
my Daughter shall not dye this day, but I shall rejoice exceedingly to hear her
speak to morrow: said the Mistress, by the assistance of the Divine Powers she
shall speak, whereby she shall decide all the variances betwixt Radamentus and
us, and you shall see the truth brought to light, so took leave of the Empress,
and departed.

Chap. 6.
How Sabrina the Empress Daughter complained of Radamentus, and how she excused
her self of her accusation.
NOw all the Mistrisses, Penthisila, Debora, C^cere, Dejanara, Boadicia,
Mardula, and Halicuja took counsel how they should bring the Princess out of
Prison to the Palace; so they went to the Princess on the morrow betimes to
counsel her, and the Princess said, take no care what I shall say, I am
provided already: then they all rejoiced, and clothed her in cloth of Gold, and
put her in a Chariot, drawn by six milk white Steed^, and they rid on
horseback, three before the Chariot, one of each side, and two behind, with
stately Banners carried before, and all sorts of Music playing; when the
Empress heard the noise she asked what it meant, and the people said, the young
Princess and all the seven Wise Mistrissas of Rome were coming to the Palace;
and the Empress rejoiced exceedingly, and came cut to meet them, and when the
Princess was come, she said to her Mother, Hall my most (...) Mother, and fell
upon her knees, and the Empress full of joy to hour her speak, took her up in
her arms and kissed her: then began the Princess to declare the whole matter
before the Empress, and all the whole multitude, and she began as follows,
Most dear Mother, before I proceed, I desire that my accuser Radamentus and all
the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber do appear before us; so the Empress commanded
Radamentus to appear with all his men, who immediately came: then said the
Princess, Most dear Mother, behold the young Gentleman that stands there in
black, who is favorite to Radamentus, above all others. command him to be
stripped before us all: said the Empress, that will be a shame to us? nay said
the Princess, be the shame to these that deserve it; and when be was unclothed
he was known to be a woman to the admiration of all.

The Complaint of the Princess against Radamentus.
THen said the Princess to her Mother, behold this Fornicator and this Whore,
who bath commonly lain with him in his bed, committing the foul sin of
fornication; which thing he would also have committed with me in the Garden,
and because I would not consent to his filthy lust, he ran out, crying, he had
seen me lying with a man under the Fig tree, and thereby complained unjustly
against me seeking all possible means how to take my life away: Therefore most
gracious Mother, give me leave to reprove him of all his grievous slanders, and
false accusations, word by word; and I beseech you to hear me patiently. When
you sent for (...) at his request, I beheld the Stars, b^ which I knew, that if
I should have spoken to you, (...) any other, within seven days, ^^^as he^^e^h
(...) sh^^ld are a shameful death, for which cause I did forbear to speak until
this present. When the Empress heard her Daughter so just and learnedly
vindicate the truth, she said to Radamentus, O wicked wretch, was not thy
Concubine enough to (...) ^hy faul and lecherous apposite, but would have had
to do with my only Daughter. Then Radamentus fell to the gro^nd and begged
pardon; but the Empress said, O ungratsful Traitor, thou do (...) mercy, but
thou shall find none, for the law shall be upon thee even unto a shameful
death as thou have deserved.

Then said the Princess, Most gracious Mother, it was told you by this wretched
Caitiff, that I should by the help of my Mistrisses, endeavor your
destruction, and assume the Government to my self? Alas, I should more rather
use all the art and skill I have to help and support you in all your Government
about your Empire, and repute you my Sovereign, since I have from you all my
living and maintenance, not to deprive you of your Dignity, for in your honor
do I glory. Then said the Empress. blessed be Almighty God, that I have such a
good and learned Daughter, that I find so expert in all Arts and Sciences;
therefore declare to me one example whereby I may understand thy wisdom
perfectly, then shall I have joy of thee, and my heart will be satisfied. Then
said the Princess, Gracious Mother, Command silence among the people, that all
may hear me, and when I have ended, o^^e sentence according to law upon me and
Radamentus: When the Hall was silenced, the Princess began as follows.

The Example of Sabrina the Empress Daughter.
THere was a Queen which had but one Daughter, whom she loved as she did her
life; therefore the Queen delivered her (...) a Wise Mistress to be brought up,
and be instr^^^^d in all virtuous Learning and Wisdom: and when she had been
with her Mistress a certain while, her Mother had a desire to see ^er, and sent
Letters to the Mistress to bring home her Daughter; when she came, she appeared
to her Mother, so expert in learning, comely in behavior, and amiable unto
all, that the Queen rejoiced exceedingly: and it happened on a time, as she
delivered a bowl of Wine to her Mother, the Queen looked upon the wall and saw
the shadow of a hand which wrote three lines in an unknown tongue, and the
Queen began to fear greatly, and said, happy were that person which could
interpret what that writing meant; then her Daughter said, if it may not offend
the Queen, I could give the true interpretation thereof: and the Queen said,
speak on my good Daughter; and the Child said, Most honored Mother, this
writing does signify, that I shall become a mighty Princess, and shall be
honored of all people, especially my own Mother, who shall bring me a Bowl of
Wine, and bow three times, and kneel in the delivery of it; and the Queen said,
Thou shall never be honored so of me, nor have such service; therefore she
commanded her servants to take her into a Forest far from the Court, and there
slay her, and bring her Heart to show her, that she may know the truth of her
death: so the servants took her away to the Forest, and having compassion on so
sweet a Child, said among themselves, let us deceive the Queen in this bloody
(...), and save the Child, and we will put her in this hollow Tree, and kill a
Lamb of the Mountain and bring the Heart to the Queen, which accordingly they
did, and the Queen believed it was the Heart of her Daughter: saying,
Prophecies sometime prove not true. And it chanced that on the morrow after, a
strange Knight happened to hunt in the Forest, where the Child was to be slain,
and his Dogs beyed about the tree, where the Queens Daughter was: at last the
Knight looked in the hollow of the tree, and there he espied a young Girl of
such incomparable beauty, that his eyes never beheld a fairer, which made him
suspect that she was of some noble race; and so he commanded his servants to be
careful of her, and to bring her into his own country, where he did bring her
up in all learned Arts, and with royal attendants, till at last her fame began
to ring throughout the whole Kingdom, for Virtue, Beauty and Learning; and the
Emperor of that Land being very youthful, came to that Knights house for so
view her. And no sooner did he behold her, but he was smitten with the
inflammation of Love, and after dinner he danced with her, and in the evening he
married her, and brought her in great triumph and solemnity home to his own
Court. And after that, the three Eastern Kings hearing of her fame, came to see
her beauty, and to bring her presents: thus for three years she lived with her
husband the Emperor in all joy and happiness, and then he dyed, leaving the
whole Empire unto she, who was then called the great Empress of Blodermario.
When she was thus in the height of all her glory, she viewed the Firmament, and
perceived by her skill in Astrology, how her Mother that day was deposed by the
Prince of Moravia, of Crown and Kingdom, and banished out of her country; and
laying to heart the distressed condition her mother was in, had compassion on
her, (for pure Nature will never fall away) and therefore she raised a brave
and mighty Army, and marched toward her mothers Country: which news did slye
before her, that it was told the Queen her mother, the great Empress of
Blodermario was coming to her assistance; which made the Queen to rejoice, and
wonder greatly, knowing she had never no correspondency with her before.
Wherefore she went to meet her, and when she came before the great Empress, she
fell down upon her knees, and said O great Empress, how have I meritted so
great honor and favor, that your m^st Excellent Majesty have vouchsafed to
come in person, and establish me again in my kingdom! Then the Empress took her
up, and have her come in^o the Chariot to her, and when they came home to the
Court, the Queen brought the Empress a bowl of wine and bowed three times, and
fell down upon her knees to present it: then the Empress commanded her servants
to depart the room, and then she asked the Queen what Children she had; and the
Queen answered, she had one Daughter but she was dead. Then the Empress said,
tell me true, did she dye a natural death or no: tell me the truth, for I swea^
by my Crown you shall come to no damage. Then the Queen answered, Most
glorious Princess, I brought up my daughter in all virtuous Learning, Arts and
Sciences, that for her wisdom and comely behavior she was honored of all
people, and beloved of every one; she was my only delight, and in her absence
was my greatest sorrow, that without her presence I was discontent: when I was
wont to sit down to meals, she was always at my elbow, to give me a bowl of
wine when I should please to call for it; for the pleasantest draught that ever
I drank was out of her hand. And it happened upon a time as I sats at dinner,
my Daughter waited upon me, and as she bare a bowl of wine to my hand, there
appeared the shadow of an Arm upon the wall, and it wrote three lines to the
great astonishment of us all: and I beheld it my self, and said, That person
was happy which could read and interpret those Lines that were written upon the
wall by a secret and an unknown band, that none but the Diverts powers did know
of. Having thus spoken, my Daughter stood up and spoke unto me to (...) words,
If it may please my most dear and reverend mother not to be offended with me, I
could read those Lines upon the wall and interpret them, and give you the true
meaning thereof. Then I answered and said, Speak on my Daughter, and you shall
find whether I shall be angry or no: them my Daughter stood up boldly and
said, The Lines upon the wall written are in several Languages, but the
interpretation does predict or signify, that I shall become a mighty Princess,
and be honored by all people, especially by my own Parents; for the time shall
come, that my Mother shall present a bowls of wine to me, and bow three times,
and deliver it upon her knees. When the young Lady had thus made an end of
declaring the interpretation of the Lines that were written upon the wall, her
mother was very wroth, and said to her self thus, I will never be so
serviceable to my own daughter surely; and being in my fury I called my
servants and commanded them to take her privately away, and conveigh her to the
Forest of Bazar, and there destroy her; and for satisfaction thereof, to bring
her Heart and show it unto me, which accordingly was done, and she is dead;
which for the reason you have heard I did destroy her.

Then said the Empress, you might well think it was much in vain to strive
against tho determinations of the holy will of God; for now you shall know of
truth that what is decreed in Heaven above the force of mortals can never
frustrate below upon the earth; therefore be it known to you that I am your
daughter whom you suppose to have been dead, and by the Providence of God I
have been preserved, the Lord putting it into the hearts of your servants not
to slay me, but to put me into a hollow tree, where a Knight chanced to come
that way a hunting, his Dogs did run and encompassed the said tree round about
howling and crying, whereby the Knight looking in to see what the reason was of
his Dogs making such a howling, he there found me: the servants also to
satisfy your implacable wrath against me, that you commanded to bring my
Heart, to let you see the Execution was effected, they slew a Lamb on the side
of the mountain and presented the Heart to you. The good Knight also that found
me in the tree cartied me into his own Country, and presented me to the
Emperor, where I was not long before I was espoused to him his Wise, and
advanced to the Royal dignity of an Empress; and his most Excellent Majesty
soon after deceased, and left me sole Heir to his Empire, in which Honor and
Glory I now remain. The Queen hearing these words, being ravished with soy, and
all amazed, sell down to the earth in a swound, whom the Empress loving, took
up in her arms, saying, Now you shall know that my exaltation and dignity
accrue to your glory, s^y, and profit, so they kissed each other: then the Queen
began to weep, but the Empress said Weep not my most dear and reverend mother,
for you are restored to your Crown and Kingdom, whereby you shall be honored
by all people above me during my life and reign. And afterward there was a
great Feast prepared, and all the Nobles and Barons of the Land assembled
together to congratulate and joy with the young Empress, in magnificent Shows
and Triumphs. After the great Day was over, and the Celebration ended, the
young Empress sent her Heralds throughout all the Kingdom, to the Dukes and
Princes to repair to her Mothers Royal Standard, and render their duty and
obedience to her Majesty, and to set the Crown again upon her Head. And after
she had settled her mother in a firm and flourishing peace, she departed in
great honor and glory, and returned into her own Empire.

Here follows the Application of the Example.
THen said Sabrina to the Empress her mother, Understand you Madam what I have
said? Yes right well said the Empress. Then said the daughter, Most worthy
mother, though God has endued me with Learning and Wisdom so far abode others,
yet it shall rather be applied to the supporting of you^ Honor and Dignity,
then to the impairing of your glorious Majesty: like as the great Empress in
the very height of all her Honor, though formerly her mother did seek her
destruction, she did not infringe her mothers Prerogative, but on the contrary,
she helped her and enlarged her Dominions. Nay, when her mother was banished
from her Realm, she restored her again to her Kingdom, and put the Royal Diadem
upon her head; and by her great strength and potent power, caused all the
bordering Princes round about to live in fear of her most Excellent Majesty.
And as long as the Empress lived, her mother was honored above her, and
enjoyed her Kingdoms in a flourishing peace and tranquillity. Then the Empress
took her daughter by the hand and led her up to the upper and of the Hall, and
placed her in a Chair of State upon her right hand; then she assembled all her
Nobles and Barons, and Privy Councillors, both Ladies and Gentlewoman, and
before them all spoke thus to her daughter.

My dearly and beloved daughter, I have not without great joy heard you all
this while declare unto me the Jewel or my delight, that is your skillful Arts
and Sciences, your good and able Perfections, just and modest Behavior in a
wise and Princely deportment, which is no small comfort for me to see and hear;
and give me leave to tell you my prudent Child, that since it has pleased the
Divine Powers to accomplish you with so many Graces which adern your Princely
person as the Lilly does the swaet and delightful dalleys: so I hope that all
my Lords and Barons here assembled, will to your assistance, as to the
undoubtful he it of this Empire, sit as Olive branches about your Council
Table; for by your learned Narration to me declared, I do well perceive you are
able to take upon you the Government of this Empire, and to sit in the glorious
Chair of Judgment, which so many of your noble Ancestors have possessed before
you; whereof few did equalize, at least never did exceed you in learned parts
or State Affairs; for you do wear the Headpiece of Vertus, the Touchstone of
Justice, and a Body Politic: therefore I do declare unto you all my Nobles
here assembled, that in my opinion and good discretion, I do think it best for
me, being now well stricken in years, to leave this tedious business of an
Empire, and ^^^ake me to my rest, whereby I may prepare for another Crown; for
I have lived to see many golden days, and many others of tribulation, now it
is high time for me to lay down my Scepter in peace, and my Crown in rest; for
my daughter is grown up to a firm maturity, and well does deserve the Laurel.
Moreover, it will fill my benes with content and joy, to see the Crown flourish
upon her head before I go of my grade.

Then after the Empress had ended her speech, all the Lords of the Council
stood up and said, Most gracious Empress, we do all think our selves happy this
day, that it has pleased your most Excellent Majesty to declare so much your
will and pleasure unto us; far be it from the heart of any of your noble
Subjects this day here present, to derogate or disanul the least tittle what
your Majesty's most gracious pleasure is, but as willingly do ratify, confirm,
and establish every word and syllable contained therein, as willingly as ever
we placed the Royal Diadem upon your head: and we do here unanimously, and with
a general consent, first, with your gracious leave and ple^sure, we do ordain
and acknowledge, the Princess your Daughter to be our Sovereign L^dy and
Empress. And furthermore we do ordain and appoint the ninth day of the second
Month, to be Celebrated for the Day of her Coronation.

And when all things were ready and the day come, all the Nobles of the Land
appeared that day in their Robes; the old Empress rode before upon a pavilion
drawn be sir Horses, and two led on each side the Pavilion in cloth of State:
four and twenty Tropbies or Banners were carried before. Next came the young
elected Empress in an open Chariot drawn by twelve Camels covered with cloth of
Silver all in State, and the Banner Royal was carried before the Empress
Chariot, with Trumpets founting, and all sorts of Music plating throughout all
the City up to the Palace, where the young Empress alighted out of her Chariot,
and walked up to the Royal Throne guarded by her Nobles, and with a rich Canopy
bore over her head. When she came into the great Hall, she ascended up to the
Royal Throne; then after the Ceremonies were ended, the Nobles put the Crown
upon her Head, and the Scepter in her Hand, and before the old Empress swore
their Alegiance to the young Empress: and then with great Joy and Acclamations,
the people shoul^d and said, God save the new Empress.

Then was the old Empress brought into the Hall, where great Ceremonies and
Reverence was done to her; then she ascended up to the Royal Throne, and placed
she was by the young Empress upon her left hand, and the young Empress began to
speak to her mother in this manner:

Most glorious and loving mother, it has been your will and pleasurs to confer
upon me this Royal Dignity before your decease, not my Ambition to bestre it:
but though I fit in the Glorious Chair of this Empire, and Govern the People
now in your Lifetime; yet most dear mother, the Name and Authority shall not
depart from you as long as you live: but in all businesses of Consequence that
does belong to the State, I mean these great Concernments that be most painful
and laborious, to ease you thereof, I will take the pains in administering all
helps and services that in me lies, as it becomes a loyal and faithful
Subfra, according to my bounden duty.

When all the Nobles and Privy Counselors heard these worthy and Heroic
Expressions of their young eleven Princess, they should all again, and gave
thanks to the Divine Powers for raising them up such a virtuous and able
Governor as she, who was the Supporter of her mothers h^^nour; the true
Maintainer of the Fundamental Laws and Privileges, and the Glory of all the
Realm. Where now we will leude her in her full power and Magistracy,
prosecuting the false Judge, evil Counselor, and persur'd and arrand Traitor,
Radamentus.

How Judgment was given upon Radamentus and his Concubine, and how they were
both put to death.
NOw when the Empress had Crowned her Daughter, and all the great Selemnity
ended, she called a Council and assembled there the Nobles, the Barons, and the
Learned Judges of the Land, for the speedy trial of Radamentus and his
notorious Concubins: and when they were all met together, and assembled in the
Judgment. Hall, the Empress and her Mother being plac'^ upon the Royal Throne,
and the Court sat, Proclamation was (...), and Radamentus sent for; where
immediately he and his Concubine were brought into the Hall, fast bound with
cords, and commanded to stand before the Bar. Then Sabrina the young Empress
stood up, and in a most Eloquent and Learned Speech she said thus as follows:

My Lords and Gentlemen of this honorable Senate, and also all you most grave
and reverend Judges of the Land, you have beard already and are very sensible
for what Radamentus and his Concubine, both now Prisoners at the Bar of
Justice, stand here indicted for. They are not brought hither for a Crime laid
against them to take away their Lives wrongfully; but for a fact which they
have committed in the highest degree of insclency, and that you very well all
do know. And be it known, that when I was at School with the Seven Wise
Mistrisses, (I may say of the world) and in the full practice of my Learning,
this Radamentus now prisoner at the Bar, being then a very great Councellor to
her Grace the Queen my mother, as you all do know, did instigate my mother to
send for me home, to the intent he might learn and find out a way how to
entrap me, whereby to take away my life: and to effect his horrid Couspiracy,
he falsely informed my mother the Empress, that he saw me in the Palace Garden
committing the foul sin of Fornication, supposing that I could speak and answer
for my self: and hereupon he brought seven Examples to my mother the Empress
against me; and labored very much for seven days together, to animate my
mother against me. And the reason why I did not speak within the time of those
seven days was, because when my mother sent for me through his instigation, I
saw in the Planets a Fate which did predict a sad omen to me: which was, that
when I came to Court, if I did speak a word within seven days, I should be
most miserable, and be put to the most shameful death that ever Virgin was.
Therefore to prevent his wicked intention, I did conceal my Speech for so long;
in which time my seven Wise Mistrisses by their learned skill and good
discretion did labor in my behalf, and spoke for me; each Mistress spoke by
turn each day, and by Providence saved me: and the eighth day, by the
assistance of the Divine Powers, I spoke and answered for my self; confuting
all the shameful and wicked accusations this hellish Monster of mankind had
contrided against me, whereby the unjustness of his own cause has now heaped
vengeance upon his own head: Moreover, the Prisoner at the bar, in the time of
my accusation, and long before, did keep a private Concubine instead of a young
man to wait on him, clothed in man's apparel, to satisfy his own lascivious
lust, and filthy appetite, and charged me an innocent Virgin with all those
abominable vices and wicked sins, that he himself daily committed in his secret
chamber; he caused me seven days one after another to be led to the Judgment
Hall, where there he sat himself, and gave sentence upon me, and caused me to
be led to the Gallows shamefully to be burnt at a stake, for crimes laid
against me that I was innocent of: Therefore most gracious Mother, as you are
the Empress of all the Eastern part of the world, forasmuch as I will not own
the general name till after your Decease; and all you my Lords and Barons of
the Prity Counsel, and you also my grave and rederend Judges, whose power and
authority requires you to do justice according to the due administration of
the Statutes of this Realm, I do therefore demand justice upon the shameless
Accuser at the Bar, Radamentus and his Concubine, through whose means I was in
peril of my life, and led seven times to the Gallows to he executed.

Then Radamentus stood up and said, Great Princess, under whose power and
protection the whole Realm do now flourish; and all you most grave and learned
Counselors and Judges. I am brought to this place to answer for my faults,
and the many misdemeanors that I hade committed against the Person of your
Royal Highness; I confess my my self guilty, and as I stand here obligod before
the Bar of Justice, I desire that your Royal Highness may consider the service
I have done for her most Excellent Majesty your Mother; in the time of your
minority I concluded a Peace between she and the great Cham; twice between she
and the King of Egypt; and once with the great Emperor the Lord Belius, in
which service I always proved a faithful Counselor; therefore I beseech your
gracious Majesty to consider, and here upon my bended knees I do beg mercy and
forgiveness for all my faults committed against your Royal Person; or if that
will not be granted, let my person extend so far in the valuation of your
gracious favors, as to be only confined to Prison for seven years, or
otherwise during the pleasure of your Majesty; if that may not be obtained, let
it please the merciful Court to save my life, and give me exile and banishment
for ever. Yet all this availed nothing; for the young Princess prosecuted very
severely, calling to the Judges, and saying, My Lords and Gentlemen of the
Counsel, and ye learned Judges of the Court, you have heard the Charge against
the evil Traitor at the Bar, and you have heard his answer; for my part I
grant no pardon, but what the bare Law will give him, therefore let your wise
and good discretions guide ye in the due administrations of this remarkable
piece of Justice, whereby he may pay the due Debt which the Law requires.

The Councels and Judges hearing the words of the Empress, were all astonished
to hear such wisdom from a woman; then all the Judges and Counselors stood up
and called Radamentus: Radamentus, your evil life and conversation is very
apparent to the Court, and your hellish conspiracies and notorious actions
which here this day you are accused of, are public Evidences against you at
the Bar; and therefore according to Law we do all here with a general Vote
pronounce Sentence against you and your Concubine, that you shall be taken away
from this place to the place from whence you came, and from thence to be drawn
at two horses tails throughout the City to the place of Execution, which shall
be under the common Gallows, and there to be burnt to ashes.

These words being ended, the Court rose up, and the Prisoners were taken away,
and carried to the Prison from whence they were taken; and on the seventh day
after they were se^ched by the Officers belonging to the Empress, and tied both
of them to a horses tail, and so was dragged through the streets, where
multitudes of people flockt about to see them, all crying out, Behold the
horrid Traitor, behold the horrid Traitor! so in this manner they were brought
to the common Gallows, and there bound fast to a stake with iron Chain, ready
to be burnt, Then began Radamentus to make his Confession after this manner
following: O People, behold here Radamentus, once a Judge, and second Ruler in
the Land, whose Power extended over all the Empire, and to whom the Subjects
came to for Justice, and I ruled with a strict hand, all the people knowing it
very well; seven years I sat Judge for life and death, and I have given
sentence upon seven hundred sixty and two persons, who departed with their
lives in this place where I now stand; I slew my Mother in my birth, my Uncle I
gave sentence upon, and I sealed the Warrant for my Fathers death; seven days
I did strongly plead for the destruction of the Royal Empress, for which cause
I am brought hither to suffer that Death which I have deserved long ago;
therefore in large your spleen against me, and give me fire enough: and as the
flame began to arise, the People heard a great and lamentable voice, as they
thought ascending out of the Concaditics of the earth; and it was sad and
doleful to the beholders, so that all were in a maze, for it roared out,
saying, Radamentus, Radamentus is coming, make room, for the great Radamentus
is coming; and no sooner were these words spoke, but his body did vanish from
the stake, and his Concubine consumed in the flame: This was the end of the
grandest Traitor and Murderer in all the world, very fit for such a lascivious
person.

The Empress having now outlived her mortal Enemy old Radamentus, she began a
most happy and glorious Reign, her own Mother esteemed her as her only joy;
the Nobles of the Land did honor her greatly for her excellent Learning and
Wisdom, the Subjects did almost adore her for the rarefy of her Justice, and
the moderation of her Language, her Crown then began to flourish upon her head,
and her Name began to spread over all the face of the earth, and the longer she
did reign, the more her glory did shine; her Mother the old Empress lived till
she saw, that what for her Beauty, and what for her Learning, the bordering
Nations round about did almost give divine reverence unto her; and in the
height of this flourishing Peace, the old Empress dyed and bequeathed her own
Crown and Royal Scopter for to be put upon Sabrina's head in this world, and a
Crown of Glory in the world to come. Sabrina after this did Celebrate her
Funeral in the greatest Triumph which can be imaginable; she also erected a
most sumptuous Monument, wherein she interred the body of her Mother, with this
Inscription written on it:

Within this Monument interred here lies
The only Mother of Sabrina the wise,
Who counseled was by Radamentus sway,
To take Sabrina's precious life away:
But time and fortune favored her at last,
Whose Life was saved, and Radamentus lost.
Sabrina the young Empress having buried the old Empress in such state, was
commended above all her predecessors: for never was such a Monument erected
before. Now Sabrina being Empress of all the Eauerne part of the World, began
to grow very potent and great, for all people gave her reverence, and did
homage unto her: Kings and Princes sent her rich presents, and came from sarre
Counteys to visit and complement her; but more especially to hear her grave
wisdom, and to see the excellency of her Arts and Sciences, which bad so much
spread over the whole world; she was accounted the greatest Philosopher that
was in those days in the world, she continually keeping all sorts of
Professors and Artificers, that so she might thereby know the nature of all
V^gitables, as Plants, Hearb^, Roots, Leaves, and Trees: she kept four thousand
Stables of Horses, which were on purpose for her own Attendance; there was no
Nation at war and variance with her but only one, and they were the Tarters;
so that now to prevent their Incroachment upon her most rich and plentiful
Dominions, she chose a fifth man out of all her Empire to build a brazen Wall
between her and her Enemies, about fifteen hundred miles long, and at every ten
miles end she caused to be built a strong and famous Castle, wherein she placed
ten thousand men for to keep guard against the said Tartars, which were People
inhabiting in a poor and barren Country; for they fought not to revenge any
quarrel or injury done to them, but merely for some of the Gold and Riches this
glorious Sabrina had, and to see if they could get into any of her plentiful
Countries to inhabit, for all her Countries were golden Valleys both for profit
and pleasure: and though this brazen Wall was built and strongly made, yet the
fury of the Tartars was so iuraged, that they broke over, according to the old
Proverb, Hunger will break through stone walls: and for three hours time there
was a mortal Battle; but the young Empress Sabrina had a Champion in her Army
called Gorgon, a Giant you must conceive he was, for he was seven Cabits high,
the Club that he bore was like the mast of a Ship, his Helmet was made of
Brass, weighing an hundred shekels of Iron; this Giant fought most
courageously, and made lanes through the Army of the Lartars, that all dreaded
and feared the place where he came: And on on a time it happening, that this
Giant was in the heat of the Battle, and being extreme hot, he went to the main
Ocean to drink, and to refresh himself, and in the vehemence of his draught, he
swallowed a Soldiers Knapsack full of Linen, which made it swim, and he spate
at it as if it had been but a mote in his glass; but finding himself not very
well, he sent for the Empress Physician, who hearing the great Champion was not
well, made what expedition he could to disit him, and seeing him in such a sad
distemper, he caused a Ladder for to be put down his Threat into his Belly,
which was a usual thing or custom in that Country, especially to such men of
such vaste and great stature, and commanded his Man to go down the Ladder into
his belly, and there for to see if he could finds and know by his skill and
good discretion what was the cause of his grief and heaviness; but his man
would not venture to go down, except he had a Link in his hand; and thereupon
he lighted a good blazing Torch, and down he goes: But he had not descended
down above two steps, but the breath of the Giant arising from his smoking
Gorge did very much dimnifle the light of his Link, and to recruit the light
again, he smote it upon the rounds of the Ladder, which reduced the Giant to
such an extreme cough, that with the extremity thereof he had a very strong
vomit, that by the force and strength thereof, he drove the fellow out of his
belly, that h^ lighted above ten foot from his mouth.

But no sooner was the Fellow out of the Giants belly, but he ran away in a
great sweat to his master, and told him, that he would not take half his Estate
to go about the same Cure again. Nevertheless, the Giant became very well
afterward, and built twelve famous Pillars, upon every Pillar he built a
Castle, upon every Castle twelve Towers, and upon every Tower spacious Gardens,
whereby a Lady of pleasure might have taken much delight in: But whether you
may take this to be incredible or no, I Will leave that to your judgment.

But now as for the noble renowned P^in cess, the became so famous by her own
State Policy, and by the assistance of that Giant in victorious Battles, that
most Princes in all that part of the world became her Tributaries, all being in
subjection to her: and she being counted the greatest Beauty that lived in
those days, she was obtained by Alexander Blag of Egypt, and espoused his
Wife, that when the strength of his deny and the excellent wisdom of this
Empress, were joined in one Politic body, they remained the sole terror of
all the earth for many years together; but in the end were both deprived from
Crowns and Kingdoms.

Of the great and triumphant Wedding between the young Empress and Alexander
King of Egypt, and of the unfortunate successes that after ensued in his
Dominions.
NOw in the beginning of April, when the earth had got on her Summer livery,
and adorned with her flourishing wonted ornaments, Alexander King of Egypt
designed his purpose to the Realm of Epirus, for he had heard say, there lived
an Empress whose wisdom exceeded all the Kings and Princes both adjacent and
far remote, and the fame of that Empress invited him thither; and thereupon he
prepared his Horses and Chariots, with his Camels and Dromedaries laden with
the richest Merchandire, Gold and Jewels that was in all that part of the
world, and prosecuted his design until he arrived in the Kingdom of Epirus,
where young Sabrina the Empress maintained her chiefest residence; and she
hearing of his coming, caused her Heralds to proclaim in all Cities, Towns,
and Corporations, that the great King of Egypt was coming to her Court, and
also prepared her self in person to meet him: she rode in a rich and stately
Chariot drawn by six milk white Steeds, with Trappings of Gold, and twelve
Ladies of Honor with Palms in their hands on each side the Chariot; twelve
Lord Barons marched before bearing rich ^rophies, in each of which there was
artificially wrought a Garland of red Roses, with all sorts of instruments of
music. King Alexander espying the Banners displayed in the Air, immediately
knew that it was the Empress, and thereupon commanded his Nobles to drive hard;
and when 05 the King was come near to the Empress, and beheld her in all her
glory, he was astonished, and said to himself, O Beauty incomparable! seeming
Deity, thou do want nothing of all the excellencies of a woman, nor in thee
has nature failed in any thing, but that it made thee mortal; so in as comely a
grace, and in as brave a deportment as ever past between King and Queen, they
saluted each other, and in a most triumphant state marched unto her Royal
Palace, where no delight was wanting: The young King had not been there above a
week, but what by the Beauty, and what by the most mavelous wisdom he saw and
heard from the Princess, he was even so ravished, that many times he knew not
what he did; but it happened in an evening, that Alexander King of Egypt saw
the Empress walking in the Garden; and thought it a fit opportunity to speak
unto her; so stepped into the Walk, and said unto the Empress, Most amiable,
beauteous, wise, and learned Madam, by your Beauty I am ravished, and at your
wisdom I am astonished, even that my senses are bereaved from me! Great Goddess,
if I do not obtain one boon from your Grace, I shall live a captive to love,
and a bond-slave to desire; the thing which I crave is of no small concernment.
The Empress in a most Virgin-like and comely behavior answered the King, being
amorous of him also: My gracious Lord and renowned Prince, whatsoever your
request is it is granted already. Then said the King, O most fair and
prudentiall Queen, nothing do I desire more then only to make you Queen and
sole Mistress of all Egypt. The Empress being wise, considered the King to be a
great Prince, amiable in visage, wise and comely in behavior, granted his
request: For she understood* that matching with such a great Prince as
Alexander, she should become the greatest Empress in the world, adding both
powers together; and thereupon she gave him her hand upon it, and the day was
appointed when the Marriage should be Celebrated between these two great
Potentates; all the Kings, Princes, Dukes, and Ladies in all the bordering
Countries round about were at the Wedding, except the King of Syra, who always
was an Antagonist to Alexander, whom all those Princes now began to fear, in
regard his Dominions were so enlarged by the Marriage with the wise Empress;
and his Power began to increase so, that he swayed the one half of the world,
but his Enemy the King of Syra swayed the other; so that between them both the
whole Universe was governed. The Marriage being ended, never King or Queen did
flourish in more peace and unity for seven years then they did; for through the
daily company of this wise and renowned Empress, Alexand^r was much bettered,
and by her wisdom his wits were illuminat^d; and she made him a body Politic,
insomuch that he would b^ inqu^^tive of all Ambassadors to know the nature of
their Countries, the disposition of their people, the majesty of their Kings,
and the ways of their Wars. He always kept a great Army, but under strict
orders, and much severity; he was feared by all the Kings about him, only the
King of Syra, who daily watched how he might supprize him; he was lovely,
valiant, and discreet; he was courteous to all people, loving to his Empress,
of whom he had begot two Sens; his love did always burn and extended so far
toward his Empress, that being in Egypt upon a time, leaving his Empress in
Epirus, he would every morning run up to the top of a mountain, and look
steadfastly toward Epirus, and would s^nd this Message to her by the Moon
feignedly.

O Sweet Sabrina, when shall we in seats
Of those blessed shades quench and renew our heats;
There shall the Queen of Love and Innocence,
Beauty and Nature banish all offense:
In thy sweet presence shall I there behold
Thy bared Snow, and thy unbraded Gold;
There my enfranchiz'd hand on every side
Shall over thy naked polisht Ivory slide;
No curtain there, though of transparent Lawn
Shall be before thy Virgin treasure drawn;
But the rich mind to the enquiring eye
Exposed shall ready still for mintage lie:
And we will coin young Cupid there a bed
Of Roses, and fresh mirtles shall be spread
Under the cooler shades of Cypress Groves,
Our pillows of the down of Venus Doves,
Whereon our panting love we will gentle lay
In the faint respites of our active play,
That so our slumbers may in dreams have leisure,
To tell the nimble fancy of our pleasure;
And so our souls that cannot be embraced,
Shall the embraces of our bodies taste;
Mean while the public stream shall drown the shore,
Th'inamour'd chirping wood-quire shall adore,
In varied Tunes the Deity of Love,
The gentle blasts of Western winds shall move
The trembling leaves, and through the close boughs breathe
Still Music, whilst we rest our selves beneath
Their dancing shades, till a soft murmurre sent
From souls intranc't in amorous languishment,
Rouse us and shoot into our eyes fresh fire
Till we in their sweet ecstasy expire:
Then as they empty be that lately bore
Into the common Treasure all her store,
Flyes'bout the painted fields with nimble Wing,
Deflowring the fresh Virgins of the spring:
So will I ris^e all the sweets that dwell
In my delicious paradise, and swell
My bag with honey drawn forth by the po^er
Of fervent kisses, from each spicy flower;
I Will seize the Rose buds in their perfumed bed,
The Violet Knots like curious Maces spread
Over all the Garden, taste the ripened Cherry,
The Apple, Apricock, and Coral Berry
Then will I visit with a wandering kiss
The Vale of Lillies, and the Bower of Bliss;
And where the beauteous Region does divide
Into two milky ways my lips shall slide
Down those smooth Alleys, wearing as I go
A track for Lovers in the printed snow;
Thence climing over thy swelling Appenine,
Retire into thy Grove of Eglantine,
Where I will all those ravished sweets distill*
Through loves Alembique, and with chymick skill*
From the mixed Mass, one sovereign balm derive
And bring that great Elixure to thy hive.
Now in more subtle wreaths I will entwine
My lovely Thighs, my Legs, and Arms with thine
Thou like a sea of milk shall lie displayed,
Whilst I the smooth qualm Ocean does invade
With such a Tempest, as when Jove of old
Fell down on Danae in a storm of Gold;
Yet my tall pine shall in the Cyprian strait
Bide safe at Anchor, and unlade her freight;
My rudder with thy bold hand, like a tried
And skilful Pilot, thou shall steer and guide
My Bark into loves Channel, where it shall
Dance as the bounding Waves does rise and fall:
Then shall thy circling arms embrace and clip
My willing body and thy balmy lip,
Bathe me in juice of kisses, whose perfume
Like a Religious Incense shall consume,
And send up holy vapors, to those powers
That bless our Loves and crown our sportful hours.
Now Wedlock bonds unwreath our twisted Loves,
We seek no midnight Arbours, no dark Groves
To hide our Kisses, there the hated name
Of Husband, Wife, lust, modest, chaste, or shame,
Are vain and empty words, whose very sound
Was never heard in the Elizian ground:
All things are lawful there that may delight
Nature, or unrestrained appetite;
Like and enjoy, to will and act is one,
We only sue where loves rites are not done.
These and ten thousand such expressions this brave King Alexander did use
toward his renowned Empress; but fortune not willing to favor him did cast a
cloud over this pattern of virtue; for no sooner had he set his Kingdom of
Egypt and arrived again in Epyrus, but there came a Herald at Arms from the
King of Syra to challenge him to the Field, that upon the happy success of one
battle, the whole universe lay on it, for they two governed all the other Kings
in the world: Alexander with a brave courageous spirit answered the Herald, I
looked for the King of Syra in the Field long ago, I wonder his Chariot Wheels
are so heavy in driving; and bid him meet upon the Downs of Opher, where I will
be in person to assail him and his ten Legions; and presently commanded his
Drums to beat, and his Trumpets to sound, with other Instruments of War, and so
marched out with his Army, taking his leave of his Royal Princess, and his two
Sons, with showers of tears betwixt them both, so parted the one from the other
with heavy hearts. When brave King Alexander was arrived upon the Downs of
Opher, he placed his men in Battle of Array, and began to admonish them in these
words; Most brave and warlike Soldiers, both Epirians and Egyptians, I exhort
you this day to be of good courage, and fight manfully, your Cause is just and
right; for the Syrans are coming against us without cause, and we are upon our
defense, and this great Battle is the Battle for the whole world; in the very
heat of Battle think to your selves that you do see the grave Senators of
Epyrus bowing down their hoary heads, praying for your good success; think that
you do hear the Prayers of your Fathers, Mothers, Wives, and Children for you;
and know that whosoever intends to see their friends again, must this day
ransom himself with his Sword: think to your selves that if the Syrans does
vanquish, us how that my head will be placed upon a Poll, and pitched up in the
Market, place, and my Quarters hung up, two in Egypt and two in Epirus; our
Cities and Towns burnt and turned to ashes, our Maidens and Virgins deflowred,
our Childrens brains dashed against the walls, and our young men slain and
murdered, and the brand of scorn upon our Kingdoms for perpetuity. And on the
other side, if we do get the day, honor and renown shall be upon our heads,
and the glories of Syra shall come into Epirus; Gold and Silver shall be your
rewards, and the favor of your Prince you shall have to eternity. The
Soldiers answered, Most great King, if the Gold of Opher will make you
glorious, if the Treasures of Syra will make you great, and if the strength of
our Army will make you considerable both at home and abroad: be assured great
King, you are this day the Master of all the Universe, for here is not a
Soldier but at your command will cut his Fathers Throat, and sheath his Sword
in his Brothers Blood, to rob the Gods and pull the Temples down, all this will
they do if you command them. By this time there was but one Fields breadth
between the two Armies, all Rampires, Trees, and Hedges were levelled even with
the ground, Lions and Bears were seen to come out of the Woods, as of purpose
to devour dead Carcasses, Vultures which are ravening Birds, did darken the
Air, Lightning and Thunder came down that did melt the heads of the Foot-mens
Spears, and singed the Hair on their Heads, and the Horse Manes. King Alexander
divided his Army into four parts, his right Wing consisted of ten thousand,
conducted by ten Kings, the Forlorn-Hope were five thousand, the left Wing were
ten thousand, conducted by ten Epirian Lords, the main Body was led by brave
Alexander himself; the Battle began hot, and sharp, the Forlorn-Hope of the
Epirians were driven back to the main Body; then advanced Alexander himself,
and the Battle began to be mortal, the dispute old hold till twelve a Clock,
and there ^ell on both sides above eight thousand: In the afternoon the Battle
began again, and the discomfiture fell upon the Epirians, for in four hours
time Alexander was fain to quit the Field, being totally defeated and most of
his men slain. Alexander was fain to throw his Crown upon the ground, because
he would not be known, and escaped by Sea in a poor Fishermans Boat, and sailed
into Epirus; and at the Haven where he designed to Land, there his Royal
Empress was waiting when any Ship would come in with news; and at last she
espied in a poor Fishermans Boat King Alexander himself; at which sight, fear
smote her to the heart, that she swoun^ed upon the thought that the King was
utterly overthrown: but Alexander took her up in his arms and kissed her, with a
shower of tears bedewing their Princely Cheeks; but there was no remedy, for
their Kingdoms was wrested from them, and they forced to slye into an
uninhabited Island, wherein they spent the remnant of their days with three
other petty Kings. Soon after Alexander dyed, and his Empress, who in a
Sepulcher which he hewed out himself, they were both interred; on which was
written this following Epitaph.

Within this House of Stone here lies
The King of Egypt, who was called the Wise:
Likewise that glorious and illustrious Queen
Of the Epirians here is to be seen;
Who from all Right and Justice were debarred,
When Syrans King in Battle with him Warred.
FINIS.

