All Mistaken, OR THE Mad Couple. A COMEDY, ACTED by His Majestyes SERVANTS, at
the Theater Royal, Written, by the Honorable James Howard, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by H. Brugis, for James Magnes in Russel Street, near the
Piazza in Covent Garden, 1672.

The Actors Names.
The Duke. Ortellus, next of Kin to the Duke: of an Ambitious, and Treacherous
Nature. Arb^tus, supposed Brother to Artabella. Philidor, a Mad Kinsman of the
Dukes, in Love with Mirida. Zoranzo, The Dukes Prisoner of War: in love with
Amarissa. Pinguister, Two Rediculous Lovers of Mirida. Lean-man, Two Rediculous
Lovers of Mirida. Doctor to Pinguister. Tailor to Lean-man. Iaylor. Servant to
Philador. Boy. Clown Guard and Attendances.
Women.
Amphelia, in love with the Duke. Artabella, the Dukes Sister; but taken for
the Sister of Arbatus. Mirida, Philador's mad Mistress. Amarissa, in love with
Zoranzo. 6. Ladies. 3. Nurses with Children.
Scene ITALY.

All Mistaken, OR THE Mad Couple.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Duke from War, in Triumph, leading in his hand Artabella, a Woman of
that Country, from whence he came with Arbatus her Brother, and Zoranzo
Prisoner, and on the other side Amphelia and Ortellus and Guard. Duke. MAdam I
need not say you're welcome to this Country since it is mine.


Artab. Sir, leaving my own for yours, speaks my belief of that and all things
else you say.


Duke. The same unto your worthy Brother
Besides my thanks to you Sir for letting
Your Sister take this Journey.

Arbat. Your Highness has so Nobly Expressed
Your self unto my Sister, that I
Consented to her Coming with you, so
Highly I esteemed your Princely word,
That I have let her Trespass on the
Bound of Common Modesty in this
Adventure, for when this hasty Judging
World shall see you have brought a woman
From her'owne Country and not your
Wife, how soon will every Tongue give her
Another title.

Duke. Sir my sudden Actions shall prevent all
Tongues or thoughts either to name or
Think her any thing but my Duchess,
Therefore all that owe Duty or Respect
To me, pay it to her.
What Amphelia did you believe the world
So Barren of good Faces, that yours
Only dos enrich it, or did you think 'twas
All men's fates only to Dote on yours.
Look on this Lady and you will see your
Error, mark well her face and you
Will find in every line Beauty sits
Empress there, These are the Eyes
Amphelia now, that dart obedience
Through my heart, are not you vexed
To see I am noe Constant fool and
Love you still.

Amphe. Vexed at what, to see a man I hate;
Love another, a very great vexation:
Know Sir this Breast has only
Room for Joy and Love, to brave Ortellus,
Forgive my heart that 'twas not
Yours before, since you have long
Deserved it.

Ortell. Madam, no time was long enough
To wait this Blessed hour.

Amphe. Alas great Duke instead of pineing
For your Change, you find me
Midst a Thousand Joys in this
New Choice.

Duke. So you do me Amphelia, amid'st
Ten Thousand; Not all the
Glories that attend a Conquering
Soldier can create one Joy so great
In me as being Conquered here in
My own Tryumphs. I am but a slave.
Nor dos my victory over Thousands please
Me so much as being overcome by
One, by this fair one, whose Eyes
By shining on my Tryumphs only
Make it Glorious.

Amphe. Well Sir we will not change our happy
States; you cannot brag of happyness
So great to make me Envy, I am
Only sorry for this Lady that had nothing
Else to do with her heart (...)
It you: Madam if your Breast ha^
Been Crowded with some Twenty or
Thirty hearts, and amongst these one very
Ill, you might have made present of
That to this mighty Duke.

Duke. Madam does not this Ladies discourse
Make you afraid of me.

Artab. Not in the least Sir.


Duke. Where Is this bold Prisoner.


Guard. Here and please your Highness.


Duke. Well Sir, though you did attempt to Kill me
In our Camp after you were our Prisoner
You shall not dye, since you are of the
Same Country this Lady is, Therefore
Thank her and Fortune for your Life.

Zo. I Would sooner Curse them both, shall I thank
Any for my life but heaven that gave
It me, I Would rather give it to a Cat, a
Noble Death were far more welcome
To me, then a mean Life at second
Hand, my being here I owe unto the
Gods when they think fit to lend it
Me no longer, they know the way
To take it from me, I scorn to run
In debt unto a Mortal Duke, for two
Or three days Breath.

Amphe. Brave Captive -- a side


Duke. You're very high considering you
Are in Chains.

Zo. Why Sir think you these Fetters can
Confine my mind as they do my Legs,
Or that my Tongue's your Prisoner,
And dares only say may it please your
Highness. How much are you mistaken:
Know Sir my Soul is Prompter to my Tongue;
And gives it Courage to say any thing,
That Heaven will not frown at we should
Detract from those great powers above, if
We pay fears to any here below, perhaps
You think, I Will beg my life now upon
A pair of bent Petitioning knees. No Sir
Had I a hundred lives, I Would give them all
To sharpest Deaths, rather then Beg for one;

Duke. You Are well resolved, perhaps your mind
May alter, when you see the Ax.
In the mean time Commit him to the
Closest Prison, where if you have any
Accounts with heaven, you will have time
To Cast them up before your Death.

Zo. Your Sentence brings me Joy; welcome
The Keenest Ax that can be set, 'twill
Cut my Head and Chains both off together.
Welcome most happy stroke, since it
Will bring rest to my Eyes, and make
A Slave a King. --

Exit with Guard Duke. Madam I suppose this Journey has so
Wearyed you, that it is time to show you
The way to your Lodgings, and leave you
To your Repose.

Guard. Make way there for the Duke,


Amph. My Lord you had best Attend the Duke.
Because it is a Respect due to him.

Ortell. I shall Madam at your Commands.


Exeunt Amphe. How has my tongue belied my too true
Heart, in speaking hate unto the Duke and love to Ortellus.
I hate the Duke, so Eyes do sleep that long have known
No rest, how could my Lips give passage,
To such words and not have closed for ever.
Not by my hearts direction I am sure, for
That so swelled being injured by my
Mouth, as had not Pride and reason Kept
It here from this unquiet seat, it would
Have forced away to Archimedes Breast,
And there have whispered to his heart my
Tongues untruth. Why should I love this
Man, that shows me nothing but Contempt,
And hate: Rouse drooping heart, and think
Of that, think of it always, so by degrees,
'Twill bring a Winter round thee, that in
Time shall Chill the heat of thy undone
And lost affections, oh it is not true that all our
Sex Love Change, then I might find one
Path that leads to it, that womanish vice,
Were virtue now in me, 'twou'd free my
Heart; and that were Charity.
Enter Duke. See where he comes again, oh how I love
And hate that man. Now help me Pride and fill
My Breast with scorn, and prithee Tongue
Take heed you do not faulter, hear not
My heart that will distract thy speech, and
So betray my feigned unkindness.

Duke. What Amphelia all alone, weary of your new
Love already, cant you pass away the
Time with him one Hour.

Amphe. Were he no finer man then your self to
Be with him a Minute, I should think a
Seven Years penance.
Good heart lie still, and let my tongue alone. aside.
I wonder what a woman can see in you,
Or hear from you, to make her Love you.
I was Just goeing to have said, hate him.
O what a task is this, therefore let me
Advise you to have a mean opinion
Of your self.

Duke. Me thinks that advise might serve for
Your self ha, ha, ha.

Amphe. Have patience heart I know I lie, thou
Need'st not tell me so, I had better then
Confess my Love. Do You laugh Duke, faith
So could I at you till the tears ran down
My Cheeks, that they would quickly do,
For grief would fain unload my Eyes.
I must begone, I cannot longer Act this
Part, unless I had a heart as hard as his.

Duke. What you are goeing now to your Love Ortellus


Amphe. I am so, and goeing from you to him is
Pleasure double, not only pain to quit,
But Joy to meet.

Duke. Make have then for your departure will
Oblidge me too, so we shall be all pleased.

Amphe. Have I will make, but with unwilling feet. aside.
For every step from him my griefs repeat.

Exit. Duke. She Is gone and after her my heart is flown,
It Is well it has no Tongue to make it is moan;
Then it would discover what my Pride conceales.
A heart in Love (though slighted) Love reveals,
Yet though I love her still she shall not know.
Her hate shall seem my Joy; which is my Woe.
My constancy I Will Outwardly disguise.
Though here within I am not half so wise,
Yet rather then disclose my doting fate,
I Will wound my heart by Counterfitting hate.
To whine it would the worst of Follies prove;
Since women only pity when they Love.
With how much scorn she gave me welcome home?
Ortellus in her hand to show my Doom.
Me and my Tryumphs she did so despise,
As if they would been unworthy of her Eyes.
It Is well to her I showed as much disdain:
I Would rather perish then she guess my pain.
But O! the horrid Act she makes me do,
To fool a woman that is young and true.
So damned a Sin, that Hell could not invent;
It is to foul for any punnishment;
To question those above I am afraid,
Else I would ask them why they woman made.
Enter Philidor. O my Mad Cosen your Servant.
Whether so fast?

Phili. So fast Sir, why, I have been haunted
By a Pack of Hounds this three Hours,
And damned Deep-mouthed Hounds too.
No less then three Couple of Nurses.
Three Couple of Plaguey hunting Bitches.
And with them three Couple of Whelps
Alias Children Sir, they have Rung me
Such a Ring this Morning through
Every by turning that leads to a Bawdy
House, I wished my self Eartht a thousand
Times, as a Fox does when he is hard Run,
But that they would have presently
D^^d me out with their Tongues.

Duke. Faith Philidor it is no news to me, for I
Have known thee from sixteen at this
Course of Life, what and these Children were
All your Bastards, and their Nurses coming
To dun you for money?

Phill. Something of that is in it I think Sir.


Duke. Well Cuz I Will leave thee to thy wildness,
A fitter Companion much for thee then I at this time.

Phill. Why Sir, I hope nothing has happened to trouble you.


Duke. No, No.
My grief alas is far beyond Express,
To tell it to a friend cannot make it less.

Exit. Phill. Would I were at the wars again, I fear
No Sword half so much as the Tongue
Of one of these Nurses, and the youling of
The Children are more dismal to my
Ears, then the Groans of Dyeing men in
A Battle, I am at this time in Law with
Six or seven Parishes about fathring
Of Bastards, it is very fine truly, and yet me
Thinks'tis a hard Case, that I should be
Sued for Multiplying the world, since death
Makes bold with Bastards as well as other
Children, the very Picture of a Nurse and
Child in her arms would fright me now,
Oh from that sight -- deliver me!
Enter Nurse and Child as he is goeing out. Ha! and here they come: Pox on it
what luck have I
After saying my prayers, it shall be a fair
Warning to me, now am I started again,
And must go Run the other Course. offers to Run away

1. Nurse. Esquire Philidor, Esquire Philidor. she Runs after him.


Phili. How deaf am I now, it is well I know
This by way to avoid her.
Enter second Nurse and meets him. Ha! God's Death another, the Devil appearing
Here too.

2. Nurse, O my Proper young squire, stay stay,
do you hear sir,

Phill. No indeed will not I. Yet I know one way
More to avoid them.
Enter third Nurse. Ha! another coming here too, nay then I
Find I am in Hell, before I thought I should.
What will become of me now?

3. Nurse. Oh Squire, I thought I should never have
Spoke with your Worship,

Phili. No by this light should you not if I
could have hope it.

1 Nurse. I wonder Squire at your Conscience to avoid
Your pretty babes as you do.

Phili. So, now't begins, I am like to have
Sweet Music from the Consort of
These Nurses tongues.

1 Nurse. Saving your presence fir, I think
Here are three as sweet Babes as ever sucked
Teat, and all born within the year too,
Besides three more that your Worship has
In our street.

Phili. A very hopeful generation, sure this was
A great Nut year; well if all Trades
Fail, I may go into some Foreign
Plantation where they want people, and
Be well paid for my pains, would I
Were there now.

1 Nurse. Codge, Codge, dos a laugh upon a dad,
In conscience sir the child knows your Worship.

Phili. A very great comfort.


1 Nurse. My young Master here is as like your
Worship, as e're he can look, has your
Tempting eyes to a hair, I could not
Choose but smile to my self the other day,
I was making him clean about the
Secrets, to see what God had sent him
In a plentiful manner, it put me half
In mind of your Worship, I am sure I
Have been at double the expense of
Other Nurses in eating choice meat to
Make my milk good for my young
Master, because I would not spoil the
Groath of any one of his Members.

2 Nurse. Nay for that Neighbor, I have eat as
Good or better meat then you every day
In the week; I never touched a bit of salt
Meat, for fear of spoiling my child's
Blood.

Philli. Considering how well it is born.


3 Nurse. Nay Neighbors for that I have been
At greater charge than either of you in
Choice dyets, to breed good milk for
My young Mistress here,

1 Nurse You Lie.


2 Nurse. You Are a Queen.


1 Nurse. And you are a Whore. Marry your husband
Is the notedst Cuckold in all our street.

2 Nurse. You lie you jade yours is a greater.


Phili. His -- now for a battle Royal.


1 Nurse. If I lay the child out of my arms Lays their children down and
fight.
I Will pull off your head-clothes you Carren

2 Nurse. Marry come if thou durst.


Phili. It Is best for me to be a Coward
And march off from this bloody fight.

All Nurses. Hold, hold, the Squire is going away.


Phili. So nothing could have parted them this
Three hours, but the fear of losing me.

1 Nurse. What would your Worship have left us,
Without paying us for Nurseing your
Children, you have a Conscience with a
Pox to you.

Phili. So, now will they end their War in
Vollies of shot upon me, I have but
One thing now to do, with every one
Of these haggs have I been forced to
Lie with, which they took as satisfaction
For payment for two months Nurseing,
Perhaps rather then they will have it
Known to one another, they will hold their
Tongues and leave me, -- well my three
Sweet harmonious Nurses what is due to you.

1 Nurse. Due, why there was twelve months
Due for Nurseing, it is true two months
Your Squireship satisfied me for

2 Nurse. And me too.


3 Nurse. And me likewise.


Phili. Hark ye, if you will not be gone I Will tell


1 Nurse. No marry wont I, till I have my money.


2. Nurse. Do'nt think to fright me, but pay me.


3 Nurse. I fear you not, pay me my money.


Phili. Pox on it 'twill not do, I must try another
Way. Boy was the Woolf fed to day.

Boy. No sir.


Phili. Go fetch him quickly to dine with these
Ladies. -- Exeunt Nurses.
So, I thought I should set them going,
Ha! the Devil they have left the
Children behind them, this was a
Very cunning device of mine, now am
I in a pretty condition. Troth a very
Noble Anabaptist Progeny, for the
Devil a one of these were ever Christened;
For I have run so much upon tick
To the Parsons for Christning of
Children, that now they all refuse to
Make any Bastards of mine a Christian
Without ready money, so that i will
Have this boy bred up a Parson, that he
May christen himself and the rest of his
Sisters and brothers, what shall I do
When these Infants begin to be hungry
And you will for the Tear. O that a milk
Woman would come by now, well I must
Remove my flock from hence. Small
Cole, small Cole, will you buy any small
Cole, Pox on it I could never light of
Any but fruitful Whores, small cole
Small cole -- Exit.

ACT II.
Enter Zoranzo as in Prison. Zo. SUre it is not kind, of those great Powers above
To add these Chains to me that am in Love.
As to my Bed of straw, I am content,
Since any bed from her is punishment.
To lie on down of Swans would be hard rest,
Could I not make my pillow on her breast.
O Amarissa were thou here with me,
I would not sell these Bonds for Liberty.
Ransomes that Prisoners give to be set free,
I Would give as much to Lie in Chains by thee. pulls out her Picture.
Here is her Picture, Oh thou too like shade,
To look on it my Eyes are half afraid.
It so presents my Joy and Misery;
Since it is the Nothing of that all to me.
The greatest pain to any Lovers heart:
Is to remember when they are a part.
For thoughts of Joys when there is a Bar Betwixt,
Are worse then poison with a Cordial mixed.

Enter Amphelia and Jailer. Amph. Well said Jailer, here is for thy pains
Brave Prisoner, perhaps this visit may appear
But strange to you, till you have heard me
Speak, Know then when you received the
Sentence of your death, you seemed to
Meet it with so brave a Soul, as if the
Sound had not displeased your Ears, thus
Did your Courage fill my Eyes with wonder,
And my heart with Pity, straight I resolved;
To give you all my helps to set you free,
Which now I offer to you.

Zo. Madam could I tell what to say I would
Begin, I have nothing but poor thanks
To offer to you, and those though Millions
Were not half enough. Compassion showed
Unto the Miserable Heaven can only
Recompense, therefore in my Dyeing
Prayers I will beg from thence, a Blessing
To reward your Pity.

Amph. Sir the Joy of your Escape will pay my pains,
All my Endeavors I will set at work,
The time is short, therefore I must make
Have, Expect to hear of me again with speed.

Enter Ortellus as she is going out. Zo. What can this mean, heaven grant she
Does not Love me, I would not wish so
Brave a heart, so great a Punnishment,
Since my Love's fixed already.

Ortell. Madam I have been seeking you, pray
Whence came you, this is no usual place
To find you in.

Amph. I was only walking this way Sir.


Ortell. I Will wait of you presently. I suspect
She has been at the Prison; I will inform
My self by the Iaylo^, and yet perhaps
She has bid him to deny it: steps to the Jailer.
The Lady Amphelia says she has left
One of her Gloves behind her in the Prison;
And has sent me for it.

Iay. I Will go see straight Sir -- Exit.


Ortell. She has been there it seems then.
Madam I fancy you have been to see the Prison.

Amph. Who I, what makes you think so.


Ortell. Why, am I mistaken?


Amph. Yes what should I do there.


Ortell. Nay that is the Question, but there you
Have been just now, and with the
Prisoner too.

Amph. Sure you dream.


Ortell. She Is false I find, I Will try her Love to me, -- aside.
Madam since you have been Pleased to
Show your Kindness publicly to me;
I take this time to beg my happyness,
Which is that a Priest may Join
Our hands.

Amph. I will not Marry yet.


Ortell. Why pray Madam.


Amph. For a very good reason, because I hant a mind to it.


Ortell. Will you give me another reason.


Amph. I need not, that is sufficient.


Ortell. You Love me, do you not?


Amph. You know I have declared it.


Ortell. But sure you will not deny me twice.


Amph. Not if you ask but once.


Ortell. Fie, Fie, this Modesty is a Thief to Lovers
And Robs them of their time, Come, Come
Say I and blush.

Amph. I Will not say I, nor blush.


Ortell. If you had any Modesty you would.


Amph. You said just now I had too much.


Ortell. To much of Impudence you mean.


Amph. What Is that you say.


Ortell. Why truth.


Amph. Get you out and wash your Tongue, it is foul.


Ortell. It Is like your heart then, but that it
Cannot Lie as much.

Amph. Most valiant Lord to give the Lie to Petty-coates.


Ortell. Why did you deny your being in the Prison.


Amph. Not for fear of you, I was with the brave
Prisoner, what then.

Ortell. You went to make love to him, you had
Best use your Time well, 'twill be short
And sweet, your dear will not be so
Proper a man by the head within this
Two days. False woman, you have a
Heart that flies from one man's breast
To another; all the inconstancy of your
Sex is Constancy to this of yours: you
Have deceived the Duke already, that
Might have been my warning.

Amph. Faith and so it might, the Duke in all
Things so far Excells you that you were
A fool to think when once my heart
Bid him farewell, that it designed no
Better a Change then you; troth you are
Mistaken, it had a further Journey to
Make; and so took your Breast for an
Inn; only to Lie by the way.

Ortell. Base woman, is it not enough that
You have fooled me but you must mock
Me too, heaven hold my hand from
Murdering thee.

Amph. Fright those that fear you. --


Exit. Ortell. Cursed of all fooled men (like me) light
Heavy on thee, Reveng begins to fill
My heart and I will pour it out on
This base woman. I know the way,
I Will to the Duke.
Enter Duke. I am glad I have met your Highness, for
I have business to impart to you that Concerns
Your Life.

Duke. What is it Ortellus.


Ortell. Know Sir Amphelia that


Duke. Loves you.


Ortell. No Sir she Loves the Prisoner


Duke. It Is impossible.


Ortell. It Is very true Sir, I caught her coming from him,
She is designeing his Escape, and for ought
I know, her Love to him may put other
Thoughts into her head.

Duke. What do you mean.


Ortell. She may design your Life, a woman that
Is ill, Exceeds a man in Mischief.

Duke. My Lord I thank your Care, if you can
Track her further, pray let me know, in
The mean time I shall prevent her
Ill intentions.

Ortell. My diligence shall not be wanting, so
Since I can have no Love, Revenge
Shall be my Mistress. --

Exit. Duke. Oh Amphelia why do thou take such
Pains to break my heart when it is to
Easily done. She needs not secretly contrive
My death since half a word from her,
Commands my life, her face and heart,
Sure cannot be a kin, Nature Mistook,
Or else she was too blame to give one
Woman to so great Extremes.
Enter Arbatus. See here comes the Brother to wronged Artabella.
The horror of that sin grows bigger in me,
That I with a deludeing Love should fool
An Innocent, to show an outward scorn
To false Amphelia, for when I heard she
Loved Ortellus, I straight made Love to
This young woman, and brought her from
Her own Country, only to make Amphelia
Think I loved another.

Arbat. I hope I don't disturb your Highness


Duke. No Arbatus you are always welcome to me.


Arba. Sir, I should ask you a question.


Duke. You freely may.


Arba. Not but I think my Sister far unworthy
Either in Birth or Fortune, to be called
Your Wife: Yet since you have been
Pleased to grace her with your Love so
Far, as saying she shall be your
Duchess, be pleased to tell me why
It is not so; she has been here so
Long, that people now begin to say you
Mean her for your Mistress, should my
Ears meet that sound from any
Tongue, I Would --

Duke. Hold Arbatus, I Am sure I have given no
Cause as yet to doubt my kindness to
Your Sister.

Arba. Pardon me Sir, in your delay you have;
My Sister has no Dowry but her Virtue,
Youth, and some small stock of Beauty.
These if you loved her for, you would
Not waste, by letting time rob her and
You at once.

Duke. Sir, business of great importance has
Hitherto deferred my Marriage, believe
Me you shall find me just.

Arba. A Princes word must not be questioned
I have done.

Duke. Oh Amphelia what dos thou make me do.


Exit. Arba. Let him take heed, if he dos fool my Sister, were
He ten thousand Dukes I Would cut his throat.

Exit. Enter Philidor alone. Philli. I have been quite at the other end ot'h
Town to put my children out to new
Nurses, for I am known so to every Nurse
Here about, that they will as soon nurse
A Cats kitten as any child of mine; this
Is a very pleasant life I lead, neither
Is this the worst part of it, for there are
A certain flock of women that I have
Promised Marriage, I expect a volly of
Shot from them too, soon as they find
Me out; would Wives and Children were
as hard to come by as Money, then would
I turn Usurer, and let 'um out to use, for
To say truth I have enough to spare
Enter Six Ladies one after another. So here comes one of my promised Virgins.
Nay a second too, -- a third -- a fourth,
A fifth -- a sixth -- Welcome blessed
Half dozen, now will I go Muster my
Nurses and children to, and go against the
Great Turk. I am glad to see they have
Brought never a Coffin, for I expect nothing
But death from them: I wonder they do'nt
Begin to Ring my Funeral peal.
See every one of them Beckons to me, as much
As to say, I Would speak with you in private,
But the Devil take me if e're a one
Of them do, I find by this, they would
Not have their business known to
One another, this may be a means for me
To get off for this time; Ladies you all
Look as if you had something to say to me.
Pray make me so happy as to let me know
What it is:
They dare not speak aloud, aside.
Will you Madam, or you, or you Madam,
Or you Madam; not one of you tell me
What the honor of these Visits mean.
I see I am troublesome to you all, therefore
I Will not be longer Rude; and so I take
My leave; This was good luck, that
They should come altogether, for I had Beckon him.
Rather be alone six hours with the Devil
Then with e're a one of them half an
Hour, I Will stand close in this corner,
Till they are all gone.

1 Lady. Now the Pox take him for a cunning Rogue.


2 Lady. A Plague take him.


3 Lady. The Devil take him.


4 Lady. If there be e're a Devil worse then another
Take him thou.

5 Lady. Oh that I had him alone.


6. Lady. Was there ever such a Rascal.


Exeunt at several doors. Phil. So the cost is clear again. peeps out.
Enter Mirida. God's Death here comes another, O it is none
Of that gange though.

Mirida. I Will lay my head, never a Girl in
Christendom of my age can say what
I can, I Am now but five years in the
Teens, and I have fooled five several men.

Phili. A brave wench by this light, sure it is I
In Petty coats.

Mirida. My humor is to love no man but to
Have as many Love me as they please
Come Cut or Long tail.

Phili. A most Divine wench.


Mirida. It Is a rare diversion to see what several
Ways my flock of Lovers have in being,
Ridiculous, some of them sigh so
Damnably, that it is as troublesome as a
Windy day 'ther's two of them that make
Their Love together, by languishing Eye-
Casts, one of them has one Eye bigger then
Another, and he looks like a Tumbler, and
That Eye's like a Musket Bullet, and I expect
Every Minute when he will hit me with it,
He aims so right at me. My other
Lover looks a squint, and to see him cast
Languishing Eyes, would make a woman
With child Miscarry. There is also a
Very fat man, Mr. Pinguister, and a very
Lean man that loves me; I tell the
Fat man I cannot Marry him till he is
Leaner, and the lean man I cannot Marry
Him till he is Fat: So one of them purges
And runs heats every morning to pull
Down his sides, and the other makes his
Tailor stuff his clothes to make him show
Fatter: Oh! what pleasure do I take in
Fooling of Mankind.

Phili. Was there ever so witty a wench, it is the
Woman of women for my turn, I Will
To her, thou most Renowned Female
I cannot hold.

Miri. From what?


Phili. From kissing thee, loving thee, or what
Thou will.

Miri. Troth you are very well acquainted, considring
You never saw me before.

Phili. Saw thee, I have heard thee talk this
Hour, like an Angel of light.

Miri. Well, and do you love me for what you heard me say.


Phili. Yes faith do I, why you are just of my
Humor, when I heard thee say how many men
You had fooled, I was very glad to hear
You come one short of me, for I have
Fooled six women, and you but five men.

Miri. Why if you love me you shall be the sixth fool,
To make up my half dozen too.

Phili. No I wont, and yet I Will love thee too.


Miri. Why how will you help it?


Phili. Thus you and I will love one another.


Mir. What whether I will or no.


Phi. Nay hear me, we two will Love how we
Please, when we please, and as long as
We please, do not these Propositions
Tickle your heart a little.

Mir. I don't mislike them. Now could I take him
About the Neck and Kiss him for this humor
Of his, and do you say you will Love me.

Phi. Yes marry will I.


Mir. Nay hold, I wont marry you.


Phi. Nor I thee, for all the world.


Mir. And yet you say you will Love me.


Phi. I tell you I will, make no more words on it.


Mir. Why then hark you, to be as obsolute
As you, I will Love you too. That is to say,
Upon the aforesaid Conditions.

Phi. With all my heart, prithee don't think
That I will Love thee upon any other
Terms; but come we must seal this
Bargain with Hands, Hearts, and Lips.

Mir. No, No, no Lips; we will only shake
Hands upon it, that is enough for so
Weighty a Contract as this of ours.

Phi. But prithee lets seal the Bargain.


Mir. No, no Sir I use no Wax to my Lips.


Phi. Nay by my Troth I care not a Pin to Kiss thee.


Mir. No, look upon me well and see if you
Can say so again.

Phi. Hum, yes faith, I will give two pence to
Kiss thee now.

Mir. Well Sir when I do Kiss you, I Will
Bate you a penny of that.

Phill. Now you and I will sing this Song.

He sings. My love and I a bargain made,
It is well worth a telling,
When one was weary we agreed.
To part both should be willing.

Mir. Nay here I Am for you too.

She sings. And thus our Loves will longer last
Then fools that still are pining,
We Will spend our time in joy and mirth
Whilst doaters do in whining.

Phili. Faith you and I sing very well; we
Are alike in that too: I see either
Nature or the Devil, some body, or something,
Made thee and me for one another; well,
But let us remember our conditions.
Imprimis, I will love you.

Mir. Item, So will I you.


Phi. I will not say how long.


Mir. Item, Nor I neither.


Phi. Item, It may be I can love you but a week.


Mir. Item, I don't care if it be but a day.


Phi. Item, I will never be tied to any thing.


Mir. Item, Thou shall be tied to what thou Will but me.


Phi. Item, I will come when I please, and go when I please.


Mir. Item, Thou shall drowned thy self when Thou will, or hang thy self when
thou Will, or go to the Devil when thou will.


Phi. Item, If I should like another woman, I Will have the liberty of leaving
you, Without any Ceremony, but just saying Good buy.


Mir. Item, If I should like any man better then You, I Will leave you without
saying so Much as good buy.


Phi. Item, The first that sighs of us two Shall fast a week.


Mir. Item, The first that looks but Melancholy of us two shall Be starved to
Death.


Phi. To Conclude we will be both as mad As we please.


Mir. Agreed and the Devil take the Tamest.


Phi. A blessed Bargain, but hark you there is
One thing I have forgot,

Mir. What Is that.


Phi. Have you had as many Children as I,


Mir. No indeed hant I:


Phi. Why then you must let me help you to'um,
That you may be even with me there too.

Mir. Hold Sir, that bargain's yet to make.


Phi. Pox on it that should have been one
Of our Articles.

Mir. Well I can stay no longer with you now.


Phi. Nay prithee hold, thou shall not go get,
I cannot part with you so soon.

Mir. I but I have a mind to go, and that is one
Of our Articles.

Phi. Well but shall not we put that other
Article in before we part

Mir. No, no, good buy to you.


Phi. Farewell Mettle. --


Exit. Enter Pinguister, Doctor and Servants. Mir. Look you Mr. Pinguister this
is the
Measure must meet about your waste
Before I marry you.

Ping. This, why twill not come about the small tryes the measure himself.
Of my Leg.

Mir. Sir, I am the sorryer for it, but it must
Compass your Middle before you can be
My dear Chuck, your Servant Sir,
I am in have.

Ping. Prithee thou damnable pretty Rogue,
Let me have some comfort from thee
Before thou go, either from thy Eyes,
Thy Cheeks, Mouth or Nose, or some
Part about thee; Consider what a
Dissolution I must undergo for Love
Of thee.

Mir. I do indeed Sir, but your Servant
For this time. --

Exit. Ping. Worthey Docter my hopes are all in you now,
I have tried many Physicians already
To make me lean enough for that
Tormenting pretty Fairy Devil.

Doct. Truly Sir your case is very desperate,
But if any man in the world can drain
Your fat from you, it is I; Sir we will
Begin your Course out of hand.

Ping. Do you hear, besure I have at least
Two dozen of Napkins, ready upon
The spot to rub me at every turn,
Therefore come you all along with me,
Have mercy on me, I have Love and
Fat enough, to furnish a whole Nation. Exeunt.

ACT III.
Enter Amphelia going to the Prison. Amph. HOw false a woman to all Eyes I
seem,
Because I still will hide my Constant Love;
This way I take will bravely break my heart,
To tell the Duke were sneekingly to dye,
Since if he knew that I did Love him still;
With basest scorns he would laugh my heart
To Death, such friendship to this Prisoner
I will show, shall make the Duke believe
My heart is there; to set him free
I Will use my utmost Art. --
Would I could do as much for this poor heart,
This way my Love with my designs complyes,
Thus one in Chains, another's Chains, unties;
I have made the Iaylor mine already,
By promising him these hundred Pieces,
It Is now about the time I appointed
To be here.
Enter Iaylor. Oh yonder is the Iaylor expecting me,
Here Iaylor here is for thy honesty;
May the business be done new?

Iay. O Madam never at a fitter time, take
You the Key and go into the Prisoner,
Whilst I go see the passage clear,
Stand you at the door, and when I beckon
To you, come away.

Amph. Honest Iaylor.


Iaylor. So now I am just in the fashion, I have
Taken money to do her business, and
Instead of doing it, I have undone it.

Enter Duke and Ortellus. Ortell. It Is so Sir, the Jailer has discovered
All to me -- here he comes.

Iay. And please your Highness to stand
Close here, for the Lady Amphelia is
Now with the Prisoner; I have given
Her a Key to convey him through this
Private passage; as soon as I becken
To her she will come away with him. beckons them.

Amph. Come Sir give me your hand, the Iaylor
Beckens me the way is clear.

Duke. Hold Lady and your Love, we must shorten
Your journey a little.

Amph. Ha? the Duke and Ortellus: I am betrayed,
Oh villain Iaylor.

Ortell. Sir I fear we have interrupted them,
It may be they were going to be
Married ha, ha, ha.

Amph. If I were, 'twas what I refused you
Ortellus, that makes you so Mad.

Duke. Well Madam, if you have a mind to be
Married; a Priest shall not join your hands,
But you shall go both back to the
Prison, and the Iaylor shall tie you both
Hands and Legs together.

Amph. Know Sir a Prison with this brave
Gentleman, will be greater Paradise to
Me, then to be Mistress of your Palace,
What do I say -- aside.

Duke. Well you shall have your desire then,
Ye shall Live together, and Dye together.
How could I speak that word to her. -- aside.

Zo. She dye, Sir; would you destroy so great
A World of Virtue; Rather invent two
Deaths for me that I may dye for her too.
You Will rob your Dukedom of your greatest
Treasure, to take away so blessed a life
As here is, let not an Ax part such a
Head and Body, least Heaven frown, and
Call you Murderer, you will pull upon your
Head all Mankinds Curse, when Nature
See's her bounty thus rewarded, she will
Turn a Miser, and will give no more
Such Blessings to the World as this
Fair Saint.

Duke. Well Sir, I am satisfied ye like one
Another, so you shall both return back
To your straw Beds, there you may lie
As close together as you please.

Amphe. No Sir, virtue shall lie betwixt us.


Duke. You Will want a Pillow till you come both
To Execution, then you shall have one,
A Block to lay your Heads on.

Amph. Know Duke, my head will rest better
With his on a Block, then with yours
On the softest Pillow.
How many lies must I confess before I dye. aside.

Duke. Indeed you will sleep pretty soundly.
See her scorns to me, makes death a pleasure
To her. -- aside.
My Lord give order that she may be
Brought immediately to her Trial; in the
Mean time Iaylor take them you, into
Your Custody; lay'um in Shackles both.
Cozen many thanks to you for this
Timely discovery, I must leave you a while. --

Exit. Ortell. Duke you shall have less to thank me for
Else I Am deceived; I have found out he
Loves Amphelia still, so she dos him,
Now will I go possess Arbatus of this,
And tell him how the Duke intends to fool
His Sister; he has the Character of so
Strict a Brother, and so brave a spirit;
That his Soul will never digest this injury
Without the Dukes Blood, I Will join
With him and tell him how the business
May be done; by this; one of these
Three things, I shall have,
Either a Mistress, Dukedom, or a Grave.
Enter Arbatus and Artabella. See here comes Arbatus and his Sister.
Artabella they talk very earnestly.

Arba. Sister I do not like it, the Duke will
Fool ye.

Arta. Indeed Brother I Am amazed at this delay?


Arba. How dos he carry himself to you.


Arta. With all respect imaginable.


Arba. Then there must be something more in it,
That he deferrs his Marriage thus.

Ortell. There is so Sir.


Arba. My Lord harkenings but a base office,
But if you have heard it, it is no Treason;

Ortell. No Sir, but it is Falsness in the Duke
To use your worthy Sister thus, I Came
To tell you upon my knowledge, he never
Intended to Marry her.

Arba. My Lord though I believe it, you must
Pardon me if I wonder at this information
From your Lordship, that is his
Near Cozen.

Ortell. Sir you have the Character of so brave
A Gentleman, Conscience and Honor
Bids me discover this to you and your Sister:
Think of a way of being revenged, and
Here Is my Hand and Heart to help you.

Arba. Pardon me that I cannot thank you
Truly, because I needs must doubt
This offer from your Lordship.

Ortell. What can I say to confirm you, will
The Word and Honor of a Gentleman do it.

Arba. To me those are things of great value.


Ortell. Then here I give them both.


Arba. But what to do my Lord.


Ortell. What you will.


Arba, Perhaps you think I Would have you ask
Some place about the Court for me,
In Recompense of this Injury to my Sister

Ortell. No Sir had you been such a person,
I should not have trusted you thus far;
With what I have said, I say again
I am your friend, if you doubt it, you
Wrong my Honor.

Arba. Why then my Lord to be short, nothing
Will satisfy me, but the Dukes --

Ortell. What


Arba. Blood.


Ortell. Why thou shall have it all, if I can help
Thee to it, this night will I convey you
Privately into his Bedchamber, come along
With me and I will tell you all. --

Exit. Arba. My Lord I follow you. --
Sister go you to your Chamber.

Arta. O Brother, Heaven preserve you in this Danger.


Arba. Now it comes into my head I need not
Doubt this Lords Truth, he is next Heir
To the Dukedom, if the Duke Dye without Issue.
It Is base in him the Dukes Life to pursue,
His blood is only to my Sister due. --

Exit. Arta. False Duke thou justly have deserved
Thy Death, to Cheat the Innocent is a
Double Crim, I had no cunning guard
About this heart, to keep it safe from a
Seduceing Tongue.
I have lost my heart which he by falsness won,
How soon is Truth and Innocence undone --

Exit. Enter Philidor. Phili. Pray remember the poor Prisoners;
Pray remember the Prisoners; well had
I not taken this course with the Regiment
Of women that I have promised to marry,
I should have been devoured by'um
By this time, they came just now into
My Chamber one by one, hoping to have
Found me alone, to have preached
Matrimony to me; but to my blessed
Deliverance, no sooner one was
There but another came, so I persuaded
Them one by one, to slip up into a
Garret, so still as one knocked at
The door, the the other ascended, there
Have I secured them with this Key,
And there must I keep them till I
Have made Conditions with them.
Enter Mirida. O here comes Mirida. Pray Remember
The poor Prisoners, pray remember
The poor Prisoners.

Mir. Who the Devill's that, Philidor,


Phi. The very same, my mettled Female,


Mir. Why what mad Prank art thou
Playing now.

Phi. Alas a day, I have great Cares upon
Me, I must provide meat for
Half a dozen Ladies, that should have
Been my Spouses; Look up yonder
In that very Garret, for ought I
Know they must Dine and Sup at my
Charge, as long as they live, and
Thus must I be their Cook every
Day, and beg their first and second Course.

Mir. I am sorry to hear this, because it is
A wilder trick then I have done
Lately to any of my Lovers, Prithee
Lets go under the window and
Call to them.

Phi. Come away you shall hear what
Vollies we shall have from the Castle.
Most excellent Amazonian Ladies look
Out, and behold your laboring Purvyor
What pains he takes to victle your
Castle, because he knows you must
Be long there.

Women looks out. 1 La. Rogue.


2 La. Rascal.


3 La. Villain.


4 La. Dog.


5 La. Slave


6 La. Hel-hound.


Phi. Me thinks you represent the Hemisphear.
Because you are Enthroned so high, your
Eyes appear like Stars to us poor
Mortals here below.

1 La. Villain if we had thee here, thou should
Find it Hell.

Mir. Pray Ladies what make you so angry?
Methink^ the Gentleman is your friend,
And has hope you nearer Heaven, then
Perhaps ever a one of you would ever have been.

2 La. What Is that you say little Pissabed.


Mir. Sweet Angels will never a one of you
Please to descend.

3. La. Thou little Devil if we had thee here,
We Would throw thee down again with
Such a swing, that we would knock that
Rascals brains out with thy fall.

Mir. Then angry Ladies I shall stay here,
See has not that Lady a very fair Nose
At this distance.

Philli. Has not the the other there a mouth, that
When she opens it to scold, looks
Like a Giants Cave.

4. La. S' life we will not be abused thus, here is
A Hercules Statue, let us throw it down
Upon their heads -- Mirida runs away, and meets Pinguister, and stops.

Enter Pinguister and Doctor. Mir. Hold Philidor, we shall have some new
Sport of my making now, here comes
My fat Lover, let us stand close and
Hear a little.

Ping. Doctor, pray how many stools
May I happily have this morning,
By this Purgation already taken by me.

Doct. Doubtless one hundred Sir.


Ping. Save me 'twill swing my Bumgut then,
But how much fat may it bring away.

Doct. Peradventure half a dozen pounds.


Ping. Love what do thou make me do? but
Worthy Docterus, from what parts of
My continual Purged body is this store
Of fat extracted?

Doct. Chiefly from your waste and Calves of your Legs.


Ping. And how many Purges may make my
Wast and Legs Calves, Alias Calves of
My Legs delightful to her Eye Sir?

Doct. Sir some ten Purges; that is to say
You must have 1000, stools to drain
Your treasure of Fat totalliter from ye.

Ping. Oh Love, Oh Mirida for thee I daily
Purge. Ergo for thee I daily Stink.
I find I must keep Company with the Bears,
That I may be able to endure my own stink the better,

Doct. Come Sir I think you had best begin
To run your heates.

Ping. Oh me, nothing could e're a made a
Footman of me but Love; well I
Must put on my Pumpes.

Phi. By this Light this is the Pleasant'st
Scene as e're I saw.

Ping. Nay Doctor if you mean I should run,
Lend me your hand to help
Me up. -- puts on night Caps.
Now in the name of Love I most
Unwillingly start.

Phi. God's Death he runs like a Duke. he runs round and sometimes goes out to
untruss.


Mir. His stools come very quickly upon him,
One after another.

Ping. I must run with my Breeches in
My hand, my Purge visits my Bumgut
So intolerable often.

Doct. Now Sir for a Cheerful Loose.


Ping. By my heart Mr. Docterus I wonder at
Your Cruelty to ask a Cheerful Loose
Of me, am not I loosed sufficiently
By your furious Purgations.

Enter Lean-man and his Tailor. Mir. Oh here comes my Lean Lover


Le. ma. Tailor do I look Gross enough now.


Tail. Yes I Will assure you, you seem very Corpulent,


Le. ma. Well I am sure if thou have not made
Me Large enough, thou will thy Bill,
Now have at Mrs. Mirida, sure my person
Will take her; why how now Cozen,
What makes you running a heat?

Ping. I must not stop to speak with you, but come
Run by me and I will tell you; why I
See you know nothing, Mrs. Mirida has
A great kindness for me, but cannot
Marry me before I am leaner.

Le. ma. She fools him, her kindness is for me,
And bids me make my self fatter before
We Marry.

Ping. But pray Coze what makes you stuff
Your self so to appear big.

Le. ma. Yes I do it to please Mrs. Miridas Eye,
She bid me.

Ping. So she makes an Ass of him.


Le. ma. Well I wont hinder you in your exercise
Farewell now I Will to Mrs. Mirida. --

Exit. Ping. Good buy, Good buy.
Goods fith my Purge again, oh, oh, oh.

Enter Clown with a Cudgel and beats him in again. Clow. A nasty Rogue, when a
man's a sleep
To come and do it just in his Mouth.
I Will swindge ye.

Ping. Oh hold good Sir, 'twas the violence of
My Physic, would my Paunch were
Out if I saw you.

Phi. Hold, what do you mean to beat a
Gentleman thus;

Clow. Let him learn more manners then
Against next time.

Ping. Oh Mrs. Mirida, I have been Purged
And beaten most Extremely for your sake,
Sure I am Lean enough now to marry you.

Mir. That I cannot tell, but I have the
Measure in my Pocket of what compass
You were about when you first were
In love with me, and also the measure
To that you must fall before I marry you.
Here was your full bigness, which
Was three Yards about, let me see,
Oh you are fallen a yard.

Ping. Well and wont you marry me then.


Mir. That you will see presently, for here is the
Measure must compass you about
Before I do, this wants a yard yet,

Ping. Well and do you think its possible for me
Ever to become such a Grig as that
Measure will meet about me,
Why to do that, you must imbowell
Me, and then shave the remaining
Roules of Fat off from my melting Sides.

Doct. Here pray Sir throw this Blanquet
about you, you will catch your Death.

Ping. Look you unreasonable Mistress, thus
Am I fain to do every day, because I
Would melt my self into a Husband for you,
You may hear my Guts at this time
Boylling within me, I Am confident they will
Have the same fat as a Kettle full of
Black Puddings that are all boiled
And so broke.

Doct. Come Sir you must needs go to Bed,


Ping. That is to say, I must go Swim, for
That I do constantly in a Sea of Sweat.

Mir. I pray Sir, I would not for all the world
You should miscarry.

Ping. Indeed I look as if I were with Child,
Lady, if you have any thoughts of going
To Heaven, have mercy on me.

Mir. Farewell Garbage.


Ping. Oh heat, O fat, oh love, what will you
Do with one. --

Exit with Doctor. Phi. Was here ever such sport as we have
Seen.

Mir. Heaven send thee and I many a fair year,
To be mad together in.

Phili. I as you say, give us but time enough,
And when we grow Tame, let the
Bell Tole for us; but stay let us return
Back to my Virgins, that I may
Make my Conditions with'um, before they
Get out of Prison.
Enter all Ladies and Bind'um. God's Death they are all got out already.

1 La. Oh, have we met with you now, ye
Pair of Devils, we will lay you fast
Enough. So good night to you, lie there
Till we come again. --

Ex. La. Phili. Pox on it was there ever such luck as this,
There was a Trap door in the Garret,
Which they found and got out at.

Mir. What think you now of this days sport,
Philidor?

Phi. Plague on it, well enough, if they had
Not bound us back to back together,
We might have past away the time,
Malicious, Iades no way of brideling us,
But this, Prithee turn about thy
Head, and let us try if we can kiss
One another a little.

Mir. No, no, we wont try for fear you
should put your Neck out of joint
With turning it too much of one side.

Phi. Well, fortune should be more careful
Of Accidents of this Nature, and not
Contrive them so cross.

Enter Boy. Phi. Oh, here comes a Boy, here Sir come
Hither.

Boy. What say you Master?


Phi. Here Prithee unbind us, I Will give
Thee a shilling.

Boy. Why Sir, cant you unbind your selves?


Phi. Simple Boy, thou see we cant.


Boy. And have you a mind to be unbound?


Phi. Yes, yes, we are in great Torments,
To lie thus.

Boy. Then Sir you shall give me a Piece
And your Hat, because I have never
A one, or else, farewell.

Phi. Well stay, here take it out of my Pockets,


Boy. Yes that I will do, before I unbind you,
And your Hat too. --

Exit. Phi. The Rogue's to nimble for me.


Mir. Well Philidor farewell, I must go
Put on a clean Handkercher?

Phi. And I must go see if I can find
A beleiving Harberdasher, else I shall
Be very Cerimonious to every one I meet

Exit. Enter Fiddler. Mir. A Fidle, nay then I am made again,
I Would have a dance if I had nothing
but my Smock on, Fiddler strick up,
And play my Gigg, called, I care not
A Pin for any man.

Fid. Indeed I cant stay, I Am going to
Play to some Gentlemem.

Mir. Nay thou shall stay but a little?


Fid. Give me ^alf a Crown then,


Mir. I have no money about me, --
But here take my Handkercher.

Dance and Exit. ACT IV.
Enter Ortellus and Arbatus as going into the Dukes Bedchamber, and the Duke
in Bed. Ortell. So I Will keep the door whilst you Dispatch him.


Arba. My Lord I find you truly Noble;
Why Duke, why Duke, I say. -- methinks
My voice should wake his guilty Soul,
Nothing but Innocence can sleep secure;
Then why good Heaven dos he take (...)
Awake thou drowsy Devil Duke, my
Sisters wrongs do call thee from thy
Sleep, methinks the sound of those
should Pierce thy Ears, why Duke?

Duke. What bold voice i^ that?


Arba. One that will be more bold with you.


Duke. Who is it so impudent a^ to break
My sleep.

Arba. It Is I, Arbatus, that will put thee
Into a wonder.

Duke. Ha, what means that Dagger in thy hands?


Arba. Can thou ask that question, it is
To tickle thy false heart.

Duke. Ha; ha; ha; you jest, you jest.


Arba. What dos the conceit on it make you
Laugh already, I was resolved to wake
Thee, before I sent thee to Hell, because
Thou may know of whose arrant thou go.

Duke. Come, come, leave your foolery, least
You heat my Blood.

Arba. If I do, I will let it out all,
And that will quickly cool it, I Would give
You time to say your Prayers now,
But that I know thy Sin to be so
Great, that Heaven will not Pardon thee.

Enter Artabella, Ortell. Who Is that?


Arta. It Is I my Lord, Artrbella, let me in
Quickly, that I may have one stab at
His false heart, before my Brother
Has put him past feelling.

Ortell. And so thou shall brave Girl.


Arba. Now Duke good night to you, and the
Devil send you good rest.

Arta. Hold Brother.


Arba. Who Is that.


Arta. It Is I thy injured Sister, come to make
The first hole in that base Dukes heart,
It is my Right.

Arba. Begin, begin then, that I may make an end.


Arta. Stay Brother, not to fast, has he said
His Prayers;

Arba. His Prayers why none but the Devil
Will hear them, Come, come Sister
Give me the Dagger again, you wast time,

Arta. And so I will, the Duke shannot Dye.


Arba. How not Dye?


Arta. Not dye I say.


Arba. Then you are his Whore all this while,
And would have him Live that you may
Be so still.

Arta. Brother, another word so foul, I Will
Strike this Dagger through your heart,
Therefore hear me speak. Know
Then it is I that cannot love the Duke,
Which he would never tell you, knowing
'Twou'd make you angry with me.

Arba. Nay then, I Will Kill you, for foolling a
Brother, and your Reputation thus.

Duke. Hold Arbatus, she says it but to save
My Life, it is I have fooled you both,
Therefore strike here.

Arba. And so I will then.


Arta. Hold Brother pull not a load of Sins
Upon your head, it is I have been to blame, indeed
I have, with Loving him to much.

Arba. Then thou shall Dye.


Duke. Hold Sir Heaven will frown on you for ever,
If you shed one drop of that pure Blood;
Upon my word it is I

Arba. Keep not my Tortured Soul thus in Suspense.
One of you tell me true, and that quickly
Too, else I Will destroy you both, and
That Is the surest way, not to mistake.

Duke. Then be assured it is I,


Arta. Brother it is nor, it is I.


Arba. Hey Day, hey day, I know not what
To do, or say. -- Throws down his Sword and goes away.

Ortell. So he is Dead I hope.


Arba. No more then you are.


Ortell. How so?


Arba. Come my Lord, as you go, I Will tell you.


Exit. -- Duke. Oh Artabella, why did take my Arba. Orte.
Sin upon thy self, hiding thy Innocence
With a face of Guilt, my Death had been
Not Punnishment enough, because I have
Wronged so fair a Life as yours; which
Way to ask forgiveness, I cant tell;
There are no Pardons for such Sins
As mine, the only way to do thee
Right, is this.

Arta. Hold Sir my Life shall follow yours,
If you strike.

Duke. Why would thou have my Live?


Arta. Because I love you Sir.


Duke. And that is the only reason I would dye;


Arta. Why would it be kindly done,
To show my Eyes your Blood?

Duke. Yes, far more kind, then Live
And show thy heart no Love. Oh
Artabella that thou were my Sister, nothing
But Brothers love were then thy due;
And I could richly pay thee in that Coin,
A Million more then ever Brother did.

Arta. Would Nature then had made me so:
Or else had gave me never a heart.

Duke. What would have me do, poor Artabella.


Arta. Nothing but Love me Sir.


Duke. See what thou do ask a Man, a god
Would do, and yet I cant, it is not thy
Want of Beauty, but my Fate, Angels
Themselves to look upon thy Face, would
Take a journey twice a day from Heaven.

Arta. If you would come, though far a shorter way,
You should be much more welcome.

Duke. Sweet Tongue lie still, offer no more such
Love as Gods themselves to have, would
Think a Bliss, since all thy kindness
Dos but wound my Heart, to see thine
Ship-wrackt in a Sea of Love, and cannot
Give it Harbor in my Breast.

Arta. Sir let me beg one thing of you then;


Duke. Withal my Soul, be it my Dukedom,
And it is thine?

Arta. It Is no such great request, it is only
When you meet me, say, I hate
Thee Artabella.

Duke. Why could that word please thee,


Arta. No, but to hear it said by you, would
Bring my Death, then I would thank
You for my Rest, would you not come
Unto my Grave Sir?

Duke. O yes, and make thy Coffin float with a Sea of Tears.


Arta. Fair Sir, of what?


Duke. Of Grief.


Arta. O me, a Sea of Tears, and yet not
One of Love, waste not such precious
Drops upon my Grave, it will not
Satisfy my hovering Soul, to see your
Eyes drop Pity without Love, farewell Sir,
Oh for a Grave, that were a resting place,
Good heart be kind, and break apace. --

Exit. Duke. Heaven Love thee for me, base Amphelia
Thou art the Author of my horrid Sin. --

Exit. Enter Philidor and Mirada. Phi. Thou talk of sport Mirida, if all the
Sport we have had already with our
Lovers, come not short of this, hang me;
You say you have invited them already
To my Funeral.

Mir. Yes, yes.


Phili. So, So, Methinks my Body lies in
Great State, to see the Tribe that will
Come by and by, here will be half a
Dozen chief Mourners, which should have
Been my Wives, and some Three or
Four Sonns and Heirs, besides Three
Or four hopeful Daughters, these with
The Congregation of Nurses, will howl
Me a pleasant Dirge, Mirida you being
My Excecutrix must carry your self
Very gravely, here is my Will which
You must read to'um, I Will be the
Priest my self, hark some body, Knocks within.
Knocks at Gate.

Enter Boy. Boy. Sir they are all come,


Phi. Let'um in. Now Mirida Manage
Your business well,

Mir. Let me alone I Will warrant ye.


Enter Ladies and Nurses. All La. Ah my poor dear dear.


All Nu. Ah my poor dear Master, ah Child,
Cry for thy poor Dad. -- Kiss the Hearse.

Phi. What a Dog-Kennell's here, how they
Howl. -- aside.

Mir. When the passions of your Griefs are over,
Pray hear me speak, because it concerns you all?

Phi. Pox of thy Gravity, Mirida -- aside.


Mir. Nay hold your Tongue, if you set me.
Once a Laughing, I shall spoil your
Funeral. -- aside.
Enter Pinguister and Lean-man. So here comes my Fat Lover, and my
Lean one. Welcome Gentlemen, I
Was afraid I should not have had your Company.

Ping. Really sweet Lady, I have taken a
Purge to day, (as I do Constantly for
Love of you) which has detorted me,
By reason of its opparation; neither can
I say it has yet finished.

Mir. Sir please you to sit down, and you
Mr. Pinguister.

Ping. Lady I embrace your offer, and shall
Press your Chair, by my heart Madam
This Chair was fitter for a Jackdaw,
Then me. -- sits down and breaks the Chair.
Nay they make such Chairs now a days,
That had I a Grudge to an Upholsterer,
I would desire no greater revenge,
Then to fit down upon every Chair
In his Shop.

Mir. Truly Sir I am sorry for your fall.
Ladies and Gentlewomen, pray give your
Attention to my dear deceased Cozens Will
Poor young man, he was Killed
Yesterday by a Duel, he lived but two
Hours after he was hurt, which time
He made use of, to settle something
On all you here, his worthy Friends.

Omnes. A good young Man.


Miri. Imprimis, I bequeath my Soul as other People used to do, and so my Body.

Item, I give to Mrs. Mary for a reason that She knows 500. l.

Item, 500. l. To Mrs. Margaret, for a Reason She knows.

Item, 500. l. To Mrs. Sarah, for a reason She knows.

Item, 500. l. To Mrs. Martha, for a Reason she knows.

Item, 500. l. To Mrs. Alice, for a reason She knows.

Item, 500. l. To Mrs. Eliner, for a reason She knows, And so to all the rest.

Item, To my Nurses, I leave each of Them 20. l. A year a piece, for their
Lives, besides their arreares due to Them for Nursing. These Sums Of Money
and Legacies, I leave to be Raised and Paid out of my Manor Of Constantinople,
in which the Great Turk is now Tennant for Life. If they should hear how their
Laughs aside. Legacies art to be Paid, how they would fall A Druming on his Coffin.

Item, I leave to Mr. Pinguister a very Fat Man.


Ping. I am so.


Mir. An Infallible receipt to make him lean.


Ping. So I hope the Dead may do, what
The Liveing cannot.

Mir. I leave to a Certain Lean Gentleman,
Whom I have seen in my Cozen
Miridas Company, a sure receipt to
Make him Fat.

Le. ma. I find he knew I was to Marry his Cozen?


Mir. I desire my Body may be carried to the
Grave by the six aforesaid Gentlewomen.
So Ladies now you have heard his Will,
Be pleased to take up the Body, Nurses
You are to follow next; new which of you
Will lead me.

(...) I will Madam,


Le. ma. By my Bones but you shanot,


Ping. By my Fat but I will Sir.


Mir. Nay Gentlemen, pray fall not out, well
One of you lead me one half of the way. --

Exeunt. Ping. Agreed Sir, take you her hand first; a
Very timely Proposition, for my Purge
Works again, save me where abouts
Is the Closset. -- goes out and comes in again.
What a loose, must I run to overtake them
Now, else I shall not lead my Mistress the
Last half way. -- deliver me from Love
And Purges.

Enter all again with a Coffin, Philidor and Mirida shut them into the Vault.
Phili. So, there let u'm converse with the dead
A while, I had rather have 'um there then
Above ground, here will I keep 'um till
They have all quitted me under their hands
And Seals.

Mir. Oh the sport that we shall have by and by;
Well, but I must go home a little, my
Father will miss me, where shall we
Meet again?

Phi. Just here.


Mir. I Will not fail. --


Exeunt. Enter Amarissa just arrived. Amar. I am come to late, and yet too soon
am here,
Since dear Zoranzo's death is now so near;
On the same block with him I Will lay my head,
That our two bodies may have but one bed.
Thus are our Nuptial joys decreed by fate
Our Wedding and our Burial bare one date.
Sure I am the first of maids that ever gave
Her body, to her Lover in a Grave.
Alas! in cold embraces we must meet,
With Icy kisses in a winding sheet.
Yet though this life denies us time to love,
The other life will not so cruel prove.
Our souls so fast in Lovers knots we will tie,
That when the headsman strikes they both shall fly.
Twind in one another through the air,
And be at rest, whilst other Souls despair.
Enter Iaylor. This is the Prison, and here is the Jailer
I believe; Pray Sir do you belong
Unto the Prison.

Iaylor. Belong, Yes I am the Keeper of it.


Amar. Is not here one Zoranzo a Prisoner.


Iaylor. Yes, but he wont be here long, for he
Is to dye anon.

Amar. Ah me, Sir I am his Sister, pray help
Me to him that I may speak with him,
Before that cruel hour, I love him
So that I must needs dye with him, I Will
Petition the Duke that I may, sure he will
Not deny me that request.

Iay. I can tell you a way that you may be sure
To have that favor granted.

Amar. Tell it me and I Will thank ye.


Iay. Why if you will try to convey him out of Prison,
As another Lady has already, you may
Bare them company too?

Amar. Why has there any Lady endeavored it,


Iay. Yes, one that is his Mistress, and they are
Both to dye together.

Amar. Ha! What is it I hear, his Mistress,
Say you?

Iay. Yes Mistress; they both lie as Contentedly
By one another, as if they were not two.

Amar. Curse him good heaven, ye cannot throw
Too many curses on him; here Jailer,
Take this and let me speak with the Prisoner.

Iay. Madam you shall.


Enter Zoranzo and Amphelia, as in Prison in Chains. Zo. Amarissa, are my eyes
false, or is it
Truly she.

Ama. Your Eyes are true, but it is your heart
That Is false.

Zo. I am deceived, that cannot be her tongue.


Ama. Should it speak otherwise to thee, I Would
Tear it out, Devil Zoranzo; cursed
Pair of Vipers, that in chains of death
Can practice Lust, as if no end were nigh.
Do not my wrongs startle thy guilty
Soul, to think of all the torments it must
Have, that could with so much falseness
Murder Love: when thou art gone to
Hell as go thou must, 'twill be a task
For all the Devils there to torture thee enough.
Thy sin is such, were I thy headsman,
When thou come to dye, i would be a week
A cutting off thy head, twixt every stroke
I Would stop; and then I Would hollow Amarissa
In thy Ears, thy Guilt would be an Echo
To my wrongs, and answer to my cry,
Wronged Amarissa; which injured name
Repeated to thy Ears, would make
Thy Soul think, Hell not half such pain.
Farwell Zoranzo, I Will come see your
Head struck off, and your Ladies.

Zo. Base Amarissa, that can conclude me
False because she saw this Lady lie
In Chains by me, and could not ask me how
We came together. Thus to revile me and
Not know the truth, I Will scorn to tell
Her now.

Enter Duke. Amar. O Sir, be pleased to hear a Maids Petition,
Though a Stranger to you.

Duke. Fair Maid what is it?


Amar. Zoranzo that's Condemned to Dye, may --


Duke. Not Live, if that be your request, pray
Do not ask, I shall not grant it.

Amar. No Sir, it is that he may have a Thousand
Deaths, instead of One, or one that has
More pain then Thousands.

Duke. What makes you thus incenc'd against him?


Amar. Heaven knows I have too much cause, Sir
I have Loved him long, and the day he was
Your Prisoner, should have been our
Wedding, news being brought to me
In my own Country, that he was to Dye,
In flying have I took this tedious journey
With Sorrow; and with Joy, I here arrived;
Tears in my eyes for his approaching
Death, Smiles in my Cheeks to think
Of dyeing with him, but when I came
Unto the Prison gate, I met the Jailer and
He told me all, then let me in, and to rejoice
My Eyes, I saw two Devils lie in
Chains together, and not half so fast
As Chained in Love, all my intended
Kisses then, I changed into as many curses
On his heart, which with my eyes I
Spoke as well as tongue,

Duke. Alas poor injured Maid, we must be one another's
Petiters, thy fate is mine;
That woman which you saw with him,
Has proved as false to me, as he to you.

Amar. For Heavens sake Sir, let'um Dye both,
No sight would please us like their
Blood, the Jailer told me they lie as
Close together all day, as if they were not two.

Duke. Oh curse on'um!


Amar. Oh the Devil take 'um, pray Sir give
Order that they may be brought
Immediately to Excecution.

Duke. I will.


Ama. I Will go call the Jailer, Sir. steps to the Prison.


Enter Iaylor. Duke. Jailer let the Prisoner be brought to
Excecution straight, I Will be there my self.

Amar. And I too, Sir.


Duke. You shall, we will go together --


Exeunt. ACT V.
Enter all Ladies, Nurses, Pinguister, Leanman, as in the Vault, Philidor as a
Crier. Phili. O Yes, O yes, o yes, did any man hear
Tale or Tidings of Three Nurses called
Three Flanders Mares, with Three
Sucking Colts?

All Nu. Hark, we are Cried in the Streets.


Phi. And also six Maiden Ladies, that should
Have been all Married to a certain
Promising Gentleman.

All La. Devil, we are Cried too.


Phi. Also a very Lean Gentleman, that must
Be Patter before he is Married?

Le. ma. Hark, that is I.


Phi. And the hugest Loss of all is one Mr.
Pinguister, a lovely Fat Gentleman,
Whom all that knew him, doubt him
To be Dead upon some Privy house,
Because he Purged every day for Love,
By reason Mrs. Mirida will not Marry him,
Till a certain Measure that he has
Will come about his Wast.

Enter Mirida. Ping. Crier, I am here, I am here.


Phi. If any can bring News of the six aforesaid
Virgin Ladies, or of the three Flanders Nurses,
And Colts, to one Mr. Philidor, a very
Conscientious young Man.

Omnes. A Pox take him.


Phi. They shall be extremely paid
For their Pains. Again, if any can
Bring Tidings of this Mr. Pinguister,
To Mrs. Mirida, she will be very bountiful
In her Reward, the poor soul weeps
Most bitterly for him.

Ping. Dos she so poor Wretch? -- cries aloud.
Prithee good Crier go tell her I am not
Dead, though I have been Buried a
Great while in the Vault. Mercy of my
Bumgut, my Purge again?

Omnes. You nasty Rogue, turn your Breech
Out at the Grate then

goes to do so, Philidor Kickes him down, he Roares out. Mir. Philidor, I have
broke a Vain
With Laughing, to hear thy Rogueries,
I Will call to Pinguister -- Mr. Pinguister,
My Love, my Dear, sure I hear
Thy voice.

Ping. Who Is that? my dear Female?


Mir. The same Fat Love.


Ping. Oh Prithee raise me from the Dead.


Phi. Well Ladies and Gentlewomen, how do you
Like your Crier now?

Omnes. The Devil take thee, was it you?


Phi. The very same.


2 La. Well, wont you let us out, pray howsoever,
Take away this Fat Gentleman from us;
For he has such a coming Looseness, and
It Is so dark here that he has
Shit upon every one of us.

Omnes. Well, but wont you let us out?


Phili. Yes, if you Ladies will set your hands
To this Paper, to quit me as to all Promises.
I will; and also my reverend Nurses,
You must set your hands to this discharge,
To quit me from all arreares of Nursing;
Else farewell t'yee?

Omnes. Well, well, stay we will Sets their hands.


Phili. So now you may go take the Air
Again, there is the Key to let your selves out.

Omnes. A Cheating Rogue.


Phili. Come Mirida, let us run away, for if
They catch us, Murder is the best we
Can hope for. --

Exit with Mirida. 1 Nur. They went this way, let us run after
Them, some one way, and some the other. --

Ex. women. Ping. So you may, but if I run any way.
Then hang me, I am gald of my Resurrection
Howsoever. On my Conscience no green
Carcass ever stunck as I did; to my best
Remembrance I went to stool some
Threescore times in the Vault, Ergo
I was beaten Threescore times, the
Unmerciful Nurses with their hugh
Palm'd hands, every time I went to it,
Played at hot Cockles all the while upon
My Buttocks, well I hope I shall never
Be buried again whilst I live, and so
With that Prayer I Will go to Bed.

Enter Mirida. Miri. My dear Fat Love, little do thou
Think how many Tears I have shed
For all thy Sufferings, that Rogue
Philidor put a Trick upon us all.

Ping. Well and has Physic, Heats, Burial,
Nor Resurrection, made me yet Lean
Enough to be thy, Husband; why I have
Lost as much Grease as would Furnish
A whole City with Candles for a Twelve Month.
And all for the Love of thee sweet, Mirida. Cries and Snobs.

Mir. Dear Love come sit thee in my Lap
And let me try if I can enclose thy world
Of Fat and Love, within these Arms,
See I cannot nigh encompass my
Desires by a Mile.

Ping. How is my Fat a Rival to my Joys? -- cries.
Sure I shall weep it all away.

Mir. Lie still my Babe, lie still and sleep,
It grieves me sore to see thee weep.
Were thou but Leaner I were glad,
Thy Fatness makes thy dear Love sad.
What a lump of Love have I in my arms.

Ping. Nay if I had not taken all these Courses,
To dissolve my self into thy embraces,
One would think my looking on thee
Were enough, for I never see thee but
I am like a fat piece of Beef, rosting
At the Fire, continually drep, drop, drop.
There Is never a feature in thy Face, or
Part about thee, but has cost me many
A Pint of Fat, with thinking on thee;
And yet not to be Lean enough for
Thy Husband; O Fate, O Fate, O Fate, O Fat.
she lets him fall.
Mir. O Lord Sir I have let you fall, how
Shall I do to get you up again?

Ping. Nay that is more then all the World
Can tell.

Mir. I Will e'ne lie down by thee then.


Ping. Nay but Prithee lie near me, thou
Had as good lie a League off, as that
Distance.

Mir. Were I thy Wife, fat Love I would.
she sings. My Lodging it is on the Cold Boards
And wonderful hard is my fare,
But that which Troubles me most is
The Fatness of my Dear.
Yet still I cry oh melt Love,
And I prithee now melt apace,
For thou art the man I shoud long for;
If 'twere not for thy Grease.

Ping he sings. Then prithee don't harden thy heart still,
And be deaf to my pitiful Moan;
Since I do endure the smart still,
And for my Fat do Groan;
Then prithee now turn my dear Love,
And I prithee now turn to me;
For alas I am too Fat still,
To Roll so far to thee:

Mir. That were not Modesty in me to turn
To you, but if you can Roll to me
Within this hour, I Will Marry you in
Spite of all your Fat.

Mir. Agreed then I shall gain thee, yet
You must lie still then.

Mir. Yes, yes.


Ping. Sure I am Sysiphus's stone, for as fast
As I turn over I think I turn be Rouls to her, and she Rouls from him.
Back again, else I must needs
Have been come to my Journies end
By this time, for I am of such a
Breadth, that every Roll I give,
I pass over an Acre at least.
Thou lie still my Love, dos't thou not?

Mir. Yes, I long to have thee here,


Ping. I doubt I shant be with thee though
This two hours.

Mir. Then my heart will break.


Ping. I Am sure mine will before I get to thee.
Oh Woman, -- oh woman, oh woman.
They talk of woman in Travail, I Am
Sure I know a man in Travail at
This time, in more Pain behalf.

Mir. Why my most Extreme Fat Ass, do she rises and Laughs at him.
Thou not find that I have fooled thee
All this while?

Ping. Why, have thou?


Mir. Yes indeed have I.


Ping. Oh thou woman; may thou grow
Fat; that thy Breasts and Belly may
Meet together, so that all the fat
Hostesses in Christendom may appear
But Eels to thee.

Mir. Farewell my lowly Love.


Ping. Why will thou not help me up before
You go.

Mir. What to do, to run heats again for Love?


Ping. No, to fight with thee.


Mir. Fight with me? by this Light would we
Had two Swords, I Would have one pass
At all thy Tripes.
Enter Cutler with two Swords. Faith and yonder is a fellow has two Swords.
Friend lend me but thy Swords one Minute.

Cut. I am going to carry them to two Gentlemen.


Mir. Oh this will not hinder thee, thou shall
See rare sport, go help that Gentleman
Up that lies yonder, and give that Sword
Into his hand.
Come are you ready Sir.

Ping. Why, you dear fight then it seems
Though thou art so ungodly a Chit as
To say no prayers before thou begin'st,
I will, I assure thee.
Good, -- I pray and desire ye, if I
Do miscarry in this Duel, that I may
Meet with no woman in the the other
World. Now thou worst of Females,
Have at thee.

Mir. Come I Will let out all your Fat and Love at
One Thrust. -- Fight and she disarmes him.
Now ask thy Life and confess thou art an Ass.

Ping. I am an Ass, and ask my life.


Mir. Then I thy conquering Caesar, take my leave,
With this conclusion, veny, vidi, vici.
And so farewell Oh Fate, Oh Love, O Fat. --

Exit. Ping. After all my Miseries would I were
Up again, else the next man that comes
Will make a Rouler of me, for to Roll
Bowling greenes. -- makes several Attempts to rise and at last gets up.
So, now have I a Mile home at least,
And every toilesome step I take, I will
Curse women. --

Exit. Enter Zoranzo and Amphelia lyeing upon Straw together. Zo. Most blessed of
women, I must tell you truth.
And yet I fear that truth will, --

Amph. Will what; I doubt he loves me. aside.
Speak it Sir, nothing from you can
Be unwelcome;

Zo. O yes it will.


Amph. I Will warrant you, out with it Sir.


Zo. Then know I, -- twill come no further.


Amph. Unhappy man it is so, he Loves me. -- aside.
O Sir, I have sadder truth to tell to you,
Then yours can be to me, I dare not
Speak it.

Zo. My fears are true, she Loves me? -- aside.
Pray tell me what it is,

Amph. Tell yours first Sir.


Zo. Alas you saw I tried, but could not
Get it past my Lips.

Amph. If I should try, mine would not come so far.


Zo. Would I knew yours, I could tell it
For you;

Amph. So could I yours, yet I cant my own.


Zo. Alas she loves me. -- aside.


Amph. Poor Zoranzo, I see he loves me. aside.
But Sir consider we are going to dye,
Let us dye undeceived in one another.

Zo. Oh that some -- that knows each of
Our hearts, would harken to our griefs,
And bid an Angel come and speak
For both.

Enter Iaylor. Iay. Come have you done your discourse,
Ye must go to Excecution.

Zo. A little patience Jailer, see we are
Called unto our deaths, pray tell me
What you mean.

Amph. I cannot, first do you begin.


Zo. Nor I.


Amph. Let us tell both together then, that one
May not blame the the other

Zo. Agreed, are you ready now to speak,


Amph. Yes, oh no I am not* -- well now I am, --
Are you.

Zo. Yes I am, begin, oh stay I cannot yet.


Iay. Come, Come, I can give you no Longer time.


Amph. Nay then we must tell.


Zo. Poor Amphelia, it is Amarissa, that I Love.


Amph. O Zoranzo I love the Duke.


Zo. Then I am joyed, I was afraid it was
Me you Loved.

Amph. And so was I that you Loved me.
Now we shall dye both happy,
Never was two such friends as you and I.

Iay. Come, Come.


Amph. Good Jailer we go most willingly now,


Ex^^nt. Enter as on a Scaffold, Duke, Amarissa, Ortellus, Zoranzo, Amphelia,
and Iaylor Excecutioner. Amar. Jailer why did thou let them stay so long?


Iay. They had so much to say to one another,
That still they begged one Minute and
Then another.

Amar. Do You hear Sir, pray let the Jailer
Be turned out of his place, for leting
Them speak to one another.

Amph. See Zoranzo where they sit in triumph,
Over our deaths. -- aside*

Amar. S'life Sir they are whispering, do you
See yonder, Excecutioner why don't
You strike off their heads, and let
Them whisper then. --
Sir you are Melancholy;

Duke. I am indeed.


Zo. Now Amphelia, to Heaven and you,
I truly Vow, my Love is still the
Same, to cruel Amarissa.

Amph. Heaven and you witnesses the same
For me, my heart is still that
Undeserving Dukes.

Excecu. Come which of you will dye first.


Zo. Have thou not skill enough to strike
Our heads off together.

Amar. Excecutioner let them not have that
Satisfaction, pray Sir let that
Woman dye first; that damned Zoranzo,
May have two deaths; it will be one
To him, to see her dye, shall it be so Sir?

Duke. What you please.


Amar. Excecutioner, the Duke says she
Must dye first.

Excecu. Come Lady, you must lay down your
Head first, the Duke says.

Amph. That word's the sharpest Ax, that I
Shall feel.

Exce. Have you said all? both kneels as at Prayers.


Amph. To Earth I have, but not to Heaven,
Farewell dear friend for one short Minute,

Zo. My soul shall hasten after yours.


Ama. S'life Jailer, will you let them speak
To one another again.

Amph. Excecutioner, now I am ready.


Duke. Hold, the Prisoner shall dye first.


Zo. With all my heart, I am ready.


Duke. Nay it is not you I mean Sir, rise
It Is I that am the Prisoner, I will
Make you a present, take your Life,
Your Love, nay and my Dukedom too,
And to oblidge you most of all.
Excecutioner strike off my head, for I
Am weary of it.

Amph. Not for ten thousand worlds Sir,
What e're you mean.

Duke. Know then I have loved you all this
While, but seeing your hate so
Great to me, I have dissembled
Scorn to you. -- she Swoones.
Why do thou Swoon Amphelia?

Amph. Did not I hear some voice just now,
That said the Duke dos love me still,

Duke. Thou did, 'twas he himself that
Said so.

Amph. If 'twere from Heaven, good Heaven
Say it again.

Duke. It Was I my self, I tell thee, -- and I will never
Speak another word, if that dos please thee.

Amp. Oh I am in Heaven then it seems, and it is
Some god that is telling me how the
Duke Loved me still.

Duke. Dear Amphelia, it is I that Loves thee,
Tells thee so.

Amp. Hark, now there is a god that says he loves
Me too, blessed god, I Am sorry if you do,
Since I have heard the Duke dos Love me still,
He must be your rival, indeed I cannot
Help it, Oh let me fly down to the Earth
Again, only to hear him say he loves me,
I cannot promise when I shall return,
That very word from him would keep me there.

Duke. I must answer her no more, they say
'Twill keep 'um longer in a Trance he Rubs her.

Ortell. I am but in a scurvy condition now, if
She comes to life again, for they will
Examine one another how the mistake
Came between them, and then I am
Sure it must come to light.

Amph. Who Is that Duke, Archemedes. --


Duke. The same sweet Angel?


Amph. Oh Sir, I am come from Heaven to see you,
Since there I heard you love me still.

Duke. Dear Amphelia, thou have dreamed all
This while, Heaven it is true, is where
Thou art, but 'twas my voice that
Said I Love thee.

Amph. Was not my head struck off just now?


Duke. Can thou ask that while I have
A head and heart?

Amph. Why have you loved me still?


Duke. With as much truth as ever lover did;


Amph. So have I you with equal constancy.


Amar. Well Sir, now you are satisfied, pray
Let me be so too, and let Zoranzo's
Head be struck off quickly.
I see he is mean as well as false, to
Quit me for a woman that dos not
Love him.

Amph. Hold Amarissa, hear me speak, before
Zoranzo dies, -- and be assured he
Loves you still.

Amar. Would you deceive me too?


Amph. Indeed I don't, when we were
Going to dye, you may remember that
We whispered, then we called Heaven
And our selves to witness,
That both our Loves were true,
Mine to Archimedes, his to you.

Amar. Can you forgive me Sir. -- Kneels.


Zo. I cannot answer yet,
Thy civility has took away my speech.

Duke. Dear Amphelia, how came this sad
Mistake 'twixt you and I.

Amph. I Will tell you Sir in part, when you were
In this last War, my woman received
A Letter from one of the Gentlemen of your
Chamber, wherein he did assure
Her, that you had a new Mistress in
That Country, and therefore bid her tell
Me of it, that I might by degrees,
Wean my affection from so false a man
As you.

Duke. Here has been some foul play, for
This very man you spoke of, received
A Letter from your woman, wherein she
Bid him assure me, that you were
Proved false in my absence, and Loved my
Cozen Ortellus.

Guard. Go fetch them both hither
Immediately, they shall dye without
Mercy.

Ortell. Nay then I had as good discover,
'Twill fall the heavier on me else.
Sir let the Guard stay,
And I will tell you all.
It Is I, have sowed the seeds of this mistake,
I long have loved Amphelia, for which cause
I tried this way to draw her heart from you.
I knew this Gentleman of your Bedchamber
Was in Love with Amphelia's woman,
Therefore I bribed her to write to him,
To assure the Duke that Amphelia loved me,
And that she should also charge him, to
Write another Letter to her, wherein he
Should complain of the Dukes falling in
Love with another woman in that
Country, I knew your spirits both to be
So great, that neither of you would
Stoop to one another, when you were
Both possessed of eithers falseness, and
So it proved, for when the Duke heard
You Loved me, he brought a fair
New Mistress over with him, to let you
See he did contemn you, and so
Amphelia Sir, when she heard you
Loved another, assured me then that she
Loved me, which now I see was only
To make you think how much she
Scorned you; though still her heart
Was true, and so was yours, now
Sir I humbly beg your Pardon.

Duke. 'Twill be in vain my Lord, I cannot
Grant it; Oh Amphelia, how many
Hours of joy, we two have lost.

Amph. Base Lord.


Enter Artabella. Artab. O Sir, I heard that people were to dye
To day, let me be one I pray.

Amph. Not for the World sweet inno^^^^


Arta. Oh Madam you are she the Duke
Loves, pray spare your Pity, Sir can
You have the heart to let me live,
And see you Married to another?

Amph. Have patience sweet young Maid,
I will not Marry him, you wo'not blame
Me if I love him though.

Arta. No, for then I should condemn my
Fault in you.

Duke. But sure Amphelia, you did but jest,
In telling her you would not Marry me;

Amph. Indeed Sir I am in earnest; Consider
It Is but justice, she loves you as well
As I, her heart was quiet till you
Troubled it.

Duke. All this is true, but how will your
Love show, if you refuse to marry me?

Amph. Not less at all, but make my Pity more.


Duke. If I would marry her, I cant believe
That she would be thus kind to you.

Amph. Yes, I dare say she would; ask her and try.


Duke. Well Artabella, will you Marry me?


Arta. You never hated me till now, can you
Believe I Would wrong so blessed a
Woman as Amphelia.

Amph. See Sir, would it be justice now in me,
She will not wound my heart, should
I kill hers.

Duke. But consider it is you I Love, not her,


Amph. That Is her misfortune Sir, yet she
Deserves as much as I: I can but love
You, so does she*

Duke. Dear Amphelia marry me?


Amph. I cannot out of pity Sir;


Duke. Talk not of pity, if thou will show
Me none.

Amp. My pity, is her due: my love is yours.


Duke. O Amphelia, this was a cruel way to
Make me happy. Thou Would better still
Have kept my joys unknown;
Then let the knowing of it be my death.
Once more my dear Amphelia marry me:

Amph. Do not Petition, her you may command
In any thing but this.

Duke. Monster of Villains, thou have caused
All this; Excecutioner, immediately strike
Off his head.

Ortell. I Am sure you will not let me dye;


Duke. Impudent Villain, dispatch him straight?


Ortell. Hold Sir, it is only I can make you three
Happy, which if you do not confess,
When you have heard me speak,
Then let me dye.

Duke. Well let us hear it.


Ortell. Promise me my life first, if I do.


Duke. Well you shall have it.


Ortell. Then know the Lady Artabella is
Your Sister.

Duke. Ha.


Ortell. I say your Sister, you do remember
That you had one once?

Duke. Yes I do, but she was lost at three
Years old.

Ortell. It Is true 'twas thought so; but thus
It is, when 'twas reported you were
Slain in the Battle;
I straight conveyed away this Lady
Then a Child, because she should not
Stand 'twixt me and the Dukedom, I being
Then acquainted with the Mother to
Arbatus, I brought this Lady, and gave
Her a sum of Money, to adopt her for
Her Child, with willingness my offer
She imbrac',d the more, because her
Son Arbatus had then been lost
About seven years; thought to have
Been cast a way at Sea; though afterward
Returned home, I had enjoined her
Secresy which she kept, therefore
She told Arbatus 'twas his Sister.

Enter Arbatus. Duke. And is she then my Sister.
Oh, Arbatus, welcome, welcome;
I have a crowd of Joys, about my heart
To tell thee.

Arba. What! that you have broke my Sisters heart.


Duke. Thou have no Sister; It Is I possess that
Blessing, Artabella, is my Sister, how
Blessed a sound is sister to my Ears,
I Will give command, no other word but
Sister shall be spoke throughout My
Dukedom; I Will have it taught to
Infants; so that when nature lends
Their sucking tongues a means to
Speak one word, they all shall
Babble Sister, instead of Nurse, I Will
Have the name ingrav'd in Gold on
Every Post and Pillar in the Streets,
And passers by, shall worship it.

Arba. I am amazed.


Enter Philidor and Mirida. Duke. Welcome Philidor.


Phili. I am glad to see joy in your looks
Again Sir, the time is long since
I have seen you smile.

Duke. Philidor, all that is Joy, I have within
This Breast, it over flows and runs
Into my Eyes; This is my Sister, oh
What a word is Sister. And this my
Dear and true, Amphelia.
Come Mirida shall be thine, to day too.

Mir. Hold Sir, I forbid that banes?


Phi. Troth so do I too; you always
Take the words out of my mouth.
You and I Marry kether.

Mir. No faith, we will be hanged first, I Would
Rather hear along Sermon, then
Hear a Person ask me, Mirida,
Will you have this man for your
Wedded Husband, to have and to hold.
From this day forward and so forth.

Phi. Right, for better, for worse, in
Sickness, or in Health.

Mir. I and perhaps after we have been
Married half a year with ones
Husband, falls into a deep Consumption,
And will not do one the favor to
Dye neither, then we must be
Ever feeding him with Caudle.
Oh from a husband in a Consumption,
Deliver me.

Phi. And think how weary I should be
Of thee, Mirida, when once we were
Chained together, the very name of
Wife, would be a vomit to me, then
Nothing, but where is my wife, call
My wife to Dinner, call my wife to Suppe^
And then at night, come wife will you
Go to Bed.

Mir. I and that would be so troublesome
To be called by ones husband every night
To go to Bed, Oh that dull, dull
Name of Husband.

Duke. Indeed you two are well met,
The World has not two more such,
I am confident.

Mir. The more the pity Sir.


Phili. No Sir, if you please, never propose
Marrying to us, till both of us have
Committed such faults as are death
By the Law, then instead of
Hanging us, Marry us.

Miri. And then you shall hear how
Earnestly we shall Petition your
Highness to be hanged rather then
Married.

Duke. No man can judge which is the
Wildest of these two.
Now brave Arbatus, in all my Dukedom,
There is but one gift worthy thy
Receiving, and that is my Sister,
Here Sir take her as freely as Heaven
Gave her me.

Arba. Do You forgive me Sir,


Duke. Or not my self Arbatus.
This day, Hymen shall light his
Torch for all.

Phi. With your Pardon Sir, not for me
And my Female.

Mir. No faith, I Will blow it out if he dos.


Arta. Sir, thought in my own desires,
Should have chose the man that
You have given me, yet I beg
We may not Marry yet, we have
Called Brother and Sister so long,
That yet needs must think we
Are so still.

Arba. Pray Madam, let us think so as
Little a while as we can, that fancy
May not keep my joy in Prison.

Duke. Let Us to the Temple now, and there thank
Heaven for these unexpected Joys.
Each day the gods shall lend me in this life;
I Will thank them for a Sister, and a Wife.

Exeunt. FINIS.

