The Honble. Sr. Robert Howard.



FIVE NEW PLAYS, VIZ. Comedies.
The Surprisal, The Committee,
AND Tragedies.
The Indian-Queen, The Vestal-Virgin, The Duke of Lerma,
As they were Acted by His MAJESTY's Servants at the Theater Royal. Written by
the Honorable Sir ROBERT HOWARD.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold by R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. MDCXCII.

TO THE READER.
THere is none more sensible than I am, how great a Charity the most Ingenious
may need, that expose their private Wit to a public Judgment; since the same
Fancy from whence the Thoughts proceed, must probably be kind to its own
Issue: This renders Men no perfecter Judges of their own Writings, than Fathers
are of their own Children; who find out that Wit in them which another discerns
not, and see not those Errors which are evident to the unconcerned. Nor is this
self-kindness more fatal to Men in their Writings, than in their Actions; every
Man being a greater Flatterer to himself than he knows how to be to another;
otherwise it were impossible that things of such distant Natures should find
their own Authors so equally kind in their affections to them, and Men so
different in Parts and Virtues, should rest equally contented in their own
Opinions.

This Apprehension, added to that greater which I have of my own Weakness, may
I hope incline the Reader to believe me, when I assure him that these Follies
were made public as much against my Inclination as Judgment: But being pursued
with so many Solicitations of Mr Herringman's, and having received Civilities
from him, if it were possible, exceeding his Importunities; I at last yielded
to prefer that which he believed his Interest, before that which I apprehended
my own Disadvantage: Considering withal, That he might pretend it would be a
real Loss to him, and could be but an imaginary Prejudice to me; since things
of this nature, though never so excellent or never so mean, have seldom proved
the Foundation of Men's new-built Fortunes, or the Ruin of their old; it being
the Fate of Poetry, though of no other good Parts, to be wholly separated from
Interest; and there are few that know me but will easily believe I am not much
concerned in an unprofitable Reputation. This clear account I have given the
Reader of this seeming Contradiction, to offer that to the World which I
dislike my self; and in all things I have no greater an ambition than to be
believed a Person that would rather be unkind to my self, than ungrateful to
others.

I have made this excuse for my self, I offer none for my Writings, but freely
leave the Reader to condemn that which has received my Sentence already. Yet I
shall presume to say something in the justification of our Nation's Plays,
though not of my own; since in my Judgment, without being partial to my
Country, I do really prefer our Plays as much before any other Nations, as I do
the best of ours before my own.

The manner of the Stage-Entertainments have differed in all Ages; and as it
has increased in use, it has enlarged it self in business: The general manner
of Plays among the Ancients we find in Seneca's Tragedies for serious Subjects,
and in Terence and Plautus for the Comical; in which latter we see some
pretenses to Plots, though certainly short of what we have seen in some of Mr
Johnson's Plays; and for their Wit, especially Plautus, I suppose it suited
much better in those days than it would do in ours; for were their Plays
strictly Translated, and Presented on our Stage, they would hardly bring as
many Audiences as they have now Admirers.

The serious Plays were anciently composed of Speeches and Chorus's, where all
things are related, but no matter of Fact presented on the Stage: This Pattern
the French do at this time nearly follow, only leaving out the Chorus, making
up their Plays with almost entire and discoursive Scenes, presenting the
business in Relations: This way has very much affected some of our Nation, who
possibly believe well of it more upon the account that what the French do,
ought to be a Fashion, than upon the Reason of the thing.

It is first necessary to consider why probably the Compositions of the
Ancients, especially in their serious Plays, were after this manner; and it
will be found, that the Subjects they commonly chose drove them upon the
necessity, which were usually the most known Stories and Fables: Accordingly,
Seneca making choice of Medea, Hippolytus, and Hercules Oetus; it was
impossible to show Medea throwing old mangled Aeson into her Age-renewing
Caldron, or to present the scattered Limbs of Hippolytus upon the Stage, or
show Hercules burning upon his own Funeral Pile: And this the Judicious Horace
clearly speaks of in his Art Poetica, where he says,

-- non tamen intus
Digna geri, promise in Scenam: multaque tolles
Ex oculis, quae mox narret facundia praesens.
Nec pueros coram populo Medea trucidet:
Aut humana palam coquat exta nefarius Atreus,
Aut in avem Progne vertatur, Cadmus in anguem.
Quodcunque ostendit mihi sie, incredulus odi.
So that it appears a fault to choose such Subjects for the Stage, but much
greater to affect that Method which those Subjects enforce; and therefore the
French seem much mistaken, who without the necessity sometimes commit the
Error; and this is as plainly decided by the same Author in his preceding words;

Aut agitur res in Scenis aut acta refertur:
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem;
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus and quae
Ipse sibi tradit spectator. --
By which he directly declares his Judgment, That every thing makes more
impression Presented than Related: Nor indeed can any one rationally assert the
contrary; for if they affirm otherwise, they do by consequence maintain, That a
whole Play might be as well Related as Acted: Therefore whoever chooses a
Subject that inforces him to Relations, is to blame; and he that does it
without the necessity of the Subject, is much more.

If these Premises be granted, it is no partiality to conclude, That our English
Plays justly challenge the Pre-eminence; yet I shall as heartily acknowledge,
That our best Poets have differed from other Nations (though not so happily) in
usually mingling and interweaving Mirth and Sadness through the whole Course of
their Plays, Ben Johnson only excepted, who keeps himself entire to one
Argument; and I confess I am now convinced in my own Judgment, That it is most
proper to keep the Audience in one entire disposition both of Concern and
Attention; for when Scenes of so different Natures immediately succeed one
another, it is probable the Audience may not so suddenly recollect themselves,
as to start into an enjoyment of the Mirth, or into a concern for the Sadness:
Yet I dispute not but the Variety of this World may afford pursuing Accidents
of such different Natures; but yet though possible in themselves to be, they
may not be so proper to be Presented; an entire Connection being the natural
Beauty of all Plays, and Language the Ornament to dress them in, which in
serious Subjects ought to be great and easy, like a highborn Person that
expresses Greatness without pride or affectation; the easier dictates of Nature
ought to flow in Comedy, yet separated from obsceneness, there being nothing
more impudent than the immodesty of Words: Wit should be chaste; and those that
have it can only write well.

Si modo --
Scimus in Urbanum Lepidose ponere dicto.
Another way of the Ancients which the French follow, and our Stage has now
lately practiced, is to write in Rhyme; and this is the dispute betwixt many
Ingenious Persons, Whether Verse in Rhyme, or Verse without the sound, which
may be called Blank Verse, (though a hard Expression) is to be preferred? But
take the Question largely, and it is never to be decided, but by right
application I suppose it may; for in the general they are both proper, that is,
one for a Play, the other for a Poem or Copy of Verses; a Blank Verse being as
much too low for one, as Rhyme is unnatural for the other: A Poem being a
premeditated form of Thoughts upon designed Occasions, ought not to he
unfurnished of any harmony in Words or Sound: The other is presented as the
present Effect of Accidents not thought of; so that it is impossible it should
be equally proper to both these, unless it were possible that all Persons were
born so much more than Poets, that Verses were not to be composed by them, but
already made in them. Some may object, That this Argument is trivial, because,
whatever is showed, it is known still to be but a Play; but such may as well
excuse an ill Scene, that is not naturally painted, because they know it is only
a Scene, and not really a City or Country.

But there is yet another thing which makes Verse upon the Stage appear more
unnatural; that is, when a Piece of a Verse is made up by one that knew not
what the other meant to say, and the former Verse answered as perfectly in
Sound as the last is supplied in Measure; so that the smartness of a Reply,
which has its Beauty by coming from sudden Thoughts, seems lost by that which
rather looks like a Design of two, than the Answer of one. It may be said, That
Rhyme is such a confinement to a quick and luxuriant Fancy, that it gives a
stop to its speed, till slow Judgment comes in to assist it; but this is no
Argument for the Question in hand, for the dispute is not which way a Man may
write best in, but which is most proper for the Subject he writes upon; and if
this were let pass, the Argument is yet unresolved in it self; for he that
wants Judgment in the liberty of his Fancy, may as well show the defect of it
in its Confinement; and to say truth, he that has Judgment will avoid the
errors, and he that wants it will commit them both. It may be objected, It Is
improbable that any should speak ex tempore as well as Beaumont and Fletcher
makes them, though in Blank Verse; I do not only acknowledge that, but that it is
also improbable any will write so well that way; but if that may be allowed
improbable, I believe it may be concluded impossible that any should speak as
good Verses in Rhyme as the best Poets have writ; and therefore that which
seems nearest to what it intends, is ever to be preferred: Nor are great
Thoughts more adorned by Verse, than Verse unbeautified by mean ones; so that
Verse seems not only unfit in the best use of it, but much more in the worse,
when a Servant is called, or a Door bid to be shut in Rhyme. Verses (I mean
good ones) do in their height of Fancy declare the labor that brought them
forth, like Majesty that grows with care; and Nature that made the Poet
capable, seems to retire and leave its offers to be made perfect by Pains and
Judgment: Against this I can raise no Argument but my Lord of Orory's Writings,
in whose Verse the Greatness of the Majesty seems un^ullied with the Cares, and
his unimitable Fancy descends to us in such easy Expressions, that they seem
as if neither had ever been added to the other, but both together flowing from
a height; like Birds got so high, that use no laboring Wings, but only with an
easy care preserve a steddiness in Motion: But this particular Happiness,
among those multitudes which that excellent Person is Owner of, does not
convince my Reason, but employ my Wonder: Yet I am glad such Verse has been
writ for our Stage, since it has so happily exceeded those whom we seemed to
imitate. But while I give these Arguments against Verse, I may seem faulty that
I have not only writ ill ones, but writ any; but since it was the fashion, I
was resolved, as in all indifferent things, not to appear singular, the danger
of the Vanity being greater than the Error; and therefore I followed it as a
Fashion, though very far off.

For the Italian Plays, I have seen some of them which have been given me as
the best; but they are so inconsiderable, that the Particulars of them are not
at all worthy to entertain the Reader; but as much as they are short of others
in this, they exceed in their other Performances on the Stage; I mean their
Opera's, which consisting of Music and Painting, there is none but will believe
it is much harder to equal them in that way, than it is to excel them in the
other.

The Spanish Plays pretend to more, but indeed are not much, being nothing but
so many Novels put into Acts and Scenes, without the least attempt or design of
making the Reader more concerned than a well-told Tale might do; whereas a Poet
that endeavors not to heighten the Accidents which Fortune seems to scatter in
a well-knit Design, had better have told his tale by a Fireside, than
presented it on a Stage.

For these times wherein we write, I admire to hear the Poets so often cry out
upon, and wittily (as they believe) threaten their Judges, since the effects of
their Mercy have so much exceeded their Justice, that others with me cannot but
remember how many favorable Audiences some of our ill Plays have had; and when
I consider how severe the former age has been to some of the best of Mr
Johnson's never to be equaled Comedies, I cannot but wonder why any Poet should
speak of former times, but rather acknowledge that the want of Abilities in
this Age is largely supplied with the Mercies of it. I deny not but there are
some who resolve to like nothing; and such perhaps are not unwise, since by
that general resolution they may be certainly in the right sometimes, which
perhaps they would seldom be, if they should venture their Understandings in
different Censures; and being forced to a general liking or disliking, lest
they should discover too much their own Weakness, it is to be expected they
would rather choose to pretend to Judgment than good Nature, though I wish they
could find better ways to show either.

But I forget my self, not considering, That while I entertain the Reader in
the Entrance with what a good Play should be, when he is come beyond the
Entrance he must be treated with what ill Plays are: but in this I resemble the
greatest part of the World, that better know how to talk of things than to
perform them, and live short of their own Discourses.

And now I seem like an eager Hunter, that has long pursued a Chase after an
inconsiderable Quarry, and gives over weary, as I do.

THE SURPRISAL, A COMEDY. Written by the Honorable Sir ROBERT HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold by R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. M DC XCII.

Dramatis Personae.
CAstruccio, Uncle to Miranzo. Miranzo. Cialto, Friend to Miranzo the late
General. Brancadoro, A rich Senator's Son. Villerotto, A bold Fellow cashiered
by Cialto, and got into Brancadoro's Service. Moreno, Father to Emilia.
Bottolo, His Servant. Two or three Bravoes. Baptista, Servant to Miranzo. A
Friar.
WOMEN.
Samira, Sister to Miranzo. Emilia. Taccola, Her Governess. A Nun.
Scene SIENNA.

PROLOGUE.
SInce you expect a Prologue, we submit:
But let me tell you, this Excise on Wit,
Though undiscerned, consumes the Stock so fast,
That no new Fancy will be left at last.
Wit's not like Money; Money though paid in
Passes about, and is received again:
But Wit when it has once been paid before,
There it lies dead, it is current then no more.
Nor must we plead for what we do present,
As in Law-Cases, by a Prcedent:
Poets and Mountebanks in this strange Age
Practice with equal hopes upon the Stage;
For it is expected they should both apply
To every Humor some new Remedy:
And one's as likely every man to please,
As the other to cure every man's Disease.
-- But you are welcome all; and what men say
Before a Feast, will* serve before a Play:
Here Is nothing you can like: Thus he that writes
Or makes a Feast, more certainly invites
His Judges than his Friends; there is not a Guest
But will find something wanting or ill dressed.
The Proverb but thus varied serves I fear;
Fools make the Plays, and Wisemen come to hear.
THE SURPRISAL.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Miranzo and Samira. Mir. IT IS strange, Sister.


Sam. It Is true, Brother.


Mir. Perhaps it is; but few such Wonders have been heard of.


Sam. Nor ever such a Wonder caused it.


Mir. There needs indeed a powerful Charm to raise up Spirits fettered long in
Age. (They say, that) Love is the Soul's business here, when Youth seems to
promise it shall have a long share in Time; but his is fitted for its Journey;
Age already has packed up all his Faculties.


Sam. Fie, fie, it is otherwise with him; he endeavors, nay, and (I think)
believes he shall grow young again: the warmth of Love serves for the heat of
Youth.


Mir. Where (in the name of wonder) could this Love find entrance in his
breast? or how live there? it has no blood to feed on; Nature sure in him is at
low ebb.


Sam. There needs small Fuel (Brother) to assist her influence; she li^e the
Sun, warms all things with her sight, yet is not wasted with expense of heat.


Mir. You speak a Miracle, Sister. --


He studies. Sam. -- You seem troubled, Brother.


Mir. Not much -- but -- I did believe, when my dear Father left us to his
care, he did not apprehend my Uncle apt for such a folly; and I little thought
to have been first saluted with this News at my return from Travel.


Sam. My Uncle still pretends to remain just to us; and I believe he will.


Mir. It may be so: But when is this hot Lover to be married?


Sam. Tomorrow morning.


Mir. But what moved her consent to take this Mummy in her Ams?


Sam. She Is all obedience to her Father, and with him my Uncle's Wealth pleads
high. I do believe she thinks choice were a sin, and would seem guilty to her
self, as if she fell from perfect Innocence, if that a partial thought for any
should make a way for passion in her breast.


Mir. Then it seems her Father wooes; I hope my Uncle spares his pains. -- But
Sister, since we are in discourse of Lovers, it is not unseasonable to ask for
yours, the brave Cialto; the last Intelligence I had was of his glorious
Victory; such a Laurel never yet adorned a Brow so youthful. Believe me, Sister,
though you may be cruel, and unconcerned, I must confess I share in all that is
his good fortune.


Sam. Alas, Brother, since that time his condition is much altered.


Mir. Ha -- you amaze me: -- Why do you appear so sad? He is not dead I hope.


Sam. No, perhaps his Life is now the greatest part of his misfortune.


Mir. Still I am lost in admiration. What changes a little time produces?


Sam. The Story is too long to tell you; only for what concerns my self, I have
observed, that since the loss of all his Fortunes, he shun^ all occasions of
seeing me. -- My Uncle will be with us presently; I would not therefore engage
my self in a disorder, which the relation of his miseries cannot but bring upon
me.


Mir. Where is my Uncle?


Sam. Abroad upon a strange design. He has employed the best Wits in Sienna to
make a Song, or indeed an Apology, for his doting at these years; and that
which he likes best when he salutes his Mistress, must to morrow be presented
before her Window.


Mir. I am amazed; yet I Will suspend my thoughts and trouble (if I can) till
fitter time.


Sam. See, Brother, where he comes;
Business and Love are mingled in his postures.

Enter Castruccio. Mir. How he mumbles to himself! sure he does chew the cud of
some set Speech. What an amorous look was there? -- with that amiable smile? --
which only adds a few wrinkles in new places.


Sam. Pray let us stand close; He Is near beginning; a rising wind you know is
ever ushered with a murmur.


Cast. How am I swelled by expectation! as the day breaks before the rising
Sun, so is Emilia's fair approach prepared within me, by a precious sense of
happiness.


He studies and searches his Pockets for Papers. Sam. Peace; he has hit a
fault, and now begins to hunt again.


Cast. O, these be they; now to my choice; for I resolve to morrow, before the
Wedding, one of them shall be sung, that which I judge will best describe my
Passion. -- Let me see, --

Could thou be yet more fair or good,

He reads. This Fool begins with impossibilities,

Ple have none on it: -- What this other?

Since fancy makes all Women fair, --

Worse and worse, he lies abominably: What ways are our Poets got into, they
cannot make a Song without a Lie, a Vapor, or Impossibility? There Is none of
these has hit my fancy yet: Once again. -- Oh, this I like well; a very pretty
Masque, short, and full of variety; the Charges wont to be great, -- let me
see, -- here is a Hymen, a Cupid, a Charon, and the Destinies: for the Hymen a
saffron Robe and a Torch, -- hang cost at such a time; it shall be presented
instead of a Song before her Window, when I first appear; it is better than
after the Wedding at night, when every body's sleepy. Now I Will go see my
Nephew, and bid him welcome from his Travels.


Sam. Step out, Brother, there is your Cue.


Mir. Can these Lovers see, trow?


Cast. My dear Nephew I -- were thy brave Father living, thou could not fill
his Arms and Breast with a mo^^ welcome joy; I Will be sworn thou art returned
with all advantages in Fame and Person.


Mir. Your kindness, Sir, sees more in me than your Eyes.


Cast. Nay, believe me, Nephew, I joy in it; and that I could not do, were it
not visible what cause I have sor't.


Mir. I wish I may continue, Sir, worthy your fair Opinion.


Cast. And how, Man? Merry still?


Mir. I take nothing to heart, Sir; It seems you do; for my Sister tells me, I
am come seasonably to see your Joys made perfect every way, at least as you
imagine.


Cast. Oh, Nephew, it is past Imagination. Nephew, thou can not fancy what
she is; in Woman kind no president is found to show thee her: But you it seems
do apprehend that all my future Actions will show me more her Husband than your
Uncle.


Mir. You mistake me, Sir; neither my Nature nor my Fortunes yet are pressed with
such mean thoughts; what I have said was more my care for you than for my self;
I would not have your last days shut up with Folly or Misfortune.


Cast. Fear not, fear not; I must be happy; it is an injury to her to doubt it.


Mir. He is unreasonably possessed.


Aside. Cast. But I forget -- My dearest Niece, you shall perceive that neither
my concerns nor passion hinder my just care of thee, my best Samira. I have
provided such a Fortune for you;

Samira starts. Nay, start not at it. -- It Is the rich Heir, young Brancadoro;
this day he comes to visit thee, we will quickly make it up. -- Come, good Nephew,
I have much to do; within I Will tell thee all my mind.


Sam. How --


Mir. Peace, Sister.


Ex. Castruccio and Miranzo. Sam. Marry Brancadoro! Is that the happiness I
hope, I may depend? I shall enjoy with him the Curses of his ill-got Wealth,
and rise upon the poor Cialto's ruins. Oh what a Crime was my feigned Cruelty!
Me thinks I am as guilty as this thriving Asses Father, and seem an accessory
to all Cialto's wrongs, because I did not openly declare my Passion for him;
that would have rendered me incapable of being now a Party: It is too much.

That poor Cialto at one time should find
Both me and Fortune equally unkind.

Exit. Enter Brancadoro and Tailor. Tay. Morrow to your Honor; how do you like
your Cloths?


Bran. I like my Cloths well enough, but my Man Jocamo says, you are such a
dear cheating kind of Tailor, that I vow he will have me turn you away; my last
Mourning Suit did not cost me half so much.


Tail. Your Man is a pick-thank Knave. Call me Cheat! I Will never work stitch for
ye more as long as I live, unless you pay me for calling me Cheat.


Bran. Nay, stay, stay; what a devilish Fellow are you now to exact upon me,
because you see I love you? The Devil take you for me; what Composition must
you have?


Tail. I Will have forty shillings, and I Will have it in Gold too.


Bran. Pox take you for me; will not Silver serve your turn, when you know I
love Gold so well? Pray ye heartily, now Jack, take Silver.


Tail. I vow Gold, or fare you well.


Bran. Stay, and be hanged then; here, here; now are you good Friends, Jack?
nay, I vow now speak truth.


Tail. Yes, I vow I forgive you


Enter Man. Bran. Look ye here is my Man. What a devilish Rogue are you to rail
at my Tailor Robin, and say he cheats me?


Serve. Pray Sir view his Bill; in the first place here is fifteen Shillings a
Yard for Stuff of half a Crown.


Bran. Why look ye there now Jack; what a strange Rogue are you now to cheat me
so?


Tail. What a strange piece of Ignorance is your Man, to call it Stuff? I
protest my Lord it is of the same piece that the King of France his Wedding Suit
was on; the Stuff is called Adam man he; King Haccamantacu sent the King of
France three pieces of it; and I bought this of his Tailor a purpose for you;
and your wise Man calls it Stuff, forsooth.


Bran. Look you there now, you blockheadly Fool you; what would you more?
prithee how do ye call the Stuff, and the King that sent it, Jack.


Tail. The Stuff is called Adam man he, and the Kings Name is Haccamantacu.


Serve. What a Mountebank Rogue is this?


Bran. I vow that is fair satisfaction; I would not for my Money but know this;
I vow, I vow, it is very pretty.


Serve. Pray ye ask him why he sets down forty Shillings for making a riding
Coat.


Bran. Nay, but I vow, Jack, the Devil take ye for me, for being so base; why
forty shillings now?


Tail. There is ten Shillings for making your Coat, and thirty Shillings for a
Port-hole for your Sword to peep out at.


Bran. Why, is not that very fair now? Why, art thou grown a stark Fool now?
Prithee, Jack, what is a Port-hole? I vow thou have the pretriest Names.


Tail. A Port-hole is, as the vulgar have it, a kind of Slit; but in France it
is called Port-hole, and is made with a whiff down here, and a whiff down
there; they are very chargeable.


Bran. I vow, thou art a pretty Fellow: but has the King of France his
Port-hole made with a whiff down here, and a whiff down there, as mine is?

Enter Villerotto. But here is Villerotto; I vow I must talk

A little wiser to him.

Ex. Tailor and Servant. How do thou like my Cloths, Villerotto; are they not
brave, fit for my quality?


Vil. Exceeding brave, Sir.


Bran. I longed to be out of Mourning, to show my self; for whilst my Father
lived I never could appear.


Vil. No, he was ashamed you should.


Aside. Bran. Besides, I hate this Mourning, it makes my hands so devilish
dirty; and I will not wash them till my Mother dies; and when I have done
Mourning for her, I Will wash them for good and all. -- Well, and what says my
Council?


Vil. Why, they say, Sir by these Writings Cialto has no justice to ^edeem, nor
can it bear dispute in any Court of Equity.


Bran. Why, this it is to have a wise Father;
As he has ordered it, it is not a Farthing matter
If I were an arrant Ass.
Thou say, my Council says,
There Is no relief can now be had.

Vill. None, Sir, -- but by the Senate.


Bran. That were ^ine i'saith,
To save him they had a mind to ruin,
Which my Father helped to do (Peace be with him)
And died when he had done; two Courtesies at once.

Vill. But suppose, Sir, the Senate wants his Conduct,
They can be kind again on such occasions.
Only the obeying part of Men
Observe the rules of Honor in their Friendship.
They can as quickly too produce the sum,
And compel you to give him up his Land.

Bran. But they will not, I hope.


Vill. So do I; but how if such a thing should be?


Bran. Pish, pish, they will not displease me,
They use to borrow money of my Father;
Yet for all that, it puts me just in such a sudden sweat
As the stumbling of my Horse uses to do.

Vill. I shall hardly work him to it. -- Aside.
But, Sir, it is not amiss to talk of things
That may be; Plots of prevention are not made
Extempore; nor is haste a Friend to Counsel:
Besides, I take it,
You go the ready way to make Cialto
Yet more your Enemy.

Bran. How so?


Vill. You are about to rob him of his Mistress,
The fair Samira; what kindness can you expect,
When you possess at once his Love and Fortunes?

Enter Messenger. Bran. What care I. -- How now? -- what is your business?


Mess. Signior Castruccio, Sir, presents his Service to you,
And has by me sent you a Counter-part
Of the Writings which concern your Marriage.

Bran. Oh, I thank him; it is very well.


Vill. How Is this? it seems strange to me,
You should agree with him, and never ask
The Ladies free consent.

Bran. Why, do thou think I need doubt that?
Would any Woman be so simple to refuse me?
Why Man, there have been many of them have fallen
Stark mad for me at first sight.

Vill. Will it not be dangerous for you to go?


Bran. Whither?


Vill. To visit your Mistress? you may meet Cialto there.


Bran. Let him be afraid of me if he will.


Vill. I doubt he will not.


Bran. I am told the pitiful Fellow dares not come near her now;
This it is to be poor: And I go boldly;
This it is to be rich.

Vill. But if he should hear you were like to have her,
It might perhaps move him --

Bran. To what?


Vill. To cut your Throat.


Bran. Let him be hanged: But if Signior Castruccio
Admit such Russians in his House, Pll send her word
Flatly, Pll have nothing to do with her.

Vill. But your Writings and Covenants, --
You cannot in honor break them.

Bran. I care not; who dares sue me? If any do,
I am rich enough to make them weary on it;
Though I confess I like the Gentlewoman well enough.

Vill. Yet there is another way would do your business.


Bran. Say thou so? nay, and there be another way,
I care not if I take it, so I may do nothing
Unbefitting my Estate and Quality.

Vil. You Will pardon, Sir, this liberty I take;
It springs from my affection to you;
For ever since I came into your Service,
All your concernments have been mine.

Bran. I do believe it, and have trusted thee
With every thing; and for my part, I have told
Thee my mind, I care for any body
As little as they care for me;
Thou may see I love thee,
Otherwise I regard no body that is not richer than my self.

Vill. What an insensible stock have I to work on? Aside.
But you forget what I propose, Sir.

Bran. No, I do not; it is that I should have Samira;
Why say no more, I will have her.

Vill. You consider not the danger of Cialto's revenge.


Bran. I care not for Cialto, nor her neither;
I can let her alone, if there be such ado about her.

Vill. But you may prevent it.


Bran. How, prithee?


Vill. Why, if Cialto were once dead,
There were no further trouble;
You might enjoy his Mistress, and his Fortune.

Bran. Would he would die then.


Vill. Men do not use to do it for a wish.


Bran. Why, how then?


Vill. Would you hang your self if Cialto should desire it?


Bran. It may be I would, if I were as poor as he;
For this is the case, -- say now --

Vill. Now will he ramble again into another matter. -- Aside.
But, Sir, he does not think himself so poor
As you imagine, while he lives in hope
That what you now possess of his may once
Again return; yet if he be unwilling
To depart this World, he may be forced.

Bran. Which way, which way?


Vill. Why, for a little money, Instruments
May be found.

Bran. To do what?


Vill. To kill him.


Bran. Um, that may be found out,
And so goodnight to my Estate.

Vill. Nay, if you please, Sir, he shall live, and do you
The Courtesy to cut your Throat.

Bran. Talk no more, good Villerotto; another time,
Another time, and that in private too.
I hope no body has heard us; men may hear
At a distance: I have heard of a Conjurer
That could make a Glass for a man to look in,
And hear his Enemies forty miles off.

Vill. Do you believe such stories?


Bran. The Devil may do much, that is certain:
But for the present I am going to see my Mistress,
Fair Samira; it is fit I should see her
Before I Marry her.

Vill. 'Twere strange if he should Marry her
Before he saw her. -- Aside.
Why, are you near marrying her?

Bran. To morrow, man, to morrow; her Uncle and I
Make but one business on it.

Vill. To morrow, Sir, and her leave yet unasked!


Bran. What needs that? her Uncle has done it for me.
Thou have the Agreements; I must away.

Exit Brancadoro. Vill. This suits with my Designs: --
And yet it startles me,
To have so dull a Fool to work on:
But easy paths do seldom lead us to revenge;
Let them be rough, as are the ways
Through troubled Seas, I Will tread 'em.
The base injury I received from Cialto,
Cashiering me from my Command for a petty plunder,
And a Rape (as the Wench called it) was the first cause
That brought me to Brancadoro's Service,
Whose Father was his mortal Enemy;
By which means I hope to find a time
To right my wrongs upon Cialto's heart.

Exit Villerotto. Enter Moreno, Emilia, and Bottolo: Mor. Come, my best
Daughter, this day thou shall
Be made a happy Woman; fear not, fear not,
Nor look upon his age with prejudice;
Age is far steadier than Youth, Emilia;
He Will never make thee jealous.

Bot. No more than an Eunuch would, I dare swear for him.


Aside. Emil. You speak, Sir, as if you thought me altered,
Or else as if I still had been an Hypocrite;
But truly, Sir, you need not doubt me,
I do believe I shall be happy with him,
Because a Blessing waits upon Obedience:
You might command me against my inclination,
But I am blessed with such indifference,
That it is no trial of my Duty, Sir,
To give my free consent.

Mor. That Is my best Girl; get thy self ready,
The Bride-groom's near at hand; I must about,
There Is nothing done if I be not at their elbows.

Exit Moreno. Bot. The Devil had as good be there.
Why, how is it, Mistress?

Emil. Very well, Bottolo, I thank you.


Bot. I wish it may continue so, Mistress.


Emil. Do thou fear I shall be sick?


Bot. Nay, I cannot tell; it may be the Palsy
Or Cough of the Lungs is not infectious;
You are going to venture, Mistress.

Emil. What do thou talk of?


Bot. Why, of that which is nothing else
But talk, of Old Age;
Sure, Mistress, it will never agree with you;
Has not your Father persuaded you
You Are above Fifty? And that you were born
Before the Battle of Lepanto?

Emil. Why should he do that?


Bot. Why, 'twere convenient he should
Either persuade you, that you were old, or
That Castruccio were young.

Emil. Away, you Fool.


Bot. Well, Mistress, hang me if ever frosty day
Did well at Fruit-time; for my part, I wonder
The old Gentleman has no more Conscience
Than to marry you --
If I were worthy to advise you, Mistress, --

Emil. Peace, you Fool, and be not rude.


Exit Emilia. Bot. Go thy way. -- I am half persuaded
Thou art no Woman, or at least
Thou do not know thou art one,
More than by thy Petticoats. -- Well, --
If thou art pleased, thanks to the Powers Divine;
For my own Cares I Will try the power of Wine.

Exit. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Miranzo and Cialto. Mir. I Should not thank you for this Visit then. --
Fie, my dearest Friend.

Cialto. Forget that Name, and me; I tried
To begin first no more to think on you;
But (...) (...) (...) in my temper;
My fondness of you had a power above
My generous Reason.

Mir. Is there a generous Cause for breach of Friendship?


Cial. It were a guilt to say I am your Friend:
Wonder not; for I Am grown so miserable
That Friendship would be paid to me
As unseasonably as to Men in graves,
Where dissolution wraps up every Title,
And buries Names with Things.

Mir. What storm tosses his noble Soul! Aside.
Why does my Friend thus wrong himself and me?
I (...) (...) think the brave Cialto's Mind
Had been so much within the reach of Fortune;
Use her as thou would a fantastical Woman,
If thou would have her kind, slight her.

Cial. Pray say no more; you understand me not;
Nay, spare your Lectures; after this I fear
That we must meet no more. -- Farewell.

Cialto offers to go out. Mir. You are too quick; think with your self;
Sure you may be persuaded, e're you go,
To see my Sister.

Cial. Ha! -- that was too severe; departing Souls
Are sometimes thus called back with cruel kindness,
To share more miseries on Earth. --
Did you not name your Sister?

Mir. How he is moved! -- Aside.
Yes, I did; my Sister Samira.

Cial. You might have spared the Explanation;
I have her Name engraved in several Characters,
By Love and Fortune. -- Why do you stare upon me so,
As if you were amazed at my disorders,
That are not ignorant of my disasters,
Nor of my Passions? What do you think?
Is It not a pretty mingle?

Enter Samira. Mir. See, my Sister.


Cial. How, Samira! -- it is she. --
With what an horror now that lovely Shape
Appears, that I have so much joy'd to gaze on!
Such a confusion would an Angel bring
Upon a Man laden with Sins,
As I am with Misfortunes. --
I am so much amazed I cannot find my way!

He offers to go. Sam. Cialto.


Mir. Stay; what means this strangeness?
Come, it is too much forced.

Cial. Cruel Miranzo, cruel in your kindness,
That only holds so fair a Mirror to me,
To let me see how much I am unhappy.

Mir. You are mistaken, and throw a blemish on her;
She is the same she ever was.

Cial. Why, that was cruel still to me.
I complained not, fairest Samira,
That you were so, when I was Fortune's Favorite;
And sure I will not hope for pity,
Now I am turned her Slave.

Sam. As my thoughts were never moved
With Arguments drawn from Prosperity; so believe,
I shall have no aversion for the Virtuous,
Although Unfortunate.

Cial. Oh, do not with mistaken Charity
Attempt to palliate my Disease;
It Is Fortune's Plague, that is never to be cured;
I shall infect those I come near, -- and yet --
I love you still -- above -- all --
I have such Tides of Passions when I but name you,
Much more now I see you, that my words
Are over-slown, and like drowned men
Disorderly pop up, and sink again.
Distempers seize me, -- I talk wildly too, I fear.

Sam. I understand you not; pray recollect
Your self, speak freely to me.

She weeps. Cial. Why do you both express such wonder in your looks?
Is misery so strange?

He sinks down. Mir. Why, Sister, you are still insensible;
If you ever loved Cialto, tell him now;
And be not like the rest of the mean World,
To own nothing that is unhappy.

Sam. If I say little, Brother, I give you leave
To think my grief stops more my words,
Than want of kindness for Cialto:
Yet to content you, hear me --

He starts up. Cial. Hold --
Your pity, if you have any, comes too late;
Those gentle Tears that once had been my Blessing
Do now but aggravate and haste my destiny.
Just so the drops of Heaven, which first caused
The thriving Plant to spring and flourish,
When by some rough and fatal accident
Its shaken roots have lost their hold,
Then the soft rain no longer gives it life,
But makes it perish faster.

Sam. Oh my heart! The throng of all his griefs
Has crowded in my Breast, and I must speak
Or burst. -- Cialto.

Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir.


Mir. What Is the matter?


Serve. Your Uncle, Sir, is coming hither,
And with him Signior Brancadoro.

Mir. Signior Coxcomb -- Mischief on his unseasonable Visit.
Has not my Uncle pressed you, Sister,
To morrow when he Weds, to Marry with
This Fool Brancadoro?

Sam. Most earnestly, even to threatening me.


Mir. ^e may be injurious. --


Studies. Cial. How! would the Fool purchase my Love,
As his damned griping Father did my Fortune?
I have not mortgaged sure my Wishes to him.
If I am urged this way I shall grow weary
Of politic patience, nor with tired hopes
Wait longer the false Senates leisure.
-- Still adored Samira, am I not too confident,
That in all my miseries, when I do not nourish the least hope
Of e're enjoying you my self,
I should now seem jealous of you.

Sam. Have I showed my self so easy, that you need fear
I will be sacrificed unto a Fool?

Mir. Peace, they come; be temperate, Cialto.


Enter Castruccio, and Brancadoro. Cast. Come, Nephew, (for so I dare venture
to call you.)


Mir. Heaven send us joy of our wise Kindred.


Aside. Bran. Ha, upon my conscience that is Cialto;
I know him by his fierce looks; it is he, I vow:
I am like to have a fine wooing on it.
Would I were hid under a Bed,
Or behind the Hangings, I would breath
No more than a Mouse that sleeps all the Winter.
Why, wh, what a terrible look was there!
D'hear, Uncle? I protest I left one of my Gloves
Behind me in the Window, and I Am afraid
It will be stoll'n.

Cast. Why, you have them both on.


Bran. I had forgot, like an Ass as I was, to hide one.


Aside. Cast. Come, come on.


Bran. Nay, as I am an honest Man,
There Is my Almanac with Notes and Memorandums in it,
I Will go back and come presently.

Cast. Fie, Nephew, my Niece sees you.


Bran. You an't tell how she likes me, can you, Uncle?


Cast. O, ^ear not that.


Bran. Never stir, Uncle, I have mighty need --
-- I must needs do you know what.
He looks vengeance surley: Aside.
He makes me wink as bad as a flash of Lightning would.

Cast. Come, Nephew, what are you bashful?
Niece, this is the Person I told you of,
That to morrow will make you an happy Woman,
And be an evidence of my care and kindness.

Sam. I need no such testimony, Sir.


Bran. What does she say, Uncle, that she has no need of me?
Why then I have no need of her;
I Will be beholden to no body living.

Cast. No, no, you are too mistrustful.
Come, Niece, prepare against to morrow,
To be made Mistress of the greatest Fortune
Sienna boasts of.

Bran. I think I can tell some few particulars without Book,
Of some small Lordships that serve my turn
To cover this poor outside, and some slight
Equipage of Servants and Attendants. --
Now dare not I proceed to particulars, for fear Aside.
I should come to name that wild-looking Man's Estate,
Which should make up the Catalogue.
I Will tell you a pretty Jest, Mistress;
A Friend of mine would have had me married
A Kinswoman of his, -- and --

Sam. I would you had, Sir.


Bran. Why, how should I have had you then?


Sam. I must have been content, Sir.


Bran. Nay, I thank you for that; so I might have forfeited
My Covenants to your Uncle; I may be sued
If I don't marry you to morrow.

Cial. How Is this!

Aside.
Mir. Peace, does this Coxcomb move you?


Cast. It Is as he tells you, Niece.


Sam. I wonder, Sir, you should dispose of me so absolutely,
Without allowing me some larger time.

Cast. You had need consider indeed for such a Fortune.


Sam. Is there nothing but Fortune to be thought on?
Consent springs not alone from Wealth:
Marriage you know admits no separation;
And if Affections should not be united,
The Persons must be miserable.

Cast. Hey day, no more of this Love-Logick:
What, you would have it a Romance,
And after some long time, and strange Adventures,
Discover pity for your Knight Errant.
Remember, your Father left you to my care;
If you marry not Brancadoro to morrow,
I Will throw you out of it.

Sam. It Is strange, Sir, that you should press me thus,
So suddenly to dispose my self for ever.
What say you, Sir? I hope you are so civil To Brancadoro.
As not to urge it.

Bran. Why, I say, A bargain's a bargain.


Cial. This is monstrous! I can hold no longer.


Aside. Mir. Consider, you may do hurt.


Cial. I care not -- Signior Castruccio,
I think it does not much become you
To force your Niece to any thing;
Her Father never believed that you would use
The Trust which he reposed in you, to such an end.

Bran. Nay, for my part, if she be'nt as willing as I,
A sig for her, and you too.
-- I am horribly afraid.

Aside. Mir. How the Ass shakes and bristles both together.


Aside. Cast. Signior Cialto, I wonder more that you
Should give your unasked Counsel, to disturb
The Advancement of my Niece and Family.

Cial. He can make large Jointures indeed,
Thanks to his Father's base and griping practices.

Cast. You are uncivil in my House.


Cial. You are old, and Samira's Uncle;
These are Protections; you may say any thing:
But I would not advise this wealthy Coxcomb,
For all your Articles, to venture upon Marriage;
'Twill be dangerous, Signior Brancadoro.

Cast. Pray leave my House, Sir; I desire no such
Rude Company.

Sam. Pray, Sir, go; this does no good.


Mir. Come, you are to blame; you may do injury.


Cial. Pardon me, fair Samira, I am gone;
My Prayers were heard, could but your happiness
Be divided from all Mankind, though I am one.

Exit Cialto. Bran. He Is gone; -- would I might never live
If I have not a great mind to bolt the door after him.
Now perhaps I shall venture to say something,
If I knew what. -- He will not pop back trow, will he?

Cast. Come, Niece, you will hereafter thank me for
This happiness; I know you will command
Him and his whole Estate.

Bran. Nay, she may do what she will in reason;
But if I Am urged I am as stout and surly
As the stoutest of 'em, let it be Man or Woman.
This Gentleman thought to bluster me
Out of my Bargain; but I think he was deceived;
He had best let me alone.

Mir. Seem to comply, dear Sister; I Will tell you why hereafter.


Aside. Sam. I hope, Sir, you will allow me a few hours
To think, perhaps to persuade my self
To an obedience which you press so much.

Cast. Do, my good Niece; for to morrow
I must needs have your Company:
Speak for your self, Nephew.

Bran. I cannot tell what to say, for fear
This (...) Fellow should peep in again: Aside.
Yet I Will set a good face on it.
Did you know my Father, Mistress?
Who Is that at Door?

Aside. Sam. I have seen him, Sir.


Bran. I doubt he listens; -- well, I care not,
I am resolved Villerotto shall get his Throat cut, Aside.
That he shall. -- And now I will speak boldly.
Why, Mistress, he would have been your Father-in-law,
Had he lived to it, I had helped you to a wise Father,
I can tell you that.

Mir. Would he had had a wiser Son.


Aside. Bran. As for my Mothers part --


Mir. She brought forth an Ass.


Aside. Bran. I Will speak a bold word,
Though I say it, that should not say it, --

Sam. You promised, Sir, to leave me to my thoughts
For a few hours.

Cast. Well Virgins will be modest; Come, Nephew,
We'll leave her to her self to day; to morrow
She shall be yours, or mine no more.
Your Brother, I hope, is more sensible than you
Of your own good; you know my mind; Farewell, --
Be wise.

Bran. Your Uncle gives you good Counsel, Mistress;
Farewell till to morrow; In the mean time
I Will go find Villerotto;
I dare not for my ears venture to marry,
Unless he makes safe this furious Cialto,
Then I shall keep all quietly,
Or else I may perhaps be invited to an honorable Duel,
Which how I can endure --

Cast. Farewell, Niece, and prepare to make
Your self and me truly happy

Exeunt Castruccio and Brancadoro. Sam. Now, Brother, to what purpose
Did you advise me to seem willing?

Mir. I have some thoughts which only want of time
Yet hinders me to ripen; I like not
My Uncle's picking Quarrels thus, all is in his power,
He may do mischief; therefore seem to consent;
Yet fear not, though the Wedding is so near,
At the last Minute I know a way to free thee;
Within I Will tell thee my design:
This Mushroom never shall be yoked to thee.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Brancadoro and Villerotto; They whisper. Vill. Now, Sir, do you yet
believe it is a consequence,
That you must not expect to live, if proud Cialto does?
Or would you have the Parish Priest to make you Friends,
And all the Neighborhood invited to the reconciling dinner?

Bran. Why thou see I looked thee out for the nonce
To know if thou can have him quickly dispatched;
Why Man, I cannot marry else.

Vill. Well, be secure, reckon that insolent Enemy
To your Repose and Fortunes, in his Grave: Enter Montalto and his Companions.
-- But see, Sir -- yonder are an odd parcel of Men,
I think I have seen the face of one of them before;
If I mistake not, they are a sort of People
Fitted by their own wants for my designs.
Retire, Sir, and leave me to sound them.

As he goes out he returns and speaks. Bran. But be sure, Man; be sure, I say:
If thou should miss, and Cialto find me married, --
Um -- I might give my life for a farthing.

Exit Brancadoro. Vill. Fear not, fear not. Save you, Gentlemen.


Mont. And you, Sir.


Vill. You seem Persons that have not been
So kindly used by Fortune as your merits
Might justly challenge; your carriage speaks you
To have been Men of Action.

Mont. We have seen danger, Sir, and have not shrunk;
When those that live at ease have shook to hear
The Story told.

Vill. It Is pity, at least to our frail Reason it so appears,
That neither Virtue nor Courage should be safe
From mixtures of Necessity.

Mont. We are used as our Swords are;
When the danger's past, hung by.

Vill. And yet if such as you, whose haughty minds
Brook not the sight of other Men's Enjoyments,
Or think it barbarous injustice to starve
Amidst that Plenty which your Swords
Secured or purchased; if such Men as you
But snatch at some small share,
You would be punished certainly.

Mont. We have found that.


Vill. Nay, the Clergy would declare your Souls
In dangerous condition.

Mont. Yes, damned, without dispute.


Vill. Come we are betrayed and fooled;
Those that have power over us
Confirm themselves by Cruelty and Cheating;
One they call Justice, the other Policy.
Mean while the poor must starve, or else be whipped;
The Soldier out of War want, or be hanged;
Nature's relieving Laws are lost in theirs;
And she whispers unto man his own advantage;
If he be guilty then in that pursuance,
The fault still cests in those that urged the Act;
The rich and powerful part of Men
Are answerable for those deeds
To which they force the poor and the necessitous.

^ Com. Oh admirable Reason!


Mont. It Is most profound, and never to be answered.


Vill. Are you convinced then?


Mont. 1 C. and 2 C. Yes, yes, yes.


Vill. Then I may tell you, I have a business for you,
If you dare attempt it, in which there will not be
Much danger, but great profit.

Mont. Pish, Danger's our Companion;
Name the thing, Sir.

Vill. Follow me then to a more private place,
Where you shall know your task; my own Sword
Shall share a little with you, as far as I dare;
I may, for ought I know, keep with the boldest.

Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Cialto solus. Cial. No News yet, and the dangerous time so near!
And she for ever may be lost to me,
And forced into a Fool's Embraces!
For though she never can be mine, I cannot
Suffer she should be another.
-- I hardly can be jealous of Miranzo;
Yet Friendship it self is not security enough
To give him credit for Samira; I dare not trust
That Treasure thus uncertainly; I must prevent
The quickest way; Friendship and Fate
Have their slow pace; but Passions will not wait.

He offers to go out. Enter Miranzo. Mir. Whither so fast? hey day, which is now
Predominant, Love or Fortune? One of them
Is ever vexing thee.

Cial. It Is well you can continue merry.


Mir. Come, what is the matter?


Cial. Nothing.


Mir. That Is unkind.


Cial. Pray urge me not.


Mir. Is there any thing to be concealed from Friends?


Cial. Yes, trouble and misery.


Mir. No more, or find some other friend.


Cial. You do not well to press me thus;
It will not please you when you hear it.

Mir. Pray let me know it.


Cial. You shall; but I must beg another thing.


Mir. What Is that?


Cial. Only to save you and me trouble;
Pray when you have heard it give no Counsel.

Mir. O, by no means, Sir, not for a World.


Cial. Why, it is no great matter, -- I Will kill Brancadoro.


Mir. How!


Cial. Nay, your Wonder is as unnecessary as your Counsel.


Mir. Have you considered what you said?


Cial. Yes, and I find it reasonable, I admire you do not.


Mir. Faith not I; I think it is an unreasonable thing
To kill an Ass; some think that Fools are damned
For their original Ignorance; thou would not
Send him to Hell on thy Errand, would?

Cial. Ha, ha, should I for fear of sending him to Hell,
Let him enjoy my Heaven here! --
Perhaps it grows indifferent to you.

Mir. Do you suspect that Brancadoro's wealth
Has bribed me, Sir? I thank you.

Cial. I do not say, it has; but yet --


Mir. But yet! it looks scurvily: A Friend when he is jealous
Is like a Child that is froward;
He knows not why he is out of humor.
Come, trust all to me, you shall not be deceived;
I Have a design; spare me but for a few minutes.

Cial. Me thinks your kindness gives me greater joy
Than a bare Friendship could: -- all thoughts
Of my revenge on others vanish; -- yet --
When I am too much pressed with Misery,
Be but so kind to give me leave to die.

Exit Cialto. Miranzo stays and studies. Mir. It shall be so, if I can frighten
him,
And make him decline the Marriage with my Sister;
'Twou'd be excellent; for certainly he is a rank Coward:
See where most luckily he comes. Enter Brancadoro.
Now Fortune; -- yet if this fail I Have a sure remedy at last.
Noble Signior, I was going to look after you.

Bran. What, I warrant your Sister sent to me;
I am coming.

Mir. No, Sir, 'twas a business of another nature.


Bran. Nay, I cannot stay to talk of business now.


Mir. You must, Sir.


Bran. Must, Sir!


Mir. I think you must; your Honor will enforce you.


Bran. Why, what has my Honor to do with it? Must!


Mir. It concerns it; and I must beg your pardon,
That am the unwilling Messenger.

Bran. Why, if you be unwilling, let it alone;
I Will excuse you.

Mir. I dare not, Sir; I am obliged so far
In common ties, that every Gentleman
Is bound unto another by; I was
Unhappy that it was required from me.

Bran. Well, another time, another time.


Mir. None but this can serve, Sir; it is the last request
That you will have from Signior Cialto.

Bran. The last! well, that mollisies somewhat; What is it then?


Mir. Why it seems reasonable, that you have his Fortune,
And are now going to possess his Mistress;
He but desires that you would now be pleased
Fairly to take away his Life too.

Bran. What Is this! I hope I am not discovered Aside.
By Villerotto! Fairly, quoth he!

Mir. Life in his condition is but useless to him.


Bran. Why he may hang himself.


Mir. That he is unwilling to do; you shall try
To free him with your honorable Sword.

Bran. I'^^ not try, Sir.


Mir. You must, Sir; and for that end he stays for you
Hard by the Nunnery, in the Cypress Grove.

Bran. There let him stay; you know, as well as I,
I am ^nga^'d, and cannot come.

Mir. No engagement, Sir, ought to be above your Honor.
Besi^^s mine will engage me not to receive
So slight an Answer.

Bran. Why, it is your Sister I am going to marry;
Is it not?

Mir. I consider not that, Sir.


Bran. If Cialto sends me a Challenge,
I hope I may appoint my Time and Weapon.

Mir. That I think you may. Sure he dares not fight, does he?


Aside. Bran. Why then tell your Friend from me, I Will meet him the
Next day after I Am married, any where:
I Will not delay such matters as these.

Mir. Why, he has Courage sure. Aside.
But, Sir, it is handsomest to end these matters quickly.

Bran. So 'twere, Sir, if a man were free;
But since I am engaged I will be married first;
And then have at him.
If he be in haste to fight, let him fasten a Quarrel
On somebody else, to pass away the time
Till I am married.

Mir. 'Slid, he amazes me.


Aside. Bran. Thus, Sir, I shall preserve my Honor every way;
I hope he understands himself as well as I do.

Mir. There is no help, this will not do. Aside.
How the Rascal has cozened me! -- well --
Who knows but he may be valiant?
This is your resolution, Sir.

Bran. I marry, Sir; nor will I alter it.


Mir. I shall acquaint Cialto with it, Sir,
And then attend you to your Nuptials:
Farewell, Signior.

Bran. You shall be welcome, Sir; there will be Ex. Miran.
A fine fight, I pay some on it.
Ha, ha, how I have conzen'd'em!
Miranzo has no mind I should have his Sister,
And so they agreed to frighten me from't; I found it;
Poor silly Fellows, 'twas too late; I have promised
To meet Cialto the next day after I am married,
That is the next day after he is dead;
It Is the same thing; -- 'em -- but
If Villerotto should fail I were in a fine case,
Positively engaged to fight with him;
I Will look him, and make sure work;
I grow horribly afraid to think of fighting,
Though I never intend to come to it.

Exit. SCENE IV.
Enter Montalto solus. Mon. What has this Rascal persuaded us to!
Nay, rather, what have I persuaded my self to!
To fancy I have Courage, and know all the while
What a dangerous Lie it is to own it;
For I had talked so loudly of my killing,
That 't was very probable I should be set to work;
And as luck is, it is to kill one
That will not easily be killed, unless
I could catch him asleep:
Would this Rhetorical Gentleman had his Money again.
He gave me Earnest very formally.
The Devil's to raise Forces, and he is his Agent
To give the Press-money.
Here come my engaged Friends: Enter 1, 2 Companions.
What made ye stay behind?

I Com. Why the Gentleman, you know who --


Mon. That hired us to do you know what.


I Com. Had still more to say to us, he is very earnest


Mont. I had rather he were in jest.


Aside. I Com. He promises to double our Reward,
If we strike home, and lose no opportunity;
We shall hardly have such another Bargain.

Mont. That Is likely; for it is very probable
We may be hanged for this:
I find I have more Conscience than I thought I had.

I Com. As good hang as starve; nay, Captain,
If you are in Dialogue with Fear and Conscience,
I have done.

Mont. I do but cast the worst to try your Spirits:
I am a Villain if Fear be not Gentleman Usher
To Conscience; I thought I had had no such thing;
Now, I am afraid, I find,
I have a most troublesome stock of it.
-- Um -- the Devil has sent his Resident again; Enter Vill.
The Fiend Knew I had a good thought or two,
And his Agent's come to treat for 'em;
Yet if I fall back, he will cut my Throat, that is certain.

Vill. Gentlemen, some new thoughts made me overtake you;
It Is to tell you, I am now resolved
Still to keep near you, that no opportunity be lost,
No^ I robbed of my part in the Action.

Mont. I would afford any one a penniworth of my share.


Aside. Vill. It were a fault to doubt your Courages;
But words waste time; no more:
Go presently and stay for me
In the Cypress Walk that leads unto the Nunnery.
This Captain methinks looks something suspiciously;
I must not be long from them:
My Sword shall make sure work.
How -- my wise Master! Enter Brancadoro.
What business sends him hunting after me?

Bran. Villerotto, have bargained? Castruccio has sent
Me word that he has got his Nieces consent:
But all is one for that; if thou can not get
Him killed, they shall not get me to marry,
For a reason best known to my self:
Yet prithee bargain as cheap as thou can;
For all that I dare trust thee though
To use thy own discretion.

Vill. I will do more than use my own discretion;
I Will use my Sword too: Go marry, Sir,
And think not of a dead Man.

Bran. Have got him dispatched already?


Vill. As good, Sir; it is sure.


Bran. But had I best marry before it be quite done?


Vill. Fear not, Sir; trust to my care and faith.


Bran. But be sure.


Vill. Nay, if you suspect me, Sir.


Bran. Why then I Will venture, fall back, fall edge;
Let him meddle with me if he dares.
Dispatch quickly, good Villerotto.

Exit Brancadoro. Vill. Yet again!
He needs not doubt me, if he knew all;
But when it is done I must propose
Some considerable Conditions to set up for my self,
And leave his wise Worship:
He dares not but consent; the guilty must
Submit to be the Slaves of those they trust.

Exit. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Bottolo. Bot. HOW that Firebrand the Cook sputters!
There Is no coming near to have a cut for Breakfast.
I am a Villain if the Butler too
Be not grown as outrageous a Beast as he.
What coil's here! -- O Mother, -- how! -- Enter Taccola.
What, you in a pelt too! Do the Quinces prove rotten?
Or is all the Bisket-slabber spilt?

Tacco. Out upon thee, thou take care for nothing;
She has been my Charge these seventeen years,
And I do not mean to quit my care yet a while.

Bot. Yes faith, Mother, you must deliver up;
She Is going to have another Governor,
And as luck will have it, as old as your grave self:
We are like to plant our fair young Twig
In hopeful soil; does it not trouble you, Mother?

Tacco. What Is that to thee, Sirrah? Thou art ever full
Of roguish thoughts; the Man may do well enough;
Age is not so contemptible.

Bot. Nay, I dare swear, Mother, you believe
You could entertain the youngest of them all
With wondrous prowess.

Tacco. Come, leave your prating; the Bride-groom's
Near at hand, with such a gallant Troop;
They are hard by: Nay, I Will tell thee what --
Out upon it, -- what do I here!
The Jolly will be spoiled.

Exit Taccola. Bot. O take care of that by all means;
The old Gentleman will need it.

Enter Moreno. Mor. How now, Sirrah? what, loit'ring here?
The Company's just coming to the Gate;
Get you gone, and mind your business within.
-- Why Daughter, Daughter.

Emilia appears above. Emil. Your pleasure, Sir.


Mor. Be ready there, Daughter; the Bridegroom
Will salute you with Music presently.
I had almost forgot the chiefest News;
This day the fair Samira, Castruccio's Niece,
Must marry the great and rich Brancadoro's Heir.
Be ready, Daughter, I cannot stay. -- Hark, -- they come.

Emil. Governess. Taccola.


Taccola appears above. Tac. Here, Sweet Charge.


Emil. Come, it must be your part to tell me the Names
Of every one; have you informed your self?

Tac. Yes, yes, I know them all.


Emil. Peace then, and observe.


Enter first some bearing Bays and Rosemary, then Moreno and Castruccio, then
Brancadoro and Samira, then Miranzo and others; As these pass over the Stage
they speak above. What be these Men?


Tac. They bear Love's Ensigns:
You know the Gentleman that follows.

Emil. Yes, yes; who is he that leads his fair Niece?


Tac. The wealthy Brancadoro, who is to marry her this day*
They say he is an Ass, though his Trappings be rich.

Emil. A sudden Wedding! But what young Man
Is that which follows next?

Tac. I marry, that is his fine Nephew Miranzo,
Newly returned from Travel.

Emil. Peace, they begin.


As soon as the Masque begins the Curtain draws, and Emilia appears; Miranzo
keeps his eyes fixed on her all the while the Masque is presented.

The Persons being all placed about the Stage,

Enter a Cupid, who waves an Arrow, and speaks. Cup. Hymen, O gentle Hymen,
come away.

Enter Hymen. Him. When Loves great God Commands, I never stay.


Cup. Then light it thy Torch.


Him. For that I hither came,
And see it is ready to receive a flame,
Whenever by thy powerful Summons pressed.

Cup. Then light at that aged Lovers breast.


Him. Where Time has been destroying, can there be
A warmth for him, much less a flame for me?

Cup. Those grosser flames that ^eed on wanton hearts,
Burn not in his; the sharpest of thy Darts
Had found no way, where Nature frozen lies,
But that 'twas thawed by fair Emilia's Eyes.

Him. Call hither all thy Votaries to gaze,
That with such Fires thy Altars still may blaze;
Not fed with loose Desires, but purest Hearts;
So I my Torch may save, and thou thy Darts.

Enter Charon. Cup. But stay, what dismal Apparition's this,
That mingles horror with approaching bliss?

Cha. Charon I am, that o'r the Stygian Waves
Waft only Fares that first have passed through Graves:
From thence I came, where all the Destinies
Do sit and smile at these unequalities:
It Is vain to sing an Hymeneal note;
Light not thy Torch, for I prepare my Boat.

Him. Why, Charon, why?


Char. Know, I did lately view
The Fatal Sisters, whilst his Thread they drew;
The last remains were on the Distaff put,
And one prepared the feeble twine to cut.

Him. Fond Fool, go back again, and thou shall find
So fair a Thread with his so firmly twined,
No Destiny will venture to divide
A Life that is with fair Emilia's tied.
Gaze, and submit.

Char. What Is this appears more bright,
Than Souls prepared for the Elysian Light?
Appear, appear, you Fatal Sisters, come
Before a Power that can reverse your doom. Enter Destinies.
See, they obey; it is just that Love and Fate
Should on the fair Emilia's Nuptials wait.

Cup. First I resign my Arrows and my Bow.


Him. The Fates submit their dreadful Ensigns too


Char. Charon will leave his unfrequented Shore,
And at Emilia's Feet lay down his Oar.

Him. Ascend, ascend, you happy Shades, and move
In various measures with the God of Love.

Enter Spirits. Cha. They come, they come, hark, hark, our charmed Ears
Are struck with Music from the moving Spheres.

The Spirits first dance an Antic; Then the Destinies join in a grand Dance.
Mir. How my Eyes are chained unto that glorious Object^
She acts like what she is, a Miracle;
And I am lost in wonder!

Cast. Good Morning to my fairest Mistress:
May but my Joys this day, be yours for ever;
I know not how to wish you more.

Bran. Uncle, must I bid her good morrow too?
These Spirits have so amazed me, I can scarce fetch my breath.

Cast. By all means.


Bra Why then, -- Good Morrow, Mistress; it is Signior Brancadoro
Bids you good morrow: I wish you as good luck as my self.
As I suppose, you may have heard of me;
For I am going the way of all Flesh too.

Mir. If i could speak, I find I cannot join
In Wishes of this nature: How my Soul struggles in me!

Mor. Come down Daughter, and meet us in the Hall,
So to the Temple, where all Complements
Are quickly ended. Come, Son, your Ceremony
Defers your happiness.

Exeunt. The Curtain draws. Manet Miranzo. Mir. The lovely Apparition's
vanished; O for a spell
To call it back again; but the black Spirits only
Are subject unto charms, and not the brighter Angels:
At what a distance she surpised!
Had the great God of Love ns'd other Eyes,
He had at rovers vainly shot his Dart;
Hers had the power alone to carry level to my heart.
How hapless must my destiny needs prove,
That in one instant both despair and love!

Exit: SCENE II.
Enter Taccola and Bottolo. Tac. Good Bottolo, set these things upon the Shelf;
I must stay here to give my Lady her Things,
She Is coming down this way; I had forgot
Her Vail; nay, prithee do so much for me.

Bot. Well, well; Pox on it, I take no joy in this Wedding.


Tac. Nay, prithee no discourse now, honest Bottolo.


Bet. O rare! honest Bottolo! before night
You Will scold at this honest Bottolo.

Tac. Thou deserve it twice, where I do it once, Sirrah.


Enter Emilia. Emil. What Is the matter?


Bot. Nothing, Mistress. -- Ah, it is a thousand pities.


Exit Bottolo. Emil. Have you brought my Things, Governess?


Tac. Yes, my sweet Charge.


Emil. Where Is the Company?


Tac. They all stay for you in the Hall.


Emil. I go, I go.


As she offers to go, enter Miranzo. Mir. Stay, stay, fairest Maid.


Emil. What Is your pleasure, Sir?


Mir. I dare not tell her it is to gaze on her. Aside.
Madam, the business I must acquaint you with
Deserves a privacy; please you to command
Your Woman for a minute to withdraw.

Emil. Leave us a little, Governess.


Tac. By my troth a comely Gentleman; had luck been,
This might have made the better Husband.
Pray, Sir, be not tedious, here is business to be done.

Mir. Not by the old Gentleman. Exit Taccola.
I am a stranger to you, Madam;
My business will seem strange too.

Emil. Pray quickly, Sir; I am staid for.


Mir. That Is part of it.


Emil. Of what?


Mir. Why, of my business, to desire you not to go.


Emil. What mean you, Sir? why do you gaze so wildly?
I hope your thoughts are not so much unsettl'd
As your looks; why do you desire me not to go?

Mir. Why, you go to be married, do you not?


Emil. Yes; what do you mean? Pray leave me.


Mir. I must not, nay, I cannot leave you.


Emil. Not leave me! What is the business
That thus unseasonably you stay me for?

Mir. I know I have done ill to trouble you;
But who can help it; Love and Whirlwinds
Will have their giddy courses.
The story's short, I saw and loved you.
Wonder not; Lightning burns at a flash,
When lesser Fires do by degrees consume.

Emil. It is not well to give me this strange trouble.
How did you come to meet me?
Pray say no more; I must obey and marry.

Mir. Do, and be happy. -- It Is true,
I might have died without afflicting you;
For that I ask forgiveness.

Emil. I forgive you freely.


Mir. This then finishes my Wooing.


He draws a Poniard. Emil. Hold; you do not mean so madly!


Mir. I mean thus, soberly.


Emil. Where is your Reason and your Justice, Sir ^
Think on it; would you rob another of his right?
Your near Relation too!

Mir. Not by dying, do I?


Emil. That offends Heaven, at whose disposal
You ought to be.

Mir. I am so; you are my Heaven here,
And you dispose me to my Fate.

Emil. Why do you cruelly disturb me? I know
You dare not be so injurious as to
Destroy at once your self, and all my peace.

Mir. You mistake; Alas! I have not courage enough to try
Whether or no I can endure to live.

Emil. Oh, you have ruined me! what shall I do!


Mir. I am sorry I have troubled you, indeed I am;
But you began to plague me first:
I was at peace with Womankind; that is,
I loved none till your eyes began the quarrel.

Emil. What would you have me do? how can I now
A void this Marriage, ready for the Temple,
Engaged by my Obedience, and my Promise!

Mir. You may pretend a sudden sickness, Madam.


Emil. I need not much pretend it;
But what is your design in this?

Mir. I dare not name a Pardon at the first;
I only beg to be Reprieved, that I may try
If it be possible to love you less,
And you may try to love me more:
But if you think it too much mercy to Reprieve me,
Pronounce my Sentence quickly, you shall find me
Your faithful Executioner.

Emil. You press me strangely;
I dare not be the cause of any murder:
Live -- I will not marry; by all that is good I will not:
But from this time see me no more,
Cruel disturber of my Peace.

Mir. I lost mine first by seeing you;
And though I promised to obey one Sentence,
Yet this is too hard, dying's easier:
I cannot promise never to see you more and live.

Emil. Be gone, and leave the most unhappy of all Women.


Mir. I go, remember only this Vow I leave behind,
Never to live to see you wretched or unkind.

Exit. Emil. Ah me! -- I need not wholly counterfeit
Sickness; I have an Ague in my thoughts,
Which shakes my Soul; I shall grow faint indeed.
Governess.

Enter Taccola. Tac. O, sweet Charge, there is old calling for you.


Emil. I cannot go yet; lead me to my Chamber;
I fear I shall grow ill.

Tac. How, how!


Emil. Prithee peace.


Tac. Why, what, a God's name, has this young Fellow done?
What is he gone and left you?

Emil. Nothing, nothing; prithee along, I faint.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Bottolo. Bot. Hey day, what doings there is within!
Signior Brancadoro has lost his Mistress;
By this time they are hunting on a cold scent,
Or else have quite given her over.
I wonder my Mistress had not the wit
To run away, and hide for good and all,
From her old Caterpillar.
Hark, there is a new Noise within, Noise within.
And louder too than ever; I Am a Villain
If I don't fancy I hear Taccola's shrieks
A note above them all; what should this mean?

Enter Brancadoro. Bran. O, Bottolo, did thou see my Mistress? As I live and
breathe,
I never took more pains a Squirrel-hunting,
Than I have done in seeking her;
I would give any thing in reason to any
That could but bring Tale or Tidings of her.

Bot. That reasonable Reward would prove a Julio.


Bran. Come, Bottolo, prithee come and help to look her.


Exit Brancadoro Bot. I had rather help to hide her from such
A covetous vapouring Coxcomb.
How now!

Enter Moreno hastily. Mor. O Bottolo, Bottolo! run, run, Bottolo.


Bot. Whither, Sir?


Mor. Any whither; run, run, fetch a Physician quickly.
O, my Daughter, my Daughter!
What, art thou here yet?

Bot. Why, what ails my Mistress?


Mor. Dying, dying; she fainted suddenly,
And lies without a sign of life.

Bot. A pretty Wedding toward; poor Soul,
Who can blame her to be afraid to be clasped by an old Ivy,
Whose embraces never suffer any thing to prosper?

Mor. Art thou not gone yet? Run quickly, Sirrah,
To Leonardo the Phycisian; make all the haste thou can.

Bot. I knew there would no good come of this Wedding,
First or last. I go, Sir, I go.

Exit Bottolo. Enter Castruccio. Cast. O mischief! No hearing of my Niece!


Mor. My Daughter, my Daughter's going.


Cast. And my Niece is quite gone:
Every corner has been searched, but no finding her.
Oh, oh, what a sad day is this!

Mor. Never a hopeful Morning so o'recast!


Cast. O my Mistress! O my Niece! Undone, undone.


Mor. Let Us in and advise together;
I have sent Bottolo for a Physician.

Exeunt. SCENE IV.
Enter Miranzo. Mir. There Is yet some hopes; the subtle Politician,
That cannot reach his ends in peace, throws all
Into disorder.
He snatches others first from their enjoyments,
And that makes way for his designs.
I find we are alike; for Peace must be
More fatal than Love's Civil War to me.
What a world of thoughts now offer
Their troublesome service to me!
Would my Man Baptista were come:
Heaven prevent mischance; I cannot doubt his truth:
I trusted him to help my Sister's flight to the Nunnery;
No way was left at last but that,
To cozen Brancadoro of her:
The Fool had almost flown her to a Mark.
O Cialto, -- I have strange News to tell thee.

Enter Cialto. Cial. Your looks express as much.
I thought sorrow and wildness
Had hung upon no brow but mine.
Where have you been? What is the Wedding finished?
Why are you thus confused? -- ha! -- where is Samira?

Mir. Not married to Brancadoro, nor ever shall.


Cial. O, my best Friend, pardon my fears;
How safe I am in thee! But where is she?

Mir. You shall know presently;
I appointed my man Baptista
To wait my coming to this place;
But an accident has brought me sooner than I thought.

Cial. Bless me! What accident?
In thine eyes appears
A strange disorder.

Mir. No, no, no great matter; we may be friends, Sir,
Now at your own rate; I am turned Lover too.

Cial. Why, it is impossible! Who Miranzo^
He that used to brag his heart was fortified
With scorn and cheerfulness!

Mir. O, Sir, I rejoice you are in such perfect memory;
But see, Baptista is returned. Now, -- what News?

Enter Baptista. Bapt. As you directed, Sir, I found an opportunity
That favored the design your Sister had:
The idle Persons, that had no business
But to mind others Actions, I got
Into the Cellar, whilst she made her escape.

Mir. To the Nunnery.


Bapt. Thither she told me she would go.


Mir. It Is well.


Cial. How! to the Nunnery! she may be willing to stay there,
It Is probable; for nothing here below
Is worth her Love: I find I cannot yet
Submit; my Passion will resist,
Though Heaven it self does prove my Rival.

Exit Cialto hastily. Mir. Cialto, friend Cialto; he is gone.
Hey day, how Love tumble^^s about!
Yet I admire not now at this distraction*
For mad men wonder not at one another.

Bapt. But, Sir, I have str(...)ws to tell you;
The fair Emilia, with her old Governess,
Is fled to the Nunnery too.

Mir. How! is it possible?


Bapt. It Is certain, Sir; and to that purpose
She left a Note upon her Table:
All the House is in an uproar,
And fancy 'twas a Plot between the Ladies.

Mir. Above my hopes she then has kept her word,
Not to bestow her self; but what a Devil
Does she do at the Nunnery?
That may be worse than the other; if she should
Turn Nun now; like enough; when people are crossed
And vexed, they grow Religious presently.
I must do something. -- How my thoughts work, He studies.
Heaving like laboring Moles within the Earth!
Ha, Baptista.

Bapt. Sir.


Mir. Have thou not told me thou have a Brother is a Friar?


Bapt. I have, Sir, in the next Convent.


Mir. Could thou not prevail with him to lend me
A little of his holiness?

Bapt. What mean you, Sir?


Mir. Nay, I mean none of his Prayers nor Meditations;
At this time I have no use for a good thought:
It Is his Habit only for a few hours; I Will not abuse it,
On my honor; Thou dare trust me, dare not?

Bapt. You cannot doubt that, Sir; and I am sure
My Brother's thoughts of you are as mine are:
I Will try presently, if you please, Sir.

Mir. Come, I Will go along with thee;
For my design requires some haste:
Thy care and love shall be requited.

Exeunt. SCENE V.
Enter Moreno. Mor. Worse and worse; my Daughter, my Daughter!
Cozened, abused and cheated!
Signior Castruccio, Brancadoro, where are you?

Enter Castruccio and Brancadoro. Cast. What Is the matter?


Mor. Oh, my Daughter! gone, fled, run away,
With her old Beldame.

Cast. How, fled and gone!


Mor. Gone, gone.


Bran. My Mistress showed her the way.
Villerotto shall let him alone now,
If I could but find him. No Wedding, no Killing.

Aside. Enter a Servant* Cast. How now? any News yet?
Where Is my Nephew Miranzo?

Serve. He Is not in the House, Sir.


Mor. We are all abused and cheated.


Bran. I am cozened too of my Mistress* but as long
As I can keep my Money, the care's the less.

Cast. It is in vain longer to vex our selves;
Let Us in and consult; then, if we judge it (...),
We Will go together to the Nunnery,
And there make our demands,
You for your Daughter, I for my Niece.

Mor. You advise well; come, let us not delay:
Signior Brancadoro, you must along too.

Bran. With all my heart; I long to see
What the meaning of these tricks are:
Every body's cozened, as well as I.

Exeunt omnes. SCENE. VI.
Enter Montalto, and two Companions. Mont. We are marvellously kept on duty;
not one Allarm yet?


1 Com. Our Scout is watching for Intelligence;
To say truth, the Gentleman takes a world of pains.

Mont. Would he would take less; he pays well,
And it is no matter how long it is doing.

2 Com. What are you squeamish still, Captain?


Mont. Pox on it, I cannot conceal my villainous apprehensions
From these Rascals; without doubt the Rogues
Are as timorous as I am, though they hide it better.

Aside. Enter Villerotto with another, and pulling in Samira. How now? what is
here to do?

Vill. Nay, do not seem angry:
This is strange rambling on your Wedding day.

Sam. Impudent Rascal, unhand me:
How dare you assumethe boldness to examine me?

Vill. Spoil not your good face with frowns;
It Is to no purpose; You must be my prisoner.

Sam. Your Prisoner, Slave!


Vill. Yes mine, till I know
In what condition you have left my Master;
Your flight's suspicious; perhaps you have murdered him.

Sam. No, the Fool's alive to thank you
For your officious rudeness.

Vill. If he be not, your life shall satisfy.


Mon. It Is not in our bargain to deal with Women.


Aside. Vill. There Is something more than ordinary;
For guilty persons use such flights;
Here, take her away.

Sam. What, will you murder me? help, help.


Vill. Stop your mouth, or I Will spoil the passage to it, He sh^ws a Dagger.
And make an hole to let your Clam^^^^ ^^^
By the way, before they climb up to your Throat.
Enter Emilia and Taccola. What have we here? more Quarry ^^^^^wing?
How the Covie's scattered?
Sure it is she; it is, it is Emilia.
Here has been some mischief practiced*
I Will seize her too, else ^^other will want company.
Stay, who are you?

Emil. Ah me!


Vill. Whither this way so ^^st?
May be you cannot speak for want of A^^,
I Will give you vent. -- I thought so, -- it is she.

He unvails her. Emil. Oh, I am ruined.


Vill. Troth, like enough; and possibly you have deserved it.


Emil. Pray stop me not; but rather, if you have pity,
Conduct me to the Nunnery.

Vill. O, do your mischiefs prompt you to a refuge?
I Will find you out a place of safety.
Two of you come along with me;
Bring them along too.

Tac. Rascal, what do thou mean to do with us?


Vill. Nothing with your Antiquity.


Sam. Conduct us to an Officer of Justice;
We dare appear, Sir.

Vill. Stop her mouth; I Will consider what to do with you;
Bring (...)long, I say.
Do y(...)it here till I return;
A ^inu^^ brings me back.

Exeunt with the Women Villerotto, and the second Companion. Mont. Why, this is
horrible Injustice;
We must only it seems do the worst work.
Why, methinks one might serve this unconscionable stomach:
But it may be we, like Serving men,
May be permitted to fall to after him.
This plunder though ought to be divided
Among us that did the duty.

1 Com. It Is but reasonable; perhaps he thinks
That full temptation cannot live
In our hunger-starved bodies.

Mon. Before I saw these sprightly Wenches
I thought so too; but I am not hungry now:
A Man has never any stomach
When he is overheated.

Enter Villerotto hastily, with the second Companion. Vill. Whist, whist; this
way, this way:
Now bravely seize the prey, he is coming directly to you.

Mont. Pox of the News: Now have I no mind
To the Wenches neither; this fear can lay that Devil,
That will obey nor hunger, nor poverty.

Vill. Come, follow me; thrust home and sure.


Mont. I, I, so we might.


Vill. Doubt not your full reward.


Exeunt. SCENE VII.
Enter Miranzo in a Friars Habit, with a Friar and Baptista. Mir. Thanks, holy
Sir; and pray be confident
That I have no design nor thought
Which may abuse this habit.

Fri. You are too noble.


Mir. In that rest assured; now Sir retire,
I need no farther your protection.

Fri. Heavens direct and send you peace of mind.


Mir. Thanks, holy Father.
Baptista, wait at my Uncle's House till you hear from me;
I shall need nothing now but an old Shoe cast after me.

Bap. I will not fail, Sir. This is strange!
He uses not to be so disturbed.

Exeunt severally. SCENE VIII.
Enter Cialto solus. Cial. Love's constant diet is not hope, I see;
For mine would then be starved; but it is still alive,
And strangely on despair knows how to thrive.
Yet think, Cialto, how preposterous it is
To fear the loss of that which 'twere unworthy
In thee now to wish.
But though the Sun must at a distance shine,
It would beget an horror in Mankind,
Should they but fear he would for ever set.
Though in this place she rises a degree
Up toward Heaven, yet she sets to me. Enter Villerotto, Montalto, and two
Companions, with their hands on their Swords.
Ha! who are these, whose dismal looks
Are seconded by their postures! --
Which is your way, Gentlemen?
You stare as if you had lost it.

Vill. No, we know our way, it is to thy heart,
And thus we force it.

Cial. 'Twill be hard to find.


As they fight, enter Miranzo in his Friars Habit; he snatches a Sword from one
of them, and by his help the Assailants are beat off. Mir. What horrid Act is
this! How, Cialto!


Vill. Villains, make up; sure I have sped him.


Cial. So bold, Sir?


Vill. Bold as your self, Sir. -- It is in vain;
Hell take these Rascals.

Mir. What caused this foul play, Sir?


Cial. Holy Sir, you know as much as I.


Mir. How do you feel your self?


Cial. Hurt, Sir; but not to any danger, as I guess;
Yet I bleed: Your timely aid
Makes my life yours; I should not have expected
Such a relief from any in your Habit.

Mir. How, Cialto, do you not know me? -- not yet?
Look again; sure if you loved me,
There Is no disguise could hide Miranzo from you.

Cial. How, Miranzo! O, my Friend, what means this Habit?


Mir. You bleed; I dare not spend the time to tell you.
All my story; I doubt here was foul play.
One of these Villains I know to be Brancadoro's Servant:
But whither were you going?

Cial. To the Nunnery; but pret he satisfy my longing,
What Is to be done in this disguise?

Mir. A very pious work, I can assure you; -- why, --
I am going to confess my Mistress.

Cial. Thy Mistress!


Mir. You may remember my Uncle was in a fair way
To Marriage.

Cial. Why, is he not married?


Mir. No.


Cial. How so?


Mir. I frighted his Mistress away, and in this Nunnery
She has taken Sanctuary; her I am going to confess;
I should be abominably out of Countenance --

Cial. At what, Man?


Mir. Why, if she should confess, amongst her sins,
That she loved me, for one.

Cial. You would absolve her, would you not?


Mir. Yes, and her Penance should be to continue in her Sin;
But we trifle here, forgetting thy condition.

Cial. Pish, I scarce feel my hurts.


Mir. Come, our Adventures lie together; lean on me;
Nay, yet more; counterfeit enough, 'twill move the more
Pity; thy Wounds and my Habit will without doubt
Open these charitable Gates.

They knock. A Nun appears. Nun. What is your business, Father?


Mir. I am sent from Father Vincentio, unto the Lady Emilia.


Nun. Here Is no such person.


Mir. How! it is not the Custom of holy places to deny truths.


Nun. Nor is it now practiced.


Mir. Why her Father sent away Father Vincentio,
Immediately to dispatch some holy Man,
To reconcile her troubled Spirit,
Which caused her to fly hither.

Nun. She came not to this place.


Mir. Nor Samira, Castruccio's Niece?


Nun. By all that is holy, neither.


Mir. I dare not but believe you,
Pardon me for pressing you so far.

Nun. All Peace dwell with you.


Exit Nun. Cial. How, not here! did you not mistake, Miranzo?
And have forgot, and sent her to some other place?

Mir. I am amazed!


Cial. Do not wonder; you cannot lose your Sister, sure.


Mir. Not lose her!


Cial. I hope so; for it is probable she knows your mind.


Mir. I scarce understand yours, nor do you know your own;
If you do, 'twill be ingenuous to speak it plainer.

Cial. If I should be jealous, or dislike any thing,
'Twou'd seem ridiculous; such humors
Are only fit for those that either hope,
Or else are in possession. -- Farewell. --
I wish your Sister happy.

He offers to go out. Mir. Stay; -- consider this is the second time
That you have started into mean suspicions:
You will repent.

Cial. I do repent that I pursued your Sister
With a Passion that has outlived all my prosperity,
As if a Ghost should love; for it is not I,
But it is Cialto's shadow that you gaze on.

Mir. It Is indeed his shade, or something less,
That bears no shape of him, nor of his mind.

Cial. I know it but too well; -- yet perhaps
You may have so much Friendship left, at my request,
To give it out that I am dead.

Mir. What Is your design in that report?


Cial. You will not do it then.


Mir. I would know why.


Cial. Nay then.


Mir. Come, your humor shall have its course,
I Will do it without a question:
But why should I report that you are dead?

Cial. You said you would not ask me; nor need
You fear to give out an untruth; it may be shortly so:
In the mean time I must disguise my self,
As from henceforward I shall every day
Resemble less and less what once I was.
Things running to decay grow every moment
More unlike themselves; and so do I.
That at the last the name of Friend
Will not fit you or me; for I shall be decayed,
Never to be repaired again; and we must part
Still more and more, till at the last our distance
Will grow so great that none will guess
We ever were united: So Lines
Both from one Center drawn, still more and more divide,
Till for the World at last they grow too wide.

Exit. Mir. I forgive thee, poor Cialto; for I am sensible
What a distraction governs thee, by the confusion
That throws my thoughts into as much disorder;
For I have raised a War where Peace still flourished,
In the calm Empire of Emilia's Breast;
And she is fled from me back to her peace.
-- Yet -- He studies.
What is the meaning that my Sister fails?
I know not what to think; I stand like one has
Lost his way, and no Man near him to enquire it of.
Yet there is a Providence above that knows
The roads which ill Men tread, and can direct
Enquiring Justice: The Passengers that travel
In the wide Ocean, where no paths are,
Look up, and leave their Conduct to a Star.

Exit. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Montalto, and his two Companions. 1 Com. TRoth, Captain, I did not
perceive
That daring Valor you talk of.

Mont. Thy fears blinded thee, else thou might have seen
What furious thrusts I exchanged with that Devil
In a Friars Habit. You are a Courteous Gentleman,
To lend your Sword at such a time.

2 Com. He came behind me on the sudden,
And wrench'd it from me:
Who would have suspected a Friar for such tricks?

1 Com. All our reward is lost; if we might have it,
I think we should be ashamed to ask it;
He that hired us was hurt himself.

Mont* Why, 'twas his own cause, and his own fault;
As for Example, I Will show you what he should have done;
Observe me. -- Enter Miranzo, and Baptista following at a distance.
How now -- what Apparition's this, as a Friar?
I hope, it is not another fighting Friar.
'Slid, it is he; my villainous apprehensions
Go as true as a Sun-dial.
What an unlucky posture he has found me in,
Would my Sword were up to the hilts in him
Or a Dunghill, or any thing that would but hide it.

Mir. What, more mischief toward? I am provided for them now;
They are those very Rascals: -- I know that blustering
Fellow again: Now Heaven prosper my designs;
I have a fair occasion to improve them.
How now, Gentlemen? What means a Weapon drawn?

Mont. We, Sir, are Men that have been used
To handle Swords; when there is no War to employ them,
We play with 'um in Peace: I hope it is no offense
To have a kindness for our best Friends.
Sure he knows us not. --

Aside. 1 Com. Alter your Countenance as much as possible,
Captain; perhaps he may not know us.

2 Com. I Will seem blowing my Nose, and so hide my face. --
'Slid, I have no Handkerchief to do it with.

Mir. You stare as if you did not know me.


Mon. Know you? how should we know you?


Mir. No? that is strange; one of you was so civil
To lend me a Sword lately;
Can you yet call me to remembrance?

Mon. We know not what you mean; if we were Friends,
We are not now at leisure to answer idle questions.

He offers to go. Mir. Nay, you must stay; come, no blustering;
I am provided now, look you -- He shows a Sword under his Gown.
I shall not trouble you for a Sword again.

Mont. Would he had mine, where I could wish it.


Mir. I am sorry I have an unpleasant question to ask you;
But yet it must be answered.

Mon. Must!


Mir. Yes, must; and you will do it calmly,
For all your stormy looks.
Bladder, if thou continuest thus to swell,
I Will make an hole to let out your vain humor.

Mon. It Is well you are a Man of Peace, or else --


1 Com. Not half so much as he is.


Mir. Never at peace with Murderers; Impudent Villains,
Who hired you to that damned act
Of murdering the generous Cialto?
Had not your feet been nimbler than the Sword,
I Would paid you your just hire, Sir -- Come, confess.

1 Com. We are undone. -- Lord, how our Captain looks big,
And trembles all at once!

Mon. We do not understand you.


Mir. Well, I cannot stay to parley;
Here, take away these Rascals Swords.

Mon. How, our Swords!


Mir. Come, come; nay, it must be so;
I know your gentle natures.

Mon. Why, Sir, I deny nothing to one of your Coat,
Or else --

Mir. You would deliver them however.


1, 2 Com. Good Sir, disgrace us not.


Mon. Pox on it, would that were the worst;
How the Rogues stand upon their credit?

Mir. Disgrace you! is that possible? Come, deliver, deliver,
Or you shall have ours, d' see, where you do not wish them.

Mon. Well, our Religion obliges me to this; but it shall be upon
Condition you use it well till you return it;
It Is a good Blade.

They deliver their Swords. Mir. If the Blade be good, you shall have a Knife
out of it,
It Is your only Weapon, this was not well mounted.

Mon. Well, Sir, you are merry, and we take our leaves.


Mir. O, by no means; you must deliver your selves up too.
Here carry these Gentlemen Murderers
To Cialto's Kinsman; these are the Rogues
He has been looking for; I leave them to his Examination.

Mon. O, good Sir, we will do any thing.


Mir. A way with them; I Will follow at a distance,
If they stir; and d' hear --

He whispers to Baptista. Bapt. Yes, Sir. -- Come, my Masters.


Exit Miranzo. Mon. What say you Friends? umh --
This was a good Bargain; we shall never have such another:
How plaguily you guessed! we are not likely
To live to make another: What say you
To a Dialogue with Fear and Conscience?

1 Com. Why, if we hang we shall be in no more wants,
And you will be in no more frights, Captain.

Bapt. Come along, Gentlemen of the peaceable Blade:
But, d' hear? if you can yet be honest,
And confess truly and penitently,
You may 'scape, I Will undertake it.

Mon. We will confess all we know, Sir.


1 Com. Yes, and more too, if that will do it.


Bapt. Come, despair not then.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter, as to the Nunnery, Castruccio, Moreno, Brancadoro, and Bottolo. Bran.
If they be here, we will fetch them out with a vengeance;
Knock, Bottolo, break the Gate down.

Bottolo knocks. Bot. They are deaf, or else at Prayers.


Bran I, so they had need, to ask forgiveness
For all their tricks. How out of Countenance, Uncle,
Will my Mistress be when the sees me?

Cast. And my Mistress too, Nephew.


Bran. Why there is one comfort yet, they did not run
After other Men; I Would have made any Man smoke
That should have been so bold to have ventured
On my Mistress. -- What, no body come yet? -- Knock again;
These be sine tricks.

Bottolo knocks. Bot. Not a distressed Damsel yet appears
Out of the sacred Castle: -- Now one bolts; Enter Nun.
We shall have a godly Exhortation,
Whether we get any Women, or no.

Nun. What means this earnest knocking at the Gates?


Bran. What a foolish question's that? we would come in.


Nun. Our Laws forbid that men should enter here.


Bran. Fiddle faddle, I Will come in, and fetch others out too;
See who shall say me nay,

Nun. Use no rude force, 'twill be a disrespect
To Heaven, as well as want of manners:
Is there a cause for all this passion?

Bran. Yes, that there is; here you shelter every Runaway;
Bring 'um out, or I Will seeze you.

Bot. Why he will beat her; it is a fierce Hector.


Nun. What is it you demand, or whom?


Bran. Why, we demand Samira and Emilia;
Here is her Uncle, and the others Father:
My Name's Signior Brancadoro; you have heard on it,
I warrant you, e're now.

Nun. I know not what you mean.


Mor. It Is true, holy Maid, such we have lost,
And hicher they are fled.

Nun. Certainly, Sir, there are none such here.
But I Will go in and ask the truth.

Cast. We thank you.


Exit Nun. Bran. 'Slid, if she had not left her tricks and denials,
I would have hit her a dowse in the chops.

Bot. Like enough; perhaps he never struck any body in his life,
And now would flesh himself upon a woman.

Enter Nun. Nun. Here are no such persous as you enquire for.


Mor. How, how! why my Daughter Emilia left a Letter
Upon her Table, expressing she fled hither,
For some trouble she had within her.

Nun. There Is some abuse in this; for but even now
There was a Friar that inquired for these Ladies;
He held a Gentleman seemed hurt to death:
He was earnest, as you are; but he was satisfied,
As you may please to be.

Bran. No, it does not please us to be satisfied,
Nor will we be satisfied; let us in and search.
-- That hurt Gentleman was Cialto, without question.
-- Now if I could but find my Mistress.

Aside. Nun. I hope you do not mean to be injurious.


Cast. I hope you do not think it lawful
To conceal Children from their Parents; this would be
The refuge then of every wilful Child.

Nun. Pray believe you are not now abused;
By our best hopes there are no such Persons
Within our Walls; we would not for a world deny a Truth.

Mor. This is strange; but we must believe.


Bran. But we may choose whether we will or no.


Nun. Heaven restore all you have lost,
And then preserve it to you.

Cast. We thank you.


Exit Nun. Bran. I Will not thank her; a pox of her truths;
I Will not be cozened by any holy Jugler of them all.

Mor. Come, let us not neglect to enquire some other way;
It Is vain to linger here.
Signior Brancadoro, what course take you?

Bran. I Will go about a little business, and presently
Set some to enquire; if she be above-ground, I Will have her.

Cast. Farewell, Signior; we will lose no time neither;


Exit Castruccio and Moreno. Bran. Some comfort yet, that I have such fair
hopes:
Cialto's dead; now I shall keep my Estate quietly;
And if I could but find my Mistress, I should have her too.
Now the roaring Lion's dead, I dare look after my Prey.
Well, -- what is best to do? let me consider.

Enter Villerotto. Vill. What, is he studying; why the Devil
Does he thus seem to search for prudent thoughts,
That has not lodging in his Brains for one?
Yet he studies; something is in the matter.
Fortune, that brought those beauteous Prisoners under
My power, prosper me now in driving of my Bargain. -- Sir.

Bran. How now? -- O Villerotto, come just in the nick;
I want thy advice and help; my Mistress
Is not here at the Nunnery.

Vil. How, Sir! not at the Nunnery! why, you told me that
Emilia had left a Note upon her Table,
That she was fled hither; and is neither here?

Bran. Pox of her Note; neither she nor Samira are here.


Vil. Who told you this?


Bran. Why, a little harlotry Nun.


Vil. She lied sure.


Bran. I said so; I was going once to hit her a Cuff of the Ear,
But that she told me some good News.

Vil. What was that?


Bran. She told me a Gentleman was dying, and a Friar
Has carried him away; that is you know who.
Have heard any News?

Vil Yes, your Enemy is dead.


Bran. For certain?


Vil. So it is reported generally.


Bran. Why, I have nothing then to fear but his Ghost;
And if that should be troublesome, I Will quiet him,
If Christendom can afford a Conjurer.
Now if I could but find my Mistress. -- But Villerotto,
If any of the Rogues should be taken that know thee.

Vil. I hope not, Sir.


Bran. Hope! -- is it come to that? Art not sure, -- ha?
Now shall not I sleep one wink this Night;
I shall do nothing but hink and dream,
And dream, and think of Judges, Sergeants, Bars,
And Hangmen; would I had never meddled with it.

Vill. There is a way, Sir, to secure you.


Bran. Name it, name it, good Villerotto.


Vill. I must go plant, Sir, in another Country;
Then you are safe.

Bran. Why, faith and troth I shall be loath to part with thee;
But what must be, must be; Friends must part.
-- Would I were well rid of him. Aside.
If thou think it ^it, I shall be ruled.

Vill. And consent I shall be gone.


Bran But against my will, as I Am an honest man;
For let the worst come to the worst, I know thou would not
Betray me, -- would thou, Villerotto? -- ha?

Vill. Nay, I cannot tell what operation
A Rack and Torture might have on me; I am flesh and blood.

Bran. So am I too, I know it by my shaking.
This was a bugs word; -- would he were gone. Aside.
Nay, Villerotto, it is for thy safety too as well as mine,
That I consent; when would go?

Vill. Soft, Sir something is first to be considered on.


Bran. What Is that? what is that?


Vill. First tell me, Sir, is there no news of the Ladies?


Bran. No, no; neither tale nor tidings.


Vil. Have Signior Castruccio nor Moreno
Heard nothing neither?

Bran. Not a syllable; I have told you all.


Vill. Are not the old Gentlemen much troubled?
You bear your Losses pretty well, Sir.

Bran. I have took on too, that I have,
As much as the best of 'um; it has made me
Ready to hang my self; but while my Money's le^t
I shall not part with this World easily; yet I would give somewhat
More than I Will say, to get my Mistress once again.

Vill. What would you give, Sir?


Bran. Nay, nothing, unless I were sure to have her,
And then sure she would not run away again.

Vill. What would you give to marry her?


Bran. I, I, that is the business that I am to look after;
I must get some Heirs quickly,
For fear the Brancadoro's Race should cease.

Vill. That were pity. -- Aside.
But if I could be instrumental, nay, the only means
To find your Mistress out, and then marry her to you; what then?

Bran. Why, she may run away afterward, for ought I know.


Vill. But what if I should put you to Bed together? after that
'Twill be too late for her to take her flight.

Bran. I marry, Sir; do this, and I Will give thee twenty Crowns.


Vill. I thought so. -- You are wondrous bountiful:
But not to trifle longer, look you, Sir,
If you sign this for my comfortable Subsistence, I Will be gone; He shows a
Writing.
It Is to secure you in a certain Safety:
And into the Bargain I Will help you to your Mistress;
You shall wed her, and Bed her.

Bran. What is it? let us see.


Vill. There Is the Sum, Sir.


He points in the Writing. Brancadoro reads it. Bran. How! Two thousand Crowns
a year!
I Will give two thousand of my Teeth as soon.

Vill. Why then, Sir, take your chance, and I Will take mine:
I must not starve, nor will I.

Bran. But if thou should not help me to her.


Vill. Then I Will be gone, and forfeit my Reward.


Bran. I would fain have her; but I would fain keep my Money:
But if I don't, he will betray me, or cut my Throat; Aside.
It Is a terrible dogged Fellow.
Well, Villerotto, I Will think on it; come along, we'll go try
If we can drive a Bargain: -- But do know where she is?

Vill. That I do not tell you; it is enough, I Will run the venture.
Hark you, Sir.

He whispers. Enter Miranzo. Mir. Ha! -- it is he; it is Brancadoro and his
Rascal,
That did attempt Cialto's Life: Fortune sure
Has offered them thus fairly to me, to make some use of:
I hope they know me not; I Will try:
Save you, Gentlemen; -- may it not appear rude to ask you
If you know one called Signior Brancadoro?

Bran. Yes, I know him as well as I know my self.


Mir. I have a little business with him, Sir,
And would be glad to know where I might find him.

Bran. Why, did I not tell you I knew him as well as my self?
That Is as much as to say, I am he, if you mean
The Honorable Brancadoro, Son
And Heir to Brancadoro, who was lately
The great rich Senator.

Mir. It Is he, Sir, I mean, whose known worth
Made it a duty in me to acquaint him
Of a black Scandal some wild Tongues have cast upon him.

Bran. What Is the business? if they talk of me,
I Will make 'em hold their Tongues.

Vill. How Is this!


Aside. Mir. It will deserve your Ear, Sir:
The cause that made me knowing of your wrongs,
Such I dare call 'em, was by some discourse
That happened of the unfortunate Cialto's Death;
There 'twas reported, that an idle Fellow,
Who takes on him the Title of a Captain,
Gives out that he was hired by a Servant of yours
To murder him; and they talk as if the Captain,
And his lewd Companions, had been secured,
At least searched after, by the direction of a Friar,
But what Friar I could not hear.

Vill. Plague on that holy Rascal.


Aside. Bran. Hey, hey, a Friar! what Friar, Villerotto?


Vill. Why the Devil do you ask me? I know no Friar.
O the damned Coxcomb!

Aside. Mir. They grow concerned; it works.


Aside. Bran. Villerotto, d' hear? if thou could be sure to help me
To Samira, and then would be gone into another Country,
I would sign the Writing.

Vill. I Will do it, Sir; nor shall you set your hand to it,
Till I have showed you I can do it: -- But hark you, Sir,
If you shall then refuse it, I Will betray all.

Bran. Like enough; I must do it.


Aside. Vil. Ha, -- a lucky Fancy mingles on the sudden
Among my crouding Thoughts; it is excellent;
This Friar may be a ^it person, -- I Will try him. --
Let me see, -- it is right. -- If I join Brancadoro to his Mistress,
That way my Fortune's gained; and to be safe,
This Friar shall make Emilia mine;
That done, her Friends will never endure to see
Her Husband hanged; though Brancadoro share part of the Feast,
Yet by his leave I Will taste both Dishes first. -- Sir,
Pray give me leave to ask this honest Friar
Some Questions in relation to your Service.

Bran. With all my Heart.


Vil. You cannot tell, Sir, whether these Rascals
Are yet in Custody, or not?

Mir. No, Sir.


Vil. Nor could you hear what Friar this is?


Mir. I am almost a Stranger in Sienna.


Vil. I like that. -- Aside.
You have expressed a great Kindness and Respect
For my Master Brancadoro; possibly, Sir,
I could propose a Service you might do him.
That might deserve a large Reward.

Mir. I should be glad to have that in my power, Sir.


Vil. Perhaps men of your Profession may scruple
To do a thing in private, without the allowance of all Parties.

Mir. What mean you, Sir?


Vil. Hark you, a word in private.


Mir. Let me alone, Sir, to make good the Title,
And fit the Party ready for possession.

Vill. O happy Accident! I am ravished with my good Fortune.


Mir. What means all this? I Will try the bottom of it.


Aside. Vill Come, Sir, be cheerful, and be confident. To Brancad.
In a few hours, I Will make you safe and happy.
If your Occasions, reverend Sir, permit you
To undertake what I have mentioned to you,
I Will show you suddenly your Clients.

Mir. I am ready, Sir.


Vill. You must engage to Secrecy.


Mir. Upon my holiness.


Vill. Nay, you have forsworn that already in your discourse.


Mir. Upon my life, Sir.


Vil. Come, Sir, to your House then, there you shall see
What I will do in order to my promise. -- Sir,
I hope this reverend person shall receive
Rewards proportionable to that Service
He is engaged to do you: -- but --
When we come there you must be pleased to use
A little patience, till I have brought together
The persons you must tie in sacred Bonds.
I Will on before, Sir,

Exit Villerotto. Mir. I shall observe all you direct.


Bran. What does he mean, trow?


Mir. I cannot guess; but I believe it is something
In order to your Service.

Bran. Nay, it is a notable Fellow; and you would say so,
Did you know as much as I:
As cunning as my Mistress is, he will go near
To hunt her out, let her make as many Doubles as she will.
Come, Sir, I Will bid you Welcome at my House;
It Is not the worst in Sienna; you shall take a full View of it.

Mir. You oblige me, Sir.


Exeunt. SCENE. III.
Enter Villerotto solus. Vil. So, now to my Prisoners:
A single Beauty could not have the power
To keep my Blood thus at high Tide; if one
Permits my Veins to find but the least Ebb,
The other makes 'em rise, and so kept always
Flowing by one or to others Eyes:
And like my Blood, my Flames find no retreat:
-- I must allay my Fires, -- or waste --
In this expense of Heat. -- Come forth, come forth, Enter Samira, and Emilia,
and Taccola
My Lady Brides, you should have made such Fools
Of Men. -- It Is not amiss to give you Joy.

Sam. What means the Villain?


Em. O give him gentle words, his Looks are dreadful.


Sam. Give him Rats-bane.


Em. O speak gently to him! when I was a Girl
They used to frighten me with such a one. -- I tremble.

Sam. Fear not, Emilia; the Villain dares not wrong us.


Vil. But the Villain dares revenge his Wrongs.


Sam. Who has injured thee?


Vil. He that did it will do so no more,
I can assure you.

Sam. What do thou mean?


Vil. Why, this Wound, as shallow as it is,
Was Fathomed by Cialto's Sword,

Sam. Pish.


Vil. It Is true indeed; but I was more bold with him,
And put in farther; he had no time
To make a Will; I doubt he left you nothing.

Sam. What do thou mean, -- Screech-Owl?


Vil. Oh, you have no mind to understand;
This it is plainly, Cialto's dead;
I killed him in my own Defense.

Sam. Villain thou lie, in every thing thou lie;
He could do nothing basely; nor could thy power
Reach his generous Life.

Vil. Why, in good truth, 'twas he that stirred my Blood,
And made this Hole to let it out at; but
As Luck would have it, 'twas not deep enough:
I saw his Error, and did rectify it;
I thrust my Sword two or three Inches deeper,
And that laid him to rest.

Sam. O Heaven protect us.


Vil. Why now you run on that Mistake again;
No help can come so quickly as you will want it.

Tac. Thou do not mean to ravish us, do thou, Varlet?


Vill. Us! can thou be ravished, old willingness?


Tac. How do you know, Jackanapes,
Whether I am willing or no? you never tried yet.

Vill. Nor ever will: This she Devil will ravish me.
Be quiet, or I Will slit your Tongue; d'see this.

He shows a Dagger. Sam. O for some help! I Will tear the Villain.


Em. Peace, pray peace, let me beg again;
Good Sir, let us go, why do you fright us so?
You dare not be so wicked as you talk.

Vill. Pretty; their different tempers bring to my enjoyment
Variety of Bliss; in her Embraces
I shall enjoy a Calm, and childish Innocence;
In the other, loftiness of Mind and Spirit,
As if kind Nature had presented now
All that she could produce for me to rifle.

Emil. Do you not hear me, Sir? I pray release us:
You have no cause to keep us Prisoners;
Yet we will pay a Ransom.

Vill. Why, so you shall before you go,
Pretty one; is it more unjust for you to be my Prisoners,
Than me to be your Slave?

Sam. Our Slave!


Vill. Nay, put not on a scornful look;
I shall not beg your pity.

Em. But we are willing to beg yours, good gentle Sir.


Sam. Beg not so meanly, he dares not injure us.


Vil. O, by no means; why that Frown?
Those Storms shall cast away no Heart of mine;
I Will force my way to harbor in your Arms.

Sam. What do you mean?


Vil. I mean to make my self as Fortunate
As Man can be in his full-crown'd Wishes;
I will enjoy you both.

Tac. Which two do you mean?


Vil. Pox on thee, would thou be one? --
Nay wonder not, nor bless your selves, unless
It be in Admiration of my Justice,
Showed to the equal power of your Beauties;
You may see the Image of it every day;
It Is in the laboring Be, that gathers sweetness
From every Flower that contends in Beauty.

Tac. By that Smile he should go near
To venture on us all.

Sam. Monster, dare thou entertain a Thought of such a Villainy?


Vil. Alas, it is past that, I am almost ready for Action;
Yet for all that you shall be honest Women
When I have done.

Em. For Heavens sake, Sir, what mean these dark Expressions;
I hope they include no Evil.

Vil. Not any; perhaps you may scruple it
A little at the first; but I Will allow you
Some small time to consider on it:
What an excellent Contrivance 'twill be!
You shall have all Love's stolen and sweetest Joys,
And yet be honest; come prepare.

Sam. For what?


Vill. For my embraces.


Sam. For those of Snakes first.


Vill. O, mine are gentler far.


Sam. Villain, thou --


Emil. Pray peace, and let me beg once more,
Upon my Knees; 'Pray, Sir, do not affright us,
I know you cannot mean the thing you threaten;
You are too wise, by our unhappiness
To bring on your own ruin.

Vill. Ha, ha, why you will not publish your own shame;
This will not do; no, if I were sure
That death waited for me, as soon as I had crowned
My Passion and Revenge, I would think it
A good bargain, to chop a little time for so much satisfaction.

Sam. Be merciful, and kill us.


Vill. That Is to be cruel to my self -- but I trifle time,
A little business calls me; be wise, and meet
My embraces willingly; if not, know your doom;
For by those Powers that govern me, Love and Revenge,
I Will sacrifice both your enjoyments to them, --
So ponder till I return.

Exit Villerotto. Em. Ah, Madam, what shall we do?


Sam. Die, Emilia.


Em. When, Madam?


Sam. Presently.


Em. Alas, I tremble at your naming it.


Sam. Why do you shake? you must dye one day?


Em. I know it, by that time I may be willing;
Old Age, or a Disease may make it welcome,
At least more gentle, than it now appears
By an approaching violence -- but --

Sam. O rather with a juster apprehension
Recount the lingering Torments a Sickness
Or old Age may bring on; a violent Fever
May make the Body a Furnace for the Soul
To suffer, not to live in; or old Age
May take away our Reason, and the use of Sense and Faculties,
And rob the Body and Soul both of their Eyes: this way
A minute's pain assures felicity for ever.

Em. Which way should we do it?


Sam. See, this I had still about me in all my fears She draws a short Dagger.
Of being forced to be made Wife to Brancadoro:
Why do you wink? the brightness of it shines
Most lovely in my Eyes, when I but think
What service it may do in sending us
To a perpetual Peace.

Em. Can a Soul be carried through a stream of Blood,
To peace in the other World? is it not a Sin to destroy Life?

Sam. It Is to avoid a greater sin we do it:
Dare you, nay, can you live stained with this --
I tremble more to name or think on that,
Than on the death that will prevent it.
But I have given you my Opinion,
And will afford you my Example:
If you stay behind me you will repent,
Among those miseries that I am freed from.

Emil. Oh! do not speak of leaving me behind you,
To the rude passions of this horrid Villain;
I know not how to live without you,
Nor dye, but as you teach me;
Pray blame me not, nor take it ill of me:
Sick Men, though they are told, and do believe
That health is offered in a bitter potion,
Shrink at the taking of it; it is no more in me:
I know, at last I shall choose death, rather than shame;
-- Yet I know not how I shall endure to hurt my self,
I have cried when I have but cut my Finger.

Sam. That only was, because 't was unexpected;
Your resolution now for a just cause
Will make this welcome, and prepare you for it.

Emil. I fear I shall hardly strike home, --
Then I may suffer all that shame and mischief
I would avoid; pray therefore grant me one thing.

Sam. What is it?


Em. To kill me first.


Sam. That were to commit Murder.


Em. Why, have you a better title to your own Life,
Than unto mine? you purchased one no more
Than you did the other; there is no contract, or permission,
Granted from Heaven, that allows the difference.

Sam. But alas, my sweet Emilia,
I never shall endure to hurt thee.

Em. Nor your self neither, did not that virtue prompt you
Which bids me beg it, and then the Argument's the same for me.

Sam. Pretty reasoned; but it will be needless
To dispute this; I know my fair Example,
In dying first, will arm thy feeble hand,
With double strength, to force a passage
For thy unstained Soul to fly with mine,
Where every thing is in perpetual luster.

Em. Shall we know one another there?


Sam. No question of it, else this bad World
In something might exceed the best.

Emil. You have confirmed me, Madam, pray forgive
My simple, if not unbeseeming fears;
'T was no dispute my virtue did admit of,
But a confusion brought upon me suddenly,
By nature, and still flattering hope, Reasons, and Virtues Enemies.
Come, dear Emilia, we'll prepare our selves,
And make the circumstances of our Death
Familiar to us; for it is practice only
Takes the sharp nature off from things,
And gives them new ones, that at the last
We shall be so much strangers to the thoughts,
Or the desires of Life, that all will seem
Already done, which we resolve to try,
And we shall both seem dead before we dye.

Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Cialto solus. Cial. WHY do I still pursue, what still must fly,
And what I dare not wish to overtake?
It seems like the pursuit of night, which follows day
In the same track, and yet can never reach it;
That distance nature did for them decree,
And honor has designed the same for me:
Yet still there is a mutiny within
Against those Laws which honor strictly makes;
And Passion like a cunning Traitor sets
The name of liberty on its own Rebellion.

Enter Baptista, Montalto, and his two Companions. Bap. Sir.


Cia. Ha, Baptista!


Bap. A word, Sir, in your Ear -- My Master, Sir, by chance
Has lighted on the Villains that attempted you;
He thought it fit that you should first examine 'em,
As Kinsman to your self, and to that end
Has sent them to you; farther, he bid me tell you
That in a little time you will perceive
You wronged him in your thoughts.

Cia. Prithee say no more;
My thoughts have so much disproportion in them,
That they are neither just nor equal unto my self, or him;
Has he not sent his Pardon by thee?

Bap. He can take nothing ill of you, Sir,
Perhaps he did admire a little.

Cia. He is a perfect Friend, and can love one
Whose Mind is lost, as well as Fortunes.
-- Now, Gentlemen, have you received your Wages?

Mon. For what, Sir?


Cia. For killing my Kinsman Cialto.


Mon. We hope he is not dead.


Cia. D' you hope so, Rascals; Come confess
Every Circumstance, how it was done,
And who hired you to it; if you miss a tittle -- or --

Mon. This Gentleman told us,
If we did confess, we should not suffer.

Cia. Well, if you do it truly, and afterward
Perform all I enjoin you, I will make good his word:
Come, who hired you?

Mon. It was an ill minded Man, Sir.
One that belonged to Signior Brancadoro.

Cia. Was it his Masters instruction?


Mon. I, no doubt on it, Sir.


Cia. Did he say so?


Mon. Yes, and more too.


Cia. What more?


Mon. Why, he told us, it was an honorable action,
And therefore would share in it himself;
And accordingly he said his Master should reward us.

Cia. You know him when you see him?


Mon. Yes, yes, Sir.


I Com. Good Sir, let us not suffer, we have your word.


Cial. Trust to it; have you any more to say?


Mon. Nothing, Sir, of any consequence.


Cia. Well, what trivial thing have you?


Mon. When we were waiting, Sir,
For that worthy and unhappy Gentleman, Cialto,
A couple of silly Women by chance came by, and the Rascal
Snatched them up too; all was Fish that came to his Net.

Cia. How, Women? what Women? speak, quickly, ha --


Mon. Why does your Worship grow angry?


Cia. Speak, Dogs, what Women?


Mon. What a Rogue was I to name them,
'Slid, it is he himself.

Aside. I Com. You must be over-doing it.


Mon. Plague on you, did not you advise to tell all?
Nay, more than all if need were?

Cia. It may be it was Samira and Emilia: Rogues, what Women?


Mon. Good Sir, we know not;
But he talked of their running away
Upon their Wedding day,
And took them, as he said, upon suspicion
Of Murdering his Master Brancadoro.

Cia. It must be they, the circumstance assures it.
O you Dogs, did you help take them! I Will send
Your mischievous Souls to that Devil that instructs them.

Mon. O good Sir, we hope you are the Gentleman,
And there is no hurt done, O good Sir,

I Com. Remember your promise, Sir.


Mont. We have more to confess, Sir;
Or if you please, we'll unconfess it all again.

Cia. I had forgot to ask, what did the slave do with them?


Mon. He sent them Prisoners to his Master's House, as we think.


Cia. O Heavens! Rogues, Prisoners! Come along with me;
For if I find you tell me any lies,
I Will spoil your Throats from venting any more.
Come, good Baptista, help guard the Rascals;
If they but offer to stir, kill 'em.
I Will carry back to the Slaves heart
All these intended mischiefs,
And break upon them like a Whirlwind,
Wrapping them up together into nothing.

Exeunt hastily. SCENE II.
Enter Samira and Emilia. Sam. Come, come, Emilia, dry those tender Eyes,
We are not going to be miserable,
But to be safe from miseries.

Em. Would it were past; I am willing to reach
My journeys end; yet I start like one
That travels in the night, in unknown ways;
For we must through darkness,
Wander in places, from whence none that went
Ever returned to tell us what they were.

Sam. O do not shake thy virtuous resolution
With feeble apprehensions; it is a journey
That we must one day take: All the dispute
Which can be raised is only from the loss
Of some uncertain time, which yet perhaps
May prove so full of miseries, you would wish
That Fate which now you would so much decline.

Em. My resolution's firm; for all my shakings
They are but starts which sometimes nature makes;
As Wolves kept tame may now and then
Provoked by appetite, or some displeasure,
Start into actions like their usual wildness,
Before they were reduced to an obedience;
So it is with me, though I have brought my nature
To a tameness, and submission:
Yet at the unwelcome prospect that it takes
Of my intended dissolution. --
It starts within me, and would fain break
Those severe Fetters, Virtue and Reason ties them up with.

Sam. Here take thy choice then; She shows a Knife and a Dagger.
This Knife by chance
Taccola had about her: which will you have?

Em. The Dagger, if you please; that seems the sharpest,
And will be best for my weak hand.

Sam. Nay do not weep that we shall dye;
But smile to think how we shall live in Fame.

Em. I must weep, since I must part with you.


Sam. We shall meet again so quickly,
Thy tears will be but thrown away: --
Now hide that fatal Friend unto thy honor,
And when I strike, strike too, that we may sail
In one another Arms, and go to rest together.
-- See, the Monster comes, be resolute.

Em. Fear me not.


Enter Villerotto. Vil. How fare my beauteous Prisoners? what is it,
Sadness, or modesty that fixes thus
Your down-cast Eyes? come, come, I Will be more ingenuous,
And acknowledge the happiness I shall enjoy;
But you must be bashful; go in, go in,
And there I Will hide your blushes, that if you please,
You shall unseen blush that you were unwilling.

Sam. Sure thou can not be such a prodigious Monster;
Have thou neither fear of earthly punishment,
Nor Heavens vengeance?

Vil. Pish, I Will not trifle, nor defer my joys They draw their Dagger and Knife.
A minute longer: Thus, I Will force you two -- how! --

Sam. Are you amazed? were you so unacquainted
With all good, nay, with any thought of it,
That you could never think there might be Women
That would prefer their death before dishonor?

Vil. Indeed I have read of a foolish Lucrece;
But I believe the story otherwise
Than perhaps you may do; yet if you have
A mind to imitate that willful Matron,
Kill your selves as she did, when you know what was done.

Sam. Stop thy lewd breath, thou Monster;
We need not to be told when we should dye,
We are prepared, but not as your damned tongue
Directed us.

Vill. And this you think will stop me;
No, your Romance trick will not do:
I know you dare not venture to hurt your selves;
And therefore -- thus --

Sam. Strike, Emilia, strike home be sure.


Vill. Hold excellent Ladies, hold;
Pardon my cruel curiosity, that led me
To make this trial of you; you have showed
There is a virtue, which I thought impossible
To live with Women; I have called back to me
The Opinion of your Sexes steadfast goodness,
Which has been so long banished from me.

Em. Can this be real!


Vill. You see it must be so; it is no faint repentance,
Charmed from your tears, or sad expressions,
Which might be feigned in Women; but my conversion
Comes from the real knowledge of a virtue
That would have shook Man's Faith to think in Woman.

Sam. This amazes me.


Vill. Why do you wonder? is it not possible
A Man may once grow good? why do you mistrust?
Are you not in my power still? take heed, fair Saints,
Of sharing any guilt, that seems like mine,
So slowly to believe goodness in Man,
As I have done in Woman: you know what Virtue is;
I scarce knew it till you taught it me;
And you will be more guilty than I was,
If you believe as slowly as I did.

Em. Sure it is real?


Vill. You then will know it, when I have restored
You to your liberty, as you have done
Me to my long-lost goodness.

Sam. If this be real, we shall believe our selves
As much preserved by you, as if another
Had been the intended Ravisher; for it is greater
Virtue to rescue us thus from your self,
Than from another; as much as it is harder
To overcome our Passions, than an Enemy:

Vill. I glory much in that high Character
You raise me to; pray give me leave to seal
My Pardon on your fair hands? nay, permit They offer their left hands.
My most ambitious Lips to receive it
Upon those noble hands that were to write
The horrid Tragedy, with your virtuous Blood.

Sam. Ha, deceived?


He offers to kiss their right hands, and so snatches away their Weapons. Em.
Ah me?


Vill. I cannot but laugh to think how we have cousen'd
One another; did you believe I was turned virtuous?
Troth I never thought you were so foolish to be so really.

Sam. Do thou take pains to appear Devil?


Vill. No, not at all; I do it easily:
The truth on it is, I feared you might have acted
Some pretty odd fantastical Scene,
Perhaps to let a little blood out, and then
Talk sinely, whilst the purple drops distilled;
Calling your selves, your Virtues Martyrs;
Then, in a tone most neatly counterfeited,
Fall into high notions of meeting in Elysium,
And walking in perpetual springing Groves,
Or some strange imagined pleasure;
Perhaps all the while believe as much as I:
But by this means you might have lost some of that blood,
Which I have so much use of for to stir you.

Sam. Monster, Devil, will thou not permit us a way to dye?


Em. Kill us, Sir, and yet we will believe you gentle.


Vill. After I have done, you may do what you please.
-- Come. --

Sam. Help, help.


Enter Taccola. Tac. Help, help.


Vill. Plague of this clap of thunder;
I Will dispose of you,
And spoil the spring of your chops.

Exit with Taccola. Em. Some help, good Heaven.


Sam. Let Us stop our breaths,
Or tear the Devils Throat out.

Em. No help left us!


Enter Villerotto. Vill. Who should help you? I have gagged
Your foul mouthed hound, she can fill up the cry no more:
Yield quietly, or I Will drag you -- thus --

Sam. Emil. Help, help, murder, murder!


They bus^e. Enter Miranzo. Mir. What noise is this; blast me! are my Eyes true?
Or is that blessed shape ever before them?
It was their cries. Hold, what is the matter?

Vill. Ha, who wanted your sacred Company
Before your time.

Mir. I heard a noise, Sir, and I did not know
Whether you might not be in danger.

Vill. You see I am not;
Wait where I told you, till I send for you.

Mir. Then 'twas the Ladies, Sir, cried out, it seems.


Vill. What then?
Is it a usual call for you when Women squeak?

Sam. O Sir, for Heavens sake help us: we shall be --


Vill. Stop your mouth, or I Will stop it for you.


Draws. Mir. Good Sir, use no violence; perchance the Ladies
May be a little frightened from reason,
If you but give them time.

Sam. O Heaven! are all Men ill? under that habit
Can there be hid the love of sin?

Vill. Well, be gone;
I want not your advice, nor your assistance yet.

Mir. If you please, Sir, I will endeavor to persuade them:
I can prove that necessity may excuse many things,
That would be sinful, uncompell'd -- if you please, Sir.

Vill. No, no, be gone; you grow impertinent.


Mir. But if you please, Sir, to hearken to my opinion.


Vill. Hang your opinion;
I do not like this Fellow; I Will trust him no more.
Ha, -- what noise is this.

A noise. Brancadoro calls Villerotto and Enters. Mir. A seasonable
interruption.


Bra. Villerotto, why where have you been, Man?
I have been looking you up and down all the House:
Here Is Bottolo come from his Master,
And has strange news for me, he says:
I told him I cared not a farthing what 'twas.
-- But for all that, I wonder what it should be?
-- How now, what here, Villerotto?
Ha -- have got her? have got her in faith? prithee let me --

Vill. You had best spoil all, Sir, and destroy
The pains I have taken for you?

Bra. Nay, prithee, I will but --


Vill. Come, you shall not But; have not I been careful,
And dare you not trust me now? Come along with me.

Bra. What, I must salute her first, Man, in good manners.


Vill. You must not, it is unseasonable;
I have not wrought her yet enough -- Nay* --

Bra. But why thy Sword, drawn Man?


Vill. You shall know the reason suddenly:
Come, be quiet, and I Will perform all I promised.
-- Hell -- how I am troubled with him: Come, Sir.

Bra. Push me no pushes; I will not go;
And see who dares make me.

Vill. Come, you must, Sir.


Bra. 'Slid, whose Master? You or I? take heed of my fury.


Sam. Good Signior Brancadoro, help us; hear us.


Vill. To be fooled again;
You have not a mind to be cousen'd
Once more, have you?

Bra. What Is that to you? I will hear 'em.
'Slid, I will stay, and I will not go yet.

Vill. I Will betray all, if you play the Fool thus:
Come, you must go now; Bottolo stays for you.

Bra. I will not, I say.


Vill. Go, go.


Mir. I Will follow him, and get some help.


Exit Brancadoro. The Friar offers to go out too. Vil. Hold, Sir, you my worthy
spiritual Counselor;
Stir not, nor attempt to come near the door;
If you do -- no more but so:
Within there, ho! -- You Rascals, how came this Friar in? 2 Appear.

1. He told us you appointed him when he heard a noise,
That he should come.

Vill. Pox on your credulous Coxcombs; now remember
You hear me say, if he offers to come out, let me
Find him dead: Stir not, but guard the door;
He has robbed our Masters: -- If you fail, I Will cut your throats.

Exit Villerotto. Mir. Yet I am pleased that I am brought to die before her.
Aside.
That with my last breath,
Which seldom unsuccessfully Petitions,
I may at once beg of the fair, and wronged Emilia,
Forgiveness, and belief; -- yet I would know
A little more, if it were possible.
My Passion makes me vainly inquisitive.
I must do it; yet it is but an idle curiosity
To ask for news the minute I must die.

Sam. What means this Friar? does that Habit harbor
An Instrument sitted for that vile Monster?

Mir. Was there not a great noise, Ladies,
Something like Women's Cries?

Sam. They were our Cries, Sir.


Emil. If you cannot help us to live with Honor,
Help us to die; we had two Weapons:
Arm us but again, he has yet not disarmed our Minds.

Mir. Would I knew how; would you accept it
As a true witness of my sorrow, if I die first
In the opposing that mischief I know not which way to prevent?

Em. Ah me, we do not ask of you to die,
But to help death to us.

Mir. It Is impossible.


Sam. Strangle us then. Why do you turn away your tread?
It is a Charity to grant it.

Mir. Alas, I need not say I must deny; you will believe it
When I let you know you ask it of Miranzo.

He discovers himself. Em. Miranzo!


Sam. My Brother.


Mir. Fair Emilia, it is the criminal Miranzo,
That loves Emilia still.

Em. O Miranzo! I blush to think how you increase
My sense of Dangers, while you are mingled with 'em.

Mir. I see I am to blame in all Conditions,
To wish your Kindness; I but strive to nourish
A Sickness that sends Infection to your Peace.

Em. What must become of us?


Mir. Thus naked as I am, I will defend you;
And with my Breast I Will dull his Sword, perhaps his Cruelty.

Em. O do not talk more cruelly; Death is gentler,
Which you may help us to.

Sam. Ah Brother, be not so rash, do not deceive your self;
A thousand Lives lost in our Defense
Would not give stop to his lewd Purposes:
Heaven sure will send some Remedy. O Brother! O Cialto!

Mir. Forgive me dearest Sister, I had forgot
To tell you, Cialto lives; though this Villain was one
Of them that did attempt his Murder.

Sam. O do not flatter me, for I shall grow
As much out of love with Death, as even now
I was with Life. -- Is there no hope?

Mir. The Villain has appointed them to murder me,
If I attempt but to go forth. -- Ha, --
Now I think on it, it was the Friar
He gave them charge of: I am none; I Will try
If they will let me out; so I may call He takes up his Disguise.
Some help.

Em. O take heed!


Mir. It Is but attempting. -- But first
I Will set the Friar in the best posture I can.
Here, Sister, support my Shape a little,
To countenance my Design; -- nay, no trifling. -- He sets his Habit on his
Sister.
So -- now to your Prayers, -- within there, ho: --
^. How now, who are you?

Mir. A Friend of Villerotto's, who left me to
Stay a little while for your Assistance:
Now I am going, have the greater Care
Of the Friar there; he may venture to escape,
For he has robbed your Master.

1. We warrant you: Sir Friar, you had not best try to bolt.

Miranzo goes out, and returns back suddenly. Mir. I have done ill, I dare not
venture
Them a minute; Honor and Reason turn me back --
Blessed Opportunity, -- Rogue -- He strikes up one of their Heels, the other
sights a little, and runs out with a noise; he gets a Sword from one of them.

1. How now, what do you mean, Sir.
Help, help.

Mir. So, I have something now to frame an Argument
For my self with, and to Dispute a little.

Em. Now you may kill us; you have got a Sword*


Mir. Dear Emilia, do you believe, I know not how Emilia weeps.
To make a better use of such a Weapon?
-- Pray weep not, do not unman me now.
Hark, a Noise.

Enter Villerotto with him that run out, and another. Vill. Ha, Miranzo, are
you Metamorphosed from a Friar?


Mir. Do you stare Monster? is a Sword bright Metal?
The Mirror that can only show
The affrighting shapes of thy unheard of Villainies.

Vill. Alas, I have not been afraid a long time;
I have forgot what it is. -- Hark, a Noise. A Noise within.
Dispatch him quickly, you shall tell no News, Sir.
-- Ha, who is this new Face for?

Enter Cialto. Cia. This shall tell thee, Villain.


They offer to fight. Mir. Hold --


Miranzo drives out the two men, comes back and parts them. Cia. Miranzo, rob
me not of that Revenge,
Which only can belong to me
-- Hark, a noise, -- guard the Passage, or we may all be lost. A noise still.
Nay, trifle not; -- hark, the Noise increases, dispatch.
-- Now, Sir, do you stare to see Cialto,
Whom you hired Rogues to Murder?

Exit Miranzo. Vill. I do not stare, nor am I frightened:
What, you are not dead it seems?

Sam. O, Cialto!


Cia. Ha, since thou have given me cause
To view thee with a strict survey, my Eyes
Are grown clear sighted,
And find thee not the Villain which thou seem,
But what thou art; the base Borazzo.

Vill. It Is well, we know one another then.


Cia. Excellent Rascal, has your hot Revenge
Been raked up all this while?

Vill. Could thou expect less from me, whom thou have disgraced
And ruined, by Cashiering me from my Command?

Cia. And what can thou expect, Villain,
But that Fate thou did design for me?

Vill. My Sword says no.


Sam. Hold, hold, I command you hold, Cialto:
Hold, Sir, I will engage for your Forgiveness.

Vill. My Forgiveness! this is my Indemnity.


Cia. Do not hang upon me, unless you mean
To have me murdered in your Arms.

Vill. Nay, I think I may drive this through your Shield.


Cia. For Heavens sake let me go.


Sam. And Heaven protect you.


They fight, Villerotto falls. Cial. Now, Sir, what think you?


Vill. That I shall presently be quiet, and think no more. Help, help.


Cial. It Is vain to call, no man has Charity
Left for thee; trouble not thy Throat,
Unless thou have some Devil to call upon.

Enter Miranzo. Mir. Let me embrace my dear Cialto,
For whom still ready Victory spreads her Wings,
When ever his waved Sword gives her but the sign.

Cial. Can Miranzo forgive all those distracted Jealousies
My miseries begot within me?

Mir. You injure me to ask it; go dry Samira's Eyes.


Cial. I dare not now approach you, fair Samira,
But as I would those Powers (I durst not hope to reach
With any thing but Prayers:) Permit me to receive forgiveness.

Sam. For what?


Cial. For pursuing you with all my miseries.


Sam. If you loved me as well as you profess,
My kindness would infuse such joy into you,
As would admit no sense of your Misfortunes.
Cannot my Love and Passion for you, have as much power as a little sleep,
To render you insensible of Miseries,
To which you only give afflicting Natures?

Cial. Fool that I was, to think that I could be wretched,
Whilst you were kind; forgive me dear Samira:
Permit me, fair Emilia, to kiss your hands too.

Em. Generous Sir, I owe an equal Obligation to you.


Enter Brancadoro. Cial. Now spare me a minute.


Sam. What means he?


Mir. I know not.


Cial. Signior Brancadoro, I think Miranzo told me once,
You did engage to fight with me.

Mir. Now I guess; peace, this will be good sport.


Bran. I, that was when I was married to Samira. But not else.


Clia. Would marriage make you Valiant?


Bran. When I have tried, you shall know my mind.


Cial. By no means, Signior; I shall forbid the Banes:
But I must have your Answer now; look ye,
Here are two Swords, take your choice.

Sam. What does he mean?


Mir. Nay, stand still.


Cial. Here, Sir.


Bran It Is neither here nor there, I Will not fight
With any man that has a less Estate
Than my self; such a one ventures nothing.

Cial. Troth, you will hardly fight then


Bran. Why, what care I; if there be no body fit
To fight with me I hope they know nothing yet.

Aside. Cial. But, Sir, as I remember, you have something
Did once belong to me; are you not weary of it?

Bran. It Is no matter whether I am or no.


Cial. Pray let me have't again.


Bran. So you shall, when I have nothing else to do with it.


Cial. You are severe, Sir; I will assign you your Money
That you lent, to receive it of the Senate.

Bran. No, do it your self, Sir.


Cial. I Will fetch others to persuade you:
Miranzo, pray look to the rich Gentleman.

Cialto goes out. Sam. What is the meaning of all this?


Mir. I guess now, you will perceive all presently.


Vill. Oh! Mir. How is it?


Vill. Too well; I have life enough to spend in Curses.


Mir. O Devil!


Em. He makes me tremble still.


Enter Cialto and Baptista, with Montalto, and his two Companions. Cial Now, my
most wealthy Signior, do you know these Gentlemen.


Bran Not I; it is not likely that I should be acquainted
With such Ragamuffians.

Cial. Do you know them, angry Sir?


Vil. Yes, I know them to be rascally Cowards;
Ten such would not venture to cut one Throat.

Cial. Why, you need not be angry; they have not had their full hire.


Vill. They deserved none, they did not do their business.


Bran. I know the Rogues now: He whispers.
Why, Villerotto, thou will not betray me, I hope.

Cial. What was that business they should have done?


Vil. Why, cut your Throat.


Cial. Brave Villain! Do You see, Signior?
These were your Pensioners; the confidence it seems
Of their performances, made you so bold,
To promise when you were married to fight with me;
That was after I was dead, as you believed.
But now, Sir, the Hangman shall end our Quarrel.

Bran. Good Sir, speak softly? I vow, that Villain persuaded me,
And told me I should never keep my Land
In quiet else, nor ever have my Mistress.

Mir. Compound, Signior; it is your best way.


Cial. What say you, noble Undertakers?


Mon. Why, Sir, we must confess --


Bran. It Is needless, Sir, it is needless; I will do any thing.


Mir. Offer him his Estate again; you are rich enough besides;
You Will cheat somebody else in a little while of as much more.

Bran. No, Sir, I am not wise enough to do it;
My Father's gone, peace be with him; he perhaps
Might have given a say to some such matter.

Mir. Are you willing? you may hang else.


Bran. No, I cannot endure that I Am sure, nor hardly the other.


Mir. Come, Cialto; Signior Brancadoro,
So he may have your Friendship, is content.

Cial. What to do?


Mir. To restore your Estate again.


Cial. Well, I love peace; he shall have an Assignment
To receive his Money from the Senate.

Bran. That I shall never get; but I must consent.


Mir. Fear not, Signior; you have the Public Faith for it.


Cial. Now, Samira, I can forgive my self, if I presume
With my restored Fortunes too.

Sam. Take heed, Sir; for if you name it,
That generous cause that forced me to declare
I loved you, will urge me to despise you.

Cial. I am charmed.


Bran. I hope, noble Signior, you will forgive Villerotto too.


Cial. You are deceived, Sir, it is not Villerotto;
It Is Borazzo. an ancient Friend of mine.

Mir. Pray forgive him, Sir; he may repent.


Vill. Yes, I do repent.


Mir. That Is well said; of what?


Vill. Why, that I did not rifle those Treasuries,
And leave you nothing to enjoy, but what
I feel, the Torments of a vexed Soul:
I should have sitted them for your Embraces,
And would have taken care you should have known it.

Mir. Bold impudent Dog,


Cial. He was still furnished with too great a Courage;
So much boldness was not fit to have been trusted
But in a Frame where it was balanced with much Virtue.

Mir. Come, we will force him to be good.


Vil. I think it must be forced.


Mir. He will die snarling.


Vill. I would die biting.


Bran. Would he had been hanged before he bit me.


Mir. Here, come hither, you that were once his Creatures;
Take him up, that he may be delivered from us,
Into the hands of the severest Justice.

Vill. Do you believe my Spirit will endure
Tamely to wait upon a formal Sentence,
And stay till you shall force it out of doors?
No, I will hear these Wounds so wide,
I Will make it room enough to go, if it be willing.

Enter Bottolo, after him Castruccio and Moreno. Cial. Away with him.


Bot. What, no Body to be found in the house? --
Hey day, what is gathered together! My Master! my Mistress!

Mir. See, Emilia, your Father, and my Uncle.


Bran. Gentlemen, no words; you remember our Bargain.


Cial. Doubt us not.


Emil. O, my dear Father, are you still as ready to forgive me as you were wont?


Mor. If I were angry, the sight of thee
Would bring a Joy enough to force it from me.

Mir. Your pardon, Uncle, joined to this, will make me and Emilia happy*


Cast. Is It so? was this the Trick on it? Well, well,
What must be, must be; I am Friends, Nephew;
I was partly in the Fault my self; I dare swear
I made thee half in love, with praising her.
Well, -- I am glad all troubles are at an end:
But she shall still be so much mine, that I may give her to thee.

Emil. You honor me, to own a Title in me.


Sam. One Pardon more, Sir, for me, that in
No other thing will ever disobey you.

Cast. What say you, Signior Brancadoro?


Bran. I say any thing, Sir. -- God's my life, I can scarce hold from crying.


Cial. Many things, Sir, may seem strange to you;
But you shall know it all at better leisure.

Mor. Come, no more; but let forgiveness
Dwell in every Breast: Back to the Nuptials now again;
This will scarce seem an interruption:
Come, let us away; our Meat is hardly cold yet.

Cial. The God of Love, if he can borrow Eyes,
Will be more pleased with this new Sacrifice;
Since by that change which he himself has made,
More equal Hearts are on his Altar laid.

Exeunt. FINIS.
THE COMMITTEE, A COMEDY. Written by the Honorable Sir ROBERT HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold by R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. M DC XCII.

Dramatis Personae.
COlonel Careless. Colonel Blunt. Lieutenant Story. Committee Men
Nehemiah Catch. Joseph Blemish. Jonathan Headstrong. Ezekiel Scrape.
Mr. Day, the Chairman to the Committee. Abel, Son to Mr. Day. Obadiah, Clerk
to the Committee. Tavern Boy. Bailiffs. Soldiers. Two Chair-Men. Gaol-Keeper.
Servant to Mr. Day. A Stage Coachman. Bookseller.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Arbella. Mrs. Day. Mrs. Ruth. Mrs. Chat.
SCENE LONDON.

PROLOGUE.
TO cheat the most Judicious Eyes, there be
Ways in all Trades, but this of Poetry:
Your Tradesman shows his Ware by some false Light,
To hide the Faults, and slightness from your Sight.
Nay, though it is full of Bracks, he will boldly swear
It Is excellent, and so help off his Ware.
He Will rule your Judgment by his Confidence,
Which in a Poet you would call Impudence;
Nay, if the World afford the like again,
He swears he will give it you for nothing then:
Those are words too a Poet dares not say;
Let it be good or bad, you are sure to pay.
-- Would 'twere a pen'worth; -- but in this you are
Abler to judge than he that made the Ware:
However his design was well enough,
He tried to show some newer fashioned Stuff.
Not that the name Committee can be new,
That has been too well known to most of you:
But you may smile, for you have past your doom;
The Poet dares not, his is still to come.
THE COMMITTEE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Mrs. Day, Mrs. Arbella, Mrs. Ruth, Colonel Blunt, and a
Hackney-Coachman. Mrs Day enters brushing her Hoods, and Scarfs. Mrs Day. NOW
out upon it, how dusty it is;
All things considered, it is better
Traveling in the Winter; especially for us of the better sort,
That ride in Coaches; and yet to say truth, warm weather is
Both pleasant and comfortable: it is a thousand pities
That fair weather should do any hurt. Well said, honest
Coachman, thou have done thy part: My Son Abel
Paid for my place at Redding, did he not?

Coach. Yes, and please you.


Mrs. Day. Well, there is something
Extraordinary to make thee drink.

Coach. By my Whip, it is a Groat of more
Than ordinary thinness. -- Aside.
Plague on this new Gentry, how liberal they are. Farewell,
Young Mistress; farewell, Gentlemen: Pray when you come by
Redding let Toby carry you.

Exit Coachman. Mrs. Day. Why how now Mrs. Arbella?
What, sad? why what is the matter?

Arbel. I am not very sad.


Mrs. Day. Nay, by my honor you need not;
If you knew as much as I. Well --
I Will tell you one thing, you are well enough, you need not fear
Who ever does; say I told you so, -- if you do not hurt your
Self: for as cunning as he is, and let him be as cunning as
He will, I can see with half an eye, that my Son Abel
Means to take care of you in your Composition, and will
Needs have you his Guest: Ruth and you shall be Bed-fellows.
I warrant that same Abel many and many a time
Will wish his Sisters place; or else his Father never
Got him: though I say it, that should not say it, yet I do
Say it -- it is a notable Fellow. --

Arb. I am fallen into strange hands,
If they prove as busy as her tongue --

Aside. Mrs. Day. And now you talk of
This same Abel, I tell you but one thing,
I wonder that neither he nor my Husband's Honor's
Chief Clerk Obadiah, is not here ready to attend me: I
Dare warrant my Son Abel has been here two hours
Before us It Is the veriest Princox;
He will ever be a galloping, and
Yet he is not full one and twenty, for all his appearances:
He never stole this trick of galloping; his Father
Was just such another before him,
And would gallop with the best of 'em: he and Mistress Busie's
Husband were counted the best Horsemen in Redding, I and
Berkshire to boot. I have rode formerly behind Mr. Busy,
But in truth I cannot now endure to travel but in a Coach;
My own was at present in disorder, and so I was fain
To shift in this; but I warrant you, if his Honor, Mr. Day,
Chairman of the honorable Committee of Sequestrations,
Should know that his Wife rode in a Stage-Coach, he
Would make the House too hot for some. -- Why, how is it
With you, Sir? what, weary of your Journey?

To the Col. Col. Bl. Her tongue will never tire -- Aside.
So many, Mistress, riding in the Coach
Has a little distempered me with heat.

Mrs. Day. So many, Sir? why there were but six. --
What would you say if I should tell you,
That I was one of the eleven that traveled
At one time in one Coach?

Col. Bl. O the Devil! I have given her a new Theme --


Aside. Mrs. Day. Why, I Will tell you -- Can you guess how 'twas?


Col. Bl. Not I truly. But it is no matter, I do believe it.


Mrs. Day. Look you, thus 'twas;
There was, in the first place, my self,
And my Husband, I should have said first; but his Honor
Would have pardoned me, if he had heard me;
Mr. Busy that I told you of, and his Wife;
The Mayor of Redding, and his Wife;
And this Ruth that you see there, in one of our Laps --
But now, where do you think the rest were?

Col. Bl. A top of the Coach sure.


Mrs. Day. Nay, I durst swear you would
Never guess -- why --
Would you think it;
I had two growing in my Belly,
Mrs. Busy one in hers, and Mrs. Mayoress of Redding
A chopping Boy, as it proved afterward in hers;
As like the Father as if it had been spit out of his mouth;
And if he had come out of his moth, he had come
Out of as honest a Man's Mouth as any in forty Miles
Of the head of him:
For would you think it,
At the very same time when this same Ruth was sick,
It being the first time the Girl was ever coach'd,
The good Man Mr. Mayor,
I mean, that I spoke of,
Held his Hat for the Girl to ease her Stomach in. -- Enter Abel and Obadiah.
-- O are you come,
Long looked for comes at last.
What, -- you have a slow set pace,
As well as your ^ally scribble sometimes:
Did you not think it sit, that I should have found
Attendance ready for me when I alighted.

Obad. I ask your Honor's pardon; for I do
Profess unto your Ladyship I had attended sooner,
But that his young Honor, Mr. Abel,
Demurred me by his delays.

Mrs. Day. Well, Son Abel,
You must be obeyed,
And I partly, if not, guess your business;
Providing for the entertainment of one I have in my eye;
Read her and take her:
Ah, is it not so?

Abel. I have not been deficient in my care, Forsooth.


Mrs. Day. Will you never leave your Forsooths?
Art thou not ashamed
To let the Clerk carry himself better,
And show more breeding than his Master's Son?

Abel. If it please your Honor, I have some business
For your more private ear.

Mrs. Day. Very well.


Ruth. What a lamentable condition has
That Gentleman been in, faith I pity him?

Arbil. Are you so apt to pity men?


Ruth. Yes, men that are humorsom,
As I would children that are froward;
I would not make them cry a purpose.

Arbel Well, I like his humor, I dare
Swear he is plain and honest.

Ruth. Plain enough of all conscience;
Faith I Will speak to him.

Arbel. Nay prithee don't, he will think thee rude?


Ruth. Why then I Will think him an Ass. --
How is it after your Journey, Sir?

C. Bl. Why, I am worse after it.


Ruth. Do you love riding in a Coach, Sir?


C. Bl. No, Forsooth, nor talking after riding in a Coach.


Ruth. I should be loath
To interrupt your Meditations, Sir:
We may have the fruits hereafter.

C. Bl. If you have, they shall break loose spite of my teeth;
This Spawn is as bad as the great Pike.

Aside. Arbel. Prithee peace: Sir -- We wish you all happiness.


C. Bl. And quiet, good sweet Ladies, --
I like her well enough. --
Now would not I have her say any more, for fear she
Should jeer too, and spoil my good opinion;
If 'twere possible, I would think well of one woman*

Mrs. Day. Come, Mrs. Arbella, it is as I told you,
Abel has done it; say no more: take her by the hand, Abel.
I profess she may venture to take thee for better, for worse:
Come, Mrs. the honorable Committee will sit suddenly.
Come, let us along. Farewell, Sir.

Exeunt. C. Bl. How, the Committee ready to sit. Plague Manet C. Blunt.
On their Honors; for so my honored Lady,
That was one of the eleven, was pleased to call 'em.
I had like to have come a day after the Fair:
It Is pretty, that such as I have been, must compound
For their having been Rascals.
Well, I must go look a Lodging, and a Solliciter:
I Will find the arrantest Rogue I can too:
For, according to the old saying,
Set a Thief to catch a Thief.

Enter Col. Careless, and Lieutenant. C. Careless. Dear Blunt, well met,
When came you, Man?

C. Bl. Dear Careless, I did not think to have met thee
So suddenly. Lieutenant, your Servant;
I am landed just now, man.

C. Car. Thou speak as if thou had been at Sea?


C. Bl. It Is pretty well guest, I have been in a storm.


C. Car. What business brought thee?


C. Bl. May be the same with yours:
I am come to Compound with their Honors.

C. Car. That Is my business too;
Why, the Committee sits suddenly?

C. Bl. Yes, I know it;
I heard so in the storm I told thee of.

C. Car. What storm, Man?


C. Bl. Why, a Tempest as high as ever blew from
Woman's breath: I have rode in a Stage Coach, wedged in
With half a dozen; one of them was a Committee-man's
Wife; his Name is Day:
And she accordingly will be called,
Your Honor, and your Ladyship; with a tongue that
Wags as much faster than all other women's, as in the
Several motions of a Watch, the hand of the minute
Moves faster than that of the hours* There was her
Daughter too; but a Bastard without question;
For she had no resemblance to the rest of the notch'd
Rascals, and very pretty, and had wit enough
To jeer a man in prosperity to death. --
There was another Gentlewoman,
And she was handsome, nay very handsome;
But I kept her from being as sad as the rest.

C. Car. Prithee, how man?


C. Bl. Why, she began with two or three good words,
And I desired her she would be quie^
While she was well.

C. Car. Thou wei't not be so mad?


C. Bl. I had been mad if I had not, --
But when we came to our Journey's end, there met us two
Such formal and stately Rascals,
That yet pretended Religion,
And open Rebellion ever painted:
It was the hopes,
And guide of the honorable Family, viz.
The eldest Son,
And the chiefest Clerk-rogues --
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- And hereby hangs a tail.
This Gentlewoman I told thee
I kept civil, by desiring her to say nothing,
Is a rich Heir of one that di'd in the
King's Service, and left his Estate under Sequestration.
This young Chicken has this Kite snatched up,
And designs her for this her eldest Rascal.

C. Car. What a dull Fellow were thou,
Not to make love, and rescue her?

C. Bl. I Will woo no Woman.


C. Car. Would thou have them court thee?
A Soldier, and not love a Siege!
How now, who art thou?

Enter Teg. Teg. A poor Irishman, and Christ save me, and save you all;
I prithee give me Sixpence, gad Mastero.

C. Car. Sixpence? I see thou would not lose any thing
For want of asking. Here, I am pretty near,
There Is a Groat for thy confidence.

Teg. By my troth it is too little.


C. Car. Troth, like enough:
How long have thou been in England?

Teg. Ever since I came hither, in faith.


C. Car. That Is true; what have thou done
Since thou came into England?

Teg. Served God and St. Patrick, and my good
Sweet King, and my good sweet Master; yes indeed.

C. Car. And what do thou do now?


Teg. Cry for them every day, upon my soul.


C. Car. Why, where is thy Master?


Teg. He Is dead, Mastero, and left poor Teg;
Upon my soul, he never served poor Teg so before.

C. Car. Who was thy Master?


Teg. Even the good Colonel Danger.


C. Car. He was my dear and noble friend.


Teg. Yes, that he was, and poor Teg's too, in faith now.


C. Car. What do thou mean to do?


Teg. I will get a good Master, if any good Master would
Get me; I cannot tell what to do else, by my soul, that
I cannot; for I have went and gone to one Lilly's;
He lives at that house, at the end of another house,
By the May-pole-house; and tells every body by one
Star, and 'tother Star, what good luck they shall have;
But he could not tell nothing for poor Teg.

C. Car. Why, man?


Teg. Why, it is done by the Stars;
And he told me there were no Stars for Irishmen:
I told him he told two or three lies upon my soul;
There were as many Stars in Ireland as in England,
And more too, that there are; and if a good Master
Cannot get me, I will run into Ireland, and see
If the Stars be not there still; and if they be,
I will come back in faith, and beat his pate,
If he will not then tell me some good luck, and some Stars.

C. Car. Poor fellow, I pity him; I fancy he is simply
Honest: Have thou any Trade?

Teg. Bo, bub bub bo, a Trade, a Trade! an Irishman a Trade!
An Irishman scorns a Trade, that he does; I will
Run for thee forty Miles; but I scorn to have a Trade.

C. Bl. Alas, poor simple fellow.


C. Car. I pity him; nor can I endure to see any miserable
That can weep for my Prince, and Friend. Well, Teg, what
Say thou if I will take thee?

Teg. Why, I will say thou will do very well then.


C. Car. Thy Master was my dear friend; were thou with
Him when he was killed?

Teg. Yes, upon my soul, that I was, and I did houl over
Him, and I asked him why he would leave poor Teg;
And in faith I staid kissing his sweet face, till the
Rogues came upon me and took away all from me;
And I was naked till I got this Mantle, that I was:
I have never any Victuals neither, but a little Snuff.

C. Car. Come, thou shall live with me; love me
As thou did thy Master.

Teg. That I will in faith, if thou would be good too.


C. Car. Now to our business; for I came
But last night my self; and the Lieutenant and I
Were just going to seek a Solicitor.

C. Bl. One may serve us all; what say you, Lieutenant,
Can you furnish us?

Lieu. Yes, I think I can help you to plough
With a Heifer of their own.

C. Car. Now I think on it, Blunt, why did not
Thou begin with the Committee-man's Cow?

C. Bl. Plague on her, she lowbell'd me so,
That I thought of nothing,
But stood shrinking like a dead Lark.

Lieu. But hark you, Gentlemen, there is an ill-tasting dose
To be swallowed first; there is a Covenant to be taken.

Teg. Well, what is that Covenant?
By my soul I will take it for my new Master,
If I could, that I would.

C. Car. Thank thee, Teg -- A Covenant, say thou?


Teg. Well, where is that Covenant? --


C. Car. We Will not swear, Lieutenant.


Lieu. You must have no Land then.


C. Bl. Then farewell Acres, and may the dirt choke them.


C. Car. It Is but being reduced to Teg's equipage;
'Twas a lucky thing to have a fellow that can
Teach one this cheap diet of Snuff.

Lieu. Come, Gentlemen, we must lose no more time;
I Will carry you to my poor house, where you shall lodge:
For know, I am married to a most illustrious person,
That had a kindness for me.

C. Car. Prithee, how did thou light upon this good fortune?


Lieu. Why, you see there are Stars in England,
Though none in Ireland: Come, Gentlemen,
Time calls us; you shall have my story hereafter.

C. Bl. Plague on this Covenant.


Lieu. Curse it not, 'twill prosper then.


C. Car. Come, Teg, however I have a Suit of
Clothes for thee; thou shall lay by thy Blanket
For some time: It may be thee and I may be
Reduced together to thy Country fashion.

Teg. Upon my Soul, Joy, for I will carry thee
Then into my Country too.

C. Car. Why, there is the worst on it,
The best will help it self.

Exeunt. Enter Mr. Day, and Mrs. Day. Mr. Day. Welcome, sweet Duck; I profess
Thou have brought home good Company indeed;
Money and moneys worth: if we can
But now make sure of this Heir, Mrs Arbella,
For our Son Abel.

Mrs. Day. If we can? you are ever at your (Ifs;)
You Are afraid of your own shadow; I can tell you
One (if) more; that is (if) I did not bear you up,
Your heart would be down in your Breeches
At every turn: well, -- if I were gone,
There Is another If for you.

Mr. Day. I profess thou say true,
I should not know what to do indeed;
I am beholding to thy good counsel for many
Good thing; I had never got Ruth
Nor her Estate into my Fingers else.

Mrs. Day. Nay, in that business too you were at
Your (Ifs:) Now you see she goes currantly
For our own Daughter, and this Arbella shall be
Our Daughter too, or she shall have no Estate.

Mr. Day. If we could but do that, Wife?


Mrs. Day. Yet again at your Ifs.


Mr. Day. I have done, I have done; your counsel,
Good Duck; you know I depend upon that.

Mrs. Day. You may well enough, you find
The sweet on it; and to say truth, it is known too well,
That you relied upon it: In truth they are ready
To call me the Committe-man: they well
Perceive the weight that lies upon me, Husband.

Mr. Day. Nay, good Duck, no chiding now,
But to your counsel.

Mrs. Day. In the first place (observe how I lay a design
In Politics) do you mark, counterfeit me
A Letter from the King, where he shall offer you great
Matters to serve him, and his Interest underhand.
Very good, and in it let him remember his kind
Love and Service to me: This will make them look
About 'em, and think you some body: then promise them
If they will be true Friends to you, to live and dye
With them, and refuse all great offers, then whilst it is warm
Get the composition of Arbella's Estate into your own power,
Upon your design of marrying her to Abel.

Mr. Day. Excellent.


Mrs. Day. Mark the luck on it too, their names sound alike;
Abel and Arbella, they are the same to a trisle,
It seems a providence.

Mr. Day. Thou observest right, Duck,
Thou can see as far into a Millstone as another.

Mrs. Day. Pish, do not interrupt me.


Mr. Day. I do not, good Duck, I do not.


Mrs. Day. You do not, and yet you do;
You put me off from the concatenation of my discourse:
Then, as I was saying, you may intimate
To your honorable Fellows, that one good turn
Deserves another. That language is understood amongst you.
I take it, ha.

Mr. Day. Yes, yes, we use those Items often.


Mrs. Day. Well, interrupt me not.


Mr. Day. I do not, good Wife.


Mrs. Day. You do not, and yet you do;
By this means get her composition put wholly into your hands,
And then no Abel, no Land, -- but -- in the mean time
I would have Abel do his part too.

Mr. Day. I, I, there is a want I found it.


Mrs. Day. Yes, when I told you so before.


Mr. Day. Why, that is true, Duck, he is too backward;
If I were in his place, and as young as I have been.

Mrs. Day. O you would do wonders; but now I think on it,
There may be some use made of Ruth;
It Is a notable witty Harlotry.
-- You were so, when I told you
I had thought on it first, -- let me see, it shall be so:
We'll set her to instruct Abel in the first place;
And then to incline Arbella, they are Hand and Glove;
And Women can do much with one another.

Mr. Day. Thou have hit upon my own thoughts. --


Mrs. Day. Pray call her in;
You thought of that too, did you not?

Mr. Day. I will, Duck; Ruth, why, Ruth.


Enter Ruth. Ruth. Your pleasure, Sir.


Mr. Day. Nay, it is my Wife's desire that --


Mrs. Day. Well, if it be your Wife's, she can best tell
It her self, I suppose: do you hear, Ruth, you may
Do a business that may not be the worse for you:
You know I use but few words.

Ruth. What does she call a few? --


Aside. Mrs. Day. Look you now, as I said, to be short,
And to the matter, my Husband and I do design this
Mrs. Arbella for our Son Abel, and the young
Fellow is not forward enough you conceive, prithee give
Him a little instructions how to demean himself,
And in what manner to speak, which we call address,
To her; for Women best know what will please Women;
Then work on Arbella on the other side, work, I say,
My good Girl, no more but so: you know my custom
Is to use but few words. Much may be said in a little,
You shall not repent it.

Mr. Day. And I say something too, Ruth.


Mrs. Day. What need you, do you not see it all
Said already to your hand, what say thou, Girl?

Ruth. I shall do my best. -- I would not lose
The sport for more than I speak of. --

Aside. Mrs. Day. Go call Abel, good Girl. By bringing this
To pass Husband, we shall secure our selves
If the King should come; you will be hanged else.

Exit Ruth. Mr. Day. Oh good Wife, let us secure our selves
By all means, there is a wise saying, It Is good to have a
Shelter against every storm. I remember that.

Mrs. Day. You may well, when you heard me say it so often.


Enter Ruth with Abel. Mr. Day. O Son Abel, do you hear.


Mrs. Day. Pray hold your peace,
And give every body leave to tell their own tale. --
D'hear, Son Abel, I have formerly told you
That Arbella would be a good Wife for you;
A word's enough to the wise: some endeavors must
Be used, and you must not be desicient. I have spoken
To your Sister Ruth to instruct you what to say,
And how to carry your self; observe her Directions as
You Will answer the contrary; be consident, and put home.
Ha Boy, had thou but thy Mother's pate. Well,
It Is but a folly to talk of that that cannot be;
Be sure you follow your Sister's directions.

Mr. Day. Be sure, Boy. --
Well said Duck, I say.

Exeum: Manet Ruth and Abel. Ruth. Now, Brother Abel.


Ab. Now, Sister Ruth?


Ruth. Hitherto he observes me punctually, Aside.
Have you a Months mind to this
Gentlewoman, Mistress Arbella?

Ab. I have not known her a Week yet.


Ruth. O cry you mercy, good Brother Abel.
Well, to begin then, You must alter your posture,
And by your grave and high demeanor make your self
Appear a hole above Obadiah; lest your Mistress
Should take you for such another scribble scrabble as he is,
And always hold up your head as if it were
Bolster'd up with high matters, your hands joined
Flat together, projecting a little beyond the rest of your
Body as ready to separate when you begin to open.

Abel. Must I go apace or softly.


Ruth. O gravely by all means, as if you were loaded
With weighty considerations so. -- Very well.
Now to apply our prescription: Suppose now that I
Were your Mistress Arbella, and meet you by
Accident; keep your posture so, and when you come
Just to me, start like a Horse that has spied
Something on one side of him, and give a little gird
Out of the way on a sudden; declaring that you
Did not see her before, by reason of your deep
Contemplations: then you must speak, let us hear.

Abel. God save you, Mistress.


Ruth. O sie Man, you should begin thus; Pardon,
Mistress, my profound Contemplations, in which I was so
Buried that I did not see you: And then as she answers proceed.
I know what she will say, I am so used to her.

Abel. This will do well if I forget it not.


Ruth. Well, try once.


Abel. Pardon, Mistress, my profound Contemplations,
In which I was so hid, that you could not see me.

Ruth. Better sport than I expected. Aside.
Very well done, you are perfect: then she will answer,
Sir, I suppose you are so busied with State Affairs,
That it may well hinder you from taking notice
Of any thing below them.

Abel. No forsooth, I have some profound
Contemplations, but no State Affairs.

Ruth. O sie, Man, you must confess, that the weighty
Affairs of State lie heavy upon you; but it is a burden
You must bear, and then shrug your shoulders.

Ab. Must I say so, I am afraid my Mother will be angry,
For she takes all the State-matters upon her self.

Ruth. Pish, did she not charge you to be ruled by me;
Why, Man, Arbella will never have you;
If she be not made believe you can do great matters
With Parliament Men, and Committee Men;
How should she hope for any good
By you else in her composition.

Ab. I apprehend you now, I shall observe.


Ruth. It Is well at this time, I Will say no more;
Put your self in your posture so:
Now go look your Mistress;
I Will warrant you the Town's our own.

Abel. I go.


Exit Abel. Ruth. Now I have fixed him, not to go off
Till he discharges on his Mistress. I could burst with laughing.

Enter Arbella. Arb. What do thou laugh at, Ruth?


Ruth. Did thou meet my Brother Abel?


Arb. No.


Ruth. If thou had met him right,
He had played at hard head with thee.

Arb. What do thou mean;


Ruth. Why, I have been teaching him to woo,
By command of my Superiors, and have instructed
Him to hold up his head so high, that of necessity he must
Run against every thing that comes in his way.

Arb. Who is he to woo?


Ruth. Even thy own sweet self.


Arb. Out upon him.


Ruth. Nay, thou will be rarely courted;
I Will not spoil the sport by telling thee any
Thing beforehand; they have sent to Lilly,
And his learning being built upon knowing what most
People would have him say:
He has told them for a certain, That Abel shall
Have a rich Heir, and that must be you.

Arb. Must be.


Ruth. Yes, Committee Men can compel more than Stars.


Arb. I fear this too late;
You are their Daughter, Ruth?

Ruth. I deny that.


Arb. How?


Ruth. Wonder not that I begin thus freely with you,
It Is to invite your confidence in me.

Arb. You amaze me.


Ruth. Pray do not wonder, nor suspect, --
When my Father, Sir Basil Throughgood, died, I was
Very young, not above two years old: it is too long
To tell you how this Rascal, being a Trustee,
Caught me and my Estate, being the sole Heir unto my
Father, into his gripes; and now for some years
Has confirmed his unjust power by the unlawful
Power of the times: I fear they have designs as bad as
This on you: You see I have no reserve, and endeavor
To be thought worthy of your friendship

Arb. I embrace it with as much clearness,
Let us love and assist one another. --
Would they marry me to this their firstborn Puppy?

Ruth. No doubt, or keep your composition from you.


Arb. 'Twas my ill fortune to fall into such hands,
Foolishly enticed by fair words and
Large promises of assistance.

Ruth. Peace.


Enter Obadiah. Obad. Mrs. Ruth, my Master is demanding your company,
Together, and not singly, with Mrs. Arbella;
You will find them in the Parlor:
The Committee being ready to sit,
Calls upon my care and circumspection to set in order
The weighty matters of State,
For their wise and honorable inspection.

Exit. Ruth. We come; come, dear Arbella, never be perplexed,
Cheerful Spirits are the best Bladders to swim with:
If thou art sad, the weight will sink thee:
Be secret, and still know me for no other than what
I seem to be, their Daughter. Another time
Thou shall know all particulars of my strange story.

Arb. Come, Wench, they cannot bring us to compound
For our humors; they shall be free still.

Exeunt ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Teg. Teg. IN Faith my sweet Master has sent me to a
Rascal, now that he has; I will go tell him so too:
He asked me why he could not send one
That could speak English. Upon my soul, I was going
To give him an Irish knock; the Devil's in them all,
They will not talk with me; I will go near to
Knock this man's pate, and that man, Lilly's One cries Books within. Enter.
Pate too, -- that I will: I will make them
Prate to me, that I will. How now,
What Noises are that? --

Book-sel. New Books, new Books, a desperate Plot
And Engagement of the bloody Cavaliers: One cries Books without.
Mr. Saltmarsh's Alarm to the Nation, after having
Been three days dead, Mercurius Britannicus, etc.

Teg. How Is that? now they cannot live in Ireland
After they are dead three days!

Book-sel. Mercurius Britannicus, or the Weekly Post,
Or, The Solemn League and Covenant.

Teg. What is that you say?
Is it the Covenant, have you that?

Book-sel. Yes, what then, Sir?


Teg. Which is that Covenant?


Book-sel. Why, this is the Covenant.


Teg. Well, I must take that Covenant.


Book-sel. You take my Commodities?


Teg. I must take that Covenant, upon my soul now, that I must.


Book-sel. Stand off, Sir, or I Will set you further.


Teg. Well, upon my soul, now I will take
That Covenant for my Master.

Book-sel. Your Master must pay me for it then?


Teg. In Faith now, they will make him pay for it
After I have taken it for him.

Book-sel. What a Devil does the fellow mean?


Teg. You will make me stay too long, that you will;
Look you now, I will knock you down upon the ground,
If you will not let me take it?

Book-sel. Stand off, Sirrah.


Teg. In Faith I will take it now.


He throws the fellow down, and takes away the Paper, and runs out. Book-sel.
What a Devil ails this fellow?
He did not come to rob me certainly,
For he has not taken above two
Penniworth of lamentable Ware away;
But I feel the Rascal's fingers; I may light
Upon my wild Irish again, and if I do,
I will fix him with some Catchpoles that shall
Be worse than his own Country Bogs.

Enter C. Careless, C. Blunt, and Lieutenant Story. Lieu. And what say you,
noble Colonels, how and how
Do You like my Lady? I gave her the Title of Illustrious
From those Illustrious Commodities which she deals in,
Hot Water, and Tobacco.

C. Car. Prithee how come thou to think of Marrying?


Lieu. Why, that which hinders men from those
Venereal Conditions, prompted me to Matrimony,
Hunger and Cold, Colonel.

C. Car. Which you destroyed with a fat Woman,
Strong Water, and stinking Tobacco.

Lieu. No, faith, the Woman conduced but little,
But the rest could not be purchased without.

C. Car. She Is beholding to you.


Lieu. For all your mocking she had been ruined
If it had not been for me.

C. Car. Prithee make but that good?


Lieu. With ease, Sir, why look you, -- you must
Know she was always a most violent Cavalier,
And of a most ready and large Faith; abundance of
Rascals had found her soft place, and perpetually
Would bring her News, news of all prizes,
They would tell her news from half a Crown, to a
Gill of hot Water, or a Pipe of the worst Mundungo:
I have observed their usual rates; they would borrow
Half a Crown upon a story of five thousand Men up
In the North; a shilling upon a Towns revolting,
Six pence upon a small Castle, and consume hot Water
And Tobacco, whilst they were telling news of Arms,
Conveyed into several parts, and Ammunition hid
In Cellars; that at the last, if I had not married,
And blown off these flies, she had been absolutely consumed.

C. Car. Well, Lieutenant, we are beholding to you
For these hints; we may be reduced to as bad: See
Where Teg comes. Goodness, how he smiles. Enter Teg smiling.
Why so merry, Teg?

Teg. I have done one thing for thee now, that I have indeed.


C. Car. What have thou done, Man?


Teg. I have taken the Covenant for thee,
That I have upon my Soul.

C. Car. Where had it thou?


Teg. Had it thou; I threw a Fellow down, that I did,
And took it away for thy sweet sake; here it is now.

C. Car. Was there ever such a fancy? why did thou think
This was the way to take the Covenant?

Teg. Ay, upon my Soul that it is; look you there now,
Have not I taken it; is not this the Covenant?
Tell me that then I prithee.

C. Bl. I am pleased yet,
With the poor Fellows mistaken kindness;
I dare warrant him honest to the best of his understanding.

C. Car. This Fellow I prophecy will bring me into
Many troubles by his mistakes: I must send him on
No Errand but, How do you; and to such as I would have
No answer from again: -- Yet his simple honesty
Prevails with me, I cannot part with him.

Lieu. Come, Gentlemen, some calls; how now, who is this?


Enter Obadiah, with four Persons more with Papers. C. Car. I am a Rogue if I
have not seen a Picture
In hangings walk as fast.

C. Bl. 'Slife Man, this is that good Man of the Committee
Family that I told thee of, the very Clerk;
How the Rogue's loaded with Papers; Those are
The winding sheets to many a poor Gentleman's Estate:
'Twere a good deed to burn them all.

C. Car. Why, thou art not mad, art? well met Sir;
Pray do not you belong to the Committee of Sequestrations?

Obad. I do belong to that honorable Committee,
Who are now ready to sit for the bringing on the work.

C. Bl. O Plague, what work, Ras --


C. Car. Prithee be quiet, Man; are they to sit presently?


Obad. As soon as I can get ready, my presence being material.


Exit. C Car. What, were thou mad; would thou have beaten
The Clerk when thou were going to compound
With the Rascals his Masters.

C. Bl. The sight of any of the Villains stirs me.


Lieu. Come, Colonels, there is no tristing;
Let Us make haste, and prepare your business, let us not lose
This sitting, come along, along.

Exeunt. Enter Arbella at one Door. Abel at another, as if he saw her not, and
starts when he comes to her, as Ruth had taught him. Arb. What Is the meaning of
this, I Will try to steal by him.


Abel. Pardon, Mistress, my profound Contemplations,
In which I was so hid that you could not see me.

Arb. This is a set Form, -- they allow it
In every thing but their Prayers.

Abel. Now you should speak, Forsooth.


Arb. Ruth, I have found you;
But I Will spoil the Dialogue. Aside.
-- What should I say, Sir?

Abel. What you please, Forsooth.


Arb. Why, truly, Sir, it is as you say; I did not see you.


Enter Ruth as over hearing them, and Peeps. Ruth. This is lucky.


Abel. No, Forsooth, 'twas I that was not to see you.


Arb. Why, Sir, would your Mother be angry if you should?


Abel. No, no, quite contrary, -- I Will tell you that presently;
But first I must say, that the weighty affairs lie
Heavy upon my Neck and Shoulders.

Shrugs. Arb. Would he were tied Neck and Heels? Aside.
This is a notable Wench; look where the Rascal peeps too;
If I should becken to her she would take no notice;
She Is resolved not to relieve me.

Aside. Ab. Something I can do, and that with some body;
That is, with those that are some bodies.

Arb. Whist, whist, Beckons to Ruth, and she shakes her head.
Prithee have some pity?
O unmerciful Girl.

Abel. I know Parliament Men, and Sequestrators;
I know Committee Men, and Committee Men know me.

Arb. You have great acquaintance, Sir?


Abel. Yes, they ask my opinion sometimes.


Arb. What weather 'twill be; have you any skill, Sir?


Abel. When the weather is not good, we hold a Fast.


Arb. And then it alters.


Abel. Assuredly.


Arb. In good time -- no mercy, Wench.


Abel. Our profound Contemplations
Are caused by the constervation of our Spirits
For the Nations good, we are in labor.

Arb. And I want a deliverance. Hark ye, Ruth,
Take off your Dog, or I Will turn Bear indeed.

Ruth. I dare not, my Mother will be angry.


Arb. O hang you.


Ab. You shall perceive that I have some power,
If you please to --

Arb. O I am pleased! Sir, that you should have power;
I must look out my Hoods and Scarfs, Sir, it is a most time to go.

Ab. If it were not for the weighty matters of State
Which lie upon my shoulders, my self would look them.

Arb. O by no means, Sir, it is below your greatness:
Some luck yet; she never came seasonably before.

Enter Mrs. Day. Mrs. Day. Why how now, Abel got so close to Mrs. Arbella,
So close indeed; nay then I smell something:
Well, Mr. Abel, you have been so used to secrecy
In Council and weighty matters, that you have it
At your Fingers ends: Nay, look ye Mistress, look ye,
Look ye; mark Abel's Eyes: ah, there be looks.
Ruth thou art a good Girl, I find Abel has got ground.

Ruth. I forbore to come in, till I saw your honor
First enter; but I have o'r heard all.

Mrs. Day. And how has Abel behaved himself, Wench, ha?


Ruth. O beyond expectation: if it were lawful, I Would undertake
He Would make nothing to get as many Women's good
Wills as he speaks to; he will not need much teaching,
You may turn him loose.

Arb. O this plaguey Wench!


Mrs. Day. Say thou so Girl, it shall be something
In thy way; a new Gown, or so, it may be a better penny:
Well said, Abel, I say, I did think thou would come
Out with a piece of thy Mothers at last: --
But I had forgot, the Committee are near upon sitting.
Ha, Mrs. you are crafty; you have made your
Composition beforehand. Ah, this Abel's as bad
As a whole Committee: Take that Item from me;
Come, make haste, call the Coach, Abel; well said, Abel, I say.

Arb. We'll fetch our things and follow you. Exit Mrs. Day and Abel.
Now Wench, can thou ever hope to be forgiven:

Ruth. Why, what is the matter?


Arb. The matter; coud'st thou be so unmerciful,
To see me practiced on, and pelted at, by a Blunderbuss
Charged with nothing but proofs, weighty affairs,
Spirit, profound Contemplation, and such like.

Ruth. Why, I was afraid to interrupt you; I thought
It convenient to give you what time I could,
To make his young honor your Friend.

Arb. I am beholding to you, I may cry quittance.


Ruth. But did you mark Abel's Eyes?
Ah, there were looks!

Arb. Nay, prithee give off, my hour's approaching,
And I cannot be heartily merry till it be past:
Come, let us fetch our things,
Her Ladyships Honor will stay for us.

Ruth. I Will warrant ye my Brethren, Abel is not in order yet,
He Is brushing a Hat almost a quarter of an hour,
And as long a driving the lint from his black Clothes,
With his wet Thumb.

Arb. Come, prithee hold thy peace,
I shall laugh in's Face else when I see him come along:
Now for an old Shoe.

Exeunt. A Table set out. Enter the Committee as to sit, and Obadiah ordering
Books and Paper. Obad. Shall I read your Honors last Order, and give you
The account of what you last debated?

Mr. Day. I first crave your favors to communicate an
Important matter to this honorable Board, in which I shall
Discover unto you my own sincerity
And zeal to the good Cause.

1. Proceed, Sir.

Mr. Day. The business is contained in this Letter, it is from
No less a Man than the King; and it is to me, as simple as I sit
Here: Is it your pleasures that our Clerk should read it?

2. Yes, pray give it him.

Obad. Reads. Mr. Day,
We have received good intelligence of your great worth,
And ability, especially in State-matters; and therefore thought
Fit to offer you any preferment, or honor, that you shall desire,
If you will become my entire Friend: Pray remember my
Love and Service to your discreet Wife, and acquaint her
With this; whose wisdom I hear is great: so recommending
This to her and your wise consideration, I remain
Your Friend, C. K.



2. C. K.

Mr. Day. I, that is for the King.

2. I suspect who brought you this Letter.

Mr. Day. O fie upon it, my Wife forgot that particular. --
Why, a Fellow left it for me, and shrunk away when he had
Done, I warrant you he was afraid I should have laid hold
On him: You see Brethren what I reject; but I doubt not
But to receive my reward: and I have now a business
To offer, which in some measure may afford you an occasion.

2. This Letter was counterfeited certainly.

Mr. Day. But first be pleased to read your last order.

2. What does he mean that concerns me?

Obad. The order is, that the Composition arising out of
Mr. Lashley's Estate, be and hereby is invested and allowed to
The honorable Mr. Nathaniel Catch,
For and in respect of his sufferings and good service.

Mr. Day. It is meet, very meet, we are bound
In duty to strengthen our selves against the day of trouble,
When the common Enemy shall endeavor to raise
Commotions in the Land,
And disturb our new built Zion.

2. Then I Will say nothing, but close with him, we must
Wink at one another; I receive your sense
Of my services with a zealous kindness. Now, Mr. Day,
I pray you propose your business.

Mr. Day. I desire this honorable Board to understand,
That my Wife being at Redding, and to come up in
The Stage Coach: It happened that one Mrs. Arbella,
A rich Heir of one of the Cavalier Party, came up also in,
The same Coach; her Father being newly dead, and her
Estate before being under Sequestration: My Wife, who
Has a notable pate of her own; you all know her;
Presently cast about to get her for my Son Abel;
And accordingly invited her to my House; where, though
Time was but short, yet my Son Abel made use of it:
They are without, as I suppose; but
Before we call them in, I pray let us handle
Such other matters as are before us.

1. Let us hear then what Estates besides
Lies before us, that we may see how large a
Field we have to walk in.

2. Read.

Obad. One of your last Debates was upon the Plea
Of an Infant, whose Estate is under Sequestration.

Mr. Day. And sit to be kept so till he comes of Age,
And may answer for himself; that he may not
Be in possession of the Land till he can promise
He will not turn to the Enemy.

Obad. Here is another of almost the like nature;
An Estate before your Honors under Sequestration:
The Plea is, That the Party died without any --
For taking up Arms; but in his Opinion for the King:
He has left his Widow with Child, which will
Be the Heir; and his Trustees complain of wrong,
And claim the Estate.

2. Well, the Father in his Opinion was a Cavalier.

Obad. So it is given in.


2 C. Nay, 'twas so I warrant you, and there is a young
Cavalier in his Widows Belly; I warrant you that too;
For the perverse Generation increases; I move
Therefore that their two Estates may remain in the hands
Of our Brethren here, and Fellow Laborers,
Mr. Joseph Blemish, and Mr. Jonathan Headstrong,
And Mr. Ezekiel Scrape, and they to be accountable
At our pleasures; whereby they may have a godly
Opportunity of doing good for themselves.

Mr. Day. Order it, order it.

3. Since it is your pleasures, we are content
To take the burden upon us, and be
Stewards to the Nation.

2. Now verily it seems to me
That the work goes forward, when Brethren
Hold together in Unity.

Mr. Day. Well, if we have now finished, give me leave
To tell you, my Wife is without, together with
The Gentlewoman that is to compound: She will
Needs have a Finger in the Pie.

3. I profess we are to blame to let Mrs. Day wait so long.

Mr. Day. We may not neglect the public for private
Respects. I hope Brethren, that you please to cast the
Favor of your Countenances upon Abel.

2, 3. You wrong us to doubt it, Brother Day.
Call in the Compounders.

Enters Mrs. Day, Abel, Arbella, Ruth, and after them the Colonels, and Teg;
they give the Doorkeeper something, who seems to scrape. Mr. Day. Come, Duck,
I have told the honorable Committee
That you are one that will needs endeavor
To do good for this Gentlewoman.

2. We are glad, Mrs. Day, that any occasion brings you hither.

Mrs. Day. I thank your honors. I am desirous of doing
Good, which I know is always acceptable in your Eyes.

Mr. Day. Come on Son Abel, what have you to say?


Abel. I come unto your Honors, full of profound
Contemplations for this Gentlewoman.

Arb. 'Slife, he is at's lessen, Wench.


Ruth. Peace, which Whelp opens next?
O the Wolf is going to bark.

Mrs. Day. May it please your Honors, I shall presume
To inform you, that my Son Abel has settled his affections
On this Gentlewoman, and desires your Honors favor
To be shown unto him in her Composition.

2. C. Say you so, Mrs. Day? why the Committee have taken
It into their serious, and pious consideration; together
With Mr. Day's good service, upon some knowledge
That is not fit to communicate.

Mrs. Day. That was the Letter I invented.


Aside. 2 C. And the composition of this Gentlewoman is consigned
To Mr. Day, that is, I suppose, to Mr. Abel, and so consequently
To the Gentlewoman. You may be thankful, Mistress,
For such good fortune, your Estate's discharged,
Mr. Day shall have the discharge.

C. Bl. O dam the Vultures!


C. Care. Peace Man.


Arb. I am willing to be thankful when I understand the
Benefit. I have no reason to compound for what is my own;
But if I must, if a Woman can be a Delinquent,
I desire to know my public censure,
Not be left in private hands.

2 C. Be contented, Gentlewoman, the Committee does this
In favor of you; we understand how easily you
Can satisfy Mr. Abel; you may, if you please, by Mrs. Day.

Ruth. And then good night to all.


Aside. Arb. How, Gentlemen! are you private marriage Jobbers,
Do You make markets for one another?

2 C. How Is this Gentlewoman?


C. Bl. A brave noble Creature.


C. Car. Thou art smitten, Blunt; that other Female too,
Methinks shoots fire this way.

Mrs. Day. I desire your Honors to pardon
Her incessant words; perhaps she does not imagine
The good that is intended her?

2 C. Gentlewoman, the Committee for Mrs. Day's sake
Passes by your expressions; you may spare your pains,
You have the Committees resolution, you may
Be your own Enemy if you will.

Arb. My own Enemy.


Ruth. Prithee peace, it is to no purpose to wrangle here;
We must use other ways.

^. C. Come on, Gentlemen, what is your case?


Ruth. Arbella, there is the downright Cavalier
That came up in the Coach with us.
-- On my Life there is a sprightly Gentleman with him.

C. Care. Our business is to compound for our Estates. While they speak, the
Colonels pull the Papers out and deliver 'em.
Of which here are the particulars,
Which will agree with your own Survey.

Obad. The particulars are right.


Mr. Day. Well, Gentlemen, the rule is two years purchase,
The first payment down, the other at six months end,
And the Estate to secure it.

C. Car. Can you afford it no cheaper?


2 C. It Is our rule.


C. Car. Very well, it is but selling the rest to pay this,
And our more lawful debts.

2. But, Gentlemen, before you are admitted,
You are to take the Covenant;
You have not taken it yet, have you.

C. Car No.


Teg. Upon my Soul but he has now; I took it for him,
And he has taken it from me, that he has.

Ruth. What sport are we now like to have?


2 C. What Fellow's that?


C. Car. A poor simple Fellow that serves me. Peace, Teg.


Teg. Let them not prate so then.


2 C. Well, Gentlemen, it remains
Whether you will take the Covenant?

C. Car. This is strange, and differs from your own Principle,
To impose on other Men's Consciences.

Mr. Day. Pish, we are not here to dispute, we act
According to our instructions, and we cannot admit any
To compound without taking it; therefore your answer.

Teg. Why was it for no matter then that I have taken
The Covenant. You there, Mr. Committee,
Do you hear that now?

C. Car. No, we will not take it, much good may it do them
That have swallows large enough;
'Twill work one day in their Stomachs.

Cl. Bl. The day may come, when those that suffer for their
Consciences and honor may be rewarded.

Mr. Day. I, I, you make an Idol of that honor.


C. Bl. Our Worships then are different, you make that
Your Idol which brings your Interest;
We can obey that which bids us lose it.

Arb. Brave Gentlemen.


Ruth. I stare at 'em till my Eyes ache.


2 C. Gentlemen, you are men of dangerous Spirits,
Know, we must keep our rules, and instructions, lest we
Lose what providence has put into our hands.

C Care. Providence, such as Thieves rob by?


2. C. What Is that, Sir, Sir, you are too bold?


C. Car. Why in good sooth you may give losers
Leave to speak; I hope your Honors out of your bowels of
Compassion, will permit us to take over our departing Acres.

Mr. Day. It is well you are so merry.


C. Car. O, ever whilst you live, clear souls make light hearts;
Faith, would I might ask one question?

2 C. Swear not then.


C Car. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Goods;
There Is a Rowland for your Oliver; my question is only,
Which of all you is to have our Estates: or will you
Make Traitors of them, draw 'em, and quarter them.

2 C. You grow abusive.


C. Bl. No, no, it is only to entreat the honorable persons
That will be pleased to be our Housekeepers, to keep them
In good Reparations; we may take possession again
Without the help of the Covenant.

2 C. You will think better on it, and take this Covenant.


C. Car. We will be as rotten first as their hearts
That invented it.

Ruth. 'Slife, Arbella, we will have these two men;
There are not two such again, to be had for love nor money.

Mr. Day. Well, Gentlemen, your follies light upon your
Own heads; we have no more to say.

C. Car. Why then hoist Sails for a new World:
D'hear, Blunt, what Gentlewoman is that?

C. Bl. It Is their witty Daughter I told thee of.


C. Car. I Will go to speak to 'em, I Would fain convert
That pretty Covenanter.

C. Bl. Nay, prithee let us go.


C. Car. Lady, I hope you will have that good fortune,
Not to be troubled with the Covenant.

Arb. If they do, I Will not take it.


C. Bl. Brave Lady, I must love her against my will.


C. Car. For you, pretty one, I hope your Portion will
Be enlarged by our Misfortunes; remember your benefactors.

Ruth. If I had all your Estates,
I could afford you as good a thing.

C. Car. Without taking the Covenant?


Ruth. Yes, but I would invent another Oath.


C. Car. Upon your Lips.


Ruth. Nay, I am not bound to discover.


C. Bl. Prithee come, is this a time to spend in fooling?


C. Car. Now have I forgot every thing.


C. Bl. Come, let us go.

2. Gentlemen, void the Room.

C Car. Sure it is impossible that Kite
Should get that pretty Merlin.

C. Bl. Come, prithee let us go; these Muck-worms will have
Earth enough to stop their mouths with one day.

C. Car. Pray use our Estates husband-like, and so our
Most honorable Bailiffs, farewell.

Mr. Day. You are rude: Doorkeeper, put 'em forth there.


Keep. Come forth, ye there; this is not a place for such as you.


Teg. Ye are a Rascal, that you are now.


Keep. And please your Honors, this profane Irishman swore
An Oath at the door, even now, when I
Would have put him out.

2 C. Let him pay for it.


Keep. Here, you must pay, or lie by the heels.


Teg. What must I pay, by the heels? I will not pay by
^^ h^^^s, that I will not, upon my soul

(...). Here, here is a Shilling for thee, be quiet. --


Exeunt. (...). Well, I have not cursed you now, that I have not:
(...) (...) I had cursed then?

Keep. That had been Sixpence.


Teg. Upon my soul now, I have but one Sixpence, that I
^ ^ave not: Here, though, I will give it thee for a Curse; there
Mr. Committee, now there is Sixpence for the Curse beforehand,
Mr. Committee, and a Plague take you all.

Runs out. Ruth. Hark ye, Arbella, 'twere a sin not to love these men.


Arb. I am not guilty, Ruth.


Mrs. Day. Has this honorable Board any other Command.


2 C. Nothing farther, good Mrs. Day: Gentlewoman,
You have nothing to care for, but be grateful
And kind to Mr. Abel.

Arb. I desire to know what I must directly trust to,
Or I will complain.

Mrs. Day. The Gentlewoman needs not doubt, she shall
Suddenly perceive the good that is intended her,
If she does not interpose in her own light.

Mr. Day. I pray withdraw; the Committee has passed their
Order, and they must now be private --

2 Com. Nay, pray, Mistress, withdraw -- So, Brethren, we have
Finished this day's work; and let us always keep
The Bonds of Unity unbroken, walking hand in
Hand, and scattering the Enemy.

Mr. Day. You may perceive they have Spirits never to be
Reconciled; they walk according to Nature, and are
Full of inward darkness.

2 Com. It is well truly for the good people, that they
Are so obstinate, whereby their Estates may
Of right fall into the hands of the chosen, which
Truly is a mercy.

Mr. Day. I think there remains nothing farther,
But to adjourn till Monday: Take up the
Papers there, and bring home to me their
Honors Order for Mrs. Arbella's Estate: So,
Brethren, we separate our selves to our
Particular endeavors, till we join in
Public on Monday, two of the Clock;
And so Peace remain with you.

Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Col. Careless, Col. Blunt, and Lieutenant. Lieu. BY my faith, a sad Story: I
did apprehend this Covenant
Would be the Trap.

C. Car. Never did any Rebels fish with such Cormorants; no
Stoppage about their throats; the Rascals are all swallow.

C. Bl. Now am I ready for any Plot; I Will go find some of these
Agitants, and fill up a blank Commission with my Name.
And if I can but find two or three gathered together,
They are sure of me; I will please my self, however,
With endeavoring to cut their throats.

C. Car. Or do something to make them hang us, that we may
But part on any terms: Nothing angered me but that
My old Kitchen-stuff-acquaintance looked another
Way, and seemed not to know me.

C. Bl. How, Kitchen-stuff acquaintance!


C. Car. Yes, Mrs Day, that commanded the Party in the
Hackney-Coach, was my Father's Kitchen-maid, and in
Time of yore called Gillian. How now, Teg? Enter Teg.
What says the Learned?

Teg. Well then, upon my Soul, the Man in the great
Cloak, with the long Sleeves, is mad, that he is.

C. Car. Mad, Teg!


Teg. Yes in faith is he; he bid me be gone, and said I was sent
To mock him.

C. Car. Why, what did thou say to him?


Teg. Well now, I did ask him if he would take any Counsel.


C. Car. 'Slife, he might well enough think thou mock'st him.
Why, thou should have asked him when we might have
Come for Counsel.

Teg. Well, that is all one, is it not? If he would take any
Counsel, or you would take any Counsel, is not that all one then?

C. Car. Was there ever such a mistake?


C Bl. Prithee never be troubled at this; we are past Counsel:
If we had but a Friend amongst them, that could but slide
Us by this Covenant.

Lieu. Hark ye, Colonel; what if you did visit this translated
Kitchen-maid?

Teg. Well, how is that? a Kitchen-maid? where is she now?


C. Bl. The Lieutenant advises well.


C. Car. Nay, stay, stay; in the first place I Will send Teg to her
To tell her I have a little business with her, and desire
To know when I may have leave to wait on her.

C. Bl. We shall have Teg mistake again.


Teg. How is that so? I will not mistake that Kitchen-maid?
Whither must I go now, to mistake that Kitchen-maid?

C Car. But d'hear, Teg? you must take no notice of that, upon
Thy Life; but on the contrary, at every word you must say,
Your Ladyship, and your Honor; as for Example, when you have
Made a Leg, you must begin thus; My Master presents
His service to your Ladyship, and having some business with
Your Honor, desires to know when he may have leave
To wait upon your Ladyship.

Teg. Well, that I will do: But was she
Your Father's Kitchen-maid?

C Car. Why, what then?


Teg. Upon my Soul I shall laugh upon her Face, for all
I would not have a mind to do it.

C. Car. Not for a hundred pounds, Teg; you must be sure to
Set your Countenance, and look very soberly before you begin.

Teg. If I should think then of any Kettles, or Spits, or
Any thing that will put a mind into my head of a
Kitchen, I should laugh then, should I not?

C. Car. Not for a thousand pounds, Teg; thou may undo us all.


Teg. Well, I will hope I will not laugh then? I will
Keep my mouth if I can, that I will, from running
To one side, and 'tother side: well now, where does
This Mrs. Tay live?

Lieu. Come, Teg, I Will walk along with thee, and show thee
The house, that thou may not mistake that however;

Exeunt Lieutenant and Teg. C. Car. Prithee do, Lieutenant, have a care, Teg,
Thou shall find us in the Temple. Now, Blunt, have I
Another design.

C. Bl. What further design can thou have?


C. Car. Why by this means I may chance see these women
Again, and get into their acquaintance.

C. Bl. With both, man?


C. Car. 'Slife thou art jealous, do love either of 'em?


C. Bl. Nay, I cannot tell, all is not as 'twas.


C. Car. Like a man that is not well, and yet knows
Not what ailes him.

C. Bl. Thou art something near the matter: but I Will
Cure my self with considering, that no woman can
Ever care for me.

C. Car. And why prithee?


C. Bl. Because I can say nothing to them.


C. Car. The less thou can say, they will like thee the better*
She Will think it is Love that has ham-string'd thy tongue:
Besides man, a woman cannot abide that any thing
In the house should talk, but she and her Parrot;
What it is the Cavalier girl thou like?

C. Bl. Can thou love any of the other Breed.


C. Car. Not honestly, -- yet I confess that ill-begotten
Pretty Rascal never looked toward me, but
She scattered sparks as fast as kindling Charcoale;
Thine's grown already to an honest flame: Come,
Blunt, when Teg comes we will resolve on something.

Exeunt. Enter Arbella and Ruth. Arb. Come now, a word of our own matters; how
do
Thou hope to get thy Estate again.

Ruth. You shall drink first; I was just going to ask you,
How you would get yours again; you are as fast as if
You were under Covert-barne.

Arb. But I have more hopes than thou have.


Ruth. Not a scruple more; if there were but scales
That could weigh hopes; for these Rascals must be hanged
Before either of us shall get our own; you may eat and drink
Out of yours as I do, and be a sojourner with Abel.

Arb. I am hampered, but I Will entangle my self
With Mr. Abel's conjugal cords: nay -- I am more
Hampered than thou think; for if thou art in as bad
Case as I (you understand me) hold up thy finger.

Ruth holds up her finger. Ruth. Behold, nay, I Will never forsake thee, if I
were not
Smitten, I would persuade my self to be in love,
If 'twere but to bear thee company.

Arb. Dear girl, hark ye, Ruth, the composition day
Made an end of all; all is ago.

Ruth. Nay, that fatal day put me into the condition
Of a Compounder too; there was my heart brought
Under sequestration.

Arb. That day, wench?


Ruth. Yes, that very day with two or three forceable
Looks 'twas driven an inch at least out of its old place;
Sense or reason cannot find the way to it now.

Arb. That day, that very day, if you and I should like
The same man?

Ruth. Fie upon it, as I live thou make me start;
Now dare not I ask which thou like.

Arb. Would they were now to come in that we might
Watch one another eyes, and discover by signs;
I am not able to ask thee neither.

Ruth. Nor I to tell thee; shall we go ask Lilly which it is?


Arb. Out upon him; nay, there is no need of Stars;
We know our selves if we durst speak.

Ruth. Pish, I Will speak if it be the same, we will draw cuts.


Arb. No, hark ye, Ruth, do you act them both,
For you saw their several humors, and then watch my
Eyes, where I appear most concerned;
I cannot dissemble for my heart.

Ruth. I dare swear that will hinder thee to dissemble
Indeed, -- Come have at you then, I Will speak as if I were
Before the honorable rascals: And first, for my brave
Blunt Colonel, who hating to take the Oath, cried out
With a brave scorn (such as made thee in love I hope)
Hang your selves, rascals, the time will come when those
That dare be honest will be rewarded; don't
I act him bravely, don't I act him bravely?

Arb. O admirably well, dear wench, do it once more.


Ruth. Nay, nay, I must do the 'tother now.


Arb. No, no, this once more, dear girl, and I Will
Act the 'tother for thee.

Ruth. No forsooth, I Will spare your pains, we are right,
No need of Cuts, send thee good luck with him I acted,
And wish me well with my merry Colonel
That shall act his own part.

Arb. And a thousand good lucks attend thee;
We have saved our blushes admirably well, and relieved
Our hearts from hard duty -- but mum, see where the Mother
Comes, and with her, her Son, a true exemplification or
Duplicate of the original Day. Now for a charge.

Enter Mrs. Day and Abel. Ruth. Stand fair, the Enemy draws up.


Mrs. Day. Well, Mrs. Arbella, I hope you have considered
Enough by this time; you need not use so much consideration
For your own good; you may have your Estate, and you
May have Abel, and you may be worse offered.
Abel, tell her your mind, never stand, shall I, shall I --
Ruth, does she incline, or is she wilful?

Ruth. I was just about the point when your Honor
Interrupted us. -- One word in your Ladyships ear.

Abel. You see forsooth that I am some body, though you
Make no body of me, you see I can prevail; therefore
Pray say what I shall trust to;
For I must not stand, shall I, shall I.

Arb. You are hasty, Sir.


Abel. I am called upon by Important affairs;
And therefore I must be bold in a fair way to tell you that
It lies upon my spirit exceedingly.

Arb. Saffron-posset-drink is very good against
The heaviness of the Spirit.

Abel. Nay, forsooth, you do not understand my meaning


Arb. You do, I hope, Sir; and it is no matter,
Sir, if one of us know it.

Enter Teg. Teg. Well, know? who are all you?


Arb. What Is here, an Irish Elder come to examine us all.


Teg. Well know, what is your names, ever one?


Ruth. Arbella, this is a Servant to one of the Colonels; upon
My life, it is the Irishman that took the Covenant
The right way.

Arb. Peace, what should it mean?


Teg. Well, cannot some of you all say nothing?


Mrs. Day. Why how now sauce-box? what would you have?
What have you left your manners without? go
Our and fetch 'em in.

Teg. What should I fetch now?


Mrs. Day Do You know who you speak to, Sirrah?


Teg. Well, what are you then? upon my soul
In my own Country they can tell who I am.

Abel. You must not be so saucy unto her Honor.


Teg. Well, I will knock you, if you be saucy with me then.


Ruth. This is miraculous.


Teg. Is there none of you that I must speak to now?


Arb. Now, wench, if he should be sent to us.


Aside. Teg. Well I would have one Mrs. Tay speak unto me.


Mrs. Day. Well, Sirrah, I am she: what is your business?


Teg. O so then, are you Mrs. Tay?
Well, I will look well first,
And I will set my face in some worship; yes indeed that I will;
And I will tell her then what I will speak to her.

Ruth. How the fellow begins to mould himself.


Arb. And tempers his Chops like a hound that has lap'd
Before his meat was cold enough.

Ruth. He looks as if he had some gifts to pour forth;
Those are Mr. Day's own white eyes before he begins
To say grace: now for a speech rattling in his kecher,
As if his words stumbled in their way.

Teg. Well, now I will tell thee, In Faith my Master
The good Colonel Careless, bid me ask thy good Ladyship --
Upon my soul now the laugh will come upon me.

He laughs always when he says Ladyship or Honor. Mrs. Day. Sirrah, sirrah,
what were you sent to abuse me?


Ruth. As sure as can be.


Aside. Teg. I'saith now I do not abuse thy good Hon. I cannot
Help my laugh now, I will try again now; I will not
Think of a Kitchen then: my master would know
Of your Ladyship --

Mrs. Day. Did your Master send you to abuse me, you
Rascal: By my honor, Sirrah?

Teg. Why do thou mock thy self now joy?


Mrs. Day. How, Sirrah, do I mock my self?
This is some Irish Traitor.

Teg. I am no Traitor, that I am not; I am an Irish
Rebel; you are cozened now.

Mrs. Day. Sirrah, Sirrah, I will make you know who
I am, an impudent Irish Rascal.

Abel. He seems a dangerous Fellow, and of a bold and
Seditious Spirit.

Mrs. Day. You are a bloody Rascal, I warrant ye.


Teg. You are a foolish brabble bribble Woman, that you are.


Abel. Sirrah, we that are at the head of affairs
Must punish your Sauciness.

Teg. You shall take a knock upon your Pate, if you are
Saucy with me, that I shall; you Son of a Roundhead, you.

Mrs. Day. Ye Rascally Varlet, get you out of my Doors.


Teg. Will not I give you my Message then?


Mrs. Day. Get you out, Rascal?


Teg. I prithee let me tell thee my Message?


Mrs. Day. Get you out, I say.


Teg. Well then I care not neither; the Devil take
Your Ladyship, and Honourship, and Kitchenship too: there now.

Exit. Arb. Was there ever such a Scene? it is impossible
To guess any thing.

Ruth. Our Colonels have don't, as sure as thou live, to
Make themselves sport; being all the revenge that is in
Their power: look, look, how her Honor trots about,
Like a Beast stung with Flies.

Mrs. Day. How the Villain has distempered me!
Out upon it too, that I have let the Rascal go unpublish'd,
And you can stand by like a Sheep: run after him then, and
Stop him; I Will have him laid by the heels, and
Make him confess who sent him to abuse me:
Call help as you go, make haste I say.

Exit Abel. Ruth. 'Slid Arbella, run after him, and save the poor
Fellow for Sakes sake; Stop Abel by any means,
That he may escape.

Arb. Keep his Dam off, and let me alone with the Puppy.


Exit. Ruth Fear not.


Mrs. Day. 'Uds my Life, the Rascal has heated me. -- Now I
Think on it, I Will go my self, and see it done: a saucy Villain.

Ruth. But I must needs acquaint your Honor with one thing
^^^st concerning Mrs. Arbella.

Mrs. Day. As soon as ever I have done. Is It good news, Wench?


Ruth. Most Excellent; if you go out you may spoil all;
Such a discovery I have made, that you will bless
The accident that angered you.

Mrs. Day. Quickly then, Girl.


Ruth. When you sent Abel after the Irishman,
Mrs. Arbella's Color came and went in her Face, and at last
Not able to stay, slunk away after him for fear the Irishman
Should hurt him: she stole away and blushed the prettiest.

Mrs. Day. I protest he may be hurt indeed; I Will run my self too.


Ruth. By no means, forsooth; nor is there any need on it;
For the resolved to stop him before he could
Get near the Irishman; she has done it upon my Life;
And if you should go out you might spoil the kindest
Encounter that the loving Abel is ever like to have.

Mrs. Day. Art sure of this?


Ruth. If you do not find she has stopped him,
Let me ever have your hatred; pray credit me.

Mrs. Day. I do, I do believe thee; come, we'll go in where
I use to read: there thou shall tell me all the particulars,
And the manner of it: I warrant 'twas pretty to observe.

Ruth. O, 'twas a thousand pities you did not see it,
When Abel walk'^ away so bravely, and foolishly after this
Wild Irishman: She stole such kind looks from her
Own Eyes; and having robbed her self, sent them after
Her own Abel; and then --

Mrs. Day Come, good Wench, I Will go in, and hear it all at
Large; it shall be the best tale thou have told these two days.
Come, come, I long to hear all. Abel for his part needs
No News by this time, come, good Wench.

Exit. Ruth. So far I am right; Fortune take care for future things.


Enter C. Blunt as taken by Bailiffs. C. Bl. At whose Suit, Rascals?


1 B* You shall know that time enough.


C. Bl. Time enough, Dogs; must I wait your leisures?


1 B. O you are a dangerous Man; it is such Traitors as you
That disturb the Peace of the Nation.

C. Bl. Take that, Rascal: if I had any thing at liberty
Besides my Foot, I would bestow it on you.

1 B. You shall pay dearly for this kick before you are
Let loose, and give good special Bail: Mark that, my
Surly Companion; we have you fast.

C. Bl. It Is well, Rogues, you caught me conveniently;
Had I been aware I would have made some of your scurvy
Souls my special Bail.

1 B. O, it is a bloody-minded Man; I Will warrant ye this
Vile Cavalier has eat many a Child.

C. Bl. I could gnaw a piece or two of you, Rascals.


Enter C. Careless. C. Car. How is this! Blunt in hold! you Catchpole,
Let go your prey, or --

Draws, and Blunt in the scu^^^e throws up one of their heels, and gets a
Sword, and helps drive them off. 1 B* Murder, Murder.


C. Bl. Faith, Careless, this was worth thanks, I was fairly going.


C. Car. What was the matter, Man?


C. Bl. Why, an Action or two for Free Quarter, now made
Trover and Conversion: Nay, I believe we shall be sued
With an Action of Trespass; for every Field we have
Marched over, and be indicted for Riots, for going at
Unseasonable hours, above two in a Company.

Enter Teg running. C. Car. Well come, let us away.


Teg. Now upon my Soul run as I do; the Men in red
Coats are running too, that they are, and they cry, Murder,
Murder, I never heard such a noise in Ireland, that is true too.

C. Car. 'Slife we must shift several ways.
Farewell, if we escape we meet at night; I shall
Take heed now.

Teg. Shall I tell of Mrs. Tay now?


C. Car. O good Teg, no time for Messages.


Exeunt several ways. Enter Bailiffs and Souidiers. A noise within. 1 B. This
way, this way; Oh Villains, my Neighbor
^^^sh is hurt dangerously;
Some good Soldiers, follow, follow.

Enter Careless and Teg again. C. Car. I am quite out of breath, and the Blood
Hounds
Are in a full cry upon a burning scent: Plague on 'em,
What a noise the Kennels make? what Door's this
That graciously stands a little open? what an Ass am I to ask?
Teg, Scout abroad; if any thing happens extraordinary,
Observe this Door; there you shall find me: be careful,
Now by your favor, Landlord, as unknown.

Exeunt severally. Enter Mrs. Day and Obadiah. Mrs. Day. It was well observed,
Obadiah, to bring the
Parties to me first, it is your Master's will that I should, as I
May say, prepare matters for him; in truth, in truth
I have too great a burden upon me: yet for the public
Good I am content to undergo it.

Obad. I shall with sincere care present unto your Honor
From time to time such negotiations as I may discreetly
Presume may be material for your Honors inspection.

Mrs. Day. It will become you so to do, you have the
Present that came last.

Obad. Yes, and please your Honor; the Gentleman
Concerning her Brothers release, has also
Sent in a piece of Plate.

Mrs. Day. It Is very well.


Obad. But the Man without, about a bargain of the Kings
Land, is come empty.

Mrs. Day. Bid him be gone, I Will not speak with him;
He does not understand himself.

Obad. I shall intimate so much to him.


As Obadiah goes out, C. Careless meets him and tumbles him back. Mrs. Day. Why
how now? what rude Companion's this?
What would you have (what is your business? what is the
Matter? who sent you? who do you belong to? who! --

C Car. Hold, hold, if you mean to be answered to all
These Interrogatories, you see I resolve to be your Companion;
I am a Man, there is no great matter, no body sent me; nor I
Belong to no body: I think I have answered to the chief Heads.

Mrs. Day. Thou have committed murder for ought I know?
How is it, Obadiah?

C. Car. Ha, what luck have I to fall into the Territories
Of my old Kitchen acquaintance; I Will proceed upon the
Strength of Teg's Message, though I had no answer.

Mrs. Day. How is it, Man?


Obad. Truly he came forceably upon me, and I fear
Has bruised some intellectuals within my Stomach.

Ex. Oba. Mrs. Day. Go in and take some Irish Slat by way of
Prevention, and keep your self warm. Now, Sir, have you
Any business, you that came in so rudely as if you did not
Know who you came to. How came you in, Sir Royster?
Was not the Porter at the Gate?

C. Car. No truly, the Gate kept it self, and stood gaping
As if it had a mind to speak, and say, I pray come in.

Mrs. Day. Did it so, Sir? and what have you to say?


C. Car. I, there is the point; either she does not, or will
Not know me: What should I say? how dull am I? Pox on it,
This wit is like a common Friend, when one has need on him,
He will not come near one.

Mrs. Day. Sir, are you studying for an invention? for ought
I know you have done some mischief,
And 'twere sit to secure you?

C. Care. So that is well, 'twas pretty to fall into the head
Quarter of the Enemy.

Mrs. Day. Nay, it is e'n so, I Will fetch
Those that shall examine you.

C. Car. Stay, thou mighty States-woman, I did but
Give you time to see if your memory would but be so
Honest, as to tell you who I am.

Mrs. Day. What do you mean, Sauce-box?


C. Car. There Is a word yet of thy former employments,
That Sauce: you and I have been acquainted.

Mrs. Day. I do not use to have acquaintance with Cavaliers.


C. Car. Nor I with Committee-mens Utensils; but in
Diebus illis, you were not Honorable, nor I a Malignant.
Lord, Lord, you are horrible forgetful, Pride comes with
Godliness, and good Clothes; what, you think I should
Not know you, because you are disguised with curled Hair,
And white Gloves. Alas, I know you as well as if you were
In your Sabbath Days Cinnamon Waistcoat, with a silver
Edging round the Skirt.

Mrs. Day. How, Sirrah?


C. Car. And with your fair hands bathed in Lather, or
With your fragrant Breath, driving the fleeting
Ambergreece off from the waving Kitchenstuff.

Mrs. Day. O, you are an impudent Cavalier! I remember
You now indeed; but I Will --

C. Car. Nay, but hark you the now Honorable,
Non obstante past conditions; did not I send my Fool Man,
An Irishman, with a civil Message to you;
Why all this strangeness then.

Mrs. Day. How, how, how is this; was it you that sent
That Rascal to abuse me, was it so.

C. Car. How now! what, matters grow worse and worse?


Mrs. Day. I Will teach you to abuse those that are in
Authority: Within there, who is within?

C. Car. 'Slife, I Will stop your mouth, if you raise an Alarm.


Cries out, and he stops her mouth* Mrs. Day. Stop my mouth, Sirrah, whoo,
whoo, ho.


C. Car. Yes, stop your mouth, what are you good at a
Who, bub, ha.

Enter Ruth. Ruth. What Is the matter, Forsooth.


Mrs. Day. The matter? why here is a rude Cavalier has
Broke into my House; 'twas he too that sent the Irish Rascal
To abuse me too within my own Walls: Call your Father, that
He may grant his Order to secure him. It Is a dangerous Fellow.

C. Car. Nay, good pretty Gentlewoman, spare your motion,
What must become of me? Teg has made some strange mistake.

Ruth. It Is he, what shall I do, (now invention be equal to
My Love) why, your Ladyship will spoil all? I sent for aside.
This Gentleman, and enjoined him secrecy, even to you your self,
Till I had made his way. O fie upon it, I am to blame; but in
Truth I did not think he would have come these two hours.

C Car. I dare swear she did not; I might very probably
Not have come at all.

Ruth. How came you to come so soon, Sir; 'twas three
Hours before you appointed.

C. Car. Hey day, I shall be made believe I came hither
On purpose presently.

Ruth. 'Twas upon a message of his to me, and please your
Honor to make his desires known to your Ladyship, that he
Had considered on it and was resolved to take the Covenant,
And give you five hundred pound to make his peace, and bring
His business about again, that he may be
Admitted in his first condition.

C. Car. What Is this? d'hear, pretty Gentlewoman.


Ruth. Well, well, I know your mind, I have done your business.


Mrs. Day. Oh, his stomach's come down!


Ruth. Sweeten him again, and leave him to me;
I warrant you the five hundred pound and --

Whispers. C. Car. Now I have found it: this pretty wench has
A mind to be left alone with me, at her peril.

Mrs. Day. I understand thee; well, Sir, I can pass by rudeness
When I am informed there was no intention of it; I leave
You and my Daughter to beget a right understanding.

C. Car. We should beget Sons and Daughters sooner:
What does all this mean?

Ruth. I am sorry, Sir, that your love for me
Should make you thus rash.

C. Car. That Is more than you know, but you had a mind
To be lest alone with me; that is certain.

Ruth. It Is too plain, Sir, you would never have run your self
Into this danger else.

C. Car. Nay, now you are out; the danger run after me.


Ruth. You may dissemble.


C. Car. Why, it is the proper business here; but we lose
Time; you and I are left to beget right understanding,
Come, which way?

Ruth. Whither?


C. Car. To your Chamber or Closet.


Ruth. But I am engaged you shall take the Covenant.


C. Car. No, I never swear when I am bid.


Ruth. But you would do as bad?


C. Car. That Is not against my principles.


Ruth. Thank you for your fair opinion, good Signior
Principle, there lies your way, Sir, however I will own so much
Kindness for you, that I repent not the civility I have done,
To free you from the trouble you were like to fall into;
Make me a leg, if you please, and cry, Thank you: and so the
Gentlewoman that desired to be left alone with you, desires
To be left alone with her self, she being taught a right
Understanding of you.

C. Car. No, I am revited; nor shall you march off thus
With flying colors: my pretty Commander in chief, let us
Parley a little farther, and but lay down ingenuously the true
State of our Treaty. The business in short is this, We differ
Seemingly upon two evils, and mine the least; and therefore
To be chosen, you had better take me, than I take the Covenant.

Ruth. We'll excuse one another.


C. Car. You would not have me take the Covenant then.


Ruth. No, I did but try you, I forgive your idle looseness;
For that firm virtue be constant to your fair principles
In spite of fortune.

C. Car. What Is this got into petti-coats -- but d'hear,
I Will not excuse you from my proposition, notwithstanding
My release: Come we are half way to a right
Understanding -- nay, I do love thee.

Ruth. Love virtue, you have but here and there a patch
Of it; you are ragged still.

C. Car. Are you not the Committee Day's Daughter?


Ruth. Yes, what then.


C. Car. Then am I thankful, I had no defense against thee
And Matrimony, but thy own Father and Mother,
Which are a perfect Committee to my nature.

Ruth. Why are you sure I would have matched with a
Malignant, not a Compounder neither.

C. Car. Nay, I have made thee a Jointure against my will;
Methinks it were but as reasonable, that I should do something
For my Jointure, but by the way of Matrimony honestly
To increase your Generation; this, to tell you truth, is
Against my Conscience.

Ruth. Yet you would beget right understandings.


C. Car. Yes, I would have 'um all Bastards.


Ruth. And me a Whore.


C. Car. That Is a coarse name; but it is not sit a Committee-
Man's Daughter should be too honest, to the reproach
Of her Father and Mother.

Ruth. When the quarrel of the Nation is reconciled, you
And I shall agree: till when, Sir --

Enter Teg. Teg. Are you here then? upon my shoul the good Colonel
Blunt is over-taken again now, and carried to the Devil,
That he is, I'saith now.

C. Car. How, taken and carried to the Devil!


Teg. He desired to go to the Devil, that he did, I wonder of
My shoul he was not afraid of that.

C. Car. I understand it now; what mischief's this?


Ruth. You seem troubled, Sir.


C. Car. I have but a life to lose, that I am weary of: come, Teg.


Ruth. Hold, you shall not go before I know the business;
What do you talk of?

C. Car. My friend, my dearest friend is caught up by rascally
Bailiffs, and carried to the Devil-Tavern; pray let me go.

Ruth. Stay but a minute, if you have any kindness for me.


C. Car. Yes, I do love you.


Ruth. Perhaps I may serve your friend. Enter Arbella.
O Arbella, I was going to seek you.

Arb. What Is the matter?


Ruth The Colonel which thou like is taken by Bailiffs;
There Is his Friend too almost distracted: You know
The mercy of these times

Arb. What do thou tell me, I am ready to sink down!


Ruth. Compose your self, and help him nobly; you have no
Way but to smile upon Abel, and get him to bail him.

Enter Abel and Obadiah. Arb. Look where he and Obadiah comes; should either
By providence -- O Mr. Abel, where have you been this long
Time? can you find of your heart to keep thus out of my sight*

Abel. Assuredly, some important affairs constrained my
Absence, as Obadiah can testify, Bona fide.

Obad. I can do so verily, my self being a material party.


C. Car. Pox on 'em, how slow they speak.


Arb. Well, well, you shall go no more out of my sight; I Will
Not be satisfied with your Bona fides: I have some occasions
That call me to go a little way; you shall even go with me,
And good Obadiah too: you shall not deny me any thing.

Abel. Is it not meet I should, I am exceedingly exalted;
Obadiah thou shall have the best bargain of all my Tenants.

Obad. I am thankful.


C. Car. What may this mean?


Aside. Arb. Ruth, how shall we do to keep thy swift Mother
From pursuing us?

Ruth. Let me alone, as I go by the Parlor where she sits,
Big with expectation; I Will give her a whisper that we
Are going to fetch the very five hundred pound.

Arb. How can that be?


Ruth. No question now. Will you march, Sir?


C. Car. Whither?


Ruth. Lord, how dull these men in Love are! why to your
Friend. No more words.

C. Car. I will stare upon thee though.


Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Colonel Blunt brought in by Bailiffs. 1 B. I, I, we thought how well you would get
Bail.


C. Bl. Why, you unconscionable Rascal, are you
Angry that I am unlucky, or do you want some Fees?
I Will perish in a dungeon before I Will consume with throwing
Sops to such Curs.

1 Ba. Choose, choose, come along with him.


C. Bl. I Will not go your pace neither, Rascals; I Will go softly,
If it be but to hinder you from taking up some other
Honest Gentleman.

1 B. Very well, surly Sir, we will carry you where you
Shall not be troubled what pace to walk; you will find a
Large Bell, blood is dear; not yours is it? a farthing a pint
Were very dear for the best urine you have.

Enter Arbella, Ruth, Abel, C. Careless, and Obadiah. 1 B. How now, are these
any of your Friends?


C. Bl. Never if you see Women, that is a Rule.


Arb. Nay, you need have no scruple, it is a near Kinsman
Of mine, you do not think I hope that I would let you suffer --
You -- that must be nearer than a Kinsman to me.

Ab. But my Mother does not know it.


Arb. If that be all, leave it to me and Ruth, we'll save
You harmless: besides I cannot marry, if my Kinsman be in
Prison; he must convey my Estate as you appoint; for it is
All in him, we must please him.

Abel. The consideration of that does convince me.
Obadiah, it is necessary for us to set at liberty this Gentleman,
Being a Trustee for Mrs. Arbella's Estate; tell 'em therefore
That you and I will Bail this Gentleman -- and --
D'hear, tell them who I am.

Obad. I shall. Gentlemen, this is the honorable
Mr. Abel Day, the firstborn of the Honorable Mr. Day,
Chairman of the Committee of Sequestrations, and I
My self by name Obadiah, and Clerk to the said
Honorable Committee.

1 B. Well, Sir, we know Mr. Day, and Mr. Abel.


Abel. Yes, that is I, and I will bail this Gentleman; I believe
You dare not except against the Bail: nay, you shall have
Obadiah's too, one that the State trusts.

1 B. With all our hearts, Sir --
But there are Charges to be paid.

Arb. Here, Obadiah, take this Purse and discharge them,
And give the Bailiffs twenty shillings to drink.

C. Bl. This is miraculous.


1 B. A brave Lady: In Faith Mrs. we'll drink your health.


Abel. She Is to be my Wife, as sure as you are here;
What say you to that now?

1 B. That Is impossible; here is something more in this:
Honorable Mr. Abel, the Sheriffs Deputy is hard by in
Another room, if you please to go thither,
And give your Bail, Sir.

Abel. Well, show us the way, and let him know who I am.


C. Car. Hark ye, pretty Mrs. Ruth, if you were not Exeunt Abel, Obadiah, and
Bailiffs.
A Committee-man's Daughter, and so consequently
Against Monarchy, two Princes should
Have you and that Gentlewoman.

Ruth. No, no, you will serve my turn; I am not ambitious.


C. Car. Do but swear then that thou art not the Issue of
Mr. Day, and though I know it is a lie, I Will be content
To be cousen'd, and believe.

Ruth. Fie, sie, you cannot abide taking of Oaths; look,
Look how your Friend and mine take aim at one another:
Is he smitten?

C. Car. Cupid has not such another wounded Subject,
Nay, and is vexed he is in love too;
Troth it is partly my own case.

Ruth. Peace, she begins as need requires.


Arb. You are free, Sir.


C. Bl. Not so free as you think.


Arb. What hinders it?


C. Bl. Nothing, but I Will tell you.


Arb. Why, Sir?


C. Bl. You Will laugh at me.


Arb. Have you perceived me apt to commit such a rudeness,
Pray let me know it?

C. Bl. Upon two conditions you shall know it.


Arb. Well, make your own Laws.


C. Bl. First I thank you, you have freed me nobly; pray
Believe it, you have this acknowledgment from an
Honest heart, one that would crack a string for you,
That Is one thing.

Arb. Well, the other.


C. Bl. The other is only, that I may stand so ready,
That I may be gone just as I have told it you; together
With your promise, not to call me back: and upon these
Terms I give you leave to laugh when I am gone. Careless,
Come stand ready, that at the sign given
We may vanish together.

Ruth. If you please, Sir, when you are ready to start,
I Will cry one, two, three, and away.

C. Bl. Be pleased to forbear, good smart Gentlewoman,
You have leave to jeer when I am gone, and am just going;
By your spleens leave a little patience.

Arb. Prithee, peace.


Ruth. I shall contain, Sir.


C. Bl. That Is much for a Woman to do.


Arb. Now, Sir, perform your promise.


C. Bl. Careless, have you done with your Woman?


C. Car. Madam --


C. Bl. Nay, I have thanked her already; prithee no more
Of that dull way of gratitude; stand ready, Man, yet nearer
The Door: so now my misfortune that I promised to
Discover, is, that I love you above my sense or reason:
So farewell, and laugh; Come, Careless.

C. Car. Ladies, our lives are yours; be but so kind as to
Believe it, till you have something to command.

Exeunt* Ruth. Was there ever such humor?


Arb. As I live his confession shows nobly.


Ruth. It shows madly I am sure, an ill-bred Fellow, not
Endure a Woman to laugh at him!

Arb. He Is honest, I dare swear.


Ruth. That Is more than I dare swear for my Colonel.


Arb. Out upon him.


Ruth. Nay, it is but for want of a good Example;
I Will make him so.

Arb. But d'hear, Ruth, we were horribly to blame, that we
Did not enquire where they lodged, under pretense of sending
To them about their own business.

Ruth. Why, thy whimsical Colonel discharged himself off
Like a Gun: there was no time between the flashing in
The pan, and the going off, to ask a question: but hark ye,
I have an invention upon the old account of the
Five hundred pound, which shall make Abel send
His Pursuivant, Obadiah, to look 'em.

Arb. Excellent! the Trout Abel will bite immediately at
That bait: the Message shall be as from his Master Day, Senior,
To come and speak with him; they will think
Presently it is about their Composition, and come certainly.
In the mean time we'll prepare them with Counter-expectations

Enter Abel and Obadiah. Ruth. You have it, peace, see where Abel and the gentle
Squire of low degree, Obadiah, approaches, having newly
Entered themselves into Bonds.

Arb. Which I Will be sure to tell his Mother, if he be
Evermore troublesome.

Ruth. And that he is turned an arrant Cavalier,
By bailing one of the Brood.

Abel. I have according to your desires given freedom to
Your Kinsman and Trustee; I suppose he does perceive
That you may have power in right of me.

Arb. Good Mr. Abel, I am sincerely beholding to you,
And your Authority.

Ruth. O sie upon it, Brother, I did forget to acquaint
You with a business before the Gentlemen went.
O me, what a Sieve-like memory have I,
'Twas an important affair too.

Abel. If you discover it to me, I shall render you
My opinion upon the whole.

Ruth. The two Gentlemen have repented of their obstinacy,
And would now present five hundred pound to your good
Honorable Mother, to stand their Friend, that they may be
Permitted to take the Covenant, and we, negligent we,
Have let them go, before we knew where to send to them.

Abel. That was the want of being used to important affairs;
It is ill to neglect the accepting of their conversion,
Together with their money.

Ruth. Well, there is but one way; do you send Obadiah
In your Father's Name, to desire them both to come to his House
About some business that will be for their good, but no more;
For then they will take it ill; for they enjoined us secrecy;
And when they come, let us alone: Obadiah may enqui^e
Them out at some Tavern.

Obad. The Bailiffs did say they were gone
To the Devil* Tavern to pay a reckoning.

Abel. Hasten thither, good Obadiah, as if you had met
My Honorable Father, and desire them to come unto
His House, about an important affair that is for their good.

Obad. I shall use expedition.


Exit* Abel. And we will hasten home, lest the Gentlemen should
Be before us, and not know how to address their offers;
And then we will hasten our being united in the
Bonds of Matrimony*

Arb. Soft and fair goes far.


Exeunt* Enter the two Colonels, and Teg as at the Tavern. C. Car. Did ever Man
get away so craftily from the thing
He liked; terrible business, afraid to tell a Woman what she
Desired to hear; I pray heartily that the Boys do not come
To the knowledge of thy famous retreat; we shall be followed
By those small Birds, as you have seen an Owl pursued.

C. Bl. I shall break some of their Wings then.


C. Car. To leave a handsome Woman, a Woman that came
To be bound Body for Body for thee; one that does that
Which no Woman will hardly do again.

C. Bl. What Is that?


C. Car. Love thee, and thy Blunt Humor; a mere chance,
Man, a thing besides all the venerate Stars.

C. Bl. You practice your Wit to no purpose; I am not
To be persuaded to lie still, like a Jack-a-lent to be cast at;
I had rather be a Wisp hung up for a Woman to scold at,
Than a fixed Lover for 'em to point at:
Your Squib began to hiss.

Enter Obadiah. C. Car. Peace, Man, here is Jupiter's Mercury, is his
Message to us, trow?

Obad. Gentlemen, you are opportunely over-taken
And found out.

C. Bl. How Is this?


Obad. I come unto you in the name of the Honorable
Mr. Day, who desires to speak with you both about some
Important affair, which is conducing for your good.

C. Bl. What train is this?


C. Car. Peace, let us not be rash, Teg.


Teg. Well then.


C. Car. Were it not possible that you could entertain this
Fellow in the next room till he were pretty drunk?

Teg. I warrant you that now, I will make him and my self
Too drunk for thy sweet sake.

C. Car. Be sure, Teg -- some business, Sir, that will take us
Up a very little time to finish, make us desire your patience
Till we dispatch it: In the mean time, Sir, do us the
Favor as to call for a glass of Sack: in the next room
Teg shall wait upon you, and drink your Master's health.

Obad. It needs not, nor do I use to drink healths.


C. Car. None but your Masters, Sir, and that by
Way of remembrance.

Obad. We that have the affairs of State under our
Tuition cannot long delay; my presence may be required
For the carrying on the work.

C Car. Nay, Sir, it shall not exceed above a quarter
Of an hour; perhaps we'll wait upon you to Mr. Day presently*
Pray, Sir, drink but one glass or two; we would wait upon you
Our selves, but that would hinder us from going with you.

Obad. Upon that consideration I shall attend a little.


C. Car. Go wait upon him, now Teg or never.


Teg. I will make him so drunk as can be upon my Soul.


C. Bl. What a Devil should this Message mean?


Exeunt. C. Car. It Is too plain; this cream of Committee Rascals! who has
Better Intelligence than a State-Secretary, has heard
Of his Son Abel's being hampered, in the cause of the
Wicked, and in revenge would entice us to Perdition.

C. Bl. If Teg could be so fortunate as to make him drunk,
We might know all.

C. Car. If the close-hearted Rogue will not be open mouthed,
We'll leave him pawned for all our scores, and stuff his Pockets
With blank Commissions.

C Bl. Only fill up one with his Master's name.


C. Car. And another with his Wife's name for Adjutant General,
Together with a Bill of Ammunition hid under Day's House,
And make it be dug down, with scandal of Delinquency.
A Rascal to think to invite us into Newgate!

C. Bl. Well, we must resolve what to do.


C. Car. I have a fancy come into my head that may produce
An admirable Scene.

C. Bl. Come, let us hear.


C. Car. It Is upon supposition, that Teg makes him drunk,
And by the way it is a good Omen that we have no sober
Apparition in that wavering posture of frailty; we'll send him
Home in a Sedan, and cause him to be delivered in that
Good natured condition, to the ill natured Rascal
His Master.

C. Bl. It will be Excellent: how I pray for Teg
To be Victorious!

Enter Musician. Mus. Gentlemen, will you have any Music?


C. Bl. Prithee no, we are out of tune.


C. Car. Pish, we never will be out of humor. Do hear,
Can sing us a Malignant Sonnet?

Mus. I can sing many Songs. You seem honest Gentlemen.


C. Car. Cavaliers thou mean.
Sing without any apprehension.
SONG.
NOW the Vail is pulled off, and this pitiful Nation
Too late see the gull of a Kirk-Reformation,
How all things that should be
Are turned topsie turvy;
The Freedom we have,
Our Prince made a Slave,
And the Masters must now turn the Waiters.
The great ones obey,
While the Rascals do sway,
And the Loyal to Rebels are Traitors.
The Pulpits are crowded with tongues of their own,
And the Preachers spiritual Committee Men grown,
To denounce Sequestration
On Souls of old Fashion,
They Rail and they Pray,
Till they quite preach away
The Wealth that was once the wise Cities.
The Courts in the Hall
Where the Lawyers did bawl,
Are turned into pious Committees.

C. Car. This Song has raised my Spirits: Here, sing always
For the King; I would have every Man in his way do something
For him; I would have Fiddlers sing for him, Parsons pray
For him, Men fight for him, Women scold for him, and
Children cry for him, and according to this rule,
Teg is drinking for him: but see, Enter Teg and Obadiah drunk.
See and rejoice where Teg with Laurel comes.

C. Bl. And the vanquished Obadiah with nothing fixed
About him but his Eyes.

C. Car. Stay, sing another Song in the behalf of
Compounders if thou can, that the vapors of the Wine
May have full power to ascend up to the firmament of
His truly reformed Coxcomb.
SONG.
COme, Drawer, some Wine,
Let it sparkle and shine,
And make its own drops fall abounding;
Like the Hearts it makes light,
Let it flow pure and right,
And a Plague take all kind of Compounding.
We'll not be too wise,
Nor try to advise,
How to suffer and gravely despair:
For Wisdom and Parts
Sit brooding on hearts,
And there they catch nothing but care.
Not a thought shall come in
But what brings our King,
Let Committees be damned with their gain;
We'll send by this stealth
To our Hearts our Kings Health,
And there in despite he shall Reign.

Obadiah repeating with him. C. Car. This is sport beyond modest hopes. How I
will
Adore Sack that can force this Fellow to Religion. The Rogue
Is full of Worship.

Teg. Well now, upon my Soul, Mr. Obed.
Commit sings as well as the Man now:
Come then will you sing an Irish Song after me?

Obad. I will sing Irish for the King now.


Teg. I will sing for the King as well as you. Hark you now.


Obad. That is too hard stuff; I cannot do these and these
Material matters.

He sings an Irish Song, and Obadiah tries. Teg. Here now, we will take some
snuff for the King -- so
There lay it upon your hand; put one of your Noses to it now,
So snuff now. Upon my Soul, Mr. Obed Commit will make
A brave Irishman.

Obad. I will snuff for the King no more. Good Mr. Teg,
Give me some more Sack, and sing English for my money.

Teg. I will tell you that Irish is as good and better too.
Come now we will dance: Can you play an Irish Tune?
Can you play this now.

Mus. No, Sir, but I can play you an excellent Irish Jig.


They dance. C. Car. This is beyond thought: So this motion
Like a tumbled Barrel has set the Liquor a working again.
Now for a Chair.

Enter Drawer. C. Bl. Drawer, who waits there?


Drawer. What do you want Gentlemen?


C. Bl. Call a Chair presently, and bring their Chair into
This room; here is a friend of ours overtaken.

Drawer. I go, Sir.


Exit. C. Car. Teg, thou have done miracles, thou art a good Omen,
And have vanquished the cause in this overthrow of this
Counterfeit Rascal its true Epitome: And now, Teg,
According to the words of Condemnation, we will send him
To the place from whence he came.

Teg Upon my shoul he is dead now, shall I howl as we do
In Ireland.

C. Car. How Is that, Teg.


Teg. Yo, yo.


Howls. C. Car. No more, good, Teg, lest you give an Alarm to the
Enemy. Welcome, honest fellow; by your looks you seem so.

Enter Sedan. 1 C. How Colonel, have you forgot your poor Soldier Ned.


C. Car. Why, this is a miraculous pursuit of good fortune,
Honest Ned; what turned Chairman?

1. Any thing for Bread and Beer, noble Colonel, shall I
Have the Honor to carry you.

C. Car. No, Ned, is thy fellow honest?

1. Or I Would be hanged before I carry a Chair an inch with him.

C. Car. It Is well -- look you, Ned, that fellow is Mr. Day
The Committee-man's Clerk, whom with wonderful industry
We have made drunk: Just as he is, pack him up in thy Chair,
And immediately transport him to his Master Day's house;
And in the very Hall turn him out. There Is half a Crown
For thy pains.

1. If I fail, say Ned's a Coward: Come shall we put your short
Winged worship into your mew. Come along.

They put him in and Ex. C. Car. Farewell, Ned: Teg, come, you must carry some
Money to one or two confident friends of mine;
We Will pay our Reckoning at the Bar, then go home and laugh;
And if you will plot some way to see our enchanting Females
Once more; they make me so long --

Exeunt. Enter Mr. Day, and Mrs. Day. Mrs. Day Dispatch quickly I say, and say
I said it; many
Things fall between the lip and the cup.

Mr. Day. Nay, duck, let thee alone for counsel. Ah,
If thou had been a man.

Mrs. Day. Why then you would have wanted a Woman,
And a helper too.

Mr. Day. I profess so I should, and a notable one too, though
I say it before thy face, and that is no ill one.

Mrs. Day. Come, come, you are wandering from the matter;
Dispatch the Marriage I say, whilst she is thus taken with
Our Abel. Women are uncertain.

Mr. Day. How if she should be coy?


Mrs. Day. You are at your iffs again; if she be foolish,
Tell her plainly what she must trust to, no Abel, no Land;
Plain dealing's a Jewel: Have you the Writings drawn
As I advised you, which she must sign?

M. Day. I, I warrant you, duck; Here, here they be.
Oh she has a brave Estate.

Mrs. Day. What news you have.


Mr. Day. Look you, Wife.


Day pulls out Writings, and lays out his Keys. Mrs. Day. Pish, teach your
Grannam to spin; let me see.


Enter Servant. Serve. May it please your Honor, your good neighbor
Zechariah is departing this troublesome life: he has made
Your Honor his Executor, but cannot depart
Till he has seen your Honors.

Mr. Day. Alas, alas, a good man will leave us, Come, good
Duck, let us hasten: Where is Obadiah to usher you?

Mrs. Day. Why Obadiah, a Varlet to be out of the way at
Such a time; truly he moves my wrath. Come, Husband, along,
I Will take Abel in his place.

Enter Ruth and Arbella. Ruth. What Is the meaning of this Alarm? there is some
Carrion
Discovered; the Crows are all gone upon a sudden.

Arb. The she- Day called most fiercely for Obadiah;
Look here, Ruth, what have they left behind?

Ruth. As I live, it is the Day's bunch of Keys, which he always
Keeps so closely: -- well -- if thou have any metal,
Now Is the time.

Arb. To do what?


Ruth. To fly out of Egypt.


Enter Abel. Arb. Peace, we are betrayed else; as sure as can be, wench,
He Is come back for the Keys.

Ruth. We'll forswear 'em in confident words, and no less
Confident countenances.

Abel. An important affair has called my Honorable Father
And Mother forth, and in the absence of Obadiah I am enforced
To attend their Honors, and therefore I conceived it right
And meet to acquaint you with it; lest in my absence you
Might have apprehended, that some mischance had befallen
My person: therefore I desire you to receive consolation;
And so I bid you heartily farewell.

Exit. Arb. Given from his mouth this tenth of April, he
Put me in a cruel fright.

Ruth. As I live, I am all over in such a dew as hangs about a
Still when it is first set a going; but this is better and better:
There was never such an opportunity to break prison.
I know the very places holes in his Closet where the
Composition of your Estate lies, and where the Deeds of my
Own Estate lie. I have cast my eye upon them often
When I have gone up to him in errands, and to call
Him to dinner. If I miss, hang me.

Arb. But whither shall we go?


Ruth To a friend of mine, and of my Fathers, that lives
Near the Temple, and will harbor us; fear not, and so set
Up for our selves, and get our Colonels.

Arb. Nay, the mischief that I have done, and the condition
We are in, makes me as ready as thou art: come let us about it.

Ruth. Stay, do you stand Sentinel here, that is the
Closet-Window; I Will call for thee, if I need thee; and
Be sure to give notice of any news of the enemy.

Exit. Arb. I warrant thee, may but this departing Brother have
So much string of life left him as nay tie this expecting Day
To his Bedside, till we have committed this honest Robbery --
Hark! -- what is that -- this apprehension can make a noise
When there is none.

Ruth. I have 'em, I have 'em; nay the whole covey,
And his Seal at Arms bearing a Dog's Leg.

Above. Arb. Come make haste then.


Ruth. As I live here is a Letter counterfeited to the King,
To the Rascal his rebellious Subject Day; with a remembrance
To his discreet Wife; nay, what do thou think these are?
I Will but cast my Eye upon these Papers that were Schismatically,
And lay in separation: what do think they are?

Arb. I cannot tell; nay prithee come away.


Ruth. Out upon the precise Baboon:
They are Letters from two Wenches, one from an increase of sallary
To maintain his unlawful Issue; another from a Wench
That had more Conscience than he, and refused
To take the Physic that he prescribed to take away
A natural Tympany.

Arb. Nay, prithee dispatch.


Ruth. Here be abundance more; come run up, and help
Me carry 'em. We'll take the whole Index of his Rogueries?
We shall be furnished with such arms, offensive and defensive,
That we shall never need
Sue to him for a League. Come, make haste.

Arb. I come.


Enter with the Sedan. 1. Come open this portable Tomb: 'Slife here is nothing
in it;
Ferret him, or he will never bolt. It looks as if we had brought
A basket Hare to be set down and hunted.

2. He Is dead.

1. Dead drunk, thou mean; turn up the Chair, and turn
Him out as they do Badgers caught in a Sack: Shake,
Man; So, now he sallies.

Obadiah tumbles out of the Chair, and sings as at the Tavern -- of the Song,
and Enter Arbella and Ruth from robbing the Closet. Arb. What Is this? we are
undone.


Obad. Mr. Teg, will you dance, Mr. Teg.


Ruth. Put a good Face on it, or give me the Van. O, it is Obadiah fallen.


Arb. Nay, and cannot rise neither: d'hear, honest Friends,
Was this zealous Gentleman your freight.

1. Yes, Mistress, two honest Gentlemen took care of him, seeing
Him thus devoutly over-taken.

Arb. It was our Colonels that thought Day sent him to trapan
Them as sure as can be.

Ruth. No doubt on it; how unmerciful they are, Arbella,
Every minute to do something or other to increase
Our whimsie -- Are you paid?

1. Yes, Mistress, -- 'Slife we shall be paid double.

Ruth. Stay, where did you leave the two
Careful-minded Gentlemen.

1. Why do you ask, Mistress?

Ruth. For no hurt. Can carry us near the place?

1. Yes, Mistress, sure there is no danger in Women.

Arb. What do mean?


Ruth. The same that thou do, to see 'em if I can;
Is It near Temple Bar? Obadiah sings.

1. Hard by, Minstress.

Ruth. Come in, there is my Friend lives hard by; fear not,
We can never fly so concealed -- May that Nightingale continue
His note, till the Owl Day returns to hear him: Come,
Honest Fellow, stay over against the place where you
Left the Gentlemen; we have some business with them;
We'll pay you, and they will thank you: so good night, Mr. Day.

1. I warrant you, Mistress. Come along, Tom.

Obad. Some small Beer, good Mr. Teg.


Exeunt. Enter as returned, Mr. Day, Mrs. Day, and Abel. Mr. Day. He made a
good end, and departed as unto sleep.


Mrs. Day. I Will assure you his Wife took on grievously;
I do not believe she will marry this half year.

Mr. Day. He died full of Exhortation. Ha, Duck,
Should be sorry to lose me?

Mrs. Day. Lose you; I warrant you you will live as long as
A better thing -- Ah, Lord, what is that?

Obadiah sings. Mr. Day. How now! what is this? how! -- Obadiah --
And in a drunken distemper assuredly!

Mrs. Day. O fie upon'e, who would have believed that he
Should have lived to have seen Obadiah overcome with the
Creature? Where have you been, Sirrah?

Obad. D -- d -- drinking, the Ki -- Ki -- Kings's Health.


Mr. Day. O terrible, some disgrace put upon us, and shame
Brought within our Walls; I Will go lock up my
Neighbor's Will, and come down and show him
A Reproof. -- How -- how -- I cannot feel my Keys -- nor -- He feels in his
Pocket, and leaps up to.
Hear 'em gingle: Did thou see my Keys, Duck?

Mrs. Day. Duck me no ducks; I see your Keys, see a Fools
Head of your own: Had I kept them, I warrant they had been
Forth coming: You are so slappish, you throw 'em up and
Down at your Tail: Why don't you go look if you have
Not left them in the Door?

Mr. Day. I go, I go, Duck.


Exit. Mrs. Day. Here, Abel, take up this fallen Creature, who has
Left his uprightness; carry him to a Bed, and when he is
Returned to himself, I will exhort him.

Abel. He is exceedingly overwhelmed.


Obad. Stand away, I say, and give me some Sack, that He goes to lift him.
I may drink a health to the King, and let Committees
Be damned with their gain. Obadiah sings.
Where Is Mr. Teg?

Enter Teg. Mr. Day. Undone, undone, robbed, robbed; the Door's left
Open, and all my Writings, Papers stolen, undone, undone.
Ruth, Ruth!

Mrs. Day. Why Ruth, I say, Thieves, Thieves!


Enter Servant. Serve. What Is the matter, Forsooth? here has been no Thieves,
I have not been a minute out of the House.

Mrs. Day. Where Is Ruth, and Mrs. Arbella?


Serve. I have not seen them a pretty while.


Mr. Day. It Is they have robbed me, and taken away
The Writings of both their Estates. Undone, undone!

Mrs. Day. This came with staying for you, Coxcomb,
We had come back sooner else: yes, slow Drone, we must
Be undone for your dullness.

Obad. Be not in wrath.


Mrs. Day. I Will wrath you, ye Rascal you, teaching you,
Drunken Rascal, and you sober Dullman.

Obad. Your Feet are swift and violent; their motion
Will make them fume.

Mrs. Day. D'lye too, ye drunken Rascal?


Mr. Day. Nay patience, good Duck, and let us lay out
For these Women; they are the Thieves.

Mrs. Day. 'Twas you that left your Keys upon the Table
To tempt them: ye need cry, good Duck, be patient. Bring in
The drunken Rascal, ye Booby, when he is sober he may
Discover something. Come take him up; I Will have 'em hunted.

Exeunt. Abel. I rejoice yet in the midst of my sufferings, that my Mistress
Saw not my rebukes. Come, Obadiah, I pray raise your self
Upon your Feet, and walk.

Obad. Have you taken the Covenant? that is the question.


Abel. Yea.


Obad. And will you drink a Health to the King?
That Is the other question.

Abel. Make not thy self a scorn.


Obad. Scorn in thy Face; void, young Satan.


Abel. I pray you walk in, I shall be assisting.


Obad. Stand off, and you shall perceive by my steadfast going,
That I am not drunk. Look ye now -- so, softly, softly; gently,
Good Obadiah, gently and steadily, for fear it should be said
That thou art in drink: so, gently and uprightly, Obadiah.

Abel. You do not move.


He moves his Legs, but stands still. Obad. Then do I stand still, as fast as
you go.


Enter Mrs. Day. Mrs. Day. What, stay all day? there is for you, Sir;
You are a sweet Youth to leave in trust; along you
Drunken Rascals, I Will set you both forward.

Obad. The Philistines are upon us, and Day is broke loose
From darkness, with keeping has made her fierce.

She beats 'em off. Mrs. Day. Out, you drunken Rascal, I Will make
You move, you Beast.

Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Bookseller and Bailiffs, having laid hold on Teg. Booksell. COme along,
Sir, I Will teach you to take Covenants.


Teg. Will you teach me then; did I not take
It then? why will you teach me now?

Booksell. You shall pay dearly for the blows you struck me,
My wild Irish, by St. Patrick, you shall.

Teg. What have you now to do with St. Patrick? he will
Scorn your Covenant.

Booksell. I Will put you, Sir, where you shall have worse liquor,
Than your Bonny-Clabber.

Teg. Bonny-Clabber! by my Goships hand now you are
A Rascal if you do not look Bonny-Clabber, and I will break
Your pate if you will not let me go to my Master.

Booksell. O you are an impudent Rascal. Come, away with him.


Enter C. Careless. C. Car. How now, hold, my Friend; whither do
You carry my Servant?

Booksell. I have arrested him, Sir, for striking me, and taking
Away my Books.

C. Car. What has he taken away?


Booksell. Nay, the value of the thing is not much;
'Twas the Covenant, Sir.

Teg. Well, I did take the Covenant, and my Mastero took it
From me, and we have taken the Covenant then, have we not?

C. Car. Here, honest Fellow, here is more than thy Covenant's
Worth; here, Bailiffs, here is for you to drink.

Booksell. Well, Sir, you seem an honest Gentleman; for
Your sake, and in hopes of your Custom, I release him.

(...). Thank ye, noble Sir.


C. Car. Farewell, my noble Friends -- so -- d'hear, Teg. Ex.
Pray take no more Covenants, -- Have you paid the money
I sent you with?

Teg. Yes, but I will carry no more, look you there now.


C. Car. Why, Teg?


Teg. God sa'my Soul now, I shall run away with it.


C. Car. Pish, thou art too honest.


Teg. That I am too upon my Soul now; but the Devil is
Not honest, that he is not; he would not let me alone
When I was going; but he made go to this little long place,
And the other little long place; and upon my Soul was carrying
Me to Ireland, for he made me go by dirty place like a lough
Now; and therefore I know now it was the way to Ireland:
Then I would stand still, and then he would make me go on;
And then I would go to one side, and he would make me go
To the other side; and then I got a little farther, and did
Run then; and upon my Soul the Devil could not catch me;
And then I did pay the money: but I will carry no more
Money now that I will not.

C. Car. But thou shall, Teg, when I have more to send;
Thou art proof now against temptations.

Teg. Well then, if you send me with money again, and if I
Do not come to thee upon the time, the Devil will make me
Be gone then with the money: Here is a Paper for thee,
It Is a quit way indeed.

C. Car. That Is well said, Teg. --


Reads. Enter Mr. Day, Obadiah, and Soldiers. Obad. See, Sir, Providence has
directed us; there is one
Of them that clothed me with shame, and the most malignant
Among the wicked.

Mr. Day. Soldiers, seize him, I charge him with Treason;
Here Is a Warrant to the Keeper, as I told you.

1 S. Nay, no resistance now.


C. Car. What Is the matter, Rascals?


Mr. Day. You shall know that to your cost hereafter,
Away with him.

C. Car. Teg, tell 'em I shall not come home to night, I am engaged.


Teg. I prithee ben't engaged.


C. Car. Gentlemen, I am guilty of nothing, that I know of.


Mr. Day. That will appear, Sir: away with him.


Teg. What will you do with my Master now?


Mr. Day. Be quiet, Sir, or you shall go with him.


Teg. That I will for all you now.


C. Car. Teg, come hither.


Whisper. Teg. Must not I go with you then?


C. Car. No, no, be sure to do as I tell you.


Mr. Day. Away with him, we will be avenged on the scorner,
And I Will go home and tell my Duck this part of my good fortune.

Exe. Enter Sedan, Women come out. Ruth. So far we are right, now, honest
Fellow, step over
And tell the two Gentlemen, that we two Women desire
To speak with them.

Enter C. Blunt, Lieutenant. 1 C. See, Mistress, here is one of them.


Ruth. That Is thy Colonel, Arbella, catch him quickly,
Or he will fly again.

Arb. What should I do?


Ruth. Put forth some good words, as they use to
Shake Oats when they go to catch a skittish Jade.
Advance.

Arb. Sir.


C. Bl. Lady -- it is she.


Arb. I wish, Sir, that my Friend and I had some convenience
Of speaking with you: we now want the assistance of
Some noble Friend.

C. Bl. Then I am happy; bring me but to do something
For you; I would have my actions talk, not I: my Friend
Will be here immediately; I dare speak for him too --
Pardon my last confusion; but what I told you was as true
As if I had staid.

Ruth. To make Affidavit of it.


C. Bl. Good over-charged-Gentlewoman,
Spare me but a little.

Arb. Prithee peace, can thou be merry, and we in
This condition. Sir, I do believe you noble, truly worthy:
If we might withdraw any whither out of sight,
I would acquaint you with the business.

Lieu. My House, Ladies, is at that Door, where both
The Colonels lodge: Pray command it, Colonel Careless
Will immediately be here.

Enter Teg. Teg. Well now, my good Master will not come;
That Commit Rogue Day has got him with Men in red Coats,
And he is gone to Prison here below this Street;
He would not let me go with him in faith,
But made me come tell thee now.

Ruth. O my heart -- Tears by your leave a while -- Wipes her eyes.
D' hear, Arbella, here, take all the trinkets, only the bait that
I Will use; accept of this House, here let me find thee, I Will try my
Skill; nay, talk not.

Exit. C. Bl. Careless in Prison! Pardon me, Madam, I must
Leave you for a little while; pray be confident,
This honest Friend of mine will use you with
All respects till I return.

Arb. What do you mean to do, Sir?


C. Bl. I cannot tell, yet I must attempt something,
You shall have a sudden account of all things;
You say you dare believe,
Pray be as good as your word; and
Whatever accident befalls me, know I love you dearly:
Why do you weep?

Arb. Do not run your self into a needless danger.


C. Bl. How, do you weep for me? pray let me see, never Woman
Did so before, that I know of, I am ravished with it; the
Round gaping Earth never sucked showrs so greedily,
As my heart drinks these: Pray if you love me, be but
So good and kind as to confess it.

Arb. Do not ask what you may tell your self.


C. Bl. I must go, Honor and Friendship call me: Here,
Dear Lieutenant, I never had a Jewel but this; use it as
Right ones should be used; do not breath upon it, but
Gaze as I do, -- hold -- one word more; the Soldier that
You often talked of to me, is still honest.

Lieu. Most perfectly.


C. Bl. And I may trust him.


Lieu. With your Life.


C. Bl. Enough, -- pray let me leave my last looks fixed
Upon you -- So, I love you, and am honest; be careful,
Good Lieutenant, of this treasure -- She weeps still --
I cannot go, I must --

Exit. Lieu. Madam, pray let my House be honored with you;
Be consident of all respect and faith.

C. Bl. What uncertainties pursue my Love and Fortune.


Exeunt. Enter Ruth with a Soldier. Ruth. Come, give me the bundle, he now the
habit;
It Is well, there is for your pains, be secret, and wait
Where I appointed you.

Soul. If I fail, may I dye in a Ditch, and there lie,
And out-stink it.

Exit. Ruth. Now for my wild Colonel; first, here is a Note,
With my Lady Day's Seal to it, for his Release; if that fails
(As he that will shoot at these Rascals must have two Strings
To his Bow) Then here is my Red-Coats skin to disguise him,
And a string to draw up a Ladder of Cords, which I have
Prepared against it grows dark; one of them will hit sure,
I must have him out, and I must have him when he is out:
I have no patience to expect -- within there -- ho. --

Enter Keeper. Ruth. You have not a Prisoner, Sir, in your Custody,
One Colonel Careless?

Keep. Yes, Mrs. and committed by your Father Mr. Day.


Ruth. I know it; but there was a mistake in it; here is a Warrant
For his Delivery, under his Hand and Seal.

Keep. I would willingly obey it, Mrs; but there is a general
Order come from above, that all the Kings Party should be kept
Close, and none released but by the States Order.

Ruth. This goes ill; may I speak with him, Sir?


Keep. Very freely, Mrs. there is no order to forbid any to come
To him: To say Truth, it is the most pleasant'st Gentleman.
-- I Will call him forth.

Exit. Ruth. Of My conscience every thing must be in love with him;
Now for my last hopes; if this fail, I Will use the Ropes
My self.

Enter Keeper and Careless. C. Car. Mr. Day's Daughter speak with me?


Keep. I, Sir, there (...) is.


Exit. Ruth. O Sir, does the name of Mr. Day's Daughter
Trouble you; you love the Gentlewoman, but hate his Daughter.

C. Car. Yes, ^ do love that Gentlewoman you speak of most
Exceedingly.

Ruth. And the Gentlewoman loves you: but what luck
This is, that Day's Daughter should ever be with her to spoil all!

C. Car. Not a whit one way; I have a pretty Room --
Within, dark, and convenient.

Ruth. For what?


C. Car. For you and I to give Counter-security for
Our kindness to one another.

Ruth. But (...) Day's Daughter will be there too?


C. Car. It Is dark, we'll never see her.


Ruth. You care not who you are Wicked with; methinks
A Prison should tame you.

C. Car. Why, do you think a Prison takes away blood
And sight? As long as I am so qualified, I am Touch-wood, and
When ever you bring fire, I shall fall a burning.

Ruth. And you would quench it.


C. Car. And you shall kindle it again.


Ruth. No, you will be burnt out at last, burnt to a coal,
Black as dishonest love.

C. Car. Is this your business? Did you come to disturb my
Contemplations with a Sermon? Is this all?

Ruth. One thing more; I Love you, it is true; but I love you
Honestly, if you know how to love me virtuously, I Will free
You from Prison, and run all Fortunes with you.

C. Car. Yes, I could love thee all manner of ways;
If I could not, freedom were no bait; were it from death.
I should despise your offer to bargain for a lie. -- but --

Ruth. Oh noble -- but what?


C. Car. The Name of that Rascal that got thee: yet I lie
Too, he never got a Limb of thee. Pox on it, thy Mother
Was as unlucky to bear thee: But how shall we salve that;
Take but off these encumbrances, and I Will purchase thee in
Thy Smock; but to have such a slaw in my Title.

Ruth. Can I help Nature?


C Car. Or I honor? Why, bark you now, do but swear
Me into a pretense, do but betray me with an Oath, that thou
Were not begot on the Body of Gillian,
My Fathers Kitchen-maid.

Ruth. Who Is that?


C. Car. Why, the honorable Mrs. Day that now is.


Ruth. Will you believe me if I swear?


C. Car. I that I will, though I know all the while it is not true.


Ruth. I swear then by all that is good,
I am not their Daughter.

C. Car. Poor kind Perjured pretty one, I am beholding
To thee; would damn thy self for me?

Ruth. You are mistaken, I have tried you fully;
You are noble, and I hope you love me; be ever fl^m to
Virtuous principles: My Name is not so godly (...) one
As Ruth, but plain Anne, and Daughter to Sir (...) Thorowgood,
One perhaps that you have heard of, since in the World he
Has still had so loud and fair a Character: it is too long to tell
You how this Day got me an Infant, and my ^^^ate
Into his power, and made me pass for his (...) Daughter,
My Father dying when I was but two years (...).
This I knew but lately, by an unexpected meeting of an ancient
Servant of my Fathers: but two hours since Arbella and I
Found an opportunity of stealing away all the Writings that
Belonged to my Estate, and her Composition: (...) flight
We met your Friend, with whom I left heras soon as I had
Intelligence of your misfortune, to try to get your liberty;
Which if I can do, you have an Estate, for I have mine.

C. Car. Thou more than --


Ruth. No, no, no Raptures at this time; here'd our disguise
Purchased from a true hearted Red coat* here is a (...)
Let this Line down when it is almost dark, and you shall draw
Up a Ladder of Ropes; if the Ladder of Ropes be done sooner,
I Will send them by a Soldier that I dare trust; and you may,
Your Window's large enough: As soon as you receive it
Come down; if not, when it is dusk, let down your line;
And at the bottom of the Window you shall find yours,
More than her own, not Ruth, but Anne.

C. Car. I Will leap into thy arms. --


Ruth. So you may break your neck: If you do, I Will jump too;
But time steals on our Words; observe, all I have told you:
So farewell. --

C. Car. Nay, as the good Fellows use to say, Let us not part
With dry Lips. -- One kiss.

Ruth Not a bit of me, till I am all Yours.


C. Car. Your hand then, to show I am grown reasonable.
A poor Compounder.

Ruth. Pish, there is a dirty Glove upon it. --


C. Car. Give me but any naked part, and I Will kiss it as a Snail
Creeps, and leave sign where my Lips ^id along --

Ruth. Good Snail, get out (...) your hole ^^st, think of
Your business. So fare

C. Car. Nay, preth^e he not* ^^am'd that thou art loath
To leave me. 'S^id, I am a Man, but I Am as ar^ant a Rogue, as thy
Quondam Father Day, it I could not cry to leave thee
A brace of Minutes.

Ruth. Away, we grow foolish -- farewell -- yet be careful --
Nay, go in.

C. Car. Do you go first.


Ruth. Nay, sie, go in.


C. Car. We'll fairly then divide the Victory,
And draw off together. -- So -- I will have the last look.

Exeunt severally, looking at one another. Enter C. Blunt, and Soldier. C. Bl.
N(...) words; I do believe, nay, I know thou art
Honest I may (...) thank thee better.

Soul. I scorn any encouragement to love my King, or those
That serve him. I took Pay under these People,
With a design to do him Service; the Lieutenant knows it.

C. Bl. He has told me so, no more words, thou art a noble
Fellow; thou art sure his Window's large enough?

Soul. Fear it not.


C. Bl Here then, carry him this ladder of Ropes: So now give
Me the Coat; say not a word to him, but bid him dispatch
When he sees the Coast clear; he shall be waited for at
The bottom of his Window. Give him thy Sword too if
He desires it.

Soul. I Will dispatch it instantly, therefore get to your place.


C. Bl. I warrant ye.


Exit. Enter Teg. Teg. Have you done every thing then? By my shoul now,
Yonder is the Man with the hard name; that Man now, that I
Made drunk for thee, Mr. Tay's Rascal; he is coming along
There behind, now upon my Shoul that he is.

C. Bl. The Rascal comes for some mischief. Teg, now, or
Never play the Man.

Teg. How should I be a Man then?


C. Bl. Thy Master is never to be got out, if this Rogue
Gets hither; meet him therefore, Teg, in the most winning
Manner thou can, and make him once more Drunk, and it
Shall be called the Second Edition of Obadiah, put forth
With Irish Notes upon him; and if he will not go drink with thee.

Teg. I will carry him upon my backside, if he will not go;
And if he will not be Drunk, I will cut his Throat then, that
I will, for my sweet Master now, that I will.

C. Bl. Dispatch good Teg, and dispatch him too if he will
Not be conformable; and if thou can but once more
Be Victorious, bring him in Triumph to Lieutenant Story's,
There shall be the general Rendezvous: Now or never, Teg.

Teg. I warrant you, I will get drink into his Pate, or I will
Break it for him; that I will, I warrant you: He shall
Not come after you now.

C. Bl. Good luck go with thee: The Fellow's faithful and
Stout; that fear's over: Now to my station.

C. Careless as in Prison. Exit. C Car. The time's almost come, how slow it
flutters?
My desires are better winged: how I long to counterfeit
A faintness when I come to the bottom, and sink into the arms
Of this dear witty fair! -- Ha, who is this?

Enter Soldier. Soul. Here, Sir, here is a Ladder of Ropes, fasten it to your
Window, and descend: you shall be waited for.

C. Car. The careful her creature has sent it -- but d'hear, Sir,
Could you not spare that implement by your side; it might
Serve to keep off small Curs.

Soul. You Will have no need on it, but there it is, make haste,
The coast is clear.

Exit. C. Car. O this pretty she Captain General over my Soul
And body; the thought of her musters every faculty I have:
She has sent the Ropes, and stays for me; no danger of the
Ropes, ever slide down with that swiftness (of desire of haste)
That I will make to thee.

Exit. Enter Blunt in his Soldiers Coat. C. Bl. All Is quiet, and the coast
clear; so far it goes well;
That is the window, in this nook I Will stand, till I see him
Coming down.

Steps in. C. Careless above in his Soldiers habit, lets down the Ladder of
Ropes and speaks. C. Car. I cannot see my North Star that I must Sail by, it is
Clouded, only she stands close perhaps in some corner;
I Will not trifl time, all is clear; Fortune, forbear
Thy tricks, but for this small occasion.

Enter Blunt. C. Bl. What Is this, a Soldier in the place; Careless,
I am betrayed, but I Will end this Rascals duty.

C. Car. How, a Soldier! betrayed! this Rascal shall not laugh at me.


C. Bl. Dog.


C. Car. How Blunt!


C Bl. Careless!


C. Car. You guess shrewdly; plague, what contrivance
Has set you and I a Tilting at one another.

C. Bl. How the Devil got you a Soldiers habit?


C. Car. The same Friend for ought I know, that furnished you.
This kind Gentlewoman is Ruth still. Ha, here she is;
I was just ready to be suspicious.

Enter Ruth, with a Ladder of Ropes. Ruth. Who Is there?


C. Car. Two notable charging Red-coats.


Ruth. As I live, my heart is at my mouth.


C. Car. Prithee, let it come to thy Lips, that I may kiss it;
What have you in your lap?

Ruth. The Ladder of Ropes: How a Gods name got you hither?


C. Car. Why, I had the Ladder of Ropes, and came down by it.


C Bl then the mistake is plainer; 'twas I that sent the
Soldier with the Ropes.

Ruth. What an Escape was this! come, let us lose no time;
Here Is no place to explain Matters in.

C. Car. I will stay to tell thee, I shall never deserve thee.


Ruth. Tell me so when you have had me a little while. Come*
Follow me, put on your plainest Ga^b; not like a Dancing
Master, with your Toes out. Come along,
Hang down your head, Ruth pulls their Hats over their Eyes*
As if you wanted pay. So.

Exit. Enter Mr. Day, Mrs. Day, Abel, and Mrs. Chat. Mrs. Day. Are you sure of
this, Neighbor Chat?


Mrs. Chapter I Am as sure of it, as I am that I have a Nose to my Face.


Mrs Day. Is my --
You may give one leave methinks to ask out one question.
Is my Daughter Ruth with her?

Mrs. Chapter She was not when I saw Mrs. Arbella last; I have not
Been so often at your Honors House, but that I know
Mrs. Arbella, the rich Heir, that Mr. Abel was to have had,
Good Gentleman, if he has his due; they never suspected
Me for -- to buy things of my Neighbor Story, before she
Married the Lieutenant; and stepping in to see Mrs. Story
That now is; my Neighbor Wish-well, that was; I saw, as
I told you, this very Mrs. Arbella, and I warrant Mrs. Ruth
Is not far off.

Mrs. Day. Let me advise then, Husband.


Mr. Day. Do, good Duck, I Will warrant 'em.


Mrs. Day. You Will warrant when I have done the business.


Mr. Day. I mean so, Duck.


Mrs Day. Well, pray spare your meaning too; first then
We'll go our selves in person to this Story's House, and in the
Mean time send Abel for Soldiers; and when he has brought
The Soldiers, let them stay at the Door, and come up himself;
And then if fair means will not do, foul shall.

Mr. Day. Excellent well advised, sweet Duck:
Ah let thee alone. Be gone, Abel, and observe thy Mother's
Directions. Remember the place. We'll be revenged for
Robbing us, and for all their tricks.

Abel. I shall perform it.


Mrs. Day. Come along, Neighbor, and show us the best way,
And by and by we shall have news from Obadiah, who is gone
To give the the other Colonels Jailer a double charge to keep
The wild Youth close. Come, Husband, let us hasten. Mrs. Chat,
The State shall know what good service you have done.

Mrs. Chat. I thank your Honor.


Exeunt* Enter Arbella and Lieutenant. Lieu Pray, Madam, weep no more; spare
your tears till
You know they have miscarried.

Arb. It Is a Woman, Sir, that weeps; we want Men's reasons
And their courage to practice with.

Lieu. Look up, Madam, and meet your unexpected joys.


Enter Ruth, C. Careless, C. Blunt. Arb. Oh my dear Friend, my dear, dear Ruth.


C. Car. Pray none of these phlegmatic hugs; there, take
Your Colonel, my Captain and I can hug afresh every minute.

Ruth. When did we hug last, good Soldier?


C. Car. I have done nothing but hugged thy infancy, ever since
You Ruth turned Annice.

Arb. You are welcome, Sir, I cannot deny
I shared in all your danger.

Lieu If she had denied it, Colonel, I would have betrayed her.


C. Bl. I know not what to say, nor how to tell, how dearly,
How well -- I love you.

Arb. Now cannot I say I love him, yet I have
A mind to tell him too.

Ruth. Keep't in and choke your self, or get the rising of the lights.


Arb. What shall I say?


Ruth. Say something, or he will vanish.


C. Bl. Do You not believe I love you, or cannot you love me?
Not a word? could you -- but --

Arb. No more, I Will save you the labor of Courtship, which
Should be too tedious to all plain and honest natures:
It is enough, I know you love me.

C. Bl. Or may I perish whilst I am swearing it.


Lieu. How now, Jack!


Enter Prentice. Boy. O Master, undone! here is Mr. Day the Committee-man,
And his fierce Wife, come into the Shop: Mrs Chat
Brought them in, and they say they will come up, they know
That Mrs. Arbella, and their Daughter Ruth, is here:
Deny 'em if you dare, they say.

Lieu. Go down, Boy, and tell 'em I Am coming to 'em; this pure
Jade, my Neighbor Chat, has betrayed us; what shall I do?
I warrant the Rascal has Soldiers at his heels: I think I
Could help the Colonels out at a back Door.

C. Bl. I Would dye rather by my Arbella; Now
You shall see I love you.

C. Car. Nor will I Charles forsake you Annice.


Ruth. Come, be cheerful, I Will defend you all against
The assaults of Captain Day, and Major General Day, his
New drawn up Wife; give me my Ammunition, the Papers,
Woman. So, if I do not rout 'em, fall on; let us all dye together,
And make no more Graves but one.

C. Bl. 'Slife, I love her now for all she has jeered me so.


Ex. Lieut. Ruth. Go fetch 'em in, Lieutenant, stand you all drawn up
As my reserve -- so -- I for the Forlorn Hope.

C. Car. That we had, Teg, here to quarrel with the Female
Triumphing Day, whilst I threw the Ma^e Day out of the Window.
Hark, I hear the Troop marching; I know the she Day stamp
Among the tramples of a Regiment.

Arb. They come, Wench, charge 'em bravely,
I Will second thee with a Volley.

Ruth. They Will not stand the first charge, fear not;
Now the Day breaks.

C. Car. Would 'twere his Neck were broke.


Enter Mr. Day, and Mrs. Day. Mrs. Day. Ah ha, my fine run-aways, have I found
you?
What, you think my Husbands honor lives without intelligence.
Marry come up.

Mr. Day. My Duck tells you how it is -- we --


Mrs. Day. Why then let your Duck tell 'em how it is;
Yet as I was saying, you shall perceive we abound in intelligence;
Else 'twere not for us to go about to keep the Nation
Quiet; but if you, Mrs. Arbella, will deliver up what you have
Stolen, and submit, and return with us, and this ungracious Ruth.

Ruth. Anne, if you please.


Mrs. Day. Who gave you that Name pray?


Ruth. My Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism; on, for
Sir, I can answer a Leaf farther.

Mr. Day. Duck, good Duck, a word; I do not like this
Name Annice.

Mrs. Day. You are ever in a fright, with a shrivelled heart
Of your own. Well, Gentlewomen, you are merry.

Arb. As newly come out of our Wardships, I hope Mr. Abell is well.


Mrs. Day. Yes, he is well, you shall see him presently;
Yes, you shall see him.

C. Car. That is with Mirmidans, come, good Anne, no more
Delay, fall on.

Ruth. Then before the furious Abel approaches with his
Red-Coats, who perhaps are now marching under the Conduct
Of that expert Captain in weighty matters; know the Articles
Of our Treaty are only these: This Arbella will keep her
Estate, and not marry Abel, but this Gentleman; and I
Anne, Daughter to Sir Basil Thorowgood, and not Ruth,
As has been thought, have taken my own Estate,
Together with this Gentleman, for better for worse: we were
Modest, though Thieves, only plundered our own.

Mrs. Day. Yes, Gentlewoman, you took something else,
And that my Husband can prove; it may cost you your Necks
If you do not submit.

Ruth. Truth on it is, we did take something else.


Mrs. Day. Oh, did you so?


Ruth. Pray give me leave to speak one word in private
With my Father Day?

Mrs. Day. Do so, do so; are you going to compound?
Oh, it is Father Day now.

Ruth. D'hear, Sir, how long is it since you have practiced Physic?


Takes him aside. Mr. Day. Physic, what do you mean?


Ruth. I mean Physic; look ye here is a small prescription
Of yours: do you know this handwriting?

Mr. Day. I am undone.


Ruth. Here Is another upon the same subject; this young one I
Believe came into this wicked World for want of your preventing
Dose; it will not be taken now neither; it seems your Wenches
Are willful: nay, I do not wonder to see 'em have more
Conscience than you have.

Mr. Day. Peace, good Mrs. Anne, I am undone if you betray me.


Enter Abel, goes to his Father. Abel. The Soldiers are come.


Mr. Day. Go and send 'em away, Abel; here is no need,
No need now.

Mrs. Day. Are the Soldiers come, Abel?


Abel. Yes, but my Father bids me send 'em away.


Mr. Day. No, not without your opinion, Duck; but since
They have but their own, I think, Duck, if we were all Friends.

Mrs. Day. O, are you at your ifs again; do you think they
Shall make a Fool of me, though they make an Ass of you:
Call 'em up, Abel, if they will not submit;
Call up the Soldiers, Abel.

Ruth. Why your fierce Honor shall know the business
That makes the wise Mr. Day inclinable to Friendship.

Mr. Day. Nay, good sweet heart, come, I pray let us be Friends.


Mrs. Day. How Is this! what am not I ^it to be trusted now?
Have you built your credit and reputation upon my council
And labors, and am not I ^it now to be trusted?

Mr. Day. Nay, good sweet Duck, I confess I owe
All to thy wisdom. Good Gentlemen, persuade my Duck
That we may be all Friends.

C. Car. Hark you, good Gillian Day, be not so fierce upon
The Husband of thy Bosom; 'twas but a small start of frailty;
Say it were a Wench, or so?

Ruth. As I live he has hit upon it by chance: now we
Shall have sport.

Aside. Mrs. Day. How, a Wench, a Wench! out upon the Hypocrite.
A Wench! was not I sufficient? a Wench! I Will be revenged,
Let him be ashamed if he will: call the Soldiers, Abel.

C. Car. Haste, good Abel, march not off so hastily.


Arb. Soft, gentle Abel, or I Will discover, you are in Bonds;
You shall never be released if you move a step.

Ruth. D'hear, Mrs. Day, be not so furious, hold your peace;
You may divulge your Husbands shame if you are so simple,
And cast him out of Authority, nay and have him trv'd for
His Life: read this, remember too I know of your Bribery
And Cheating, and something else* you guess, be Friends,
And forgive one another; here is a Letter counterfeited
From the King, to bestow preferment upon Mr. Day, if
He would turn honest; by which means I suppose you
Cousened your Brother Cheats, in which he was to remember
His service to you; I believe 'twas your indicting: you are the
Committee-man, it is your best way: nay, never demur;
So, kiss and be Friends. Now if you can contrive handsomely
To cozen those that cozen all the World, and get these
Gentlemen to come by their Estates easily, and without
Taking the Covenant, the old Sum of five hundred pound
That I used to talk of, shall be yours yet.

Mrs. Day. We will endeavor.


Ruth. Come, Mrs. Arbella, pray let us all be Friends.


Arb. With all my heart.


Ruth. Brethren, Abel, the Bird is flown, but you shall be
Released from your Bonds.

Abel. I bear my afflictions as I may.


Enter Teg leading Obadiah in a Halter, and Musician. Teg. What is this now?
who are you? well, are not you
Mrs. Tay? well, I will tell her what I should say now?
Shall I then? I will try if I cannot laugh too, as I did, that I will.

C. Car. No, good Teg, there is no need of thy Message now;
But why do thou lead Obadiah thus?

Teg. Well, I will hang him presently, that I will; look you
Here Mrs Tay, here is your Man Obadiah, do you see that now?
He would not let me make him drunk; no more that
He would not; so, I did take him in this string, and I did tell
Him if he did make noises, I would put the Knife into
Him, that I would upon my Soul.

C Bl. Honest Teg, thy Master is beholding to thee in some
Measure for his liberty.

C. Car. Teg, I shall require thy honesty.


Teg. Well, shall I hang him then? It is a Rogue now; who
Would not be drunk, that he would not.

Obad. I do beseech you, Gentlemen, let me not
Be brought unto death?

C. Car. No, poor Teg, it is enough we are all Friends;
Come, let him go.

Teg. Well, he shall go then; but you shall love the King,
Or I will hang you another time, that I will by my Soul. Well,
Look you here now, here is the Man that sung you the Song,
That he is; I met him as I came, and I bid him come hither
And sing for the King, that I did.

C. Car. D'hear, my Friends, is any of your
Companions with you?

Mu. Yes, Sir.


C. Car. As I live we'll all dance; it shall be the celebration
Of our Weddings: nay, Mr. Day, as we hope to continue
Friends, you and your Duck shall trip it too.

Teg. I by my Soul will we; Obadiah shall be my Woman too;
And you shall dance for the King, that you shall.

C. Car. Go, and strike up then, no chiding now, Mrs. Day;
Come, you must not be refractory for once.

Mrs. Day. Well, Husband, since these Gentlemen will have
It so, and that they may perceive we are Friends,
Dance.

C. Bl. Now, Mr. Day, to your business, get it done as soon as
You will, the five hundred pound shall be ready.

C. Car. So, Friends, thank honest Teg, thou shall flourish
In a new Livery for this: Now, Mrs. Annice, I hope you and
I may agree about kissing, and compound every way.
Now, Mr. Day, if you will have good luck in every thing,
Turn Cavalier, and cry, God bless the King.

Exeunt. Epilogue.
BUT now the greatest thing is left to do,
More just Committee, to Compound with you;
For, till your equal Censures shall be known,
The Poet's under Sequestration:
He has no Title to his small Estate
Of Wit, unless you please to set the Rate.
Accept this half years purchase of his Wit,
For in the compass of that time 'twas Writ:
Not that this is enough, he will pay you more,
If you your selves believe him not too poor:
For it is your judgments give him wealth, in this,
He Is just as rich as you believe he is.
Would all Committees could have done like you,
Made Men more rich, and by their payments too.
FINIS.
THE Indian Queen, A TRAGEDY. Written by the Honorable Sir ROBERT HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold by R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. MDCXCII.

Dramatis Personae.
THE Ynca of Peru. Montezuma his General. Acacis Son to Zempoalla. Traxalla
General to Zempoalla. Garrucca, a faithful Subject to Amexia. The God of
Dreams. Ismeron, one of their Prophets, a Conjurer. Officers and Soldiers.
Peruvians and Mexicans. Priests.
Amexia, the lawful Queen of Mexico. Zempoalla, the Usurping Indian Queen. D
Orazia, Daughter to the Ynca. Attendants of Ladies.
PROLOGUE.
As the Music plays a soft Air, the Curtain rises softly, and discovers an
Indian Boy and Girl sleeping under two Plantain-Trees; and when the Curtain is
almost up, the Music turns into a Tune expressing an Alarm, at which the Boy
wakes and speaks. Boy. WAke, wake, Que^ira; our soft rest must cease,
And fly together with our Country's Peace;
No more must we sleep under Plantain shade,
Which neither H^^t could pierce, nor Cold invade;
Where bounteous Nature never feels decay,
And opening Buds drive falling Fruits away.

Que. Why should men quarrel here, where all possess
As much as they can hope for by success?
None can have most, where Nature is so kind
As to exceed Man's Use, though not his Mind.

Boy. By ancient Prophecies we have been told
Our World shall be subdued by one more old;
And see that World already's hither come.

Que. If these be they, we welcome then our Doom.
Their Looks are such, that Mercy flows from thence,
More gentle than our Native Innocence.

Boy. Why should we then fear these are Enemies,
That rather seem to us like Deities?

Que. By their protection let us beg to live;
They came not here to Conquer, but Forgive.
If so, your Goodness may your Power express;
And we shall judge both best by our success.

THE Indian Queen.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Ynca, Orazia, Montezuma, Acasis, Prisoners, with Peruvians. Ynca. THrice
have the Mexicans before us fled,
Their Armies broke, their Prince in Triumph led;
Both to thy Valor, brave young Man, we owe;
Ask thy Reward, but such as it may show
It is a King thou have obliged, whose Mind
Is large, and like his Fortune unconfined.

Mont. Young and a Stranger to your Court I came,
There by your Favor raised to what I am:
I Conquer, but in right of your great Fate,
And so your Arms, not mine, are Fortunate.

Ynca. I am impatient, till this Debt be paid,
Which still increases on me while delayed;
A Bounteous Monarch to himself is kind;
Ask such a Gift as may for ever bind
Thy service to my Empire, and to me.

Mont. What can this Gift he bids me ask him be!
Perhaps he has perceived our mutual Fires,
And now with ours, would crown his own Desires;
It Is so, he sees my Service is above
All other payments but his Daughters Love.

Aside. Ynca. So quick to merit, and to take so slow?
I first prevent small wishes, and bestow
This Prince, his Sword and Fortunes to thy hand;
He Is thine unasked; Now make thy free demand.

Mont. Here, Prince, receive this Sword, as only due Gives Acacis his Sword.
To that excess of Courage shown in you.
When you without demand, a Prince bestow,
Less than a Prince to ask of you, were low.

Ynca. Then ask a Kingdom; say where thou will Reign.


Mont. I beg not Empires, those my Sword can gain;
But for my past and future Service too,
What I have done, and what I mean to do;
For this of Mexico which I have won,
And Kingdoms I will Conquer yet unknown;
I only ask from fair Orazia's Eyes
To reap the Fruits of all my Victories.

1. Peru Our Ynca's Color mounts into his Face.


2. Peru. His Looks speak Death.


Ynca. Young Man of unknown Race,
Ask once again, so well thy Merits plead;
Thou shal't not Die for that which thou have said:
The price of what thou ask'st, thou do not know;
That Gift's too high.

Mont. And all besides too low.


Ynca. Once more I bid thee ask.


Mont. Once more I make
The same demand.

Ynca. The Ynca bids thee take
Thy choice, what Towns, what Kingdoms thou would have.

Mont. Thou giv'st me only what before I gave.
Give me thy Daughter.

Ynca. Thou deserve to dye.
O thou great Author of our Progeny,
Thou glorious Sun, do thou not blush to shine,
While such base Blood attempts to mix with thine!

Mont. That Sun thou speakst of did not hide his face,
When he beheld me Conquering for his Race.

Ynca. My Fortunes gave thee thy success in Fight;
Convey thy boasted Valor from my sight;
I can overcome without thy feeble aid.

Exit. Ynca, Orazia, Peruvians. Mont. And is it thus, my Services are paid?
Not all his Guards --

Offers to go, Acaces holds him. Aca. Hold, Sir.


Mont. Unhand me.


Aca. No, I must your Rage prevent,
From doing what your Reason would repent;
Like the vast Seas, your Mind no limits knows,
Like them lies open to each Wind that blows.

Mont. Can a Revenge that is so just be ill?


Aca. It is Orazia's Father you would kill.


Mont. Orazia, how that name has charmed my Sword?


Aca. Compose these wild Distempers in your Breast;
Anger, like Madness, is appeased by Rest.

Mont. Bid Children sleep, my spirits boil too high;
But since Orazia's Father must not Dye,
A nobler Vengeance shall my Actions guide,
I Will bear the Conquest, to the conquered side,
Until this Ynca for my Friendship sues,
And proffers what his Pride does now refuse.

Aca. Your Honor is obliged to keep your trust.


Mont. He broke that Bond in ceasing to be just.


Aca. Subjects to Kings should more Obedience pay.


Mont. Subjects are bound, not Strangers, to obey.


Aca. Can you so little your Orazia prize,
To give the Conquest to her Enemies?
Can you so easily forego her sight?
I that hold Liberty more dear than Light:
Yet to my freedom, should my chains prefer,
And think it were well lost to stay with her.

Mont. How unsuccessfully I still overcome,
I brought a Rival, not a Captive home;
Yet I may be deceived; but it is too late
To clear those doubts, my stay brings certain fate. Aside.
Come, Prince, you shall to Mexico return,
Where your sad Armies do your absence mourn;
And in one Battle I will gain you more
Than I have made you lose in three before.

Aca No, Montezuma, though you change your side,
I as a Prisoner am by Honor tied.

Mont. You are my Prisoner, and I set you free.


Aca. 'Twere baseness ^o accept such Liberty.


Mont. From him that Conquered you, it should be fought.


Aca. No, but from him, for whom my Conqueror fought.


Mont. Still you are mine, his Gift has made you so.


Aca. He gave me to his General, not his Foe.


Mont. How poorly have you pleaded Honors Laws?
Yet shun the greatest in your Country's Cause.

Aca. What succor can the Captive give the Free?


Mont. A needless Captive is an Enemy,
In painted Honor you would seem to shine;
But 'twou'd be clouded, were your wrongs like mine.

Aca. When Choler such unbridled power can have,
Thy Virtue seems but thy revenge's Slave:
If such injustice should my Honor stain,
My Aid would prove my Nations loss, not gain.

Mont. Be cousend by thy guilty honesty,
To make thy self thy Countrey's Enemy.

Aca. I do not mean in the next Fight to stain
My Sword in Blood of any Mexican,
But will be present in the fatal strife
To guard Orazia's, and the Ynca's Life.

Mont. Orazia's Life, fond Man: First guard thy own,
Her Safety she must owe to me alone.

Aca. Your Sword that does such Wonders, cannot be,
In an ill Cause, secure of Victory.

Mont. Hark, hark.


Noise of trampling. Aca. What noise is this invades my ears?
Fly, Montezuma, fly; the Guards are near
To favor your Retreat: I Will freely pay
That Life, which you so frankly gave this day.

Mont. I must retire, but those that follow me,
Pursue their Deaths, and not their Victory.

Ex. Mont. Aca. Our Quarrels kinder, than our Friendships prove:
You for my Country Fight, I for your Love.

Enter Ynca and Guards. Ynca. I was to blame, to leave this mad Man free,
Perhaps he may revolt to the Enemy,
Or stay, and raise some fatal Mutiny.

Aca. Stop your Pursuits, for they must pass through me.


Ynca. Where is the slave?


Aca. Gone. --


Ynca. Whither?


Aca. Over the Plain. --
Where he may soon the Camp, or City gain.

Ynca. Curse on my dull neglect --
And yet I do less cause of wonder find,
That he is gone, than that thou stayest behind.

Aca. My treatment since you took me was so free,
It wanted but the name of liberty.
I with less shame can still your Captive live,
Than take that freedom which you did not give.

Ynca. Thou brave young Man, that have thy years outdone,
And losing Liberty have Honor won:
I must my self thy Honor's Rival make,
And give that freedom which thou would not take.
Go and be safe. --

Aca. But that you may be so --
Your dangers must be past before I go.
Fierce Montezuma will for sight prepare,
And bend on you the fury of the War,
Which by my presence I will turn away,
If Fortune gives my Mexicans the Day.

Ynca. Come then, we are alike to honor just,
Thou to be trusted thus, and I to trust. --

Ex. all. Enter Zempoalla, Traxalla, and Attendants. Zemp. O my Acacis!
Does not my grief, Traxalla, seem too rude,
Thus to press out before my Gratitude
Has paid my debts to you? -- yet it does move
My Rage and Grief, to see those Powers above
Punish such Men, as if they be Divine,
They know will most Adore, and least Repine.

Trax. Those that can only mourn when they are crossed,
May lose themselves with grieving for the lost.
Rather to your retreated Troops appear,
And let them see a Woman void of fear:
The shame of that may call their Spirits home.
Were the Prince safe, we were not overcome,
Though we retired: O his too youthful heat,
That thrust him where the dangers were so great!
Heaven wanted power his Person to protect,
From that which he had Courage to neglect:
But since he is lost, let us draw forth, and pay
His Funeral Rites in Blood; that we are they
May in our Fates perform his Obsequies,
And make Death Triumph when Acacis dies.

Zemp. That Courage thou have shown in Fight seems less
Than this, amidst Despair to have Excess:
Let thy great deeds force Fate to change her mind,
He that courts Fortune boldly makes her kind.

Trax. If ever Traxalla so successful proves,
May be then say he hopes as well as Loves;
And that aspiring Passion boldly own,
Which gave my Prince his Fate, and you his Throne?
I did not feel Remorse to see his Blood
^ow from the spring of life into a flood;
Nor did it look like Treason, since to me
You were a Sovereign much more great than he.

Zemp. He was my Brother, yet I scorned to pay
Nature's mean debts, but threw those Bonds away;
When his own Issue did my hopes remove,
Not only from his Empire, but his Love.
You that in all my wrongs then bore a part,
Now need not doubt a place within my heart:
I could not offer you my Crown and Bed,
Till Fame and Envy with long time were dead;
But Fortune now does happily present
Occasions fit to second my intent.
Your Valor may regain the Public Love,
And make the Peoples Choice their Queens approve. Shout.
Hark, hark, what noise is this that strikes my Ear!

Trax. It Is not a sound that should beget a fear;
Such Shouts as these have I heard often fly
From Conquering Armies crowned with Victory.

Zemp. Great God of Vengeance, here I firmly vow,
Make but my Mexicans successful now,
And with a thousand Feasts thy flames I Will feed;
All that I take shall on thy Altars bleed;
Princes themselves shall fall, and make thy Shrine,
Died with their blood, in glorious blushes shine.

Enter Messenger. Trax. How now! --
What News is this that makes thy haste a flight?

Mess. Such as brings Victory without a Fight;
The Prince Acaces lives. --

Zemp. Oh, I am blessed. --


Mess. Reserve some joy till I have told the rest.
He Is safe, and only wants his liberty;
But that great Man that carries Victory
Where ever he goes; that mighty Man by whom
In three set Battles we were overcome;
Ill used (it seems) by his ungrateful King,
Does to our Camp his Fate and Valor bring.
The Troops gaze on him, as if some bright Star
Shot to their Aids, call him the God of War:
Whilst he, as if all Conquest did of right
Belong to him, bids them prepare to fight;
Which if they should delay one hour, he swears
He Will leave them to their Dangers or their Fears,
And Shame (which is the ignoble Cowards choice.)
At this the Army seemed to have one Voice,
United in a shout, and called upon
The God-like Stranger, Lead us, lead us on.
Make haste, Great Sir, lest you should come too late,
To share with them in Victory or Fate.

Zemp. My General go; the Gods be on our side;
Let Valor act, but let Discretion guide. Exit Traxalla.
Great God of Vengeance --
I see thou do begin to hear me now;
Make me thy Offering if I break my Vow.

Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Ynca, Orazia, as pursued in a Battle. Orazia. O Fly, Sir, fly, like
torrents your swift Foes
Come rolling on. --

Ynca. The Gods can but destroy.
The noblest way to fly, is that death shows;
I Will court her now, since Victory's grown ^oy.

Oraz. Death's winged to your pursuit, and yet you wait
To meet her --

Ynca. Poor Orazia, time and fate
Must once overtake me* though I now should fly.

Oraz. Do not meet death; but when it comes then dye.


Enter three Soldiers. 3. Sold. Stand, Sir, and yield your self, and that
fair prey.


Ynca. You speak to one unpracticed to obey.


Enter Montezuma. Mont. Hold, Villains, hold, or your rude lives shall be
Lost in the midst of your own Victory:
These I have hunted for; nay do not stare,
Be gone, and in the common plunder share. Ex. Sold.
How different is my Fate, from theirs, whose Fame
From Conquest grows! from Conquest grows my shame.

Ynca. Why do thou pause? thou can not give me back
With fruitless grief, what I enjoyed before,
No more than Seas repenting of a Wrack,
Can with a calm our buried wealth restore.

Mont. 'Twere vain to own repentance, since I know
Thy scorn, which did my passions once despise,
Once more would make my swelling anger flow;
Which now ebbs lower than your miseries:
The Gods that in my fortunes were unkind,
Gave me not Scepters, nor such gilded things;
But whilst I wanted Crowns; enlarged my mind
To despise Scepters, and dispose of Kings.

Ynca. Thou art but grown a Rebel by success,
And I that scorned Orazia should be tied
To thee my slave, must now esteem thee less:
Rebellion is a greater guilt than Pride.

Mont. Princes see others faults but not their own;
'Twas you that broke that Bond, and set me free:
Yet I attempted no^ to climb your Throne,
And raise my self; but level you to me.

Oraz. O Montezuma, could thy love engage
Thy Soul so little, or make Banks so low
About thy heart, that thy revenge and rage,
Like sudden Floods, so soon should overflow!
Ye Gods, how much was I mistaken here!
I thought you gentle as the gaulless love;
But you as humoursome as Winds appear,
And subject to more Passions than your Love.

Mont. How have I been betrayed by guilty rage,
Which like a flame rose to so vast a height
That nothing could resist, nor yet assuage,
Till it wrapped all things in one cruel fate,
But I Will redeem my self, and act such things,
That you shall blush Orazia was denied;
And yet make Conquest, though with wearied Wings,
Take a new flight to your now fainting side.

Ynca. Vain Man, what foolish thoughts fill thy swelled mind?
It is too late our ruin to recall;
Those that have once great Buildings undermined
Will prove too weak to prop them in their fall.

Enter Traxalla with the former Soldiers. 1 Sold. See, mighty Sir, where the
bold stranger stands,
Who snatched these glorious Prisoners from our hands.

Trax. It Is the great Ynca, seize him as my prey,
To crown the triumphs of this glorious day.

Mont. Stay your bold hands from reaching at what is mine,
If any title springs from Victory;
You safer may attempt to rob a shrine,
And hope forgiveness from the Deity.

Enter Acacis. Trax. O my dear Prince, my Joys to see you live
Are more than all that Victory can give.

Aca. How are my best endeavors crossed by fate!
Else you had never been lost, or found so late.
Hurried by the wild fury of the fight,
Far from your presence, and Orazia's sight,
I could not all that care and duty show,
Which as your Captive (mighty Prince) I owe.

Ynca. You often have preserved our lives this day,
And one small debt with many bounties pay.
But humane actions hang on springs that be
Too small, or too remote for us to see.
My glories freely I to yours resign,
And am your Prisoner now, that once were mine.

Mont. These Prisoners, Sir, are mine by right of War;
And I Will maintain that right, if any dare.

Trax. Yes, I would snatch them from thy weak defense;
But that due reverence which I owe my Prince,
Permits me not to quarrel in his sight,
To him I shall refer his General's right.

Mont. I knew too well what Justice I should find
From an armed Plaintiff, and a judge so kind.

Aca. Unkindly urged, that I should use thee so;
Thy Virtue is my Rival, not my Foe;
The Prisoners Fortune gave thee shall be thine.

Trax. Would you so great a prize to him resign?


Aca. Should he who boldly for his Prey designed
To dive the deepest under swelling tides,
Have the less title if he chance to find*
The richest ^ewel that the Ocean hides?
They are his due --
But in his Virtue I re pose that trust,
That he will be as kind as I am just:
Dispute not my Commands, but go with haste,
Rally our Men, they may pursue too fast,
And the disorders of the inviting Prey
May turn again the fortune of the day.

Ex Trax. Mont. How gentle all this Prince's actions be!
Virtue is calm in him, but rough in me.

Aca Can Montezuma place me in his Breast?


Mont. My heart's not large enough for such a Guest.


Aca. See, Montezuma, see, Orazia weeps.


Orazia weeps. Mont. Acacis, is he deaf, or waking, sleeps?
He does not hear me, sees me not, nor moves;
How firm his Eyes are on Orazia fixed!
Gods that take care of Men, let not our loves
Become divided by their being mixed.

Aca. Weep not, fair Princess, nor believe you are
A Prisoner subject to the chance of War;
Why should you waste the stock of those fair Eyes
That from Mankind can take their liberties?
And you, great Sir, think not a generous mind
To virtuous Princes, dares appear unkind,
Because those Princes are unfortunate,
Since over all Men hangs a doubtful fate:
One gains by what another is bereft;
The frugal Deities have only left
A common bank of happiness below,
Maintained like nature, by an ebb and flow.

Ex. omnes. Zempoalla appears seated upon a Throne, frowning upon her
Attendants* then comes down and speaks. Zemp. No more, you that above your
Princes dare proclaim
With your rebellious breath a stranger's name.

1. Peru. Dread Empress --


Zemp. Slaves, perhaps you grieve to see
Your young Prince glorious, 'cause he sprang from me;
Had he been one of base Amexia's brood,
Your Tongues, though silent now, had then been loud.

Enter Traxalla. Traxalla, welcome, welcomer to me,
Than what thou bring'st, a Crown and Victory.

Trax. All I have done is nothing, fluttering Fame
Now tells no News, but of the Stranger's Name,
And his great Deeds; it is he they cry by whom
Not Men, but War it self is overcome;
Who bold with his success, dares think to have
A Prince to wear his Chains, and be his Slave.

Zemp. What Prince --


Trax. The great Peruvian Ynca, that of late
In three set Battles was so Fortunate,
Till this strange Man had power to turn the tide,
And carry Conquest unto any side.

Zemp. Would you permit a private Man to have
The great Peruvian Ynca for his Slave!
Shame to all Princes! was it not just now
I made a sacred, and a solemn Vow
To offer up (if blessed with Victory)
The Prisoners that were took, and they shall dye.

Trax. I soon had snatched from this proud stranger's hand
That too great object for his bold demand;
Had not the Prince your Son, to whom I owe
A kind obedience, judged it should be so.

Zemp. I Will hear no more; go quickly take my Guards,
And from that Man force those usurpt rewards;
That Prince upon whose Ru^^es I must rise,
Shall be the Gods, but more my Sacrifice:
They with my Slaves in Triumph shall be tied,
While my Devotion justifies my Pride.
Those Deities in whom I place my Trust,
Shall see when they are kind, that I am Just.

Ex. Zemp. Trax. How gladly I obey --
There Is something shoots through my enlivened Frame,
Like a new Soul, but yet without a Name:
Nor can I tell what the bold guest will prove,
It must be Envy, or it must be Love;
Let it be either, it is the greatest bliss
For Man to grant himself, all he dares wish;
For he that to himself, himself denies,
Proves meanly wretched, to be counted wise.

Ex. Traxal. Enter Montezuma, Acacis. Aca. You wrong me, my best friend, not to
believe
Your kindness gives me joy, and when I grieve,
Unwillingly my Sorrows I obey,
Showers sometimes fall upon a shining day.

Mont. Let me then share your Griefs, that in your fate
Would have took part --

Aca. Why should you ask me that?
Those must be mine, though I have such excess;
Divided Griefs increase, and not grow less.

Mont. It does not lessen Fate, nor satisfy
The Grave, it is true, when Friends together dye;
(...)et they are unwilling to divide.

(...). To such a Friend nothing can be denied
You, when you hear my story will forgive
My grief, and rather wonder that I live.
Unhappy in my Title to a Throne,
Since Blood made way for my Succession:
Blood of an Uncle too, a Prince so free
From being Cruel, it taught Cruelty.
His Queen Amexia then was big with Child;
Nor was he ^^ntler, than his Queen was mild:
The impatient people longed for what should come
From such a Father, bred in such a Womb --
When false Traxalla, weary to obey,
Took with his Life their joys and hopes away.
Amexia by the assistance of the Night,
When this dark Deed was acted, took her flight;
Only with true Garrucca for her aid;
Since when, for all the searches that were made,
The Queen was never heard of more: yet still
This Traitor lives, and prospers by the ill:
Nor does my Mother seem ^o reign alone,
But with this Monster shares the guilt and Throne:
Horror choaks up my words; now you will beheve
It Is just I should do nothing else but grieve.

Mont. Excellent Prince. --
How great a proof of virtue have you shown,
To be concerned for griefs, though not your own!

Aca. Pray say no more. --


Enter a Messeng^^ ^astily. Mont. How now, whither so fast?


Mess. O Sir, I come too slow with all my haste!
The fair Orazia --

Mont. Ha, what do thou say?


Mess. Orazia with the Ynca's forced away
Out of your Tent; Traxalla in the head
Of the rude Soldiers, forced the Door, and led
Those glorious Captives, who on Thrones once shined,
To grace the Triumph that is now designed.

Ex. Mess. Mont. Orazia forced away! what tempests roll
About my thoughts, and toss my troubled Soul?
C^n there be Gods to see, and suffer this?
Or does Mankind make his own fate or bliss;
While every good and bad happens by chance,
Not from their orders, but their ignorance --
But I will pull a ruin on them all,
And turn their Triumph to a Funeral.

Aca. Be temperate, Friend.


Mont. You may as well advise
That I should have less love, as grow more wise.

Aca. Yet stay -- I did not think to have revealed
A secret which my heart has still concealed;
But in this cause since I must share with you,
It Is sit you know -- I love Orazia too:
Delay not then, nor wast the time in words,
Orazia's cause calls only for our Swords.

Mont. That ties my hand, and turns from thee that rage
Another way; thy blood should else assuage:
The ^^orm on our proud Foes shall higher rise,
And changing, gather blackness as it flies:
So when Winds turn, the wandering Waves obey,
And all the Tempest rouls another way.

Aca. Draw then a Rivals Sword, as I draw mine,
And like Friends suddenly to part, let us join
In this one act, to seek one destiny;
Rivals with honor may together die.

Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Zempoalla appears seated upon her Slaves in Triumph, and the Indians as to
celebrate the Victory, advance in a Warlike Dance; in the midst of which
Triumph, Acacis and Montezuma fall in upon them. Zempoalla descends from her
Triumphant Throne, and Acacis and Montezuma are brought in before her. Zemp.
SHame of my blood, and Traitor to thy own,
Born to dishonor, not command a Throne;
Have thou with envious Eyes my Triumph seen?
Or could not see thy Mother in the Queen?
Could thou a stranger above me prefer?

Aca. It was my Honor made my Duty err;
I could not see his Prisoners forced away,
To whom I owed my Life, and you the day.

Zemp. Is that young Man the Warrior so renowned?


Mont. Yes, he that made thy Men thrice quit their ground.
Do, smile at Montezuma's Chains; but know,
His Valor gave thee power to use him so.

Trax. Grant that it did, what can his merits be,
That sought his Vengeance, not our Victory?
What has thy brutish fury gained us more,
Than only healed the wounds it gave before?
Dye then, for whilst thou liv'st, Wars cannot cease;
Thou may bring Victory, but never Peace.
Like a black storm thou roul'st about us all,
Even to thy self unquiet till thy fall.

Draws to kill him. Aca. Unthankful Villain, hold.


Trax. You must not give
Him succor, Sir.

Aca. Why then I must not live.
Posterity shall never report they had
Such thankless Fathers, or a Prince so bad.

Zemp. You Are both too bold to will or to deny,
On me alone depends his destiny.
Tell me, audacious Stranger, whence could rise
The confidence of this rash enterprise?

Mont. First tell me how you dared to force from me
The fairest spoils of my own Victory?

Zemp. Kill him -- hold, must he dye? -- why let him dye;
Whence should proceed this strange diversity
In my resolves? --
Does he command in Chains? what would he do
Proud Slave, if he were free, and I were so?
But is he bound, ye Gods, or am I free?
It Is love, it is love, that thus disorders me:
How Pride and Love tear my divided Soul!
For each too narrow, yet both claim it whole:
Love as the younger must be forced away;
Hence with the Captives (General) and convey
To several Prisons that -- young Man, and this --
-- Peruvian Woman --

Trax. How concerned she is!
I must know more.

Mont. Fair Princess, why should I
Involve that sweetness in my destiny?
I could out-brave my death, were I alone
To suffer, but my fate must pull yours on.
My breast is armed against all sense of fear,
But where your Image lies, it is tender there.

Ynca. Forbear thy saucy love, she cannot be
So low, but still she is too high for thee.

Zemp. Be gone, and do as I command, away.


Mont. I never was truly wretched 'till this day*


Orazia. Think half your sorrows on Orazia fall,
And be not so unkind to suffer all:
Patience in Cowards is tame hopeless fear,
But in brave minds a scorn of what they bear.

Exit Ynca, Montezuma, Orazia, Traxalla. Zemp. What grief is this which in your
face appears?


Aca. The badge of sorrow, which my Soul still wears.


Zemp. Though thy late actions did my ^nger move,
It cannot rob thee of a Mother's love*
Why should thou grieve?
Grief seldom joined with blooming youth is seen,
Can sorrow be where knowledge so^^ce has been,
Fortune does well for heedless youth provide,
But Wisdom does unlucky age misguide*
Cares are the train of present power and sta^e,
But hope lives best that on himself do^s wa^^*
O happiest Fortune if well ^^derstood,
The certain prospect of a future good*

Aca. What joy can Empire bring me when I know*
That all my greatness to your crimes ^ owe?

Zemp. Yours be the joy, be mine the punishment.


Aca. In vain alas that wish to Heaven is sent
For me, if fair Orazia must not live.

Zemp. Why should you ask me what I cannot give?
She must be sacrificed: Can I bestow
What to the Gods by (...)?

Aca. O plead not Vows; I wish you had not shown
You slighted all things (...) for a Th^o^e.

Zemp. I love thee so, that though fear follow still,
And horror urges, all that have been (...)
I could for thee --
Act o'r my crimes ^^en, and not ^ep^nt,
Even when I bore the shame and punishment*

Aca. Could you so many ill acts undertake,
And not perform one good (...) ^or my sake?

Zemp. Prudence permits not pity (...) be shown*
To those that raised the War to shake my ^^rone*

Aca. As you are wise, permit (...) just*
What Prudence will not venture, (...) must;
We owe our Conquest to (...),
It Is just his Prisoners be to hi^ restored*
I love Orazia, but a nobler way --
Than for my Love my Honor to betray.

Zemp. Honor is but an itch in youthful Blood,
Of doing Acts extravagantly good;
We call that Virtue, which is only Heat
That reigns in Youth, till Age finds out the cheat.

Aca. Great Actions first did her Affections move,
And I by greater, would regain her love.

Zemp. Urge not a Suit which I must still deny;
Orazia and her Father, both shall dye:
Be gone, I Will hear no more --

Aca. You stop your Ears --
But though a Mother will not, Heaven will hear;
Like you I vow, when to the Powers Divine
You pay her guiltless Blood, I Will offer mine.

Ex. Acacis. Zemp. She dies, this happy Rival that enjoys
The Stranger's love, and all my hopes destroys;
Had She triumphed, what could She more have done,
Than robbed the Mother, and enslaved the Son?
Nor will I at the name of Cruel stay,
Let dull successive Monarchs mildly sway:
Their Conquering Fathers did the Laws forsake,
And broke the Old, e're they the New could make.
I must pursue my Love -- yet Love enjoyed,
Will with esteem that caused it first grow less;
But Thirst and Hunger fear not to be cloyed,
And when they be, are cured by their Excess.

Enter Traxalla. Trax. Now I shall see, what thoughts her Heart conceals;
For that which Wisdom covers, Love reveals.
Madam, the Prisoners are disposed.

Zemp. They are --
And how fares our Young blustering Man of War?
Does he support his Chains with patience yet?

Trax. He, and the Princess, Madam.


Zemp. Are they met? --


Trax. No, but from whence is all this Passion grown?


Zemp. 'Twas a mistake.


Trax. I find this rash Unknown
Is dangerous; and if not timely Slain,
May plunge your Empire in new Wars again.

Zemp. Thank ye, I shall consider.


Trax. Is that all? --
The Army dote on him, already call
You cruel; and for ought I know, they may
By force Unchain, and Crown him in a day.

Zemp. You say, I have already had their curse
For his bad usage; should I use him worse?

Trax. Yet once you feared his Reputation might
Obscure the Prince's in the People's sight.

Zemp. Time will inform us best, what course to steer,
But let us not our Sacred Vows defer:
The Ynca, and his Daughter both shall Dye.

Trax. He Suffers justly for the War; but why
Should she share his sad fate? a poor pretense,
That birth should make a crime of innocence.

Zemp. Yet we destroy the poisonous Vipers young,
Not for themselves, but those from whom they sprung.

Trax. O no, they die not for their Parents sake,
But for the poisonous seed which they partake;
Once more behold her, and then let her dye,
If in that face or person you can see
But any place to fix a Cruelty:
The Heavens have Clouds, and spots are in the Moon;
But faultless Beauty shines in her alone.

Zemp. Beauty has wrought compassion in your mind.


Trax. And you to Valor are become as kind.
To former services there is something due.
Yet be advised --

Zemp. Yes by my self, not you --


Trax. Princes are sacred.


Zemp. True, whilst they are free;
But power once lost, farewell their sanctity:
It Is power to which the Gods their worship owe,
Which, uncontrolled, makes all things just below:
Thou do the Plea of saucy Rebels use,
They will be judge of what their Prince must choose:
Hard fate of Monarchs, not allowed to know
When safe, but as their Subjects tell them so.
Then Princes but like public Pageants move,
And seem to sway because they sit above.

Ex. Zemp. Trax. She loves him; in one moment this new Guest
Has drove me out from this false Woman's Breast;
They that would fetter Love with Constancy,
Make Bonds to Chain themselves, but leave him free.
With what impatience I her fallhood bear!
Yet do my self that which I blame in her;
But Interest in my own Cause makes me see
That Act unjust in her, but just in me.

Exit Traxalla. Ismeron asleep in the Scene. Enter Zempoalla. Zemp. Ho,
Ismeron, Ismeron.
He stirs not; ha, in such a dismal Cell
Can gentle Sleep with his soft blessings dwell?
Must I feel tortures in a humane Breast,
While Beasts and Monsters can enjoy their Rest?
What quiet they possess in sleeps calm bliss!
The Lions cease to roar, the Snakes to hiss,
While I am kept awake --
Only to entertain my Miseries.
Or if a slumber steal upon my Eyes,
Some horrid Dream my laboring Soul benums,
And brings Fate to me sooner than it comes.
Fears most oppress when sleep has seized upon
The outward parts, and left the Soul alone.
What envied blessing's these cursed things enjoy!
Next to possess, it is pleasure to destroy.
Ismeron; ho Ismeron, Ismeron.

Stamps. Ism. Who Is that with so loud and fierce a call
Disturbs my rest?

Zemp. She that has none at all,
Nor ever must, unless thy powerful Art
Can charm the Passions of a troubled heart.

Ism. How can you have a discontented mind,
To whom the Gods have lately been so kind?

Zemp. Their envious kindness how can I enjoy,
When they give Blessings, and the use destroy?

Ism. Dread Empress, tell the cause of all your grief*
If Art can help, be sure of quick Relief.

Zemp. I dreamed before the Altar that I led
A mighty Lion in a twisted thread;
I shook to hold him in so slight a tie,
Yet had not power to seek a remedy:
When in the midst of all my fears a Dove,
With hovering Wings, descended from above,
Flew to the Lion, and Embraces spread,
With Wings, like clasping Arms, about his head,
Making that murmuring noise that cooing Doves
Use in the soft expression of their Loves.
While I, fixed by my wonder, gazed to see
So mild a Creature with so fierce agree,
At last the gentle Dove turned from his head,
And pecking tried to break the slender thread,
Which instantly she severed, and released
From that small bond the fierce and mighty Beast,
Who presently turned all his rage on me,
And with his Freedom brought my Destiny.

Ism. Dread Empress, this strange Vision you relate
Is big with wonder, and too full of fate
Without the Gods assistance to expound.
In those low Regions where sad Night hangs round
The drowsy Vaults, and where moist Vapors steep
The God's dull brows that sways the Realm of Sleep;
There all the informing Elements repair,
Swift Messengers of Water, Fire, and Air,
To give account of Actions whence they came,
And how they govern every mortal frame;
How from their various mixture, or their strife,
Are known the Calms and Tempests of our Life:
Thence Souls, when Sleep their Bodies overcome,
Have some imperfect knowledge of their doom.
From those dark Caves those Powers shall strait appear;
Be not afraid whatever shapes they wear.

Zemp. There Is nothing thou can raise can make me start;
A living form can only shake my heart.

Ism. You twice Ten Hundred Dei^ies,
To whom we daily sacrifice;
You Powers that dwell with Fate below,
And see what men are doomed to do;
Where Elements in discord dwell;
Thou God of Sleep, arise and tell
Great Zempoalla what strange Fate
Must on her dismal Vision wait.

Zemp. How slow these Spirits are! Call, make them rise,
Or they shall fast from Flame and Sacrifice.

Ism. Great Empress --
Let not your rage offend what we adore,
And vainly threaten, when we must implore.
Sit and silently attend, --
While my powerful Charms I end.
By the creaking of the Toad,
In their Caves that make abode,
Earthy Dun that pants for breath,
With her swelled sides full of death;
By the Crested Adders Pride
That along the Clifts do glide*
By thy visage fierce and black;
By the Deaths-head on thy back;
By the twisted Serpents placed
For a Girdle round thy Waste.
By the Hearts of Gold that d^ck
Thy Breast, thy Shoulders, and thy Neck:
From thy sleepy Mansion rise,
And open thy unwilling Eyes,
While bubling Springs their Music keep,
That use to lull thee in thy sleep.

God of Dreams rises. God. Seek not to know what must not be revealed;
Joys only flow where Fate is most concealed:
Too busy Man would find his Sorrows more,
If future Fortunes he should know before*
For by that knowledge of his Destiny
He would not live at all, but always die.
Enquire not then who shall from Bonds be freed,
Who it is shall wear a Crown, and who shall bleed:
All must submit to their appointed doom;
Fate and Misfortune will too quickly come:
Let me no more with powerful Charms be pressed,
I am forbid by Fate to tell the rest.

The God descends. Zemp. Stay Couz'ner, thou that hat'st clear truth like light,
And usest words dark as thy own dull night.
You Tyrants Gods do you refuse to free
The Soul you gave from its perplexity?
Why should we in your mercies still believe,
When you can never pity though we grieve?
For you have bound your selves by harsh decrees;
And those, not you, are now the Deities.

Sits down sad. Ism. She droops under the weight of Rage and Care:
You Spirits that inhabit in the Air,
With all your powerful Charms of Music try
To bring her Soul back to its Harmony.

SONG is supposed sung by Aerial Spirits.
POor Mortals that are clogged with Earth below
Sink under Love and Care,
While we that dwell in Air
Such heavy Passions never know.
Why then should Mortals be
Unwilling to be free
From Blood, that sullen Cloud,
Which shining Souls does shroud?
Then they will show bright,
And like us light,
When leaving Bodies with their Care,
They slide to us and Air.
Zemp. Death on these Trifles: Cannot your Art find
Some means to ease the Passions of the Mind?
Or if you cannot give a Lover rest,
Can you force Love into a Scornful Breast?

Ism. It Is Reason only can make Passions less;
Art gives not new, but may the old increase;
Nor can it alter Love in any Breast
That is with other flames before possessed.

Zemp. If this be all your slighted Art can do,
I Will be a Fate both to your Gods and you;
I Will kindle other Flames, since I must burn,
And all their Temples into ashes turn.

Ism. Great Queen.


Zemp. If you would have this Sentence staid,
Summon their Godheads quickly to your aid,
And presently compose a Charm that may
Loves flames into the Strangers Breast convey,
The Captive Stranger, he whose Sword and Eyes
Where ever they strike meet ready Victories:
Make him but burn for me in flames like mine,
Victims shall bleed, and feasted Altars shine:
If not --
Down go your Temples, and your Gods shall see
They have small use of their Divinity.

Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
The Scene opens and discovers Montezuma sleeping in Prison. Enter Traxalla
leading in Orazia. Trax. NOW take your choice, and bid him live or die;
To both show Pity, or show Cruelty:
It Is you that must condemn, I Will only act;
Your Sentence is more cruel than my Fact.

Oraz. You are most cruel to disturb a mind
Which to approaching Fate was so resigned.

Trax. Reward my Passions, and you will quickly prove
There Is none dare sacrifice what I dare love
Next to thee, Stranger, wake, and now resign
The bold pretenses of thy Love to mine,
Or in this fatal minute thou shall find --

Mont* Death, Fool; in that thou may be just and kind:
'Twas I that loved Orazia, yet did raise
The storm in which she sinks: why do thou gaze,
Or stay thy hand from giving that just stroke,
Which rather than prevent, I would provoke?
When I am dead, Orazia may forgive;
She never must, if I dare wish to live.

Oraz. Hold, hold -- O Montezuma, can you be
So careless of your self, but more of me?
Though you have brought me to this misery,
I blush to say I cannot see you die.

Mont. Can my approaching Fate such pity move?
The Gods and you at once forgive and love.

Trax. Fond Fool, thus to mispend that little breath
I lent thee to prevent, not hasten Death:
Let her thank you she was unfortunate,
And you thank her for pulling on your fate;
Prove to each other your own Destinies.

Draws. Enter Zempoalla hastily, and sets a Dagger to Orazia's Breast. Zemp.
Hold, hold, Traxalla, or Orazia dies.
O, is it Orazia's Name that makes you stay?
It Is her great Power, not mine, that you obey.
Inhumane Wretch, dare thou the Murderer be
Of him that is not yet Condemned by me?

Trax. The Wretch that gave you all the power you have,
May venture sure to execute a Slave;
And quench a flame your fondness would have burn,
Which may this City into ashes turn.
The Nation in your guilty Passion lost,
To me ungrateful, to your Country most:
But this shall be their Offering, I their Priest.

Zemp. The wounds thou giv'st I Will copy on her Breast.
Strike, and I Will open here a spring of blood,
Shall add new Rivers to the crimson flood.
How his pale looks are fixed on her! -- it is so.
Oh, does amazement on your spirit grow?
What, is your public Love Orazia's grown?
Could thou see mine, and yet not hide thy own?
Suppose I should strike first, would it not breed
Grief in your public heart to see her bleed?

Trax. She mocks my passions, in her sparkling eyes
Death and a close dissembled fury lies:
I dare not trust her thus. -- If she must die,
The way to her loved Life through mine shall lie.

He puts her by and steps before Orazia, and she runs before Montezuma. Zemp.
And he that does this Stranger's fate design,
Must to his heart a passage force through mine.

Trax. Can fair Orazia yet no pity have?
It Is just she should her own Preserver save.

Zemp. Can Montezuma so ungrateful prove
To her that gave him Life, and offers Love?

Oraz. Can Montezuma live, and live to be
Just to another, and unjust to me?
You need not be ungrateful; can she give
A Life to you, if you refuse to live?
Forgive me Passion, I had rather see
You dead, than kind to any thing but me.

Mont. O my Orazia!
To what new joys and knowledge am I brought!
Are deaths hard lessons by a Woman taught?
How to despise my Fate I always knew;
But never d^rst think at once of death and you:
Yet since you teach this generous jealousy,
I dare not wish your Life, if I must die.
How much your Love my Courage does exceed!
Courage alone would shrink to see you bleed.

Zemp. Ungrateful Stranger, thou shall please thy Eyes,
And gaze upon Orazia while she dies.
I Will keep my Vow: -- It is some joy to see
That my Revenge will prove my Piety.

Trax. Then both shall die; we have too long withstood,
By private Passions urged, the public good.

Zemp. Sure he dissembles, and perhaps may prove
My ruin with his new ambitious Love:
Were but this Stranger kind, I Would cross his Art,
And give my Empire where I gave my heart. Aside.
Yet thou ungrateful Man,
Let thy approaching ruin make thee wise.

Mont. Thee and thy Love and Mischief I despise.


Zemp. What shall I do? -- some way must yet be tried.
What Reasons can she use whom Passions guide?

Trax. Some black designs are hatching now; false Eyes
Are quick to see another Treacheries.

Zemp. Rash Stranger, thus to pull down thy own fate.


Mont. You, and that Life you offer me, I hate.


Enter Jailer. Zemp. Here Jailer, -- take -- what title must he have?
Slave -- Slave -- Am I then Captive to a Slave!
Why art thou thus unwilling to be free?

Mont. Death will release me from these Chains and thee.


Zemp. Here, Jailer, take this Monster from my sight,
And keep him where it may be always night;
Let none come near him; if thou do, expect
To pay thy Life the price of the Neglect.

Mont. I scorn thy Pity and thy Cruelty,
And should despise a Blessing sent from thee.

Zemp. Oh horror to my Soul! take him away;
My Rage like damned up Streams swelled by some stay
Shall from this opposition get new force,
And leave the bound of its old easy course.
Come, my Traxalla, let us both forgive,
And in these Wretches Fates begin to live.
The Altars shall be crowned with Funeral Boughs,
Peace-offrings paid, but with unquiet Vows.

Ex. Zem. Tr. Oraz. How are things ordered, that the wicked should
Appear more kind and gentle than the good!
Her Passion seems to make her kinder prove,
And I seem cruel through excess of Love:
She loves, and would prevent his Death; but I
That love him better, fear he should not die.
My Jealousy, immortal as my Love,
Would rob my Grave below, and me above,
Of Rest. -- Ye Gods, if I repine, forgive;
You neither let me die in Peace, nor live.

Enter Acacis, Tailor, and Indians. Tailor. They are just gone, Sir.


Aca. It Is well: be faithful to my just design,
And all thy Prince's Fortune shall be thine.

Exit Acacis. Indian. This shall to the Empress.


Exit Indian. Oraz. What can this mean! --
'Twas Prince Acacis, if I durst believe
My sight; but Sorrow may like Joy deceive:
Each object different from it self appears,
That comes not to the Eyes but through their Tears.

Enter Acacis bringing in Montezuma. Ha! --

Aca. Here, Sir, wear this again;
Now follow me.

Mont. So, very good; --
I dare not think, for I may guess amiss;
None can deceive me while I trust to this.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Orazia, conducted by two Indians with their Swords drawn:
Montezuma, Acacis, whispering another Indian. Aca. Think what a weight upon thy
Faith I lay.


Ind. I never did more unwillingly obey.


Aca. First, Montezuma, take thy liberty;
Thou gav'st me freedom, here I set thee free;
We Are equal now. Madam, the danger's great
Of close pursuit; to favor your Retreat
Permit we two a little while remain
Behind, while you go softly over the Plain.

Oraz. Why should I go before? what is your intent?
Where is my Father? whither am I sent?

Aca. Your doubts shall soon be cleared. Conduct heron. Exit Orazia*
So, Montezuma, we are now alone:
That which my Honor owed thee I have paid;
As Honor was, so Love must be obeyed.
I set Orazia as thy Captive free,
But as my Mistress ask her back from thee.

Mont. Thou have performed what Honor bid thee do;
But Friendship bars what Honor prompts me to.
Friends should not fight.

Aca. If Friendship we profess,
Let us secure each others happiness;
One needs must die, and he shall happy prove
In her Remembrance, the other in her Love.
My Guards wait near, and if I fail they must
Give up Orazia, or betray their trust.

Mont. Suppose thou conquer'st, would thou wander over
The South Sea Sands, or the rough Northern Shore,
That parts thy spacious Kingdom from Peru;
And leaving Empire, hopeless Love pursue?

Aca. By which of all my actions could you guess,
Though more your Merit, that my Love was less?
What prize can Empire with Orazia bear?
Or where Love fills the Breast, what room for fear?

Mont. Let fair Orazia then the Sentence give,
Else he may die whom she desires to live.

Aca. Your greater merits bribe her to your side;
My weaker Title must by Arms be tried.

Mont. Oh Tyrant Love, how cruel are thy Laws!
I forfeit Friendship, or betray thy Cause.
That Person whom I would defend from all
The World, that Person by my hand must fall.

Aca. Our Lives we to each others Friendships owe;
But Love calls back what Friendship did bestow:
Love has its Cruelties, but Friendship none;
And we now sight in Quarrels not our own.

Fight. Enter Orazia. Oraz. What noise is this? --
Hold, hold; what cause could be so great to move
This furious hatred? --

Mont. 'Twas our surious Love. --


Aca. Love which I hid till I had set you free,
And bought your pardon with my liberty:
That done, I thought I less unjustly might
With Montezuma for Orazia fight;
He has prevailed, and I must now confess
His Fortune greater, not my Passion less;
Yet cannot yield ye till his Sword remove,
A dying Rival that holds fast his Love.

Orazia. Who ever falls, it is my Protector still,
And then the crime's as great to dye as kill.
Acacis, do not hopeless love pursue,
But live, and this soft malady subdue.

Aca. You bid me live, and yet command me dye,
I am not worth your care, fly, Madam, fly,
While I fall here unpittied, over this Plain,
Free from pursuit, the faithless Mountains gain;
And these I charge as they would have me think their Friendship true.
Leave me alone to serve and follow you:
Make haste, fair Princess, to avoid that fate,
Which does for your unhappy Father wait.

Orazia. Is he then left to dye, and shall he see
Himself forsaken, ever his death, by me?

Mont. What would you do. --


Orazia. To Prison I Will return,
And there in Fetters with my Father mourn.

Mont. That saves no^ his, but throws your Life away.


Orazia. Duty shall give what nature once must pay.


Aca. Life is the gift, which Heaven and Parents give,
And duty best preserves it, if you live.

Orazia. I should but further from my Fountain fly,
And like an unfed stream run on and dye:
Urge me no more, and do not grieve to see
Your Honor rivaled by my Piety.

Exit. She goes softly off, and often looks back. Mont. If Honor would not,
shame would lead the way.
I Will back with her.

Aca. Stay, Montezuma, stay --
Thy Rival cannot let thee go alone,
My love will bear me, though my blood is gone.

As they are going off. Enter Zempoalla, Traxalla, the Indian that went to tell
her, and the rest, and seizes them. Zemp. Seize them --


Aca. Oh, Montezuma, thou art lost.


Orazia comes back. Mont. No more, proud heart, thy useless Courage boast.
Courage thou curse of the unfortunate,
That can encounter, not resist ill fate.

Zemp. Acacis bleeds. --
What barbarous hand has wounded thus my Son?

Mont. 'Twas I, by my unhappy Sword 'twas done.
Thou bleed'st, poor Prince, and I am left to grieve
My Rival's fall.

Trax. He bleeds, but yet may live.


Aca. Friendship and love my failing strength renew,
I dare not dye when I should live for you;
My death were now my crime, as it would be
My guilt to live when I have set you free:
Thus I must still remain unfortunate,
Your Life and Death are equally my fate.

Orazia comes back. Orazia. A noise again, alas what do I see!
Love thou did once give place to Piety:
Now Piety, let Love triumph awhile;
Here bind my hands: come, Montezuma, smile
At Fortune, since thou suffer for my sake,
Orazia will her Captive's Chains partake.

Mont. Now, Fate, thy worst.


Zemp. Lead to the Temple straight,
A Priest, and Altar for these Lovers wait:
They shall be joined, they shall.

Trax. And I will prove --
Those joys in Vengeance which I want in Love.

Aca. I Will quench your thirst with Blood, and will destroy
My self, and with my self, your cruel joy.
Now, Montezuma, since Orazia dies,
I Will fall before thee, the first Sacrifice;
My title in her death shall exceed thine,
As much as in her life, thy hopes did mine:
And when with our mixed blood the Altar's died,
Then our new Title let the Gods decide.

Exeunt. ACT V.
SCENE I.
The Scene opens, and discovers the Temple of the Sun all of Gold, and four
Priests in habits of white and red Feathers, attending by a bloody Altar, as
ready for Sacrifice. Then Enter the Guards, and Zempoalla, and Traxalla; Ynca,
Orazia, and Montezuma bound; as soon as they are placed, the Priest sings. SONG.
YOU to whom Victory we owe,
Whose glories rise
By Sacrifice,
And from our fates below;
Never did yet your Altars shine
Feasted with Blood so near divine;
Princes to whom we bow,
As they to you,
Thus you can ravish from a Throne,
And by their loss of power declare your own.
Zemp. NOW to inflict those punishments that are
Due to the Authors of invasive War;
Who to deceive the oppressed World, like you,
Invent false quarrels to conceal the true.

Ynca. My quarrel was the same that all the Gods
Must have to thee, if there be any odds
Betwixt those Titles that are bad or good,
To Crowns descended, or usurpt by Blood:
Swell not with this success, 'twas not to thee,
But to this Man the Gods gave Victory.

Mont. Since I must perish by my own success,
Think my misfortunes more, my Crimes the less;
And so forgiving make me pleased to dye,
Thus punished for this guilty Victory.

Ynca. Death can make Virtue easy; I forgive:
That word would prove too hard were I to live;
The Honor of a Prince would then deny,
But in the Grave all our distinctions dye.

Mont. Forgive me one thing yet; to say I love,
Let it no more your scorn or anger move,
Since dying in one flame, my ashes must
Embrace and mingle with Orazia's dust.

Ynca. Name thy bold love no more, lest that last breath
Which should forgive, I stisle with my death.

Orazia. Oh my dear Father! Oh, why may not I,
Since you gave Life to me, for you now dye?

Mont. It Is I that wrought this mischief ought to fall;
A just and willing sacrifice for all.
Now, Zempoalla, be both just and kind,
And in my fate let me thy mercy find:
Be grateful then, and grant me that esteem,
That as I live, so dead I may redeem.

Oraz. O do not for her cruel mercy move;
None should ask pity but from those they love.

Weeps. Ynca. Fond Girl, to let thy disobedient Eyes
Show a concern for him whom I despise.

Orazia. How love and nature may divide a Breast,
At once by both their Powers severely pressed!
Yet, Sir, since love seems less, you may forgive,
I would not have you dye, nor have him live;
Yet if he dies, alas what shall I do?
I cannot dye with him, and live with you.

Mont. How vainly we pursue this generous strife,
Parting in death more cruel than in life!
Weep not, we both shall have one destiny,
As in one flame we lived, in one we'll dye.

Trax. Why do we waste in vain these precious hours?
Each minute of his Life may hazard ours:
The Nation does not live whilst he enjoys
His life, it is his safety that destroys.
He shall fall first, and teach the rest to dye.

Zemp. Hold --
Who is it that commands -- ha, you or I?
Your Zeal grows saucy; sure you may allow
Your Empress freedom first to pay her Vow.

Trax. She may allow -- a justice to be done
By him that raised his Empress to her Throne.

Zemp. You are too bold --


Trax. And you too passionate.


Zemp. Take heed with his, you urge not your own fate.
For all this pity is now due to me.

Mont. I hate thy offered mercy more than thee.


Trax. Why will not then the fair Orazia give
Life to her self, and let Traxalla live?

Mont. Orazia will not live, and let me dye;
She taught me first this cruel jealousy.

Orazia. I joy that you have learned it --
That flame not like immortal love appears
Where death can cool its warmth, or kill its fears.

Zemp. What shall I do? am I so quite forlorn,
No help from my own pride, nor from his scorn!
My Rival's death may more effectual prove,
He that is robbed of hope, may cease to love:
Here, lead these Offerings to their deaths.

Trax. Let none --
Obey, but he that will pull on his own.

Zemp. Tempt me not thus, false and ungrateful too.


Trax. Just as ungrateful, and as false as you.


Zemp. It Is thy false love that fears her destiny.


Trax. And your false love that fears to have him dye.


Zemp. Seize the bold Traitor.


Trax. What a slighted frown*
Troubles your brow? feared nor obeyed by none;
Come prepare for Sacrifice.

Enter Acacis weakly. Aca. Hold, hold, such Sacrifices cannot be*
Devotion's but a solemn Cruelty:
How can the Gods delight in humane Blood?
Think 'em not cruel; if you think 'em good.
In vain we ask that mercy, which they want,
And hope that pity, which they hate to grant.

Zemp. Retire, Acacis --
Preserve thy self, for it is in vain to waste
Thy breath for them: The fatal Vow is past.

Aca. To break that Vow is juster than commit
A greater Crime, by your preserving it.

Zemp. The Gods themselves their own will best express
To like the Vow, by giving the Success.

Aca. If all things by Success, are understood,
Men that make War, grow wicked to be good:
But did you Vow, those that were overcome,
And he that Conquered both, should share one Doom?
There Is no excuse; for one of these must be
Not your Devotion, but your Cruelty.

Trax. To that rash Stranger, Sir, we nothing owe,
What he had raised, he strove to overthrow:
That duty lost, which should our Actions guide,
Courage proves Guilt, when Merits swell to Pride.

Aca. Dare thou, who did thy Prince's Life betray,
Once name that Duty, thou have thrown away:
Like thy Injustice to this Stranger shown,
To tax him with a Guilt, that is thy own? --
Can you, brave Soldiers, suffer him to Dye,
That gave you Life, in giving Victory?
Look but upon this Stranger, see those Hands,
That brought you Freedom, fettered up in Bands.
Not one looks up --
Lest sudden pity should their Hearts surprise,
And steal into their Bosoms, through their Eyes.

Zemp. Why thus in vain, are thy weak Spirits pressed?
Restore thy self, to thy more needful Rest.

Aca. And leave Orazia --


Zemp. Go, you must resign --
For, She must be the Gods; not Yours, nor Mine.

Aca. You are my Mother, and my Tongue is tied
So much by Duty, that I dare not chide.
Divine Orazia --
Can you have so much Mercy to forgive?
I do not ask it, with design to Live,
But in my Death, to have my Torments cease:
Death is not Death, when it can bring no Peace*

Orazia. I both Forgive, and Pity --


Aca. O say no more, lest Words less kind destroy,
What these have raised in me of Peace and Joy;
You said, you did both Pity, and Forgive;
You would do neither, should Acacis live.
By Death alone, the certain way appears,
Thus to hope Mercy, and deserve your Tears.

Stabs himself. Zemp. O my Acacis! --
What cruel Cause could urge this fatal Deed Weeps*
He Faints, help, help, some help, or he will Bleed,
His Life and mine away:
Some Water there -- Not one stirs from his Place;
I Will use my Tears, to sprinkle on his Face.

Aca. Crazia. --


Zemp. Fond Child, why do thou call upon her name?
I am thy Mother.

Aca. No, you are my shame,
That blood is shed that you had title in,
And with your title may it end your sin:
Unhappy Prince, you may forgive me now,
Thus bleeding for my Mothers cruel vow.

Ynca. Be not concerned for me --
Death's easier than the changes I have seen,
I would not live to trust the World again.

Mont. Into my Eyes sorrow begins to creep,
When hands are tied it is no shame to weep.

Aca* Dear Montezuma.
I may be still your Friend, though I must dye
Your Rival in her love; Eternity
Has room enough for both, there is no desire,
Where to enjoy is only to admire:
There we'll meet Friends, when this short storm is past.

Mont. Why must I tamely wait to perish last?


Aca* Crazia weeps, and my parched Soul appears
Refreshed by that kind shower of pitying tears;
Forgive those faults my passion did commit,
It Is punished with the life that nourished it:
I had no power in this extremity
To save your life, and less to see you dye.
My Eyes would ever on this object stay,
But sinking Nature takes the props away.
-- Kind Death -- (...)
To end with pleasures all my miseries
Shuts up your Image in my closing Eyes.

Dies. Enter a Messenger. 1 Mess. To Arms, to Arms.


Trax* From whence this sudden fear?


1 Mess. Stand to your Guard, my Lord, the danger's near:
From every quarter Crowds of People meet,
And leaving Houses empty, fill the street.

Ex. Mess. Trax. Fond Queen, thy fruitless tears a while defer.
Rise, we must join again -- Not speak nor stir!
I hear the Peoples Voice like Winds that roar,
When they pursue the flying Waves to shore.

(...) Enter second Messenger. 2 Mess. Prepare to fight* my Lord; the Banished
Queen,
With old Garrucca, in the streets are seen.

Trax. We must go meet them e*er it be too late;
Yet, Madam, rise, have you no sense of fate.

Enter third Messenger. 3 Mess. King Montezuma their Lord shouts Proclaim,
The City rings with their new Sovereign's Name;
The banished Queen declares he is her Son,
And to his succor all the people run.

Zempoalla rises. Zemp. Can this be true? O Love! O Fate! have I
Thus doated on my mortal Enemy.

Trax. To my new Prince I thus my homage pay;
Your Reign is short, young King.

Zemp. Traxalla, stay --
It Is to my hand that he must owe his fate,
I will revenge at once my love and hate.

She sets a Dagger to Montezuma's Breast. Trax. Strike, strike, the conquering
Enemy is near,
My Guards are pressed while you detain me here.

Zemp. Dye then, ungrateful, dye; Amexia's Son
Shall never triumph on Acacis Throne:
Thy death must my unhappy flames remove;
Now where is thy defense -- against my love?

She cuts the Cords, and gives him the Dagger. Trax. Am I betrayed?


He draws and thrusts at Montezuma, he puts it by and kills him. Mont. So may
all Rebels dye:
This end has Treason joined with Cruelty.

Zemp. Live thou whom I must love, and yet must hate;
She gave thee Life, who knows it brings her fate.

Mont. Life is a trifle which I would not take,
But for Orazia's and her Father's sake:
Now, Ynca, hate me, if thou can; for he
Whom thou have scorned will dye or rescue thee.

As he goes to attacque the Guards with Traxalla's Sword, Enter Amexia,
Garrucca, Indians, driving some of the other Party before them. Gar. He lives,
ye Gods, he lives, great Queen, see here
Your coming joys, and your departing fear.

Amex. Wonder and joy so fast together flow,
Their haste to pass has made their passage slow;
Like struggling Waters in a Vessel pent,
Whose crowding drops choke up the narrow Vent.
My Son. --

She embraces him. Mont. I am amazed, it cannot be
That fate has such a joy in store for me.

Amex. Can I not gain belief, that this is true?


Mont. It is my fortune I suspect, not you.


Gar. First ask him if he old Garrucca know.


Mont. My honored Father, let me fall thus low.


Gar. Forbear, great Prince, it is I must pay to you
That adoration, as my Sovereign's due:
For from my humble Race you did not spring,
You are the Issue of our Murdered King,
Sent by that Traitor to his blessed abode,
Whom to be made a King, he made a God:
The story is too full of fate to tell,
Or what strange fortune our lost Queen befell.

Amex. That sad relation longer time will crave;
I lived obscure, he bred you in a Cave,
But kept the mighty secret from your Ear,
Lest heat of blood to some strange course should steer
Your youth --

Mont. I owe him all that now I am,
He taught me first the noble thirst of fame,
Showed me the baseness of unmanly fear,
Till the unlick'd Whelp I plucked from the rough Bear,
And made the Ounce and Tiger give me way,
While from their hungry Jaws I snatched the Prey:
'Twas he that charged my young arms first with toils,
And dressed me glorious in my Salvage spoils. --

Gar. You spent in shady Forest all the day,
And joy'd returning to show me the Prey.
To tell the story, to describe the place,
With all the pleasures of the boasted chase;
Till sit for arms, I reav'd you from your sport,
To train your Youth in the Peruvian Court:
I left you there, and ever since have been,
The sad attendant of my exiled Queen.

Zemp. My fatal Dream comes to my memory;
That Lion whom I held in bonds was he,
Amexia was the Dove that broke his Chains;
What now but Zempoalla's death remains?

Mont. Pardon, fair Princess, if I must delay
My love a while, my gratitude to pay.
Live, Zempoalla -- free from dangers live,
For present merits I past crimes forgive:
Oh might she hope Orazia's Pardon too. --

Orazia. I would have none condemned for loving you;
In me her merit much her fault over powers,
She sought my Life, but she preserved me yours.

Amex. Taught by my own I pity her estate,
And wish her penitence, but not her fate.

Ynca. I would not be the last to bid her live;
Kings best revenge their wrongs when they forgive.

Zemp. I cannot yet forget what I have been,
Would you give life to her that was a Queen:
Must you then give, and must I take; there is yet
One way, that is by refusing to be great:
You bid me live -- bid me be wretched too,
Think, think, what Pride unthron'd must undergo:
Look on this youth, Amexia, look, and then
Suppose him yours, and bid me live again;
A greater sweetness on these Lips there grows,
Than breath shut out from a new folded Rose:
What lovely charms on these cold Cheeks appear,
Could any one hate death and see it here?
But thou art gone --

Mont. O that you would believe,
Acacis lives in me, and cease to grieve.

Zemp Yes, I will cease to grieve, and cease to be,
His Soul stays watching in his wound for me;
All that could render Life desired is gone,
Orazia has my Love, and you my Throne:
And Death Acacis -- yet I need not dye,
You leave me Mistress of my destiny;
In spite of Dreams how am I pleased to see,
Heavens truth or falsehood should depend on me;
But I will help the Gods;
The greatest proof of Courage we can give,
Is then to dye when we have to power live.

Kills her self. Mont. How fatally that instrument of death
Was hid --

Amex. She has expired her latest breath.


Mont. But there lies one to whom all grief is due.


Orazia None ever was so unhappy and so true.


Mont. Your Pardon, Royal Sir.


Ynca. You have my Love.


Gives him Oraz. Amex. The Gods, my Son, your happy choice approve.


Mont. Come, my Orazia, then, and pay with me, Leads her to Acacis.
Some tears to poor Acacis memory;
So strange a fate for Men the Gods ordain
Our clearest Sun shine should be mixed with rain;
How equally our joys and sorrows move!
Death's fatal triumphs joined with those of Love.
Love Crowns the dead, and death Crowns him that lives,
Each gains the Conquest which the other gives.

Exeunt omnes. EPILOGUE to the INDIAN QUEEN,
Spoken by Montezuma.
YOU see what Shifts we are enforced to try
To help out Wit with some Variety;
Shows may be found that never yet were seen,
It Is hard to find such Wit as never has been:
You have seen all that this old World could do,
We therefore try the fortune of the new,
And hope it is below your aim to hit
At untaught Nature with your practiced Wit:
Our naked Indians then, when Wits appear,
Would as soon choose to have the Spaniards here:
It Is true, you have marks enough, the Plot, the Show,
The Poet's Scenes, nay, more, the Painter's too;
If all this fail, considering the cost,
It Is a true Voyage to the Indies lost:
But if you smile on all, then these designs,
Like the imperfect Treasure of our Minds,
'Twill pass for current wheresoe'er they go,
When to your bounteous hands their stamps they owe
FINIS.
THE VESTAL VIRGIN, OR, THE Roman Ladies. A TRAGEDY. Written by the Honorable
Sir ROBERT HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold by R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. M DC XCII.

Dramatis Personae.
Emilius, A Roman Senator of great Quality. Sertorius, One that had been a
General; a brave Man, of a high Spirit. Sulpitius, His Brother, of a
treacherous Nature. Mutius, One that had been a Lieutenant of a Province, a
Lover of War. Artabaces, Prince of Armenia, driven from his Country by the
Romans. Tiridates, His younger Brother, Prisoner at large in Rome, and kept as
Hostage till his Brother came in. Caska, Servant to Sertorius. Corbulo, and
four or five more Veterans.
WOMEN.
Hersilia, Daughter to Emilius. Verginia, Her Sister, the Vestal. Marcellina,
Their Cousin.
SCENE ROME.

PROLOGUE.
PRologues, like Forlorn-hopes, first face the Stage,
Before the main Battalions do engage:
Just so our Poet, doubtful of the day,
Ventures his Prologue first, and next his Play.
But stay, I fancy that I hear one call;
I Will step but to the door, and tell you all.
'Troth it is the Poet's Voice, now danger's near;
He sends me back as his Commissioner,
To treat that he might fairly march away,
If you would be content to have no Play.
He offers fair: Should it prove very bad,
As like enough it will, you would wish you had:
He has been wounded, proofs there need no more
Than what you know, that he has writ before;
For sure none ever escaped that ever writ;
There Is no being shot-free in the Wars of Wit:
Poets by dangers like old Soldiers taught,
Grow wise, and shun the fame which once they sought.
But if he must proceed --
Would you would tell him which of all the ways
You like in Prologues, used to help out Plays.
Some tell you stories of the former Age,
And swear that Faction now undoes the Stage;
Sure such believe you will do as you are bid,
And that you paid your money to be chid.
Some craftier Poets at each other hit,
Knowing grave Rudeness has been took for Wit;
This does a wretched dearth of Wit betray,
When things of Kind on one another prey.
Some Prologues are more modestly addressed,
Just like Petitions, those he thinks are best;
For such a one he means that this shall be,
And therefore humbly shows as you shall see.
THE VESTAL VIRGIN, OR, THE Roman Ladies.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Sertorius and Sulpitius. Sert. NOT speak to her, nor see her!


Sulp. But for a few days.


Sert. A minute is too much.


Sulp. Be but patient.


Sert. And tamely wait upon my Rival's triumph.


Sul. You do mistake.


Sert. So do you, to think a Roman Soul can be
So mean to stoop to his own Victory;
Submitting to a Prince's empty Name,
And tamely yield unto a vanquished Fame.

Sulp. Your Passion tells you wrong; it is not that Prince,
But it is Hersilia sends you these Commands.

Sert. I care not whence they came, I like 'em not.


Sulp. You throw away your fury now as wildly,
As Tempests waste their giddy violence.

Sert. No matter, raging Storms grow loud and high
When they are most opposed, and so will I.

Sulp. Am not I your Brother!


Sert. Is not Prince Tiridates, as you call him,
Your bosom Friend?

Sulp. You are not jealous, are you, that his Friendship
Makes me betray the trust you placed in me?

Sert. You should have scrupled then to bring a Brother
Such an unwelcome Message.

Sulp. Consult a little with your prudence.


Sert. Wisdom's too froward to let any find
Trust in himself, or pleasure in his mind;
She takes by what she gives, her help destroys;
She shakes our Courage, and disturbs our joys*
Rashness allows unto the sudden sense
All its own joys, and adds her Confidence.

Sulp. You have not patience but to hear the Circumstance.


Sert. Well, well, what is it? quickly then.


Sulp. It Is more than you deserve.


Sert. Then keep it for your self.


Sulp. They properly belong to you,
Since they were her Commands; when she sent them
She mingled trouble with her seeming Cruelty*
-- The^ sighed, and pa^^'d -- then bid me tell you,
Her Father was so kind to Tiridates,
She could no other way deny his Visits,
But by forbidding yours for some few days,
To give her self time to attempt some Friends,
To try their interest to persuade her Father
That she with freedom* may be left to choose
Where inclination guides her.

Sert. Um'h.


Sulp. Now, Sir, is the Circumstance so trivial?


Sert. But was this all she said?


Sulp. Was not this enough?


Sert. As it may prove --
You are sure Tiridates will be forbid too, --
-- Are you not? --

Sulp. As I suppose.


Sert. I will be sure of that, -- or else --


Sulp. What need you question it? in a few hours
You will discover that you are abused,
If there be foul play meant on any side.

Sert. That Is true, -- but --


Sulp. Come trouble your self no more, but strictly
Observe what she Commands.
These starts are the Convulsions of weak Reason,
When sits of Passion grow too strong upon you.
We have all our haggard Passions, but none so wild
Or so unmanned as yours; --
They may be tamed and brought from their excess,
And watched by Reason into gentleness.

Sert. Without your Simile I will endeavor to endure it,
-- But --

Sulp. But what?


Sert. I find a mutiny in all my Faculties,
That will not yield to this Cessation;
My Tongue seems to consent without Commission*
But I Will go wrangle with my self,
And will obey her -- if I can --

Exit Sertorius. Sulp. Where must my wild beginnings find an end?
Nature and Friendship; Brother too, and Friend!
Titles that grow in soils so rich and good,
Whose Roots are spread in Honor and in Blood:
Yet all those ties keep not their hold so fast,
As to oppose unshaken but* one blast
Of Love's unruly storm; great Trees fall so,
Pulling up all about 'em where they grow.

Enter Tiridates, runs to Sulpitius, and embraces him. Tir. O my Sulpitius,
thou that can prove
Friend to the Rival of thy Brother's Love;
Have you yet spoke of me, and would she hear?
It Is not thy Friendship, but her Love I fear.

Sulp. I did not name you.


Tir. -- Perhaps you did not dare.
Methinks concerned Physicians, in despair,
Gaze on their Patients as you stare on me,
And from their Skill sink to their Piety.

Sulp. I wish Hersilia had not named you.


Tir. You are my Friend.


Sulp. And therefore could not like the unwelcom Office
That she has put upon me.

Tir. Could you dislike what she commands!


Sulp. Yes, I do, or else I must repent
My Love to you, and grow indifferent.
Know, it is the cruel fair Hersilia's pleasure
You should forbear to visit her, or if you meet her,
To speak to her for some few days.

He looks down as sad. Tir. Why should Hersilia cruelly contrive
Death for that Passion which she keeps alive?
But it is a guilt to question or repine;
She acts like what she seems, something divine:
For when Mankind their frailer passions show,
Those Powers above condemn that made them so.

Sulp. I feared 'twou'd trouble you, for I can find
A measure of your Sorrows by my Mind.

Tir. Did she not tell you why?


Sulp. -- That she refused,
Though I still pressed it to find out her end,
More than became one that was less your Friend:
At last continuing still importunate,
She told me with a Smile, 'twas not her hate,
Nor love unto another was the cause,
She seemed to be so cruel in these Laws.

Tir. When I lost my Brother --
Brave Artabaces, whom I could not call
More Brother than a Friend: for he was all*
I did not think a Friendship could express
It self so great, to make his loss the less:
But thine, my dear Sulpitius, is above
The Rules and Measures of the strictest Love.
You might have hoped to see your Brother's joy,
Sprung from those harsh commands which mine destroy.

Sulp. My love unto Sertorius is not less,
I wish his Gratitude, his Happiness,
To pay great Marcellina all Love's scores,
Whom every Roman but himself adores:
Why do you droop? fie, fie, do not give way
To your encroaching Griefs; hope and obey:
In the mean time during your Banishment,
In my best Love and Care rest confident*
I Will weary her with Prayers, till I obtain
Leave from her Lips to call you back again.

Ter. My hopes are only raised by thy kind Charms,
O let me always hold thee in my Arms.

Embraoo. Enter Sertorius. Ser. I must go back and tell him it is impossible.
-- Ha -- twisted. --

Sulp. How, my Brother! --
I must say something quickly; but -- what,
-- Brother -- perhaps you wonder --

Ser. Yes, I do.


Sulp. I mean, to see my kindness at this time
So great to Tiridates: but as a Friend,
I could not be exempt from pity.

Sert. What pity does he need?


Sulp. It seems much more than you,
In the severe Commands of fair Hersilia:
He is for over banished; no time nor hopes
Allowed to him: you are too generous
To swell upon his sinking.

Sert. That I despise.


Sulp. Pray give me leave at least to show
That pity which a Friend ought to bestow:
Perhaps the Reasons of a Friend may prove
A Balm to cure the Wounds of hopeless Love. Goes to Tiridates.
-- I could not stay a minute, Sir, --
From telling you the happy News
Which you may find writ in my Brother's looks.
The fair and just Hersilia has pronounced
His Banishment for ever. -- Enter Hersilia and Marcellina.
Ha, Hersilia! what new Confusions crowd upon me?
How near my Plots are to discovery!
I must outface Fortune and Honesty, He steps to Sertorius hastily.
Brother, give not Tiridates the advantage
To seem more pleased than you in his Obedience.
I Will instantly attempt to serve you. Goes to Hersilia.
-- Madam, this unexpected Happiness
Adds to the greatness of it.

Hers. The coolness of the Evening, and these Walks,
Invited out me and my Cousin,
Not thinking to have met so much good Company
As you, Prince Tiridates, and Sertorius. She curtsies to them, and they bow
and stand still.
-- Ha -- Marcellina, a word. Speaks aside with Marcellina.
Do You not observe what an unusual distance
Prince Tiridates, and Sertorius keep?

Marc. I both observe and wonder.


Hers. Peace, let us be gone --
We have almost tired our selves, Sir,
And were just now returning home*

Sulp. Permit me, Madam, to receive the Honor
Of waiting on you; I have something to acquaint you with.

Enter Servant. Ser. Madam,
Your Sister the fair Verginia is just now
Brought from the Vestals, and begs to see you.

Hers. I long as much to look on her:
They say she is much altered. --
-- This is strange, Marcellina. -- Looks at Tiridates and Sertorius.

Sulp. I will return presently; till then be silent: To Sertorius.
I wait upon you, Madam.

Exeunt. Manent Tiridates and Sertorius; they stare at one another; at last
Sertorius speaks. Sert. I hope you do not think that I forbore
To speak my love and thoughts unto Hersilia,
Because a Rival did look on.

Tir. Nor did that hinder me to own my Love.


Sert. Your hopes upon her Father's friendship move.


Tir. The greatness of my love is its own aid.


Sert. Some use of empty Titles might be made:
There is a noise with Names of Princes brought;
Yet though her Father is with nothing caught,
Those that have conquered Princes need not show
Respect to Titles which they can bestow.

Tir. Could any Roman Sword find Victory,
As soon as you can with your Vanity;
A Prince indeed might tremble then to hear,
But now he smiles at what you would have him fear.

Sert. O you shall see that I can keep my word,
And show no Roman ever out-talk'd his Sword; They draw and fight.
To this a greater Quarrel yet I join,
Hersilia's Cause, they equally are mine.

Enter Sulpitius, runs in and parts them. Sulp. Hold, hold, hear me but speak:
From what hid Cause does all this Fury break?

Sert. Love is our Cause which we resolve to trust
To our own Swords, we are sure that they are just.

Tir. It Is mean to wait for one to be denied,
And to refer that which we may decide:
Death is the certain Umpire that makes friends;
With him that dies Hersilia's trouble ends.

Sert. Stand by, and since you wear the double ties
Of Friend and Brother, look with equal Eyes.

Sulp. Must Hersilia thus
Be saved from trouble by the loss of Fame?
Your Swords will wound her yet unspotted Name;
No drop of blood vou shed but will remain
Upon her injured Innocence, a stain;
She will be equally obliged to hate
The Victor's life; the vanquished in his Fate.

Sert. She Is cruel now; if she her hate should show
When I am dead, it is more than I shall know.

Sulp. Suppose she never would your loves requite,
For what is'^ then you would pretend to fight?
It Is vain to strive for Empire, that would be
Not gained, but rather lost by Victory.

Sert. Yet without Conquest she is gained by none,
And only can be overcome by one;
Both in Hersilia cannot happy prove,
The Government is Monarchy in love.

Tir. Sulpitius now your troubles shall have end,
Left free to serve a Brother or a Friend:
He that first falls, (for one of us must dye)
Leaves you to the other as his Legacy.

Sert. All the disputes of love are judged by fate,
And death makes room when life is grown too strait.

Offers to fight. Sulp. Hold, hear me a word!


Sert. Pish.


Sulp. Of you I ask it, Tiridates, stay,
And let your reason this rash action weigh.

Tir. Love never waits on Reason but on chance;
But why should you advise this temperance?
Bid me be cold, and bring the Fever too;
Hersilia sent the banishment by you.

Sert. Ha, --
Did my careful Brother bring you such news?

Tir. Yes, and from Hersilia's cruel Lips.


Sert. I received just such another Message.
Can you tell Brother which was the Copy and Original?

Sulp. No.


Tir. How!


Sert. Whence came they then?


Sulp. From me.


Sert. And your invention.


Sulp. Right.
Do You think Hersilia's loved by you alone?
Had I perceived it easy to be done,
I would have fooled you both: Why do you stare?
Do You wonder that I love, or that I dare
A vow a Passion which both you proclaim?
I Will be as loud as you in Love or Fame.

Sert. O Monster.


Sulp. See I am changed, of your opinion grown, Draws.
Think Life and Love is useful but for one:
We shall but hinder one another still; agree
Which is my Man, so Fate and Love for me.

Sert. Brave Tiridates,
This Villain's baseness the first cause removes,
And makes the quarrel Nature's, which was Love's:
To me it is just the title to resign,
To let out his soul blood that will stain mine:
Nor will I on the score of Rivals fight.
And while I take my own injure your right:
But as his Executioner I Will prove,
The Minister of Justice, not of Love.

Sulp. Fight you by your own Rules, I Will make the Laws
For my own Sword, and Love shall be my Cause.

Offers to fight. Tir. Hold, hold, Sertorius,
No seeming cause can check or cosen Fame,
Every thing will at last bear its own name;
You may stand by with justice and look on,
Nature is your excuse, but I have none.

Sert. Nature did never yet send an excuse
In her own whispers, for her own abuse.

Sulp. Come, come, we trisle; let some lots decide
Which of your Fates with mine shall first be tried.

Sert. Fortune has ever been too cursed to me,
To trust her with my hopes of Victory:
But, Tiridates, now methinks we show
In our own Cause too quick, in Loves too slow:
He that survives of us by love will be
Entitled to revenge thy Treachery.

Tir. Thus I embrace the offer.


Offer to fight. Sulp. Not so fast,
I will fight too, and will not fight the last:
That mighty rate which nicely you assign
Your love and honor, I have sixth on mine.

Sert. My flesh trembles like shaking Earth, when pressed
By tempests that want room within her Breast:
Through all my Veins there runs a boiling stood,
And makes a thousand pulses in my blood.

Tir. Stay, Sertorius, stay; methinks we grow
Too bold; Hersilia's Sentence should bestow
Life, or give Death: we but like Rebels are,
While with our Swords Hersilia's Power we share.
Come let us go like Friends in misery,
And from our Judges Lips learn which shall dye.

Sert. He does dissemble sure -- it is noble -- Aside.
Brave Prince, with your fair temper I am brought
To reason, by a Rival's Friendship taught:
Had you or I sunk under to others hate,
The living would have pitied his hard fate.
Though love condemns, our grief may be the same;
For death's all one brought by a Sword or Flame:
'Twere mean, if love had not the power to show
That generous grief which honor can bestow. They put up.
Why should the steps raised by our honor prove
Too hard to be ascended by our love.

Sulp. Good, very good; do you think to cousen me?
You practice to dissemble scurvily.

Tir. All treachery dwells only in thy Breast.


Sulp. Pish, none are truly by themselves expressed;
He that seems Virtuous does but act a part,
And shows not his own Nature, but his Art.

Sert. I can be tame no longer.


Draws and offers to run at him. Tir. -- Sertorius, stay
Our Friendship must not yet oblige this way.

Sulp. O does the mask fall off!


Sert. Let us together then dispatch the Traitor.


Sulp. You dare not --
-- Your honors as my guard will stand;
You both scorn odds, and I a single hand.

Sert. Tortures seize thee. -- Tiridates.


Makes a sign to him. Tir. Enough.


Sulp. I Will follow too: O you need say no more.


Ser. How meanly we must part! never before
Honor and Love showed such strange properties,
To keep all safe by being Enemies;
With their own niceness they themselves betray,
And while they both Command they both obey.

Exeunt at several door^. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Emilius, Hersilia, Marcellina, and Verginia veiled. Emil. WElcome my
sweet, my dear Verginia;
Off with this Cloud, in thy own brightness shine,
And let my longing Eyes twist rays with thine;
All my decaying joys grow warm, and bring
A heat which thaws me into youth again.

Ver. Are you my Father, Sir?


Emil. I am, sweet Innocence; and richer in that title
By Nature's gift, than he that by his fame
Of his own Country gains a Father's name.

Ver. Your Pardon, Sir, that I seem amazed,
I never saw a Man before.

Her. Pray, Sir, give us leave
To have a little share in her enjoyment;
Dearest Sister, you look amazed or troubled.

Embraces her. Ver. Pardon me, dear Sister, if you find
Some small disturbance hang about my mind;
To be thus soon from a devotion brought,
Not more by precept than by custom taught.

Mar. Dear Cousin, so much kindness yet express
As to take pleasure in our happiness.

Ver. 'Twere want of true Religion not to know
Some joy in so much goodness which you show.

Emil My dear Verginia,
I have found out a Man to make thee happy,
Whose Virtues, and whose Fortunes shall contend
Which are the greatest, both without an end.

Ver. What does my Father mean?


Emil. Come, Verginia, Company troubles thee I see,
Be not amazed; I must be fond of thee,
To wean thee from thy self, till thou shall find
No room but for content within thy mind.

Exeunt. Manent Hersilia and Marcellina. Mar. How fair she is, how full of
Innocence!
All true content dwells with unpracticed sense.

Her. O Marcellina!
Though Knowledge does beget both Joy and Love,
Yet Vice and Sorrow too her issue prove;
Pressed with the last the greatest numbers show;
And the Worlds seeming mischief is to know.
-- Did you not wonder, Marcellina,
At the strange distance that was kept so strictly
By Tiridates and Sertorius?

Mar. I did, and was as much amazed as you;
I wish no mischief happen, for their looks
Strove with a strange constraint.

Her. Prince Tiridates too expressed the same
-- Whose gentle temper I have always seen,
Like standing Water wearing still one face,
That had no tides to move it from its place.

Mar. Can you guess the cause?


Her. Not in the least.


Mar. I need not ask, it is enough that they are Rivals,
And both love you.

Her. Such quarrels still my injury must prove;
Both may deserve, but cannot have my love;
Love cannot like the wind its help convey
To fill two sails, though both are spread one way.

Mar. D' you love one of them?


Her. Yes, but not Sertorius:
Though freely I confess my love to thee;
Yet I forgive thy short return to me,
Which seems to violate our Friendship's Laws;
But his ingratitude pleads in thy cause;
Since the acknowledgment would lay a blame
On thy great Soul, or on thy cheeks a shame.

Mar. Be not deceived, Hersilia,
I would not make my self so guilty prove,
And like a hidden sin disown my love.

Her. Thus his ingratitude the more is shown.


Mar. By his ingratitude confess your own:
Where does the difference appear to be?
You cannot sigh for him, nor he for me.

Her. But you deserve much more than he can do.


Mar. He merits more than me, he merits you:
Love pleads no cause for the unfortunate,
Choice rules above our power as much as fate:
Love unrewarded may to Virtue grow,
But love for love like a design may show.

Her. Sertorius my revenge not love invites,
And that strict Friendship which our Souls unites:
Must now our Soul's affections separate,
And what you love it is just that I should hate.

Mar. What friendship would return my love denies,
I dare not say I hate whom you despise.

Enter Sulpitius. Her. Peace; Sulpitius;
Let him not see disorder in our looks,
I suspect him. -- How amazed he seems!

Sulp. Help, Fortune, now, thou that have always sent
Thy willing aid to the most confident.
-- Madam --

Her. Sir.


Sulp. Perhaps your own amazement might be less,
Could I forbear my wonder to express.

Her. What wonder, Sir?


Sulp. Some wonder must attend a sudden change,
To see Prince Tiridates and Sertorius strange.
So unlike Lovers now they did appear,
That they both seemed as if they never were.

Her. I know not what you mean.


Sulp. I wish 'twere so, my troubles then might end,
One is my Brother, the other is my Friend:
Yet to those titles there is nothing due,
Since they so soon forget themselves and you.

Her. You only fancy sure this strange neglect,
They paid to me as much as I expect.

Sul. I Am sorry that my Passion renders me
The severe judge of their inconstancy.

Her. Your Passion, Sir!


Sulp. Yes mine, so mingled with Eternity,
It understood not what they seemed to be.

Mar. You speak too like a Rival now to prove
An uncorrupted Judge in Pleas of love.

Sul. If I confess the bonds in which I Am ti'd,
Fair Marcellina should not seem to chide;
Since if the just Hersilia pitties me,
I leave Sertorius to her love more free.

Mar. In such mean paths as cous'ning Statesmen move,
To walk to greatness, others tread to love:
Both creep upon the strength of fawning lies,
And on Men's blasted fames attempt to rise.

Sulp. This to me, Madam, that have always shown
A sorrow for your wrong!

Mar. I know of none,
But those which I receive from your design;
The injury of Virtue must be mine.

Sulp. Virtue by truth receives no injury.


Her. Truth is ill carried by an Enemy;
I Will do my self and them at least this right,
To forbid you to come into my sight.
O Marcellina, As going out.
How hard it is my trouble to disguise,
Though I believe not him, I must my Eyes.

Exeunt. Manet Sulpitius. Sulp. What can this mean, perhaps they both agree!
To hide their trouble, and to cosen me;
'Twas dull and foolish to betray my flame,
Designs that hit should be as swift as aim.
They should go quicker off; Powder not dry
Does seldom hit, but makes the Fowl more shie. Enter Servant.
O, Claudius, welcome.

Ser. Have you sped, Sir?


Sulp. Indifferently; but still thy merits
Deserve more than I promised: Here, take this,
And still continue constant to my wishes;
I shall need thy further help.

Ser. You shall not fail to have it, Sir.


Sulp. Meet me an hour hence
Hard by the Flavian Bridge: fail not.

Serve. You need not, Sir, repeat commands to me.


Sulp. Thy rewards shall fall like showers upon thee. Ex. Serve.
My plots fall short, like Darts which rash hands throw
With an ill aim, and have too far to go;
Nor can I long discoveries prevent,
I deal too much among the Innocent I
Their tracks are not so soon discerned that go
Thorough soul paths, as theirs that tread in snow.

Exit. Enter Sertorius and Caska. Sert. When will Tiridates meet?


Cask. Presently, Sir; he promised to be there as soon as you.
A little farther brings you to the place.

Sert. He Is noble.
Why should it easier prove
To agree more in Virtue than in Love!
Those that are Rivals in their Piety
Are kind, yet all bow to one Deity:
We both have but one Altar and one Flame,
Our Honor, Love and Wishes are the same;
From those fair Springs true Friendship used to flow;
But from those Fountains now our Quarrels grow.

Enter Mutius. Mut. Noble Sertorius.


Sert. You mean Sulpitius.


Mut. I should be glad to see him.


Sert. Prithee look him.


Exit with Caska. Mut. What Is this! I have been better entertained:
My Sword has helped this Man to Victory;
But now it seems there is no use of me:
There may come yet a time -- Enter five or six Veterans.

1. Brave Mutius.

Mut. Mighty Plebeians, yours.

1. A hard time, Mutius.

Mut. Easy enough for you, brave Veterans;
I take it you are not cloyed with business.

2. Troth we have scarce business for our teeth.

Mut. Draw 'em then;
Hunger is the worst kind of Toothache.

1. We have been courted, Mutius,
Speeches made to us, and called the Bulwarks of the Country*
Now we are slighted.

Mut. Did you intend that for a Jest?
I hate a Soldier that is poor and witty;
Wit is the peace of every Man; hang it,
A Soldier should be blunt and mutinous.

1. We should be hanged then.

Mut. Not if you would hang together, Puppies.
O the brave days of Julius, when he flew
The Roman Eagles at the stooping World,
And dared it like a Lark!

1. I, I, those were days.

Mut. Peace is the rust of Minds; brave Souls refine
By great Examples, and with use they shine.
I remember Pharsalia's dreadful Field,
When the first Ranks came to so near a view,
The Roman Soldiers all each other knew;
In vain the Generals gave their fierce Commands,
The Eyes of both the Armies held their hands;
While Brothers gaze, and Fathers Sons behold,
Nature in whispers her fond stories told;
Friends gazed on Friends, forgot they were to fight,
And made a halt as shameful as a flight;
When Crastinus advanced before the rest,
And struck his Pyle into a Roman Breast:
As from one Cloud vast Tempests fill the Skies,
So showers of Piles from his began to rise:
Had not his great Example set us free,
We had been robbed of that day's Victory.

1. I Captain, our Emperor has shut up Janus's Gates,
The World's at peace now.

Mut. Let him lull in it,
Till he forget the way how to Command;
It Is a dark Lanthorn in a Prince's hand;
It Is Peace that shines, while he in darkness lives,
Hid by the light which he to others gives.
The Gown-men now by cherished Vices thrive;
Virtue is starved, or hardly kept alive;
Mischief is fed, while out of Policy
They keep some to betray, and some to lie.

1. No employment now for Soldiers.

Mut. You are dull Blockheads when you are out of pay;
The Soldiers Vices lie another way.
Do You think that Statesmens kindnesses proceed
From any principles but their own need?
When they are afraid, they are wondrous good and free;
But when they are safe they have no memory.

1. The Great Men swallow all.

Mut. Mankind upon each others ruins rise,
Cowards maintain the brave, and Fools the wise:
Honor and all Religion bears a price,
But as the rates are set by Death and Vice.

Enter Sulpitius. Sulp. Brave Mutius, never more happily met.


Mut. That Is well; did you not meet Sertorius?


Sulp No, why do you ask?


Mut. Nay nothing;
I thought he had been going to keep an Oracle,
He practiced to stare and swell strangely.

Sulp. Let him swell and burst, it matters not.
-- Who are these, Mutius?

Mut. Quiet Rogues; they were brave Soldiers.


Sulp. Have they lost their Spirits?


Mut. I know not; they are out of practice;
They have been bob'd;
They might be trained again perhaps, and entered.

Sulp. This way a little, Mutius; you are my Friend.


Mut. I would cut any Man's throat
That said the contrary.

Sulp. I must use your Sword, Mutius.


Mut. Here it hangs ready, it is almost rusty.


Sulp. Be not startled when I tell you
It Is against my Brother.

Mut. Let it be against your Father,
It Is all one to me.

Sulp. The quarrel is Hersilia.


Mut. A Woman is the worst that could be.
Are you to fight who shall have her?

Sulp. That she must only judge.


Mut. So then, shall we fight to make her sport?
A parcel of such Lovers
Would make excellent pastime in the Amphitheatre:
I had an easier way with my Damsels;
Kind or cruel, they never escaped me.

Sulp. Not if you could come at 'em, Mutius.


Mut. If they were hid in Houses
I made 'em bolt with Fire,
And pitched my toils on all sides ready for 'em.

Sulp. Ha --

1. Noble Mutius, farewell; we'll wait on you
Another time.

Sulp Pray let your Friends stay a little.


Mut. Stay, Gentlemen.


Sulp. Fire a House, Mutius!


Mut. There Is no such way; the coyest then
Will leap into the next Man's Arms:
I have been thanked for saving them
Out of the very Fire that I kindled.

Sulp. I hey may live to love Hersilia.


Seems troubled. Mut. If we kill 'em, it is two to one however
That you will never have her.

Sulp. Dare these Men stick by us?


Mut. Pay 'em well, and let the business
Be wicked enough; Then never fear 'em.

Sulp. They shall eat Gold.


Mut. 'Troth I believe they can digest it too.


Sulp. Thou have put wild thoughts into my head:
If I should fail, she crowns their Victory;
Or if Prince Tiridates falls by me,
I must live hated by her. You Powers above,
Let either Death or Life reward my Love.

Mut. You are troubled, Sir: I did not talk
To save the ^ighting part: I would serve you in your love
Through greater dangers.

Sulp. O Mutius, advise me something;
My blood and thoughts stand still within my Breast;
Reason's asleep, and torments seem a^ rest.

Mut. Why I have told you my best stratagem;
If you get her Father's House but fired,
Let us alone, we'll help to quench it;
And in the hurry we may get your Mistress;
There Is no suspicion waits on such disorders.

Sulp. Dear Mutuis, thou reviv'st my drooping Soul;
There is no other way left probable. Enter Claudius a Servant.
See, Mutius, Fortune seconds thy advice,
Here Is one may prove the Instrument -- walk off.
Claudius, welcome; here I have been short in my Rewards.

Gives him money Claud. You have been, Sir, too bountiful
To my small services.

Sulp. I have a business, if thou dare attempt it,
Shall treble thy Rewards, and yet leave me thy debtor.

Claud. Name it, Sir, and think it done.


Sulp. Thou know
How unsuccessful I am like to prove;
One Act of thine may help me to Hersilia,
Then think what thy reward shall be.

Claud. Speak but the thing, Sir.


Sulp. Presently then in some convenient place
Set fire on thy Master's House; do not wonder,
I Will have those ready that shall quench it quickly;
And in the hurry, under pretense of help,
Bring Hersilia forth at the Eastgate,
That looks toward the Tiber;
There I Will wait for her; and by my happiness
Measure thy own Rewards.

Claud. Whither shall we fly, Sir?


Sulp. Trouble not thy self, leave that to me:
Dare thou do it?

Claud. When would you have it done, Sir?


Sulp Presently, before suspicion can have time to grow.


Claud. I Will do it, Sir; be sure that you wait ready.


Sulp. Be gone about it, let me see it flame
Before an hour's expired: trust to me,
And have no fears.

Claud. I know an unfrequented room
Fit for my purpose; I Will do it instantly:
Expect me at the Eastgate.

Ex. Claud. Sulp. I will not fail.
It Is done, Mutius, it is a fire already;
That Fellow is a Servant to Emilius,
Whom I have made my Slave with Br^bes;
He Is gone about it: Are your Friends prepared?

Mut. Beyond sick Men, ready to dye for you.


Sulp. It Is well,
I Will place you in your several stations
That she may escape no way:
Then if we can but carry off our plunder.

Mut. Pish, the fire will have all the Enemies,
We shall have none.

Sulp. Where shall our Rendezvous be?


Mut At my House of pleasure
That stands upon the Tiber;
That will be least suspected, because I live
Most in the City: besides, we have the River
To help us to escape if need require.

Sulp. No better place. -- Gentlemen,
Pray observe such orders as my Friend Mutius gives you.
He shall have money to reward you
Equal to all your services, and beyond modest wishes.

1* 2. Doubt us not, Sir, we will be punctual.

Sulp. Come, Mutius* as we go
We will agree on the particulars:
Justice has took away all my compassion;
And when their flames in cruel brightness shine,
I Will smile, since there was none that pitied mine.

Exeunt. Enter Sertorius and Caska. Sert. Have you placed the Horses where I
appointed?


Cask. Yes, Sir.


Ser. I have but one thing more then to enjoin thee;
If I should fall by Tiridates Sword,
Carry the News thy self unto Hersilia,
And watch her as thou would an Arrow shot,
To see whether it hit or no.

Cask. To what purpose, Sir?


Sert. If she had any pity for me living,
Her sorrow for me dead, will show it.

Caska. But how, Sir, should I send you word?


Sert. It Is true, abundance travel through the Grave;
But there is not one of all the multitude
Will carry more than his own News about him:
Why should things so remote beget such strife
Beyond our knowledge, and beyond our life?
Succession thus some to fond Joys betray,
For whose vain hopes their ruin must make way.

Enter Tiridates. Cask. Prince Tiridates, Sir,


Sert. O it is well; leave us now, Caska,
And watch where I appointed:
If Tiridates comes without me,
Let him receive those helps that I should have.

Cask. This is a cruel Service, Sir.


Sert. Dispute it not


Exit Caska. Tir. Your pardon, Sertorius, that I seemed thus slow.
I was enforced to make some little stay
To 'scape Sulpitius* he and Mutius
Were earnest in Discourse.

Sert. May be they are looking us; Mutius is bold,
Nor is that base Sulpitius less than he;
And thus much, Tiridates, I Will acknowledge,
Had they now met us with their Swords about 'em*
I should with much more pleasure as your Friend
Have took my share against 'em.

Draws. Tir. Assisted by Sertorius, I should have been.
As sure of Conquest, as he is now of Victory. Draws.
I have one motion only left to make,
He that survives ^e^ him go tell Hersilia
That though his Rival in the fatal Strife
Was lost in Death, yet Love outlived his Life.

Sert. I will be just to you; but if I fall,
Carry no news of Love* nor me at all;
For* I have thought upon it, and find it vain,
To me no Message can come back again.
-- So to our For^^^^*

Fight. Enter Caska hastily. Cask. Hold, hold, as you have Honor, hold.


Sert. Ha, Caska What tempts thee to this Folly?


Cask. The saddest Spectacle that ever was:
Emilius's House seems almost wrapped in Flame;
The noise of people, and the Fire increase.

Sert. Take heed you do not play the Fool.


Cask. Go but to the place where you appointed me to wait,
And if it be not true, cut me to pieces:
While you doubt,
You but delay to help Hersilia.

Tir. Can this be true!


Cask. Or I am more a Villain than I was used to be.


Sert. We may believe him. Come, Tiridates,
Hersilia's Danger now our Quarrel ends,
And when she is unsafe, we must be Friends:
Our Actions some fantastic Planet guides,
Ill Fortune can unite whom Good divides.

Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I.
The Scene appears a Burning-house. Enter* Artabaces. Artab. WHat Noise is
this! -- How! -- Noise.
A House in Flames! where ever I go, I see
Ruins of several Natures wait on me.
-- Hark, they cry for help -- Noise of help.
'Twere pity to devote my self to Flames,
To save I know not who; what need I care?
He that is wretched has a Life to spare;
Fate shall not need look after me, I Will try
Which is most careless grown, Fortune, or I.

Exit, as into the House. Enter Mutius, and two Soldiers. Mut. No stirring yet?

1 Sold. Not as we can see.

Mut. They are not sindg'd yet:
Nor do I gaze with such a Gust of Joy,
As Pyrrhus had to look on burning Troy:
That this might grow to be Rome's funeral Flame,
And in its Ashes bury its own Name.

2 Sold. Shall we go to the other side?

Mut. We'll keep our motions in this compass.

1 S. How should we know the right Lady, Mutius?

Mut. Troth 'twas high time to ask;
Yet to say truth, I scarcely know my self;
But that we may be sure not to mistake,
Catch up every thing that looks but like a Woman.
Come softly this way.

Exeunt. Enter Artabaces with Verginia, veiled, and in a swoon. Art. Here Is
something yet, she was well findg'd,
And had been over-roasted presently. Sets her down.
-- Now let me see my purchase. --
-- Ha, -- my Eyes dazzle as if they star'd on Sunshine.
-- I Will wipe 'em, and then look again;
Her Eyes are closed; and though with her it is Night,
Her Beauty shines without the help of Light:
A darker Form has hid a Deity,
But Death's too near for Immortality.
I Will bow her gently;
Nature begins to triumph in the Strife,
And through her Lips soft Whispers steal of Life.
How fresh they show, the Roses almost gone
For want of air, by Breath seem newly blown.

Ver. -- Ha, -- where am I?
Hersilia, Sister, Hersilia, --
Ha, -- who are you? Are you not my Father?

Art. No, by no means, fair Creature.


Ver. Are you not a Man?


Art. That Is an odd question -- yes. --


Ver. You should be then my Father.


Art. That Is right, a man indeed should be her Father.


Aside. Ver. Or is there any other man besides my Father?


Art. She Is mad, overheated with the Fire.


Ver. Pray pardon my want of knowledge,
I never saw a man besides my Father,
Till I saw you, if you be one.

Art. This is the likeliest thing to be a Virgin
That ever I met with. Aside
-- Where have you lived, to be so ignorant?

Ver. Among the Vestal Virgins from an Infant,
And helped to keep the Sacred Fire alive.

Art. O that my Flame, as pure as those, might be
Fed by your pity, though not piety!

Ver. Help me but back again, and I Will attend
With true Devotion those pure Flames you send.

Art. From Ignorance alas her pity grows,
Her Innocence above a Virtue shows.

Ver. I had forgot, my Father and my Sister
May want the help that you ill placed in me.
O pity, there is rather my misery;
Their Merits and Rewards far exceed mine.

Art. Rewards could never yet my Soul incline.


Ver. I can invite you then no other way.


Art. Command me to my Death, and I obey.


Ver. Sure all Mankind are not thus virtuous too.


Art. All Womankind do less resemble you.


Ver. Hark, a Noise again; O my Father! Noise.
Gentle Sir, that generous pity show,
Which those above gave you but to bestow.

Weeps. Art. Dry up your Tears, fair Innocence;
I only beg, if I return,
That I may find you in this place again.

Ver. Here you shall find me sending up my Prayers
For your Success and Happiness.

Art. I had forgot to ask your Name.


Bows, and as going. Ver. Verginia, Sir, my Father's Name's Emilius,
You never asked me that.

Art. Nor never should;
I have your word to stay just in this place.

Ver. You need not doubt; I know not where to go.


Art. It Is all I ask for my Reward;
Think, bright Verginia, all your Cares are mine.
Fortune has played her Tricks, now Love play thine.

Exit, as into the Burning-house. Manet Verginia. Ver. Does Heaven on all
Mankind such good bestow?
My Fortune's excellent, or they are so:
I grow strangely concerned, some unknown Cause
A secret warmth into my Bosom draws;
I blush, I know not why; my confused Sense
Whispers, that Shame can live with Innocence;
Mind's like smooth Paper never writ upon,
When folded up, by some Impression,
Marks will remain it never had before,
And never return to former smoothness more.

Enter Mutius, and three or four. Mut. No news yet of Sulpitius!
-- The Women are all burnt, I hope.
-- Ha, here is one yet left, a very fair one too.
-- Come, Lady, you must along with me.

Ver. What are you?


Mut. Why, men.


Ver. You would not be thus rude then.


Mut. Who the Devil should be rude, if men should not?
Away with her, and stay for me
Under the Grove I told you of.
^ Come along.

Ver. Whither? why do you pull me?
Alas, you will frighten me.

Mut. She Is wondrous fair. -- Away with her.
I hope this is not Hersilia. -- Aside.
Then it is fair play: Equal Danger, equal Plunder.

Ver. Pray do not pull me, I promised to stay here
Till a Friend come; I must not break my word.

Mut. Indeed you must. -- Away with her.


Ver. What do you mean. O my heart fails me.
-- Oh.

Swoons. Mut. Up with her, she will wake with jogging:
Stay where I told you; I Will see a little farther,
And then come to you.

Exeunt. Enter Sulpitius and Hersilia, with Claudius and others. Sulp. Follow
still behind, and give me notice
If any overtakes us: Is Cinna gone to Mutius?

1. Yes, Sir.

Her. Whither do you carry me?
I do command you let me go.

Sulp. When we are a little farther,
Free from the Danger that concerns your Honor,
I will obey you; till then, believe it was your Service,
That made me throw my self into this Danger.

Her. This is strange, I mistrust something.


Sulp. You might if you knew all I know;
Pray ask no Questions in this place.
All is unsafe about us.

Exeunt. Enter Sertorius, bringing out Marcellina out of the fire. Mar. Set
down your wretched load, for I am grown
Your burden, that only would have been my own;
Had you preserved Hersilia, you had proved
Happy to save the person we both loved;
But now you are as much unfortunate
To save a wretched thing whom we both hate.

He stands amazed. Sert. Forgive the mixture which in me appears;
Wrong not my joys, nor yet condemn my fears.

Mar. Why do you stay, look on those shining Walls,
And think that from those flames Hersilia calls.

Sert. O what a wonder does your Friendship prove!
Forgives ingratitude, and urges love.
-- I know not what to do.

Mar. -- Go, go,
And pay what you to Love and Honor owe.

Sert. Then I must stay; for there is nothing due
From Love or Honor justly but to you.

Mar. All debts to me, to her I thus resign;
Be gone, and think Hersilia's danger's mine.

Ser. And leave you thus!


Mar. -- If you stay here,
Your formal gratitude will look like fear.

Sert. It is my shame to stay, my shame to go;
Yet not my Virtue, but yours makes it so:
If in these flames I meet my death, they will prove
As gentle, but more just than those of love.

Exit as into the House. Mar. -- What shall I do, my thoughts are tired, I find,
With tedious Journeys up and down my mind;
Sometimes they lose their way, sometimes as slow,
Like Beasts o'er-loaded, heavily they move,
Pressed by the weight of sorrow and of love.

Enter Artabaces. Art. So much for this; I Will have no more of these siery
trials,
My hair stinks like new burned Tinder:
See, she has kept her word.
-- Best Lady.

Mar. Sir.


Art. 'Slife, it is not she.


Mar. You seem concerned at some mistake.


Art. A little, Madam; it was my good fortune
To save a Lady from these flames,
That I expected here: 'twas her Commands
That sent me back, to see what help
Her Father and her Sister might have need of.

Mar. She was not tall, Sir.


Art. No, Madam, her beauty and her stature
Showed her very young.

Mar. You are happy, Sir, to be the fortunate preserver
Of so much Innocence and Beauty.

Art. D' you know her, Madam? or to whom
This wretched House did once belong?

Mar. She was my Cousin, Sir, and that was once
Her Father's Palace: you seem a stranger by these questions.

Art. I am, Madam, and but arrived this minute:
The first thing I almost saw, at least took notice of,
Was this sad Spectacle.

Mar* Is all consumed?


Art. Every one now is 'scapt or perished,
And need no help, or else are past it:
The last I met with was a noble Gentleman,
Concerned it seems above the thought of danger;
For he appeared careless of cracking beams,
And uncheck'd flames: A sudden noise
Without the House called him away.

Mar. O Sertorius! which way, Sir, was the noise?


Art. 'T was on the other side.


Mar. That way Sertorius went, and I must follow.
-- Pardon my disturbance, Sir -- yet --
-- Reason and Honor check my haste --
But our unsteady actions cannot be
Managed by rules of strict Philosophy;
There is but part belongs unto our care;
Fortune has right, and title to a share.

Exit. Manet Artabaces. Art. Should Fortune count with me unto this day,
She Would find there was a mighty debt to pay;
The Roman Conquest over my Country spread,
My Brother lost, or worse, in Triumph led;
Sure such full Empires have no aim or guide,
And those that reach 'em do not move but slide.
Man is too weak to manage with frail sense,
Such a resemblance of Omnipotence.
A Storm at Sea threw me on Italy,
And here I thought to find my death or thee:
Poor Tiridates, -- how could fortune prove,
So cursed among my woes to mingle love!
Which way to go I know not, nor need care;
I have been used to wander in despair.
All by uncertain ways pursue their ends,
And unto every object Reason bends.

Exit. The Scene shuts. Enter Emilius, and Tiridates, and followers. Emil. You
have saved my Life, brave Tiridates;
Would I could pay you with Hersilia,
That would appear more than a common gratitude.

Tir. Hersilia is a happiness beyond
My hopes and merits.

Emil. This fire was kindled by some treachery;
I fear Hersilia is the purchase
Of their designs and mischiefs.

Tir. Let us not now waste time with vain conjectures;
Hersilia and Verginia may want help,
While we are talking how they come to need it.

Emil. It Is true, let us take several ways,
And meet down by the Tiber, hard by Numa's Grove.

Tir. If I have life I Will bring it thither. Ex. Emil. and followers.
-- What did I say! how could I talk
Of carrying any longer life about me!
-- But humane things have such variety,
Neither the wise nor brave know when to die;
For neither justly can their deaths intend,
Till they are sure all hopes have first their end.

Enter Sertorius. Sert. -- Ha -- Tiridates!
He Is it seems no happier yet than I.
Stay, -- Sir, -- what news?

Tir. None that either of us wish;
Hersilia is for certain forced away
By unknown Persons.

Sert. So I have heard.


Tir. Emilius has took the great Flaminian way;
Let us divide our selves, -- and when --

Sert. Stay, Tiridates; Fortune seems wise in bringing us together,
She knows not what to do with both of us;
In the pursuit of Honor she can be
Liberal to many in one Victory:
When Fame's the Mistress, more than one may prove
Happy at once; but it is not so in Love.

Tir. He that blind Fortune will have happy made,
Let her guide him unto Hersilia's aid.

Sert. She shall guide me no farther; you and I
Will not ask her Opinion which shall die;
Our Swords will tell us all that she can know;
Her means are quick, though she her self be slow.

Draws. Tir. I draw for my defense, not my design; Draws.
You urge a wrong both to your Love and mine;
While your Revenge above your own does prove,
And force my Honor to exceed my Love.

Sert. It Is only Love that does this quarrel breed,
And so my Love my Honor does exceed.

Tir. Would Love attempt to ruin its own aid?
We fight for them by whom she is betrayed:
Whoever o'ercomes, his guilty Conquest shows,
Hersilia nothing to his Valor owes.

Sert. It Is true, --
It Is against her that I my Sword employ,
And she may want that help which I destroy.
-- Forgive me, Sir: -- Yet all things that can move,
As well as I, have felt Revenge and Love;
Unruly heats are with our Essence spread,
And by crazed Passion Nature's cemented.

Tir. While she has Enemies let us be Friends,
And now by several ways pursue our ends.

Sert. Stay, I am yet confused; it is a hard fate
To ^elp to make my self unfortunate.

Tir. We waste that time which takes too fast a slight,
And it is more guilt to talk than 'twere to fight.

Sert. How weak these wild distractions make me prove!
I am taught when to fight, and how to love;
Yet one thing more, if in your Breast you have
No mixed designs but what are clear and brave;
Let us engage, whoever is happy made,
To find Hersilia first, and bring her aid,
That he shall make no use of his success,
Nor the least story of his Love express,
Till first by our own Swords our cause is tried;
It is too great for Fortune to decide.

Tir. To keep this sacred here I freely vow;
You learned at first, but teach me Honor now.

Sert. Till then let us embrace; whoever Love guides
Unto his bliss, for the other Fate provides.
Now to our Fortunes; I Will pursue the way
Which leads through Numa's Grove.

Tir. -- But stay,
Where shall we meet?

Sert. Under those stately ranks
Of Cypress Trees that shade the Tiber's Banks,
Near Mutius's House; for still I apprehend
That Man; he is Mischief's and my Brother's Friend.

Tir. Agreed; -- in equal hopes now both are tied.


Sert. But when we meet our wishes must divide.


Exeunt. Enter Artabaces. Art. How ignorant of every thing I move!
I know not where I go, nor what I love:
Yet though she is gone, her Image still I find,
And I pursue what she has left behind.
Ah, my dear Brother, -- poor Tiridates! --
Cast on these Shores I came to look out thee,
And by my Bonds or Death to set thee free;
But into other Fetters I am thrown,
Not by my honor but my Love put on.
Quite tired I seem, like a hard-hunted Beast,
That does not seem to go, but sinks to rest.
Spent Nature's weight hangs heavy on my Eyes;
Sleep can cure Fevers, why not Miseries?
A Soul's disease can few Physicians find;
For Emp'ricks only practice on the mind:
Yet sleep her Image might convey to me,
And show in Dreams what I must never see. Enter two of Mutius men with
Verginia still in a swoon.

1. On, on, to the Tiber with her,
And Sacrifice her to Neptune.

2. The Devil we will; -- what,
Go twice as far as we need,
To try to be apprehended for Murderers!
The next Ditch will serve. -- Ha, -- what is here!
A dead man! 'slife, a most excellent Companion for her;
If he be asleep let him wake and answer for it;
Gently, gently; so, lay her behind him. They lay her behind Artabaces.
So, now to Mutius, and swear she was dead.

1. I, and cold too.

Exeunt. Artabaces after a little time wakes. Art. Sure 'twas that Beauty which
appeared so bright;
My Eyes by waking rob me of my sight;
When they were shut her Image did appear;
I star'd too boldly sure, and made her fear. Turns and sees her
Ha! -- look where she is; alas, I do mistake;
For I dream still, and think I am awake:
Some pitying Power this Vision does bestow,
And helps me to deceive my Sorrow so. She groans.
What Is that! my Senses sure are not my own!
Can empty Dreams and airy Visions groan?
Her Eyes begin to move and shine with life,
Now sink again in Death's ungentle strife:
In doubtful Weather, so the Sun resigns
Sometimes his Light to Clouds, and sometimes shines.
She lives again; O cease your Cruelty,
And she will by that Example pity me.

She (...). Ver. Oh me!
Have I not slept too long, and am to blame,
Neglecting to attend the Sacred Flame?

Art. Here is that Flame to which your Eyes did give
Life first, and promised it should always live.

Ver. Where are the Vestals then, or where am I?
Some confused Thoughts now shake my Memory;
I do remember I was seized upon
By some rude men; I thought there had been none.
Pray, who are you?

Art. -- Alas, I have no Name,
But that which is my Trouble, or my Shame.

Ver. Sure both my Eyes and Ears deceive me now,
Once I saw something looked, and spoke like you:
But by my fond Desires he was betrayed;
I owed him Life, which with his Death I paid.

Weeps. Art. Those Flames you sent me to, have let me live,
Perhaps reserved to dye by those you give.

Ver. Pray do not wrong me, are you he indeed?
I feel some unknown Joys that do exceed
The usual Measures of my Happiness;
I fear there may be guilt in the excess.

Art. O do not fear that Pity ever can prove
A guilt in any, should it grow to Love.

Ver. Pity is Love, and then it need not grow.


Art. In the World's common Charity it is so;
Such Love is only in Obedience shown
To those above, the other is our own.

Ver. We should deny our own Affections still.


Art. These Passions are all Strangers to the Will.
When I first saw your Eyes, my Heart was free.

Ver. O that I could restore your Liberty.


Art. That way there is no pity to be shown,
Restore not mine, but try to lose your own.

Ver. Will that strange way a Remedy procure?
Can a Disease in one, another cure?

Art. In Love's Disease neither their Cures obtain,
But both grow well by one another pain.

Ver. I know not what you mean, but I incline
To think that your Misfortunes would be mine.

Art. May I not dare to wish a little more?


Ver. -- Take heed,
Our Wishes may be Faults when they exceed.

Art. Do covetous men, or the ambitious find
Their vast Desires by any bounds confined?
If powerful Nature lets no Passion move
Within known limits, why alas should Love? Enter the two men of Mutius.

1. On, on; we are dead men;
Look where she is alive too: O happy Chance.

Ver. Help, help, these are the Villains.


Art. Your business, Rascals. He steps before her.

1. That Woman is our business.

Art. You shall have her thus, Dogs.


Fight, kills one, the other runs, and as he pursues, Enter Mutius, and others
behind him, and seize him. Art. Unhand me, Slaves.


Ver. O help.


Mut. You call for that you need not.


Art. Slaves, Dogs.


Mut. Ha, what is this? Tigellinus dead!
Thy Life for his is justly forfeited

Offers to run at Artabaces, she steps between. Ver. O hold, I was the cause
that stained his Innocence
With that man's blood, for 'twas in my Defense;
Besides, I Am tired with Life, and fit to dye.

Art. There Is none so weary of a Life as I;
Yet if you Romans would be thought such men,
Give me a Sword, and try to take it then.

Mut. It Is for her sake I do not punish thee.
This Fellow is not to be trusted free; Aside.
Bring him along.

Art. -- Slaves, I will not go.


Mut. Drag him along.


Ver. -- O, do not use him so.
Alas, what do you mean?

Mut. Why do I stay
Thus trifling? Madam, come, here lies our way.
Bring him alive or dead.

Exit. Ver. -- Pray hold your hands.
Good Sir, obey their Power, or my Commands.

Art. Come, lead me where you please; how much above
My Reason and my Courage is my Love!

Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Mutius and Verginia. Mut. STill weeping, Madam? these are unkind Tears,
Love is ill paid with Sorrow, or with Fears.

Ver. If Love's ill paid with Grief, it needs must be
As ill expressed by signs of Cruelty.

Mut. It is a Cruelty to my Soul expressed,
Because I keep it Prisoner in my Breast?

Ver. Not while it is willing, but it would be so
Had it as much desire as I to go.

Mut. Since Life and you in me bear equal sway,
Be not less willing than my Life to stay.

Ver. If Bondage only does express you kind,
Why does the Stranger such harsh usage find?
Can you pretend that the same act should be
Cruel to him, and yet so kind to me?

Mut. O my vexed Soul! how true my Fears do prove!
Love betrays me, and she betrays her Love. Aside.
I Will try her yet. -- Should I not seem to be
In all things kind, to set this Stranger free?

Ver. Alas, what shall I say! -- I think you were,
He offers all I wish, and all I fear.

Aside. Mut. How brightly her betraying Blushes move,
And seem a glorious Traitor to her Love!

Aside. Ver. Sure when he has his Freedom he will be gone. Aside.
Should I beg his that am denied my own?

Mut. You need not now your Power or Tears employ,
The Stranger does his Liberty enjoy.

Ver. But is he gone already? Can it be?


Mut. What, are you troubled at his Liberty?


Ver. Did he not ask to see me ere he went?


Mut. He said not much: I know not what he meant.


Ver. Perhaps you did refuse that small Request?


Mut. I could not grant that which he never expressed.


Ver. Why, did I owe my Safety to his aid?
O Kindness ill bestowed, but worse repaid?

Mut. Thou have betrayed thy self, the Lover's part
I Will act henceforward with a Soldier's Heart.

Ver. Alas, what do you mean? What Tempests rise?
The gathering Storms lie rolling in your Eyes.

Mut. I blush that I have been so calm and tame;
Conquests in Love and War are but the same;
Both reached by boldest hands, and Fools alone
Thank Fate or you, for that which is their own.

Ver. Alas, what have I done?


Mut. -- How could you be
So foolish to think I had set him free?
I quickly found he was too fortunate:
You may cheat those you love, not those you hate.

Ver. O be more gentle.


Mut. -- Yes, when you are kind.


Ver. Storms hardly will teach Calmness to a Mind.


Mut. You raised the Storm which shall his ruin prove,
And he shall owe his Fate unto your Love.

Ver. Alas, it is your suspicion does engage
Your Fury thus; this Object of your Rage
I never saw, till from the Flames just now
He brought me forth, and gave me Life to owe.

Mut. What Flames were those?


Ver. -- Those wretched Flames which burned
My Father's House, and all to Ashes turned.

Mut. O happy, Hersilia's Sister!
How the kind Fates still nearer Bonds provide,
For me, and for Sulpitius to be tied.

Ver. Are you not yet appeased? Or can it be,
That Gratitude should cause such Jealousy? Walks musing, she after him.
In gentle Minds, Love takes the most delight;
Rough Natures urge not Passion, but affright.

Mut. Come, dry those gentle Showers, for there will be
No need of Tears, unless to pity me.

Ver. Will you no more appear in such a Rage?


Mut. You need not fear the Storms you can assuage:
Teach me by your Example, I shall prove
The aptest Scholar, when I Am taught by Love:
-- But I forget Sulpitius: -- Who Is there?
-- Here -- Enter 1.
Receive this Virgin with Respect and Care,
Safely till I return, and let her be
Obeyed by you that is adored by me.

Exit. Ver. I find his Jealousy has told him true,
And found my Love sooner than I could do;
What shall I say? which will the hardest prove,
To hide my Hate, or to conceal my Love?
How can I practice what I never knew?
And appear false, that so I might be true?
And yet if they should take his Life away --
Will none of these as well as I betray? Looks on the men.
-- Is your Captain gone, my Friend?

1. A little way.

Ver. When will he return?

2. That Is uncertain.

Ver. He was very kind to me;
You know it best, with whom he left
Commands that were so civil.

2. Yes, I think he did.

Ver. I do believe there was no need;
Your Natures would have urged you to as much
As I shall beg

2. What does she mean?

Ver. I have a small Request.

2. Well, what is it?

Ver. Nay, do not ask me harshly;
A Kindness may be lessened by the manner.

2. What the Devil does she mean?

Ver. How ruggedly they look? -- Aside.
Yet I should take it well, nay, very kindly.

1. 'Slife, how she tempts! -- Aside.
-- Well, name it.

Ver. It Is only -- If they should deny me, Aside.
I know you will think it but a small Request.

1. Well, let us hear it.

Ver. I would see the Stranger that was taken with me,
I have a little business with him.

1. We dare not do it.

Ver. Your Captain said you should obey me;
But I would owe it to your Natures,
Rather than his Commands.

2. It Is impossible to deny her.

Ver. Yet I would be grateful too; not to bribe,
But to reward your gentle natures.

1. If we do not take the better care,
She Will make us think we are honest too.

2. We can easily convince her.

Ver. Why do you delay? pray make more haste to goodness;
Here, divide this between you. o^^exs money.

1. Do think we shall be able to deny her?

2. It Is impossible to deny her, and her money too;
Our Captain has a brave prize.

Ver. Alas, I fear they will deny me:
Are you not yet resolved? -- here, pray accept it.

1. Well, for once we'll strain a point;
Come follow us, we'll bring ye to him:
But it is two to one whether he will speak to you or no;
He Is as sullen as a new taken Eagle.

Ver. I Will venture that.

1. My Companion will guide you to the place;
Follow me slowly, for I must step before
And prepare those that guard him.

Ver. I thank you, may you find full rewards
In the success of all your just desires: Exit.
When shall the fears of minds concerned grow less,
I tremble now at my own wished success:
Courage in great distress can only ^id,
But fear of what should help will be afraid.
The Gods from passions might have made us free,
Or gave us only those which best agree;
For such as mine a wretched mingle prove,
The want of Courage, and excess of Love:
They were not jealous sure that we might be
By Virtue raised too near Divinity;
For since within their power dwells all our breath,
The distance is preserved enough by death.

Exeunt. The Scene a solitary Room. Enter Artabaces out of it. Art. That I
could fly from every thought I have,
And lie as senseless in my Life as Grave:
I that had power of thousand lives am thrown
In bonds out of the Title to my own. Lies down.
Why did the gods --
Make us so fit for Vice and Misery?
In goodness their immortal Chequers lie;
They might have given our Souls better Estates,
And set our Blessings at far cheaper rates. Enter one of those that went from
Verginia, with another Comrade that had the keeping of Artabaces.

1. Come, come, here is that will conquer
Both thy Fears and Honesty.

2. If Mutius should return.

1. Pish, he is engaged to look Sulpitius;
Besides, he bid us to obey what she desired.

2. Well, let us go to him; to toll thee true,
I pity him; it is a brave Fellow.

1. I could pity too; but we are p^^d too well
To be good-natured; -- prithee tell him
That one desires to speak with him.

2. He Is horrible surly. -- Sir, --
D'hear, Sir? there is one without desires to speak with you.

Art. It Is a question whether I Will speak with him or no.

2. You must needs.

Art. I am busy, Rascals.

1. It Is but a word, Sir.

Art. I will not waste half a one, Slaves, for you.

2. Fetch her in Man; he will never be persuaded.

Exit 1. Art What do you stay for, gentle Sir?
Do You suppose your Company is pleasant?

2. You Will be made tamer.

Art. Yes, thus Rascals. Starts up.

2. 'Twere a just act to take away your Life,
It troubles you.

Art. Prithee do me but that courtesy, (...) ^ot,
Lend me the Sword, and see how kind (...)

2. He does amaze me.

Enter Verginia ^id 1. Ver. Hold, hold; what is this? why a Sword drawn?

2. This Madman would provoke his death.

Ver. Pray hold, you do mistake: -- (...) he not; Sir?

2. How he stares on her!

1. And how his fury slides away -- Sir --
-- The Lady -- Sir --

Art. Peace, Slaves. -- I was co(...). Stamps.

2. What, Sir?

Art. That, Rascal.


(...) him; the Fellow offers to draw. Ver. Pray hold; here, take more; pray
hold:
For my sake, Sir, be gentle.

Art. I have done.


Ver. Pray be gone; you do disturb him. Exeunt.
Why are your furious Eyes so fixed on (...)?
I do confess I caused your misery.
Propose your own revenge, and my just nearst
Against the Life it feeds, will take your part.

Art. Alas, if your just heart so kind (...) pro^^^
To share in Griefs, teach it to share in Love.

Ver. It Is you must teach my (...) what it should do;
It Is aptest to learn any thing from you.

Art. Love's hardly to be taught, (...) to have;
It Is strange you should not know the thing y^^ (...).

Ver. Though what I gave per ha(...) not know;
Sure I should understand w^^t you (...);

Art. Fortune, alas, has (...) all (...);
Love seldom is the gift of Misery.

Ver. You said Pity was Love.


Art. A common Pity does not Love expres^;
Pity is Love when grown into excess.

Ver. If that be all, Love is not taught I see;
For before you could speak 'twas learned by me.
Sure Nature's Laws are above Heaven's got;
Love need not, though Religion must be taught.

Art. O speak again; the breath that tells your Love
Approaches like the gentle Winds that move
Over the tops of fragrant Flowers, and brings
To the blessed Sense their Souls upon their Wings.

Vir. Alas, I have said something which I fear
Had such a sound a Virgin should not hear;

Art. O do not teach your Love a common way;
Love's power is small, unless it can betray.

Ver. You Will then confess you have power enough in me,
If for your sake I Am pleased with Treachery.
But tales of Love make us forget our woes;
A sudden fear upon my spirit grows,
Like People that tell tales of Ghosts at night,
So long till they are talked into a fright.

Art. Such phancies, from no real cause, will prove
But Dreams, that hinder the repose of Love.

Ver. You call my phancies dreams; but if they are,
All those must wake that do their dreams declare.
Think I am sleeping when you see me sad,
And when I wake I Will tell what dreams I had.

Enter Mutius suddenly. Mut. I cannot find Sulpitius; all is in an uproar.
-- Ha! --
What sight is this, at which my stiffened hair
Starts from their shaken roots! I should not stare
So frightened, had I met every Ghost
Started from Hell which Roman Conquests boast.

Ver. Ah me! what storm is falling on us now?


Art. No Thunder dwells upon a humane brow.


Mut. Yes, you shall feel the Thunder that you slight:
It shows more power to ruin than to fright.

Art. Vain slighted Villain.


Ver. -- Pray let me speak;
Perhaps he will least resist what is most weak:
Pray be not angry; did you not engage
That I should never see you in a rage?

Mut. You Powers, what an ungrateful confidence
This Woman hides with painted Innocence!

Art. Would thou have thanks for want of liberty?
Which way is gratitude grown due to thee?

Mut. While thou do speak it is with ungrateful breath,
Which I could stisle if I would in death.

Art. Prithee then do. --


Ver. -- Cannot my tears incline?
Will you provoke your ruin, perhaps mine?

Art. I Have done; and though death's business I despise,
Yet when you talk that it may close your Eyes,
This too fond heart of mine, that did not fail
At death in gross, shrinks now at the retail.

Mut. Come, have ye done? I long till I remove
With him thy hopes, if not destroy thy love.

Ver. Hold, hold, your passion guides you to mistake;
Alas, it is the wrong life that you would take.

Mut. My just revenge is this way best expressed,
To take that Life away which you love best.

Ver. Yet hear me speak; Had I no life to pay
To Nature, would you then take his away? Mut. studies.
How plain it is, if Death to him you give,
The reason only is because I live?

Art Do not on my loathed Life set such a rate;
It is unkind to plead for what I hate.

Mut. One thing may save all yet;
If you will swear by all that you adore
From hence, never to see each other more.

Ver. What shall I do? I fear that this may be
An easy Oath for him, though not for me.

Art. -- Then hear me swear.


Ver. Alas, I thought 'twou'd prove
My fears would be far truer than his love.

Art. By all that is good, thus, in this blessed amaze,
I would for ever on this object gaze.

Mut. They trifle with my rage. Without there, ho. Enter one or two.
Here, Take 'em away.
-- Hold -- be gone with her, but let him stay.
-- Now, Sir,
Once more I ask you, will you swear?
You Would best consult with wisdom, and with fear.

Art. Let fear upon the prosperous hearts take hold,
Cowards themselves in miseries grow bold.

Mut. Fortune, by me, now offers to be kind.


Art. And raise me on the ruins of my mind;
Though I am sunk, my honor keeps above.

Mut. It Is not thy Honor urges, but thy Love.


Art. Those are the same. Poor frighted men at Sea,
To save their lives cast all their goods away.
In storms of Fortune, where there is a strife
Which shall be saved Man's Honor, or his Life,
Who would preserve this tottered Bark from fate,
But sink the Vessel to preserve the freight?

Mut. I Will shake thy stubborn Spirit, while I feed
Thy Life with tortures, Death shall death exceed.

Art. Life may be less than Life, as it does waste;
But Death cannot be more than death at last.

Mut. Who Is there? Enter one or two.
-- Here --
Take him away, and shut him up from light,
Let him see nothing but Death's Image, Night.

Art. Thou can not reach the light that I shall find;
A generous Soul is Sunshine to the mind.

Mut. Be gone,
In the least title he that disobeys,
His own neglect his wretched Life betrays. Ex. with Art. Manet Mutius.
In what increase of Tempests I am tossed,
Like those in storms afraid of any Coast:
Now every way to me unsafe appears,
Reason has left the Helm, and Love now steers:
Yet one Trick more I am resolved to try;
Love's Wisdom is composed of Treachery.
-- Ho -- Corbuio.

Enter Corbulo. Cor. Your pleasure, Sir?


Mut. Fetch Verginia hither.
And send Titus to spy abroad:
And bring what News he can; however
Let him not stay, for I intend at his return,
To look my self after Sulpitius.

Cor. I will, Sir.


Exit. Mut. This Fellow sits my humor;
Like Flies he feeds upon the foulest things,
And to the rugged'st places fastest clings.
-- But -- I forget my Business, I must now
With all that is gentle, smooth a rugged Brow,
And tempt her with feigned Goodness to believe;
The shape of Virtue still can best deceive.
Those that in faithless Oceans take their way,
Sink in the Storms, but it is the Calms betray. Enter Corbulo with Verginia.
She comes. -- Now leave us, Corbulo,
But stay within my call. Exit Corbulo.
Still drowned in Sorrow? sure my Rage appears
As just, and far more gentle than your Tears;
You fear the Storms, yet make the Tempests rise,
While you retain soul Weather in your Eyes.

Vir. Tempests by Showers sometimes are laid to peace.


Mut. And when you weep for me, my Storms will cease.


Ver. To show my Gratitude, I show my Fears,
And poorly pay the Debt of Life with Tears;
Secure me only this, that he shall live,
Or do not blame the Sorrow that you give.

Mut. Does not feigned Gratitude true Passion hide?
But since only by this it can be tried,
Here in a sacred Vow my self I tie,
By me, nor by my means he shall not dye.

Ver. Now you are gentle,
And as in Tears I paid to him his due,
Now with dried Eyes I Will pay my thanks to you.

Mut. Your Gratitude might find a better way,
And my kind Vow with one as gentle pay:
It Is the same Oath which he has took before,
To avoid ever seeing of him more.

Ver. If he has swore, alas, what need I swear?
A Vow should be as gentle as a Prayer.

Mut. Can Prayers to all alike so gentle be,
Since all the World's Devotions disagree?
None beg the same, the Prayers of all the best
Are little more than Curses for the rest. Enter Corbulo.
-- How now --

Cor. Titus is returned, Sir, and says, there is most noise
By Numa's Grove; another joined to him
To scout on either side, might bring you full Intelligence.

Mut. No, I will go my self. -- In the mean time
Think, gentlest Maid, how little I deny;
Who ever you command, must live or dye. Ex. with Ver.
-- Corbulo, -- Come back. --
I have a Business that I dare commit
Unto no Care but thine. -- Give out that I am gone,
And with a show of pity offer Verginia,
To bring her to the Stranger; in the mean time,
I Will place my self to over-hear their Passions:
The Business will be easy.

Corb. If 'twere hard, it were all one to me.


Mut. Dispatch then, my brave Corbulo,
And send Spurius along with Titus. Ex. Corbulo.
I will search out the Secret of her Heart,
And find that Passion which she hides with Art:
May be 'twas Charity that feared his harm,
But Charity does seldom show so warm.
No, no, such deep Concerns appear above,
All taught Affections, it is unlessen'd Love:
When this Disease of Jealousy can find
A way to seize upon a crazy Mind;
Most things instead of help or giving ease,
The Humor feed and turn to the Disease. Exit. Enter Marcellina.
-- Hark --
I listen still for Noise to be my Guide,
And want, yet have too much on every side.
-- O Sertorius! --
How I pursue, with what uncertainty?
Yet though I lose my way, I follow thee:
Hurried along upon Love's Wings I move,
Pursuing Fate, and am pursued by Love.

Exit. Enter Sulpitius, with Hersilia and others. Sulp. Be pleased to pardon
me, Madam,
I was enforced to lead you a by-way,
Something about; we are nearer a place of safety now.

Her. I would not censure, but this seems to be
A mingle between Force and Courtesy.

Sulp. Since it is so hard to gain your clear belief,
I must be innocent, though it gives you Grief.
Yet for your own sake do not wish to know,
Time is too hasty, and my Tongue too slow:
Why should his Guilt and Mischief blemish me?
Yet Silence seems a virtuous Treachery.

Her. Why do you show such struglings in your Breast?


Sulp. Nature and Friendship are at a Contest;
Know then, I would you could, and I not tell,
That Tiridates by Sertorius fell:
You were the Quarrel, and for you they strove
With equal Courage, and with equal Love;
Till Fortune blinder now than ever proved,
And denied Victory to what you loved.

Her. Ha, Tiridates dead!


Weeps. Sulp. We have no time to talk, or to lament,
Lest we meet Dangers which we should prevent.

Her. Alas, my Grief's the greatest Dangers are:
Who would fly Death, that cannot fly Despair?

Sul. Sorrow deceives, that bids you stay and dye;
It Is from Sertorius, not from Death you fly;
Whose Rage had blown it self to such a height,
It stopped not at the unhappy Princes Fate,
But presently your Father's Palace blazed
In circling Flames, which his Revenge had raised;
As if 'twere just he should the Ruin prove
Of his own Hopes, that had destroyed your Love.

Her. Methinks my Love looks mean in Sorrow dressed,
Sure 'twou'd show greater by Revenge expressed.

Sulp. Though nothing of your Heart you will resign
To me, let your Revenge at least be mine.

Her. O, Tiridates!
I have condemned my self to dye, and grieve;
Revenge does only my short Life reprieve. Enter Sertorius.
Ha, the horrid Monster comes! you Powers above,
Revenge at once Death and an injured Love.

Ser. Have I o'er-took you Villain with your Prize?


Draws. Sul. There Is none is over-took but he that flies.


Her. Defend me now, Sulpitius.


Sert. -- Ha, does Hersilia want such a^^?
O Heavens! her Virtue's lost, or she is betrayed;
I will not trisle out my Cause with words.

Her. Let my Revenge and Wrongs assist your Sword.


Ser. What Riddle's this! she courts his Treachery?
Then through their Deaths I thus must haste to dye.

Fights among 'em, and kills one. Enter Marcellina, takes up his Sword, and
hurts another that is running at Sertorius; he turns, and she and he fight, and
Marcellina kills him, and then falls her self: In the mean time, Sulpitius and
the rest wound Sertorius so, that they fall together. Her. What, do I see?
Marcellina!


Mar. Hersilia!


Sulp. Come, we must not stay,
All is unsafe, and pity will betray.

Sulpitius pulls her. Sert. Hear my last words, have so much Charity;
My Life was yours, but here it is just I dye;
I feel new Fires, my ancient Flames appease,
And I own Health unto a new Disease.

Her. Do thou not shrink at thy approaching Fate?
Are all my Sorrows and his Blood no weight?

Ser. What Sorrows do you wear? Or what is my Crime?


Sul. We trifle out our Safety with the Time.


Pull. Hersilia. Her. Stay -- let me tell him. --


Sulp. -- -- It Is in vain, ^away.


Sert. That Villain does betray you.


Her. -- -- Hold, I will stay^.
O, Marcellina! O, Tiridates!

Sert. -- -- What is the mystery?
Why do you call on them from whom you fly?

Her. What does he say?


Sulp. -- -- He raves, ^o matter what.


Her. I Will hear him speak.


Sulp. -- -- Away, it is too late.


Hurries her out. Manet Sertorius and Marcellina. Ser. What can this mean? --
farewell my unjust Fires,
New warmth grows in me, though my Life expires.
How slow I crawl? my Love would make more haste,
But weakened Nature cannot move so fast.
My sinking Soul this bleeding Current drowns;
How equal we are now in allout Wounds;
O speak, and tell me if you can forgive;
Or if that be too much, tell me yo^live.

Mar. I would deny you nothing; should I say
I live, Life while I tell it steal^ away.
Be not concerned; Death has the some event,
By Nature called, or brought by accident.

Sert. Do not so willingly your Life resign;
Or if you must, let your Soul go with mine.

Mar. It will go softly, if it goes before,
And wait for yours, where they shall part no more.

Sert. And shall we thus know one another there?


Mar. Else we should want a Blessing we have here.


Sert. I feel Death ^shades creep upon Nature's light;
O guide your Hand to mine, it is almost Night.

Mar. Here, where is yours?


Sert. -- -- Searching to find yours out.


Mar. Have it I now? Weakness and Love may doubt.
Hold fast, -- farewell. -- There Is something -- ^id^^.

Dies. Sert. It Is Death, that kindly thus it self divides.


Dies. ACT. V.
SCENE. I.
Enter Artabaces. Art. WHY to our Bodies are the Gods more kind,
Than to the Place where Worship dwells, the Mind?
Nature provides Defense, and yi^^d^ R^treat
From piercing Cold, and from th^se ^rching Heat;
But for the Passions which about us wait,
There is no means allowed prop^^tionate.

Enter Corbulo. Cor. Are you busy, Sir?


Mutius over-hearing. Art O wondrous busy.


Cor. In what?


Art. Why I was thinking that the World's ill balanced,
More Knaves than honest Men.

Cor. An honest Man would then be welcome sure.


Art. Not to this place.


Cor. To you, I hope.


Art. Troth I have but little business for him.


Cor. Do you not want a courtesy?


Art. Yes, and one to do it.


Cor. Pray try me, Sir.


Art. With all my heart; -- help me to a Sword.


Cor. That Is hard.


Art. So are most courtesies; prithee do me an easy one*


Cor. What Is that?


Art. Be gone, and leave me.


Cor. I would first willingly do something for you,
And would help you to a Sword too;
But they are too suspicious at this time,
Strict Spies are set on you;
Somewhat more liberty is allowed the Lady.

Art. The Lady! -- ha -- did thou not say the Lady?


Cor. Yes, I did. -- It takes.


Aside. Art. Could you help me to speak with her, or see her,
Though but for a book or two?

Cor. Um'h.


Art. That Is too hard too.


Cor. No, I will do it.


Art. Are you sure of it?


Cor. Stay there a little, and you shall see.


Steps to Mutius. Art. This Fellow sure has inclinations to be honest.


Cor. It Is done; watch there.


Comes back and Exit. Mut. My best Corbulo.


Art. I have been thinking
Why those above, so full of tenderness,
Made ways so hard to good and happiness:
Through Graves we travel to felicity;
The road unto Religion's misery.
The ways might have been easier to find out,
Not left so rugged, and so far about:
To every object we submit our sense,
And call our accidents their providence.
There is no satisfaction here below,
But such as Chance or strange extremes bestow:
Secure Content can only be acquired
By brutish minds, or such which are inspired,
Where Reason must not come, or cannot incline,
Sunk unto Beasts, or raised to be divine.

Enter Corbulo with Verginia. Cor. Then, Sir, now believe.


Exit. Art. H'as don't indeed.
Just so when welcome light begins to rise,
An unknown Comfort steals on troubled Eyes.
Here let me kneel for ever in this place,
And cling like Ivy to my first embrace.

Ver. Alas, in sorrow should we plant our Loves!
Prisons are barren Soils where nothing proves.
Joys may spring up and make a little show;
But fastening roots in prosperous places grow.

Art. Love may, like Virtue, starve in full content:
Misfortunes are their noblest punishment.

Ver. If Love fares well, do not his Feasts betray,
While Death stands ready to take all away:
Let rather Art and Wisdom act their parts,
And hide our Love from all things but our hearts.

Art. Dull order takes from Love its edge and grace;
He stumbles in all steps but his own pace;
His sacred liberty is in Fetters tied,
When Art or Wisdom his loose steps would guide.

Ver. Perhaps there is a way to set you free.


Art. Can I be so, and you want liberty?


Ver. Do but at least comply with my design;
For here your Life's in danger more than mine.

Art. Without your sight my Life is less secure;
Those wounds you gave your Eyes can only cure;
No Balm in absence will effectual prove,
Nature provides no Weapon-salve for Love.

Ver. Might you but live a Prisoner still with me,
It were unkind to wish your liberty;
It Is offered from my love, -- and yet I find Sighs.
You that deny to take it seem more kind.

Enter Mutius hastily. Mut. It Is I must bring you freedom at the last.


Draws. Ver. O hold, remember what a Vow you past,


Mut. It is thy falseness makes me call it back;
No Vows so strong but just revenge will crack.

Ver. Revenge will be no plea to those above.


Mut. But they will hearken unto injured Love.


Art. The gods will hear no business comes from thee.


Mut. I Will send you on my errand.


Ver. -- Oh through me
Guide your kind Sword: -- Methinks your looks appear He pauses and studies.
To me at least more gentle than they were.

Mut. O yes, I am grown very tame, and now
I think on it better, I will keep my Vow.

Ver. The Gods reward what I can never pay.


Mut. Hold, hold, take all together when you pray;
For you shall see me take such wondrous care,
That neither of you both shall need to swear.

Ver. What do you mean?


Mut. -- Without there, ho, Corbulo.


Enter Corbulo. Art. O treacherous Slave. --


Mut. -- Yes, you are in the right;
Since you were squeamish to forswear her sight,
I will secure your Eyes without your Vow.

Ver. Oh Sir, by all --


Mut. -- Nay, no dissembling now:
Take him away, and on his charming sight
With burning Irons fear eternal night.

Cor. How, burn out his Eyes!


Mut. Yes, burn out his Eyes.
Do^^ Corbulo demur at Cruelties?
No more, be gone.

Ver. -- O hold, he bids you stay.


Mut. He stays to meet his death that dares delay.


Art. Farewell, fair Vestal;
By my Soul's Eyes your Image shall be seen;
And when it is dark without, I Will gaze within.

Ver. O stay, I know you will relent, you must;
Need you be cruel, when you should be just?
Preserve your Vow without your Cruelty;
And do not make your Sin your Piety.

Exit with Artabaces. Mut. Begone, I Will practice what you taught before.
I Will show no pity, nor ask yours no more.

Ver. But you may want pity from those above.


Mut. Not now, since they denied it in your Love.


Ver. They Will make me pay, if you will make me owe.


Mut. You are too cunning, and the gods too slow. Enter Corbulo.
How now, is it done?

Cor. No.


Mut. Ha! -- the reason, Slave?


Cor. I think such horrid business was not in our bargain.


Mut. Pitiful Rascal, take that soft reward; Strikes him.
I Will trust such tender Slaves no more.

Exit Mutius. Cor. Am I thus paid?


Ver. Alas, what does he mean to do?


Cor. Mischief, no doubt.


Ver. Look on my wrongs, or your own injury;
Revenge on him will prove pity to me.

Cor. A blow! this my reward! -- follow me;
I will do something, but I know not what.

Ver. The gods would think that I enough had paid,
Were my Tears measured, or my Sorrows weighed.

Exeunt. Enter Sulpitius with others, leading in Hersilla. Her. Hold, or you
shall drag me on:
There Is something in all this like treachery;
Sertorius now is dead, what need we fly?
-- Leave me; --
You may be innocent if you obey.

Sulp. No, we have wandered, you may lose your way.


Her. Take heed left I suspect some ill design.


Sulp. Suspicion will be more your fault than mine.


Her. I fear that I have shared his guilt, I find
Poor Marcellina's Ghost walks in my mind. Enter Tiridates.
Ha! -- Tiridates! -- false Villain.

Sulp. Pish, it is his Ghost: Here lead her away
To the appointed place; hold, you two, stay.

Her. Help, Tiridates.


Exit with Hersilia. Tir. Villain, look back, and see thy Death.


Sulp. Death is more used to obey me than you.
-- Dispatch him. Fight, Tiridates falls.
-- It Is done; come for Mutius's House, away.

Exeunt. Tir. It will not be. Strives to rise.
I bleed so fast that withered Life begins
To fade away for want of Nature's Springs:
And yet I feel no such decay of Love,
Though Life and Passion from one Fountain move.
-- Hersilia, -- Hersilia. --

Swoons. Enter Artabaces with his Eyes out, and bound. Art. Where am I now?
I thought the way to death had been so broad,
Though I were blind I could not miss the road:
Death's Lodgings such perpetual darkness have,
And I seem nothing but a walking Grave.
-- Verginia, -- I must never hope to see;
All Nature's Windows are shut up in me:
The Sun to me brings an unuseful light;
About me now I always carry night.
There Is yet one grief added to all my store,
Never to see poor Tiridates more.

Tir. Who Is that names the unfortunate Tiridates?


Art. What noise is this which sadly strikes my Ear?
A sound like Tiridates Voice I hear.

Tir. It Is yet his Voice; were not my senses broke,
I should think too 'twere Artabaces spoke.

Art. It Is Artabaces speaks, and seeks about
For Tiridates.

Tir. -- Why do you not find me out?
It is not dark.

Art. -- Alas, it is dark with me.


Tir. Here, here; that I should live once more to see
My long-lost Brother! 'twill scarce show like death
In thy embraces to resign my breath.

Art. O take me in thy arms for mine are tied;
If they were free I have no Eyes to guide.

Tir. Assist me, my weak strength, but to unty
Those Arms, to make my self a place to die.

Unties him, and Artabaces sits down and takes him in his arms. Art. How
dismally we meet like death and night!
My Arms are now thy strength, thy Eyes my sight.

Tir. What hand or chance shut up those Eyes of thine?
While I enquire the cause death closes mine.

Dies. Art. He sinks; Tiridates, -- Brother: His pulse is gone;
It Is grown a dead low ebb with Life's warm flood:
How proper are my tears? my Eyes weep blood.
He Is gones before to rest, why must I stay?
Eyes that are wounds might weep a Life away:
They drop too slow, Life will not at this rate
Distill away; I Will seek a quicker fate. Starts up.
Now I have hands, they will some death afford;
I had forgot to ask him for his Sword;
I Will grope it out; -- it is hard, I cannot find He creeps up and down for it
on's knees.
The means of death; Fortune should help the blind
-- O -- I have it now.
All steps of Life were going to this home;
But this does not bring Death, but show it is come.
So Motion causes what it cannot express;
It Is the last Step declares the Weariness.
One Thought for dear Verginia, -- then --

Enter Corbulo with Verginia. Cor. This way I Am sure. --
-- Look where he stands: I dare not stay.

Exit. Ver. Heaven reward you.


Art. Who Is there?


Ver. -- The horrid Deed is done! --
Look down on him you Powers, with Pity too,
That has no Eyes left to look up to you.

Art. Who Is that which does too late the Gods implore?
A Music like that Voice I Have heard before.

Ver. That I were dumb.
It is too much that I can speak and see;
Each Sense is but a several misery.

Art. It is Verginia; guide me where he stand,
To leave my last Kiss on your sacred Hand.

She comes to him, and gives him her Hand. Ver. O do not to despair your Soul
resign;
Your Eyes have been my Guides, now see with mine.

Art. It Is Life, not you, that I forsake or fly;
I do but go before you when I dye.

Ver. Hold, hold;
Give me your Sword, it is fittest for me now;
I dare not use it, and you know not how.

Art. In this condition I can use it best;
I need no Eyes to guide it to my Breast.

Enter Mutius, and pauses a little. Ver. Hold, hold; Oh Mutius comes! Stand
behind me;
Give me your useless Sword, for I can see.

Art. Away, away; those Powers will send Supplies,
And guide my Sword, that took away my Eyes.

Mut. Fair Cous'ner, have I overtook you now?
With Justice, thus I break my slighted Vow.

Runs at Artabaces; he stands still, and catches the Hilt of Mutius's Sword as
it passes through his Body, and kills him. Art. So I heard him fall; -- I think
My Sword feels him now. --
Is he -- not -- dead? --

Staggers and falls. Ver. Are you not dying too? O, let me know.


Art. Yes, all the while I lived, I have been so;
Time equal steps to Death, and Life does give;
And those that fear to dye, must fear to live:
Death reconciles the World's and Nature's Strife,
And is a part of Order and of Life.

Ver. It Is out of Order without Nature's call.


Art. It were the same if Accident paid all.
We have no right in Time to come, no more
Than we had Title to the Time before.

Ver. Yet to my Life some pity should be shown,
( Verginia's Life) though you despise your own.

Art. Reviving Comfort from that Name is sent;
And though my -- fainting -- Life -- is almost spent,
It baits upon your Name, and then -- goes on;
But it is so tired, it cannot -- travel -- long.

Sinks. Ver. Oh!


Starts up a little. Art. I could have smiled at loss of Life and Crowns,
But at the loss of you -- I dye -- in Frowns.

Dies. Ver. Oh, do not leave me thus; for pity stay
A little. -- 'Twas but just now he went away;
I have not since had time to shed a Tear;
And yet the Distance does the same appear,
As if h'ad been a thousand years from me.
Time takes no measure in Eternity.

Weeps over him. Enter Hersilia, with the Fellow that went off with her. Clau.
This is the unhappy place, and there the wretched Object.
-- Now, your promised pardon.

Her. Go, and live honest. -- Exit.
Oh my Tiridates, -- speak but one word. Runs and kneels by him.
He Is gone for ever; -- has he not left his Sword She rises.
To help me after? -- Ha! -- who is that appears Sees Verginia.
Like me in Griefs, so drowned in hopeless Tears?

Ver. -- Ha! -- my Sister Hersilia! She will prevent my Death,
Unless I quickly counterfeit some way
To deceive her, and my own Life betray.

Her. It Is she; -- Ah, poor Verginia! --
Who Is this who in his Blood thus weltring lies,
Mourned like a Lover by thy tender Eyes?

Ver. 'Twas one made me concerned I know not how;
But all is past, for he is nothing now;
So we are told we must account the Dead;
And Tears are wasted when for nothing shed.

Her. Alas, you do but think that you have loved:
Just so when Heaven, by some trouble moved,
Unto some tender place its Flames designs,
It seems to burn, because the Lightning shines;
But when it is gone, after its swift retreat,
It Is left, like you, without a Flame or Heat.
Do but look on, and see me take my leave
Of my dead Love, and you must learn to grieve.

She goes to kneel by her Love. Ver. It Is Life that must to Griefs their being
give;
And she that learns to grieve must learn to live. Goes to Artab.
Come, -- lend me your Sword, that I may find my Heart,
It keeps me now from you: -- Sure it will smart; Tries the Point.
-- Yet -- all is but Death, -- by Nature, -- Sword, or Flame;
But we find choice in that which is the same;
And when the Gods our Life seem to deny,
It Is kind to let us choose which way to dye.
-- Why do you hold your Sword so fast? let go: Tries to get the Sword.
This does not like your Love, but Courage show.
I have been told, and do believe it true,
Love out-lives Death, which Courage needs not do.
-- Let go.

Her. Stay -- I had forgot to take my leave of her, She rises.
It Is just that Nature should some share receive,
Since she in Death for ever takes her leave.
-- Ha, -- poor Girl, what art thou doing there? Sees Ver. by Artab.
Do not conceal thy Love, nor hide a Tear.

Ver. Nothing indeed, I only looked to see
Why the Dead gave the Living misery;
I fancied Death some Horror did express,
It rather seems to promise quietness.

Her. In Sorrows Death's securest payment lies,
But Youth like thine, untouched with Miseries;
As if it hoped to 'scape and never pay,
Puts off the Creditor from day to day.

Ver. In Grief the most ill husbandry's expressed,
It makes us poor with paying Interest;
I Have heard some Romans at a cheerful Feast,
Invited Death to come and be a Guest:
What wondrous Act can you with Sorrow do,
Not to be equaled with a cheerful Brow?

Her. You may be one day touched with Misery,
Sorrow will teach you then to think of me:
Farewell, Verginia, these for thee I shed,
All my last Tears are due unto the Dead.

She goes to Tiridates. Ver. O quickly now let go your Sword, -- Unkind,
Why do you make me stay so long behind?
Indeed I shall not find which way you went,
Yet Arrows swiftest fly from Bows most bent.
-- Let go, -- thank ye, -- I could afford to pay
A thousand thanks; but that I cannot stay, She gets the Sword.
My Love's in haste, yet not one Tear shall move,
I will no more be childish in my love.
-- Hersilia, -- Sister --

She starts up. Her. -- Ha --


Ver. Pray see, you have good skill in Grief you say,
Does any look in all this Face betray
Sorrow within? Can you the least descry?
See how I smile -- and now -- see how I dye.

Kills her self. Her. Thou have indeed deceived me, thy brave Fate
I will not poorly praise, but imitate;
In every thing, I Will fall as thou have died,
And take my rest by my dead Lover's side.

Kills her self. Enter Emilius with his Followers, bringing in Sulpitius. Emil.
Come, Monster, show me the place
Of all thy Mischiefs and my Misery.

Sulp. By all these signs of Death, here it should be.


Emil. Ha, Hersilia dead, and poor Verginia!
-- Where shall my Griefs begin!
Death like a Frost on a too early Spring,
Stole on thy Blossoms -- Monster, come and see
What heaps of Ruin thou have raised for me.

Sulp. Ruins for you? Trifles: -- there, gaze on mine;
-- The love --
Of forty thousand Fathers that can whine
Their Sorrows out, make but a formal show,
Short of a Lover's Grief. Let me but go,
And I will show you why.

Emil. Hold, keep him fast:
What would thou do?

Sulp. Since all the Mischief's past,
I might be trusted now -- I would dye there
Between them two: Those Lovers lie too near,
I fancy they enjoy each other,
For all they are as cold as Cakes of Ice;
That I might dye but once, or kill him twice.

Emil. One Wish be sure thou shall obtain, for I
Endure to live, only to see thee dye.

Sulp. We are at last agreed it seems. -- Come, --
Lend me a Sword then.

Emil. Monster, thou shall bleed
By Justice only.

Sulp. O, I understand you, you mean
Thrown down from the Tarpeian Rock; if you should see
My Tumble, pray, do not leap after me:
Troth it may spoil your whining.

Emil. Stop his vile Breath,
Till the Infection is removed by Death.
Farewell, Hersilia, -- and farewell, my sweet Verginia,
I Will first revenge your Deaths, and then I Will dye;
So, though I take my leave, my Eyes are dry;
Sorrow for such a Loss too mean appears,
Griefs were a Roman's Shame expressed in Tears.
The World shall weep for me when ever Fame
Does but relate the Vestal-Virgin's Name.

Just as the last Words were spoke, Mr. Lacy entered, and spoke the EPILOGVE.
BY your leave, Gentlemen. --
After a sad and dismal Tragedy,
I do suppose that few expected me;
But when I saw things grow so Tragical,
I thought the Poet would have killed us all;
And craftily perhaps, so to prevent
An Epilogue, when all his Wit was spent:
Besides, having been once a Poet, it does breed
A foolish Itch to see how others speed.
Troth we Poets have had ill Success of late,
But what you call our Faults, we call our Fate.
I have raised a Scheme, and find that Poets are
Damned with the Influence of the Blazing-Star.
Here has been Rhyme good store, and very fit,
For well-made Noise sometimes has past for Wit.
-- 'I would make you smile. --
To see what confused Faces Poets make,
This walks about, and cries 'twill never take:
There Is not one word of Mirth, nor Show, nor Dance;
A Man of Farce thought I might then advance;
For I had promised, and I think you know it,
A proper Crown for the next dullest Poet.
Your Judgment is desired, and pray be free,
Whether this shall be Crowned by You or Me.
Thus it was Acted the Comical way; the Alteration beginning in ACT IV. toward
the latter end, after these words,
-- And injured Love --

Sulp. Come, Madam, fly the sight of what you hate;
If he pursue us, stop him with his fate.

Ser. She called me Monster, and implored their aid;
Hersilia or her Virtue is betrayed.
Slaves, let me pass.

1. -- Stop, or we'll make you stay.

Sert. When it is denied I use to force my way.


They sight, he kills one; Marcellina enters and takes up his Sword and kills
another; the rest fly. Sert. How like a helping Deity you prove!
At once your power has given Life and Love.

Mar. What Love, Sertorius?


Sert. -- That which was due
Once to Hersilia, is now so to you.

Mar. Take heed; for though this Passion seems to be
A gratitude, it is still Inconstancy.

Sert. If Love admits a change, though it does grow
From Virtue, will the change a Vice still show?

Mar. I fear it must; for Constancy's above
All other Virtues that belong to Love.

Sert. If Virtue merely dwells in Constancy,
By that strange Rule then all Mankind should be
Firm to the error which they first embraced;
For error is no more than Love ill placed.

Mar. By this large rule, if ever you confess
Your Love ill placed, it is just to love me less:
If Love to those that most oblige is due,
Fortune disposes of your Love, not you.

Sert. In Love's adventures Fortune busy shows;
But it is not she, but you, the Love bestows.
What difference in this Argument is shown,
To shake my Love, and to confirm your own!

Mar. Mine is the same, and never can be less.


Sert. Yours will enough secure my happiness.
Come Fairest, let us thus pursue our Friends;
Where you begin to help, misfortune ends.
Thus as you are appear a Deity,
Like an armed Pallas crowned with Victory.

Exeunt. In ACT V. the Alteration begins at these Words.
Cor. Am I thus paid! -- Stay, Sir,
If it must be done, I will not for a little squeamishness
Lose my Rewards at last.

Mut. O, I thought you would repent.


Ver. This is a strange Religion to be taught,
To show repentance but for one good thought.

Mut. Well then, you are resolved?


Cor. I Will do it, Sir, as unconcerned
As you are to command it.

Mut. Take her away, and instantly about it.


Ver. The Gods would think that I enough had paid,
Were my Tears measured, or my Sorrows weighed.

Exeunt. Enter a Veteran. Vet. Sir, Titus brings word,
He saw Sulpitius, with a Woman,
By Numa's Grove; his haste showed some disorder.

Mut. What luck is this, thus to be called away!
I would have made a little longer stay;
But I Will haste back. -- It must not be delayed;
For ought I know Sulpitius may want aid.
No thought I have but comes clogged with a doubt:
When ever busy Man does but step out
From his own usual track, he does confer
More power on Fortune than belonged to her.

Exit. The Scene opens, and Corbulo appears busy heating his Irons. Enter
Mutius peeping. Mut. O, I am satisfied. -- When thou have done,
My best Corbulo, turn him out alone,
To wander up and down in his own night,
And let him seek his way without his sight.

Exit. Cor. He was jealous sure. Now to my business.
Within there, Titus; go fetch the Prisoner, and then Enter Titus.
Wait at the Gate that opens on the Tiber,
And stir not till I call; it is Mutius's Orders.

Tit. -- Well, we know it.


Exit. Titus goes out, and fetches in Artabaces. Cor. Come, Sir, are you ready?


Art. For what?


Cor. For darkness.


Art. -- Had thou said for death,
TO had been more gentle: I Will not waste my breath
To ask for pity; bless but my last sight,
To let Verginia come and say, Goodnight.

Cor. Time's precious.


Art. Mischief was never so hasty but t'wou'd stay,
If dying Men asked a short time to pray:
So in the midst of all your Cruelties,
Allow me this devotion of my Eyes.

Cor. Well, such a small Request I Will not deny.


Art. Then I forgive thy former Treachery. Exit Corbulo.
I Have copied fair Verginia's Eyes within;
Perhaps it wants a little finishing;
My last looks in my heart will perfect all,
And make the Copy serve the Original. Enter Corbulo with Verginia; Corbulo
goes to his Irons.
Forgive me, Sacred Virgin, if my Eyes
Begged their last looks might be your Legacies.

Ver. What do you mean! what is he doing there?
What horrid instruments does he prepare?

Art. Such as must rob me always of your sight,
And without Death bring a perpetual night.
-- O do not weep! --
I seem to shrink under the load of fate,
Not as it is mine, but as it proves your weight.

Ver. My fears for you as kind and grateful are,
Lest in your sufferings I should want a share:
My grief seems great for want of miseries;
I should not weep if I might lose my Eyes.

Art. O do not grieve! see for your sake I Will prove
Injurious to my self, more to my Love:
To make your sorrow prove the less for me,
Know that you love your Country's Enemy,
The unfortunate Armenian Prince, that strove
Against all Roman Conquests but your Love.

Ver. Love will admit no such concerns in me,
Because you have been my Country's Enemy;
Should therefore my uninjur'd love decline?
I fear it hardly would had you been mine.

Art. Yet think my Love's grown to a sad excess,
When its own greatness makes me wish yours less.

Cor. Come, are you ready?


Art. -- Yes, for miseries.


Cor. Here are hot Looking-Glasses for your Eyes.


Ver. Before your own let them true Mirrors stand,
And show how Death stays blushing in your hand.

Cor. My Irons cool.


Ver. -- What gentleness they show!
They from forced heats to cooler natures grow.

Art. Fortune and Interest are disposers grown
Of Men, they have no natures of their own.
Fair Vestal, let your sacred hand receive
This kiss as pure as they; and when you find
My Eyes are sunk in darkness, be so kind
As but to tell me if it can be true,
That I have only lost my Eyes, not you.

Ver. My Eyes shall still be yours, when you have none;
But if you apprehend when yours are gone,
Some other object may my heart incline,
I Will beg him if you will to burn out mine.

Cor. Come, I must stay no longer: -- If you dare --


Art. Yes, exquisite Villain, I can stare
On death in any shape.

Cor. -- Then gaze on this;
'T will make brave Music when you hear it hiss; Puts his Irons in the water.
What say you, does it sound unpleasantly?

Ver. What does he mean?


Cor. -- I Will tell you instantly:
Stay, I must fetch another Instrument.

Exit Corbulo. Art. His mischief varies only, not intent;
Unless he means a gentle death to give,
That with my Life my torments may not live.

Enter Corbuio with a Sword. Cor. See how you're both mistaken; Here,
I bring you fate to give, and not to bear.
Here, Sir, at once receive this Sword, and mine;
Thus to your Fortunes all my own I join.

Art. I have seen sudden starts to mischief grow;
But turns to good are usually more slow.

Cort. What, do you wonder at this change in me!
Needs Courage armed admit such Jealousy?
Follow me quickly, while the Coast is clear;
To stay or wonder would be faults like fear.

Art. Forgive me, Corbulo;
And since thou do resolve to share in mine,
My gratitude will make my Fortunes thine.
-- O my Verginia, --
My joys like Men in crowds press out so fast,
They stop by their own numbers and their haste.

Ver. I fear Disease may this health pursue;
For sudden Fortune has relapses too.

Art. Banish these fears; against the Plagues of Fate,
A Sword and Courage is a sure Receipt.

Exeunt. Enter Sulpitius with Claudius, bringing in Hersilia. Her. Stay, what
d' you mean? or whither should we fly?
There Is something in all this like treachery:
Take heed lest I suspect some ill design.

Sul. Suspicion will be more your (...) than mine.


Enter Tiridates. Her. Ha, Tiridates! O Villain!


Tir. Look here, false Man, and see thy Death pursue.


Sul Death will as soon be sent from me as you.
Hold her fast, Claudius, that she now-may see
Whose one her Conquest proves by victory.

Tir. It Is brave thy Courage seems from Justice sent,
To make thee stay and meet thy punishment.

Sul. Is there a better or worse Cause in Love,
Where all their Titles by their (...) prove?
Love's Thrones by Conquest only are made good,
Like Empire where there is no claim in Blood.

Enter Mutius. Mut. How Is this? Sulpitius, stay thy Sword, for thine
Must never engage without the help of mine.

Sul Stay, Mutius, do not so injurious be,
As to deprive my Love of Victory.
Look on that Sun, whose power's not less great,
Since she as well disposes life and heat.
Rob me not of my hopes while she stands by;
Love hovering seems to wait a Victory.

Tir. Not all your Swords can so successful prove;
Though they may reach my Life, they cannot her love.

Mut. Dispatch him, Sir; I have much more to say;
Though your Love does, mine will not brook delay.

Sulp. Thine, Mutius! then Love has power I see.


Her. Sulpitius, hold, or be my Enemy,
Beyond the power of Mercy to forgive.

Mut. Come, come, we trisle, Sir, he must not live.
-- Ha! --

Enter Artabaces, with Verginia and Corbulo. Art. Whatever this soul Play
means, Justice does guide,
Where Mutius is, my Sword to the other side.
Sir, you seem to want. What Mist does rise*
Or has not Corbulo put out my Eyes,
And I gaze on my Brother, as I use to do,
Within my Mind! Pray speak, Sir, Who are you?

Tir. Your happy Brother, dear Artabaces,
And still the same in all things but my ^oy;
Fortune seems now grown weary to destroy.

Mut Ha! my Prisoner by that treacherous Slave set free!


Art. Why do you stare? --


Mut. -- O, it seems you can see.
Look there, Sulpitius, nothing less divine
Than that could charm a Heart so rough as mine.
These are our Rivals too; just Fortune draws.
Our Swords together in an equal Cause.

Art. Now know, sierce Mutius, though no Cause can be
So great as Love, to make an Enemy^
Yet to raise up thy Horror to a height,
Armenia's Prince is sent to bring thy Fate.
Now thou shall see where Conquest be thy due,
And without numbers what thy Sword can do.

Her. Sulpitius, hold; obey me yet at last,
And I Will forgive all thy Offenses past.

Sulp. While I am armed, I never use to pray,
And Love commands me now not to obey.

Tir. We trifle Time.


Art. -- Corbulo, that charge is thine.


Cor. Kind Fate provides another Sword for mine.


Art. Now, idle Fortune, modestly stand by
And let just Love dispose of Victory.

They sight, Mutius falls, and Sulpitius stands staggering. Tir. Now,
Sulpitius, to whom's Hersilia due?


Sul. Would she were so to any one but you.
Use your Advantage to the Unfortunate;
Honor is cruel that denies a Fate.
Must I fall thus, and in Hersilia's sight?
I stand to talk, that cannot go to fight.

Falls. Tir. Sulpitius, live;
As thou were once my Friend, my Friend still prove.

Sulp. That Life thou giv'st is Death unto my Love.
Hersilia, now I beg your Cruelty;
I want no help to live, but some to dye.

Art. Brave Man! I pity his ungentle Fate;
I would have none that love Unfortunate.
-- Come, Tiridates, --
How trembling after Victory we go,
To pay Devotions which to Love we owe!
Fortune at last seems kind in her Designs,
To bring our Victory before our Shrines.

Tir. Ah, Brother, I am still unfortunate,
Not less by Honor now, than once by Fate.

Art. What Is this!


Tir. Fairest Hersilia, can you pity me,
Not for your own, but Honor's Cruelty?
I must not speak of Love; yet though her ^yes
Bind up my Tongue, I thus may use my Eyes.

Art. Fair Vestal,
Though Fortune now at last seems kind to me,
Without you smile, it is useless Victory.

Ver. My joys must always wait on your Success,
Since they take being from your Happiness.
I beg now to return from whence I came;
And there while I attend the sacred Flame,
My true Concerns for you shall never cease,
And pray for yours, while I enjoy my peace.

Art. Will you forsake me now, and be less kind,
Than you once promised if I had been blind?
I had been happier then by Mistries:
Now I lose you, that had but lost my Eyes.

Ver. Then you did need my help now you are free:
Does Love exceed the use of Charity?

Art. Yet let not Charity your Love exceed;
But grant me Alms as long as I have need.

Ver. Alas, the World is full of Storms I find;
I would return for shelter to my mind.
Come, dear Hersilia, which way must we go?
Ah me! why do you look upon me so?
At once I weep and tremble too; my Tears
Spring without Grief, and without cause my Fears.

Enter Sertorius and Marcellina. Sert. Look, Marcellina, see what Heaven
bestows,
As a full Recompense of all your Woes. --

Mar. Harsilia and Verginia!
Let me embrace you both, lest I should wrong
My Love, which else would stay from one too long.

Her. Dear Marcellina, Joy seems perfect now:
Nor Love nor Fortune gives it without you.

Tir. Sertorius! --
I now demand my Freedom from your Sword;
In spite of Torments I have kept my word,
And silently endured my Miseries,
Though all the while wracked by Hersilia's Eyes.

Sert. To such strict Honor all Rewards are due;
All I once hoped, I now resign to you.
Here, fair Hersilia, may you as happy prove.
In his, as I in Marcellina's Love.

Tir. How all my Happiness together flows,
If with Hersilia's Love your Friendship grows!

Her. If I deny, it would ungrateful show;
I give not Love, but pay you what I owe.

Sert. How, Mutius and Sulpitius too!
Dead both together!

Sul. -- No, would it were true;
Mutius, you see, has better Luck than I,
He Is quiet, past the sense of Misery.

Sert. By whom fell Mutius?


Art. -- By the Unfortunate;
One that came here to fetch, not bring a Fate:
While Tiridates lived and was not free,
I blushed at my own Life and Liberty;
Hither I come, either or both to pay,
But lost my Freedom by another way.
It Is I, Armenia's, wretched Prince whom yet
Rome wants to make her Victory complete:
Let Tiridates live, and let me find
But a swift Death, and Rome's as great as kind.

Ter. Sertorius, if your Friendship can extend
To love Rome's Enemy, because my Friend,
No Conquest that you ever gained before,
Can exceed this, or will become you more.

Sert. Dear Tiridates, were he not to you
So loved a Brother, to his worth were due
All that you ask; it is more than Victory,
Thus to embrace so brave an Enemy.

Art. You Romans all the World sure must obey,
Since you know how to Conquer every way.

Tir. Permit me, fair Hersilia, to present
Him whose dear Loss I did so long lament.

Ver. If for my sake you can more Love bestow,
My Life and Honor unto him I owe.

Her. Either of these are ties enough to prove
Strict Bonds, not Motives to oblige my Love.

Mar. My Debts, Sir, and Hersilia's are the same.


Art. You oblige one has nothing but a Name.
My Heart, though not overcome by Miseries,
I lost a Conquest to Verginia's Eyes.
While I was mis'rable, she did express
Concerns like Love, but they are all grown less;
For she will now forsake the World and me.
Good gods, give me again my misery.
Dear Corbulo, repent, and make me blind;
For when I Am wretched she will again be kind.

Ver. What have I done, that you should tempt your Fate.
And beg the gods to be unfortunate?

Art. Did you not say you would forsake me now?


Ver. To go to Heaven, do I fly from you?
There by my Prayers my Love will best be tried;
You shall have more than all the World beside.

Art. It is a strange Devotion takes away
The Happiness for which it seems to pray.

Enter Emilius, and others. Ver. My Father!


Emil. -- Ha, Hersilia and Verginia!
Does not the sondness of my Eyes betray!
O let me thus confirm my Happiness,
Till my Embraces grow to weariness:
My Joys increase. Ha! Marcellina too!
All Comforts next to them are brought by you.
And since Sertorius finds his Happiness
In yours, to Tiridates I Will express
My promised Care, that he may happy prove,
Like you in mine, and his Hersilia's love.

Tir. Those Blessings that you give are such a store,
I almost blush that I must ask you more.
See, Sir, my long-lost Brother, that here brought
His Life for mine, and his own Ruin sought:
Our Country gave the Roman Victories,
Its King's now vanquished by a Roman's Eyes:
Yet, Sir, your pity will like Justice show,
To pay a Love where she a Life does owe.

Ver. I owe him, Sir, my Life, I do confess,
And mean to pay him more than Love, not less:
I would return and see the World no more,
And there for him unwearied Heaven implore.

Emil. No, dear Verginia, such a Piety
That robs me of thy sight, were guilt in thee.
Nor need you fear, brave Prince, your own Success;
Our Gratitude enjoins your Happiness.

Art. Fair Vestal, since you must no more return
To those, pity the Flames that in me burn.
You shall for ever have a Vestal's Name,
And like them always keep alive a Flame.

Ver. Since it is my Father's pleasure that I stay,
It Is you that make me willing to obey.
Press me no more, till I by Time may prove
In yours as well instructed as my Love.

Art. That breath all my Misfortunes blows away;
The loss of Scepters Love can over-pay.

Sert. Brave Sir, you have lost no Crown; for you shall find
A Prince that loves the Conquest of the Mind;
The great Augustus, whose bright Nature brings
More surer Conquest than his Sword, or Kings.
Take up that wretched Man, that nothing may
Hang heavy on the Joys of this bright Day:
He Is still my Brother, and may yet repent;
A hopeless Love must be his punishment.
How all our Joys are set in foils of Woes!
As after Darkness Light the brighter shows,
So from our Sorrows all our Joys increase,
And unto Love Rome owes a Friend and Peace.

EPILOGUE
Spoken by Mr Lacy,
who is supposed to enter as intending to speak the Epilogue for the TRAGEDY.
BY your leave, Gentlem -- How! what do I see!
How! all alive! Then there is no use for me.
'Troth, I rejoice you are revived again;
And so farewell, good living Gentlemen.

1. Nay, Mr. Lacy.

La. What would you have with me?
I cannot speak Epilogues ex tempore:
The Poet has done craftily to day;
H'as spoiled my Epilogue, perhaps his Play;
H'as cured 'em all; a very pretty prank!
And from a Poet turned a Mountebank.
Well, -- If nothing pleases but Variety,
I Will turn Rageu into a Tragedy.
When Lacy, like a whining Lover, dies,
Though you hate Tragedies, 'twill wet your Eyes.
Letters of Marque are granted every where,
And one Prize-Office is kept always here:
All that are Phlegmatic are Enemies,
Which makes Poets and Dutchmen certain Prize.
All that I wish is that the Dutch may fight
With as ill fortune as we Poets write.
I thought to have spoke something of the Play;
But you will think what you please, whatever I say.

FINIS.
THE Great Favorite, OR, THE DUKE OF LERMA. A TRAGEDY. As it was Acted at the
THEATER ROYAL, By His MAJESTY's Servants. Written by the Honorable Sir ROBERT
HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be Sold by R. Bentley, J.
Tonson, F. Saunders, and T. Bennet. M DC XCII.

TO THE READER.
I Cannot plead the usual Excuse for Publishing this Trisle, which is commonly
the Subject of most Prefaces, by charging it upon the Importunity of Friends;
for, I confess, I was my self willing, at the first Desire of Mr. Herringman,
to Print it: not for any great Opinion that I had entertained, but for the
Opinion that others were pleased to express; which being told me by some
Friends, I was concerned to let the World judge what subject matter of Offense
was contained in it: Some were pleased to believe, little of it mine: but they
are both obliging to me, though perhaps not intentionally; the last, by
thinking there was any thing in it that was worth so ill designed an Envy, as
to place it to another Author: The others (perhaps, the best bred Informers) by
continuing their Displeasures toward me, since I most gratefully acknowledge
to have received some Advantage in the Opinion of the sober part of the World,
by the loss of theirs.

For the Subject, I came accidentally to write upon it; for a Gentleman brought
a Play to the King's Company, called, The Duke of LERMA; and by them I was
desired to peruse it, and return my Opinion, whether I thought it fit for the
Stage: After I had read it, I acquainted them, that in my Judgment it would not
be of much Use for such a Design, since the Contrivance scarce would merit the
Name of a Plot; and some of that, assisted by a Disguise; and it ended
abruptly: and on the Person of Philip the IIId there was fixed such a mean
Character, and on the Daughter of the Duke of Lerma, such a vicious one, that I
could not but judge it unfit to be presented by any that had a Respect, not
only to Princes, but indeed to either Man or Woman; and about that time, being
to go into the Country, I was persuaded by Mr. Heart to make it my Diversion
there, that so great a Hint might not be lost, as the Duke of Lerma saving
himself in his last Extremity, by his unexpected Disguise, which is as well in
the true Story as the old Play; and besides that and the Names, my altering the
most part of the Characters, and the whole Design, made me incapable to use
much more; though perhaps written with higher Style and Thoughts, than I could
attain to.

I intend not to trouble my self nor the World any more in such Subjects, but
take my leave of these my too long Acquaintances; since that little Fancy and
Liberty I once enjoyed, is now fettered in Business of more unpleasant Natures;
yet were I free to apply my Thoughts as my own Choice directed them; I should
hardly again venture into the Civil Wars of Censures.

Ubi -- Nullos habitura Triumphos. In the next place, I must ingenuously
confess, that the manner of Plays, which now are in most esteem, is beyond my
power to perform; nor do I condemn in the least any thing of what Nature soever
that pleases; since nothing could appear to me a ruder Folly, than to censure
the Satisfaction of others: I rather blame the unnecessary Understanding of
some that have labored to give strict Rules to Things that are not
Mathematical, and with such eagerness, pursuing their own seeming Reasons, that
at last we are to apprehend such Argumentative Poets will grow as strict as
Sancho Panco's Doctor was to our very Appetites; for in the difference of
Tragedy and Comedy, and of Farce it self, there can be no determination but by
the Taste; nor in the manner of their Composure; and who ever would endeavor
to like or dislike by the Rules of others, he will be as unsuccessful, as if he
should try to be persuaded into a power of believing; not what he must, but
what others direct him to believe.

But I confess, it is not necessary for Poets to study strict Reason, since they
are so used to a greater Latitude than is allowed by that severe Inquisition;
that they must infringe their own Jurisdiction, to profess themselves obliged
to argue well: I will not therefore pretend to say, why I writ this Play; some
Scenes in blank Verse, others in Rhyme, since I have no better a Reason to give
than Chance, which waited upon my present Fancy; and I expect no better a
Reason from any ingenious person, than his Fancy for which he best relishes.

I cannot therefore but beg leave of the Reader, to take a little notice of the
great pains the Author of an Essay of Dramatick Poeste has taken, to prove
Rhyme as natural in a serious Play, and more effectual than blank Verse: Thus
he states the Question, but pursues that which he calls Natural in a wrong
Application; for it is not the Question, whether Rhyme or not Rhyme, be best, or
most Natural for a grave and serious Subject; but what is nearest the nature of
that which it presents. Now after all the Endeavors of that ingenious Person,
a Play will still be supposed to be a Composition of several Persons speaking
ex tempore; and it is as certain, that good Verses are the hardest things that
can be imagined to be so spoken; so that if any will be pleased to impose the
Rule of measuring things to be the best, by being nearest Nature; it is granted
by consequence, that which is most remote from the thing supposed, must needs
be most improper; and therefore I may justly say, that both I and the Question
were equally mistaken; for I do own, I had rather read good Verses, than either
blank Verse or Prose, and therefore the Author did himself injury, if he like
Verse so well in Plays, to lay down Rules to raise Arguments, only unanswerable
against himself.

But the same Author being filled with the Precedents of the Ancients writing
their Plays in Verse, commends the thing, and assures us that our Language is
Noble, Full, and Significant; charging all Defects upon the ill placing of
Words, and proves it by quoting Seneca, loftily expressing such an ordinary
thing, as, Shutting a Door.

Reserate clusos Regii posts Laris. I suppose he was himself highly affected
with the sound of these Words, but to have completed his Dictates together
with his Arguments, he should have obliged us, by Charming our Ears with such
an Art of placing Words as in an English Verse to express so loftily the
Shutting of a Door, that we might have been as much affected with the sound of
his Words. This, instead of being an Argument upon the Question rightly stated,
is an Attempt, to prove that nothing may seem something, by the help of a
Verse, which I easily grant to be the Ill fortune of it; and therefore the
Question being so much mistaken, I wonder to see that Author trouble himself
twice about it, with such an absolute Triumph declared by his own Imagination.
But I have heard that a Gentleman in Parliament, going to speak twice, and
being interrupted by another Member, as against the Orders of the House, he was
excused by a Third, assuring the House he had not yet spoken to the Question.

But if we examine the general Rules laid down for Plays by strict Reason, we
shall find the Errors equally gross; for the great foundation that is laid to
build upon is nothing, as it is generally stated; which will appear upon the
examination of the particulars.

First, We are told the Plot should not be so ridiculously contrived, as to
crowd two several Countries into one Stage; secondly, to cramp the Accidents of
many years or days into the representation of two hours and a half: And lastly,
a Conclusion drawn, that the only remaining dispute is concerning time, whether
it should be contained in twelve, or four and twenty hours, and the place to be
limited to the spot of ground, either in Town or City, where the Play is
supposed to begin; And this is called nearest to Nature: For that is concluded
most natural, which is most probable, and nearest to that which it presents.

I am so well pleased with any ingenious offers, as all these are, that I
should not examine this strictly, did not the confidence of others force me to
it; there being not any thing more unreasonable to my Judgment, than the
attempt to infringe the Liberty of Opinion by Rules so little demostrative.

To show therefore upon what ill grounds they dictate Laws for Dramatick
Poesy, I shall endeavor to make it evident, that there is no such thing as
what they all pretend; for, if strictly and duly weighed, it is as impossible
for one Stage to present two Houses, or two Rooms truly, as two Countries or
Kingdoms; and as impossible that five hours, or four and twenty hours should be
two hours and a half, as that a thousand hours or years should be less than
what they are; or the greatest part of time to be comprehended in the less; for
all being impossible, they are none of them nearest the truth, or nature, of
what they present, for Impossibilities are all equal, and admit no degrees: and
then if all those Poets that have so ^ervently labored to give Rules as
Maxims, would but be pleased to abbreviate, or endure to hear their Reasons
reduced into one strict definition, it must be, that there are degrees in
impossibilities, and that many things which are not possible, may yet be more
or less impossible; and from this proceed to give Rules to observe the least
absurdity in things which are not at all.

I suppose I need not trouble the Reader with so impertinent a delay to attempt
a farther Confutation of such ill-grounded Reasons, than thus by opening the
true state of the Case, nor do I design to make any farther use of it, than
from hence to draw this modest Conclusion, That I would have all attempts of
this nature be submitted to the fancy of others, and bear the name of
Propositions, not of Confident Laws, or Rules made by Demonstration; and then I
shall not discommend any Poet that dresses his Play in such a fashion as his
fancy best approves; and fairly leave it for others to follow, if it appears to
them most convenient, and fullest of Ornament.

But writing this Epistle in so much haste, I had almost forgot one Argument,
or Observation, which that Author has most good fortune in; It is in his
Epistle Dedicatory, before his Essay of Dramatick Poesy; where, speaking of
Rhyme in Plays, he desires it may be observed, That none are violent against
it, but such as have not attempted it, or who have succeeded ill in the
attempt; which as to my self and him I easily acknowledge; for I confess none
has written in that way better than himself, nor few worse than I: Yet, I hope,
he is so ingenuous, that he would not wish this Argument should extend further
than to him and Me; for if it should be received as a good one, all Divines and
Philosophers would find a readier way of Confutation than they yet have done,
of any that should oppose the least Thesis or Definition, by saying, they were
denied by none but such as never attempted to write, or succeeded ill in the
attempt.

Thus as I am one that am extremely well pleased with most of the Propositions,
which are ingeniously laid down in that Essay, for regulating the Stage; so I
am also always concerned for the true honor of Reason, and would have no
spurious Issue Fathered upon her. Fancy may be allowed her wantonness; but
Reason is always pure and chaste: and as it resembles the Sun, in making all
things clear, it also resembles it in its several Positions, when it shines in
full height, and directly ascendant over any Subject, it leaves but little
shadow; But when descended and grown low, its oblique shining renders the
shadow larger than the substance, and gives the deceived person a wrong measure
of his own proportion.

Thus begging the Reader's Excuse for this seeming Impertinency, I submit what
I have written to the liberty of his unconfined Opinion, which is all the
favor I ask of others to afford to me.

PROLOGUE To the Duke of Lerma,
spoken by Mrs Ellen, and Mrs Nepp.
Nepp. HOW, Mrs. Ellen, not Dressed yet, and the Play ready
to begin.

El. Not so near ready to begin as you think for.


Nepp. Why? What Is the matter?


Ellen. The Poet and the Company are wrangling within.


Nepp. About what?


Ellen. A Prologue.


Nepp. Why, Is It an ill one?


Nell. Two to one it had been so if he had writ any; but the
Conscious Poet, with much Modesty, and very Civilly and
Sillily -- has writ none.

Nepp. What do they mean to do?


Nell. Nay, Fortune knows; They are now Compounding
with him but for two Lines.

Nepp. And what says the wilful Rhi^er?


Nell. Why he says for his Defense, that Prologues are like
Corn well thrash'd, there is nothing left in the Straw.

Nepp. What shall we do then? 'Slife, let us be bold,
And speak a Prologue. --

Nell. -- No, no, let us Scold.


Nepp. Nay --
Since to be tried here is our Poet's Chance,
We'll wish him sure a good Deliverance.

Nelle. Why, then deliver him from you (...) (...)*
And boldly Censure, what, you have not Wit:
May you be poor, and know not what to do
For Sixpence, and then rail at Money too.

Nepp. From you that have some Wit, and yet more Spite,
May you be judged, as you do those that write;
May all your Courted Mistresses to you
Prove froward and malicious Griticks too.

Nell. May they observe with Care your ugliest Looks,
As you do the worst things in Plays and Books*

Nepp. Deliver him from you that nothing spare;
Nay, you that would fain seem worse than you are*
Out-talk your own Debaucheries, and tell
With a fine Shrug, Faith, Jack, I am not well.

Nell. From you that with much Ease, and little Shame,
Can blast a Poet's, and a Woman's Fame;
For at first sight a well-bred Trick you have got,
Combing your Wiggs, to Cry, Dam me, She Is naught.

Nepp. Prithee let us say no more, but run away,
For they will revenge themselves on the poor Play.

Nell. No matter, we have here one Party fast,
I mean the Gentlemen we spoke of last:
Though they deny't the Poet, yet we know,
On us they freely would their Claps bestow.

Exeunt. Dramatis Personae.
PHilip, the young King of Spain. The Duke of Medina, Uncle to Donna Maria. The
Duke of Lerma; Father to Donna Maria. The Duke d' Alva. The Marquis of Alcara.
Count Bruchero. The King's Confessor made Archbishop of Toledo. Caldroon,
Lerma's chief Servant and Creature. Angelo, Servant to Lerma. Francisco and Don
Juan, two Courtiers. Antonio. Three Lords. Three Courtiers. Three Suitors.
Friars. Officers and Attendants. Four Blackamores. Six Pages.
WOMEN.
The Queen Mother. Donna Maria, Daughter to Lerma. Catalina, a Maid of Honor
to the Queen. Izabella, a Lady, Kinswoman to Medina. Attendants of
Court-Ladies.
The SCENE MADRID. THE Great Favorite: OR, THE DUKE of LERMA.
ACT 1.
SCENE 1.
Enter Lerma, Alone. Ler. REpulse upon repulse; like Waves thrown back,
That slide to hang upon obdurate Rocks;
The King shot Ruin at me, and there lies,
Forgiving all the World, but me alone;
As if that Heaven too, as well as lie,
Had scratcht me out of numbers; at the Last
He turned his feeble Eyes away from me,
As dying Men from sins that had misled 'em,
Blasting my hopes, and theirs that hang upon me:
Thus all those mighty Merits of my Family,
Are going to his Grave, there to be buried;
And I my self have hung upon his frowns,
Like dew upon a Cloud, till shaken off
In a cold shower, and frozen as it fell,
Starving my growth, with this untimely frost:
But, -- I fondly prate away my thoughts
Till I have made 'em nothing, like my self.
Enter Pedro, Lorenzo, Jaques, Paulo, and Caldroon, his Servants. See -- here
are the parts of my full Ruin,
These decayed Outhouses show the chief Building
Wants Reparation. A good day
May you all share my Friends, and better too
Than Lerma's best, or 'twill be dark enough.

Pedro. What means this Salutation?


Loren. I understand it not.


Ler. What? all struck dumb? has then the news
Of Lerma's late Repulse, from Mighty Philip,
Wrought such effects upon your shaken spirits,
Who are but Play-Fellows with my decays,
That it has ravished from you all your tongues,
(Afflictions best Appeasers) he that is boldest,
Let him attempt to talk me up to* slight it,
And he that is fearful, Let him pity me;
For I have thanks for every sort of kindness,
Nay, for your looks; I see a sorrow there,
For which Lerma has nothing left to give you,
But that poor empty name of Thanks, a word
That pays for fain^ salutes, or a good morrow.

Called. My Lord, we were commanded, at this hour
Here to attend your pleasure:

Ler. It Is true, I had forgot,
I called you to confess, I am your Debtor,
And you my patient Creditors,
Pen, Ink, and Paper there; and now my Friends, Ex. Paulo, for Pen, Ink, etc. *
I Will tell you all the Fortune I have left,
And you shall shar't, as far as it will go.
How long, Pedro, have thou served me?

Ped. Seven years, my Lord.


Ler. Do thou not Curse me now for want of Wages?
In such A'prentiship, with great Medina
Thou had set up thy self; thy tedious service
Has now no more Inheritance, than a loose Ragg
About a hang'd-up Man, consuming with
The shameful Carcass it should cover.

Omnes. We do beseech your Lordship.


Ler. I apprehend you: all I can do, is this:
Let every Man examine his own wishes,
The aptness of his own abilities; and see
The Man, how great so ever, (the King excepted)
In reach of whose great fires I dare not trust,
My withered Supplications) And to him
I will with all the liberal praise I can
Give him a fair preferment.

Omn. We wish no other choice, but as we are.


Ler. No more; your kindness is ill-timed.
That Paper waits for your Impressions,
And I to finish your desires: peruse it. He walks about while they write.
So -- nay grieve not, this is a day
Of your most happy changes. He reads.
Let me see -- Pedro to Don Bruchero, it is well.
Jaques, the Duke d' Alva; good. Lorenzo,
The Duke of Auzon, in Naples, fit. Paulo,
To Don Lewis de Velasco, very well. --
Who for the Wars then?

Ped. I, my good Lord.


Ler. It Is a good choice -- but stay, what is this,
At last? sure I mistake. Read it, Pedro.

Ped. Roderigo del Caldroon, and the Marquess of Lerma.


Ler. Ha, ha, ha, I was not then mistaken
In him, though in the Rest.

Aside. Called. I hope your Lordship never shall have cause
To alter your good thoughts, of your poor Servant.

Ler. Thou'st took a course to make thee poor enough;
But ever we part, I must say something to thee.
For you, Gentlemen, you may assure your selves
You shortly shall possess your several choices:
I dare not wish you well, lest my desires
As in my own successes, fail in yours;
Yet all the parts of good, that are not dangerous,
Your miserable Lord will pay you: now go in,
I Will follow presently; in the mean time,
I Will try to turn poor Roderigo's Love
More to his proper use.

Omn. Heaven Crown you with success.


Exeunt. Ler. See, Caldroon, how my infected fate
Has driven these to seek more healthful Airs.
But why do thou dote on my misery,
Thus to pursue a death, that would fly from thee,
Or Love thou to grow old in poverty,
Hurrying thy Fortune on before it is ready,
And making my ill Fate, Conscious of thine.
By Heaven, unless some Holy Nunnery
Receive my dear Maria, I have not means
Left to preserve her: of my self
I Am grown more careless now, than others are:

Called. My Lord,
I never followed any hopes of yours,
Nor vowed my self a Servant to your Fortunes;
I only beg, I may not be discarded
Before you see some trial of my Faith.

Ler. Thou do engage me in new Wars, Caldroon,
For I am urged by gratitude to thee,
To tug again with froward destiny,
That I may ravish mighty favors from her
To throw in showers upon thee: but consider,
Art thou resolved to try this chance with me?

Called. In spite of Injury, and Fate, my Lord.


Ler. Our Contract then is sealed -- but no more,
See, some Servants of the King, stand close.

Enter Don Francisco and Don Juan. Don Juan. Good day, Francisco, how fares the
King?


Fran. Ill enough, I fear, for even now I met
Physicians, and some of his Bedchamber,
Who had this time the watch about his Person;
By them I heard, he had a cruel night.

Don Ju. Made they a question then of his Recovery?


Fran. No, For they said it was impossible.


Ler. The weather alters.


Aside: Don Ju. Of what nature may his Disease be?


Fran. Physicians are pleased to tell us that
After the Patient's dead: it is supposed
To be of a strange Nature; if bloody Men
May draw down Vengeance; Heaven seems
To send a Portion of his Anger on him.

Ler. Revenge my Quarrel, little Mighty People.


Aside. Fran. It Is dangerous to talk: At St. Merced's
'Twixt Nine and Ten I Will meet you.

Don Ju. I will not fail: Farewell.


Exeunt severally. Ler. Grow up, you Blessed Ministers of Anger,
And turn the giddy Court into Distractions,
And let Great Philip die, as loathed a^ Poverty,
Or as his own Disease -- ha! more distraction?

Enter two or three, running hastily with Lights; Physicians and Friars another
way, and every way Noblemen with Torches before them, as the Duke d' Alva,
Marquess of Alcara, and Count Bruchero. Called. This strange confusion tells the
news of death.


Ler. My heart is winged, and soars I know not whither.


Aside. D' Alva. Call the Florentine Doctor.


1 Lord. H'as watched three nights, and is stolen hence to rest.


Alca. Where Is that Florentine, and the Confessor?


2 Lord. Not in the Court.


Ler. Now it heightens.


Aside. Alca. Not in Court?
Has the Impostor then leisure to sleep
When Spain's Great Majesty lies so afflicted?
Go raise him up, and bid him waken nature,
That almost now is in a dying sleep:
Hark, I fear the fatal blow is struck.

noise of a groan. Exeunt. Called. Heard you not that, my Lord?


Ler. I heard methoughts a groan as Horrible
As if great Nature's Frame had cracked in two,
And yet that blow killed not a fly, Caldroon;
Something is gone old Folks will talk on.
But see, these Faces speak a certainty;
Draw near 'em.

Enter two or three Courtiers. 1 Cour. The King is dead.


Ler. Thanks be to Heaven.


Aside. 2 Cour. He died in extreme torment.


Called. Good news, my Lord.


Aside. Ler. Oh Admirable! but see, here is more.


Stand aside. Enter the Duke of Medina, the Duke D' Alva, and the King's
Confessor, with Attendants. Medi. My Lords, it is fit we every one retire
Freely, to pay our Griefs for our dead Master;
In the mean time summon the Privy Council,
To meet two hours hence --
In the King's Chamber.

D' Alva Father Confessor, you must bring the Will:
And Publish it at the Council Board.

Exeunt. Lerma pulls the Confessor as he is going out. Conf. I shall not fail.


Ler Is the King dead?


Conf. Too sure.


Exit. Ler. I have Ideas in my head, Caldroon,
Thy Council and thy Service must give Life to,
That holy Robe I touched at going off
Must Sanctify, and hide my mortal thoughts,
For I am very Worldly at the present.

Called. Command me, I am all yours, my Lord.


Ler Then the young King -- It will not out,
But I will cleave unto the Court, like flesh
Grown up to fill the place, where 'twas cut off;
I will sow Jealousy in every Breast,
It Is a Rank growing weed, and will choke up
All that should spring of Love, or Confidence.
And then -- Good, Excellent -- Studies.
My mind grows fruitful now, and brings forth thoughts
Enough, to stock the World with my ambition,
And like a fruitful Mother now takes care,
That was before as barren as despair.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter the young King, the Queen Mother, the Duke of Medina, the Duke D' Alva,
the Marquess of Alcara, Count Bruchero and the Confessor, carrying the King's
Will upon a Cushion in State. Queen. Should we all stay, till we had paid our
griefs
To his dead Majesty; we should neglect
The Just performance of his sacred Will.
By long continued Sorrows: Therefore we must
Beg so much time from tears, as to fulfill
The Last commands of our dead Sovereign.
In which your Services we must command.

Med. Madam, the Affairs of Spain, dwell in a Calm
By the wise Conduct of our dead Master:
And our last troubles in the Belgicke Wars,
Back^ by the English, for a time laid by;
So that the breath we have from all our toyls
May be employed in this our last obedience,
To our dead Sovereign; and our future Loyalties
Performed to this fair risen Sun.

D' Alva. The first visit this new Sun must make
Is through the several Governments; calling all
To just Accounts, that those that have done well
May be continued, other Men removed.

Alca. Committees for that purpose, must be empowered.
At our next meeting, and the Peoples Oaths
In every Province taken for the King.

Bruch. Then all the Garrisons must be surveyed,
The General, Colonels, and the Captains, sworn
By a new Oath, to their immediate King;
And all the Soldiers paid their full Arrears.

Queen. Add to this our Navies, and our Galleys,
And then Ambassadors to several Nations
Must be next thought on, the King and I
Will if he pleases go to the Escurial,
Till all things are disposed in better order.

Alca. Madam, the Marquess of Lerma is yet in Court.


Queen. To little purpose Alcara; That Is not forgot
In the King's Will, and we must blast him hence
With the disdain, that by the Will's bequeathed him.

D' Alva. He is a danger always where he is.


Queen. The King has left us heirs unto his State,
And we have not forgot, the saucy words
His idle Spleen gave out against our Person;
I Will keep him like a poison, in a glass,
Till his own venom bursts him.

King. Madam, I think it best (...)
To the Escurial.

Queen. If you please, Sir, till the (...)
Of your dead Father's (...)* for (...)
In Clouds: the rest, my Lord(...)
Commits to you, for safety of (...) Affairs.

Med. It is the Boast of Spain, (...) best (...)*
That we have eyer truly served (...).

Queen. It Is an undoubted true(...) you to go.


King. I must first speak with (...)essor.


Queen. Let him attend you to (...).


Exeunt. Bruch. That Confessor's (...).


Alca. Would he were shaken off.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
E^^^^ Lerma ^n^ ^h^ Confessor* Ler. NAY, I am not very (...)
And yet I hardly think it will be called
A holy thought.

Confess. By whom?


Ler. The Multitude.


Confess. Oh I confessed, you have a long time strived
With mighty Care to please their (...)*

Ler. She is my Daughter.


Confess. The fitter then to save her Father
Is It not more piety for such a Cause
To lose her Honor, then her own Appetite*
And she perhaps may do like other (...)

Ler. You have confirmed me now to be that thing,
I faintly wist before; were all the Honors
Of my dead Ancestors, locked up in (...)*
It should be thus broke up; But you must now*
Soften her squeamish (...) (...)* you may t^^^ her,
The Mistress of a King, is h^^^ a ^aint*
For she will be worshipped; and with h^^ (...)
She raises up her Father to his wishes*
Now, by my hopes, I speak in (...)*
You have a fine, large Text, to (...)*
And I will second you, and add new (...)*
Hugging her sin, and (...) her for (...)*
See the Sedan is come.

Confess. Dispatch the Slaves away* (...)
You do unload the Ghair.

Call. I understand y(...)


Ler. There go (...)ing*
And now if Love have (...)
Can shoot a flame into (...)*
I shall grow warm age^^* by (...)
If these Plots fail, I Will (...)
Shall keep my Enemies from rest.

Confess. Swell not too soon above your banks,
And so betray the head of all your springs:
We will not fail what fate so ever oppose (...)*

Ler. Nobly resolved;
But have you found the humors of the King?

Conf. Yes, I have traced an easy nature in him,
But too much sixth to one unhappy virtue.
His temper is too gentle for our business,
And would be rather cruel to himself
Than unto others; for if pressed to Justice,
I find a pity hangs upon his heart
Like gentle dew that cools all cruel passions.
Such a smooth heart as his, will sooner take
Impression of a figure than a rough one.
In his soft nature Love's prepared to grow,
When fair Maria's Eyes, their Sunbeams show.

Ler. Thou have now made my hopes so strong
That I dare lean upon 'em: farewell,
If we but prosper now; not we on Fate
But she on us, shall for direction wait.

Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Maria, and the Confessor following her* Maria. IS this Divinity? Defend
me, Heaven!


Conf. Sweet Lady, hear me.


Maria. Go preach thy Heresies to Toads and Serpents,
Or to the Sun-burnt-Indians, whose Devotion
Is paid to that which thou would have me be,
A Devil.

Conf. Pray, Madam, be not so loud, you may be heard.


Maria. Would my Soul's storms could raise my Voice
Loud as the Oceans Raving; that the Fooled World
May know what dangerous Couzenage may lie hid
Under such holy shapes.

Conf. Is this my Recompense?


Maria. Oh Monstrous!
Thou exquisite Exceeder of Impieties,
That do Expect a Recompense from Sin,
Perhaps it is all your Trades with Cheating Zeal,
To tear your Jaws, and stretch your Throats to hoarseness,
To raise poor People to a fond belief,
The easier to o'erthrow their new-built Faith;
When such as you but laugh at what you taught;
Such a Destroyer now of all Mankind
Art thou black Homicide.

Conf. Homicide?
Who whispers to a Storm, may be overwhelmed,
But never heard; I wished you to the King,
And something with it, of a holier name
Than what you rave at, but farewell.

Mar. -- Stay, Father --
What Is this? A holier name? --
You or I rave indeed.

Conf. Yes, and perhaps may warm your coldness,
The name of Queen, Will that yet take Impression?

Mar. No -- I am as chaste to that as to the other,
Ambition has its Lust, as well as Love.

Con. You give too course a name to great Attempts,
And blast our honors, with the care of yours,
You may be raised unto your Prince's Bed,
And climb by your obedience to his Throne,
Led by your Love, and not Ambition.

Mar. These are large thoughts -- but the Queen. --


Conf. Forget her, she is in her wayne.


Mar. Ha! there is no safety while she is alive.


Conf. Nothing's unsafe to thee but unbelief,
Thy Father got thy Honor, and thy Life,
And will not murder either: take my advice,
And for the rest -- see -- your Father.

Enter Lerma. Ler. Tell me, holy Father, is it Idolatry
To pay Devotion to those Glorious Eyes,
And call them Lights Divine? they are my Stars,
Since their Bright Influence must direct my fate,
My growth of Life, and Fortune must depend
Upon their warmth, whose power must fetter power,
And Majesty it self learn to obey.

Mar. What means my honored Father?


Ler. Call me not Father, I must take Life from thee,
And from thy Suns, like growing Fruit be ripened.

Mar. This is strange, to me, Sir.


Ler. Ha! Have you not wrought her?


Conf. I have used my utmost art, and tempted her
With the name of Queen -- but --

Ler. You are dull: I thought your profession
Had been more subtle in these practices;
Leave us a little -- Exit Confessor.
Has not your Confessor, my best Maria,
Acquainted you with my designs?

Mar. He told me something, Sir, had an ill sound,
But may be 'twas his Piety to try me,
It was not his Religion sure to tempt me?

Ler. Tempt you? to what? to a King's Love,
Perhaps his Throne; Call your own niceness folly,
And not his Love and Care Impiety.

Mar. My Mother, Sir, upon her Deathbed, charged me
(When her Acquaintance grew so great with Heaven,)
That I should still be chaste; chaste to all Appetites,
Called Pride, the Dropsy of Infected Souls,
That swelled 'em first, then burst 'em.

Ler. Your Mother was for the other World
When she preached thus, but I am yet for this;
And I must leave it in a hurry, unless thy power
Stops the fierce Whirlwind that is just now ready
To wrap me into nothing --

Mar. Heaven defend my Father.


Ler. Amen, but you must help; it was
On purpose that Heaven made thee fair,
To save thy Father.

Mar. I hope there is no danger near you?


Ler. Nothing but Death, or Banishment;
Come, Maria, my Best, my Dear Maria,
Come shine upon the King, the flames thou giv'st
Will return warmth to thee, like the bright Sun
That gives the World his heat, and yet so justly
Paid back again, he lends at no expense,
But preserves all, and shines, as thou may do.
If a declining Father be thy all, if not,
Let it be night, and it shall be a dark one
To more than me.

Mar. Oh Heavens! What do you mean?


Ler. Peace, see the King.
This opportunity is lost.

Mar. Good Sir, let me go.


Ler. You must not.


Enter King, Duke D' Alva, the Marquess of Alcara, and Count Bruchero. D' Alva.
Your Father's Blessing Lerma observes.
Sealed it with that condition.

Alca. You forfeit all the strength of his advice,
If at the first you break his strict Commands.

Bruc. The King commanded Lerma's Banishment,
As if some Oracle had said, till that be done,
The Plague shall Reign, or Famine, or the Sword.

Ler. Mark that, Maria.


King. I am unwilling to begin my Reign,
With a severity to any one -- but --

D' Alva. Look, Sir, where he is, no fitter time
Than now, to throw him to his Banishment.

King. What Lady's that? --


Alca. How he gazes on her? --
It Is his Daughter, Sir. --

D' Alva. Sir, Remember now, your Father's last Commands:
What do you look at, Sir?

Ler. Now, my prophetic Soul!


Aside. King. Look at? -- that fair Lady:
Is she not wondrous fair?

Bruc. But she is Lerma's Daughter, Sir.


King. No matter -- Madam -- Goes to her.
I ought sooner to have Saluted you,
But it is not less Respect, to so much Beauty
To lose Civility in Admiration.

She looks down. Ler. Speak.


King. Be not displeased, fair wonder of your Se^,
That I admire so suddenly; a slower Conquest
Is fit for lesser Beauties.

D' Alva. Sir, Do you remember?


King. I do, concerning Lerma,
Know, my Lord, I will not wait for a Petition
That this fair Beauty might present;
It Is juster to her power to tell you,
I can pronounce no Banishment, nor Death
To him that gave her Life.

Ler. You pour Mercies on me.


Bruc. What change is this?


King. In Return, my Lord, I do expect this gratitude,
That I and all the Court may be made happy
By this fair Object -- I do expect your promise.

Ler. You have it, Sir.


King. I will no more punish her modesty.


D' Alva. Sir, Will you forget?


Exit. looking on Maria, the Lords on Lerma. King. No more.


Ler. Now, my Maria, Should I not fall down
And worship the Divinity that saves me?

Mar. Are there Divinities below?


Ler. There are; every wise thing is a Divinity,
That can dispose, and check the fate of things:
I ask no other help but thine,
To make Spain know I am their Deity.
Come, you must to Court, my word's engaged.

Mar. What to do, Sir?
To be a Prostitute, or to be thought so?
I shall show there, Sir, not like a Sun,
But like a Meteor, risen on a sudden,
Whose false light quickly slides into a vapor.

Ler. Ha!
Do thou in Disobedience show thy virtue,
And with those guilty Eyes, that may preserve me,
Gaze unconcerned on my approaching ruin.

Mar. Heaven will defend you, Sir.


Ler. I will not trouble Heaven, when you may do it;
Did you not hear my Banishment and Death
Charged on the young King, as his Father's Legacy,
Of safety to his Crown? Was he not going
Just to pronounce it too? when thy bright Eyes
Arrested all his Anger at Love's Suit.

Mar. What should I do?


Ler. Keep still his heat alive, or I am sent
To an Eternal Coldness; and like a Crocodile,
Thou may then weep, over him thou have destroyed.

Mar. Were there no way, Sir, but by my Death
To make your Life secure? I would resign
It willingly, and pay you back,
The Life I borrowed of you.

Ler. No, it is the Death of others then must save me,
Since I must fall, excuse me, cursed necessity;
For I will sow Murders so thick, and sudden,
That Death shall have a fruitful Harvest.

Mar. What do you talk of, Sir?


Ler. Of Death.


Mar. Of whose?


Ler. Of those that have the power of mine.


Mar. Not of the King's, Sir?


Ler. Yes of the King's, why do you start?
Nature has no exceptions, though Laws have.

Mar. Direct me, Heaven!


Ler. Come, I trifle,
And play with my own dangers, farewell:
I Will leave a Father's Curse behind me,
And only stay to please my Eyes with ruin
Before mine comes.

Offers to go. Mar. Stay, Sir -- I know not what to say;
I will do any thing; I should have said
That had been honest; but that is disobedience.
I beg, Sir, but one minutes time to think.

Ler. Do, while I call the Confessor:
Be sudden in your thoughts, for death depends
Upon your Meditations.

Exit. Mar. What storms are risen, in my shaken breast?
Thoughts succeed thoughts, like restless troubled waves,
Dashing out one another: if I deny,
My Father to avoid his destiny,
May reach that sacred Life, which I may save;
If I discover this my Father dies.
Virtue, thou shall protect me before heaven,
Though not from this bad world. Ah me!
The only way now left me to preserve
A King, and Father, is t'expose my Fame:
Hard fate, when Virtue is the guide to shame.

Enter Lerma with the Confessor. Ler. Come, Are you resolved?


Mar. I am, Sir.


Ler. To what?


Mar. Obedience, Sir.


Ler. Oh, Maria, thou breathe new life into me,
And I could waste it in embracing thee;
But time will not allow me choice in happiness.
Here, Father, carry her: where I appointed:
Remember only this my dear, Maria;
Be not too easy, nor too nice: she is wise
That rules as much by Craft, as by her Eyes. Ex. Maria and Confessor.
So now I may rise
To be a Pyramid,
For I have laid a large foundation.
The Queen must be remembered and forgotten,
Or she may shake my politic structures.
Enter Caldroon. How now, Caldroon; what has transported thee?
There is a kind of wantonness that plays
On thy pleased Countenance, what is the matter?

Called. Nothing but your good fortune could
Have caused it.

Ler. Why, did thou meet the Confessor
That told thee?

Called. No.


Ler. How did thou hear it then?


Called. The quick-ey'd Rascals spied it.


Ler. Who?


Called. Poor suffering fellows, whose business
Is to watch, on every change of power:
They have heard of the King's smiles.
And are now in full cry, hunting after you.

Ler. Good, Excellent.


Called. They were running on a wrong track
But I hollowed 'em in -- see, my Lord --
They have found you; walk by,
Leave 'em to my managing.

Enter two or three Suitors, they follow Caldroon fawningly and how to Lerma.
He walks smiling. Ler. Good, very good.


Called. Well, my Lord is now a little busy.


Suit. We ever prayed for your Grace.


Exeunt. Ler. Kind Rogues.
Here Is an alteration, strange as Winter's Thunder,
Not two days since neglected as the Grave,
That holds dead Inmates; now I grow warm,
The Flies begin to buzze and swarm about me;
What an attractive force has a King's favor?
The Dogs now fawn upon me, that before
Started away, and barked like little Curs
At some unusual Traveller; I was grown
Useless, like a dull piece of Iron of no virtue,
Till by a Loadstone touched, and then it gathers.
Such a magnetic Power's in a King,
Where he but kindly touches, others cling.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter King, D' Alva, Alcara, and Bruchero at a distance, the King is pensive.
D' Alva. What fatal sadness, like a sullen Cloud,
Hangs on his growing Brightness?

Alca. That cursed sight of Lerma's Daughter
Has sunk the hopes, and fortunes of all Spain.
When must our dangers have an end,
When Lerma can beget 'em?

King. My Lords, I would be private.


D' Alva. Would your heavy thoughts, Sir,
Were as obedient as we are,
And would at your command depart.

King I have not yet desired 'em to be gone.


D' Alva. Have you the power, Sir, to force 'em:


King. I have not power enough, it seems
To compel your obedience.

Alca. We will be gone, to death, when you command;
Let us but leave you happy in your life.

Bru. Oh, Mighty Sir --


King. No more, I did not doubt your Loves, or Loyalty.
I have some business in my thoughts
That does require weighing: stay without. Exeunt.
Oh, what a Traitor is my Love
That thus unthrones me! I am no longer King
Of any thing but sorrow; and my griefs
Have but a half obedience, they will stay;
But would not go, should I command 'em from me;
I see the errors that I would avoid,
And have my Reason still, but not the use on it;
It hangs about me like a withered Limb
Bound up and numbed by some disease's Frost,
The Form, the same, but all the use is lost.
Enter Lerma with Maria. She comes, and in her mighty Beauty
Has drawn new forces up; so wondrous powerful
That Reason shrinks, to
Venture the dispute.

Ler. Mighty Sir,
We come, like Pilgrims creeping to a shrine
Of some blessed Saint, by whom kind Heaven
Dispensed its shower of Mercies on their
Crowned Devotions.

King. And I, like him that gave me power
And pleased with Mercies when acknowledged,
But this Pilgrim, you better might have called
Your Saint, or Mine, for her fair Mediation
Is your Blessing. Rise, Maria;
Your knees must bow to nothing but to Heaven.

Mar. That they do now for you, Sir, though to you:
For while I bend my knees, before my King,
I beg that Heaven would preserve you so,
And give you power over your self and others.

King. Ha!


Ler. Death; she will spoil me yet.


King. Would Heaven would grant her Prayers!


Ler. Fond Girl, no more of these dull Orizons -- Aside.
Mighty Sir, I leave this blessing of my life,
To be a witness of my Loyalty; malice it self
Cannot, I hope, shake you against this testimony.

Exit. King. Why do you look with fears, Maria?
As if a King were by his name alone
Made powerful in his passions, as his Throne.
Those that obey may fear a slavery,
You now may be the Tyrant, but not I.

Mar. If this, Sir, from your power does you remove
Against your self; there is Treason in your Love.

King. It is your power that makes me any thing.


Mar. I would preserve you, Sir, to be my King.


King. Enthrone me in your heart, and make me so.


Mar. A Throne of passion, for a King's too low.


King. Were I no King, but blessed like other men,
Would you despise, or chide my passion then?

Mar. Oh, why Sir; do you send out treacherous spies?
Should they bring back such weak discoveries,
'Twere useless, as to say, what kind of Love,
Angels should have to leave their Joys above.

King. Their joys are sure, but ours are shook with care.


Mar. Oh, raise my Father from his black despair,
While we our selves to Heavens practice raise
Your Love in Mercy's showed, and mine in praise.

King. It Is yours, that may increase his power and name;


Mar. And should his Glories, Sir, spring from my shame?


King. Suppose your Father does my joys design.


Mar. Would he to purchase Honor, ruin mine?
Yet his Commands make not my guilt the less,
For Heaven allows no pious wickedness.

King. Thy Father shall both Life, and Honors owe
Unto thy virtues; fair Maria, know
A miracle is done, I more admire,
And enlarged Love grows grows from confined desire.

Enter the Duke of Medina gazing at them. The King stands admiring. Med. What
blasting sight is this? I must
Disturb him, with an unwelcome piece of Duty.
Sir,

King. Ha!


Mar. Oh, my Uncle!


Med. I was afraid, Sir, that you were not well.


King. Not well? -- would you be a Physician?


Med. With all my heart, Sir, would you let me practice,
And would prescribe such wholesome Medicines to you
As should prevent this great Distemper
Growing on you and all the Nation.

King. The Nation!


Med. Yes, the Nation, Sir, that will of you
Demand their King, when you have lost him
In Lerma's Charms: Think of your Father, Sir,
Who did despise that any Favorite
Should be a lawful Traitor by permission;
And usurp all the Power.

King. What do you mean?


Med. I mean Lerma, Sir, whose wicked hand
Grasps at your painted Scepter; that Lerma
That was to sink into the lowest banishment
Is creeping up into your Throne, and Power.
That he had never twisted with my Sister,
And like a Snake begotten such a Viper,
Whose sliding to your bosom will but leave
A sting upon your Conscience, and disturb
The ashes of her sleeping Mother.

King. Though your bold Duty might receive a pardon
For any large discourse; know yet,
(That ignorantly you may not snatch your Fate)
All injuries to Maria's virtues,
Shall be forgiven as I would a malice
Studied to blast my Honor.

Lerma whispers to the King. Med. My Life, Sir, is a thing you once believed;
I did despise to balance with your service.
For her, Sir; Nature be my witness,
I would preserve her full as virtuous
As I believe her wretched Mother was,
But then she must not, Sir, be the foul means
To charm your sacred Breast, to breath our Honors
On every thing that is but Lerma's Creature,
Whose hungry Poverties must eat as deep
As Famine to the Nation. Honors, might Sir,
When they meet Fortunes, are support's to Thrones,
But joined to Poverty are the shakers of it*
And wasting Crowns sink with such deep Consumptions.

King. I can give no greater Testimony
That all your former services to my Father
Are not forgotten, than to pardon you now.

Med. If this, Sir, that I say, be an offense,
That I would have none to be King but you,
Take your forgiveness back; for I must live
A Traitor by your Mercy.

King. If you despise our Mercy.


Med. Oh Sir, upon my Knees I beg it rather,
But it is for all your Kingdom, not for me:
Think, Sir, what it is to sit upon your Throne
Without your Thunder; only so much left
As a swelled Favorite will please to lend you
Enter Lerma, whispers to the King. To hurl at honest Truths; so, he may speak,
And at this idle time sure you may hear. To Maria.
What is your Father turned your careful Bawd?
For his ambitious ends he would have been
So to thy Mother too, but that her virtue
Had an unshaken soundness; thou art rotten
As he that did beget thee; only Nature
Painted thee over with a fair resemblance
Of her blessed Image, would it were blotted out.

King. Ha! she weeps, that insolent Man
That dares draw tears from fair Maria's Eyes,
Shall drop his blood as fast: Without there, my Guards.

Mar. Let mine, Sir, drop, before you shed my Uncle's.
Think how the World would Curse me, when they hear
Medina's love to Virtue, lost his Life.
He talked to me of nothing but of goodness;
And when he spoke of that, (as he must needs)
He named my Mother, and by chance I wept.

King. Thy virtue is too excellent, let thy goodness
Punish him for the injuries he did thee,
Though I forgive him; and hence forward To Medina.
I will send for you when I want your Council,
Till then, forbear my sight.

Ler. Mighty Sir;
Perhaps his wild and unbecoming passions
Had their beginnings from an ill-timed Duty.
(If boldness to a Sovereign may be called so)
Yet I dare swear, his Loyalty is perfect,
Though my fond Nature is a partial surety
For what I love.

Med. Oh, spare your partial kindness, good my Lord;
It Is your old Craft to whet your sharpest Weapon
Upon pretended Friendship; and cut a Throat,
As smoothly, as if it were good manners.

King. No more, lest your rude breath raise an anger
More fatal than your snarling: from hence be
Duke of Lerma, and your next Friend, what you
Will call him -- Come, Maria,
At thy fair sight my blushing anger shrinks
As if some Angel from above descended,
Whose powerful Vision made all passions cease
But only Love, still waited on by Peace.

Exeunt. Manet Medina. Lerma looking back upon him. Med. What a look was there
To out-stare honesty?
Sure he practices to set his eyes,
As some do Guns to make 'em carry right,
But he can take no aim, but at the fearful;
Those he may hit perhaps; his full-charg'd eyes
Will hardly carry level to brave minds.
I must do something, I think it is no Treason,
To snatch a King from falling down a precipice:
But in Maria's eyes, lies Lerma's power,
And I must find a way to put those Lights out.
Nor will I leave to help him one small spark,
Then let him grope for power in the dark.
Enter D' Alva, Alcar. and Bruchero. How now, my Lords, do you seek any thing?


D' Alva. The King, my Lord.


Med. He Is lost.


Alca. Does not your Lordship know which way he went?


Med. Would you find the King?


D' Alva. Yes.


Med. Look in his Father's Grave then; for his ashes
Do yet retain more Majesty than he.
If you look after him that should be King.
You may perhaps find him in Lerma's pocket.

Alca. We are miserable.


Med. It tamely adds to misery to talk on it,
Like hearts weakened with griefs, that spend
Faint sorrows on their dying friends,
When they should strive,
Rather to give them help; my worthy Lords,
Were all your Courages, and Wisdoms ready
To snatch at any honest opportunity
That fortune offers: keep near the King,
And cross him not, till you hear more of me:
Something I Will do to merit from you all,
At least, deserve your pity, if I fall.

Exit. D' Alva. Heaven prosper and direct you;
This man's Soul is greater than his Title.

Alca. We have new Titles.


Bru. And likely to have more, all the Spawn
Of that poor slave, Caldroon, must be
Called Something, as well as he is now,
They say, a Marquis.

D' Alva. The Queen! her looks are full of sorrow,
All is not well.

Enter the Queen and Catalina with Ladies. D' Alva. Madam.


Alca. Royal Lady.


Bru. Is your Majesty not well?


Queen. Ha! I was thinking of the King.


D' Alva. What of him, Madam?


Queen. I know not what, but yet he lately seeks
Retirements from his Friends, and from himself.
A fatal sadness grows upon his youth
And makes him haste (before it comes) to age.

D' Alva. He has ill Council, Madam.


Alca. From Lerma too.


Queen. I thought ever now, he had been banished.


Bru. He Will banish us all, if his power holds.
He hangs in the King's bosom like his Crucifix,
And with no less an Adoration.
He may be safe in power, that can beget
Those beauteous Charms that have subdued the King,
Power seems to grow, nay, grow his own Inheritance.

Queen. We must quickly try to prevent
This growing danger to us all, and Spain.
Where Is Medina?

D' Alva. Shall he be sent for?


Queen. Ha! -- I feel a coldness creeping in my veins;
What haste it makes to my grieved heart. --
Ah, me!

She faints. Bru. Carry her in, this news The Queen is carried off.
Has troubled her.

D' Alva. I cannot tell, I am suspicious of all Accidents.


Alca. These fainting fits seem as if she were
With Child.

D' Alva. With Death I fear.


Enter Catalina. Alca. How now, how does the Queen?


Cata. I fear there is as little hopes now left,
As signs of life; just as we laid her on the bed,
She fetched a heavy groan mixed with a sigh,
I fear all the small stock of breath
That she had left.

D' Alva. This is sudden.


Cata. It Is sit your Lordship know all my suspicion;
I doubt, she is poisoned, this fatal day:
There came a Friar with a face unknown
To the Queen's Ante-chamber;
To all, a stranger, and to the Queen her self;
By him, a Letter was delivered to her,
Which had no name, but in its matter fair:
When she had half read over the fatal Paper,
Her eyes seemed to grow weary, and pulse
Kept an uneven, and a heavy time, and then
Just as you saw her now, she fainted.

Alca. What became of the Friar?


Cata. It Is not yet known; for in this hurry,
While every one was careful of the Queen,
He vanished.

Bru. 'Twas poison on my life.


D' Alva. It Is evident, we must make further
Search into it.

Bru. You must assist us, Madam; and by your faith
Revenge the murder of your Mistress.

Cata. Doubt not my Faith or Secrecy,
I must return, I fear, to a dead Woman.

Exit. Alca. Here Is a strange Relation:


Bru. It must be kept with secrecy:
We are hunted, and the toyls pitched about us.

Enter to them, Caldroon, the Archbishop of Toledo. Alca. See the new Indian
Stars.


D' Alva. Silence, he gapes; a Proclamation sure.


Called. The Duke of Lerma, Constable of Spain;
By Father Francisco late. Confessor to
His Majesty, now Archbishop of Toledo,
And me Roderigo del Caldroon, Marquess
Of Mirida; and Treasurer of Spain;
Commands thee, Philip Duke D' Alva,
Don Pedro, Marquess of Alcara;
And Don Bruchero, Great Major Domo;
Within an hour to meet in Council.

D' Alva. Here Is a Volley of Titles.


Called. We must inform you further, of
The Queen's Death.

Alca. The Confessor should have told us that.


Bru. The Archbishop, you forget your self:


Arch. Marked ye that, my Lord?


Called. Why, my Lords, the truth is nothing lessened
In my Report.

D' Alva. No nor the sadness: we shall attend the Constable.


Arch. I do not like that word of Alcara.


Exeunt D' Alva, Alca. and Bru. Called. Pish, it is a fond fear, who should
Reveal it to him? he slept not since
'Twas done, and could not dream it.

Arch. Would 'twere undone.


Called. Oh, your treacherous Conscience
Wakes too late; who should betray it?

Arch. The disguised Friar.


Called. He was ignorant of what he carried.


Arch. I have some business that commands
Me hence, the rest your self can manage.

Called. Be constant, or you loose us -- Exit.
I like him not, this scrupulous Churchman
Has a shrinking Liver, that stops the motion
Of his blood sometimes, and such another
Fright, may like an Earthquake
Shake him into discoveries of all;
A blush, in such a case as this,
Is Evidence sufficient for a Jury.
But I Will confirm him, or send his faint
Contrition to the other World, and he
Shall be the Messenger.
He must be held in use, or he will rust,
We must find mischiefs out to keep him busy,
Lest he have time to think how to be good;
Leisure begets relapses in his Blood:

Exit. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Caldroon, followed by Angelo, and Medina thrusts him by and Enters. Med.
STand by, Sir, methinks your well paced,
Greatness might move a little.

Called. For whom?


Med. For me, thou ill-drest Puppet of Authority;
Thou Stalking Property, that walk'st on Screws,
Which but laid by, thy Honor is unjoynted,
And grows as bedrid as the Impotent.

Called. You shall be answered.


Med. Thou Mist, exhaled from Dunghils,
Whose thick Breath poisons the purer Air
It mingles with.

Called. You are very bold.


Med. I will be bolder, and knock your Greatness,
Without you study quickly a Set-form,
To ask Forgiveness in.

Called. My Honor can defend it self
From worse Opposers.

Draws. Med. I Will mince your Honor.
And send your Lousy Family the Shares
Of your divided Greatness.

Draws Enter Alcara and Bruchero. Alca. Hold, this place is not for Quarrels.


Med. Nor for Wrongs.


Alca. How was it?


Med. Let met speak, that dare tell truth.


Called. When I relate the manner, it shall be
To those that have the power to punish.

Med. Let me go.
There Is nothing that has a lawful Birth,
That can endure this mongrel Greatness.

Enter the Duke of Lerma, leading Maria Veiled, with Attendants. Ler. What
Hurry's here?


Called. I know not, the Duke Medina thinks
His Greatness Entitles him to Injure
Any one.

Ler. I Will blow him and his Storms quickly away.


Med. Is your Breath so powerful, that it can
Puff Men off like tops of Thistles?

Ler. I cannot now spare so much time
As to lose any on your Brawls.

Caldroon. I have Employment for you.


Exeunt Lerma, Maria, and Caldroon Med. And for that piece of
Night-work too I take it.

Alca. Pray peace, my Lord


Med. Let me go, I will but ask him
A civil Question.

Alca. What is it?


Med. Whether great Men, and Fathers too
Are not the best and closest Bawds?

Alca. Fie, fie, consider who they are.


Med. It Is that considered doubles every wrong:
Had I been sindg'd with Lightning, I had stood
With all my Wrongs hushed as unwindy Night;
But to be scorched thus by a Candles Snuff,
A thing that only blazes in expiring,
And which must dye in its own noisomness:
Makes my Impatience swell above the Banks
Of common temper.

Alca. You must restrain this Fury, whose effect
Turns to your own destruction.

Enter the King, with a few. Med. What Is this?


Alca. The King.


Med. I will speak.


Alca. Take heed, good my Lord.


King. Which way went Lerma?


Med. Headlong, Sir, and 'twill be dangerous
To follow him.

King. What Is this?


Med. I was your Soldier once, Sir,
And had Commission to destroy your Enemies;
And I have done it with my Sword as boldly
As I will now attempt it with my Tongue:
And it is against a greater Enemy
Than ever Fortune brought me to oppose
In all your Battles.

King. What Enemy is this?


Med. So great a one, that he is now become
More Terror to your Soldiers, than those Armies
They always met, with Noble hopes of Conquest.
Here Victory is lost already: for Lerma
Has took you Captive.

King. It Is boldness, and not duty, to question
Prince's Favors.

Med. But not to beg 'em, Sir, no more than it is
To pray, that Heaven would turn a Vengeance from us,
Threatening in Lerma's power: Do not forget,
Great Sir, the last Desires your Father made,
And force him to call louder from his Grave.
Turn, mighty Sir, your Looks the other way,
And see your widowed People want their King,
Drooping like Days unlooked on by the Sun.
Your Council withered more with Care than Age,
Grown as much Strangers to your great Affairs,
As unto Lerma's pleasure.

Alca. Excellent! it is nobly honest.


King. Must Prince's Favors then be limited,
Or judged by common Breaths?
It Is restless Envy, that urges Mutinies
Sheltered under duty.

Exit. Med. So the Lesson is learned perfect.
Oh Impudence! to make the Majesty of Kings
The Pawn of all their Villainies.

Alca. Brave Lord, though I grieve to see you pressed
Thus into needless dangers; yet I must
Joy, that our Country can yet boast such worth.

Med. O my Lord, so wretched are we growing,
I tremble to outlive our Happiness:
Those that would always live among Diseases,
Ventures not more for Life than I for Death.

Alca. Nay, my brave Lord,
You shall see all your Friends dare share
With equal Courage the worst Fate;
For wisely to go back is now too late.
My Jealousies are just, lend me your aid,
And we may dive into the heart of all.

Med. And into his that wrought these Mischiefs too,
In greater privacy I Will utter more;
Let us be firm, and like a mighty Weight,
Sinking our selves, press others to their Fate.

Exount. SCENE II.
Enter the King and Maria, with two Papers. King. It is a thing of great
Concern Maria,
And I should have the Opinion of my Council.

Mar. Your Council, Sir? are you their Sovereign,
Or would you be a Slave to their Opinions?

King. But if*


Mar. If what?
Dull Majesty, is this the loudest Tune
Of a King's powerful Breath? If's and but's,
The timorous Language of the meanest people,
That are to give account of their low Actions
Unto Authority: Princes Determinations
Should be as free as they design their Power;
Not shaken with the Aguish touch of Doubts:
What Tracts leave the great Ocean? Or, who questions
Why it is calm, or rages? Who shall chide
The Sun that warms one portion of the World,
More than another? When you are absolute
In Love or Power, then I Will beg again.

King. Stay, I have resigned my Reason to
My Love, give me the Warrants. --
-- Now think, Maria, The King signs them*
Whether you have not asked too much
Of one you love so little.

Mar. Have you done it, Sir?


King. You see I have.


Mra. Do you not repent it, Sir?
Nor hate me as an Instrument,
Of pressing you to Acts, unworthy of you.

King. Oh Maria, it is hard for me to hate,
As it is for you to love.

Mar. But have I not amazed you, Sir?
In pressing you so hastily unto an Act
Of such Importance?

King. A little.


Mar. Thus low I beg your pardon;
And by this measure see to what dangers
Princes expose themselves, and Crowns
By too much trust, and kindness.

King. How Is this?
Have you then acted, what you thought amiss?

Mar. I have, Sir, by necessity, not choice;
My Father's violence had took another way.
More fatal, had I not gained from you
These Governments, as he designs to send
Away the Marquess of Alcara, and
Count Bruchero.

King. Ha!


Mar. Now have I set before you, Sir, a Mirror,
That truly shows --
-- How fatal it is for Princes,
To shine on any with contracted kindness.

King Whither must all this tend?


Mar. For he that does engross your Beams
Robs others of your Light, and is a Cloud
That hangs upon your brightness; breeding
Ill weather to all the World be^^des; while he seems
To make you practice power unlimited;
Just then you have the least, obeying his.

King. Excellent Woman!


Mar. From henceforth, Sir, be every body's King,
And then you are your self: lend equal ears
To what all say, and like a skilful Chemist
Draw the quick spirit off, from every Counsel,
And from your wise breast breath it as your own.

King. Oh, Maria! you set foundations for my
Love, upon my reason now.

Mar. One thing more I have to beg,
And then (my Father's Life only excepted)
It is the last I Will ask: these Warrants, Sir,
I will deliver to my Father; but in the mean time
Those Lords shall have private directions,
A little to defer their preparations;
If you dare trust me, Sir, it is your safety
I study now: pardon my foolish fears,
Your danger only named, calls forth my tears.

King. Oh, do not waste the treasure of your eyes,
For such a life that you so much despise,
While I more justly disobey in this,
To dare be careless of the thing you wish.

Mar. Can you my heart for want of friendship blame,
That for your safety have exposed my fame?
Love to your glories, should his flames resign,
As fires their Light, when the bright Sun does shine.

King. If Thrones be Seats for Cares, in a King's Breast
Love has a Title sure among the rest:
My love, as a fair Virtue I proclaim;
When it grows foul, I will conceal my shame.

Mar. Ah, it is some ease to love, to be confessed,
But, it is a torment, when it is suppressed.

King. Does cruelty, a sign of kindness, prove?


Mar. It is the greatest to deny the Love.


King. Both cannot suffer in one cruelty.


Mar. I should confess too much, should I deny.


King. Would you more cruel than you are appear?


Mar. Pray, Sir, be gone, I Have said too much I fear.


King. Maria --


Mar. -- If you have pity, Sir, be gone,
Leave me to blush a little while alone.

King. Farewell, I Will love, though you should still design
To hide your own, and never to pity mine.

Exit. Mar. Among what Rocks I steer a dangerous course,
My duty to a King, and to a Father;
My Countries shaken honor, and my own,
Calling at once upon me to take heed:
There Is something more than this, yet, shakes my heart,
But I will throw the Ague off, lest I
That to direct others their way design,
Should my self want a friend, to show me mine.

Enter Lerma. Ler. Have you prevailed?


Mar. Yes, Sir -- but --


Ler. No matter for a Reason, or a Circumstance,
Give 'em me; and still maintain thy power,
That I may pay Allegiance to thy eyes;
So now retire, for the Court begins to fill. Exit Maria. Enter Alcara and
Bruchero.
They come, she was dispatched in happy time.

Bru. See the full sail of Spain.


Alca. Strike, and pass by.


Ler. The King by me salutes you.


Lerma throws them the Warrants, and Exit. Alca. This was a running Lottery,
Mine Is a good prize, the Viceroy Ship of Naples.

Bru. Mine, of Navarre --


Alca. Why, this great man drops Kingdoms
As a full-plum'd Hawk mews her loose Feathers,
And never cares who stoops to take 'em up.

Bruce. He has some other meaning in it.


Alca. It Is certain his bounty else had never
Showered on us.

Enter the Archbishop, and Caldroon. Alca. See, these are of his Council.


Bru. And now come sweating with their fond complements.


Arch. My Lords, you are much engaged
Unto his Grace, the Duke of Lerma.

Bru. We have the Bonds about us.


Called. Oh, such another friend as Lerma,
The Earth holds not.

Alca. It Is believed.


Arch. Had you but seen, how he implored the King,
Pleaded your worths, and your abilities;
I think you would have thought, as now you may,
Nature had ti'd him to you in some bond.

Bru. The Duke is, as he ever was,
Covetous to scatter Favors, though unasked.

Call. I, and so careful of the Men he marks
To make Election of in his great Thoughts,
That when they sleep, he wakes to make 'em great.
As I dare swear you never thought of this.

Alca. Not I, I vow to you.


Called. I hope, my Lord, it shall not be forgotten:


Arch. That were too foul Ingratitude.


Bru. Oh, never, my Lord; and to assure the Duke --


Arch. It Is well, so may you prosper.


Exit Arch. and Caldroon. Alca. What think you now?


Bru. It Is Rank -- you and I, my Lord,
Are busy, and stand too much in his way;
Our remove will give his Actions scope.

Alca. H'as wove his cursed Inventions cunningly.
How he threw his guilty Favors to us;
And durst not stay to take our Thanks,
Here Is more Intelligence, see the Duke. Enter Medina, leading Izabella veiled.
He has got something too.

Med. Your way's now clear: there is one
Will bring you to your Attendance --
Remember to bring Maria to the Garden
At the appointed time.

Izab. I will not fail on my part.


Exit. Alca. You have got a fair Charge, my Lord.


Med. When you know all, you will say so.


Bru. We two, my Lord, are banished.


Med. Banished?


Alca. But to honorable Employments.


Med. We have trifl'd then too long;
And suffered this black Cloud to grow too big,
Whose breaking will drown us all.

Bru. See here the Sentence of our Banishments.


Enter a Woman veiled, puts a Letter into Alcara's hand, and Exit. Alcara
reads, and seems amazed. Bru. What Is this that vanished?


Bru. Some secret Invitation.


Bru. How now, man, what not impart
It to your Friends?

Alca. Yes, read.


Bruchero reads. To the Marquess of Alcara.

YOU and your Friend Count Bruchero, will receive two Patents for your
honorable Banishment, 'twill not be unpleasant to the King, if you pretend
Sickness or Business to defer going to your Employments: This Advice admire not
at, but follow.

Bru. This is strange.


Med. The Advice is good, no matter who sent it.
Nor could it come from any common hand,
The Business is too young to be acquainted
With any thing but one that knew its birth.

Alca. It Is true, and we must put it off.


Bru. And yet it may prove dangerous.


Med. The danger's only in accepting it.
If we disperse our selves, he will catch us up,
Like a flowen Covey; besides, the Letter says,
The King will not be displeased: there is some Mole,
That heaves for us unseen; Count Bruchero,
You shall pretend, that to prevent all Rumors,
You Will perfect your Accounts before you go.
You, my Lord, must pretend sickness,
And seem to keep your Chamber;
Prescribing to your Doctors a Receipt,
To make them say as you do, and in hard words
Set forth a dangerous Distemper.

Alca. Good; but what success attends on this?


Med. That we must wait for, honest designs
Justly resemble our Devotions,
Which we must pay, and wait for the Reward:
Yet this I Will add, to strengthen your resolves,
I have some designs, I think cannot fail me,
Shall shake the great foundation, Lerma laid;
We search deep Mines, and if the veins but hold,
We purchase all the Wealth we wish to have,
And if it fails, we dig a noble Grave.

Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Caldroon, with Letters. Called. Mischiefs, with Plagues, engender every
where,
And beget new Diseases; the Queen's Murder
Is more than whispered now; and the Duke's Daughter
Is Indian talk, the 'tother World is full on it,
And, which is more than all, the Messenger
That brought that fatal Letter to the Queen,
In which her death was sealed; is by Medina
Sent for in private: whom we thought asleep,
But waked too soon, before our careful Friend
Could stop him in his close attempt.
The Storm has overtook our greatest speed.
Nor can the Duke himself find out a shelter:
I Will instantly entomb my new got wealth
In a disguised Chapel which I Have consecrated
To my dead Ancestors; that may save me yet;
It Is pity to take ill pains to rake up wealth,
Which at the last can purchase us no more
Than a mean life, which we enjoyed before. Enter Lerma and the Archbishop.
The Duke, and trouble in his face,
I Will step aside a little.

Exit. Ler. Said he, he would not go?


Arch. Till his Accounts were levelled.


Ler. And Alcara is sick?


Arch. It Is so given out.


Ler. They have me in the wind,
There is some secret trick in this, or else
They durst not slight me thus; it must be so,
My violent motion grows already slow:
I Will weather falls about me, every way
I try to take, proves heavy traveling.

Arch. The peoples cries grow loud.


Ler. The gaul'd Rascals wince at my oppressions,
They are like swarms of Bees, when up and buzzing
They light on any thing; Alcara, and Bruchero
That dare dispute their Sovereign's Command,
Give Language to their murmurs, I have strived
In Hunters toils like a fierce Lybian Lion,
And am grown weaker by my struggling.

Arch. The King hears nothing of all this.


Ler. No, Maria's Charms hang yet about his Senses;
But all this weight will stretch Love's bonds; whose ties
Are weakly twisted between gazing eyes.
A little distance or some new Object
May set his heart free and unravel al^

Arch. It Is dangerous.


Ler. Extremely; besides, I fancy, she grows
Dark to my business, and has starts
As if she would lose me before her Honor.

Arch. What Is to be done?


Ler. No way but what we last resolved on,
And that out-does the soul of all invention.

Arch. I Am ready for the Journey.


Ler. Your safety is included in my peace,
Which with like care, all my designs propose.

Arch. The way for my departure's made already.
And the feigned Letters from his Holiness,
Showed and allowed by the King's great Council.

Ler. It Is well, this Packet then determins
All the rest, and now, my Lord, cut through
The tardy time, and let your expedition kill my doubts:
While I at home will fan away these fears,
Till this hot weather changes; so farewell.

Arch. Farewell, keep the storm off till then,
With the advantage of the Sun, you hold,
And my return shall be swift as your thought.

Exit. Ler. Farewell, and prosper. Enter Caldroon with Letters.
Ha! thy face is full of News.

Called. Such as I wish I had not:
Is the Archbishop gone --
I dare not show my Letters --

Ler. But now dispatched.


Called. But now? -- Humh!


Ler. Thou fright'st me with thy Accents,
Why that Humh?

Called. Nothing, my Lord.


Ler. Thou lie.


Called. My Lord.


Ler. Ha! do thou swell, that art my creature?
Thy breath is nurtured from my bounty;
Why art thou then a Traitor to my trust.

Called. My Lord, you do amaze me.


Ler. Why do thou hide such necessary truths,
And ruin all my Plots for want of knowledge?

Called. I love your Peace so well, I dare not utter it*


Ler. Why, Caldroon?
What craven temper have thou found in me?
What chill cold standing blood without a tide?
That thou should think I know what it is to fear:
Thou'st seen me sight against a destiny,
Which I have turned, by wise and bold designs;
Thou'st seen me poorer than the Cheeks of Famine,
Less loved and followed than infected Towns:
Could thou then witness once, in all these hazards,
That Fate could triumph in one sigh of mine.

Called. Alas, my Lord.


Ler. Pity me, if thou see me tremble at it;
Come, I will know it all: and, tell it me,
In the most horridst Language thou can study;
For I am skilful, and can tune all terrors.

Called. My Lord, this packet first is a sad witness
Of too much danger.

Ler. So.


He reads. Called. His color changes.


Ler. Keep in, false Fear, he must not see thee:


Aside. Called. His blood flies up and down, the storm has tossed it.


Aside. Ler. Ha, ha, ha, does this trouble thee?
Let 'em all like creeping Snakes hiss at me,
I have a charm yet left shall dead their stings;
Yet it was fit I should know all this:
What more is there?

Called. Much, my Lord -- for --


Ler. Let it alone; Attend me in my Closet,
There I Will satisfy thee better.

Called. I Will attend your Grace --


Exit. Ler. Now, heart, I give thee leave to sigh, and swell,
My thoughts must not be judged by these base Slaves
Who hang upon my Fortune, not on me;
Such Instruments, like flattered Princes,
Must never hear but of Prosperity;
Virtue can singly stand on its own trust,
But Passions must depend on truth of others.
Our hopes of Victory on mean Men's valors,
Ambition upon base and wretched Instruments,
On Women Love, more treacherous than all;
Yet in despite of my cursed Enemies,
I Will find a Conquest in a safe retreat,
And though they rise, I Will sink to be as great.

Exit. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Maria, and Izabella. Mar. YOu're welcome, and I dare trust your goodness;
Since it can share with me in my condition,
Which is a bitterness well gilded only.

Iza. I never shall deceive you, Madam.


Mar. Perhaps I may do you, and all the World
Who thinks I dote upon my splendid shame.

Iza. What Is this?


Aside. Mar. The Character which I have had of you
Gives me a confidence I Have found a Friend
That I may weep to; sorrow's like a Child
Which loves to be bemoaned.

Weeps. Iza. Sure she is Injured.


Mar. Come, sit down: see, Izabella,
These Flowers live without the sense of sorrows.

Iza. And yet they will hang their heads in scorching heat,
When no kind drops fall on 'em.

Mar. It Is true, as if like me they wanted pity,
But I Will stoop down upon their fragrant Beds,
And weep upon 'em. Oh, Izabella,
Would any thing could prosper by my griefs.

Iza. I must believe her. --


Soft Music. Mar. Hark, What Is that?


Iza. Nothing, Madam, it is but your fancy.


Mar. It Is Harmony, and cannot be my fancy,
For that is out of tune. Enter Medina as a Genius, in a glittering Habit.
Ha! What Is this? help, Izabella.

Iza. Sit still. Madam, it is only some design
To entertain you, the Music shows it now.

The Music ceases; and the Genius speaks. Genesis I am the Genius which does wait
Upon Spain's loose and shaken State;
I rule the Spirits of the Air,
Who, as their guide to me repair;
And then by me to every mind
A several genius is assigned,
Who wait and whisper to their Souls,
But no Decree or Power controuls;
For every one their freedoms use*
And all their Faults, and Virtues choose.
The account of every deed and thought
Are by the winged Spirits brought:
We sit in Sunbeams, while they tell
The news of Mortals that do well;
But when they tell of Vice, they shrou'd
Their heads, and whisper't in a Cloud.
Some merit neither praise nor shame,
Who tempt not fate, nor trouble Fame;
Those Spirits that on such attend,
I Will charm, to show how time they spend. He Charms, an Entry of Spirits,
imitating vain men dumb.
Now, from above, I Will call for one
That is the Genius of the Throne;
Next thine, whose sighs increase the Air,
That thou art not so chaste as fair:
It Is those alone waste every hour,
That wait on Beauty, or on Power.

Enter the First Genius. 1. Genesis See, I obey, and now am weary grown
Longer to wait upon a Throne,
Then let me take some rest
And fly to whisper to a common Breast;
Not fed with Luxury,
Nor flattered up to be a Deity.

He waves his Wand, and enter the second Genius. 2. Genesis I come, I come, filled
with despair
To whisper longer, to the proud and fair.
Their own just Conquest they despise,
And please themselves with guilty Victories:
Against those Altars I in vain persuade
Where worship is by time decayed.

1. Genesis I often have mingled with the thoughts
Of Kings, and told, they were not Deities,
And how all Princes faults
Made men have daring Tongues and Eyes.

2. Genesis I told this Beauty too her fate,
That one soul Crime had such a weight,
That all must sink; and he that first does find
A Beauty, yet unblemisht, kind,
He is like one that does discover
An unknown World, by whose success
He makes a way for others to possess;
As she is made ready for another Lover.

Both. Then set us free, that we may find,
In low Estates, a steady mind,
Whose harmless Life, and virtuous Love,
Is far above
The reach of Vice, or fear of Fate;
Let no good Genius henceforth wait
Upon such false, and such unsteady things
As adored Beauties, or as flattered Kings.

Exeunt. Mar. Ha, Izabella, There is some
Further meaning, sure in this,
I do not like it.

Med. You must.


Mar. How must? what are you? I am betrayed,
Izabella, stay; what was all this meant for?

Exit Iza. Med. Truth.


Mar. These shapes spoke falsehood.


Med. I Will help you to one then, shall tell you Truths.
Do You know me?

Pulls off his disguise. Mar. My honored Uncle; brave Medina,
My wonder's greater than my doubts before.

Med. The greatest wonder is behind.


Mar. What Is that?


Med. Thy Lust,
That does exceed all wicked Miracles.

Mar. My Lord, for pitties sake.


Med. It Is pity forces me to this Violence,
The pity of thy Blood, I had a share in
Before it was infected with this Leprosy;
The pity of thy Youth, thy beauteous Youth,
Like a fair Flower plucked up by the Root
When 'twas but newly budding, before time
Could show it to the World, how sweet it was.

Mar. Do but hear me, Sir.


Med. Yes, if you will speak Repentance with a Passion
As great as that which made you act your lewdness,
Then I will hearken like a doting Mother,
To hear her Children praised by flattering tongues.
But if it be to excuse or mitigate
Thy wretched Fathers, or thine own offense.
And Bawd for whorish Acts, by poor excuses;
The Ears of Cruelty shall not be deafer,
Nor storms to crying Seamen that must sink,
As thy drowned Honor does, though not so deep.

Mar. My Lord.


Med. Think of thy Mother now, that through some Star
Looks blushing down on thy Impieties;
And finds it harder to hold a wrath from thee
With all the Mediation of the Saints,
Than 'twas to purchase for her self, by Virtue,
That blessed Eternity which she enjoys.
Oh, thou had been blessed, Maria; if thy Father,
Like other Wolves, had been then torn to pieces
Before he knew what he begot in thee;
For thou had then wanted a powerful Pander:
Or, had Heaven blessed thee with Deformity,
Thou had been safe in unattempted Virtue.
Oh, Maria, it is thy Beauty that has been
The fatal blazing Star that did foretell
The hot Contagion that has followed in thee.

Mar. Will you not hear me then, my Lord?


Med. Do thou make way at all for me to
Hear thee? or have thou yet let fall a tear?
To bribe me from pronouncing cruel Judgment.

Mar. When I want Innocence, I Will weep, or beg
Of you and Heaven; But I that have preserved
My Virtue, as unstained as at the time
When my blessed Mother (who now smiles upon me)
Gave me and that together to the World.
I will not stain it by a false Confession.

Med. What Is this?


Mar. A Truth, which I am bound by ties of Nature
And Honor, to tell you, and all the World,
Nay, on my Knees I thank you, that you take
The room of a lost Father up so kindly;
And question me, for all you do suspect:
And I will gladly tell you my true Story,
Like those that with a pleasure do repeat
The Tales of mighty Dangers they have past.
But if your foul Belief, like the World's Tongues,
Can only think all ill, as they can speak 'em,
Then I rise thus, and from my Virtue borrow
A Scorn, as great as such from their own Vices
Can borrow foul Opinions

Med. Why, what a Fool was I, I did expect
Repentance, and should have looked for Impudence*
Perhaps you fool your self into this boldness,
And think there is no man that dares question
The Mistress of a King, but I would sooner
Destroy a Traitor to my Prince's Soul,
Than to his Crown.

Mar. The King has as much Virtue as I wish him.


Med. That easily may be, but it is a question
Whether he will continue still so bad,
As thou desir'st him.

Mar. I see that you are deaf to hear of goodness*
And I must either have a guilt within,
To beg enough, or Virtue to despise you.
And when you know, which you shall quickly do,
How you have injured me, you will repent
Your bold Injustice: -- so farewell.

Med. Stay, stay, you must not go.


Mar. Must not?


Med. No, nor shall not: the Masquers that you saw
Are all my trusty Friends, it is in vain
To cry, or tear your Throat.

Mar. What do you mean?


Med. To shake you in your damned security,
Or set your Soul free from that gilded Frame,
Whose unseen rottenness corrupts it.

Mar. Will you murder me?


Med. I did not come with that intention.
But thou have raised me to a virtuous anger,
That tempts me to prevent thy shame and mine.
Yet will you turn your Eyes in to your Breast,
And they must weep, for they will see thy heart
So very foul, that it needs pious washing.

Mar Nay, then
If your scorned Anger swelled you to a Mountain
And were to fall upon me, I would stand
Thus -- and not shake, but would despise
Your Ruin and mine own.

Med. Yet repent, and do not force my Hand
To a swift Justice, that must send thy Soul
Where vicious Falseness dares not tell a Tale.

Mar. I had rather be judged there than here.


Med. Then, Justice, I thus obey thy strict Command,
But powerful Nature stays my feeble Hand.

Draws aside. Mar. Why do you pause? your Passion is more noble
Then your Virtue, one can make trial of me,
The Other dares not; Strike, and all the while,
See what suspected Sin startles my Soul,
Or stirs me to a blush.

Med. Dare you endure to dye?


Mar. Were It not a sin, perhaps I durst do more.


Med. What more?


Mar. Give my self what I wish, as easily
As I provoke your shaking hand to do it.

Enter Izabella running. Iza. Oh, my Lord, undone, undone, the King's just
Coming, and searches for Maria.

Med. The King? -- no matter --
I Will fall nobly, now you shall be revenged.

Mar. I could weep now to see the great Medina
Believe all ill so easily; when you speak
Of my unhappy Father, his bare Name
Confirms you in your cruel censure of me:
But though you talk of my blessed Mother to me
A thousand times, you have not power to think,
One drop of Virtue has descended to me
From that pure Fountain.

Med. Oh Heaven! send peace to my distracted Soul,
And tell me which is truth.

Mar. Heaven will tell you suddenly, but we forget,
Put on your Disguise, and leave the rest to me.

Med. This Disguise may be more fatal
Than my own shape.

Mar. You must not for the World appear your self,
For then you will be thought, the Author
Of something I intend, which will be fatal to you.
Dare you trust me in nothing?

Med. Well, in this I dare -- Izabella,
Bid my Friends hide their Disguises,
And conceal themselves.

Iza. I will.


Exit Izab. Mar. You remember there was a Letter
Written to the Marquess of Alcara.
And Count Bruchero.

Med. I do: Did you write it?


Mar. No more Questions now.


Med. But I will ask something;
For I grow willing to believe thee good:
Pray tell me.

Mar. Peace, I hear a Noise. -- Look
If you see any coming.

Med. It Is the King; I trust you now, Maria.


Mar. Do so always then.


Enter the King, D'Alva, etc. King. Maria -- How now, What Is this?


Mar. Pray, Sir, do not look upon him,
'Twill make the poor man so out of Countenance,
That I shall have no more Diversion;
It seems that Izabella and the Gardener
Contrived an Entertainment for me,
It was done just as your Majesty came.

D' Alva. This is an odd Excuse.


King. I should have been sorry to have
Interrupted your pleasures.

Mar. Pray, Sir, do not look at him,
He Will be so ashamed.

King. I will look on nothing but thy brightness;
Come, Maria, I fell in love with thee,
Then with thy Virtue which was hard to find
In so much Beauty; the other is so common
It bears no Rate, there is Poverty in Vice;
The hardest things to find bear greatest price.

Med. This is the likeliest thing Exeunt King, Maria, D'Alva.
To Virtue, I ever saw:
Besides, had she been vicious,
She would not have neglected her Revenge,
One of the pleasant'st Lusts ill Women have:
All may be Counterfeit -- and yet --
There may be such a thing as a good Woman. Enter Izabella.
How now, What news?

Iza. All safe; I must have after them.


Med. Stay, and prithee tell me, my best Cozen,
Do thou think Maria Virtuous?

Iza. By Heaven I do.


Med. By Heaven I have a mind to do so too.


Iza. I have observed things worthy of your knowledge.
Another time I will relate them to you.
Something she is resolved to do, I Will watch
To find it out: So farewell,
I dare not stay.

Exit Izab. Med. I know not what to think;
I would believe, but yet my shaken Faith
Creeps to its growth but slowly, like an Infant
Forced to a hasty Birth before its time.
Our lives and our devotions are but sickly,
When Aguish doubts their growing health controuls;
A shaken Faith's the storm of tottering Souls. Enter D' Alva.
Ha! D' Alva? What has brought him back?

D' Alva. Here Is the Apparition still, I must be satisfied,
What are you, Sir?

Med. One of Lerma's Angels.


D' Alva. Lerma's Devils.


Med. See, my Lord, I meant his evil Angel.


D' Alva. Oh, my dear Lord, Discovers himself.
Pardon my apprehension;
We tread upon such rough and narrow paths,
That any trick, or error, throws us down.

Med. Fear not, my Lord, I have discovered
And broken, as I hope, the best foundation
That Lerma builds upon.

D' Alva. Let us delay no time, but instantly
To Council with the Marquess of Alcara,
And Count Bruchero; they have something
To impart, that is of great Importance.

Med. To add to all, I have secured the Witnesses,
Antonio, and Catalina; we'll lose no time,
Whilst Lerma, as I hear, thinks I am fled,
And Joys in fullness of his growing power.
But let him swell, fate never durst deny
Bold Spirits, to dispose of destiny.
Unshaken Trees, that have the largest roots;
A bold, and well-arm'd hand as well may throw
As those, whose Roots do not so deeply grow.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Lerma. Ler. If my invention fail not, I have yet
Out-stript 'em all; if my winged Mercury
Keep touch in time: The Court looks odly,
And every brow wears mysteries about 'em:
The fawning Rascals of it (which like Cobwebs
Should be swept off) methinks avoid me now,
Who used to crowd, and stop my way with cringes;
Their smiles look like the grins of angered Monkeys:
But I am safe, while my Maria's Charms
Hang on the King, and numb him to a Lethargy,
There Is some that are too great, must be cut down,
Feigned Accusations, and a little time
Will kill all wonder, which is shorter lived
Than dreams of Children, or old Women's tales.

Enter Angelo. Ang. My Lord.


Ler. Ha! Death on thee, I was serious.
Begone -- this was a guilty start, Strikes him. Ex. Angelo.
This Slave too, will perhaps
Grow wise, and guess at something,
How hard it is, in slippery ways
To keep a steady Motion. Enter Caldroon.
How now? what news? -- speak.

Called. I am too narrow to contain,
It is too great to keep or to let out.

Ler. Curse on this form in thy Relations.
For thou do practice on me like an Advocate,
Whose splenetive exordiums are more horrid
Than the ill cause he would make monstrous.

Called. Your Daughter, Sir. --


Ler. Is sweeter than the Spring, wreathed in the Arms
Of budding Flowers; what more of her?

Called. There cannot be Man enough in you to hear it,
And then outlive it; it is so great a weight,
I almost sink to bring it.

Ler. And yet art such an Ass under thy burden
As not to throw it off: or tell it me,
And I have all thy weight.

Called. You cannot hear it.


Ler Not if you do not tell it.


Called. 'Twill crush you.


Ler. It must be heavier than all the weight
Of Peoples Curses, and the great Ones Envies:
Thou do not know one thing, Caldroon;
Fortune and I did long ago agree,
I to make work for her, and she for me,
Tell it me boldly; and prithee now, Caldroon,
Do not like those that bring a bitter Potion,
Make scurvy Faces at it, as you give it.

Called. Oh, my Lord,
Dogs howlings, or the groans of Mandrakes,
Would be a Consort of soft Music,
To this harsh thing I have to utter.

Ler. Thou'st numbed my Senses like a skilful Surgeon.
And now may strike, I shall not feel thy Hand.
But come, what of Maria?

Called. She Is gone, stole away,
Unknown by whom, or whither.

Ler. This is a dangerous Wound indeed,
I know not where to search it.

Called. My Lord, I told you what 'twou'd come to.


Ler. Oh, Sir, you are a mighty Prophet,
Where was the King?

Called. As they say, asleep.


Ler. Could he sleep? and his dull Soul without
A dreaming Whisper, that she was losing,
And when he wakes, and misses her, what then?

Called. He will be troubled sure.


Ler. Troubles wear off from Kings, (they are too high
To grieve, and sorrow slides from them) like falling drops
From sides of houses, -- they dare not hurt her sure.

Called. It cannot be imagined that they dare


Ler. She must appear again, our rapid Motions
Will bring us round again to that fair Sun.
If the King loves her too, (as sure he does)
Her Absence makes it Night with him.
I wonder what they meant by it.

Called. I cannot guess, my Lord.


Ler. You Are shallow then; they fondly think
The King will be uncharm'd, and hearken to their
Clamours, now she that stood between
Their Breath and him, is thus removed;
'Twas pollitically done; --
And yet they dare not tell him where she is,
Nor the bold Ravisher confess the Fact.
For yet, Caldroon, she hangs upon his Heart
Like hopes of Joy upon a troubled Soul;
I have a Plot to help us yet, at least
To give us time till I have searched this further.

Called. What is it, my Lord?


Ler. I Will instantly to the half-soul-less King*
For he must want his better part of Life
Now she is gone: and tell him she is retired
On purpose, till a hasty Vow be past:
And frame a Letter in her dearest Name,
Shall keep his Love from chilling.

Called. It Is excellent.


Ler. He must not know she is lost.


Called. Not for the World.


Ler. By that time, Fate will send her me again;
For those above, all know my Title to her;
She is my Child, Caldroon, but such a one
As can raise Sorrow above Nature's pitch.
Prithee observe, Caldroon, how other Fathers
Mourn for lost Children; then thou wou't see
I do not talk so idly as thou think;
But in this loss, I must not lose my self,
And whine to nothing: I Will to the King.

Enter the King and Medina, D' Alva, Alcara, and Bruchero, whispering to him
and Medina showing Papers: the King sad, and expressing Amazement angerly, and
so passes over the Stage. Called. He comes.


Ler. But with a Guard, I like not.


Called. We are undone.


Ler. He would not look upon me once,
While round about him, all my Enemies
Whispered Destruction to me.

Called. All Is out, I fear.


Ler. Base Prince;
By Heaven, Caldroon, he has forgot her;
How easily his fond and childish Love
Threw the fine Thing away, that it so cried for.
The Memories of Princes are but Graves
Where Beauty, and where Merit lie forgotten.

Called. Think of your self, my Lord.


Ler. When the thick crowd of Thoughts for lost Maria
Will leave the least way open, then I will;
Oh, she had Eyes, Caldroon, I hope she has,
That did, and may, yet look him into nothing.

Called. Could we but find her.


Ler. She cannot be concealed, she is too glorious,
Had she been coupl'd with some rough-hewn Slave,
Her Language would have played upon his Soul,
And charmed him into dotage, if she had grieved
Like an Idolater, he would have gathered
Her Tears upon his Knees, for sacred Relics.
But had he lost her thus, thus as she is lost,
He would have searched her out, or else destroyed
All that he could suspect, and then himself.
But this sick shadow of a Lover
That whin'd, and pined away in passion for her,
Is like a Schoolboy, glad to be released
From a hard Lesson.

Called. Here Is more Company.


Ler. The worst is come already, and the rest looked for.


Enter Medina, D' Alva, Alcara, Bruchero, with Angelo, led Prisoner by an
Officer, with a white staff and a Guard attending. Med. You shall have more
Company,
Seignior Angelo -- Do your Office, Algazil.

Algaz. Roderigo del Caldroon, I Arrest thee
In the name of Philip, King of Spain.

Called. I obey it, we are o'er-taken.


Ler. Medina, I will answer the Arrest.


Med. Your case is not much better,
You will be summoned, Lerma.

Exeunt. Ler. Why then I will appear, Medina;
You're a kind Brother.
Could I turn all my Passions into Curses,
And make 'em as effectual as my sorrows,
They might, perhaps, destroy the proudest of 'em;
And yet my well-propt heart shall bear it all,
He only is above Envy and Fate,
Whose mind in sinking Fortunes keeps its height.

Exit. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Lerma appears, as in his House, with a Letter in his hand; two Men bringing in
a Coffer after him, opens a Door, and they place it in. Ler. HEre, set that
Treasure in, for they are Relics,
And will preserve their faithful Worshipper;
Why, here are mysteries Canonical,
That must not be searched into by disputes;
'Twas a good purchase too, considering
The deep necessity; or if compared
To the vast sums I gave my Instruments
To turn them Fiends, and make my self a Devil,
For I am Sainted at a cheaper Rate,
Thanks to his Holiness, my pack of Counselors,
I have out-gone you all; but to my Letter.
He Reads. My LORD,
THis Coffer holds your wishes, and the full salutes from Rome; your Money is
returned as promised: I have at Naples here, met news so fearful, has altered
all my purposes: I have served you faithfully, pay it to my memory; you are
secure, and I preserved from shame, by a death of my own choosing, Poison. So
farewell, no more yours, nor any more

Toledo.


Kind Man, that with such pious Charity
Saved me the labor; he knew I honored him,
And would not have his Life laid to my charge,
But Piously he took it from himself;
Where Is such another Churchman?
For Caldroon, by this time he is going after him,
I would the Bishop had but taught the Slave,
His Wife, and charitable way of dying:
But where is Maria? I dare not ask my self,
For I, alas, cannot tell, and Heaven will not;
Where is its Mercy then? for it never had
Another way to Bless, but by Maria.
Could my profane and passionate Revenge
Reach but the Hearts and Lips of the Religious;
No Incense evermore should upward fly,
Of Prayer or Praise; I Would stop all Piety
Till they restored Maria to me -- hark --
Sing here. I hear some noise -- ha? what is this?

Enter Caldroon, going to Execution, led by two Friars; a Friar going before,
carrying a Crucifix; after follow others of several Orders, every one with a
wax Taper in his hand; they pass round the Stage, singing his Funeral Dirge.
After they go out, Medina enters with a Guard. Ler. Oh, are you come? what
Tempest now?


Med. How do you like the sight you saw?


Ler. What the Pageant? I did not like it.


Med. I thought so.


Ler. I was vexed to see how the poor Slave
Hung down his head, he should have laughed at you.

Med. This heavy Spectacle was meant --


Ler. To frighten me?


Med. No, to prepare and touch thy Conscience
Before thy Summons which I here pronounce;
Charles Duke of Lerma, the Council do Command
In the King's Name, that you appear immediately
To answer Articles preferred against you.

Ler. Philip, Duke of Medina, (...) dare come.


Med. Your impudence was never questioned.


Ler. Nor shall my confidence be shaken by you.
This was no kind Office for a Brother.

Med. Where I find Virtue, there I own Alliance,
But I still persecute ignoble Acts, though
Against him that would b^ called my Brother.

Ler. Would be called?
Take thy disdained Alliance back again,
I do despise to plead the chance of Nature
To give me Title or pretense to any thing.
And if you are such as you talk, your self,
You might more nobly have pursued those Actions,
That you count ill: I always wore a Sword,
And do so now.

Med. I love not to be urged to draw my Sword,
Though that of Justice is much fitter now
To strike at thee, which is so sure and sudden,
That thy pretended Courage is despair.
Yet, now I think on it better, it is an Honor
To be thy Executioner.

Draws. Ler. I did not think yet to have found Medina
A poor malicious Enemy, could you believe
That I have lost my Courage with my Fortunes,
But to take off your mean ignoble scruple,
Know, Medina, that at this time, my Life
Is as secure as thine, by Heaven it is. Enter Alcara.
Thou rob'st not greedy Justice of a morsel.

Alca. What Is this? the Guard there, hoa?


Ler. What, betrayed?


Alca. How now, my Lord? suffering a Traitor
With a Sword drawn upon you.

Med. My Lord, you are mistaken.


Alca. The Council call for you, and are
Just going to Sit, and immediately expect
Your Prisoner's Appearance.

Med. My Lord, I Will follow you.


Alca. I must not leave him Armed.


Med. Take my Honor, my Lord, there shall be
Nothing done, he is my Brother, and as far
As Justice gives me leave, I Would use him Nobly.

Alca. The Guard, my Lord, must wait in sight.


Med. As you please; but he and I must have
Some words in private.

Alca. Upon the engagement of your Honor.
Nothing but words shall pass, I leave you.

Exit. Med. My Lord, you have it, I Will follow presently.
You see we are prevented.

Ler. You have dealt Nobly, and I am calm again;
Only, I would beg leave to tell you a little tale
Before you go. There was a Man,
Whose Pious Love to Honor, made him forget
Friends and Alliance: such Chimera's
Have brought on Cruelties in your cousen'd mind
That Nature startles at, and the forced World
Who make advantage on your formal dotage,
Condemns you for that ruin which they wish;
And call it cruelty in you to bring it.

Med. You are a subtle Sophister, and might
Talk a believing Fool from his just ends.

Ler. Why, Did you never try in all this time
To teach my heart in private, and direct it;
And where you found a wound, like a good Surgeon,
Search it to Cure, and not to kill your Patient.

Med. Away.


Ler. The love of Virtue reaches not to Ruin,
And all will judge your course thus violent
(But such as flatter you for their own ends)
To be your hate to me, not love to Virtue.

Med. I Will hear no more.


Ler. It Is true, perhaps I am my self an Ocean,
And mingled something dangerously by Fortune,
And yet but only gently whispered to:
I am as calm as Nature undisturbed
In sleeping Infants; but when loud breaths
Blow me to storms, I care not then who sinks.

Med. I trifle time to hear thee:
The hour of your Appearing's come, make have,
Or you will be fetched by common Officers:
So farewell, I fear you fool your self with hopes.

Exit. Ler. He Is gone; he durst not stay to hear me;
He did begin to melt: good natured Gentleman.
I love to try Men's tempers to laugh at 'em;
For I should hardly trust a promised kindness.
I will not beg, that can command my Peace;
He that secures himself well in the end,
Must destroy Foes, and never trust a Friend.

Exit. SCENE II.
Enter Medina, D' Alva, Alcara, and Bruchero, ready to sit as in Judgment. Med.
I hope, my Lords, I have deserved your thanks.


D' Alva. And all the Nations.


Bru. Caldroon and Angelo did hardly thank you:
The Ants had pil'd a mighty heap of Treasure.

Alca. No news, my Lord, yet of your Niece?


Med. Not any.


D' Alva. She has showed a Virtue in this close retreat
Beyond all Story.

Med. I do confess I Am glad I was mistaken;
I thought her worse than she has proved.

Alca. The King they say begins to have suspicions
That she is conveyed away by some of us.

Med. That fancy will be nourisht in his mind
By Lerma's Creatures, we must haste the Trial.

Alca. All Is ready, see the King. Enter the King.
A Cloud of sadness gathers on his calmness;
He seems disturbed.

D' Alva. Sir --


King. What, you would make excuses for the fact,
Or, would you own it for a Politic Virtue?

D' Alva. What fact, Sir?


King. Dare you ask me what? or do you think
I am too young, not grown up to a King?

Alca. We do beseech your Majesty --


King. To give you leave to be all Kings, and Tyrants
Of my Affections; you Ravishers of Virtue,
Either restore Maria to the World,
Or all go suddenly, and lose your selves.

Med. Does your Majesty believe? --


King. Yes, I do, that all great Men
Have jealous envies, equal unto Rivals;
And all the courted Beauty is Ambition,
Hid under Justice, which, take heed you follow,
And closely too, or ye shall all feel mine:
So, you may sit, but I will watch your actions.

Exit. D' Alva. This is unhappy.


Med. It will be more, unless we now embrace
The opportunity: Come, let us sit
And call the Witnesses. Enter Izabella.
How now, What Is the news with you?

Iza. I would speak with the King.


Med. From whom?


Iza. Maria.


Med. What Is your business?


Iza. It Is only for his Ears.


Med. How, Izabella, are you grown her Servant?


Iza. I am a Servant to her Virtues.


Med. And so brought a virtuous Message?


Iza. My Lord, you may say what you please.


Med. But you must not go; unless you first.
Tell me the business -- Where Is Maria?

Iza. I must tell neither.


Med. Ha, Did not I entrust you?


Iza. And so does she, and I Will be just to both:
Pray stop me not.

Med. Sure, Izabella, you forget your self,
And what I am?

Iza. But not what I ought to be.


Med. Go back, I say, and tell that counterfeit Maria,
She shall not save her Father, with the loss
Of her own Prince -- go -- Nay, no help.

Iza. Then I must speak.


Med. Put her out, and from henceforth
I do disown my blood in thee too.

Iza. This is Cruelty, not Justice.


Med. Stop her mouth; out with her.


Puts her out. D' Alva. What Is the matter, my Lord?


Med. Nothing but a Talebearer dispatched
Away.

Alca. I have seen her sure.


Med. It may be so: Come, we trifle time;
Sit, my Lords, and call the Witnesses.

Enter Catalina and Antonio. Med. Antonio, you are ready to averr
Your own Confession, made at several times.

Anto. My Lords, I am.


Med. The Heads of your Confession made out
The Queen's Death, and your reward; and how
At last your own Death was designed.

Anto. All this I am ready at large to testify,
And prove.

Med. Your Father was a worthy Man,
And you were more unfortunate than safe;
Your proof's fair: Catalina,
I know, will be as steady as your Virtues. Enter a Messenger. The King appears
above.
Is Lerma come?

Mess. He has refused to come the common way,
And is descending by the private Lobby.

D' Alva. That private way is not for Traitors.


Med. Envy him not, my Lords, it is the last time
That his proud humor shall be satisfied;
I do believe he knows not what he does,
But like a tired o'er-hunted Deer,
Treads fatal Paths offered by chance,
And not designed by him. Enter Lerma in a Cardinal's Habit. They cry, Room.
Hark, he comes -- ha -- What Is this?
A Vision?

D' Alva. A Mask, I think, not an Arraignment.


Alca. He has o'er-reach'd us all.


Ler. I see you are amazed, my worthy Lords,
To find your Loves to Virtue made so useless,
As not to practice your admired Justice:
Perhaps you are so fond of that fair Mistress,
As that it mingled Passion with your Actions,
But now you may discharge your managed Witnesses
That stand prepared against the Duke of Lerma,
Lerma the Cardinal cannot here be Tried:
Be not so dull, my Lords, it shows uncharitable,
An envious Malice will be thought the Father
Of such a Sadness: nothing but Ruin please you?

Med. Do You come hear to rail?


Ler. No, to Preach, it is my Office.
I did no sooner touch this Sacred Habit,
But I was filled with Notions.

D' Alva. The Devil helps thee to 'em.


Ler. Still so uncharitable?


D' Alva. Do thou name any thing that is good?


Ler. Ha, ha, ha!


Med. Are you so merry too?


Ler. Why, would you have me whine, and beg from you
A thing you never had; and which I need not?
He that seeks Safety in a States-man's pity,
May as well run a Ship upon sharp Rocks,
And hope a Harbor: nay, if you are so dull,
You Will make me laugh again: it is not ill sport
To see your cruel Aims thus lost and cozened.
Could you believe, I meant to dye so tamely,
And quench the Thirst of your ambitious Envies
With my desired Blood?
This holy Robe tells me, it is my duty,
And I forgive: but sure I may laugh at you.

Med. Impudence, stand off. Let us consult.


They whisper. Ler. Do, whistle out your Brains.
The Council will run mad; they are angry,
I would not take their way to Heaven.
I must preach Patience to 'em: Now for an Oracle.

Med. You know it is in our power to Confine you.


Ler. In that I have as well prevented you:
Here Is the Assignment of a holy Prison
By my own choice, and granted by his Holiness,
In that fair Monastery I raised my self.

Med. Subtle Devil.


Ler. I will not longer trouble you, my Lords,
But leave you now to prey upon your selves.
He that devours the rest, in time may be
A Monster, more o'ergrown than ever I was.
When you are low, and poor, you are all Friends,
And in one fair pretense together join,
While every one conceals his own design.
It is your Countries cause until full grown
In long sought power, then it proves your own.
When you seem good, your Crimes are not the less,
Men have all new Creations by success.
Ambition like a wanton Woman's have,
Invites new Slaves, grown weary of the last.
Mankind each others stories do repeat,
And Man to Man is a succeeding cheat.
So to this fate I leave you, and shall joy,
To see those Crimes you blame, your selves destroy.
May you all sink in fates for me you meant,
And be too dull, your ruins to prevent;
That when you're lost in this ambitious toil,
I in my safe retreat may sit and smile.

Exit. D' Alva. Here Is a strange change: thanks to his Holiness.


Alca. We may blush to be thus cozened.


Med. Methinks the greatness of his Spirit stirred me,
I could almost forgive him. Enter Maria led by Nuns, and Izabella. She
discovers.
What, More Masquerades; How, Maria?

Mar. Where, or to whom, shall I now bend
My almost worn out Knees? Alas the Deity,
From whom I should hope mercy, is not here:
How short are Kings of gods? they are every where.

She weeps. King. Maria on her Knees?
Dare they suffer her to kneel Above, and Descends
To whom I bow?

Mar. How durst you to a King shut up the way?
Should Saints deny a wretched Soul to pray?
Did I your safeties with such care design
For you to take the Life, that gave me mine.

Med. Her sorrow moves.


D' Alva. Her Virtue more; rise, fair Maria.


Mar. Speak, must my Father dye? if it be so,
We'll both together to my Mother go.

D' Alva. Fair virtuous Maid, your Father lives.


Enter the King hastily. Med. Ha! the King.


King. Maria,
Tell me the wretch, that ravished thee from me,
That my Revenge, great as his crime may be.

Mar. When you your Sacred Word to me did give,
My Father by your Mercy still should live,
I stole away that you might be left free
To be as just, as merciful to me:
And durst not else, but unto those above
In Prayers for you, confess my secret Love.

King. Your Father is preserved from danger, free,
And saved himself that had been saved by me.
He in a Holy Robe is now retired,
By danger urged, by Heaven I hope inspired.

Mar. What an excess of Blessings Heaven can give?
Oh happy Father that does more than live!
With joy now to my Sacred Cell I Will go;
I should not weep, but my fond tears will flow.
My Zeal it self has a temptation too,
I scarce shall pray for any thing but you.

King. If you, in leaving me so cruel prove,
Your Prayers will be as useless as your Love.

Mar. Time, Sir, alas, will in a little space,
An Image drawn but faintly, quite deface.
Love, like a shadow, while youth shines, is shown,
But in old Ages darkness, there is none.

King. But all pure Love, like glowworms heatless fires
Lives where it shines, and with that Life expires.
Beauty, like Time on Dials, moves so flow,
That they who always gaze, cannot see it go.

Mar. But I must now leave Heaven, Sir, or you.


King. The choice were easy, were the question true.


Mar. Is not Heaven then the best felicity?


King. But you as well may go to Heaven with me.


Mar. It Is hard, through the World to find the way,
If I talk long, I shall my self betray;
Your Joys I study, and deny my own;
Should Lerma's Daughter share your Bed and Throne;
Farewell, Sir, when you think of this, confess,
I loved you, far beyond my happiness.

Going out. King. Stay yet, and hear this Vow,
Spain's empty Throne,
Unless from you, shall want succession.

Med. Now, by my Sisters blessed Soul, I share
Between her Virtues, and my Kings Despair;
Maria, stay, you must to Duty bow.

D' Alva. You saved us all, preserve your Nation now.


Alca. That Virtue still may flow from you, their Spring.


Bru. And make a Nation happy with their King.


Mar. What should I do?


King. -- Defer your cruel thought,
Till by my grief you are more pity taught.

Mar. This, Sir, is to overcome the easiest way,
My Forces will all lessen by delay,
Yet, Sir, in this I must submit to you,
And Heaven, to teach my heart what is best to do.

King. Till then --
Let all that love me, in my troubles join,
And let their griefs, Allegiance pay to mine.
Let not a smile upon a Face be seen,
Till fair Maria yields to be my Queen.

Epilogue
Spoken by Mrs Ellen.
MUch injured Gentlemen, may you now please,
You true Committee of such Grievances,
Kindly to hear me now, and I will show it,
We have been all ill used, by this days Poet.
It Is our joint Cause; I know you in your hearts
Hate serious Plays, as I do serious Parts,
To trouble us with Thoughts and State-designs,
A melancholy Plot tied with strong Lines,
I had not the least Part to day you see,
Troth, he has neither writ for you, nor me;
You are not hard to please; though a Poet scarce
Can make a Play, yet he might make a Farce,
With small ridiculous things to stuff it full,
And make you pay to laugh, not to be dull.
Henceforth, against all sad and grave intregues,
We'll make Offensive, and Defensive Leagues;
And for all those that dare write Tragedy,
We'll make a Law, with a huge Penalty;
And yet few Poets so much Wealth possess,
Or Wit, where you might levy a Distress;
Let the grave Poets then trouble but few,
Write Elegies on Men, which few Men knew,
And few perhaps will read; or let 'em write
Rhimes for the Bell-man, to be spoke at night.
This Poet may be pardoned, lest it be said
You did condemn before the Law was made;
I mean, if's Play be good, I tell you True,
He thinks it is, but pray now, What think you?
FINIS.

