A TREATISE OF Delighting IN GOD: From PSALM. xxxvij. 4. Delight thy self also
in the Lord, and he shall give thee the Desires of thine heart.

In Two Parts.

By John How, M. A. sometime Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxon.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, for Sa. Gellibrand, at the Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1674.

To my much valued Friends, The Magistrates and other Inhabitants of
Great-Torrington in Devon, with the several Worthy and Religious Persons and
Families of my acquaintance in those Parts.
IT is likely that the Title of the following Treatise will put many of you (my
dearly esteemed Friends) in mind, that sundry Sermons were preached twenty
years ago among you upon this Subject. I had it indeed in design, to have given
you some abstract of those Sermons; But searching among my Papers, could find
none but so imperfect and broken Memorials as would be of little use for that
purpose. And yet being desirous to present you with somewhat that might both be
a testimony of my affection, and an advantage to you: And knowing this Subject
was grateful to many, and affords what may be useful to all of you; I have for
your sakes, applied my self to a re-consideration of it. Few passages or
expressions, probably, will occur to you that you heard before; yet you will
find the substance of the Doctrine the same: As from so plain a Text, it could
not well but be, whosoever should have had the handling of it. The First Part
is even altogether new, except the introductive suppositions in the beginning.
Nor do I remember I then had more than one Discourse to you on that Subject,
before the practical application of it. The other Part contains many things
formerly delivered to you, though perhaps not in the same order, much less in
the same words, whereto the short Notes in my hands could no way enable me.

The matter here treated of, is the very Substance of Religion; The first and
the last; The root and the flower; Both the basis and foundation, and the top
and perfection of Practical Godliness; And which runs through the whole of it.
Nor knew I therefore what to present you with, that could have in it a fitter
mixture and temperament of what might be both useful and pleasant to you.

As there is therefore no need, so nor do I desire you should receive the
matter here discoursed of, merely for my sake; there being so great reason, it
should be chiefly acceptable on higher accounts. I do very well understand your
affection to me; and could easily be copious in the expression of mine to you,
if I would open that Sluice: But I do herein resolvedly, and upon consideration
restrain my self; Apprehending, that in some cases (and I may suppose it
possible that in our case) a gradual mortification ought to be endeavored of
such affection as is often between those so related as you and I have been.
Which is no harder supposition, than that such affection may be excessive and
swell beyond due bounds: So it would, if it should be accompanied with
impatient resentments toward any Providence or Instrument, whereby it finds it
self crossed, or from whence it meets with what is ungrateful to it: If it
prove turbulent and disquieting to them in whom it is, or any others: Or if it
occasion a looking back with distempered lingerings after such former things as
could be but means to our great End* with the neglect of looking forward to
that End it self still before us. Far be it from me, to aim at the keeping any
thing alive that ought to dye; that is, in that degree wherein it ought so to
do.

But our mutual affection will be both innocent and useful, if it be suitable to
mortal objects, and to persons not expecting the converse we have had together
any more in this world. If also in the mean time it preserve to us a mutual
interest in each others prayers. If it dispose us to such acts and
apprehensions of kindness as our present circumstances can admit. And if,
particularly, as it has moved me to undertake, it may contribute any thing to
your acceptance of this small labor, which is now designed for you. The
subject and substance whereof, as they are none of mine, so they ought to be
welcome to you, for their own sake, and His who is the prime Author, though
they were recommended to you by the hand of a stranger, or one whose face you
never saw.

They aim at the promoting of the same End which the course of my poor labors
among you did, (as He that knows all things knows), The serious practice of
the great things of Religion, which are known and least liable to question;
without designing to engage you to or against any party of them that differ
about circumstantial matters. They tend to let you see, that Formality in any
way of Religion, unaccompanied with Life, will not serve your turn, (as it will
no man's); Than which, there is nothing more empty, sapless, and void both of
profit and delight.

I have reflected and considered with some satisfaction, that this has been my
way and the temper of my mind among you. Great reason I have to repent, that I
have not with greater earnestness pressed upon you the known and important things
wherein serious Christians do generally agree: But I repent not I have been so
little engaged in the hot contests of our age, about the things wherein they
differ. For, as I pretend to little light in these things (whence I could not
have much confidence to fortify me unto such an undertaking); so I must
profess to have little inclination to contend about matters of that kind.

Nor yet am I indifferent as to those smaller things, that I cannot discern to
be in their own nature so. But though I cannot avoid to think that course right
which I have deliberately chosen therein, I do yet esteem that but a small
thing upon which to ground an opinion of my excelling them that think
otherwise, as if I knew more than they. For I have often recounted thus
seriously with my self, That of every differing Party (in those circumstantial
matters) I do particularly know some persons by whom I find my self much
excelled in far greater things than is the matter of that difference. I cannot
('it is true) thereupon say and think every thing that they do; which is
impossible, since they differ from one another as well as me. And I understand
well, there are other Measures of Truth than this or that excellent Persons
Opinion: But I thereupon reckon I have little reason to be conceited of any
advantage I have of such in point of knowledge, (even as little as he should
have, that can Sing, or Play well on a Lute, of him that knows how to Command
Armies, or Govern a Kingdom); And can with the less confidence differ from
them, or contend with them. Being thereby, though I cannot find that I err in
these matters, constrained to have some suspicion lest I do; and to admit it
possible enough, That some of them who differ from me, having much more light
in greater matters, may have so in these also. Besides, that I most seriously
think, Humility, Charity and Patience, would more contribute to the composing
of these lesser Differences, or to the good estate of the Christian Interest
under them, than the most fervent Disputes and Contestations. I have upon such
considerations little concerned my self in contending for one way or another,
while I was among you; or in censuring such as have differed from me, in such
Notions and Practices as might consist with our common great End; or as
imported not manifest hostility thereto. Contenting my self to follow the
course that to my (preponderating) judgment seemed best, without stepping out
of my way to justle others.

But I cannot be so patient of their practical disagreement, (not only with all
serious Christians, but even their own Judgments and Consciences also), who
have no Delight in God, and who take no pleasure in the very substance of
Religion.

I have been grieved to observe, That the case has too apparently seemed so,
with some among you: Some have been openly profane and dissolute, and expressed
more Contempt of God (which you know was often insisted on the one part of the
day From Psalm. 10. 13.
, when I had this subject in hand the other) than Delight in him. I know not
how the case may be altered with such since I left you; or what blessing may
have followed the endeavors of any other hand: Death I am sure will be making
alterations, as I have heard it has. If these lines may be beforehand with it,
may they be effectually monitory to any such that yet survive! That however
this or that external from of godliness may consist with your everlasting
well-being, real ungodliness and the denial of the power never can; which power
stands in nothing more than in love to God, or delight in him. Therefore
seriously bethink your selves, Do you delight in God or no? If you do, methinks
you should have some perception of it. Surely if you delight in a friend, or
some other outward comfort, you can perceive it. But if you do not, What do you
think alienation from the life of God will come to at last? It is time for you
to pray, and cry, and strive earnestly for a renewed heart. And if any of you
do in some degree find this yet many degrees are still lacking. You cannot
delight in God, but upon that apprehension as will give you to see, you do it
not enough: Therefore reach forth to what is still before. I bow my knees for
you all that a living delightful Religion may flourish in your hearts and
families, in the stead of those dry, withered things, worldliness, formality,
and strife about trifles. Which will make Torrington an Heph-zibah, a place to
be delighted in; your Country a pleasant Region: And (if he may but hear of it)
add not a little to the satisfaction and delight of

Antrim, Sept. 1. 1674. Your affectionate Servant in Christ, who most seriously
desires your true prosperity, John How.

IF there be any thing of mistake, or defectiveness, found in this Scheme; let
it not be charged upon the accurate Author, who lives at a very great distance
from the press, and knows nothing of it: but upon one who was willing to help
the Reader, by giving him a short View of this Excellent Work, which for the
matter, contrivance, spirit and manly Eloquence of it, may commend it self
(above the vulgar estimate) unto the ingenuous; who upon a distinct reading of
it all through with seriousness, cannot but desire a review, and be glad easily
to find out the Page where some remarkable thing did more especially affect his
heart, that he may refresh himself again and again with it. Others may perhaps
from a glance at the sweetness and variety of these Contents, be invited to
feed heartily upon the Book it self; Which if they do, no doubt but they will
experimentally attest it to be in its proportion very agreeable to the Subject
it treats upon, truly Delectable.

Of Delighting in God, Two Parts; Concerning the
I. Import, or meaning of it, Page 1. 1. Delectible Object, in an Absolute
Relative consideration. 5

1. Absolute ibid. 2. Relative, as 1. Lord to be obeyed. ibid. 2. Portion to be
enjoyed sufficient. communicable 10

To state the Communicable Delectable Good with more advantage premise 1. That
delightful enjoyment of God, supposes some Communication from God. 12 2.
However God himself is enjoyed, yet this Communication is also a sort of
mediate object of this real Delight, suited to the new-born-creature's wants of
further knowledge, likeness, and assurance of his Love 13
Hence Divine Communication to regenerate Souls contains in it, 1. An inwardly
enlightening revelation of God himself to them, 19 Which exceeds the common
appearances to all, in that it is 1. Attributed to the Spirit, 22 2. Spoken as
a reward of their love, 23
This exceeding common light may have these characters 1. It is much more
distinct and clear, 24 both as to the beauty, and tendency 26 of Truths. 27


2. More powerfully assuring, 32 in respect of matter revealed. manner of
revelation, vigor it carries with it, design of it,

2. A transforming impression of his Image, 43 including the removal of such
dispositions as are corrupt, 50 setlement of such as are gracious, ibid.
rectifying the Soul toward God himself as the end, 51 Christ as the means, 52
men, 72 themselves, 72 this and the other world, 86
The Characters of this Divine Communication are, 1. Generative, 93 2.
Nutritive, ibid. 3. Sanative, 94 4. Corroborative, ibid.
From not-knowing or not-considering this way of enjoying God, arises a
twofold mistake, 97 viz. 1. That some have thought they have enjoyed God when
they have not. 2. That others have thought they have not enjoyed God when they
have.
Yet some Doubts upon this Discourse are to be removed, viz. D. 1. Does not
this bring us to delight in our selves? A. 1. As such holy dispositions are not
God, so not our selves: 98 2. Yet they have more affinity with God than us. 100
3. Nor said, nor meant, our delight is here to terminate. ibid. 4. We enjoy a
friend without partaking his essence. ibid. D. 2. But how can this delighting
in God (communicating himself) be our duty? 101 A. This will be cleared in
treating of actual delighting in God. ibid. D. 3. But where is this temper of
spirit to be found? or how can I delight in that I question whether I have or
no? ibid. A. 1. They who really have not this communication cannot delight in
it, but in hope. 102 2. Somewhat else than delight belongs to their states.
ibid. 3. Such who really have it, have that which is delectable in it self.
ibid.
3. A manifestation of Gods love to the Soul in particular. 103 Not any
Enthusiastical assurance. ibid. Nor that which God rarely does. 105 Nor that he
ever says any thing in this matter by his Spirit to the hearts of men,
repugnant to what the same Spirit has said in his Word. 107 Nor is it his
usual way to do it immediately. 110 But if the Spirit do it as a co-witness,
and but mediately, 1. It is no small thing to be ascertained of Gods love.
ibid. 2. It is not less than if he testified immediately. ibid. 3. Yea it does
more advantageously propose the same thing to us. 111
Whichsoever way the Spirit does manifest Gods love, it is not to be doubted,
but that, 1. There is such a thing in it self very necessary, to be attained
and sought after: And, 2. That it is highly delectable when he does vouchsafe
it. 113 1. If we consider the matter, the Love of God. 119 2. The nature and
kind of the manifestation. 124

as being in the general, made by himself. 125 particular, most bright and
lightsom. immediate in a sort, facile. efficacious.

Yet to be understood with Caution,
viz. 1. Not simply necessary to a Christian as a Christian. 126 2. God deals
herein with great variety. 127 3. It Is to be sought with much resignation.
ibid. 4. To be less esteemed than heart-rectifying communication. ibid. 5. Nor
think God is not otherwise to be enjoyed. ibid. 6. Nor to place the sum of
Religion here. 128. 7. Nor to reckon it the first thing in minding Religion.
ibid. 8. Yet renewed Christians wanting it, should reckon it much. 9. However
the necessary degree, not to think raptures withheld penally. 131 10. They who
have transports, should take heed they despise not those who have them not in
the same kind. 134
2. The Delight it self to be taken in the Delectable object. 135
This (1) in General, is essential to Love, and imports well-pleasedness. 136
But because Love in the present state is but in a tendency to perfection,
Desire that it might be so to our selves and others takes place. 138 Delight
being Love in Motion; Desire, Love in Rest. 139 (2) In Special, which is here
placed upon God. 141 About which consider, 1. What it is we are called to. 142
Here distinguish Humane delight into merely natural, in man's corrupt state; and
Holy, the subject of the present Discourse, as suited to God the blessed Object.
This Holy delight is twofold, according to the consideration of the object in
the communication of light 144 and operative influence.

So Delight is either mental, understood. or real, felt.
And the Delight taken in God, is either more Open and explicit, more
directly. Latent, implicit and unobserved, rather collaterally. 145
The former is contemplative, as of the Sight; the latter spiritually
sensitive, as of the Taste; that of spiritual reason, this of spiritual sense.
146 1. Of the latter, Delight from spiritual sensation, being a relish of
sweetness in the holy quickening communications of God to it, more principally
in his spiritually infant state 148 So under Delighting in God thus taken,
Christians are called to the keeping of their Souls open to Divine influences
and communications, thirsting after them, praying and waiting for them, and
endeavoring to improve them. 149 Delighting in this notion imports then two
things, 1. Applying our selves, by help of God communicating influences, to
these things wherein the matter of delight lies. 151 2. Reflecting upon the
things themselves that are so delightful.
Obj. But so we shall bring our whole Religion within the compass of this one
thing? Ans. 1. It can only be said there is a delight adhering thereto. 152 2.
All the things of Religion are truly delectable. 153 3. What fault, that
delight runs through Religion? 154 4. What absurdity the several acts of
Religion should be comprehended under Delight in God?
2. Explicit Delight in God may be considered, as to its 1. Nature, which is
the rest of the Soul in God, by a satisfiedness of will in him, as the best and
most excellent Good. 155 Which supposes, 1. A knowledge of him. 156 2. Actual
thoughts of him. 157 3. A pleasedness with the first view of him. 4. A desire
of what is due to him, or wanted from him. 5. Satisfaction and repose it self,
so far as desire is satisfied, work as our love to him, either for himself, or
our selves. 158

6. A stirring up of our selves to heighten our delight. 159
2. Modification, manner or measure of this delight in God, in respect of the
Excellency, highest delight simply and comparatively, 160 Permanency, suitable
to the object. 162


2. How it is we are called to it. 163 And that is according to what it is in it
self, both As 1. A Privilege, by Gracious Invitation. 164 2. A Duty, by way of
Authoritative Command; It is a great piece of Homage. 165
Therefore we should be well informed, 1. That we are to delight in him
supreamly. 169 2. That we continue therein. 170

II. Practice or Exercise of Delight in God. 173 Both as, 1. Adhaerent to the
other Duties of Religion, and so treat of the exercise of Religion as
delightful. 175 Wherein, 1. We are not to rest in or practice a Religion which
is not naturally and in it self delightful. 176 Hence more distinctly is
showed, 1. What that Religion is, which is wholly in it self undelightful.
Taking two Cautions, 1. That even such Religion as is true and living, and
consequently in it self delightful, yet may by accident sometimes not appear or
be thought so. 177 2. That a dead Religion may be thought delightful, through
the ill temper of the subject.
And premising a twofold General Rule, viz. 1. Such Delight which is taken in
any thing not answering the end to which it serves. 178 2. Such as is
accompanied with a real hurt greater than the Delight can countervail.
So then that Religion is undelightful, i.e. not chiefly delightful. 1. Which
consists wholly in revolving in one's mind the notions that belong to Religion,
without either the experience or the design and expectation of having the heart
and conversation formed according to them. 180 2. Which too many place in some
peculiar opinions, that are either false and contrary to Religion, or doubtful
and cumbersom to it. 182 3. Hitherto may be referred the much less rational
pleasure which is taken by some in the mere dress wherewith such notions and
opinions may be artificially clothed by themselves or others. 184 4. Which is
made all of Talk. 186 5. Which stands all in hearing. 187 6. Which consists
entirely in the external additaments and forms of Worship, which this or that
party have chosen to affix to it. 188
2. How unfit that Religion is to be chosen and rested in. 189
Here let it be considered, 1. That Religion which is in it self undelightful,
is incapable of growth, because a dead thing. 190 2. Nor for the same reason
can it be a lasting thing. 192 3. While it does last it wants the fruit and
profit which should be designed and sought by Religion. 193 4. How foolish a
thing it is, and unworthy of a reasonable creature, to do that in a continued
course and series of actions, wherein we can have no design, and do aim at
nothing. 194 5. What Reflections are likely to be made upon this matter
hereafter, when this short course in this world is run out. 196 6. How
offensive it must be to the jealous God, that any should thus trifle with him
in his holy things, under a show of Religion and devotion to him. 197
2. What Religion is fit to be chosen, i.e. such as is in it self rationally
and justly delectable. 199
Where somewhat is to be offered for, 1. Direction in these Rules following,
viz. 1. Endeavor to have a mind well-instructed in the knowledge of such things
as more directly concern the Practice of a Religious man, as such. 200 To which
are opposite, an excessive 1. Curiosity in speculation of Truths. 201 2.
Scrupulosity about matters of Practice.
2. Be principally intent to have your Soul good and holy, by its own settled
temper and complexion. 203 3. When your spirit is well-inclin'd, know yet that
it needs your continual inspection and care, to cherish good principles and
repress evil ones. 205 4. Be frequent and impartial in the actual exercise of
gracious Principles, or in practicing and doing as they direct. 208 5. Be
confirmed in the apprehension, That Religion is in it self a delightful thing,
even universally and in the whole nature of it. Whereby a double mistake will
be avoided; either 1. That Religion is such a thing to which delight must be
alien and banished from it. Or, 2. If any delight did belong to it at all, it
must be found in the extraordinary assurances of Gods love. 212
6. However all the acts and operations of true and living Religion be in
themselves delightful, yet apply your selves to the doing of them for an higher
reason, and with a greater design than your own delight. 213 7. Yet disallow
not your self to taste and enjoy the pleasure of well-doing, yea and
(secondarily and in due subordination) to design and endeavor that you may do
so. 214 8. Take heed distempers you now discern in your own spirit, you do
neither indulge your self nor despair, but take the proper cause of redress. 218
This must be done in the power of the Holy Ghost. 223 By 1. Dependence and
trust. 2. Subjection and obedient surrender to the spiritual conduct. 226
2. Excitation. And do we need it to a Life of Delight? 228
2. The very act of Delight has its direct exercise upon himself, as a
distinct Duty of it self. 234 About the Practice of which, will be requisite,
1. Expostulation, concerning the omission of it, both with those who are averse
to it, and defective in it. 235 1. With those who are averse to it, alienated
from Delighting in God, for their conviction of the matter of fact, and the
evil of it. 1. That this is the state of their case, tried by the word, to be
apostasy from God, You were sometimes haters of God. 237 1. Are you altered?
What difference do you observe? 237 2. What is your present temper? Do you
dislike thoughts of God? 238
2. That this sin is great and horrid. 245
Considering, There is a taking delight in one thing more than another, and
should be something that is a known good? Is not the blessed God acknowledged
to be the best good? 246 More particularly, 1. How tumultuous and disorderly a
thing this your disaffection to God is? 248 2. What an unnatural wickedness it
is! 3. A comprehensive wickedness, which contains all others in it! 4. A
reproachful contemptuous wickedness to the most high God!
2. With those who are defective in it, and dispute it. 254
Considering, 1. What evil is included in the neglect of this part of holy
Practice, and judge by the measures. 1. How directly opposite is it to the Law
of God? 255 2. To your own Conscience, as agreeing with the Royal Law. 259 3.
Your own experience, which ought to have been instructive to you. 260 4. The
great obligations the Love of God has laid on you. 261 5. What by solemn Law
and astipulation you have bound your selves to. 263 6. Your Relation to God,
which arises from your Covenant. 264 7. Your Profession to own God to be your
supreme delight. 265 8. The tendency of that new Nature within you. 268 9. The
Spirit of Grace, in sleighting his dictates. 270 10. Gods design for magnifying
his Grace. 273
2. What evil is derived into it from its very faulty Causes, as 1. Great
blindness and ignorance of God. 275 2. Much unmindfulness of him. 276 By
thoughts of him, 1. Slight and transient. 2. Low and mean. 277 3. Hard and full
of censure. 278 4. Few and unwonted. 280

3. Much carnality. 4. Downright aversion to him. 281
3. What evils follow upon this neglect, as natural consequents. 283
2. Invitation thereunto; as a kind of manuduction. 287 Q. But how shall we go
about it? A. Take some plain Prescriptions. To those, 1. Less disposed, 1. It
is necessary that you deliberately and resolvedly design the thing it self. 288
2. Consider your present state Godward. 290 3. Yet do not think it unalterable.
4. Acquaint your self with the way and terms upon which his Gospel declares him
reconcilable. 291 5. Make request to him, that he would draw you into that
union with his Son, unto whom none can come but who are drawn by himself. 292
6. Accepting Christ, accept with humble reverence* thankfulness and admiration,
the blessed God to be thy God. 293
2. More disposed, or in a nearer capacity, yet are grown strange. 294 1. Make
a stand and bethink your selves. 295 2. Represent to your selves the greatness
of the fault. 296 3. Return to him with weeping and supplication. 297 4. Yet
apprehend you are before a Mercy Seat. 298 5. Most earnestly seek and crave a
better and more fixed temper of spirit. 300 6. Let there be a solemn
recognition and renewal of your engagement, and devoting of your self to God.
304
3. Desirous of direction how to proceed and improve in this holy Exercise. 305
1. Endeavor to get a temper of mind actually more spiritual. 305 2. Endeavor
your knowledge of God may be more distinct. 315 3. Employ your knowledge in
frequent, solemn thinking of him. 322 Here more particularly, 1. Set your
selves at chosen times to think on God. 325 2. Think often of him amidst your
other affairs. 326
4. Look often to him as absolutely considered in himself. 329 5. Take heed of
denying your own interest in God, as a good suitable to you, to have any place
in your delight. 344 6. Take heed of grosser transgressions, which will
interrupt the pleasant intercourse both on Gods part and yours. 349 7. Cherish
the great Grace of Humility. 351 8. Reckon upon an eternal abode in that
presence where there is fullness of joy for ever.
3. Excitation to it. 355 Considering 1. The Grace breathing in these words
[Delight thy self also in the Lord]. 355 2. The thing desired, [And he shall
give thee the Desires of thine heart]. viz. 357
Either 1: Spiritual good things; so delight in God is satisfaction it self of
such desire. Or, 358 2. External, of an inferior kind, so far satisfying of
them.
It does either 1. Moderate them, and dispose to acquiescence, if the good be
withheld. 359 2. Add a satisfying sweetness to the enjoyment, if it be granted.
363 3. Deliver from the torment of unsatisfied Desire. 364


A TREATISE OF Delighting in GOD: From PSALM. 37. 4. Delight thy self also in
the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.
PART I.
Showing the Import of this Precept.
THIS Psalm, by the Contents of it, seems to suppose,

An afflicted state of good men, by the oppression of such as were (in that and
other respects) very wicked.

The prosperity of these wicked ones in their oppressive course.

An aptness in the oppressed to impatience under the evils they suffered.

A disposition to behold, with a lingering and an envious eye, the good things
which their oppressors enjoyed, and themselves wanted.

Hence the composure of it is such as might be most agreeable to these
suppositions, and serviceable to the fortifying of the Righteous against the
sin and trouble which such a state of things might prove the occasion of unto
them.

This Verse has a more direct aspect on the last of these cases, or on this
last mentioned thing considerable in the case, of Upright men suffering under
the oppression of violent and prosperous wickedness, viz. That they might
hereupon be apt both to covet and envy the worldly delights of their enemies;
To be desirous of their dainties, and grudg they should be theirs, who, they
knew, deserved worse things: And while themselves also felt the pressure of
worse, which at their hands they deserved not.

What is here offered to the consideration of the sufferers, tends aptly to
allay their discontent, to check and repress their inordinate desire toward
inferior things; or to divert and turn it another way; as in case of bleeding
to excess and danger, the way is to open a Vein, and stop the course of that
profusion by altering it.

As if it had been said, You have no such cause to look with displeasure or
immoderate desire upon their delicacies; You may have better, Better belong to
you, and invite you, The Lord himself is your portion; It becomes both your
state and spirit, to apply your selves to an holy delight in him; To let your
Souls loose, and set them at liberty, to satiate themselves, and feed unto
fullness upon those undefiled and satisfying pleasures unto which you have a
right; and in which you will find the loss and want of their meaner enjoyments
abundantly made up unto you. You have your natural desires and cravings as well
as other men; and those may be too apt to exceed their just bounds and
measures; But if you take this course, they will soon become sober and
moderate, such as will be satisfied with what is competent, with an indifferent
allowance of the good things of this earth. And toward the Lord, let them be
as vast and large as can be supposed, they can never be larger than the Rule
will allow; nor than the object will satisfy. The direction and obligation of
the former being indeed proportioned to the immense and boundless fullness of
the latter.

We need not operously inquire what sort of persons this direction is given
unto. It is plain, that it is the common duty of all to delight in God. But it
cannot be the immediate duty of all. Men that know not God, and are enemies to
him, have somewhat else to do first. They to whom the Precept is directly
meant, are the regenerate (the righteous and the upright, as the Psalm it self
does plainly design them) or his own people.

The most profitable way of considering these words, will be chiefly to insist
on the direction given in the former part of the Verse. And then to show
toward the close, how the event promised in the latter part, will not only by
virtue of the Promise, but even naturally follow thereupon.

The Direction in the former part, gives us a plain signification of Gods good
pleasure, that he himself would be the great object of his peoples delight. Or,
it is his will, that they principally delight themselves in him.

Our discourse upon this Subject will fall naturally into two parts:

The Former Latter
whereof will concern the Import Practice
of the enjoined Delighting in God.

(Under which latter, what will be said of the latter part of the Verse will
fitly fall in).

That we may more distinctly open the import and meaning of Delighting in God;
It will be necessary that we treat, 1. Of the Delectable Object. 2. Of the
Delight to be taken therein.


some good, or somewhat so conceived of; with the addition of being apprehended
some way present. Here it is the chief and best good. The highest and most
perfect excellency. Which goodness and excellency considered as residing in
God, gives us a twofold notion or view of the object, whereupon this delight
may have it is exercise.

Absolute. Relative.
1. God may be looked upon in an absolute consideration, as he is in himself the
best and most excellent Being; wherein we behold the concurrence of all
perfections; The most amiable and beauteous excellencies, to an intellectual
eye, that it can have any apprehension of.

2. In a Relative, viz. As his Goodness and Excellency are considered, not
merely as they are in himself, but also as having someway an aspect on his
creatures. For considering him as in himself the most excellent Being; If here
we give our thoughts liberty of exercising themselves, we shall soon find, that
hereupon he must be considered also as the first Being, the Original and Author
of all other Beings; Otherwise he were not the most excellent.

From whence we will see, Relation does arise between him and his creatures
that have there Being from him.

And besides the general relations which he bears to them all, as the common
Maker, Sustainer, and Disposer of them; Observing that there are some which by
their reasonable natures, are capable of Government by him (in the proper
sense, viz. by a Law) and of blessedness in him.

To these we consider him as standing in a twofold reference, in both which we
are to eye and act toward him, viz. As a Lord, to be obeyed. Portion, to be
enjoyed.


And have most delectable excellencies to take notice of in him (that require
we should sutably comport with them), answerable peculiarly to each of these
considerations, in respect whereof we are to look upon him;

1. As the most excellent Lord; most delectably excellent (we take not here
that title so strictly, as to intend by it mere propriety or dominion; But as
to ordinary apprehension it is more commonly understood to signify also
governing Power, or Authority founded in the other) whom we cannot but esteem
worthy of all possible honor and Glory; that every knee bow to him, and every
tongue confess to him, that universal homage, subjection and adoration be given
him for ever.

2. As the most excellent Portion, in whom all things that may render him such
do concur and meet together; all desirable and imaginable riches and fullness,
together with large bounty, flowing goodness every way correspondent to the
wants and cravings of indigent and thirsty Souls.

The former notion of him intimates to us our obligation of duty to him: The
latter prompts to an expectation of benefit from him.

But now because by the apostasy we have injured his right in us, as our Lord;
forfeited our own right in him, as our portion; and lost our immediate capacity
or disposition both to serve and enjoy him: This great breach between him and
us was not otherwise to be made up but by a Mediator. Unto which office and
undertaking, his own Son, incarnate, the Word made Flesh (being only fit) was
designed. By him, dealing between both the distanced Parties, satisfying the
Justice of God, overcoming the enmity of man, the difference (so far as the
efficacy of his Mediation does extend) is composed. And to the reconciled, God
becomes again their acknowledged both Lord and Portion. His right is
vindicated, theirs is restored; and both are established upon new grounds,
added to those upon which they stood before. And so, as that now our actings
toward God, and expectations from him, must be through the Mediator.

Whereupon this object of our delight, considered relatively unto us, is
entirely God in Christ, -- Being reconciled, -- We joy in God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 10 11.
by whom etc.

In these several ways that have been thus briefly mentioned, may God come
under our consideration. Nor are they, any of them, unapplicable or impertinent
to our purpose, when we would design him the object of our delight. Yea, and
surely God considered each of these ways ought to be looked on by us, as a most
delectable object.

For it is pleasant to contemplate him, even most absolutely considered, as the
most excellent Being, when we behold his glorious excellencies in themselves;
that is (not with the denial, but) without the actual present consideration of
any advantage that may redound to us from them. As we are apt to find our
selves pleased and gratified in viewing an excellent object (suppose a stately
Edifice, or beautiful Flower), from which we expect no other benefit.

Again, If we consider him relatively, 1. In the former capacity of a Lord, it
is grateful to behold him decked with Majesty, arrayed in Glory, clothed with
Righteosness, armed with Power, shining in Holiness, and guiding himself with
Wisdom and Counsel in all his administrations. Yea, and it is delightful to
obey him; while we are most fully satisfied of his unexceptionable right to
command us. For there is a great pleasure naturally arising to a well-tempered
spirit, from the apprehended congruity or fitness of things, as that he should
command and that we should obey. His right, and our obligation, being so
undoubtedly clear and great. Especially when we also consider what he commands,
and find it is no hard bondage; that they are not grievous commands which he
requires we be subject to; but such, in the keeping whereof there is great
reward; And that his ways are all pleasantness and peace.

And being considered as a Portion, the matter is plain, That so rich and
abounding fullness, where also there is so communicative an inclination, cannot
but recommend him a most satisfying object of delight.

And thus we are more principally to consider him, viz. rather relatively than
absolutely; and that relatedness (which the state of the case requires) as now
anew settled in Christ. And so, though it be very delightful to look upon him,
as one that may, and is ready to become related to us, (as he is to any that
will consent and agree with him upon the Mediators terms): Yet it adds
unspeakably to the pleasantness of this object, when we can reflect upon such
characters in our selves, as from whence we may regularly conclude, that he is
actually thus related unto us. That is, that we have consented; That our
relation to him immediately arises from the Covenant of life and peace; That he
has entered into Covenant with us, and so we are become his.

It is pleasant thus to behold and serve him as [our] Lord. How great is the
emphasis of these words, I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus [my Lord!]. To consider not only how well he deserves
the acknowledgments and subjection of all; But also to find our selves under
the chosen and gentle bonds of perpetual service, and devotedness to him, is
c^rtainly matter of very high delight and pleasure.

But how infinitely delightful is it, to view and enjoy him as [our] Portion!

And this seems very pertinent to the design of this Scripture; which aiming to
recall and draw in the hearts of godly Persons from too earnest, and from
envious lingerings after the enjoyments of worldly men (their enemies and
oppressors), propounds what may be an overbalance to the (imagined) felicity
of their state; And wherein they should more than equal them in point of
enjoyment.

And should we single out this, as the object to be considered, God as a
portion. That it might be more distinctly represented, we should have two
things to take notice of, that would render it most delectable, and such as
wherein holy hearts may acquiesce, and rest with fullest satisfaction.

The Sufficiency Communicableness
of it.

1. The Sufficiency of it. Which cannot but be every way complete and full; it
being the all-comprehensive good, which is this portion. God all-Sufficient.

The most eminent and known Attributes of his Being; wherein by any issues of
them they can be communicated, having an ingrediency and concurrence to the
happiness of his people therein.

2. The Communicableness thereof. Which proceeds from his bounty, more
peculiarly, and his gracious inclination to do good, and make his boundless
fullness overflow to the replenishing of thirsty longing Souls, whom first it
had allured and caused so to long. But though the scope and order of the
discourse in this Psalm, did not directly seem to import more than a design of
calling off the persons here spoken to, from one sort of enjoyment to another,
from a meaner and more empty to a better: Yet it is to be considered, that true
(and the best) enjoyment, cannot be unaccompanied with duty; and that God is
not otherwise to be enjoyed, than as he is obeyed, nor indeed are the notions
of him, as a Lord to be obeyed, and as a good to be enjoyed, entirely distinct;
but are interwoven, and do run into one another. We obey him, even in enjoying
him; It being part of our enjoined duty, to set our hearts upon him, as our
best and highest good. And we enjoy him in obeying him. The advantage and
benefit of his government, being a real and most momentous part of that good
which we enjoy from him, and in him. He is our Benefactor even as he is our
Ruler; and is therein our Ruler, as he proposes to us benefits, which he
thereby binds us to accept; for even his invitations and offers, are also laws
and formal bonds of duty upon us.

Yea, and even the act of delight it self pitched upon him, is an act of homage,
as there will be occasion hereafter to take notice.

Wherefore it will be fit to steer a larger course, than merely to consider him
as a good commensurate to our partial appetites. Which are apt to prescribe to,
and limit our apprehensions to this or that particular sort of good, and
tincture them with such a notion of delight, as which, if it be not false and
grossly carnal, may yet be much too narrow and unproportionable to the
universal, all-comprehending good: And though we shall not here go beyond the
compass of delectable good; yet as there is no good (truly so called) which is
not in, or from the first goodness; So indeed, nor is there any capable of
being gathered up into that sum which is not delectable.

Nor therefore can the usual distribution of goodness into profitable, honest,
and pleasant, bear a strict test. Only the false relishes of vitiated appetite
in this corrupted state of man, have given ground for it. Otherwise to a mind
and will that is not distempered, the account would be much otherwise. To a
prudent mind, profitable good would be pleasant, even as it is profitable. To a
just and generous mind, honest comely good would be pleasant, even as it is
honest. Nor would there need another distinction, but into the goodness of the
end, which is pleasant for it self, and the goodness of the means, which is
pleasant as it is honestly and decently profitable, (and otherwise it cannot
be) thereunto.

That we may here therefore with the more advantage state the delectable good,
we are now to consider, It will be requisite to promise two things.

1. That all delightful enjoyment of God, supposes some communication from him.
Nothing can delight us, or be enjoyed by us; whereof we do not, some way, or by
some faculty or other, partake somewhat. Either by our external sense,
sensitive appetite, fancy, memory, mind, will; and either in an higher, or
lower degree, for a longer or a shorter time, according as the delight is, for
kind, degree, or continuance which is taken therein. This is plain in it self.
And in the present case therefore of delighting in God or enjoying him, some
communication, or participation there must be one way or other according as the
enjoyment of him is. And as the case with man now is, it is necessary he do
with clearest and the most penetrative light and power, come in upon his mind
and heart, scatter darkness, remove prejudice, abolish former relishes,
transfuse his own sweet savor through the Soul. Proportionably therefore, to
what is to be done, he communicates himself, as the event constantly shows,
with all them that are ever brought to any real enjoyment of him.

For we plainly see, that the same divine communication which being received,
does delight and satisfy, does also procure, that it may be desired and
received; makes its own way, attempers and frames the Soul to it self; and
gives it the sweet relish and savor thereof, wherein God is actually enjoyed.

2. That however God himself, is truly said to be enjoyed or delighted in by
holy Souls; yet this communication is also a sort of mediate object of this
delight or enjoyment. These things being fore-laid, It is now needful to to
inquire somewhat more distinctly, what that communication or communicable good
is, which is the immediate matter of proper spiritual enjoyment unto holy men
in this world. Because many have that phrase of Speech [injoying God] often in
their mouths, that well understand not what they mean by it; Yea even diverse of
them that have real enjoyment of him; Unto whom, though they possibly taste the
thing which they cannot express or form distinct conceptions of; it might be
somewhat their advantage to have it more cleared up to their apprehension, what
it is that they immediately enjoy, when they are said to enjoy God; or by what
he is to be enjoyed?

It is not a mere fancy (as too many profanely think, and are too apt to speak)
that is the thing to be enjoyed. There have been those, who, comparing their
own experience with Gods promises, and precepts (the rule by which he imports
and according whereto men are to expect his gracious influence) were capable of
avowing it, rationally, to be some very substantial thing they have had the
enjoyment of. The sobriety of their spirits, the regularity of their workings,
their gracious composure, the meekness, humility, denial of self, the sensible
refreshing, the mighty strength and vigor which has accompanied such
enjoyments, sufficiently proving to them that they did not hug an empty cloud,
or embrace a shadow, under the name of enjoying God. Such expressions as we
find in the book of Psalms (the 16. and many other) with sundry parts of
Scripture besides, leave us not without Instance: That import nothing like
flashy and flaunting bombast, no appearance of affectation, no pompous show of
vainglory, no semblance of swelling words of vanity, but which discover a most
equal orderly well-poys'd temper of mind, in conjunction with the highest
delight and well-pleasedness in God. That rich and unimitable fullness of living
sense, could not but be from the apprehension of a real somewhat, and that, of
a most excellent nature and kind, whatsoever be the notion, that may be most
fitly* put upon it.

Nor yet is it the mere essence of God which men can be said to enjoy. For that
is not communicated nor communicable. Enjoyment supposes possession. But it
would be a strange Language to say we possess the Essence of God otherwise than
relatively; which is not enough unto actual enjoyment. His mere essential
presence is not enough. That renders him not enjoyed by any, for that is
equally with all and every where; But all cannot be said to enjoy him.

As therefore it is a real, so there must be some special communication, by
which, being received, we are truly said to enjoy him.

A special good it must be, not such as is common to all. For there is a
communication from him that is of that extent, in as much as all live and move
and have there Beings in him and the whole earth is full of his goodness.

This is a Good peculiar to them that are born of God. And suited to the
apprehension and sense of that divine Creature which is so born.

What this Good is, how fully sufficient it is, and how or which way it is
communicable, may be the better understood when we have considered what are the
wants and cravings of this Creature, or of them in whom it is formed and
wrought. For when we have pitched upon the very thing it self, which they most
desire, (and which they can tell is it, when they hear it named, though their
thoughts are not so well formed about it as to give it the right Name before)
we shall then understand it to be both what will be sufficient to Satisfy, and
what may be communicated to that purpose.

But now before that new birth take place in the spirit of man, it wants but
knows not what; craves indeterminately (who will show us any good?) not fixing
upon any particular one that is sufficient and finite, and laboring at once,
under an ignorance of the infinite; together with a disaffection thereunto. Its
wants and cravings are beyond the measure, of all finite good; for suppose it
to have never so large a share, nay could it grasp and ingross the whole of it,
an unsatisfiedness and desire of more would still remain. But that more is
somewhat indeterminate, and merely imaginary. An infinite nothing. An idol of
fancy. A God of its own making. God it must have, but what a one he is it
misapprehends, and wherein it rightly apprehends him likes and loves him not;
will by no means choose, desire, or take complacency in him. So that an
unregenerate soul is, while it is such, necessarily doomed to be miserable. It
cannot be happy in any inferior good, and in the Supreme, it will not.

What the real wants and just cravings of a man's spirit therefore are, is not
to be understood by considering it in that state.

And if the work of the new creature were perfected in it, it would want and
crave no more; But were satisfied fully and at perfect rest. Nor is that state
so known to us as yet.

Therefore they are best to be discerned in the state wherein that work is
begun and hitherto unfinished. In which it therefore desires rightly, and still
continues to desire. A state of intermingled motion and rest; wherein delight
is imperfect, and allayed by the continual mixture of yet-unsatisfy'd desire.
And yet it may be collected what it is that would be Sufficient to satisfy;
because their desire is still determined to one thing, Psalm. 27. 4.
is not vagrant, wanders not after things of another kind, but is intent only
upon more of the same.

Now let it be enquired of such a one what that thing is. We are generally told
there, * One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life to behold the
beauty of the Lord, etc. And it may be many would more shortly tell you it is
God they desire, whence it would only be concluded it is God they aim to enjoy
or delight in. But because this brings us but where we were; Let it be further
enquired, what then is your business with God, or what would you have of him?
It is not, sure, to be God that you expect or seek, or to enjoy God in that
sense wherein he possesses and enjoys himself. No, not by any means. It is then
some communication from God, diverse from what all men have (for that they do
not find apt to satisfy) which they desire and crave. And what is that? It Is
somewhat, as possible to be apprehended, and as distinguishable both from his
incommunicable Being, and his so generally communicated Bounty toward all. As
if the enquiry were, What it is that I desire really to enjoy when I desire to
enjoy a friend? (viz. as the notion of a friend or friendship does most
properly import). That is neither to desire the impossible thing, of possessing
his Being as my own; Nor the unsatisfying thing, the mere partaking some part
of his external goods and wealth; whereof it may be he daily imparts somewhat
to every beggar at at his door. But it is to have his intimate acquaintance,
his counsel and advice, the advantage of improving my self by his converse, and
of conforming my self to his example in his imitable perfections; The
assurances of his faithful constant love and friendship, in reference to all
future emergencies. A friend is really to be enjoyed in such things as these.

And in suchlike is God to be enjoyed also; But with this difference, that
Gods communications are more immediate, more constant, more powerful and
efficacious, more delightful infinitely and satisfying, in respect both of the
good communicated, and the way of communication.

In short then, the wants and desires of a renewed soul, the supply and
satisfaction whereof it seeks from God, would be summed up in these things.

That it may know him more fully, Or have clearer apprehensions of him.

That it may become like to him, and framed more perfectly after his own holy
image.

That it may be ascertained of his love and good will, that he has those
favorable inclinations toward it, which shall certainly infer his doing all
that for it which its real necessities (to be estimated by his infinite Wisdom)
can call for.

These are the things, in kind, which would satisfy it. And answerably to these
we may conceive the communicable good which is the immediate object of their
enjoyment. So that, as God himself is the object which is enjoyed; This is the
object by which, or in respect whereof he is injoyable.

Therefore the divine communication, or that which is communicated from God to
regenerate souls wherein they are to delight themselves, contains in it,

1. An inwardly enlightening revelation of himself to them, that they may know
him more distinctly. This is a part of the one thing, would be so highly
satisfying, and delightful. Joh. 14.
Show us the father and it suffices us. When their desires are toward God
only, it is with this aim in the first place, that they may know him, which is
supposed, when that is given as an encouragement to the pursuit of this
knowledge. Hos. 6.
We shall know if we follow on to know the Lord. As if it had been said; This
is a thing not doubted of but taken for granted, that we would fain know the
Lord; we shall, if we follow on, etc. This is a dictate of pure and primitive
nature to covet the knowledge of our own orignal, him from whom we and all
things sprang. Men are herein become most unnaturally wicked when they like not
to retain God in their knowledge. Romans 1.


The new and divine nature once imparted, that is, primitive nature renewed and
restored to it self, revives the desire of this knowledge. And in compliance
with the present exigencie of the case has this inclination ingrafted into it,
to know him (as he is now only to be comfortably known) viz. 1 Cor. 2.
in the Mediator. I determined to know nothing among you (says S. Paul) but
Jesus Christ, etc. i.e. to glory in, to make show of, to discover my self taken
with no other knowledge than this, or with none so much as this. To which
purpose, he elsewhere professes to count all things loss for the excellency of
this knowledge. Phil. 3.
So vehemently did desire work this way. And proportionably as it is
apprehended desirable, must it be esteemed delightful also. Nor are we here to
think that this desired knowledge was intended finally to terminate in the
Mediator, for that the very notion of Mediator resists. The name Christ is the
proper name of that office, and the desire of knowing him under that name
imports a desire to know him in his office. viz. as one that is to lead us to
God, and restore our acquaintance with him, which was not to be recovered upon
other terms. So that it is ultimately the knowledge of God that is the so much
desired thing, and of Christ, as the way and our conductor to God. That is, the
knowledge of God not absolutely considered alone, (though he is, even so, a very
delectable object (as has been said); But as he is related to us, and from
whom we have great expectations, our all being comprehended in him. It cannot
but be very delightful (answerably to a certain sort of delectation of which we
shall have occasion to speak in its proper place) to have him before our eyes
represented and revealed to us, as the allcomprehending good, and that (in the
way and method whereinto things are now cast) may, at least, become our
portion. He is some way, to be enjoyed even in this view. It Is a thing apt to
infer complacency and delight thus to look upon him. They who place felicity in
contemplation, especially in the contemplation of God, are not besides the
mark; If they do not circumscribe and confine it there, so as to make it stand
in mere eontemplation, or in an idle, and vainly curious view of so glorious an
object, without any further concern about it. They will then be found to speak
very agreeably to the language of holy scripture which so frequently expresses
the blessedness of the other state by seeing God.

And if the act of vision be delicious, The representation of the object must
have proportionable matter of delight in it. It cannot but have so, if we
consider the nature of this representation;

Which, answerably to the sensible want and desire of such as shall be
delighted therewith, must have somewhat more in it than the common appearances
of God which offer themselves equally to the view of all men. Though it is
their own as common fault, that they are destitute of the more grateful and
necessary additions.

That it has more in it, is evident from Gods own way of speaking of it. For
we find that his revealing himself in this delectable way,

1. Is attributed to the spirit. Ephesians. 1. 17.
And as a work to be done by it when it shall be given (supposing it therefore
yet not given and that all have it not) yea that such have it not, in such a
measure as they may have it, unto this purpose; who yet truly have it, in some
measure already; v. 13.
even as a thing peculiar to them from the unbelieving world. For it is prayed
for to such as concerning whom it is said that after they believed (not before)
they were sealed by the spirit of promise, v. 13.
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the father of glory would give v. 17.
it them; and it is mentioned by a name and title proper to the end and purpose
for which it is desired to be given them, viz. as the spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, that end and purpose being immediately expressed in or (as that
particle is some time used) [for] the knowledge of him. v. 38.
The eyes of their understanding being enlightened by it (which are supposed
blind before) for the same purpose. By which prayer it is supposed a
communicable thing; Yea and that these had some way a right to the
communication of it, or that it was a thing proper to their state, fit to be
prayed for, as some way belonging to them, they being in a more immediate
capacity of such revelation than others.

But how incongruous had it been with such solemnity of address to make request
on their behalf for that which they already sufficiently had as a thing common
to all men.

2. It is spoken of as a reward of their former love, Joh. 14. 21
loyalty, and obedience. He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it
is that loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I
will love him, and will manifest my self to him. Therefore is such
manifestation no more to be accounted common, than the love of Christ is and
keeping his commandments.

It is spoken of as given discriminatingly, and the grace of God admired upon
that account. In the next words, v. 22.
Judas says unto him, (not Iscariot, it being well understood how little
covetous he was of, or qualifyed for such manifestations) Lord how is it, that
thou will manifest thy self to us, and not to the world?

What it has more than common light, external or internal, answerable to the
deeply resented wants, and the hearts desires of the regenerate, by which it
becomes so highly pleasant and delectable to them, though it is rather to be
felt than told (as it is hard to describe the very things we have only
immediate sensible perception of) may yet in some degree be understood by such
characters as these.

1. It is much more distinct and clear. They are confused and dark glimmerings
which other men have of the blessed God, so that the light which is in them is
darkness. Mat. 6.
It Is true that an unregenerate person may possibly have clearer acquired
notions of God, and of the things of God, than those may be which are of the
same kind only in some who are regenerate. So that he may, by the advantages he
may have above some of the other, in respect of better natural abilities, more
liberal education, such circumstances of his condition as may more engage him
to study and contemplation and befriend him therein, be capable of finding out
more, of making fuller discoveries, and more evident deductions, and be able to
discourse thence, more rationally and satisfyingly to others, even concerning
God, his nature, attributes and works, than some very pious persons destitute
of those advantages may be able to do. But these though their candle give a
dimmer light, than the others, have the beams of a Sun raying in upon them,
that much outshines the others candle. And though they know not so many things,
nor discern the connexions of things so thoroughly; yet as they do know what is
most necessary to be known, so what they do know, they know better, and with a
more excellent sort of knowledge; proportionably as whatsoever is originally,
and immediately divine, cannot but much excel that which is merely human.

Those do but blunder in the dark, These, in Gods own light do see light. Psalm.
26.
And his light puts a brighter hue and aspect upon the same things, than any
other representation can put upon them. Things are by it represented to the
life, which to others carry with them but a faint and languid appearance; and
are all covered over with nothing else but dark and dusky shadow, so as that
may be hid from the wise and prudent which is revealed to babes. Mat. 11.
How bright and glorious things, are divine wisdom, love, holiness, to an
enlightened mind! which is therefore supposed to have a clearer discovery of
them.

But it may be said; Is there any thing apprehensible concerning these or any
other matters which may not be expressed in some proposition or other. And what
proposition is there which a regenerate person can assent to, but one who is
not regenerate may assent to it also? what definition, so truly expressive of
the natures of these things, can be thought, of unto which a carnal mind may
not give its approbation? what can be said or conceived so fully and truly
tending to describe and clear them up but an unrenewed understanding may have
the representation of the fame truth, so as to give entertainment to it?

It Is answered there are many things, to which somewhat may belong not capable
of description, and whereof we have yet a most certain perception. As the
different relishes of the things we taste. There are no words that will express
those many peculiarities. And as to the present matter; There is somewhat
belonging to the things of God (those for instance that were mentioned, his
wisdom, holiness etc.) besides the Truth of the conceptions that may be formed
about them; which is more clearly apprehensible to a divinely enlightened
understanding than to one that is not so. As,

1. The beauty of those Truths; which it is most delightful to behold, Their
lively sparkling luster, by which they appear so amiable and lovely, to a
well-tempered spirit; as to transport it with pleasure and ravish it from it
self into union with them. There was somewhat else apprehensible no doubt, and
apprehended by them, the inward sentiments of whose souls those words so
defectively served to express, Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods,
who is like thee, glorious in holiness! etc. besides the mere truth of any
propositions that those words can be resolved into. And so in those, O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! etc. And those, God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that, etc. Or those,
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners, whereof I am chief. Or the strains of that
rapturous prayer, -- That he would grant you according to the riches of his
glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man. That Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and grounded in love,
may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height: And to know the love of Christ, that passes knowledge, that
ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.

There is a certain acceptableness in some Truths (necessary to their being
received in the love thereof), which is peculiarly so represented to some, as
that their apprehension is clear and vivid, beyond that of other men; who,
however they have the representation of the same things, yet have not the same
representation; Though, if they be things of necessary and common concernment,
it is (as was said) their own fault that they have it not. And to have yet
clearer apprehensions of this sort, is what the renewed Soul does most
earnestly crave, and would be proportionably delighted with.

2. The tendency of such Truths, is much more clearly conceivable to an holy
Soul, than another; what their scope and aim or aspect is, which way they look,
and what they drive at, or lead to. I mean not what other truth they are
connected with, and would aptly tend to infer; But what design God has upon us
in revealing them, and what impression they ought to make upon us. To the
ignorance or disregard of which tendency and design of Gods revelation, it is
to be attributed, that many have long the same notions of things hovering in
their minds, without ever reflecting with any displeasure upon the so vastly
unsuitable temper of their spirits thereto. They know it may be such things
concerning God, the tendency whereof is to draw their hearts into union with
him, to transform them into his likeness, to inflame them with his love. But
they still remain notwithstanding at the greatest distance, most unsuitable,
averse, coldly affected toward him, yea utterly opposite and disaffected; and
fall not out with themselves upon this account, have no quarrel nor dislike,
take not any distaste at themselves for it. They take no notice of an
incongruity and unfitness in the ill temper of their own spirits; but seem as
if they thought all were very well with them, nothing amiss; and apprehend not
a repugnancy in their habitual dispositions toward God to their notions of him.

For a vicious prejudice blinds their eyes, their corrupt inclinations and
rotten hearts send up a malignant dark and clammy fog and vapor, and cast so
black a cloud upon these bright things, that their tendency and design is not
perceived. That prejudice not being conceived so much against the abstract
notions of the things themselves, (whence they are entertained with less
reluctance) but only against the design and scope of them. Against which
poisonous cloud Gods own glorious revelation directs its beams, dissolves its
gross consistency, scatters its darkness, as to them to whom he by special
grace affords it. Whereupon, observing any remainders of the same distemper in
their spirits (though it be in a considerable degree abated and lessened) they
are ashamed of themselves for it, filled with confusion, yea and indignation;
do loath and abhor, and could even be ready, if it were possible, to run away
from themselves. And what is the reason of this so great difference? Surely
somewhat appears discernible to these in Gods revelation of himself, which to
the other does not. They have then before their eyes a more clear prospect of
the aim and scope of it. Which, so far as they have it, pleases them (for they
like the design well), only they are displeased at themselves, that they
comport no more with it. And as the end therefore aimed at is desirable to
them, and would be delightful (as will be shown in its proper place), so is it
to have that representation immediately offered to the view of their Souls,
which has so apt and comely an aspect thereon, not merely for its own sake,
but for the sake of the end it self.

Wherefore there is somewhat to be apprehended by Gods representation of
himself to the minds of this regenerate people, at least more clearly than by
other men. Whence the work of regenerating or converting them it self, Act. 26.
18.
is expressed by opening their eyes. For the divine communication makes its own
way, and enters at the eye, the Souls seeing faculty, which it does find (as
opening the eyes imports) and not now create: But finding it vitiated, and as
to any right seeing of God, shut and closed up, it heals, opens, and restores
it as it enters. It is expressed, By turning them from darkness, to light; And
from the power of Satan, (the Prince of that Darkness, the God of this World;
who had blinded their eyes --) unto God. Which (because they cannot turn and
move toward God blindfold, and that this opening their eyes is in order to
their turning to God) implies, that their eyes were so distempered, blinded,
and sealed up, chiefly toward him; So that, though they could see other
things, him they could not see; but he was invisible to their intellectual, as
well as their bodily eyes. Hence also is that understanding said to be given
(i.e. as rectified and renewed) by which we know God; which implies it to be
(wherein it is now given) somewhat superadded to the whole natural being and
powers of the human Soul, as in its present corrupted state, -- He has given
us an understanding to know him that is true. 1 John 5. 20.
And that given rectitude of understanding is is by such a communication from
God, as has that aptitude and power in it to infer so happy a change. The same
renewing-work is also said to be a calling of men out of darkness into his
marvelouslight. 1 Pet. 2.
As if they were brought by it into a new world, wherein they found themselves
beset with wonders, and all things were surprising to them. To which purpose is
that prayer of the Psalmist (out of a just consciousness, that this work was
not perfect in him, but might yet admit great additional degrees), Psalm. 119.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. He
supposed many undiscovered wonders, which more open eyes might yet behold in
that external revelation of Gods mind, which was then afforded (and which was
wont in those days to go under the name of his Law, though it contained
Histories, Prophecies, and Promises, as well as Precepts) although he was no
stranger to those records, nor little insighted into them, he yet apprehended a
need of more light and better eyes; which he therefore desires. Not that God
would cause a new revelation to be written, (though that he vouchsafed to do,
and partly by himself, but that he might learn more out of that already extant;
and that the wonderful things contained in it might be made more clear to him.
Nor can we suppose him, herein, to desire to be gratified and delighted by the
communication of an incommunicable thing.

2. It is more powerfully assuring, and such as is apt to beget a more certain
operative belief of the things revealed. That is, being added to the means of
Faith men may be supposed to have had before, it adds much to their assurance
of the same things, so as to make it efficacious upon their spirits. And as
well cures the doubtfulness, irresolution, and way-wardness of their minds and
hearts, as the confusion and darkness of them.

It is very possible those things may be distinctly understood, which the more
we understand, the more we disbeleive them through their apprehended
inconsistency with themselves or some certain truth. The delectable things of
God, his own discovery procures at once, by one and the same radiation of
light, both to be clearly understood, and effectually believed. Others have the
word of faith without the spirit of faith. The faith therefore which they have
is a carcass; Not a weak only (which imports but diminished power) but a dead
thing. And which has no power at all to determine the soul and compose it to
that delightful rest which such things, duly believed, would certainly infer.
The most delectable truths of God and such as most directly tend (in this
apostate lapsed state of man) to give us the sweet and refreshing relishes of a
just and rational joy and pleasure, are such as are contained in the Gospel of
Christ. The things that concern our reconciliation, friendship and communion
with God in him. And which are therefore wholly of immediately divine and
supernatural revelation, and to be received by faith. Therefore one Apostle
prays for some they might be filled with joy and peace [in believing]. Romans
15. 3.
And another says of others that [believing] they rejoiced with joy unspeakable
and full of 1 Pet. 1. 8.
glory. The external Revelation in the Gospel is an apt means, to beget that
Faith (which it is said comes by hearing): But the very notion of means
importing what intervenes to the effect, between that and the Principal Agent,
necessarily supposes such an Agent. And that what is only means, cannot work
the effect alone. That Agent, viz. (in this case) God himself, or the Spirit,
besides the means which he uses, and makes effectual, must have his own
influence whereby he makes them so. If a pen be a fit means or instrument to
write with, it does not therefore follow, that it can write alone, without an
hand to move and guide it, in order whereto a motive and directive influence is
imparted. In the present case, The influence is the inward enlightening
overpow'ring communication, whereof we speak. The efficacy whereof is such, as
to give the Soul that peaceful rest in believing, which is also most pleasant
and delightful, according as the things are found to be so, which are believed.
Nor does it in order hereto work by way of Enthusiastical impulsion, without
any reference to the external Revelation, that is, rationally and aptly suitable
to the working of the effect. For then, that should no way have the place so
much as of means. But there being sufficient inducement to persuade that this
external Revelation is divine (so as to procure a rational assent to the things
revealed, with any man, that, having that revelation, with the account of its
first confirmations, shall but use his understanding in reference thereto, and
is not besotted to a party of sworn enemies to the Christian name). This inward
revelation then falling in, captivates his heart to an entire unitive closure,
with the great things contained in the outward one; and principally with the
Son of God himself, unto which union, that whole revelation is most directly
subservient. Therefore it was, that when diverse others (of whom it is said, and
particularly of Judas, Joh. 6.
that they believed not) forsook Christ, Peter and the other Apostles stuck so
resolutely to him, because, we believe (say they) and are sure that thou art
Christ the son of the living God; which assurance we may then conclude was much
of another sort than that of Judas; though we cannon suppose him to have wanted
a rational ^^^^^ty of the same truth, sufficient to have ove^come objections in
his judgment: but not sufficient to overcome the contrary corrupt inclinations
of his wicked heart. Therefore as the inward revelation uses not to do its work
without the outward, (for I suppose we have not heard of many Christians where
the Gospel has not been), so nor is the outward revelation able, alone to
beget that which, in the more eminent sense, goes in Scripture under the name
of Faith. It may beget that merely intellectual certainty which may prevail
against all doubts and objections in a man's mind to the contrary; but not the
contrary inclinations of his corrupt will. Most men's faith is but opinionative,
and many men's never reaches so high as to a rational opinion; that proceeds
upon having balanced considerations on both sides, and inclines to that part
on which seems to be the most weighty; whereas the Faith (as they call it) of
too many is no other thing than a merely blind and sequacious humor, grounded
upon nothing but a willingness to be in the fashion; or the apprehension of
disgrace with other inconveniences, if where that is the common profession one
should profess to be any thing but a Christian; or a lazy indifferency easily
determinable to that part which is next at hand to be chosen; or it may be,
they never having heard of another profession (which precludes any choice at
all).

But admit it did arrive to a rational certainty (as it easily might with them
that have with the external requisite advantages, competent understanding,
patience, diligence, and impartiality to consider); That is, suppose it to
proceed upon that abundant evidence which the case will admit, that the
Christian Doctrine has been testified by God; And that Gods testimony cannot
deceive: There needs more to win and overcome men's hearts; which must be done
e're the things revealed in the Gospel can be apprehended delectable. What can
any man have greater certainty of, in a mere human way, than all men have that
they must dye? And yet how few are there whose spirits are formed hereby to any
seriousness agreeable to that persuasion? Whatever way a man comes to be
certain of any thing that has a contrary tendency to the bent of his
habitually wicked heart, he needs more than the evidence of the thing, to make
it efficaciously determine his will against his former vicious course. If the
matter be such as properly falls under Faith; That Faith grounds upon the
Authority of God apprehended as avouching the Truth of that revelation to which
we subscribe our assent. But then it is lively or languid, according as the
apprehension is we have of that avouchment. But the apprehension which is only
the product of the external revelation, even recommended by the most
advantageous and convincing circumstances, is too faint to command the Soul.
Who amongst all the people of the Jews at Mount Horeb, could have any doubt,
but the Authority that avouched the Law there given them was Divine? And yet
how boldly do they rush into Idolatry, against the express letter of that Law;
while the sound of that dreadful voice of words which delivered it, could
hardly, one would think, be well out of their ears! And though they could not
doubt of Gods Authority, yet for all that, their frequent rebellions are
plainly resolved into their infidelity. Number. 14. 11.
How long will this people provoke me? And how long will it be ere [they
believe me], Psalm. 106. 24.
for all the signs which I have showed among them? Yea they despised the
pleasant land: [they believed not] his word. Or what place could be left for
rational doubt, with the multitudes that beheld Miracles of our Lord Jesus, but
that they were Gods own Seal affixed purposely to the Doctrine taught by him?
Yet how few (though we must suppose many convinced) did heartily believe in
him? more (abundantly) did upon a less-advantagious-external revelation after
his ascension; And the reason is plainly told us, The Spirit was not yet given,
Joh. 7. 39.
because that Jesus was not yet glorified. And how expressly have we it from his
own mouth *, Joh. 6.
(after he had interpreted coming to him by believing on him) No man can come
unto me, v. 35.
, except the Father that has sent me draw him. And afterward having said, v.
63.
It is the Spirit that quickens; he adds, But there are some of you, that
believe not, v. 64.
(so that no man's professed assent, though as forward a professor as Judas was,
there referred to, will in strict account entitle him a Believer, if it be not
produced by the quickening influence of the Spirit). And then repeats, v. 65.
Therefore I said unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were given
him of my Father. And what provocation the Father had to withold that
quickening Spirit, so generally, from that people, any one may see that reads
their story. Upon which, by the recess of that Spirit, they are hardened to as
great a Miracle as formerly their Egyptian oppressors were many ages before
(there being indeed no greater Miracle as was said of old, than that men should
not believe upon the sight of so many Miracles). And this dreadful dereliction,
and consequent obduration we see is referred to primitive Justice as a
vindictive dispensation. But though he had done so many Miracles before them,
Joh. 12.
yet they believed not on him. v. 37.
That the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fulfilled which he spoke, 38.
Lord who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed, Isa. 53. 1.
(where it is obvious to observe, that the believing of the Gospel-report owes
it self to the revelation of Gods arm; or requires the exerting of his power,
agreeable to that of the Apostle, That ye may know what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward, Ephesians. 1. 19*
who believe according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, etc.). And how the arm of the Lord
came not to be revealed, or that power not to be put forth, is intimated in
what follows, Therefore they could not believe, because (for which Isaias is
again quoted), Isa. 6.
he had blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, etc. Which shows, that
as that blinding and hardening of eyes and hearts, in some superadded degrees
thereof, is the effect of a penal dereliction or retraction of Gods arm, for
former obstinate opposition to the external revelation of the Gospel; So that
there is a precedent blindness and hardness, not otherwise vincible than by the
arm of the Lord; And which, it being penally withheld, will naturally grow
worse and worse. And certainly that, upon the withholding whereof, such things
certainly ensue as are inconsistent with believing, must needs it self be
necessary to it. All which things considered, do so plainly speak the
insufficiency of a mere external revelation, and the necessity of an internal
besides, unto that Faith, which is the immediate spring of delight in God; that
it is not needful to insist upon many plain Texts of Scripture besides, that
fully say the same thing. 1 Cor. 12. 3.
As that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. And
again, Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, Joh. 4. 15.
God dwells in him, and he in God. And whosoever believes that Jesus is the
Christ is born of God. chapter 5. 1.
Upon which words, with many more of like import in the sacred Volume, no sense
can be put which is tolerable, and not the same with what we have above
asserted.

In short, Faith is a part of homage paid to the Authority of the great God;
which is to be estimated sincere, according as it answers the end, for which
the things to be believed were revealed. That end is not to beget only the
notion of those things, as truths that are to be lodged in the mind, and go no
further; as if they were to be understood true only that they might be so
understood; But that the person might accordingly have his spirit formed, and
might shape the course of his whole conversation; Therefore is it called the
obedience of faith: And the same word which is wont to be rendered unbelief
signifies disobedience, obstinacy unperswadeableness; being from a theme, which
(as is known) signifies to persuade. So that this homage is then truly given to
the eternal God, when his revelation is complied with and submitted to,
according to the true intent and purpose of it. Which, that it may be, requires
that his spirit urge the soul with his Authority, and overpower it into an
awful subjection thereto. The soul being so disjointed by the Apostasy that its
own faculties keep not (in reference to the things of God) their natural order
to one another, further than as an holy rectitude is renewed in them by the
holy Ghost. Therefore is it necessary, that the enlightening communication
which he transmits into it, be not only so clear, as to scatter the darkness
that beclouded the mind, but so penetrating, as to strike and pierce the heart,
to dissolve and relaxe its stiff and frozen rigor, and render it capable of a
new mould and frame. In order whereto, God that (at first) commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, is said to have shined into the hearts (of them viz.
2 Cor. 4.
whom he renews) to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ.

And as they to whom this communication of God is in some degree afforded, do
hereupon apprehend how necessary it was to them that it should be afforded; and
be such as they now find it* (which they apprehended not before), so they
perceive it to be delightful also, as well as necessary. And finding it yet
given into them but in an imperfect degree, their continual cravings are still
for more. And having tasted hereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3.
how gracious the Lord is; as new-born-babes, they desire it, as sincere milk
that they may grow thereby. They hereby, come to know God and the things of God
with savor. Prove. 2. 10.
And wisdom having entered into their hearts, knowledge is pleasant to their
soul. Whereby, as every renewed taste provokes in them new desire, all such
renewed desires dispose them unto further and more satisfying delight. They
sensibly discern the difference between their former dry and sapless notions of
God, and the lively-spirited apprehensions which they now have. They can in
some measure understand the reason why the Apostle should in such a rapture
speak of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord; And why he
should so triumphingly give thanks to God for the manifestation of the [savor]
of his knowledge in every place. 2 Cor. 2* 14.
They can perceive there was good sense in those words, as they have a more
quick and judicious perception of the fragrancy of that knowledge. It is to them
a refreshing, vital, quickening perfume, v. 16.
(as the word there, and before imports) most cheeringly odoriferous, the savor
of life to life, lively in it self, and to them. So full of life, as to beget
and transmit it; and replenish their Souls therewith. So as they might feel
life thence working in all their powers; A revelation of God, that is of such a
nature, cannot but be highly delectable.

1. In respect of the matter revealed, God himself especially (if not yet
testifying himself to be, yet at least willing in Christ to become) our God; in
such a way, and upon such terms as is expressed in the Gospel. A more
particular mention of the things (contained in this revelation) that are more
apt to beget delight and feed it, is purposely deferred, till we come to press
and enforce the duty it self.

2. In respect of the immediate way and manner of Revelation, with so much
facility continually coming in from time to time, upon the Soul, according as
it is found ready by a dutiful compliance to admit it, and does ly open to it:
(For otherwise, a fatherly severity, is most fitly expressed in withholding it
at some times).

3. In respect of the life and vigor which it carries with it, whereby it is
experienced to be a vital light; and that it is indeed (as is said) life, Joh.
1.
which is the light of men. Dull, sluggish, ineffectual notions of such things
can have little (comparatively) of delectation in them.

4. In respect of the design and tendency of the Revelation, (discernible at
the same time), to draw the Soul into union with God; And that there may be a
continual intercourse between him and it. Not that it might have a transient
glance of so lovely an object, and no more. When once it apprehends God has
made this light shine in upon me, not to amuse me, but here he fixes it as a
lamp to guide me, in a stated course of communion with him. How pleasant is it
to think he will be known for this blessed purpose!

Now a communication of God, including a revelation of him, apt to beget such a
knowledge, cannot be without much matter of delight.

But besides, that (though most naturally following thereupon) it also includes,

2. A transforming impression of his image. to enjoy God; what does he
immediately enjoy? or whereby is he said to enjoy God? what does God
communicate or transmit, by which he may be said to be enjoyed? He communicates
his own living likeness, the very image of himself; not the Idaea or likeness
only by which he is known; Though it must be confessed, the knowledge of him, if
he be known to be what he truly is, must suppose a true likeness of him,
offered to the mind, and formed there. But this of which we now speak, is a not
merely representative but a real image.

The product of the former it is, as is sufficiently to be collected from what
has been said. For that appears to be not a mere aerie, spiritless,
ineffectual thing, as the notion of God, and of all divine matters is with the
most; but as has been said operative, penetrating, efficacious, apt to beget
suitable impressions upon the heart, and wholly transform the Soul. The effect
of it then is, this transformative impression it self; By which the Soul
becomes another thing than it was; 2 Cor. 5.
A new creature; old things being done away, and all things made new. In
respect of this it is said to be, born of God. This is the new man which after
God is said to be created in knowledge, Ephesians. 4.
righteousness, 2 Pet. 1*
and true holiness; The divine nature participated; 1 John 3.
The seed of God; The (...), the prime and most excellent part of his
creatures. Jam. 1.


Concerning this likeness, and the satisfyingness of it, in its perfect state,
though much have been discoursed elsewhere; It will be requisite to say
somewhat here also, that may bear a more direct reference to the present
imperfect state of the regenerate in this world.

That communication of God which must be supposed afforded them, in order to
their delighting in him, could signify little to that purpose, if with deformed
and diseased Souls they were only to look upon a very lovely object; still
themselves remaining what they were. Nor does it delight them only as it is
apprehended apt and aiming to work an happy change in them; but as it does it
or has in part done it. As like an active quick flame it passes through their
Souls, searches, melts them, burns up their dross, makes them a new lump or
mass, forms them for Gods own use and converse.

God is proposed unto our communion and fellowship under the name of Light. 1 John 1. 3. 5.
But such a light (it appears) as whereby we that were darkness do also become
light in the Lord (as elsewhere it is expressed.) Ephesians. 5.
That, as he is the father of lights, we may appear the children of such a
father, and walk accordingly i. e. as children of light. For we are presently
told that if we say we have fellowship with him, v. 6.
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. But if we walk in the
light as he is in the light, v. 7.
then we have a mutual fellowship, (i. e. God and we). It is needful then, that
we have that apprehension of him. And he therefore by solemn message makes that
declaration of himself that he is Light, (This then is the message which we
have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and with him is no
darkness at all), i. e. the most pure, holy, excellent, glorious Being.

But for what purpose are we to have that apprehension? We are told by the
Apostle for what; He there makes that declaration with that design, that we
might be entered into the same fellowship in which he was already: For that end
therefore we are to have this apprehension. But inasmuch as he immediately
adds, That yet while we converse in darkness, we lie, if we pretend to that
fellowship: It Is manifest, that this discovery of God and our suitable
apprehension are no further serviceable to their end, than bringing us into
fellowship with him, than as by his beams he begets us into his own likeness
herein: And that (so far as our capacity and present state admit) we be truly
in a degree made pure, bright, shining, excellent creatures, resembling our
Maker, and being a second time formed after the image of him that created us.

The Gospel is the formative instrument in this work, as it was said to be the
instrument or means of our intellectual illumination. The new creature is said
to be begotten of the Word of God; And the divine Nature to be communicated
through the exceeding great and precious promises, (which discovering Gods
gracious Nature and favorable inclination toward us, are an apt means (but no
more than a means) to render us well-natur'd (not cross, thwarting, contrary)
unto him. Faith admits the Gospel-discovery into the Soul, and of an external
word without, makes it become an ingrafted word; The word of Christ dwelling
richly in us; And so gives it the advantage of becoming thus mightily
operative; For unto them only who believe is it the power of God to Salvation.
And being received, not as the word of man, but as the word of God, it works
effectually in them that believe. To them who believe it not, it signifies
nothing, is to them an empty sound, or only as a tale that is told.

And inasmuch as the Gospel-revelation is the instrument of this impression; by
it the impression must be measured, with it must it agree. Which revelation
being expressive of the Nature of God, and of his mind and will in reference to
us; the impression cannot but be agreeable to that revelation; but it must also
carry in it the resemblance and likeness of God himself; for the
Gospel-revelation is Gods Seal; the stamp upon it is a model of his Image.
Whence therefore the Soul sealed therewith, bears on it at once the signature
both of the Author and the Instrument. But because our best and surest way of
forming true and right apprehensions of God, is to attend and guide our selves
by the representation that is there made of him (for it were useless and in
vain, if letting our thoughts work at random without reference to it, we might
conceive as fitly of God and his mind concerning us, as by the direction and
guidance of it); Therefore are we to aim at conformity to God as he is there
represented. For that is the proper likeness to him we are to inquire after
(and which only could be impressed by his Gospel) that is expressed and
represented there. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory. It is by the glory of the Lord
shining through that glass, that we are changed. And the image whereinto we are
changed is the same image that is to be seen in that glass. For there God has
provided such a representation of himself and of his mind should appear, as is
most suitable to our case and state, and which it most concerned us to have the
view and the image of. That represents him in his imitable excellencies; and
shows what he is toward us, what his counsels, determinations, and
constitutions are concerning us, and hereupon shows, what we should be, or what
temper of Spirit becomes us in reference to such a revelation. And such, when
we receive this his impressive communication, he really makes us thereby
become. And then is it that it will be found most highly delectable. An heart
formed according to the revelation of God in Christ, and cast into the mould of
the Gospel (as is the import of the Apostles words, -- Ye have obeyed from the
heart the doctrine, Romans 6. 17
into the type or frame whereof ye were delivered) has a spring of pleasure in
it self. Not of perfect unmixed pleasure; for there is much yet remaining, that
cannot but be very displeasing and offensive to such as have learned no longer
to put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, and have senses exercised to
discern betwixt good and evil. And indeed by the same vital principle the Soul
is made capable of both the sweetest delights and the quickest sense of pain;
while it was dead it was sensible of neither.

Nor is it an original Spring; Whatever it has that is good and pleasant comes
from an higher Head, and is communicated. But the communication remains not in
this heart as in a dead receptacle, but creates the Soul where it is a living
spring it self. The Lord shall satisfy thy Soul in drought, Isa. 58. 11.
and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and as a
spring of water whose waters fail not. After which it follows, Then shall thou
delight thy self in the Lord, v. 14.
etc. So though the waters that are so pleasantly refreshing to holy Souls are
given by Christ; yet he himself tells us, Joh. 4. 14.
they shall be in him to whom they are given a well of water springing up into
everlasting life. Whence also the Good man is said to be satisfied from
himself; Pro. 14. 14.
And the mouth of the righteous chapter 10.
to be a well of life i. e. to others, much more must his heart be so to
himself. Nor indeed can there be a vainer or more absurd design and
expectation, than to aim immediately at delights and joys, without ever looking
after that transforming, purifying, quickening communication from God, in which
he is to be enjoyed; which is apparently the (most prejudicial and dangerous)
mistake, the practical error (and so much the worse therefore) of many persons
of much pretense to Religion, that dream and boast of nothing less than
raptures and transports, having never yet known or felt what the work of
regeneration or the new creature means. And having only got some notions of God
and Christ, that tickle their fancies without ever changing their hearts, these
go for divine enjoyments. Others somewhat awakened and convinced but not
renewed, though they do not pretend already to have, yet do (from the same
mistaken apprehension) as vainly seek and catch at joys and sweetnesses; while
their unsanctified hearts do yet ly steept in the gall of bitterness: And they
wonder and complain, that they feel not in themselves the delights whereof they
find Scripture sometimes make mention, while in the mean time they expect and
snatch at them in that preposterous impossible way, as to abstract them from
the things themselves, wherein the pleasure and delight lies. They would have
delight without the delectable good, that must immediately afford and yield it;
or without foregoing the noysom evils that resist and hinder it; which
therefore makes it necessary to treat the more largely of the delightful
communication, by which only intervening Souls are capable of delighting in God.

And as to this Branch of it, The vital Sanctifying transforming influence,
whereby the Soul is wrought to a conformity to the Gospel; If we take a
(somewhat more distinct) view of it, we shall find, it cannot but have in it
abundant matter of delight. In the general, The thing here to be communicated,
is an universal rectitude of temper and dispositions, including The Removal of
such as are sinful and corrupt; Settlement of such as are holy and gracious.


Both to be measured and estimated, as to their good or evil, by the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Now surely that must be a blessed and delighful state
(and its that toward which this divine communication gradually tends) wherein
a wretched Soul, that was lost in the impurities of sin, shall be stripped and
unclothed of all the pravity, perverse inclinations, corrupt affections which
the Gospel of Christ condemns; and invested with all the parts of that purity,
that gracious and holy-frame which that Gospel recommends. For as the former
carry in them matter of certain vexation and anguish, which it is hereby freed
from; So the latter manifestly carry in themselves matter of unspeakable
delight and pleasure, which it hereby partakes. And by the same degrees by
which this divine communication infers the latter of these, it expels the
former. By the same degrees by which any are made partakers of the divine
nature, they escape the corruptions which are in the world through lust.

And that we may be here a little more particular, without descending into the
innumerable particularities which might be severally spoken of upon this
occasion; we shall only consider this heart-rectifying communication, in
reference to some of the more principal things, toward which the spirit of man
may be either perversely, or duly and aright inclined; that we may see what
matter of delight it infers and brings with it.

In order whereto it must be considered, that wherein it is transforming, it is
also enlivening; And therefore furnishes the Soul, with the power of spiritual
sensation; whereby it comes to apprehend its former temper, as very grievous
and detestable; not only being entire and undiminished, but even the relics
of it which do yet remain; and proportionably, the holy frame to be introduc't,
as highly covetable and to be infinitely desired.

Which being supposed, It must needs be very delightful to such a Soul, to feel
it self in part rectified, and to expect it further in its temper and
inclinations,

1. Toward God, toward whom it was most disinclined: That is, both toward
him as its end, and toward Christ as its way to him.

As to himself it is end. It finds upon reflection, it was dead toward God,
without motion toward him, without inclination, all it is powers bent and set
quite another way; So that to persuade it to begin a course of holy motion
toward God, was a like thing as to persuade a stone to fly upwards. It could
not trust the original Truth, nor love the sovereign Good, nor obey the supreme
Authority. Its course was nothing else but continual recession from him,
toward whom it should have been continually pressing forward with all its
might. It was wont to say to him, in whom was its life and all its hope, Depart
from me, I desire not the knowledge of thy ways; was utterly alienated from the
life of God, and did choose to live as without him in the world. And although it
still remain thus in too great a degree, yet as it abhors this as an hateful
way of living, and desires it may be otherwise; so is it sensibly delightful
that it does in some degree perceive a change; That now it can find it self
returning into its right and natural state of subordination to God. Which while
it was out of it, laid that claim to it, that its dislocation was uneasy, and
it could have no rest; though it was not aware what the matter was with it, and
could never thoroughly apprehend, that it ought (much less could desire or aim)
to return.

And if in returning, and it is continual course afterward (which ought to be
but a continuing return and moving back toward God), there be much cause for
the exercise of Repentance; the disposition whereto is a part of that new
nature now communicated; yet even such relentings as are due and suitable upon
this account are not unpleasant: There is pleasure mingled with such tears, and
with those mournings which are not without hope, and which flow naturally and
without force, from a living principle within, as waters from their
still-freshly springing fountain. When the Soul finds it self unbound and set
at liberty; when it can freely pour out it self to God, dissolve kindly and
melt before him; It does it with regret only at what it has done and been, not
at what it is now doing, except that it can do it no more; affecting even to be
infinite herein, while it yet sees it must be confined within some bounds. It
loves to lie in the dust and abase it self; and is pleased with the
humiliation, contrition and brokenness of heart which repentance toward God
includes in it. So that as God is delighted with this Sacrifice, so it is with
the offering of it up to him. Many men apprehend a certain sweetness in
revenge; such a one finds it only in this just revenge upon himself.

How unexpressible pleasure accompanies its devoting it self to God, when
bemoaning it self, and returning with weeping and supplication, It says, Now Lo
I come to thee, thou art the Lord my God. I have brought thee back thine own,
what I had sacrilegiously alienated and stolen away, the heart which was gone
astray, that has been so long a vagabond and fugitive from thy blessed
presence, service and communion. Take now the Soul which thou have made;
Possess thy own right; enter upon it, stamp it with the entire impression of
thine own Seal, and mark it for thine. Other Lords shall no more have dominion.
What have I to do any more with the Idols wherewith I was wont to provoke thee
to jealousy? I will now make mention of thy name, and of thine only. I bind my
self to thee in everlasting bonds, in a covenant never to be forgotten.

The self-denial which is included in this transaction, has no little pleasure
in it. When the Soul freely quits all pretense to it self, and by its own
consent passes into his (now acknowleged) right; disclaims it self, and all its
own former interests, inclinations and ends, and is resolved to be to him and
to no other. When this is done Vnreservedly, without any intention of retaining
or keeping back any thing from him; Absolutely, and without making any
conditions of its own, but only agreeing to and thankfully accepting his;
Peremptorily and without hesitation, and without halting between two opinions,
Shall I? or shall I not? (as if it were ready in the same breath to retract and
undo its own act) How does it now rejoice to feel it self offer willingly! They
that have life and sense about them, can tell there is pleasure in all this.
And the oftener repetition is made hereof (so it be done with life, not with
trifling formality) they so often renew the relishes with themselves of the
same pleasure.

Continued commerce with God, agreeable to the tenor of that League and
Covenant struck with him, how pleasant and delightful is it! To be a friend of
God, an associate of the most High, a domestique, no more a stranger, a
foreigner, but of his own household. To live wholly upon the plentiful
provisions, and under the happy order and government of his family. To have an
heart to seek all from him, and lay out all for him! How great is the pleasure
of trust, of living free from care; that is, of any thing, but how to please
and honor him in a cheerful unsolicitous dependence, expecting from him our
daily bread, believing he will not let our Souls famish. That while they hunger
and thirst after righteousness they shall be filled; that they shall be
sustained with the bread and waters of life; that when they hunger he will feed
them with hidden Manna, and with the fruits that grow on the tree of life in
the midst of the Paradise of God; that when they thirst he will give water, and
add milk and honey without money, without price.

And for the body not to doubt, but he that feeds Ravens and clothes Lillies
will feed and cloth them. To be so taken up in seeking his Kingdom and
righteousness, as freely to leave it to him to add the other things as he sees
fit; To take no thought for to morrow; To have an heart framed herein according
to divine precept; Not to be encumbered or kept in an anxious suspense by the
thoughts and fears of what may fall out, by which many suffer the same
affliction a thousand times over, which God would have them suffer but once; A
firm repose on the goodness of providence, and its sure and never-erring
wisdom; A steady persuasion, that our heavenly Father knows what we have need
of, and what it is fittest for us to want, to suffer or enjoy; How delightful a
life do these make! And how agreeable to one born of God, his own Son, and heir
of all things; as being joint-heirs with Christ, and claiming by that large
grant, that says all things are yours; only that in minority it is better to
have a wise Fathers allowance, than be our own carvers.

To live in the fear of God, is not without its pleasure. It composes the Soul,
expels the vanity which is not without vexation, represses exorbitant motions,
checks unruly passions, keeps all within in a pleasant peaceful calm; Is health
to the navel, and marrow to the bones.

To live in his love, is delight it self, or a tendency toward it. The
disposition whereto being communicated from God, and a part of the holy new
creature derived from him; is also part of the (secondary or subservient)
delectable object. As the light that serves unto vision is partly (as the
mediate object) somewhat of what I see, and does partly (as a principle)
actuate and concur with the faculty in the act of seeing. And as the blessed
God himself is both the first Principle and ultimate Object of that and other
gracious acts And how rationally men may be said at the same time to love,
delight in and enjoy the amiable or delectable object, and therewith also love
their own love, enjoy their own fruition, or delight in their own delight;
enough is said by some Schoolmen. Nor indeed can it be conceived how the Soul
can continue to love or delight in any thing but it must be so. For while it
perseveres, every latter act justifies the former, and takes complacency
therein, but all as directed toward such an object.
: Therefore it cannot but be pleasant to the Soul, to perceive that powerful
influence from God stirring in it, by which it is disposed to design and pitch
upon him as the Great Object of its highest delight, unto whom it labored
under so vile and wicked an aversion heretofore. Yea though it yet have no
certain persuasion of a present interest in him, yet this disposition of heart
toward him, and that it finds it could satisfyingly rest in him as its best
good, upon supposition it had such an interest, the very strivings and
contentions of the Soul toward him upon this account, are not without a
present pleasure: As we behold with an intermixed desire and delight a grateful
object, which we would enjoy, but do not yet know whether we can compass or
not. To be in that temper of Soul, as to resolve, Him I will seek and pursue,
him I will study to please and serve, and spend my strength and life in serving
him (which is to live in his love) though I yet know not whether he will
accept, or how he will deal with me! This cannot but have a certain sensible
delectation in it.

To live in a stated habitual subjection to him as the Lord of our lives, How
pleasant is it! To have learned to obey; To be accustomed to the yoke; To taste
and prove the goodness and acceptableness of his will, through an effectual
transformation in the renewal of our minds; To be by the law of the spirit of
life made free from the law of sin and death; To be able to speak it as the
undisguised sense of our hearts, because thy law is holy, therefore thy servant
loves it; To reckon it a royal law of liberty, so as to account our selves so
much the more free, by how much we are the more thus bound; When we affect to
be prescribed to, and are become patient of Government, not apt to chafe at the
bridle, or spurn and kick at the boundaries that hem us in: This is a temper
that has not more of duty in it than it has of delight. There is such a thing
as delighting in the law of God, according to the inward man, when there is yet
a difficulty in suppressing and keeping under inordinate rebellious workings of
corrupt nature; unto which there is no desire an indulgence should be given, by
having the law attempered to them, but severity rather used to reduce them to a
conformity to the law: So will it be, if the law become an heart impression;
when it can once be truly said, Thy law is in my heart, It will be also with
the same sincerity said, Psalm. 40.
I delight to do thy will, O God.

The continual exercise of good conscience toward God, has great pleasure in
it. Hereby our way and course is continually reviewed, and we pass censures
upon our selves, and upon that account survey our own works. And by how much
the more carefully and often this is done, so much the more delectable it will
be; that is, the more approvable we shall find them upon review. For we shall
order our course the more warily, as we reckon upon undergoing an inquisition
and search; wherein an apprehensive serious heart well understands it is not it
self to be the supreme Judge. How blessed an imitation might there here be of
the blessed God himself, who we find beheld his six days works, and lo they
were all very good; whereupon follows his delightful day of rest; So we shall,
in some degree of conformity to him, finding our works to be in that sort good,
as that he will by gracious indulgence accept them as such, have our own
Sabbath, a sweet and peaceful rest in our own spirits. Though we can pretend no
higher than sincerity only, yet how sweet are the reflections of a
well-instructed conscience upon that! when our hearts reproach us not, and we
resolve they shall not as long as we live; we are conscious to our selves of no
base designs, we propose nothing to our selves, wherein we apprehend cause to
decline Gods eye; we walk in the light, and are seeking no darkness or shadow
of death, where (as workers of iniquity) we may hide our selves from him; Can
implore him as an assistant, and appeal to him as a Judge in reference to our
daily affairs and wonted course: Is this without pleasure! This is our
rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
says the Apostle, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had
our conversation, etc.

And thus to converse with God, a him whom we daily design to glorify and
serve, and whom we expect daily in some measure, and fully and finally ere it
be long, to enjoy, Is certainly throughout a way of pleasantness and peace. How
delectable then is this Soulrectifying communication from God, whereby, being
before so disaffected, it becomes now so well inclined toward him in all these
respects.

But because the exigency of the case did require (by reason of sin that had
cut off the intercourse) that there should be a Mediator to open the way and
renew the former outworn friendship; Therefore it was also necessary that so
the Soul might duly move toward God, it should be rightly framed and disposed
also toward him. We are therefore to consider too, how delectable this
communication must be, as it aright disposes the heart toward Christ, our way
to God.

For toward him we must understand it to have been most obstinately and
inflexibly averse; and that therefore a mighty communication of power was
necessary to set it right here.

Unto that part of Religion which is natural, there was so much of an advantage
beforehand, as that there was an old foundation to build upon. There are some
notions of God left, not only concerning his Existence, but his Nature and
Attributes, many of them. And from the Apprehension what he was, it was in some
measure discernible what he should have been, and ought yet to be toward him;
And from thence many checks and rebukes of conscience wherein it was found to
be otherwise: So that here was somewhat in Nature to be wrought upon, as to
this part of Religion. But as to that part which respects the Mediator, this
was a frame wholly to be raised up from the ground. There were no principles
immediately and directly inclining to take part with the Gospel; But all to be
implanted anew. The way that God would take to bring back Souls to him being so
infinitely above all human thought. And therefore, though to a considering
Pagan it would not sound strangely, that God ought to be trusted, feared,
loved, etc. yet even to such the Gospel of Christ was foolishness. Besides,
that this way of dealing with men was not only unknown and unimaginable to
them, not so much as once thought of, or to be guest at. But the tendency and
aspect of it (when it should come to be made known) was such as that it could
not but find the temper of men's spirits most strongly opposite, not merely
ignorant, but prejudic't and highly disaffected. For this course most directly
tended to take men quite off from their old bottom; To stoop and humble, and
even bring them to nothing; To stain the pride of their Glory, and lay them
down in the dust as abject wretches, in themselves fit for nothing, but to be
trampled on and crushed by the foot of divine revenge. Suppose a man to have
admitted a conviction from the light of his own mind and conscience that he was
a sinner, and had offended his Maker, incurred his just displeasure, and made
himself liable to his punishing justice; It would yet have been a hard matter
to make him believe it altogether impossible to him, to do any thing to remedy
the matter, and restore himself to divine favor and acceptance. He would
naturally be inclined to think; why admit the case be so, he should easily find
out a way to make God amends. He would recount with himself all his own natural
excellencies, and think himself very capable of doing some great thing, that
should more than expiate his offense, and make recompense abundantly for any
wrong that he had done. But when the Gospel shall come, and tell him he has
deserved eternal wrath, that his sin is inexpiable, but by everlasting
sufferings, or what is of equal value; That here is one (the eternal Son of
God) who became a man like himself, and thereupon a voluntary Sacrifice, to
make atonement for the transgression of men; That God will never accept another
Sacrifice for the sins of men than his, nor ever any service at their hands,
but for his sake; That him now revealed to them they must receive, rely upon,
and trust to wholly, or perish without mercy; Yea, and that he has put the
Government over them, into his hands, laid it on his shoulders, and to him they
must subject themselves as their Ruler and Judge, the great Arbiter of life and
death to them and all men;

That they are to be entirely devoted to him as long as they live, as their
Redeemer and Lord; In him as they are to have righteousness and strength, so to
him they must pay all possible homage and subjection, to him their knees must
bow, and their tongues confess; They must receive the Law from his mouth; Be
prescribed to by him, comply with his will, though never so much to the
crossing of their own; And though notwithstanding, they must know they can
deserve nothing by it; That so vile and worthless miscreants they are become
that God will never have to do with them upon other terms.

When this shall appear the state of the case, and it comes to be apprehended,
Then must I yield my self a greater transgressor than ever I thought, and an
undone impotent helpless wretch? I shall thus make nothing of my self: And what
must all my natural or acquired excellencies go just for nothing? And a person
of such worth and accomplishments as I, be thus brought down into the dust? Yea
and besides, to be brought, under such bonds, and profess to owe my self so
entirely to a Redeemer, that I must for ever live after his will and pleasure,
and no more at my own; And can never hope, if I take a liberty to indulge my
self besides the allowance of his rules, that I can ever make any amends for
such transgression by any thing that I can do. So that by taking his gift (of
my pardon and life) upon such terms, I shall sell my liberty, and render my
self a perfect slave to his will and pleasure for ever. Here now cannot but be
a strong stream to be striven against, and most vehement counter-strivings of
the haughty and licentious spirit of man. So that it is not strange it should
be said by our Savior, No man can come to me except my father draw him. And
that the exceeding greatness of power, according to the workings of the
mightiest power in any case, should be put forth upon them that believe.
Therefore are men in Christ by creative power only; 2 Cor. 5. 15.
If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. He is new made, if he be in
him. And this aversion being so deeply natural, will still in a degree remain
(while any thing of corrupt nature remains) in the hearts of even the
regenerate themselves.

Therefore a continual exertion of the same power will be ever requisite to
hold Souls to Christ, and retain them in their station in him. He that
establishes us with you in Christ [is God] etc. q. d. 2 Cor. 1.
It is only a God that can do this.

Therefore how is God admired and adored upon this single account. Now to him
that is of power to stablish you according to my Gospel, Romans 16.
and the preaching of Jesus Christ according to the revelation of the mystery,
which was kept secret since the world began, (this was indeed a great Secret to
the lapsed world) -- To God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ for ever.
Amen.

But as the heart-rectifying communication from God, in this matter, is such as
carries mighty power with it, so it does proportionable pleasure, when it has
overcome, and (to the pitch of sincerity) set the Soul right in this thing.

How delectable is it to receive the Son of God! when the heart is made willing
in the day of power! when his cords take hold of the Soul, and draw it to him!
What pleasure is there in the consenting, self-resigning act and disposition!

It is most highly delightful to receive him, and give up our selves to him as
our full suitable good, so exactly answering all the exigencies of our
distressed case; when sensibly apprehending the true state of it, the Soul
cries out, None but Christ, and finds him present, waiting only for consent,
readily offering himself, Here I am, take me, thy Jesus, thy help, thy life!
How overcomingly pleasant is this to a Soul that feels its distress, and
perceives it self ready to perish; Yea and that daily sees it self perishing,
were it not for him. How pleasant, when in the time of love he finds the poor
Soul in its blood, and says to it, live; clothes it, decks it, makes it perfect
through his own comeliness, tenders himself to it, unto it taken off the
dunghill, cast out in the most lothsom deplorable plight; And enters the
marriage Covenant with it, (we need not be squeamish or shy to speak after God
himself, so representing this matter), overcomes by his own mercy and goodness,
and prevails with a sinful creature to accept him. How gladly does it throw off
every thing of its own, that it may entirely possess him and be possessed by
him. Here is the Joy of a Nuptial Solemnity, or the Joy of Espousals. I am my
beloved's, and my beloved is mine.

While as yet this transaction is not distinctly reflected on, (as when
possibly afterward it is, there may great difficulties and doubts arise,
whether all were rightly done, or yet be on its own part, yea or no) if however
it be truly done, in the very doing it self, and the same continuing
disposition there is a sensible and inseparable delight. I say in the same
disposition, as often as by any repeated acts of the same kind, it expresses
and shows it self: That is, as often as this Covenant is renewed (whether with
solemnity or more occasionally), though the relation arising thence, be not in
the same instant considered or reflected on, nor the sincerity of the act it
self, which is necessary thereto; yet that very consent it self, if it be
sincere, has a secret joy accompanying it; and the Soul feels the gratefulness
and pleasure of its own act, though it do not for the present examine and take
a view of it. For it is now from a principle of life, embracing and drawing
into union with it self an object that is all life and goodness, and sweetness;
which therefore sheds its own delightful savor and fragrancy through the Soul,
while it is in the mean time acting only upon the object directly, and not
reflecting upon its own act, or considering in that very instant what will be
consequential thereupon. But if withal it do consider, (as that consideration
cannot be far off, though it cannot consider every thing at once), that it is
receiving him that is to bring it to God, who is able to do it, (even to save
to the uttermost all that will come to God by him), who is intent upon that
design, and did in the midst of dying agonies breath forth his Soul in the
prosecution of it, and with whom God requires it to unite for this very
purpose; This cannot but add unspeakably to the delightfulness of this
transaction, and of this effusion of the Holy Ghost, in the virtue whereof the
thing is done, how often soever it be (seriously) done; As our case and state
require that it be very often.

And to receive him as our Lord, (which is joined with that other capacity
wherein we receive him, Col. 2. 6.
viz. of a Jesus or Savior; As ye have received Christ Jesus [the Lord], so
etc.). This also, and the heart-subduing influence that disposes to it, is most
highly delectable. When the Soul, that was so stoutly averse, and that once
said within it self, I will not have him to reign over me, is brought freely to
yield; and with sincere loyal resolutions and affections devotes it self to
him, consents to his government, submits its neck and shoulder to his yoke and
burden; says to him with an ungainsaying heart, as its full sense, Now thou
Lord of my life and hope, who have so long striven with me, so often and
earnestly pressed me hereto, so variously dealt with me, to make me understand
thy merciful design, and who seek to rule with no other aim or intent, but
that thou may save; and who have founded thy dominion in thy blood, and
did die and revive and rise again that thou might be Lord of the living and
the dead, and therefore my Lord; Accept now a self-refigning Soul; I make a
free surrender of my self, I bow and submit to thy Sovereign Power, I fall at
the footstool of thy Throne, Thou Prince of the Kings of the Earth, who have
loved sinners, and washed them from their sins in thy blood; Glory in thy
conquest, Thou have overcome, I will from henceforth be no longer mine own, but
thine; I am ready to receive thy commands, to do thy will, to serve thy
interests, to sacrifice my all to thy Name and Honor; my whole life and being
are for ever thine.

I say (as before) there is pleasure in the very doing this it self, as often
as it is sincerely done; And it adds hereto, if it be more distinctly
considered, It is no mean or any way undeserving person to whom this homage is
paid, and obligation taken on unto future obedience; He is the brightness of
the Fathers glory, the express Image of his person, the Heir of all things, and
who sustains all things by the word of his power: It is he whose name is
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace: It Is he to whom all power is given both in heaven and earth, and (more
especially) power over all flesh, that he might give eternal life to as many as
were given him; It Is he who spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made an open
show of them; He whom because when he was in the form of God, and thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, he humbled himself, made himself of no
reputation, took on him the form of a servant, became obedient to death, the
Father has therefore highly exalted, and given him a Name above every name,
that in his Name, every knee should bow; And of whom, when he brought him (his
firstborn) into the world, he said, Let all the Angels of God worship him.

And such a one he is, whose temper is all goodness and sweetness. Tell Sion,
thy King comes meek and lowly. He came into this world drawn down only by his
own pity and love, beholding the desolations and ruins that were wrought in it
every where. Sin universally reigning, and death by sin, and spreading its dark
shadow, and a dreadful cloud over all the earth. In which darkness the Prince
thereof was ruling and leading men captive at his will; having drawn them off
from the blessed God their life, and sunk them into a deep oblivion of their
own original; and disaffection to their true happiness that could only be found
there.

This great Lord and Prince of life and peace came down on purpose to be the
Restorer of Souls, to repair the desolations and ruins of many generations. He
came full of grace and truth, and has scattered blessings over the world
wheresoever he came; has infinitely obliged all that ever knew him; and is he
in whom all the nations of the earth must be blessed; And who would not with
joy swear fealty to him, and take pleasure to do him homage? Who would not
recount with delight the unexpressible felicity of living under the governing
power of such a one?

And if the tenor and scope of all his Laws and Constitutions be viewed over,
what will they be found, but obligations upon men to be happy; How easy his
yoke, how light his burden, what is the frame of his Kingdom, or whereof does
it consist but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. And who would
not now say, This Lord reigns, Psalm. 96.
let the earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof. Why
should it not be triumphingly said among the Heathen, That the Lord reigns,
that the world also shall be established, that it cannot be moved; Let the
heavens rejoice, and the earth be glad; let the sea roar, and the fullness
thereof; let the fields rejoice and all that is therein, and all the trees of
the wood rejoice!

Its plain, that be the matter of joy here what it will, be there never so much
cause of exultation and glorying in him, The righteousness and peace which his
Kingdom promises, never actually take place, nor the joy that is connection
therewith, till the Holy Ghost dispose and form men's spirits thereto. Romans 14.
17.
For all this is but mere dream and idle talk to those who hear only of these
things, and feel not that vital influence insinuating it self, that may give
the living sense and savor of them. And we may rather expect seas and fields,
beasts and trees, to sing his triumphant Song, and chant his praises, than
those men whose hearts are not attempered to his Government, and who are yet
under the dominion of another Lord, not being yet by the law of the spirit of
life in Christ Jesus, made free from the law of sin and death: But where this
is effectually done, How large matter of most rational pleasure do they find
here; while there is nothing in that whole System of Laws by which he governs,
that is either vain, unequal, or unpleasant, or upon any account grievous? only
this is not the estimate of distempered spirits, or of any other than them in
whose hearts his Law is written, and who because they love him, Joh. 15.
keep his Commandments. Unto Love his commands are most connatural; For this is
the love of God, 1 John 5. 3.
that we keep his commandments; They are not grievous i. e. (by the Meiosis
which some do reasonably enough apprehend in those words), they are joyous,
delightful, pleasant, but to them only who being born of God, have overcome the
world. This holy influence and communication of God, is therefore grateful, and
contributes not a little to delight in this respect, that thereby men's spirits
are rectified and set right toward God, viz. both toward the Creator and
Redeemer.

2. As hereby they are rectified toward men, having the universal Law of Love
wrought deep into their hearts; being filled with all goodness, righteous
meekness, mercifulness; apt to do no wrong, to bear any, to pity and help the
distressed, to love enemies, and as there is opportunity, to do good to all,
especially to them that are of the household of Faith. We must understand in
this, as well as in the other parts of that stamp which the Spirit of God puts
on the Souls of men, That the Impression corresponds and answers to the Seal,
(as has been said), the inward Communication to the outward Revelation of Gods
will; And so we find the matter is: For as Divine Precepts require this should
be the temper of men's spirits, so the very things that compose and make up that
blessed temper, are said to be the fruits of his own Spirit; The fruit of the
Spirit is peace, Gal. 5. 22, 23.
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. And again, The fruit of
the spirit is in all goodness, Ephesians. 5. 9.
and righteousness, and truth. Now has not that Soul a spring of pleasure
within it self, that is in these respects as God would have it be? That is
conscious to it self of nothing but righteousness, goodness, benignity, candor
toward any man, and is in all things acted by a spirit of love, 1 Cor. 13.
that suffers long, and is kind, that envieth not, that vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not its own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in
the truth, that bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things, and never fails. That so equally poises and acts a man's
spirit, that he carries seemly and sutably toward all men, takes pleasure in
the best, in the Saints and excellent ones of the earth has all his delight;
and is no worse affected, than to wish them better, even toward the very
worst; neither envies the greatest, nor despises the meanest; neither is
revengeful toward them that injure him, nor unthankful to them that oblige
him; that is apt to learn of good men, and to teach the bad, by observing and
giving the most imitable example; That is not undutiful to superiors, nor
morose and unconversable toward equals; That lives not to himself; Is a common
good to all within the sphere through which his activity can extend it self;
That does good with inclination, from the steady propension of his own will,
and an implanted principle of goodness. It is evident, God has formed such a
man's spirit unto delight of the purest kind, and the best sort of pleasure;
unto which they who are strangers, banish it from their own breasts, by the
resistance and grief they give his blessed Spirit, thereby making it a stranger
there; And by harboring in their own bosoms their own tormentors, the pride,
the wrath, the envy, the malice, the revengefulness, the bitterness of spirit,
which as they render them uneasy and intolerable to all that are about them,
so most of all to themselves; And which while they prey wherever they range
abroad, yet still bite most keenly and tormentingly that heart it self wherein
they are bred; as poisonous Vipers gnawing the bowels which enclose them.

3. Toward themselves; which also may be considered distinctly; For though all
the good qualifications we can mention or think of, do redound to a man's self,
and turn to his own advantage, repose and delight, (which it is the design of
all this discourse to show), yet there are some that more directly terminate on
a man's self, wherein the rectitude we now speak of does in great part consist:
When we are obliged to love others as our selves, it supposes not only an
allowable, but a laudable self-love. Men shall praise thee when thou do well
to thy self. Before this right spirit be renewed in a man, he does not only
wound himself, by blows that are reflected on him, and hurt at the rebound, but
by many a direct stroke; or he lets the wounds fester and corrupt, to the cure
whereof he should with all diligence directly apply himself. How unpropitious
and cruel to themselves are all unholy persons! What wastes and desolations do
they commit and make in their own Souls, by breaking the order God and Nature
did at first set and establish there? Dethroning their own reason and judgment,
which ought to bear sway and govern within them. This banishes delight, and
drives it far away from them? They see what is fittest for them to do and seek,
and run a quite counter-course. What storms do they hereby raise in their own
bosoms! What a torture is it, when a man's own light and knowledge bears a
standing testimony against him, and holds him under a continual doom!

How ill-dispos'd are men toward themselves, when they wholly neglect
themselves in one kind, when they too much mind and seek themselves in another;
when they too little understand themselves, so as not to put a true value on
themselves, but do either disesteem themselves, as to their more noble part, in
respect of that common excellency which belongs to them with all other men; or
do over-magnifie themselves, and are conceited and too well opinion'd of
themselves, in respect of any peculiar excellency wherein they imagine they
outstrip others? How ill do they treat themselves in their self-indulgence,
their gratifying their own sensual inclination, with the greatest danger and
damage to their Souls? When they care not at what expense they make provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof? What unkind usage do they find at
their own hands, when they cherish and countenance desires which they cannot
gratify, and raise to themselves expectations of things not within their own
power, which being disappointed turn into so many furies, and in that shape
take a sharp revenge upon their own hearts? when they exercise no authority and
dominion over themselves, preserve not the liberty due to what should both be
it self free, and should command the rest in them; Inslave themselves to vile
and ignominious lusts and passions, put out their own eyes, and grind blindfold
to the basest and most tyrannical Lords, their own sordid humors and base,
mean appetites; when though they serve more rigorous taskmasters than the
Israelites in Egypt did, and are more sorely beaten by them when their tale is
not fulfilled for want of materials, yet groan not because of their hard
bondage, nor affect liberty?

This gracious communication from God, sets all things in a good degree right
within; So that where there was nothing before, but horrid and hellish
darkness, disorder and confusion, there now shines a mild, pleasant, cheerful
light, that infers regularity, purity, and peace.

How great is the pleasure that arises from self-denial (wherein we do, duly
and as we ought, deny our selves); not only as it is an act of duty toward God
(of which before,) but as it is an act of justice and mercy toward our own
souls! That is, wherein we make a just and true estimate of our selves, do
esteem basely of our selves; wherein we are really become base and vile: And
wherein there is any thing of real value and excellency in our own beings, we
value it only upon that account, and in that subordination wherein it is truly
valuable!

How pleasant, when we have learned to forsake and abandon our selves, when we
are not apt to magnify and applaud, to trust or love, to seek and serve our
selves unduly and are only inclined to own, to cleave and stick to our selves,
wherein and so far as we ought! when that Idol Self is no longer maintained
within us, at the dear expense of our peace, comfort, safety, and eternal hope;
An Idol that engrossed the whole substance of our Souls, that exhausted and
devoured the strength and vigor of our spirits, which it does not maintain,
and cannot repair; which consumes our time, which keeps all our powers and
faculties in a continual exercise and hurry, to make a costly, a vain, an
unlawful provision for it! How great is the ease and pleasure which we feel, in
being delivered from that soul-wasting Monster, that was sed and sustained at a
dearer rate, and with more costly sacrifices and repasts then can be paralleld
by either sacred or other History; That has made more desolation in the souls
of men, then ever was made in their Towns and Cities where Idols were served by
only humane sacrifices, or monstrous creatures satiated with only such
refections; Or where the lives and safety of the most were to be bought out by
the constant successive tribute of the blood of not a few! That has devoured
more, and preyed more cruelly upon human lives than Molech, or the Minotaure;
When this monstrous Idol is destroyed and trodden down, what a Jubilee does it
make, what songs of triumph and praise does it furnish and supply to the poor
soul, now delivered and redeemed from death and bondage. How much more easy
and reasonable a service is it (when once the grace of God and their own
experience give men to understand it,) to study to please him than themselves?
when they feel themselves dead to their former Lord and service, Romans 6. 11, 12.
and only alive to God through Jesus Christ! when Sin no longer reigns in their
mortal bodies, that they should obey it in the lusts thereof; v. 13.
when they no more yield their members as instruments of unrighteousness unto
sin, but have yielded themselves unto God, as those that are alive from the
dead, etc.! When being made free from sin, v, 18.
they are become servants unto righteousness! Romans 8. 2.
The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus having made me free from the law
of sin! What an ease is it to the spirit of a man, when he has not himself to
seek and serve and care for in any unlawful disallowed sense, when he finds not
himself necessitated or urged by his own imperious fleshly inclination so to
do; when he perceives himself by a prevailing better principle counterpoys'd,
and the weight and bias of his own Spirit inclines him quite another way; when
he finds he has nothing left him to do, but to serve God, to know his will and
do it; and is disburdened of all unnecessary care for himself; That which is
necessary being part of his duty, and is therefore done on purpose only for
God: and that which is unnecessary and forbidden (which part only was
burdensome) being supplied by (what has the greatest ease and pleasure in it
imaginable) trust and self- resignation to his pleasure and will whose we
wholly are? what life is pleasant, if this be not! Surely wherein it is
attained to, it is most pleasant; and hither this gracious heart-rectifying
communication is gradually tending.

How great is the pleasure that arises from Self-government! When that governs
in us which should govern, and that is subject and obeys which should obey;
when a man's mind is competently furnished with directive practical principles,
and his heart is so framed that it is capable of being prescribed to, is
patient of restraints and direction, easily obeys the reign and follows the
ducture of an enlightened well-instructed mind; when the order is maintained
between the superior faculties and the inferior, and there are no contentious
murmurs of ungovernable appetitions and passions against the law of the mind:
It Is true, that where this holy rectitude does but in a degree take place, there
will be many conflicts, but those conflicts are in order to victory; and how
joyful and glorious is the triumph upon that victory! when the soul enters upon
its (...), its thanksgiving song, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord!
how happy a state is that (wherein at some times it is here attained) when
there are now no tumults within! The wicked (which is the very import of their
name) are as troubled sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt. Here is no governing principle in any power; no Scepter, no Trident to
check and allay the rage of those waters. But when his power goes forth in the
soul, whose very word Winds and Seas obey, how peaceful and pleasant a calm
does ensue!

Now is a man restored to himself, and is again in his right mind. He is truly
now said to enjoy himself, and upon the best terms; that is, he enjoys himself
in and under God. He is (in a due subordination) master of himself. He
possesses his own Soul; That one piece of holy rectitude [patience] inables him
to do so. Luke 21. 19.
In your patience possess ye your Souls. Patience is a part of Fortitude* an
ability to suffer; He that is in this respect impotent of himself, not able to
suffer, is a perfect slave; not a slave only to the vicious wills and humors
of other men, in whose power he apprehends it is to befriend or hurt him; but
first and chiefly to his own; he is not master of his own judgment, reason, and
conscience; but he prostitutes all in the first place, to his own inordinate
self-love, his avarice, his fear, and consequently to the pleasure of other
men, (which upon no other terms and inducements is base and vile toward any
man, were the matter in it self never so right, and the obedience as due to
them as can be supposed), whereas if he could suffer, he retained his mastery
over himself, and were, under God, within his own power. Upon this, Col. 1. 11.
with other grounds, is joyfulness a companion of patience; How much more is it
so (if to this one part) to the whole frame of that holy rectitude whereby a
man's spirit is composed to a due order within it self; When there is an
universal sobriety (or soundness of mind, as the word that uses to express
sobriety signifies), a continency and dominion of ones self; and the Soul is no
longer hurried to and fro, and even outed of it self, by undue desires, fears,
angers, sorrows, etc. nor vexed by the absence of and its perverse ineptitude
and indisposition to those which it well knows are due; When it finds it self
at liberty from the exactions of an unsubdued flesh, and for the kindly and
genuine operations and exercises of the divine life. When it is in good measure
freed from the rackings and tortures that naturally accompany the habitual
contrariety of an ungovernable heart to a convinced judgment and conscience;
And is no longer held in pain, by such continual self-upbraidings; Thou art,
and affectest to be, what thou know thou should not; and neither art, nor
do, nor can desire or endure to be, or do, what thou very well know
thou should. In that case the soul is throughout disjointed, and continually
grating upon it self. And the ease and pleasure which it finds by this happy
change much resembles that which a man's body, being in such a case, feels, when
every dislocated bone is brought back and well-settled in its own proper place
and order again. How resentingly does the Psalmist acknowledge divine goodness
in this! He restores my Soul: Psalm. 23. 3.
and leads me in paths of righteousness, for his names sake; q. d. Now I can
walk and act as a sound man, and the paths of righteousness are become pleasant
and delectable to me, which before I declined, or wherein my halt and maimed
Soul was unable to move a step. Now is heard the voice of joy and gladness when
the bones which were disordered and broken rejoice. Psalm. 51.


How great is the joy and pleasure of self-activity! when the Soul is not moved
by foreign, improper motives, but finds it self to move freely from an
implanted principle of life, that acts it forward in right and plain paths;
when it does, with its own full consent, what it is convinced it ought without
being forcibly dragged or violently imposed upon; and is (not a weak,
ineffectual, or only self-judging, but) a powerful governing vital Law to it
self.

How great pleasure arises from a constant diligent self-inspection! when a
man's spirit dwells within it self, resides at home, seeks not it self abroad;
remains within its own bounds, is intent upon it self; watches over its own
motions as its proper charge; is formed to a compliance with that Precept,
Prove. 4. 23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence. And upon that consideration, as seriously
weighing that thence are the issues of life, all vital acts and operations
whatsoever will savor of the root and principle from whence they proceed, and
be as the heart is; good and pure if that be so; if otherwise, corrupt and
naught. To have a spirit habituated to the business of its own Province and
Territory; Its eyes, not with the fool's in the ends of the earth, but turned
inward upon it self. Hence his own vineyard is best kept; when the sluggard's
(that neglects himself) is wholly overrun with thorns and briars, that cover
the face thereof. How forlorn and comfortless a spectacle has such a man of
his own Soul! The horror whereof is only avoided by (the more hopeless course
of) turning off his eye; as conscious how ill entertainment is there to be met
with. Therefore are such, strangers at home; and are afraid to converse with
themselves; are better acquainted with the affairs of France and Spain, or at
least of this and that and the other neighbor, than those of their own Souls.
And the more things at home are neglected the worse they grow. Poverty and
desolation come upon them as an armed man; that (in this case) wastes and makes
havoc without resistance.

And herein lies much of the heart-rectifying work and power of grace, in
disposing and setting the heart so far right toward it self, as that it may
first have the patience to look inward, and then the pleasure which will
afterward arise, most naturally, thence. The great aversion hereto of
misgiving hearts is not otherwise overcome. But when it is; How do all things
flourish under such a ones careful, self-reflecting eye! That Soul is as a
watered garden. Thither it can invite his presence who is altogether made up of
delights, to come and eat his pleasant fruits. And now, retirement and solitude
become delectable: And a man delightfully associates with himself; singles out
himself to be his own companion, as finding another always stepping in; so that
he is never less alone than when alone. How unspeakable an happiness is this,
when the great Mediator that undertook to reconcile God to the Soul, shall thus
have also reconciled it to it self! When it shall be considered, how dreadful
the case is, when a man's wickedness has transformed him into a Magor-Missabib,
compassed him with affrightments, made him a terror to himself: It may then be
understood how grateful a change it is when he is reformed into a son of peace,
and made a delight to himself; when he can recreate himself, and refresh his
tired eye, overcharged with beholding the sad things that everywhere come in
view from a world lost in wickedness, by looking into Gods own Plantation
within himself; and considering it under that notion only, he does not look
upon himself with an eye of pride; as he does not upon others with that of
disdain. He beholds with a sort of self-complacency what God has wrought and
done there, not with self-arrogance; as knowing there is a self too, upon which
he has still reason to look with abhorrence and self-loathing. And though
there be now incorporated with him a better self, yet that was not of himself.
He well understands who made him differ, not only from others but from himself;
and put him into that capacity of saying that I am not I, I am not who or what
I was before. And the more he is used to such self-reflection, the more
pleasant it becomes to him; That is, if he confine not his eye too much, to the
dark side of his own Soul; and do look to the more lightsome side with that
remembrance (as before) that whatsoever he is, that is good and grateful to
behold, he is by grace. He thus grows familiar with himself, and the sight
mends as it is oftener beheld; and while it is not observed always to do so.
Yea, though things look many times sadly and sometimes dubiously; that however,
does but occasion the accomplishment of a more diligent search, which engages
to more earnest labor and strugglings with God and with himself, which labor
is recompensed with a following fruit and pleasure: Yea, and God is invocated
not only for redress, but for further search; when such fear lest they have
been too indulgent and partial toward themselves, and lest they have not made
so strict a scrutiny as the case may possibly require; then the request is,
Search and try me, O Lord, see if there be any way of wickedness in me. And
here the sincerity which appears in that self-suspicion, and jealousy over
their own Souls, is not without its grateful relishes, and a secret delight
insinuates and mingles with the appeals which such a Soul makes to Him, whose
eye is a flame of fire, searches hearts and tries reins. And it is some
pleasure, however, to find that disposition in their own Souls, that they are
thoroughly willing to know themselves, and desire not to shun and decline the
search of that fiery flaming eye.

Thus then upon all accounts this divine communication is delectable, as it
tends to rectify men's dispositions toward themselves, and to set them right
in their inclinations and posture in reference to their own Souls. We may add,

4. It contributes much to the matter of delight, as it sets men's spirits right
in their dispositions toward this and the other world; the present and future
state of things. How great a work is necessary to be done in this respect,
wherein things are so monstrously out of course; and men become thereby not
strangers only to true delight and pleasure, but even incapable of any such
relishes till the matter be redrest! How vitiated and unexercised are men's
senses as to these things, and unable to discern between good and evil! Their
grosser sense is utterly incompetent, and a spiritual more refined sense is
wanting; Therefore do they judge, and choose, and love, and pursue only as that
most incompetent and injudicious principle does direct, That is appealed to in
all cases: All their measures are taken from thence; and that only is called
good, which to their sensual imagination, tinctured by the earthliness and
carnality of their hearts, appears so; that evil, of which the same principle
does so pronounce; according hereto is the whole bent and inclin^^ion of their
Souls. And they are only in^^^^^'d and governed by the powers of this sensible
world; this present evil world, the fashion whereof (yea it and the lusts
thereof together) are passing away. And the things of the world to come have no
power with them; no motives from thence signify any thing. They are only
steered in their whole course by the apprehension they have of advantages or
disadvantages in reference to their present secular concernments. They love
this world, and the things of this world; mind earthly things, and are not
startled when they are so plainly told, that men of this character have not the
love of the Father in them, and are enemies to the cross of Christ, and that
their end will be destruction. It Is a death to them to think of dying; not from
the fear of what may ensue (they have Atheism enough to stifle such fear), but
from the love of their earthly stations, and that vile earthly body in which
they dwell.

But how delightful a thing is the change which this rectifying communication
makes! How pleasant to live in this world as a Pilgrim and Stranger, seeking
still the better, the heavenly Country! To behold the various inticements which
are here offered to view at, sometimes without inclination toward them; the
frightful aspect and appearance of things at other times without commotion; Is
not this delectable? To dwell apart from this world in the midst of it; Psalm.
91.
In the secret of the Almighty, under his pavilion, as one of his hidden ones,
Psalm. 27.
withdrawn from the communion of this world to his own communion; so severed
and cut off from this world, as not to partake in the spirit of it, or be acted
thereby; but by another, a greater and more mighty, as well as a purer and more
holy Spirit; 1 John 4. 4.
Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. 1 Cor. 2. 12.
And again, We have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which
is of God, that we might know the things which are freely given to us of God.
Which things the divine Spirit disposes the Soul to, and unites it with, when
it disinclines and disjoins it from this world and the things thereof; and
thereby discovers this Soul to be quite of another community from that of this
world, viz. of an heavenly community, unto which those better and more
excellent things do ly in common, as their portion and inheritance. What matter
of Joy and Glorying is it, Gal. 6.
when one is crucified to this world, and this world to him; when the world
appears to him a crucified thing, i. e. an accursed, hateful, detestable thing,
(which is one notion of crucified), such a thing as he can despise and hate;
which he is as little apt to be fond of, as one would be of a loathsome carcass
hanging upon an ignominious Cross. And when he can feel himself crucified
toward it, i. e. dead (another notion of it), disinclin'd, without sense,
breath, pulse, motion, or appetite; not so dead as to be without any kind of
life, but without that base, low, sordid kind of life by which he lived to it,
and in its converses and embraces. So much of delectation does this infer, as
even to endear the very cross it self (that hateful horrid thing) by which it
is effected. But that carries a farther signification with it, to be fetched
more expressly from other Scriptures; The cross is it self rendered amiable, and
a thing to be gloried in, to be looked on with delight and pleasure, upon the
account of the design and end of that Tragedy which was acted thereon; within
which design (being executed and accomplished) this happy effect is included.
We elsewhere find the Apostle expressing his vehement desire to know Christ and
the power of his resurrection, Phil. 3.
and (in order thereto) the fellowship of his sufferings, v. 10.
being made conformable to his death. But what did he lastly aim at in this?
The next words more fully speak out (what he first mentioned) the power of his
resurrection to be the thing chiefly in his eye, and that he desired (what he
adds) the fellowship of his sufferings, etc. as a means unto that end, though
it seemed a sharp and painful means; If by any means I might attain the
resurrection of the dead; v. 11.
q. d. I care not what I undergo, not the sufferings even of a painful
crucifixion it self, or that my worldly earthly Self do suffer conformably to
the sufferings of my crucified Lord; I matter not by what so severe method the
thing be brought about, if by any means it may be brought about, that I may
know the power of his resurrection so feelingly, as to attain also the
resurrection of the dead. And what was that? No doubt to attain a state (which
he confesses he had not yet perfectly attained, but was in pursuit of) suitable
to his relation and union with a risen Jesus; Union with him supposes a being
risen with him; If ye then be risen with Christ --. Col. 1. 3.
It is taken as a granted thing, that they that are his are risen with him. And
what state and temper of spirit would be suitable to that supposition? The next
words show, Seek those things that are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God. Set your affection (or mind) on the things above, not on the
things on the earth. Then follows the method in which they were brought to the
capacity of doing so; For ye are dead. Their professed relation to Christ did
suppose them risen, and did therefore first suppose them dead. Now if they
would do sutably to what their profession imported, this was it they had to do;
To abstract their minds and hearts from the things of this earth, and place
them upon the things of an higher region. And (as its afterward expressed in
this same context which we were considering before) to have our conversation
(or Citizenship) in heaven, Phil. 3. 20.
whence we look for the Savior, etc. That is, as our chief interests and
privileges are above, to have our thoughts and the powers of our Souls chiefly
exercised upon that blessed and glorious state, which state is the prize
(mentioned above) of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. v. 14.
It being the scope and import of his Call unto us, and the very design of his
sufferings on the Cross, to draw up a people from earth to heaven; whence
therefore they that under this Call do still mind earthly things, Ver. 18. 19.
are said to be enemies to the Cross of Christ; the great incongruity whereof
the Apostle even resents with tears as he there testifies. And it was in this,
that he was for his part so willing to comply with the design of the Cross,
that he made no difficulty to endure all the hardship and dolor of it, that he
might attain this glorious fruit and gain which he reckoned should accrue to
him from it; even more of a raised heavenly mind, which signified it to be
strongly bent that way already; when no mortifications were reckoned too severe
to be undergone in order thereto. And here therefore this, soul-rectifying
influence must be understood to have been proportionably strong.

Hence also it was that we find him groaning as one under a pressure or heavy
weight to be clothed upon with the heavenly house: and to have mortality
swallowed up of life: 2 Cor. 5.
Because God had wrought him to this self-same thing, v. 4.
so bent and determined his spirit was toward the blessedness of the future
state (which seems the most natural contexture of discourse here, v. 5.
though some others have understood it otherwise) as that, though he could bear
patiently the delay, he could not but desire most earnestly to be there.

And we see how the temper of the Primitive Christians was, as to this, and the
other world, in those days when the Spirit was plentifully poured out. Heb. 10.
34.
They took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves, they
had in Heaven a far better and an enduring substance. Heaven signified much
with them, and this world very little. They looked not to the things that were
seen and temporal, but to the things unseen and eternal. 2 Cor. 4. ult.
As those former Worthies did, whose minds and hearts, being set right by that
faith, which is the substance of the things hoped for, Heb. 11.
and the evidence of things not seen. They lived as pilgrims and strangers on
earth, despised the pleasures, riches and honors of it. Endured all manner of
hardships and tortures in it, not accepting deliverance, because they were
taken up in the pursuit of the better Country; had respect to the recompense of
reward; and expected a part in the better Resurrection.

And is it not a delightful thing to the spirit of a man when he is sensibly
disintangled, and at liberty from the cares, desires, griefs and fears that
were wont to enwrap his heart? when he finds his weights and clogs fallen off,
that deprest him, the bonds and snares loosed which bound him down to this
earth; and feels himself ascending and moving upwards; out of that darkness,
stupidity and death that possessed his Soul, into that upper region of light,
purity and peace, unto which his spirit is still gradually more and more
connaturallized day by day? When Heaven in respect of the pure holiness, the
calm serenity, the rest and blessedness of it, is now grown familiar to him,
and his very element?

We see then, that in all these mentioned respects this gracious communication,
wherein it is rectifying, and tends to settle the Soul in that frame which it
ought to be in, and which is most proper and natural to it; therein it is also
most delightful, and carries highest matter of pleasure in it.

It is upon the whole (that we may sum up the account, of this divine
communication in the following characters of it);

1. Generative, and begets the Soul to a new, a divine life; makes it of a
sluggish, stupid dead thing (as it was toward all heavenly and divine matters)
living and sprightly, full of active life and vigor. Life we say is sweet, it
is in it self a pleasant thing. This mean, bodily life it self is so; if we do
but consider it, and allow our selves to taste and enjoy the pleasure of it. As
for instance, that this and that limb and member is not a dead lump, that we
feel life freshly sprouting and springing in every part, is not this
delightsom? How much more the life of the Soul! especially this so excellent
and sublime kind of life!

And it is the radical principle of all other (consequent) pleasure, that by
which we are capable thereof; every thing is sapless and without savor to the
dead. How pleasant operations and fruitions does the divine life render a
person capable of!

2. It is Nutritive. Souls are nourished by the same thing by which they are
begotten, by the same divine influence. As a generative virtue is wont to be
attributed to the Sun, so it cherishes also its own productions. The beams of
that Sun of righteousness make them that fear God grow up as calves in the
stall, Mal. 4. 2.
fill them with marrow and fatness, cause them to flourish as the Cedars of
Lebanon. And is not that delightsome to be increased daily with the increases
of God? fed with heavenly hidden Manna, Angels food; and thereby (though we
need not here speak distinctly of these) to receive at once both nourishment
and growth?

3. It is Sanative, and virtually contains all the fruits in it which are for
the healing of the Nations; when the Soul grows distempered, it restores it,
and is both sustaining and remedying to it. How great is the pleasure of health
and soundness! of ease to broken bones! of relief to a sick and fainting heart!
so it is often (for in the present state the cure is not perfect and relapses
are frequent) with the Soul in which the life of God has begun to settle and
diffuse it self, till his influence repair and renew it; And when it does so,
how pleasant is it to find an heart made sound in his statutes! and to perceive
anew working in it the Spirit of love, 2 Cor. 4.
power and a sound mind! So pleasant that it occasions a triumph (even when the
outward man is perishing) if it be found that the inward is renewed day by day.

4. It is Corroborative and strengthening; confirms resolutions, and
establishes the heart. Hereby they who have felt this quickening, cherishing,
healing virtue are also strengthened with might ( viz. by the Spirit) in the
inner man; so that they hold on their way, and being of clean hands, Job 17. 9.
grow stronger and stronger. They go from strength to strength; and do not so
much spend, Psalm. 84.
as increase it by going forward. For the way it self of the Lord is strength
to the upright. Prove. 10.
He provides that fresh recruits shall still spring up to them in their way.
For all their supplies are of him, and are acknowledged to be so; In as much as
by waiting upon the Lord they renew strength and mount up with wings as Eagles,
Isa. 40.
run without weariness, and walk without fainting. And this increasing strength
cannot be without a proportionably increasing delight. How pleasantly does the
strong man rejoice to run his race! and enterprise even difficult and hazardous
things! By this strength does the regenerate man perform the ordinary duties
belonging to his holy profession; by it he encounters difficulties, combats and
conquers enemies, bears heavy and afflicting pressures, and none of these
without some intermingled pleasure. For even that exercise of this strength
which is likely to be least accompanied with pleasure, the suffering of sharp
and smarting afflictions, has many times much of this grateful mixture; and
can only be expected to have it in this way of gracious communication, as the
depending sufferers shall be strengthened with all might according to the
glorious power of God, Col. 1. 11.
unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness.

God is therefore to be enjoyed and delighted in by this delectable
communication intervening, by which he now frames the Soul according to his own
Image, and gives an heart after his own heart, that is, such as is suitable to
him, and as he would have it be. And this way only is any one in a possibility
to delight in God, by having a good frame of Spirit communicated to him, and in
wrought in him; I mean never without this, and in a great measure by it. Then
is he in a happy state, when God has by his own Spirit made him what by his
Word he requires him to be. Now is he composed to delights and blessedness,
being by the same workmanship created in Christ Jesus both to good works and to
the best of enjoyments. How happy is that Soul in whom the true matter of
delight is become an implanted thing! that is what it should be, and should be
nothing (such is the constitution of Gospel-Rules and Precepts) but what most
truly makes for its own content, delight, and rest! whose own temper is now in
some sort become to it both a law and a reward! Surely this is one great part
of what an enlightened apprehensive Soul would most earnestly desire and crave,
or would be the genuine breathings of a sincerely gracious heart. O that I were
more like God! more perfectly framed according to his holy will! And must
therefore be, in great part, a thing apt to afford it delight and rest; as has
been already inculcated before.

But yet this natural consequence is little understood. And the common
ignorance or inadvertency of this, has made it necessary to insist the more
largely (though but little have been said in respect of what might) on this
part of the delectable communication wherein God offers himself to his peoples
enjoyment. For from the not-knowing, or not-considering of this way of enjoying
him, this twofold mistake (the one of very dangerous, the other of
uncomfortable importance and tendency) has arisen.

1. That some have thought they have enjoyed God when they have not; having
only had their imaginations somewhat gratified, by certain, either false or
ineffectual notions of him. In which they have rested, and placed the sum of
their Religion and Happiness. Never aiming, in the mean time, to have their
spirits reformed according to that pure and holy Image and Exemplar which he
has represented in the Gospel of his Son; the impression whereof, is, Christ
formed in us.

2. That others have thought they have not enjoyed God when they have;
supposing there was no enjoyment of him, but what consisted in the rapturous
transporting apprehension and persuasion of his particular love to them; and
slightly overlooking all that work he has wrought in their Souls, as if it
were nothing to be accounted of, not allowing themselves to reflect on any
thing in themselves, but what was still amiss; and vainly seeking with much
anxiety and complaint what they have, while they will not take notice that they
have it, nor apply themselves to improve the already implanted Principles that
are, in themselves, apt to yield fruits of so pleasant relish.

It was upon this account requisite to discover, and labor somewhat to
magnify the intrinsecal delightfulness of Religion it self; and to put the
more of note and remark upon a well-tempered spirit, even in point of
delectableness and the matter of pleasure it has in it, by how much it is with
too many, on one account or another, a neglect^d thing.

There is only somewhat of doubt, or objection that may possibly lie in the
minds of some against the scope and drift of this Discourse; which it will be
needful we endeavor to remove before we proceed to what is further contained
in this gracious communication: As,

It may be said, Does not all this tend to bring us, instead of delighting in
God, to delight in our selves? To make us become our own center and rest? And
how can the relishable sweetness of gracious principles and dispositions
signify Gods being to be enjoyed or delighted in? For what, are these things
God?

To this I only say: 1. That such holy dispositions as they are not God, so nor
are they, in strictness of speech, our selves. And how absurd were it, to call
every thing our selves that is in us! And how self-contradicting then were the
very objection! for that would make delighting in God and in our selves
directly all one; and so the fault which it causlesly pretends to find, it
would really commit. It Is true, that improperly holy dispositions are said to
make up another self in us, a new man, according as corrupt and sinful
principles and dispositions do make also a self, the old man. But then it is
also to be remembered, that with no greater impropriety they are capable of
bearing the name of God; as the image of any thing frequently does the name of
the thing which it represents, or the work of its Author: And they are expressly
called, Christ formed in us; and is not the God? They are called the Spirit;
for when we are cautioned not to quench the Spirit, how can that be understood
of the eternal uncreated Spirit himself? And the very thing produced (not
merely the productive influence) in the work of Regeneration is expressly called
by that name (as it is no such strange thing for the effect to carry the name
of its cause); Joh. 3. 6.
That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. There is Spirit begetting, and
Spirit begotten. And the Spirit begotten, as it must be distinguished from its
cause, the Spirit of God; so it must from the subject wherein the effect is
wrought, our own Spirits; For they sure are not produced by the regenerating
work. Yea, and when God is said to dwell in them that dwell in love, and that
are humble and contrite; somewhat else is thereby signified to be indwelling
there, than the mere being of God; for otherwise the privilege of such were no
greater than of all other men and things. And what else is it, but somewhat
communicated and imparted immediately from God to such? (else how by dwelling
in love, do they dwell in God?) which because dwelling imports permanency,
cannot be a transient influence only, but some settled abiding effect, a
consistent frame and temper of Spirit, maintained by his continually renewed
influence; and therefore it would be very unreasonably said, that the
representing this as delectable is a calling us off from God to delight in our
selves. For if this communication be not it self, in strict propriety, God, it
were as great impropriety to say it were our selves. Again,

2. It has a great deal more affinity with God than with us. We are, its true,
the subjects of it; but it is his immediate production and very likeness, a
Divine nature, no humane thing. Therefore if here our delight were to
terminate, it were more proper to call it delighting in God than in our selves.
But,

3. It is neither said nor meant, that here our delight is to terminate; but
that hereby we are to delight in God, and so that our delight is to terminate
in him.

4. When we are said to enjoy God, I inquire, Is any thing communicated to us,
or no? If not, we have no enjoyment; If any thing be, what is it? Gods Essence?
That Is impossible and horrid to think, as has been said. And we need not
repeat, that when we can tell what it is to enjoy a Friend, without partaking
his essence, whose communications are so incomparably more remote, mediate,
resistible; It is less difficult to conceive, how God is to be enjoyed by his
communications.

2. It may be again said; But if God be

Let any that object thus, only study the meaning of those Precepts; Keep your
selves in the love of God. Continue in his goodness. Be ye filled with the
Spirit. Walk in the Spirit. And if they can think them to signify any thing,
they will not be to seek for an answer. But to this more hereafter; when from
the delightful object, we come to treat of actual delighting in it.

3. But some may say, It were indeed to be (which may be all our time). [Is
there a real thorough work of God upon my Soul or no?] For how can I rejoice in
that whereof I have yet a doubt, whether it be what it seems or no?

I answer, 1. It is plain, they that really have nothing of this communication
from God, cannot take delight in it (otherwise than as hoped for). But,

2. Would we therefore have such to please themselves and be satisfied without
it; and delight in their distance and estrangement from God; and while there is
no intercourse between him and them? And shall this be called too delighting in
God? Surely somewhat else than delight belongs to their states.

3. But for such as really have it, That which has been designed to be
evinced, is, that it is delectable in it self; and therefore they cannot be
without any taste or relish of pleasure therein; while yet some doubt touching
the sincerity and truth thereof does yet remain: Though such doubt (but more
their imperfect reception of this communication, and neglect to look after
further degrees of it) cannot but render their delight comparatively little.

Nor has it been designed to speak hitherto, of what delight the regenerate in
this way actually have, but what they may have; and what matter of delight Gods
heart-rectifying communication does in the nature of it contain; that is,
supposing it were imparted and received, so as actually to have formed the Soul
according to the Gospel-revelation. And if it were so in a more eminent measure
and degree, it were then in it self so delectable, as without the assurance of
our future safe and happy state (though that, in that case, is not likely to be
in a comfortable degree wanting), that is, not by it only, but by it self,
without the present constant necessary concurrence thereof, to afford
unspeakable pleasure to that Soul in which it has place. So that the getting
of assurance is not the only thing to be done in order to a persons delighting
in God; (of which more hereafter is intended to be said in the directive Part).

But though that be not the only thing, yet it is a very great thing; and being
superadded, makes a great addition to the matter of delight: Therefore we
further say,

This divine communication is delectable the manifestation of Gods love to the
Soul in particular.

Nor do we hereby intend an Enthusiastical assurance; or such a testification
of the love of God to the Soul, as excludes any reference to his external
revelation and exercise of our own enlightened reason and judgment thereupon;
or wherein these are of no use, nor have subservience thereto: But as in the
other parts of the divine communication, his external revelation has the place
of an instrument, whereby he effects the work inwardly done upon the mind and
heart, and of a rule or measure whereby we are to judge of it; so we are to
account it is, as to this part of it also; that is, he inwardly testifies and
manifests the same thing which is virtually contained in his Gospel-revelation,
considered in that reference and aspect which it has on the present state of
the Soul. For that outward Revelation must needs be understood to signify
diversely to particular persons, as their state may be diverse; As when it says,
1 Cor. 2. 9.
The things that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the
heart of man, God has prepared for them that love him. To a person that does
indeed truly love God, it virtually says, all these things are prepared for
thee: To one that does not love God, it can only be understood to say, all
these things may be thine, i. e. if thou shall love him; If thou do not, thou
have no part in them; but in as much as a conditional promise, when the
condition is performed, is equivalent to an absolute; These words do as truly
import this sense to one that loves God [these things are thine], as if they
were directed to it in particular: As truly, I say, supposing the person do
truly love God, but not so clearly or with that evidence. For this Truth,
(supposing it a Truth), I do sincerely love God, is not so evident as this,
That such preparation is made for them that do: For this is expressly contained
in the Word of God; The other is not so, but to be collected only by
self-inspection, and observation of the bent and tenor of my spirit and way
Godward; yet however the evidence of truth admits of degrees, Truth it self
does not. All things that are true, are equally true. And therefore, when it is
said, so great things are prepared for them that love God; It is as truly said,
they are prepared for this man who loves God, as this or that particular lover
of God is contained in the general notion of a lover of him. And then, as that
public declaration says not to any, these things are prepared for you, whether
you love God or no, or otherwise than as they come under that common notion of
lovers of God; This inward manifestation is also so accommodate to that, as
that it says not another thing, but the same; that is, nothing that contradicts
(and indeed no more than is virtually contained in) the other; or it applies
what is generally said of the lovers of God to this particular lover of him as
such; that is, enabling him to discern himself a lover of him, impresses this
Truth powerfully upon the heart, these great preparations belong to thee, as
thou art such a one.

We speak not here of what God can do, but what he does. Who can doubt but as
God can, if he please, imprint on the mind the whole System of necessary Truth,
and on the heart the entire frame of holiness, without the help of an external
revelation; so he can imprint this particular persuasion also without any
outward means?

Nor do we speak of what he more rarely does, but of what he does ordinarily;
or what his more usual course and way of procedure is, in dealing with the
spirits of men. The supreme Power binds not its own hands. We may be sure, the
inward testimony of the Spirit never is opposite to the outward testimony of
his Gospel (which is the Spirits testimony also); and therefore it never says
to an unholy man, an enemy to God, thou art in a reconciled and pardoned state.
But we cannot be sure he never speaks or suggests things to the spirits of men
but by the external testimony, so as to make use of that as the means of
informing them with what He has to impart; Nay, we know he sometime has
imparted things (as to Prophets and the Sacred Penmen) without any external
means, and (no doubt) excited suitable affections in them, to the import of the
things imparted and made known.

Nor do I believe it can ever be proved, That he never does immediately
testify his own special love to holy Souls without the intervention of some
part of his external Word, made use of as a present instrument to that purpose,
or that he always does it, in the way of methodical reasoning therefrom.

Nor do I think that the experience of Christians can signify much to the
deciding of the matter. For besides that this, or that, or a third persons
experience cannot conclude any thing against a fourth's; and the way of arguing
were very infirm, what one or two or a thousand, or even the greater part of
serious Christians (even such as have attained to some satisfying evidence of
their own good estate) have not found, that nowhere is to be found: Besides
that I say, it is likely few can distinctly tell how it has been with them in
this matter; that is, what way or method has been taken with them in begetting
a present persuasion at this or that time of Gods peculiar love to them. His
dealings with persons (even the same persons at diverse times) may be so
various; his illapses and coming in upon them at some times may have been so
sudden and surprising; the motions of thoughts are so quick; the observation or
animadversion persons usually have of what is transacted in their own spirits
is so indistinct; and they may be so much taken up with the thing it self, as
less to mind the way and order of doing it, that we may suppose little is to be
gathered thence toward the settling of a stated rule in this case. Nor is the
matter of such moment, that we need either be curious in enquiring or positive
in determining about it; that Principle being once supposed and firmly stuck to;

That he never says any thing in this matter by his Spirit to the hearts of
men, repugnant to what the same Spirit has said in his Word; Or, That he does
not say a new or a diverse thing from what he has said there for their
assurance: that is, That he never testifies to any person by his Spirit that he
is accepted and beloved of him, who may at the same time be concluded by his
publiquely-extant constitutions in his Word to be in a state of non-acceptance
and disfavour; or concerning whom the same thing (viz. his acceptance) might
not be concluded by his Word, if it were duly applied to his case. Hereby the
most momentous danger in this matter is avoided; For if that Principle be
forelaid, enough is done to preclude the vain boasts of such as may be apt to
pretend highly to great manifestations of divine love, while they carry with
them manifest proofs of an unsanctified heart, and are under the power of
unmortified reigning sin. That Principle admitted, will convince that their
boasted manifestations, do only manifest their own ignorance, pride and vanity;
or proceed only from their heated imagination, or (the worse cause) Satanical
illusion, designed to lull them asleep in sin, and the more easily to lead them
blindfold to perdition. And this is the main concernment about which we need
to be solicitous in this matter: which being provided for; as it is difficult,
so it is not necessary to determine, whether the Spirit do always not only
testify according to the external revelation, but by it also; and so only as
to concur in the usual way of reasoning from it.

No doubt but the same Truth may be assented to upon diverse grounds; sometimes
upon rational evidence; sometimes upon testimony: And some Truths may be seen
by immediate mental intuition (as being self-evident) which also may be capable
of demonstration. And though this Truth of Gods particular love to such a man,
be none of those that have self-evidence: Yet Gods Spirit, as it may by
assisting the discursive faculty help us to discern the connexions of some
things which otherwise we should not perceive; so it may by assisting the
intuitive, make things evident to us that of themselves are not. Nor yet, also,
that it actually does so, can any I believe certainly tell; For admit that at
some times some have very transporting apprehensions of the love of God toward
themselves, suggested to their hearts by the holy Spirit; they having this
habitual knowledge before that love to him (for instance) or faith in him, or
the like, are descriptive characters of the persons whom he accepts and
(delightfully) loves; How suddenly may the divine light irradiate, or shine
upon those preconceived notions (which were begotten in them by the
interveniency of the external revelation before) and excite those
before-implanted principles of Faith, Love, etc. so as to give them the lively
sense of them now stirring and acting in their hearts? And thence also enable
them unwaveringly to conclude (and with an unexpressible joy and pleasure)
their own interest in his special love, in this way shedding it abroad in their
hearts by the Holy Ghost given to them? Romans 5. 5.
This may be so suddenly done that they may apprehend the testimony to be
immediate when indeed it is not.

Nor are they able to prove from Scripture the immediateness of it; For as to
what it does to them in particular, Scripture says nothing, they not being so
much as mentioned there: What it does or has done to this or that person there
mentioned signifies nothing to their case; if any thing were said that must
have that import (which will be hard to evince), and that it is any where in
Scripture signified to be its usual way, in common, toward them on whose
hearts it impresses this persuasion, to do it immediately; is much less to be
evinced. For what Scripture says so? and that famous Text that speaks so
directly to this matter; The Spirit of God bears witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God, seems rather to imply the contrary: In as
much as the Spirit of God is there expressly said to co-witness with our spirit
(as the word there used signifies) by which it should seem to take the same
course in testifying which our spirit or conscience does, that is, of
considering the general characters of his children laid down in his Word,
reflecting upon the same in our selves, and thereupon concluding we are his
children: Which if it were supposed the only thing the Spirit of God ordinarily
does in this matter, we may with much confidence assert;

1. That it does herein no small thing; for is it a small thing to be
ascertained of Gods fatherly love to us as his own children?

2. That it does not a less thing than if it testified the same matter in a way
altogether immediate. For wherein is it less? Is the matter less important?
that cannot be said; for the thing we are assured of is the same, howsoever we
be certify'd thereof. Is it less evident? That can with as little pretense be
said; For does any one account a thing not evident in it self, and that needs
to be proved to him, some way or other, the less evident for being proved to
him in a discursive way: What pretense can any one have to say or think so? Is
it that reasoning is more liable to error and mistake? But I hope the reasoning
of Gods Spirit is not so, when it enables us to apprehend the general Truth we
should reason from; to assume to it; to collect and conclude from it, guiding
us by its own light: In each of these surely we have as much reason to rely
upon the certainty and infallibility of the Spirits reasonings as of its most
assertory dictates; Otherwise, we would (most unreasonably) think the authority
of those conclusions laid down in the Epistle to the Romans, and other parts of
Scripture, invalidated by the Holy Ghost's vouchsafing to reason them out to
us, as we know it most nervously and strongly does.

Or, is it less consolatory? That cannot be, for that depends on the two
former, the importance and evidence of the thing declared: The former whereof
is the same, the latter not less.

3. Yea and supposing that the Holy Ghost do manifestly concur with our spirits
in the several steps of that discursive way, so that we can observe it to do
so, (and there is little doubt but it may do so as observably to us, by
affording a more than ordinary light to assist and guide us in each part of
that procedure, as if it did only suggest a sudden dictate to us and no more),
we may upon that supposition add, That it does hereby more advantageously
propose the same thing to us, than if it only did it the other way. It does it
in a way more suitable to our natures, which is not nothing; and it does it in a
way less liable to after-suspicion and doubt; for it is not supposed to be
always dictating the same thing. And when it ceases to do so, howsoever
consolatory and satisfying the dictate was at that instant when it was given,
the matter is liable to question afterward, upon what grounds was such a thing
said? And though it cannot be distrusted, that what the Holy Spirit testifies
is true; yet I may doubt whether it was indeed the Holy Spirit that testified
it or no. Whereas if it proceeded with me upon grounds, they remain, and I have
no reason to suspect that which was argued out to me, upon grounds which I
still find in me, was either from an ill suggestor, or with an ill design;
whereas there may be some plausible pretense of doubt in the matter, if there
was only a transient dictate given in to me, without any reference or appeal to
that rule by which God has not only directed me to try my self, but also to
try spirits whether they be of him or no.

Nor is there any imaginable necessity of assigning quite another method to the
Spirits work as it is a Spirit of Adoption, from that which it holds as it is a
Spirit of Bondage: For, as to this latter, when it convinces a person and binds
down the condemning sentence upon him; this surely is the course it follows, to
let a person see (for instance) they that live after the flesh shall die; But
thou live after the flesh, therefore thou shall dye: Or, all that believe
not, the wrath of God abides on them; But thou believe not (as it is we know
the Spirits work, to convince of not-believing), therefore the wrath of God
abides on thee. And what need is there of apprehending its method to be quite
another in its comforting-work? Nor is it surely a matter of less difficulty to
persuade some that they are unbelievers, and make them apprehend and feel the
terror suitable to their states; than others, that they are believers, and make
them apprehend the comfort which is proper to theirs. Yea, and is not its
course the same in its whole sanctifying-work, to bring home the particular
Truth, whose Impression it would leave on the Soul, with application thereof to
it in particular; which (as generally propounded in Scripture) men are so apt
to wave and neglect; for what is every ones concern, is commonly thought no
ones: And what need that its method here should be wholly diverse?

But in whichsoever of these ways the Spirit of God does manifest his love, it
is not to be doubted, but that

There is such a thing in it self very necessary, and to be attained and sought
after:

And that it is highly delectable when he does vouchsafe it,

That there is such a thing to be sought after, as a communicable privilege and
favor to holy Souls, is evident enough from multitudes of Scriptures. Those
that have been occasionally mentioned in speaking (what was thought fit to be
said) of the way of his doing it, need not be repeated, unto which we may add,
what we find is added to those above-recited words, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Eye has not seen, etc. the things which God has prepared for them that love
him, v. 10.
viz. But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit. And that Spirit not only
gives those lovers of God abovementioned a clearer view of the things prepared
for them, so as that the nature of them might be the more distinctly
understood, (as is argued in the latter part of this, and in the following
verse); but also of their own propriety and interest in them; v. 12.
Now we have received not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit that is from
God, [that we may know the things that are freely given us of God]. Whence
therefore they are revealed by the Spirit, not as pleasing objects in
themselves only, but as gifts, the evidences and issues of Divine Love; their
own proper portion, by the bequest of that Love to whom they are shown. Nor is
this the work of the Spirit only, as inditing the Scriptures, but it is such a
work as helps to the spiritual discerning of these things; such as whereto the
natural man is not competent, who yet is capable of reading the Scriptures as
well as other men. And what will we make of those words of our Savior, when
having told his Disciples, Joh. 14.
he would pray the Father, v. 16.
and he should give them another comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, that he
might abide with them for ever: Even the Spirit of Truth, v. 18.
etc. He adds, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you; that is,
(as is plain) by that Spirit]. And then shortly after subjoins, v. 21.
He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he
that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him. Here is an express promise of this love-manifestation,
whereof we speak, by the Spirit, (the Comforter mentioned above); not to those
particular persons only, unto whom he was then directing his speech, or to
those only of that time and age, but to them indefinitely that should love
Christ, and keep his commandments. Which is again repeated in other words of
the same import; after Judas (not Iscariot) his wondering expostulation
touching that peculiarly of this loving manifestation; Jesus answered and said
unto him, v. 23.
If any man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him. So that such a manifestation
as is most aptly expressive of love, such converse and cohabitation as imports
most of kindness and endearedness, they have encouragement to expect that do
love Christ and keep his words; The same thing no doubt with that shedding
abroad of the love of God in their hearts, by the Holy Ghost given to them,
mentioned before. And whereas we have so plain and repeated mention of the
seal, the earnest, the first fruits of the Spirit, what can these expressions
be understood to import (and they do not signify nothing) other than
confirmation of the love of God, or assuring and satisfying evidences and
pledges thereof.

And that there should be such an inward manifestation of divine love
superadded to the public and external declaration of it (which is only made
indefinitely to persons so and so uncharacterized) the exigency of the case did
require; That is, wherein it was necessary his love should be distinctly
understood and apprehended, it was so far necessary this course should be taken
to make it be so. A mere external revelation was not sufficent to that end; Our
own (unassisted) reasonings therefrom were not sufficient. As other Truths have
not their due and proper impression, merely by our rational reception be they
never so plain, without that holy sanctifying influence before insisted on; so
this Truth also of Gods love to this person in particular has not its force
and weitht, its efficacy and fruit answerable to the design of its discovery,
unless it be app^ied and urged home on the Soul by a communicated influence of
the Spirit to this purpose: Many times not so far as to overcome and silence
tormenting doubts, fears and anguish of spirit in reference hereto, and, where
that is done, not sufficient to work off deadness, drowziness, indisposition to
the doing of God cheerful service, not sufficient to excite and stir up, love,
gratitude, admiration and praise. How many (who have learned not to make light
of the love of God as the most do) who reckon in his favor is life, to whom it
is not an indifferent thing whether they be accepted or no; who cannot be
overly in their enquiry, nor trifle with matters of everlasting consequence,
who are not enough Atheists and Scepticks to permit all to a mad hazard, nor
easy to be satisfied, walk mournfully from day to day with sunk, dejected
spirits, full of anxiety, even unto agonies under the clear (external)
discovery of Gods love, to persons of that character, whereof they really are?
such as observe them judge their case plain, and every one thinks well of them,
but themselves; yea their mouths are sometimes stopped, by such as discourse the
matter with them, but their hearts are not quieted: or, if they sometime are,
in a degree, yet the same doubts and fears return with the former importunity,
the same work is still to be done, and it is but rolling the returning stone:
And all humane endeavors to apply and bring home the comforts proper and
suitable to their case prove fruitless and ineffectual, nothing can be fastened
upon them; they refuse to be comforted, while God himself does not create (that
which is the fruit of his own lips) peace, peace; while, as yet, they are not
filled with joy and peace in believing, Romans 15* 13.
and made to abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. It is plain
there needs a more learned tongue than any humane one, Isa. 50.
to speak a word in season to such weary ones. How many, again, have spirits
overcome with deadness and sloth under a settled (perhaps not altogether
mistaken but more notional) apprehension of the same love! They have only that
assurance which arises it may be not from a false but the single testimony of
their own spirits; at least unaccompanied with other than the ordinary help of
the Spirit, not very distinguishable from the workings of their own; Have
reasoned themselves (perhaps regularly, by observing the rule and the habitual
bent of their own spirits) into an opinion of their own good estate, so that
they are not vexed with doubts and fears as some others are. But they do not
discover to others, nor can discern in themselves any degree of life and
vigor, of heavenliness and spirituality, of love to God or zeal for him,
proportionable to their high expectations from him, or the great import of this
thing to be beloved of God: There is no discernible growth or spiritual
improvement to be found with them; How remote is their temper from that of the
Primitive Christians! Acts 9. 31.
It is apparent what is yet wanting, they are not edified (as those were)
walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost.

Wherefore the matter is plain, There is such a thing, as an effectual
over-powering communication of the Holy Ghost for the manifesting of the love
of God, of great necessity and importance to Christians; that may be had and
ought to be diligently sought after.

other thing proposed); How infinitely delectable is that manifestation! the
thing it self carries its own reason and evidence with it.

1. If we consider the matter represented to us thereby; The love of a God! How
transporting would the thought of it be to an enlightened apprehensive mind! no
one whose nature is not overrun with barbarism would entertain the discovery
of the harmless innocent love (though it were not profitable to us) even of a
creature like our selves otherwise than with complacency; Yea, though it were a
much inferior (even a brute) creature. Men are pleased to behold love
expressing it self toward them in a child, in a poor neighbor, in an impotent
servant; yea, in their horse or their dog. The greatest Prince observes with
delight the affection of the meanest peasants among his Subjects: Much more
would they please themselves if they have occasion to take notice of any
remarkable expression of his favorable respect to them! But how unspeakably
more, if he vouchsafe to express it by gracious intimacies, and by
condescending familiarities! How does that person hug and bless himself! How
does his Spirit triumph, and his imagination luxuriate in delightful thoughts
and expectations, who is in his own heart assured he has the favor of his
Prince! Yea, with what complacency are inward friends wont to receive the
mutual expressions of each others love! And can it be thought the love of the
great and blessed God should signify less?

How great things are comprehended in this, The Lord of Heaven and Earth has a
kindness toward me and bears me good will! How grateful is the relish of this
apprehension, both in respect of what it, in it self, imports, and what it is
the root and cause of?

True ingenuity values love for it self. If such a one will think of me, if I
shall have a place in his remembrance, If he will count me among his friends;
this we are apt to be pleased with. And tokens are sent and interchanged among
friends, not only to express love, but to preserve and cherish it, and keep up
a mutual remembrance among them. And as there is a great pleasure conceived, in
receiving such expressions or pledges of love from a friend, not so much for
the value of the thing sent, as of what it signifies, and is the token of his
love, his kind remembrance; so is there no less pleasure in giving and sending,
than in receiving: Because that hereby, as we gratify our own love, by giving
it a kind of vent this way; so we foresee how we shall thereby excite theirs;
which therefore, we put a value upon, even abstracting from any advantage we
expect therefrom. And this has a manifest reason in our very natures; because
we reckon there is an honor put upon us, and somewhat is attributed to us,
when we are well thought of, and a kindness is placed upon us; especially by
such as have themselves any reputation for wisdom and judgment. H^w dignifying
is the love of God! How honorable a thing to be his favorite! To Apostle
seems to put a mighty stress on this, when he utters those so emphatical words,
2 Cor. 5. 9.
wherefore we labor (so defectively we read it, we covet, or are ambitious of
it as our honor, as that word signifies), that whether present or absent we
may be accepted of him; q. d. neither life or death, neither being in the body
or out of it, signify any thing to me, or they are indifferent things in
comparison of this honor, that he may accept me, that I may be pleasing to
him, and gracious in his eyes, that I may stand well in his thoughts, and he
bear a kind and favorable regard to me.

Yea and this is a thing in it self delightful, not only as it is honorable,
but as it is strange and wonderful. Things that are in themselves grateful, are
so much the more so, for their being somewhat surprising, and above all our
expectation. I say, supposing they have an antecedent gratefulness in them,
(for otherwise we know there are also very unwelcome wonders, and which are so
much the more dreadful, because they are surprising and unexpected), it is
greatly heightened by their being out of the road quite of all our thoughts, --
great things that we looked not for. And who would have looked for such a thing
as this, That the Lord of Glory should place his Love on such a Worm as I!
Which is set off with the more advantage, because the same light that
represents to a Soul Gods love, does also discover to it, at the same time, its
own deformity and unloveliness. And then how taking and overcoming is the
thought, I impure wretch! loathsome miscreant! that lost apostate creature,
that made one with a race and crew of rebels, was confederate with rebellious
men against Him, yea in a combination with those revolted creatures the Devils,
and now taken (I know not why) into a state of acceptance and favor with him!
And his love is declared to be toward me! And why toward me? in my self so
vile! And such love! the love of an holy glorious God, toward one in whose
very nature was such an horror and hell of wickedness! Why toward me rather
than others, not naturally more vile than I? How can this be thought on without
crying out, O wonderful! O the depths, breadths, lengths and heights of this
love, that so infinitely passes knowledge! And here the greater the wonder, the
greater is also the delight.

And now also are the effects of this love great in the eyes of the Soul,
according to the apprehended greatness of their cause. If we indeed were to
form conceptions of these things our selves, by our own light and conduct, our
way were to follow the ascending order, and go up from the effects till we
reach the cause; But he can, if he please, in the cause present to us the
effects, and maginfie them in our eyes, by giving us to see unto how great and
magnificent a cause they owe themselves. Now shall we know whence all has
proceeded that he has done for us. Wherefore again must the transported Soul
admiringly cry out, I now see whence it was that he gave his Son, because he so
loved the world! Why he came and bled and died, who has loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his blood! What a luster does that love cast upon those
sufferings and performances! I see why he sent his Gospel to me, why so
convincing awakening words were often spoken in my ear, (I see much in what
once I saw but little), why he so earnestly strove with me by his spirit, why
he gave not over till he had overcome my heart, why he humbled, melted, broke
me, why he drew so strongly, bound me so fast to himself, in safe and happy
bonds; why he shone into my mind with that mild and efficacious light,
transformed my whole Soul, stamped it with his holy Image, and marked me out for
his own. These are now great things, when I behold their glorious mighty cause!

And now also in this same cause are all the great effects to be seen which are
yet to be brought about by it.

They are seen as very great. His continued presence and conduct, which he
affords to his own through this world; That constant fellowship which they
expect him to keep with them; The guidance and support they look for; In his
love these appear great things. And now does Heaven sound no more as an empty
name, it looks not like a languid faint shadow; somewhat can be apprehended of
it that imports substance, when it is understood to be a state of rest and
blessedness in the communion of the God of Love; and intended as the last
product and expression of his love!

They are seen as most sure and certain. Such Love, now manifested and
apprehended, leaves no place for doubtful thoughts and suspicious misgivings.
There is no fear that this Love intends to impose upon us, or mock us with the
representation of an imaginary heaven; or that it will fail to do what can be
expected from it to bring us to the real one.

How pleasant is it now to behold the great and sure products of this mighty
Love! its admirable designs and projects, as they appear in the
Gospel-revelation (now illustrated and shone upon by divine light) to lie ready
formed in the pregnant womb of this great productive cause. It cannot but be an
unspeakable pleasure which such a discovery will carry with it; when we thus
behold the matter it self that is discovered and offered to our view, unto
which it must be a very considerable additional pleasure that will arise.

2. From the nature and kind of this manifestation. As being

In the general made by himself. It Is a too plain and sad Truth that men have
unhappily learned to diminish God to themselves, and make every thing of him
seem little. But when he represents his Love himself (as who but God can
represent the Love of God? He only can tell the story of his own Love) that
evil is provided against: He will manifest it so as it shall be understood; and
set it off to the best advantage. He will make it known how great a thing it is
to be beloved of him. And when he gives that blessed salutation; Hail thou that
art highly favored! O thou that art greatly beloved! He will withal bespeak
and procure a suitable entertainment of it. And hence

Particularly it will be,

Most incomparably bright and lightsom in respect of any representation we have
had of the Love of God any other way.

Most immediate, that is, (at least) so as not to be only made by some external
testimony, given out many an age ago, out of which we are left to pick what we
can; and to construe or misconstrue it as our own judgment serves us; but so,
as that if He use such an instrument, he animates it, puts a soul into it,
leaves it not as a dead spiritless letter: and applies it himself, to the
purpose he intends by it, and immediately himself reaches and touches the heart
by it.

Most facile and easily sliding in upon us; so that we are put to no more
pains, than to behold the light which the Sun casts about us and upon us.
Whatever labor it was necessary for us to use before, in our searches and
enquiries into the state of our case, there is no more now, than in moving
being carried; or in using our own weak hand when another that is sufficiently
strong lifts and guides it for us

Most efficacious and overcoming: That makes its own way, scatters clouds,
drives away darkness, admits no disputes, makes doubts and misgiving thoughts
vanish, pierces with a quick and sudden energy like lightening, and strikes
through the mind into the heart; there sheds abroad this love, diffuses the
sweet refreshing savor of it; actuates spiritual sense, makes the soul taste
how gracious the Lord is; and relish the sweetness of his love, puts all its
powers into a suitable motion, and excites answerable affection, so as to make
the Soul capable of interchanging love with love.

In all these respects, this manifestation of love cannot but be very
delectable; and they who have not found it to be so, will yet apprehend that it
must be so, if they have found and experienced the cravings of their own hearts
directed this way, and can upon enquiry find this among the things they would
fain have from God; O that I might be satisfied of his love! that I might know
his good will toward me! For to such cravings must this delight at least be
commensurate (as was formerly said). But to them that are indifferent in this
matter and unconcerned, to whom the love of God is a fancy or a trifle, no real
or an inconsiderable thing, all this will be as tastless as the white of an egg.

Concerning which yet (before we pass from this head) it is needful to add these
few things by way of caution.

1. That when we say this is of great necessity, we mean not that it is simply
necessary; we think it not so necessary that a Christian cannot be without it;
i. e as a Christian. But it is necessary to his well-and
more-comfortable-being, and his more lively, fruitful walking and acting in his
Christian course.

2. That therefore the way of Gods dealing herein is with great latitude and
variety; he having reserved to himself by the tenor of his Covenant a liberty,
to afford or suspend it, to give it in a greater or less degree as in absolute
sovereignty, and infinite wisdom he pleases and sees fit to determine.

3. It may not therefore with so absolute and peremptory an expectation be
sought after, as those things may that are necessary to the holding of souls in
life; but with much resignation, submission, and deference of the matter to the
divine good pleasure; such as shall neither import disesteem of it, nor
impatience in the want of it.

4. That it ought to be less-esteemed than the heart-rectifying-communication,
that is impressive of Gods Image, and whereby we are made partakers of his
holiness. This proceeds more entirely from pure love to God for himself, that
from self-love; this tends more directly to the pleasing of us, than to the
pleasing of God. This is necessary (as was said) but to our well or better
being, That simply to our very being in Christ; this has its greatest real
value from its subserviency to the other. And what has its value from its
reference to another must be of less value than that.

5. That its a great mistake to think God is not otherwise to be enjoyed than
in this way of more express testification of his love; as if you could have no
enjoyment of a friend, otherwise than by his often repeating to you; I love
you, I love you, indeed I love you.

6. That it is a much greater, to place the sum of Religion here; and that any
should make it the whole of their business, to seek this, or to talk of it; or
should think God does nothing for them worth their acknowledgment, and solemn
thanksgiving while he does not this.

7. Most of all, that any should reckon it the first thing they have to do when
they begin to mind Religion, to believe Gods particular love to them, and that
he has elected them, pardoned them, and will certainly save them. So too many,
most dangerously impose upon themselves; and accordingly before any true
humiliation, renovation of heart, or transaction and stipulation with the
Redeemer, do set themselves thus to believe, and it may be seek help from God
more strongly to believe it, when as the Devil is too ready to help them to
this Faith: And when he has done it, they cry to themselves peace, peace, and
think all is well; take their liberty, and humor themselves, live as they
list, and say that for so long a time they have had assurance of their
salvation. The Father of Lies must needs be the Author (or the Fautor, or both)
of this Faith; for it is a lie which they believe; that is, that they are
pardoned and accepted of God is a downright lie, repugnant to his Word and the
tenor of his Covenant. And for any thing else that may import their state to
be at present safe, is to them no credible truth.

8. That for the most part, if Christians, upon whom the renewing-work of the
Holy Ghost in that former communication has in some degree taken place, do yet
want that degree of this also, which is necessary to free them from very
afflicting doubts and fears, and enable them to a cheerful and lively walking
with God; it is to be reckoned their own fault; either that they put too much
upon it (too little minding his public declarations in his Word), or do unduly
seek it, or unseasonably expect it; or that they put too little upon it, and
expect or seek it not; or that by their indulged carnality, earthliness, vanity
of spirit, they render themselves incapable of it; or by their careless and too
licentious walking, or their either resisting or neglecting holy motions, they
grieve that Spirit that would comfort them. For though the restraint of such
more pleasant communications may proceed, sometimes, from an unaccountable
Sovereignty, that owes no reason to us of it is arbitrary way of giving or
withholding favors; yet withal, we are to know and consider, that there is
such a thing as paternal and domestic Justice proper to Gods own Family, and
which as the Head and Father of it, he exercises therein; whereby (though he
do not exercise it alike at all times) it seems meet to his infinite Wisdom to
awaken and rouse the sloth, or rebuke the folly, or check the vanity, or
chastise the wantonness of his offending-children; and that even in this way,
by retiring himself, becoming more reserved, withdrawing the more discernible
tokens of his presence, and leaving them to the torture (sometimes) of their
own conjectures, what worse thing may ensue. And herein he may design, not only
ref^rmation to the delinquents, but instruction to others, and even vindication
to Himself. For however these his dealings with men's spirits are in themselves
(as they must needs be) secret, and such as come not under the immediate notice
of other men; yet somewhat consequential thereto, does more openly appear, and
becomes obvious to the common observation of serious Christians with whom such
persons converse; that is, not only such as languish under the more remarkable
terrors of their spirits, and are visibly, as it were, consuming in their own
flame, (of which sort there occur very monitory and instructive examples, at
some times); but even such also as are deprived of his quickening influence, and
have only somewhat remaining in them that is ready to dye, that are pining away
in their iniquities, and sunk deep into deadness and carnality (for his
comforting communication is also quickening, and he does not use to withhold it
as it is quickening, and continue it as it is comforting, but if such have
comfort, such as it is, they are their own comforters), do carry very
discernible tokens of divine pleasure upon them; and the evils and distempers
under which their spirits lie wasting, are both their sin and punishment. Their
own wickedness corrects them, and their backsliding reproves them. And that
reproof being observable, does the same time warn others, yea and do that right
to God, as to let it be seen he makes a difference, and refuses the intimacies
with more negligent, loose, idle, wanton professors of his Name, which he
vouchsafes to have with some others, that make it more their business and study
to carry acceptably toward him, and are more manifestly serious, humble,
diligent, obedient observers of his will. If therefore we find not what we have
found in this kind, however the matter may possibly be resolvable into the
Divine Pleasure, (as it is more likely to be in the case of such desertions as
are accompanied with terror, when no notorious apostasy or scandalous
wickedness has gone before), it is both safe and modest, yea and obvious to
suspect such delinquencies as were beforementioned, are designed to be
animadverted upon; and that the Love has been injured, which is now not
manifested as heretofore.

9. That yet such a degree of it, as is necessary to a comfortable serving of
God in our stations being afforded; such superadded degrees, as whereby the
Soul is in frequent raptures and transports, are not to be thought withheld
penally, in any peculiar or remarkable respect, (or otherwise than it may be
understood some way a penalty, not to be already perfectly blessed). For it is
certain, that such rapturous sensations, and the want of them, are not the
distinguishing characters of the more grown, strong, and excellent Christians,
and of them that are more infirm, and of a meaner and lower pitch and stature.
Yea those extatical emotions, although they have much of a sensible delectation
in them (as more hereafter may be said to that purpose); and though they may,
in part, proceed from the best and most excellent Cause, do yet, if they be
frequent (which would signify an aptitude thereto), import somewhat of
diminution in their subject, and imply what is some way a lessening of it; that
is, they imply the persons that are more disposed this way, to be of a temper
not so well fixed and composed, but more volatile and airy; which yet does not
intimate, that the chief Cause and Author of those motions is therefore mean
and ignoble; nay, it argues nothing to the contrary, but that the Holy Spirit
it self may be the supreme Cause of them. For admitting it to be so, it does
not alter men's natural tempers and complexions; but so acts them, as that they
retain (and express upon occasion) what was peculiar to their temper
notwithstanding. The work and office of the Holy Ghost, in its special
communications, is to alter and new-mold men in respect of their moral
dispositions, not those which are strictly and purely natural; the subject is
in this regard the same it was; and whatsoever is received, is received
according to the disposition of that; and it gives a tincture to what
supervenes and is implanted thereinto; whence the same degree of such
communicated influence will not so discernibly move some tempers, as it does
others; as the same quantity of fire will not so soon put solid wood into a
flame, as it will light straw. That some men therefore are less sensibly and
passionately moved with the great things of God (and even with the discovery of
his love) than some others, does not argue them to have less of the Spirit, but
more of that temper which better comports with deeper judgment, and a calm and
sober consideration of things. The unaptness of some men's affections unto
strong and fervent motion, does indeed arise from a stupid inconsiderateness;
of some others, from a more profound consideration, by which the deeper things
sink, and the more they pierce even into the inmost center of the Soul, the
less they move the surface of it. And though I do not think the saying of that
Heathen applicable to this case, It is a wise man's part to admire nothing; for
here is matter enough in this Theme, the Love of God, to justify the highest
wonderment possible; and not to admire in such a case, is most stupidly
irrational; yet I conceive the admiration (as well as other affections) of more
considering persons, is more inward, calm, sedate, and dispassionate, and is
not the less for being so, but is the more solid and rational; and the pleasure
that attends it, is the more deep and lasting: And the fervor that ensues upon
the apprehended Love of God, prompting them to such service as is suitable to a
state of devotedness to his interest, is more intense and durable; of the
others, more flashy and inconstant. As, though Flax set on fire, will flame
more than Iron; yet withal it will smoke more, and will not glow so much, nor
keep heat so long.

10. But to shut up this Discourse: They that have more transporting
apprehensions of the love of God, should take heed of despising them who have
them not in just the same kind, or do not express them in the same seraphick
strains. They that have them not, should take heed of censuring those that with
humble modesty, upon just occasion, discover and own what they do experience in
this kind; much less should they conclude, that because they find them not,
there is therefore no such thing to be found; which Cynical humor is too
habitual to such tempers. If they do fancy such to be a weaker sort of persons
they may be sincere for all that. And it ought to be considered of whom it was
said, That he would not quench the smoking flax, The Grace and Spirit of
Christ ought to be reverenced in the various appearances thereof: Whether we be
sober or besides our selves -- The love of Christ constrains us -- So
diversely may the apprehensions of that Love work in the same person, 3 Cor. 5.
13, 14.
much more in diverse. Christians should be shie of making themselves standards
to one another; which they that do, discover more pride and self-conceit, than
acquaintance with God, and more admiration of themselves than of his love.

Thus far we have given some account of the object to be delighted in; wherein,
if any think strange that we have spoken so much of the delectable Divine
communication as belonging to the object (which how it does has been
sufficiently shown); let them call it, if they please, a preparing or
disposing of the Subject (which it also, making its own way into the Soul, as
has been said, effectually does); and if the necessity of it be acknowledged
upon that account, it equally answers the main purpose aimed at in all this;
and had it been only so considered, would but have inferred some alteration in
the frame and method of this Discourse, but not at all of the substance or
design of it.

We art next to say somewhat briefly of Delight it self to be taken therein.
Nor shall we be herein so curious as to distinguish (which some do) Delight and
Joy. The distinction wont to be assigned, cannot, it is plain, hold here, so as
to make the former of these signify a brutish affection only; and the latter
proper to rational nature. Nor is there any such propriety belonging to the
words, but they may be rendered (as indeed they are used in Scripture)
promiscuously, either in reference to the matter of intellectual or sensitive
complacency, and either of a reasonable being, or an unreasonable. We take
these therefore to signify substantially the same thing, and here delight to
be entirely all one with joy: That is, there is not any the highest degree of
joy which may not fitly enough be comprehended under the name of Delight, when
it is placed (as here it is required to be) upon the blessed God; Whereof, that
we may speak the more fully, it will be necessary to preface somewhat
concerning its general nature; and more principally as it is found in man,
within which compass our principal business lies.

Delight, in the general, is most intimately essential to Love; which imports a
well-pleasedness arising from the apprehended goodness or congruity of the
thing loved; and it seems to be merely by accident, that there is any thing
else in Love besides that complacency of Delight: That is, what there is else
belonging to the nature of Love arises from the mixture and variety which is to
be found in the present state of things; which, if it were at present
universally and perfectly good, and as most rationally it might be wished; Love
could have no exercise but in Delight. Not being so; Desire that it might be
so, in reference to our selves and others whom we love, comes duly to have
place; together with other acts or exercises of Love, which it belongs not so
much to our present purpose to mention.

For instance, Whatsoever we can love, is either Things or Persons; whatsoever
things we love, is for the sake of Persons, either our selves or others; whom
also we love either supreamly, or subordinately. And whomsoever we love
supreamly, as it is certainly either God or our selves, we love whatsoever
else, Person or Thing, either for Gods sake, or our own. Be it now the one or
other, or wheresoever we can place our love, we find things in reference to any
object of it, not yet as we would have them, and as they shall be in that
settled state which shall be permanent and last always; whereunto this is but
preparatory only* and introductive. The Creation is indigent, every creature
wants somewhat even whereof it is capable; and our own wants in many respects,
we cannot but feel. Nothing is perfect in its own Kind, in respect of all
possible accessories thereto; even the state of glorified Spirits above, is not
yet every way perfect; much is wanting to their full and complete felicity; the
Body and Community whereto they belong, the General Assembly, is not yet entire
and full; Their common Ruler and Lord is not acknowledged and had in honor as
he shall be. In the mean while, their consummate blessedness (which much
depends on these things), and the solemn Jubilee to be held at the close and
finishing of all Gods work, is deferred. Yea, and if we go higher; The blessed
God himself, the Author and Original of all things, although no-thing be
wanting to the real perfection of his Being and Blessedness, has yet much of
his Right withheld from him by his lapsed and apostate Creatures; so that,
which way soever we turn our selves, there remains to us much matter of
rational (yea, and holy) desire; and most just cause that our love (place we it
as well and duly as we can) have its exercise that way; we have before us many
desiderata, according as things yet are. Desire is therefore Love suited to an
imperfect state of things wherein it is yet imperfect.

And because it is suited to such a state of things, it cannot therefore but be
imperfect love, or love tending to perfection. Pure and simple delight is love
suited to a state of things every way perfect, and whereto there is nothing
lacking. Wherefore Delight appears to be the perfection of Love, or Desire
satisfied*

But now because this present state is mixed, and not simply evil, or such
wherein we find no present good; therefore the love which is suited thereto,
ought consequently to be mixed of these two especially (unto which two the
present discourse is both extended and confined, because these two affections
only are mentioned in the Text) Desire and Delight.

So far as things are otherwise than we (practically) apprehend, it is fit they
should be with our selves or others whom we love; our Love is exercised in
desire, wherein they are as we would have them, in delight; for then our desire
is so far satisfied; and desire satisfied ceases, though love do not cease. Or,
it ceases not by vanishing into nothing, but by being satisfied; that is, by
being perfected in the Delight which now takes place.

The one of these is therefore truly said to be Love exercised upon a good
which we behold at a distance, and are reaching at. The other, Love solacing it
self in a present good. They are as the wings and arms of love; Those for
pursuits, these for embraces. Or the former is love in motion; the latter is
love in rest. And as in bodily motion and rest, that is in order to this, and
is perfected in it; Things move not, that they may move, but that they may rest
(whence perpetual progressive motion is not to be found); so it is also in the
motion and rest of the mind or spirit; it moves toward any object with a
design and expectation to rest in it, and (according to the course and order
which God has stated and set) can never move forward endlesly toward a good
in which it shall not at length rest; though yet Desire and Delight have a
continual vicissitude, and do (as it were circularly) beget one another.

And thus has God himself been pleased to express his own Delight, or the Joy
which he takes in his people, Zeph. 3. 17. 18
even by the name of Rest, viz. that of Love. He will rejoice over thee with
joy, he will rest in his love. Wherefore delight has not been unfitly defined,
The repose or rest of the desiring faculty of the thing desired.

It is true, that Love, as such, has ever somewhat of delectation in it; for
we entertain the first view of any thing we apprehend as Good, with some
pleasedness therein (so far as it is loved), it is grateful to us, and we are
gratified some way by it; yea, there is somewhat of this before any emotion by
desire toward it; For we would not desire it, if it were not pleasing to us;
which desire is then continued (as far as love is in exercise) till it be
attained for our selves or others, according as the object of our love (i. e.
the object for whom as we may call it) is.

Nor is that a difficulty, how yet there may be somewhat of delectation, and
even of rest in this love of desire; For the Soul does in that case, while it
is thus desiring, rest from the indetermination of desire: that is, if it have
placed Love upon any one (it self or another) upon whom therefore it does with
a sort of pleasedness stay and rest; it does first in the general desire it may
be well with such a one; and then, if any thing occur to its notice that it
apprehends would be an advantage to the person loved; though it cease not
desiring it, yet it ceases from those its former hoverings of desire; being
pitched upon this one thing, as satisfied that this would be a good to him it
loves. The appetite stays and insists upon this thing; As the Psalmist, One
thing have I desired. Psalm. 27. 4.
It has here, as it were, a sort of hypothetical rest; q. d. How well-pleased
should I be if this were compast and brought about! Or it has an anticipated
and pre-apprehended rest, a rest in hope (by which the object is some way made
present), as it is said, We rejoice in hope of the glory of God. For there is
no rational desire which is not accompanied with hope. Despair stifles Desire.
That which appears simply impossible, passes for nothing; and goodness goes not
beyond the compass of being. But whatsoever appears to us a good (whether for
our selves or another), that is suitable and possible; That if love stir in
reference to it, becomes the object of complacential desire; that is, it
pleases us first upon sight, or upon such an apprehension of it; the appetite
pitches, centers and rests upon it; and then we pursue it with desire. But then
our delectation therein grows, as our hope does it will be attained; and still
more (if we find it to answer its first appearance) as by degrees it is
attained actually; till being fully attained, our desire (as to that thing)
ends in all the delight and satisfaction which it can afford us; so that the
delight and rest which follows desire in the actual fruition of a full and
satisfying-good, is much more intense and pure, than that which either goes
before, or does accompany it; and is indeed the same thing with fruition or
enjoyment it self; only that this term has been, by some, more appropriated to
signify the delectation which is taken in the last End, unto which yet it has
no more native designation than diverse other words.

We have then thus far some general notion of Delight (and also of Desire which
is taken in here only on the by, and as tending somewhat to illustrate the
other, whereof yet what we now say may be of some use hereafter).

We are next to speak of this Delight in special, which is here to be placed
upon God. About which we are are to consider, both What it is we are called to.

And how we are to reckon our selves called to it.

And 1, That we may show, What we are called to. Having in this general account
spoken only of humane delight, or of delight as it is to be found among men; It
will now be necessary to distinguish this unto Merely Natural, And Holy.


And when we thus distinguish, it is to be understood, that by natural we mean
what is within the sphere of Nature in its present corrupted state; otherwise,
what was natural to man did (taken in a large sense) include holiness in it;
and so the addition of holiness does but make up purely natural delight, as it
was at first: But as the case now is, the distinction is necessary.

And the latter of these only will be the subject of our following discourse;
as being only suitable to the blessed Object whereon it must terminate, and only
capable of being applied thereto.

When therefore our delight is to be placed and set on God, this must be
understood as presupposed, that it be purified, drained from the pollution and
impure tinctures which it has derived from our vitiated Natures, and further
contracted by our converse with impure, mean, and vile things. For only that
delight is to be placed on God which can be so placed; and delighting in God
being duly designed, that is, by consequence designed which is necessary
thereto: And thereto is necessary, not merely the direction of one such
particular act toward God, but an holy principle, as prerequisite to the right
doing even of that also.

Unholy love declines God; and indeed it is unholy, in as much as it does so.
Whence therefore it is as impossible it should be set on God, remaining unholy,
as that it should be another thing from it self, and yet be still wholly what
it was.

Although it cannot be another thing in its general nature (as it is not
necessary it should), it must be a much altered thing, by the accession of
holiness thereto. And this coming upon the whole Soul, even upon all its
faculties and powers, does therein spread it self unto its delight also.
Delight in God is not the work of an unholy heart.

And (as may be collected from what has been said) Holiness consisting in a
right disposition of heart toward God, a divine Nature, participated from him,
conform to him, and which works and tends toward him, and in it self so
delightful a thing; It may thence be seen what holy delight is, or wherein the
holiness of it stands.

It must to this purpose be considered, that this holy delight is twofold,
according to a twofold consideration of the delectable object; into which,
what was formerly said about it may be reduced.

All delight in God supposes, as has been said, some communication from him.

That communication is either of light, whereby his Nature and Attributes are
in some measure known; or of operative influence, whereby his Image is impressed,
and the Soul is framed according to his will. And so it is partly mental or
notional (I mean not merely notional, but that has with it also an aptitude to
beget a correspondent-impression on the Soul, and not engage it in some
speculations concerning him only), and partly real, that actually begets such
an impression it self. It is partly such as may be understood, and partly such
as may be felt; the manifestation of his Love partly belongs to the one of
these, and partly to the other.

Answerably hereto, the delight that is taken in him, is either more Open and
explicit, and wherein a person reflects upon, and takes notice of his own act,
and whereupon it is exercised. Or, more latent, implicit and unobserved, when
his delight lies folded up in other acts and dispositions which have another
more principal design, though that also is involved in them.


The former way, the Soul delights in God more directly, applying it self
thereto on purpose, and bending the mind and heart intentionally thereto; its
present views of him having that very design and aim.

The latter way, it delights in him rather collaterally, when its present
action (as well as the disposition leading to it) has another more direct
scope and aim. And the delight only adheres to the act, as being in it self
delightful; as for instance, the acts of Repentance, Trust, Self-denial, etc.
which have another end than delight, though that insinuates into them.

The former of these may be called contemplative delight. The Soul solacing it
self in a pleasant meditation of God, whereby its delight in him is excited and
stirred up.

The latter (understanding sense spiritually, as it belongs to the new
creature, and is taken Phil. 1. 9. Heb. 5. ult.) may be called sensitive
delight; whereby the Soul, as it were, tastes how gracious the Lord is. Which
though it does by the other also, yet the distinction holds in respect of the
way wherein the delight is begotten and begun, if not in respect of the thing
it self, begotten, or wherein the matter ends.

In the former way, the Soul more expressly reflects upon its own present
exercise, which it directly intends.

In the latter, it may not reflect expressly either upon its actual delight
which it has, nor actually consider God as the object that yields it that
pleasure; as I may be delighted by the pleasant taste of this or that food,
without considering what the things is I am feeding on; nor have distinct
reflection on the pleasure I take therein, having another and more principal
design in eating, the recruiting of my strength, and that delight being only
accessory and accruing on the by.

The former is less durable, and sooner apt to vanish upon the cessation of the
present act, like the delight of the eye.

The latter is more permanent, as that of the taste, and habitual; such as is
the pleasure of any thing whereof one has a continued possession, as of a
confirmed state and habit of health, or of the riches, dignities, pleasant
accommodations which belong to any ones settled condition; of which he has that
continual enjoyment that insensibly forms his spirit, raises and keeps it up to
a pitch suitable to his condition, though he have not every day or hour distinct
formed thoughts of them, nor is often in that contemplative transport with
Nebuchadnezzar, -- Is not this great Babylon which I have built? etc.

Both these are holy delight, or delight in God. In both whereof may be seen,
added to the general nature of delight, an holy Nature as the Principle,
inferring a powerful steady determination of the heart toward God, as the
object and end which it ultimately tends to, and terminates upon. Though in the
former way of delighting in God, the Soul tends toward him more directly: In
the latter (according as the acts may be to which the delight adheres), more
obliquely, and through several things that may be intermediate unto that final
and ultimate object.

And both these may fitly be understood to be within the meaning of this Text;
which therefore we shall now consider apart and severally; though both of them
very briefly.

And we begin with the latter of them. For though the former have, in some
respect, an excellency in it above the latter; yet as the progress of Nature in
other Creatures is by way of ascent, from what is more imperfect to what is
perfecter and more excellent: So is it with the communicated Divine Nature in
the new creature, which puts it self forth, first in more imperfect operations,
the buddings, as it were, of that tree of life which has its more florid
blossoms, and at length its ripe and fragrant fruit afterward; Or (to come
nearer the case), inasmuch as the latter sort of delight (according to the
order wherein we before mentioned them) has more in it of the exercise of
spiritual sense; the other more of spiritual reason; Since humane Creatures,
that have Natures capable of both sorts of functions, do first exercise sense,
and by a slower and more gradual process, come on to acts of ratiocination
afterward. So it is here, The Soul in which the Divine life has taken place,
does first exercise it self in spiritual sensations: So that though, in the
matter of delight, it is not destitute of the grateful relishes of things truly
and spiritually delectable; yet the more formed and designed acts of holy
delectation, in the highest object thereof, distinctly apprehended and pitched
upon for that purpose, do follow in their season; and these are preparations,
and the essays of the new creature, gradually and more indistinctly putting
forth it self in order thereto; The Embryo's of the other.

If therefore it be inquired, Wherein the delight of this more imperfect sort
does consist?

I answer, In the Souls sensation and relish of sweetness in the holy
quickening communications of God unto it, by which he first forms it for
himself, and in the operations which it is hereby enabled to put forth toward
him, while it is in the infancy or childhood of its Christian state.

Nor, while we say the delight of this kind does more properly belong to the
younger and more immature state of Christianity, do we thereby intend wholly to
appropriate or confine it to that state: For as when a Child is grown up to the
capacity of exercising reason, it does not then give over to use sense, but
continues the exercise of it also in its adult state, even as long as the
person lives; only, in its infancy and childhood its life is more entirely a
life of sense, though there are early buddings of reason, that soon come to be
intermingled therein; notwithstanding which* the principle that rules and is
more in exercise, more fitly gives the denomination: So it is in this case
also; that is, though there are sensations of Delight and pleasure in Religion
(yea, and those more quick, confirmed and strong in more grown Christians), yet
these sensations are more single and unaccompany'd (though not altogether) with
the exercise of spiritual reason and judgment, and do less come in that way
with Christians in their minority, than with others or themselves afterward.

Therefore that which we are to understand our selves called to under the name
of delighting in God (thus taken) is,

The keeping of our Souls open to Divine Influences and Communications:

Thirsting after them, praying and waiting for them:

Endeavoring to improve them and cooperate with them, and to stir up our
selves unto such exercises of Religion as they lead to, and are most suitable to
our present state.

Together with an allowing, yea, and applying our selves to stay, and taste in
our progress and course, the sweetness and delightfulness of those
communications and operations whereof we have any present experience. For
instance;

When we find God at work with us, and graciously dealing with our spirits, to
humble them, break and melt them under a sense of sin, incline and turn them
toward himself, draw them to a closure with his Son the Redeemer, to a
resignation and surrender of our selves to him, upon the terms of his Covenant
and Law of Grace; Yea, and when afterward we find him framing our hearts to a
course of holy walking and conversation; to the denial of ungodliness and
worldly lusts; to a sober, righteous and godly life in this present world; to
the exercises of Piety, Sobriety, Righteousness, Charity, Mercy, etc. And now
this or the like heavenly Dictate occurs to us, Delight thy self in the Lord;
what does it import? what must we understand it to say or signify to us?
Though this that has been mentioned, and which we are now saying is not all
that it signifies (as will be shown hereafter); yet thus much we must
understand it does signify and say to us:

Thy only true Delights are to be found in a course of Religion, they are not
to be expected from this world, or thy former sinful course; but in exercising
thy self unto godliness, in receiving and complying with the Divine
discoveries, recommended to thee in the Gospel, and (through them) the
influences of Life and Grace, which readily flow in upon any Soul that hungers
and thirsts after righteousness; and by which thou may be framed in all
things after the good and holy and acceptable will of God. Herein thou shall
find such pleasures and Delights entertaining thy Soul, as that thou will have
no cause to envy wicked men their sensual Delights which they find in their
sinful way; if thou will but observe what thou find, and exercise thy sense,
to discern between good and evil; and set thy self to consider whether there be
not as well more satisfying, as purer relishes of pleasure, in mortifying the
flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, in denying thy self, in dying to
this world, in living to God, in minding the things of another world, in giving
up thy self to the several exercises of an holy Life, watching, praying,
meditating, etc. in trusting in the Lord with all thy heart, and in doing all
the good thou can in thy place and station, letting so thy Light shine before
men, that they seeing thy good works, may glorify thy Father which is in
Heaven; In contentment with what thou enjoyest, and patience under what thou
suffer in this world, in doing justice, loving righteousness, and walking
humbly with thy God, Than ever the vanishing pleasures of sin did or can
afford.

Thus into these two Things may all be summed up, which Delighting in God
imports according to this notion of it.

1. The applying our selves to those things by the help of Gods own
communicated Influence (which in that case will not be withheld) wherein the
matter of Delight lies.

2. The reflecting upon the things themselves that are so Delightful, and
setting our selves to discern, and tasting actually the Delectableness of them.

And surely, if such words, Delight thy self in the Lord, do say to us all
this, they do not say nothing; nor say any thing impertinent, either to their
ow^ native import, or our state and condition in this world.

Obj. But here it may be Objected; If we so interpret Delighting in God, we
shall by this means bring the whole of Religion, and all sorts of actions that
are governed and directed by it, within the compass of this one thing; and make
Delighting in God, swallow up all that belongs to a Christian, and be the same
thing with Repentance, Faith, Self-denial, Humility, Meekness, Patience, etc.
which would sure seem too much to be comprehended under the name of one
Particular holy action or affection; Especially that they should be called
Delighting in God, when in the exercise of diverse of these God may possibly not
be in that instant actually so much as thought on.

Answ. To this it may be sufficiently answered:

1. That these things cannot be hence said with any pretense to be made the
same thing with Delighting in God; but only that there is a delight adhering to
all these; no more than it can be said, when, at some splendid Treat or
entertainment, there is a great variety of delicious Meats and Wine, which do
therefore all agree in this, That they are delectable; that all these Dishes
and Liquors are therefore one and the same. Or, if the Master of the Feast call
upon his Guests to delight themselves with him, their Friend (as here the
Particle in the Text, which we read Delight thy self [in] the Lord, may be read
Delight thy self [with] him); and he explains himself, That he means by tasting
this and that and another sort of his Provisions, and eating and drinking
cheerfully thereof, surely his words could not with more Reason, than civility
be capable of that snarling reply; That, therefore, it seems, he thought the
things themselves or their tastes and relishes were all one. For though they all
afford Delight, yet each of a different kind.

2. But are not all these truly Delectable? Is there not a real Delight to be
had in them? Let any man, that has tried, consult his experience; yea, let any
one that has not besotted his Soul, and infatuated his understanding, but
seriously consider the very Idaea's of these things, and revolve the notions of
them in his mind, and then soberly judge, whether they be not delightful? And,
if so, when there is an actual sense of pleasure and sweetness in the
communicated power, and in the practice of them, Why is not this delighting in
God? Admit that he is not actually thought on in some of these exercises; As
when I freely forgive a wrong, or relieve a distressed person, or right a
wronged one: If yet I do these things, from the radical Principle of the Love
of God deeply settled in my Soul, and with a sensible delight accompanying my
act, and the disposition I find in mine heart thereunto: Here is not, it is
true, the very act of delighting in God, formally terminated upon him as the
Object; But it is he that gives me this Delight, and is the material Object (as
well as Author) of it. The communication is from him, whereby I am delighted,
and enabled to do the things that are further delightful. As if I converse with
an excellent person, my intimate friend, who is at this time incognito, and by
a disguise conceals himself from me, or I through my forgetfulness or
inadvertency have no present thoughts of this person; but I hear his pleasant
Discourse, and am much taken with it, and the person on the account of it: It
is my Friend that I Delighted in all this while though I knew it not.

3. And what fault can I find in the matter that Divine delight thus runs and
spreads it self through the whole business of Religion, and all the affairs
whereon it has any influence? Is this the worse or the better? Have I any
cause to quarrel at this? Sure I have not. But if I have not such actual
thoughts of God, as may give me the advantage of terminating my Delight more
directly on him, that may be, very much, my own fault.

4. And what is that an absurdity that under the name of Delighting in God, the
several acts and exercises of Religion besides should be comprehended? How
often in Scripture are other (no-more-eminent) parts of Religion put for the
whole. The knowledge of God, calling upon God, The fear of God, etc. How
commonly are these acknowledged to be Paraphrases of Religion? And shall I not
add [The Love of God?] That most authentic and owned summary of all practical
Religion, and which ought to influence all our actions. And then how far are we
from our mark? What is the difference between loving God, and delighting in
him? But I moreover add, that delight it self in him, cannot but be so taken in
that sharp passage, (though misapplied to the person of whom it was meant), Job
34. 9.
For Job has said, what profit is it that a man should delight himself with
God, (i. e. or be religious)? It fitly enough signifies Religion, as thus
modified or qualified, viz. as having this quality belonging to it, that it is
delightful, or is tinctured with delight in God.

But this (so large) is not the only sense, as we have said, wherein we are to
take delighting in God. And when any part of Religion casts it is name upon the
whole, it would be very unreasonable to exclude the part from which the
denomination is taken, or not to make that the principal thing there meant.

We therefore proceed to speak,

2. Of the more explicit delight in God: And shall therein consider, The
Nature Modification
of it.

1. Its Nature; Which from what has delight in the general, with the addition
of holiness thereto, (which is the work of Gods Spirit, determining the act or
faculty to which it adheres toward God), may be conceived thus, That it is the
acquiescense or rest of the Soul in God, by a satisfiedness of will in him, as
the best and most excellent Good.

That it be the rest of the Soul, belongs to its general nature.

And so does the mentioned kind of rest, more distinguishingly, by the wills
satisfiedness in him: Because the Soul may be also said to rest satisfied (in
respect of another faculty) by the mere knowledge of Truth; But this supposes so
much of that also as is necessary. And because the acts of the understanding
are subservient and in order to those of the will, in the Souls pursuit of a
delightful good; which is so far attained as it actually delights therein;
Therefore this may more simply be called the rest of the whole Soul, whereas
that other is its rest but in some respect only: Especially when we add,

As in the best and most excellent good; for this signifies the good wherein it
rests to be ultimate, and its last end, the very period of its pursuits, beyond
which it neither needs nor desires to go further, viz. as to the kind and
nature of the good which it is now intent upon; though it still desire more of
the same, till there be no place left for further desire, but it wholly cease
and end in full satisfaction.

And that we may speak somewhat more particularly of this rest in God; it
supposes,

1. Knowledge of him. That the Soul be well furnished with such conceptions of
his Nature and Attributes, as that it may be truly said to be himself it
delights in, and not another thing; not an Idol of its own fancy, and which its
imagination has created and set up to it instead of God. Therefore his own
representation of himself must be our measure; which being forsaken, or not so
diligently attended to, He is either by some, misrepresented, (according as
their own corrupt hearts do suggest impure thoughts), and made altogether such
a one as themselves, and such as cannot be the object of a pure and spiritual
delight; or by others (as their guilt and fear do suggest to them black and
direful thoughts of him) rendered such as that he cannot be the object of any
delight at all.

2. It supposes actual thoughts of him; My soul shall be satisfied as with
marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63. 5, 6.
when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches.

3. A pleasedness with even the first view or apprehension of him; which is
most essential to any love to him, and which gives rise to any motion of

(4.) Desire directed toward him, upon the apprehension that somewhat is
absent, either of what is due to him, or lacking to our selves from him.

5. It includes the satisfaction or repose it self which the Soul has, so far
as it finds its desire answered in the one kind or the other.

Where we must more distinctly know, that the delight taken in him, is
according as the desire is which works toward him, and that as our love to him
is:

Now we love him either for himself, or for our own selves.


For himself, ultimately, so as that our Love periods in him, and stays there,
viz. on him, as good in himself.

For our selves; as when our love to him returns upon our selves; apprehending
a goodness in him which is suitable for our enjoyment.

Loving him in the former way, we desire all may be ascribed and given to him,
that possibly may or can. And because we know him to be every way perfect and
full, and that nothing can be added to him of real perfection, and therefore
nothing can be given him besides external honor and acknowledgments: We
therefore desire these may be universally rendered him to the very uttermost.
And as far as we find him worthily glorified, admired, and had in honor, so
far we have delight in (or in reference to) him; consisting in the
gratification of that desire.

Loving him in the other way, (which also we are not only allowed, but obliged
to do, in contradistinction to all creature-good), we desire his nearer
presence and converse, more full communications of his light, grace, and
consolations. And are delighted according as we find such desire is answered
unto us.

6. The form of expression used in the Text, implies also a stirring up our
selves, and the use of endeavors with our own hearts, to foment, heighten, and
raise our own delight. The Conjugation (as it is thought fit to be called) into
which the word is put, importing (by a peculiarity of expressiveness belonging
to the sacred Language) action upon ones self; which must also be understood to
have the same force, in reference to that former sense of delighting in God;
That is, that we put our selves upon those acts and exercises whereunto such
delight is adjoined.

(These things are now more cursorily mentioned, because there will be occasion
more at large to insist on them in the Discourse of The Practice of this Duty,
reserved to the Second Part).

2. We now proceed to the Modification of Delight in God; or the right manner
or measure of it.

Concerning which it is apparent in the general, it can be no further right
than as it is agreeable to its Object.

That our Delight should ever be adequate, or of a measure equal to it, is
plainly impossible: But it must be some-way suitable, or must bear proportion to
it. I shall here mention but two (and those very eminent) respects wherein it
must do so; viz. in respect of

The Excellency Permanency
Of the Good to be delighted in.

1. The excellency of it. Inasmuch as it is the best and highest Good; it
plainly challenges our highest Delight:

That is, The highest Delight simply, which our natures are capable of, is most
apparently due to the blessed God, even by the Law of nature it self, resulting
from our natures, referd unto his. And as the Case stands under the Gospel;

The highest Delight comparatively, i. e. higher than we take in any thing
else; nothing must be so much delighted in as he. We do not otherwise delight
in him as God, which is one way of glorifying him. And its part of the Apostles
charge upon the Pagan world, that knowing him to be God, they did not glorify
him as God.

If we make the comparison between him and all the good things of this world,
the matter is out of question. It is the sense of holy Souls, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee? Psalm. 73.
and whom can I desire on earth besides thee? When others say, Who will show us
any Good? They say, Lord, Psalm. 4.
Lift thou up the light of thy countenance --. And thereby he puts gladness
into their hearts, more than when Corn and Wine increase. And whosoever love
not Christ more than Father, Mat. 10. 47
Mother, Luke 14. 26.
Wife, Child; yea, and their own lives, cannot be his Disciples. Their present
worldly life it self, it put in the balance, he must outweigh.

And if we put the comparison between our spiritual eternal Life and him;
though he and that can never be in opposition (as there may be often an
opposition between him and this present life, so that the one is often quitted
for the other); yet neither is there a co-ordination, but the less worthy must
be subordinate to the more worthy: We are to desire the enjoyment of him for
his own glory.

And yet here is a strange and admirable complication of these with one
another. For if we enjoy him, delight and rest in him as our best and most
satisfying Good, we thereby glorify him as God. We give him practically
highest acknowledgments, we confess him the most excellent one. It Is his glory
to be the last term of all desires, and beyond which no reasonable desire can
go further.

And if we seek and desire his glory supreamly, sincerely and really beyond and
above all things; when he is so glorified to the uttermost, or we are assured
he will be; our highest desire is so far satisfied, and that turns to, or is,
our own contentment: So that by how much more simply and sincerely we pass
from, and go out of our selves, so much the more certainly we find our own
satisfaction, rest, and full blessedness in him. As it is impossible the Soul
that loves him above it self, can be fully happy, while he has not his full
glory; so it is for the same reason equally impossible, but it must be so when
he has.

2. Our delight must be suitable to the Object (the Good to be delighted in).

In respect of the permanency of it, This is the most durable and lasting Good.
In this blessed Object therefore we are to rejoice evermore. 1 These. 5. 16.
As in the matter of Trust we are required to Trust in the Lord for ever,
because in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. Isa. 26. 4.
Everlasting strength gives sufficient ground for everlasting Trust. So it is
in the matter of delight: A permanent everlasting excellency is not answered,
but by a continual and everlasting delight; Therefore, is it most justly said,
Phil. 4. 4.
Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say to you rejoice; always, and still
on. If through a long tract of time you have been constantly always rejoicing in
the Lord, begin again, I, again, say to you rejoice; or rather never give over.
The Object will warrant and justify the act, let it be drawn forth to never so
vast a length of time. You will still find a continual spring, unexhausted
fullness, a fountain never to be drawn dry.

There will never be cause of diversion with this pretense, that now this
Object will yield no more: It is drained to the uttermost, and is now become an
empty and gustless thing.

With other things it may be so; and therefore our delight does not answer the
natures of such things, 1 Cor. 7. 30.
but when we rejoice in them as if we rejoiced not. They are as if they were
not. All the things of this world are so. For even the fashion of this world
passes away; as it is afterward added. v. 31.
Therefore no delight can fitly be taken in them, but what is volatile and
unfixed as they are; lest otherwise it overreach, and run beyond its Object.
And how absurd and vain is it to have our hearts set upon that which is not?
That takes wing, and leaves us in the dirt.

This Object of delight is the I am, yesterday and to day the same, and for
ever; without variableness and shadow of change. Therefore the nature of it
cannot allow us a reason; wherefore, if we be delighted therein yesterday, we
should not to day; or if to day, why not to morrow, and so on to for ever.

Whence then we may see no one can say he has answered the import of this
Exhortation, Delight thy self in the Lord, by having delighted in him at
sometime. It is continual, as well as highest delight we are here called to.

We see then thus far what we are called to when we are here directed to
delight our selves in the Lord.

2. We are next to show How we are called to it. And the matter it self will
answer the enquiry, we are called to it, according to what, in it self, it is.
Now it is

Both a Privilege, And Duty.


We are therefore called to it (and accordingly are to understand the words).

1. By way of gracious invitation to partake of a privilege, which our Blessed
Lord would have us share and be happy in; no longer to spend our selves in
anxious pursuits and vain expectations of Rest where it is not to be found; but
that we retire our selves to him in whom we shall be sure to find it. Pity and
Mercy invite us here to place our delight, and take up our Rest. And concerning
this, there is no question or imaginable doubt.

2. By way of authoritative Command. For we must know,

That delight in God is to be considered not only under the notion of a
privilege unto which we may esteem our selves entitled; but also of a duty
whereto we are most indispensibly obliged. This is a thing (not so much not
understood, as) not considered and seriously thought on, by very many; and the
not-considering it proves no small disadvantage to the life of Religion. It
occurs to very many, more familiarly, under the notion of a high favor, and a
great vouchsafement (as indeed it is), that God will allow any of the Sons of
men to place their delights in himself; but they (at least seem to) think it is
only the privilege of some special favorites; of whom, because they perhaps,
are conscious they have no cause to reckon themselves, they are therefore very
secure in the neglect of it. And thus is the pretense of modesty and humility
very often made an umbrage and shelter to the vile carnality of many an heart;
and a want of fitness is pretended and cherished at the same time, as an
excuse; That whereas they do not delight in God, they never may: For he that is
unfit to day, and never therewithal applies himself with seriousness, to the
endeavor of becoming fit, is likely to be more unfit to morrow, and so be as
much excused always as now; and by the same means at length excuse himself from
being happy; but never from having been the Author of his own misery: But what?
is it indeed no duty to Love God? Is that become no Duty which is the very sum
and comprehension of all duties? or can they be said to Love him, that take no
pleasure in him, that is, to Love him without loving him. It is, indeed,
wonderful grace that there should be such a contexture of our happiness and
duty; that, by the same thing, wherein we are obedient, we also become
immediately, in the same degree, blessed. And that the Law of God in this case
has this very import an obligation upon us to Blessedness. But in the mean
time we should not forget that Gods Authority and Honor are concerned herein,
as it is our duty; as well as our own happiness, as it is our privilege; And
that we cannot injure our selves in this matter without also robbing God.

Delight in God is a great piece of homage to him, a practical acknowledgment
of his sovereign excellency, and perfect all comprehending goodness; when we
retire from all the world to him, we confess him better than all things
besides: That we have none in Heaven or Earth that we esteem worthy to be
compared with him. But when our hearts are averse to him, and will not be
brought to delight in him, since there is somewhat in the mean while wherein we
do delight; we do as much as say (yea, we more significantly express it than by
saying) that whatever that is, it is better than he; Yea, that such a thing is
good, and he is not. For as not-believing him is a denial of his Truth, the
making him a liar; not delighting in him is, equally, a denial of his Goodness,
and consequently even of his Godhead it self.

And since we find the words are here laid down plainly in a preceptive form;
Delight thy self in the Lord: Can any think themselves after this at liberty,
to do so or not? It Is true, that they who are in no disposition hereto have
somewhat else to do in order to that (of which hereafter); but, in the mean
time, how forlorn is their case, who have nothing to excuse their sin by, but
sin; and who, instead of extenuating their guilt, do double it!

Yea, and we are further to consider, that it is not only commanded, by a mere
simple precept, but that this Precept has its solemn sanction; and that not
only by promise, here expressly annexed (of which hereafter); but also of
implied threatening; That we shall not else have the desires of our hearts, but
be necessarily unsatisfied, and miserable; which is also in many other places
expressed plainly enough. Great penalty is due upon not delighting in God, even
by the Gospel-constitution it self; which is not so unreasonably formed as to
require more in this matter, than is suitable to the object it self; and is
framed so indulgently, as to accept much less than is proportionable thereto;
and yet within the capacity also of a reasonable Soul: so that, though the very
nature of the thing does plainly dictate a rule, by which this matter is to be
estimated and judged; yet this other rule gives considerable abatement and
allowance; That is, it being considered what the Object claims and challenges,
as by its own proper excellency due to it; and what the Subject is, by its own
nature, capable of: Not only does it hence appear, that delight in God is a
duty, but that the Soul ought to rise to that highest pitch of delight in him,
i. e. unto the highest the Soul is naturally capable of. The very Law of
Nature, resulting from the reference and comparison of our nature unto Gods
own, requires so much; That we Love (or delight) in him with all our heart,
with all our mind, with all our might, and with all our strength; He deserves
from us our very uttermost. Yet this is by the Gospel-constitution required
with indulgence and abatement, not as to the matter required, but as to the
manner of requiring it. The matter required, is still the same, so as that the
purest and highest delight in God does not cease to be a duty, or any gradual
defect thereof cease to be a sin. The Gospel does make no change of the natures
of things; makes nothing cease to be due to God from us, which the Law of
Nature made due; nor renders any defect innocent, which is in its own nature
culpable and faulty; Therefore the same pitch of delight in God is still due
and required that ever was: But that perfection is not (finally and without
relief) required in the same manner, and on the same terms it was; that is, it
is not, by the Gospel required under remediless penalty, as it was; For the Law
of Nature (though it made not a remedy simply impossible yet it) provided none,
but the Gospel provides one.

Yet not so but the same penalty also remains in it self due and deserved,
which was before. For as the Gospel takes not away the dueness of any part or
degree of that obedience which we did owe to God naturally, so nor does it take
away the natural dueness of punishment, for disobedience in any kind or degree
of it. Only it provides that (upon the very valuable consideration which it
makes known) it becomes to us a remissible debt, and actually remitted to them
who come up to the terms of it. Not that it should be in it self no debt, for
then nothing were remitted; Nor yet, when it so provides for the remission of
defects in this part of our duty, does it remit the substance of the duty it
self, or pardon any defects of it to any but such who are found sincere in
this, as well as the other parts of that obedience which we owe. Others, who
after so gracious overtures, remain at their former distance, and retain their
aversion, enmity, and disaffection to God, it more grievously (and most justly)
threatens and punishes as implacable; and who will upon no terms return into a
state of friendship and amity with their Maker, whom they hated without cause,
Heb. 10. 29
and do now continue strangers and enemies to him without excuse; so that the
very blood of the reconciling Sacrifice cries against them.

And surely since (as was formerly said) it is God in Christ that is the entire
Object of this Delight or Love, It Is a fearful penalty that is determined upon
them that do not so place it; 1 Cor. 16. 22.
when it is said, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maran-atha. Ephesians. 6. 24.
And when also it is said, Grace be upon all them that do, it is plainly
implied, that the penalty belongs to all them that do not love him in sincerity.

Of which sincerity therefore of delight in God, (to keep within the compass of
our present Theme), it is necessary we be well informed; as we may be from what
has been said before; that is,

1. That we delight in him supreamly, and above all things else, viz. with our
highest and deepest complacency of will. For it is not necessary (nor
ordinarily possible), that our delight in him should be ever accompanied with
such sensible agitation of the corporeal Spirits, as we find in reference to
merely sensible objects. Which is not essential to such delight, but an
accident that follows union with the body; and more frequently, and to a
greater degree in some tempers of body than others. But it is necessary there
be that practical estimation of him, and propension toward him, as the best
and most excellent good; as that we be in a preparation of mind and heart to
forego whatever can come into any competition with him for his sake.

That though we do not thus delight in him so much as we should, yet we do more
than in any thing else.

2. That we continue herein: That this be the constant habitual temper of our
Spirits toward him: That we cleave to him with purpose of heart, as not only
the most excellent, but the most permanent object of our delight: Having settled
the resolution with our selves, Psalm. 48.
This God shall be our God for ever and ever; He shall be our God and guide
even to the death. And that there be frequent actual workings of heart toward
him, agreeable to such a temper, though they are not so frequent as they ought.

Which account we give of this sincerity of delight in God, not to encourage
any to take up with the lowest degree of that sincerity; but that none may be
encouraged, upon their own mistake in this matter, to take up with any thing
short of it; and that we may see whence to take our rise in aiming at the
highest pitch thereof.

And that we may (understanding the highest intenseness and most constant
exercise of delight in God that our Natures are capable of, to be our duty)
understand also, that in reference to our gradual defects and intermissions
herein, we ought to be deeply humbled, as being faulty; not unconcerned, as
though we were innocent in this regard, That we need continual pardon upon
these accounts; That we owe it to the Blood of the Redeemer, that such things
can be pardoned: That we are not to reckon, or ever to expect that Blood should
stand us in stead, to obtain our pardon for never delighting in God sincerely
at all; but only (supposing we do it sincerely) that we do it not perfectly.
For most certainly, they whose hearts are never turned to him as their best and
most sovereign Good or Portion, and Ruler or Lord; but do still remain
alienated in their minds, and enemies through wicked works, will perish
notwithstanding. And that we might the more distinctly, together with the
apprehension of what we are called to in this matter, understand also how we
are called to, i. e. not by an invitation only, that leaves us at liberty,
whether we will or will not, as we think fit: But by express command, and that
also backed with the severe determination of most dreadful penalty in case of
omission.

And thus we have in some measure shown the Import of the Direction in the
Text, That we Delight our selves in the Lord.

A TREATISE OF Delighting in GOD: From PSALM. 37. 4. Delight thy self also in
the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.
PART II.
Concerning the Practice of Delight in GOD.
WE have in the former Part extended the meaning of the words, Delight thy self
in the Lord, beyond what they seem at first sight literally to signify: So as
not to understand them merely as requiring that very single act of Delight to
be immediately and directly terminated on God himself; But to take them as
comprehending also the sum of all holy and religious converse with God, i. e.
as it is delightful, or as it is seasoned (intermingled, and as it were
besprinkled) with delight; and upon the same account, of all our other
converse, so far as it is influenc't by Religion.

And I doubt not, to such as shall attentively have considered what has been
said, it will be thought very reasonable to take them in that latitude; whereof
the very letter of the Text (as may be alleged for further justification
hereof) is most fitly capable. For (as was noted upon another Text where we
have the same phrase) the particle which we read [in] the Lord, has not that
signification alone, but signifies also [with] or [by] or [besides] or [before]
or [in presence of], as if it had been said, Come and sit down with God, retire
thy self to him, and solace thy self in the delights which are to be found in
his presence and converse, in walking with him, and transacting thy course as
before him, and in his sight. As a man may be said to delight himself with a
friend that puts himself under his roof; and besides personal converse with
himself, freely enjoys the pleasure of all the entertainments, accommodations,
and provisions which he is freely willing to communicate with him, and has the
satisfaction which a sober person would take in observing the rules and order
of a well-governed house.

According to this (diverse) Import of the Precept enjoining this Duty, it will
be requisite to speak diversely of the Practice of the Duty it self:

That is, That we treat of the practice and exercise of Delight; 1. As a thing
adherent to the other Duties of Religion. 2. As it is a distinct Duty of it
self.


As to the former, our business will be, exercise of Religion as delightful.
Now Religion is delightful naturally and in it self; and makes a man's other
actions, even that are not in themselves acts of Religion, delightful also, so
far as they are governed and influenc't by it; If that Religion be true, i. e.
if it be living, such as proceeds from a principle of Divine life.

Being therefore now to treat of the Practice of this Duty (whereof the account
has been already given), our Discourse must aim at and endeavor these two
things, (the former as leading and subservient to the latter), viz. 1. That we
may not take up, and rest, or let our practice terminate in a Religion which is
not naturally and in it self delightful. 2. That we seek after and improve in
that which is.


1. That which is not so, we have great reason not to acquiesce in, or be
contented with, for it is plainly such as will not defray it self, or bear its
own charges, as having only cumber and burden in it, no use or end; I mean the
dead formality of Religion only. We find it natural and pleasant to carry about
with us our own living body; but who would endure (how wearisom and loathsome a
task were it?) to lug to and fro a dead carcass?

It will be upon this account needful to Insist in showing more distinctly,
What sort of Religion it is, that is in it self wholly undelightful. Propound
some things to consideration concerning it, that may tend to beget a dislike of
it, and so incline us to look further.


1. That we may know what we are not to take up with; because our present
Subject confines us to this one measure of Religion, that it be delightful, it
will be proper to limit our Discourse to this Character only of the Religion we
are to pass from, as vain and worthless, viz. That which is without delight;
which it also will be sufficient to insist on to our present purpose. For since
(as has been largely shown) the delightfulness of the Religion which is true,
and living is intrinsecal, and most natural to it, 'twill therefore be
certainly consequent, that which is not delightful is dead, and can serve for
nothing.

And yet here it will be necessary, for Caution, to insert,

1. That even such Religion as is true and living, and consequently in it self
delightful, yet may by accident sometimes, not appear or be thought so; because
either variety of occasions may divert from minding, or some imbittering
distemper of spirit may hinder the present relishing of that pleasure which is
truly in it. As a man may eat and feed on that, which is very savoury and good;
and yet, though his taste be not vitiated, but because he reflects not, may not
every moment have that present apprehension that it is so; much more if the
Organs of taste be under a present distemper. But, if they be not so, any one's
asking him how he likes that dish, (because that occasions a more express
animadversion), will also draw from him an acknowledgment that it is pleasant
and savoury.

2. That a dead Religion may be thought delightful; and through the ill temper
of the subject, a pleasure may be apprehended in it, which does not naturally
arise from it; that is, The mere external part of Religion may be flexible, and
be accidentally perverted into a subserviency to some purposes which Religion
of it self intends not, in respect whereof a delight may injuriously (and as by
a rape) be taken in it, as is said by the Prophet of an hypocritical people,
Isa. 58. 2.
Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did
righteousness; they take delight in approaching to God. Therefore, that which
is here intended, is not, that the Religion should be rejected, in some present
exercises whereof we have not the actual relish of a present pleasure (as that
should not be embraced, wherein upon any whatsoever terms we find it); but that
which can rightfully, and upon just terms afford us none; and which upon our
utmost enquiry and search, cannot in reason (as it is not unfit that spiritual
reason should be employed in making a judgment what may) be thought spiritually
delectable.

We shall therefore in some particular heads, give a short account of such
Religion, as rationally cannot but be judged undelightful, or which has not
that in it which can yield pleasure to a sound and well-complexioned spirit;
but that if any be taken therein, that very pleasure is so unnatural and out of
kind, as to be the argument rather of a disease in the Subject, than of any
real goodness in the thing it self.

Whereunto we only premise this two-sold general Rule, whereby an undue and
unnatural delight may be estimated and judged of.

1. That such delight may be justly deemed unnatural which is taken in any
thing besides, and with the neglect of the proper use and end which it most
fitly serves for.

2. Such as is accompanied with a real hurt, greater than the delight can
countervail, or as is so far from taking in profit and benefit in conjunction
with it, as that the damage and prejudice which it cannot recompense, is
inseparable from it; which rules will be the more fitly applicable to the
present case; for that (as has been formerly observed) the delight which
accompanies the acts and exercises of Religion, or that flow from it, though it
be natural thereto, yet is not the only or chief end of those acts; but they
have another more important end, unto the prosecution whereof by such acts
delight is only adherent: Whence the delight cannot but be most preposterous
and perverse, which is taken in such things as do either not serve the more
principal design of Religion; or much more that are repugnant and destructive
of it.

By these Rules we may plainly see what delight in the general is to be
accounted undue.

As by the former Rule we would justly reckon that an undue delight which a man
should take in his food, if he only please himself with the looking on the
handsome garnishing of the dishes, which he loathes in the mean time and refuses
to taste; or which a covetous miser takes in having wealth hoarded up, which he
is pleased often to view and cannot endure to use.

And by the latter, That were most irrational delight, which in a Fever one
should take in gratifying his distempered appetite, whereby he does not so much
relieve nature as feed his disease.

And so we may say, that Religion is undelightful, i. e. not duly delightful.

1. Which consists wholly in revolving in ones own mind the notions that belong
to Religion, without either the experience, or the design and expectation of
having the heart and conversation formed according to them. So the case is with
such as content themselves to yield the principles of Religion true, and behold
with a notional assent and approbation the connection and agreement of one thing
with another: But do never consider the tendency and aim of the whole; or that
the Truth of the Gospel is the Doctrine that is according to godliness; 1 Timothy
6. 3
or such as is pursuant to the design of making men godly; of transforming them
into the Image of God, and framing them to an entire subjection to his holy and
acceptable will; that bethink not themselves the Truth is never learned as it
is in Jesus, except it be to the renewing the Spirit of the mind, Ephesians. 4.
the putting off the old man, and the putting on of the new. When this is never
considered, but men do only know, that they may know; and are never concerned
further about the great things of God, than only to take notice that such
things there are offered to their view which carry with them the appearance of
Truth, but mind them no more than the affairs of Eutopia, or the world in the
Moon; what delight is taken in this knowledge, is surely most perverse. There is
a pleasure indeed in knowing things, and in apprehending the coherence of one
Truth with another; but he that shall allow himself to speculate only about
things wherein his life is concerned, and shall entertain himself with delight
in agitating in his mind certain curious general notions concerning a disease
or a crime that threatens him with present death, or what might be a remedy or
defense in such a case, without any thought of applying such things to his own
case, or that the case is his own, one may say of such pleasure it is mad; or
of this delight, What does it? or he that only surfeits his eye with beholding
the food he is to live by, and who in the mean time languishes in the want of
appetite, and a sickly loathing of his proper nutriment; surely such a one has
a pleasure that no sober man would think worth the having.

And the more any one does only notionally know in the matters of Religion, so
as that the temper of his spirit remains altogether unsuitable and opposite to
the design and tendency of the things known; the more he has lying ready to
come in judgment against him; and if therefore he count the things excellent
which he knows, and only please himself with his own knowledge of them, it is but
alike case as if a man should be much delighted to behold his own condemnation
written in a fair and beautiful hand: Or, as if one should be pleased with the
glittering of that sword which is directed against his own heart, and must be
the present instrument of death to him: And so little pleasant is the case of
such a person in it self, who thus satisfies his own curiosity with the
concernments of eternal life and death, that any serious person would tremble
on his behalf, at that wherein he takes pleasure, and apprehend just horror in
that state of the case whence he draws matter of delight.

2. It Is yet a more insipid and gustless Religion which too many place in some
peculiar opinions, that are either false, and contrary to Religion, or doubtful
and cumbersome to it, or little and inconsiderable, and therefore certainly
alien to it, and impertinent. For if that Religion only be truly delightful
which has a vital influence on the heart and practice, as that must needs be
indelectable, which is only so notionally conversant about the greatest truths,
as that it has no such influence; much more is that so, which is so wholly
coversant about matters either opposite or irrelative hereto, as that it can
have none. It must here be acknowledged that some Doctrines not only not
revealed in the Word of God, but which are contrary thereto, may (being thought
true) occasion the excitation of some inward affection, and have an indirect
influence to the regulating of practice also, so as to repress some grosser
enormities. As the false notions of Pagans concerning the Deity, which have led
them to Idolatry, have struck their minds with a certain kind of reverence of
invisible powers and perhaps rendered some more sober and less vicious than had
they been destitute of all Religious sentiments.

And yet the good which has hence ensued, is not to be referred to the
particular principles of Idolatry, which were false; but to the more general
principles of Religion, which were true. Yea, and though such false principles
viewed alone, and by themselves, may possibly infer somewhat of good; yet that
is by accident only, and through the short-sightedness and ignorance of them
with whom they obtain; who, if they did consider their incoherence with other
common notions and principles most certainly true, would receive by them (if
thought the only Principles of Religion) so much the greater hurt, and become
so much the more hopelesly and incurably wicked: As most manifestly the
principles which (looked upon by themselves) while they are reckoned true, do
lead to Idolatry, and consequently, by that mistake only, to some Religion; do
yet, being really false, lead to Atheism, and of themselves tend to subvert and
destroy all Religion. Therefore such Doctrines as cohere not with the general
frame of Truth, whatever their particular aspect may be, considered apart and
by themselves, are yet in their natural tendency opposite and destructive to
the true design of Religion, and the pleasure which they can any way afford, is
only stolen and vain; such as a person takes in swallowing a potion that is
pleasant, but which, if it perform what belongs to it, he must with many a
sickly qualm refund and disgorge back again.

We also acknowledge some Truths of less importance, may be said to concern
practice, though not so immediately. Nor is it therefore the design of this
Discourse to derogate from any such, that are of apparently Divine Revelation
or Institution; which, however they justly be reckoned less than some other
things, yet for that very reason as they are revealed by God for such an end,
are by no means to be esteemed little, or inconsiderable; be their subserviency
to the great design of Religion never so remote. Upon the account of which
subserviency, they are also to be esteemed delectable, that is, in proportion
thereto; but when they are so esteemed beyond that proportion, and are exalted
into an undue preference to their very end it self; so as that, in comparison
of them, the great things of Religion are reckoned low, frigid, sapless things;
when men set their hearts upon them abstractly, and without consideration of
their reference and usefulness to the greater things of Religion; The delight
that is so taken in them, argues but the disease of the mind that takes it, and
so great a degree of dotage, that a serious person would wonder how men can
please themselves with such matters, without considering, and with the neglect
of so great things they have relation to.

3. And hither is to be referred the much less rational pleasure which is taken
by some in the mere dress wherewith such notions and opinions may be
artificially clothed by themselves or others; Rhetorical flourishes, a set of
fine words, handsome cadencies and periods, fanciful representations, little
tricks and pieces of wit, and (which cannot pretend so high) pitiful quibbles
and gingles, inversions of sentences, the pedantick rhyming of words, yea and
an affected tone, or even a great noise, things that are neither capable of
gratifying the Christian nor the man; without which even the most important
weighty matters do to so squeamish stomachs seem gustless and unsavory, and
are reckoned dull and flat things. And most plain it is, (though it is not
strange, that so trifling minds should impose upon themselves by so thin a
sophism), that such are in a great mistake, whose delight being wholly taken up
in these trifles, do hereupon think they taste the delights of Religion; for
these are nothing of it, are found about it only accidentally; and by a most
unhappy accident too, as ill (for the most of these things) agreeing to it, and
no more becoming it than a Fool's Coat does a prudent grave person; and the
best of them agreeing to it but in common with any thing else, about which such
arts may be used; so that they are no way any thing of it, or more peculiarly
belonging to it, than to any theme or subject besides, unto which such
ornaments (as they are thought) can be added. How miserably therefore do they
cheat themselves, who, because they hear with pleasure a discourse upon some
head of Religion thus garnished, according to their idle trifling humor; and
because they are taken with the contrivance of some sentences, or affected with
the loudness of the voice, or have their imagination tickled with some
fantastical illustrations, presently conclude themselves to be in a Religious
transport, when the things that have pleased them have no affinity or alliance
with Religion, befall to it but by chance, and are in themselves things quite of
another Country!

4. Of the like strain is the Religion that is made up all of talk. And such
like are that sort of persons, who love to discourse of those great things of
God wherewith it was never their design or aim to have their hearts stamped, or
their lives commanded and governed. Who invert that which was the ancient glory
of the Christian Church, We do not speak great things, but live them. And are
pleased with only the noise of their own (most commonly insigficant senseless)
words; unto whom how ungrateful a relish would that Precept have, Be swift to
bear, slow to speak!

And how much to be regretted a thing is it, That the delights of practical
living Religion should be so lost, and vanish into a mere lip-labor! Things of
this nature are to be estimated by their end, and the temper of Spirit which
accompanies them; Which unto a serious and prudent observer, are commonly very
discernible and easy to be distinguished. It Is an amiable lovely thing to
behold those that are intent upon the great business of Religion themselves,
provoking others also with serious gravity unto love and good works. And it
will ever stand as a monumental character of them that feared the Lord, that
they spoke often one to another upon this account. Mal. 3.
But the pretense of this is odious, when the thing designed is nothing but
self-recommendation, and the spirit of the pretenders is visibly vain and
empty; and when it is apparent they take delight, not in the things they speak
of, but only in this thing it self, speaking much. No breath is then more
fulsom; And the better the things are, the worse it is to have no more savor
of them.

5. Again, The Religion is akin to this, which stands all in hearing. It Is as
remote (at least) from the heart, when it is wholly placed in the ear, as when
it is all in the tongue. As it is with them that are hearers only, Jam. 1.
not doers of the word, deceiving their own souls. When the Preacher is to them
as a very lovely song, Ezekiel. 33.
of one that can play well on an instrument, and they hear his words, but do
them not. And it is natural to the same sort of persons to be pleased
indifferently with either of these, as the Athenians were in hearing or telling
some new thing. Only that this difference most commonly appears with the
persons we intend, that when the things they delight to hear, must be ever new,
or at least new dressed; the things they speak, shall be everlastingly the same.
How perverse a delight is that? Whereas it is the glory of substantial Religion,
that the principal things of it can never grow old, or be dry: Their ears still
itch after novelties; a plain argument that it is not Religion it self that
pleases them (which cannot change), but the variable accessory modes of
representing it.

However, there is certainly very often a distemper appearing among those that
profess Religion, in coveting to hear unto excess, and beyond what is either
suitable or designed unto use and profit. When the pleasure of a delightful
revolving of the ever-fresh and fragrant Truths of the Gospel, and reducing
them to answerable practice, is lost and stifled, by heaping on of more than
can be digested. And many an hopeful birth of pious and holy dispositions,
affections, and good works, is suppressed or enfeebled by an untimely
superfetation.

6. Lastly, It Is a most undelightful Religion, which consists entirely in the
external additaments and forms of Worship, which this or that party have chosen
to affix to it. Yea, though those forms be never so certainly of Divine
Prescription; which, however God has appointed them, were never appointed or
intended by him to be our Religion, but to be subservient helps and means to
it. Being enlivened by it, they are comely and delightful; but severed and cut
off from it, or the course of vital spirit that should flow into them being
obstructed and represt, they have no more pleasure in them than a dead arm or
finger. Such Divine appointments themselves, severed from the things wherein
substantial Religion consists, have been an abomination to the Lord, Isa. 1.
(Your new Moons and Sabbaths, etc. my Soul hates), and then sure there is
little reason they should be a delight to us. If they be, it is as fond and
trifling a delight, as when one has the opportunity of conversing with some
excellent person, to neglect all his wise sayings, and pleasant instructive
discourses, and only to please ones self in viewing his handsome apparel; yea,
though I should know at the same time, that I thereby greatly displease him
whom (as is also supposable) I were greatly concerned to please. Thus it is
with them that mind only the solemnity of Gods worship, not the design. And
more gross the matter is, with such as be their observance of the external
modes of Religion, think to expiate the badness of their most vicious
conversation; That will steal, and murder, and commit adultery, oppress the
stranger, the fatherless and the widow; and yet presume to stand before the
Lord in his house, Jer. 7.
and cry, the Temple of the Lord, etc. This is the Pharisaical Religion, that
is scrupulous in tything Mint, Annise, and Cummin, and neglects the weighty
things of the Law, Justice, Judgment, and Truth.

These men delight in what not only is dead in it self, but will be mortal unto
them. And if the Divine Institution of the things wherewith they so vainly
please themselves, will not bear them out, much less their own; be their
discriminating denomination or profession what it will.

And now all these things (whether severally or together) and whatever else of
like kind do at the best make but a dead, and consequently an undelightful
Religion, such as has no pleasure in it, because it has no life: It remains
therefore,

2. To show, how unfit such a Religion is to be chosen or rested in. And surely
since (as appears from what was formerly said) the persuading of men to become
religious or godly, is but an inviting them to a state and course wherein they
may delight themselves with God; or to a life of pure and heavenly pleasure;
That is only the vain show of Religion, which affords nothing of that pleasure.
And how unreasonable and foolish is it when Religion it self is the thing we
pretend, to let our selves be mocked (as we mock others, and vainly attempt to
mock Him also, who is not to be mocked) with the mere empty show and appearance
of it!

That we may be here somewhat more particular, let it be considered,

1. That the Religion which is in it self undelightful, is, for the same reason
for which it is so, incapable of growth; that is, because it is a dead thing.
For that reason it is without delight; and for the same reason admits not of
improvement: It wants the self-improving Principle. He that drinks of that
water (says our Savior) which I shall give him, Joh. 4.
it shall be in him as a well of water springing up in him unto life eternal.
That only Principle of all true Religion and Godliness, The Divine Nature, the
Seed of God, is of that heavenly tendency, it aims and aspires upward, and will
never cease shooting up till it reach Heaven; and the pleasure and
delightfulness of it stands much in its continual springing up toward a
perfect state* from a grain of Mustard Seed to the talness of a Cedar. It Is
pleasant to behold its constant undecaying greenness and verdure; such as
renders its Subject like a tree planted by the rivers of water that brings
forth fruit in season, whose leaf also does not wither, and whatsoever he does
prospers. Psas. 1.
Or as plants set in the House of the Lord, that flourish in the Courts of
their God. That shall still bring forth fruit even in old age, Psalm. 92.
and be fat and flourishing. The dead dry forms, or other appendages of
Religion, that have no communion with a living root, or the Religion that is
only made up of these, gives no such hope of improvement. A great and most
considerable prejudice against any thing that pretends to the name of Religion;
which being at first an imperfect thing (as that especially which it self is
but pretense and shadow cannot but be) if it shall never be expected to be
better, can have little claim or title to any excellency. The value even of
true Religion, though it be of an excellent nature and kind, stands much in the
hopefulness and improveableness of it; and is not so much to be considered in
respect of what it is, as what it shall come to. This lank spiritless Religion
as soon as you assume and take it up, you know the best of it. It Is not of a
growing thriving kind; Never expect better of it. It Is true, the notional
knowledge, opinionativeness, and external observances, which we have spoken of,
may be so increased, as an heap of sand may be; but the Religion of such grows
not as a thing that has life in it, by vital self-improvement.

2. Nor for the same reason can it be a lasting thing. For it wants what should
maintain it. It will, as a vesture, wear and grow old; or, being as a cloak put
on to serve a present turn, is, when that turn is served, as easily thrown off,
i. e. being found to be more cumbersom than useful. What has living Union with
a man's own self, it is neither his ease nor convenience; he neither affects, nor
can endure to lay it aside.

It is given as a character of an hypocrite (one who therefore must be
understood to carry with him some show and face of Religion, and to want the
living Root and Principle of it) that he is inconstant in his Religion; Job 27.
10.
will he at all times call upon God? or will he be constantly religious? The
interrogative form of speech implies more than a mere negative; That is, does
not only say that he will not at all times call upon God, but that it is absurd
to say or think that he will. For it is an appeal to common reason in the case;
as if it had been said, Can any man think that such a ones Religion will be
lasting? It imports a disdain it should be thought so. What? he call upon God
at all times; a likely thing! no; the matter is plain, his Religion is measured
by his secular interest, and he will only be so long Religious as will serve
that purpose. And the reason is plainly assigned in the foregoing words, Will
he delight himself in the Almighty? His Religion has no delight with it; it is
a languid faint spiritless thing, a dead form. If it had life, it would have
pleasure in it; and then the same vital principle that would make it pleasant,
would make it lasting and permanent also.

3. While it does last, it wants the fruit and profit, which should be designed
and sought by Religion; even for the same reason for which it is without
delight, it is also fruitless and vain, i. e. because it has no life in it: So
that all that is done in this way of Religion is only labor and toil to no
purpose. And what do or can we propose to our selves from Religion, as the
proper design of it, but to have our spirits fitted to the honoring and
enjoying of God, unto service to him, and blessedness in him; and that we may
hereupon, actually both serve and enjoy him? Both these chiefly depend upon his
favorable acceptance of us. He will neither reckon himself served by us, nor
allow himself to be enjoyed, if he be not pleased with us. And how shall we
expect to please him with that, wherewith, the more our minds come to be
rectified and made conformable to the rule of righteousness and life, the more
impossible it is that we can be pleased our selves? Can we please him by a
Religion that is in it self unsavory, spiritless and dead; and that affords
not to our selves the least relish of true pleasure? And partly the success of
our Religion in the mentioned respects, depends upon the due temperament our
spirits receive by it; But what good impression can that light chaffie empty
Religion, that has been described, ever be hoped to make there? Is it a likely
means of refining and bettering our spirits? Even as it is void of spiritual
delight it is also of spiritual benefit; for certainly our spirits are like to
embrace and retain nothing in which they can take no pleasure. How vain then is
that Religion by which we can neither please God nor profit our selves?

4. It ought to be considered how foolish a thing it is, and unworthy of a
reasonable creature to do that in a continued course and series of actions
wherein we can have no design, and do aim at nothing; Even they that place
their Religion in things so remote and alien to the Spirit and power of it, do
yet spend a considerable part of their lifes-time in those things. And how
becoming is it of a man to have spent so much of his time in doing nothing? And
that from week to week, or from day to day, the seasons should return, of which
he has constantly this to say, Now comes the time of doing that whereof I can
give no account why I do it!

That there should be so constant a defalcation of such portions of time for
that which a man can neither call business nor recreation, which tends to no
advantage in any kind. For it tends not to promote his secular interest but in
so indirect and by-a-way, and with so sinister and basely-oblique respects, as
an honest man would abhor, and an ingenious man be ashamed to profess; And his
spiritual and eternal interest much less. This were therefore the same thing as
to proclaim ones self a fool or a vain trifler. The things that have been
instanc't in (considered so abstractly from the substance of Religion, as we
have considered them) being such, some of them, as carry not with them so much
as that very show of wisdom, Col. 2. 23.
of which the Apostle speaks: And others of them, so faint a show, as it ill
becomes a wise man to be pleased with, while they do his better part no good,
and carry not that show in any provision (as that word (...) sometimes
signifies) for the satisfying of the flesh.

And yet it is to be withal remembered that this (waste and lost) time of their
life, is all that such persons allot to their everlasting concernments; and
that the things which have been mentioned (some or other of them; for all do
not always concur with the same persons) are not made subservient to; but are
substituted in the room and stead of the Religion by which those concernments
should be provided for. And is this a wise provision for Eternity? What, man? A
few empty unimproved notions! a by-opinion or two! the flourishes of a little
pedantique art tickling thy toyish fancy! the motion of thy (only) busy and
laboring tongue! or the thirst and satisfaction of thy vain ear! the bowing of
thy hypocritical knee! Are these all that thou designest, or will mind to do
for thy Soul? Are these like well to supply the place of living Religion? to
serve thee instead of inward acquaintance with God? of being really and
habitually good and holy? of doing good and walking in the path of life? What a
Soul have thou that can live upon chaff and air, and be sustained by the wind?
Have thou no need of quickening influence from God? no hunger after the
heavenly hidden Manna? and the fruits of the Tree of Life? What use make thou
of thy Understanding, or of the Reason of a man, when thou think such empty
vanities as thou trustest in can do the office, or attain the ends of true
Religion? How much more rational were it to pretend to nothing of Religion at
all, than to think such a one will serve the turn!

5. Consider, what reflections are likely to be made upon this matter
hereafter, when thy short course in this world is run out. Will it be a
grateful remembrance to thee that thou wast so long hovering about the borders
of Religion? and wast at the very door and would not enter in? That thou
did so often think and speak, and hear of the things wherein Religion stood,
but would never allow thy self to taste the pleasant relishes thereof? To
have been so nigh to the Kingdom of God, and yet an alien to it, to the
righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost wherein it consists! That
thou did only please thy self with the painted Casket (made fine, as thou
thought, but only with thine own Pencil) wherein so rich a Jewel was; and
retaining that, threw'st away this as a thing of naught! will not these be
wounding thoughts?

6. Let it be seriously pondered how offensive it must be to the jealous God
that any should thus trifle with him and his holy things, under a show and
pretense of Religion and Devotion to him. Not to please him by the sincerity
and truth of our Religion, loses the end and reward we would expect. But that
is not all. To provoke him by the hypocritical pretense and abuse of it, cannot
but infer a sharp revenge which it may be we expected not.

And let us bethink our selves how high the provocation is: Either we design to
please, honor and enjoy him by that irrational and undelightful course of
Religion, or we do not; If we do not, This signifies nothing but highest
contempt and defiance of him; and that we care not for his favor, nor fear his
displeasure: Yea, inasmuch as such Religion is pretended as an homage to him,
it is nothing really but most profane and insolent mockery; as if we would join
in the same breath and in the same act, Hail Jesus and Crucify him; and at
once invest him with the purple Robe, and spit in his Face: But if we have such
a Design, and do really think to please him by such trifling with him; and that
these vain fancies and formalities shall make amends for all our neglects of
him through the whole course of our lives besides; Then how vile thoughts have
we of him! what do we make of the God we serve? How justly may that be applied
to us, Ye worship ye know not what! Joh. 4.
Who gave us our Idaea of that ever blessed Being? It is not God, but a
despicable Idol of our own creating we are thinking to please. We may see how
well he is pleased with the external show and the appendages of Religion (which
being his own appointments would in conjunction and in subserviency thereto
have signified somewhat, but disjoined from it, and accompanied with the
neglect and abandoning of real piety, and righteousness signified nothing but
an affront to him) in that remonstrance by the Prophet; He that kills an ox
is as if he slew a man; Isa. 66. 3.
he that sacrifices a lamb as if he cut off a dogs neck; He that offers an
Oblation as if he offered swines blood; He that burns Incense as if he
blessed an Idol. He is pleased with their Religion as he would be with murder,
profaneness and Idolatry. And is it strange this should be his estimate, when
he is hereby practically represented as such a one that will not be displeased
with real wickedness, and that will be pleased with the thinnest and most
superficial show of Devoton?

They therefore make a fair hand of their Religion, who are so far from
pleasing God by it and advantaging themselves, that they wound their own Souls
(as they are most like to do that handle so awkardly such an edged tool) and
render God their most avowed enemy. The Religion then which has no delight in
it has so much of folly, incommodity and mischief, that measuring it by the
Rules which were premised, we may see sufficient reason why such a Religion
should not be chosen or rested in. And that we are concerned to look further.

Wherefore we proceed next,

2. To the other Head we proposed, The positive judgment we are to make, What
Religion is fit to be chosen, and wherein we may safely acquiesce; whereof we
shall only give the account which the subject we have in hand allows to be here
given, i. e. That it be such as is in it self rationally and justly delectable.
And though Religion is not to be chosen only, or chiefly, for the
delightfulness of it; yet since, as we have seen, only that Religion is true
which is delightful; that only which is delightful is fit to be chosen. So that
this is a certain character (though not the chief cause) of the eligibleness of
Religion. And when it is so expressly enjoined us as a duty, To delight our
selves in the Lord; If, as has been shown, this be within the meaning of the
Precept, That, in the general, we delight our selves in a way and course of
Religion; It is plain, such Religion only can be meant or intended, as can
afford us matter of delight, or as is in it self truly and really delectable.

And here we shall not need to repeat what has been so largely discoursed in
the former part, tending to show the rich matter of delight which the several
exercises of true living Religion, and all the actions influenced and directed
by it, do carry in them. It will only be requisite, to offer somewhat partly to
direct, partly to excite unto that de^l pleasant life.

1. For Direction, Let such Rules be observed as these which follow.

1. Endeavor to have a mind well-instructed in the knowledge of such things as
more directly concern the common practice of a Religious man, as such. That is,
to be thoroughly insighted into practical Truths, or into that Truth which is
after Godliness.

It has been the merciful vouchsafement of the Divine Goodness, so to order
it, that those things are plain and but few, which are of more absolute
necessity in Religion; as may be seen by the summary accounts which we find
sometimes given thereof, Repentance toward God, Act. 20.
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; which two things (intimated to
comprehend the whole Counsel of God) do manifestly suppose the state of
apostasy, and express the way of remedy; whereinto, when we are brought, How
succinct and clear a recapitulation of our Duty have we in that of our Savior,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind: And thou shall love thy Neighbbour as thy self! To a
well-complexion'd spirit, how comprehensive and full, how savoury and
acceptable will these things appear! Nor would such a one part with the
substantial fullness of these few words for all the treasures of both the
Indies. How truly is it called, Romans 12. 2
That good, that acceptable and perfect will of God! And how fitly to be
preferred before thousands of Gold and Silver!

Things of highest value are not bulky; their excellency is the greater by
being contracted; and that, being in themselves precious, they are so
conveniently portable. How easily are these dictates carried about with us
through our whole course! And how universally useful are they for the
well-guiding of it, to such as have a greater mind to do their duty than move
questions about it!

Two things are both opposite to this Rule, and not a little prejudicial to the
delight of Religious conversation, (by which it will appear, how conducible to
it the matter here directed is), viz.

Excessive curiosity in the speculation of Truths belonging to Religion;
without designing to refer them to practice; which has been animadverted on
before. And,

An equally-excessive scrupulosity about matters of practice. It were indeed an
argument of a desperate mind, and destitute of any fear of God, To be careless
what we do, and unconcerned whether the way we take, in this or that case, be
right or wrong. But it is certain, there may be an excess in this matter, and
too often is; that is, there may be a scrupulosity which is both causless and
endless. There is surely some medium in traveling between a careless wandering
we mind not whether, and a perpetual anxiety whether we be in our way or no,
with often going back to enquire. This would quite destroy both the pleasure of
the journey, and the progress of it. Some difficulties may occur, which should
justly occasion one to make a stand and consider: But probably, very many cases
that some do agitate with much disquiet to themselves and others, would soonest
be expedited by sincerity, and reducing them to the Law of Love.

It would however make much for our pleasant delightful walking on in the way
of God, To have a mind (informed once and established thoroughly in the belief of
the principal Doctrines of Christian Religion) well furnished also with the most
useful practical Precepts, which might at every turn be ready at hand to be
applied upon emergencies; which they whom predominant self-interest or corrupt
inclination render not difficult to the apprehending of their duty, (our way is
not usually otherwise so very intricate), may cheerfully and innocently guide
themselves by. He that walks uprightly, walks surely. Though some men's way
may, by the circumstances of their conditions, be much more perplexed than
others, who are therefore concerned to be the more wary. But the difficult toil
and tug that some have with themselves, is, how by contrived explications they
may make their Rule bend and yield to their self-byast humors and ends; which
because they find it not easy to do, with full satisfaction to their
consciences, (that see more than they would have them, and are yet not of
authority enough with them to govern and command their practice), it is not
strange, they entangle and even lose themselves amongst thorns and briars, and
meet with little delight in their way. Wherefore,

2. Be principally intent to have your Soul become habitually good and holy, by
its own settled temper and complexion inclined and made suitable to the way of
righteousness and life. It was, no doubt, with a very sweet gust and relish of
pleasure, that the Psalmist utters that gratulatory acknowledgment of the
Divine goodness in this, Psalm. 23. 2.
He restores my Soul; he leads me in paths of righteousness, for his names
sake. The paths of righteousness are very agreeable and pleasant to a restored,
a sound and healthy Soul; to one that is now got into a good habit, and a
settled state of spiritual strength. You may therefore take the meaning and
substance of this Precept, in the Apostles (more-authoritative) words, Be ye
transformed in the renewing of your mind, Romans 12. 2
that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God.
You can never (q. d.) have a proof it (the very palate of your Soul will be
vicious and still disaffected till then, that is,) till that transformation and
renewing change have past upon you. Then it will be pleasant to you to know the
will of God; your delight will be in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law you
will meditate both day and night. And it will be more pleasant to do it. You
will esteem the words of his mouth as your appointed food, and it will be as
your meat and drink to do his will. You can easily apprehend how toilsom and
painful any thing of business and labor is to a person that languishes under
some enfeebling lazy disease: A like case it is, when you would put one upon
doing of any thing spiritually good, that is listless, indisposed, to every
good work reprobate. How will the heart recoil and give back! with how vehement
a reluctation will it resist the proposal, as if you were urging it upon flames
or the Swords point! The carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7.
and is not subject to his law, nor indeed can be. But when once the law of God
is within your heart, Psalm. 40. 8.
you will delight to do his will. To one that is born of God, 1 John 5*
and has (therefore) overcome the world, his commands are not grievous. Know
therefore, you must be good (really and habitually so) in order to your doing
good with any delight, Psalm. 119. 68.
in conformity to the blessed God himself (your pattern,) who therefore
exercises loving kindness, Jer. 9. 23.
judgment and righteousness in the earth, as delighting in these things. You
must be partaker of a Divine nature, and have the heart-rectifying
communication before discoursed of, and become Gods own workmanship (a second
time) created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Ephesians. 2.
It Is not to be hoped, it can be delightful to act against inclination; or that
a forced imitation of that good whereof you want the implanted vital principle,
can be any more pleasing to you than it is to God, whom you cannot mock or
impose upon by your most elaborate or specious disguises. And therefore, since
that holy heart-rectitude must be had, it must be sought earnestly and without
rest. Often ought Heaven to be visited with such sighs and longings sent up
thither, O that my ways were directed to keep thy righteous judgments. Psalm.
119.
Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. And it should be
sought with expectation of good-speed and without despair, remembering we are
told, If we ask, we shall receive; if we seek, we shall find; if we knock, it
shall be opened unto us; yea, that our heavenly Father will much more readily
give his Holy Spirit to them that ask, than you would bread to your Child that
calls for it, rather than a stone.

3. When once you find your spirit is become in any measure well-inclin'd, and
begins to savor that which is truly good; know yet, that it needs your
continual inspection and care, to cherish good principles and repress evil
ones. Your work is not done as soon as you begin to live; as care about an
Infant ceases not as soon as it is born. Let it be therefore your constant
business, to tend your inward man; otherwise all things will soon be out of
course: God has coupled delight with the labor of a Christian, not with the
sloth and neglect of himself; Prove. 4.
The heart must then be kept with all diligence, or above all keeping, in as
much as out of it are the issues of life: All vital principles are lodged
there; and only the genuine issues of such as are good and holy, will yield you
pleasure. The exercises of Religion will be pleasant when they are natural, and
flow easily from their own fountain; but great care must be taken that the
fountain be kept pure. There are other springs besides, which will be apt to
intermingle therewith their bitter waters, or a root of bitterness, whose fruit
is deadly, even that evil thing, and bitter forsaking the Lord. I wonder not,
if they taste little of the delights of Religion that take no heed to their
spirits. Such a curse is upon the nature of man, as is upon the ground which
was cursed for his sake, (till the blessing of Abraham through Jesus Christ do
take place, Gal. 3. 14.
even the Promise of the Spirit), that it brings forth naturally thorns and
thistles, and mingles sorrows with his bread. But that promised blessing, that
will enable a man to eat with pleasure, comes not all at once; nor do the
increases of it come on, or the pleasant fruits of righteousness spring up, but
in them that give all diligence, 3 Pet. 1.
to add to their faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge,
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly-kindness; and to brotherly-kindness, charity: Which would
make that we be not barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Otherwise, look in upon thy Soul when thou will, and thou will have no
other than the dismal prospect of miserable wastes and desolation. Consider it
seriously, wretched man! who tillest thy Field, but not thy Soul; and love to
see thy Garden neat and flourishing, but let thy Spirit lie as a neglected
thing, and as if it were not thine.

We are directed for the moderating of our care in our earthly concernments, to
consider the Lillies how they grow without their own toil, and are beautifully
arrayed without their spinning; But we are taught by no such instances, to
divert or remit our care of our inward man. To these concernments, let us then
apply and bend our selves; That is, carefully to observe the first stirrings of
our thoughts and desires; to animadvert upon our inclinations as soon as they
can come in view, upon our designs in their very formation; and enquire
concerning each, whence is it? from a good Principle or a bad? whither tends
it? to good or hurt? will not this design, if prosecuted, prove an
unjustifiable self-indulgence? Does it not tend to an unlawful gratifying of
the flesh, and fulfilling some lusts thereof? If so, let it be lop't off our of
hand, and the axe be laid even to the root: strike at it, favor it not: Think
with thy self, this, if spared, will breed me sorrow; so much as I give to it,
I take away from the comfort of my life; and spend of the stock of my spiritual
delight in God; Shall I let sin, the tormentor of my Soul, live and be
mantain'd at so costly a rate? If any good inclination discover it self,
cherish it, confirm and strengthen it. Look up, and pray down a further
quickening influence; Say with thy self, now that heavenly Spirit of Life and
Grace begins to breath, More of this pleasant vital breath thou blessed and
holy Spirit! Account this a Seed-time, Now the light and gladness are a sowing
in thy soul (which are wont to be for the righteous and upright in heart), and
do promise ere long, a joyful Harvest.

But if thou will not observe how things go with thy Soul, despair that they
will ever go well.

4. Be frequent and impartial in the actual exercise of gracious Principles; or
in practicing and doing as they direct: Your actual delight arises from and
accompanies your holy actions themselves, and is to be perceived and tasted in
them; not in the mere inclination to them which is not strong enough to go
forth into act. And as these Principles are more frequently exercised, they
grow more lively and vigorous, and will thence act more strongly and
pleasantly; so that your delight in doing good, will grow with the Principles
it proceeds from.

But then you must be impartial and even-handed herein, as well as frequent;
and run the whole compass of that Duty which belongs to you as a Christian. 1 Timothy 4.
Exercise your self (as we find the direction is) unto godliness; and in such
acts and parts of godliness chiefly and in the first place, as may be the
exercise of the mind and spirit, in opposition to the bodily exercise (whether
severities imposed upon, or performances that require the Ministry of that
grosser part) to which this nobler kind of exercise is justly preferred. Turn
the powers of your soul upon God; Act seasonably the several graces of the
Spirit that terminate directly upon him. Let none grow out of use. At some
times Repentance, at others Faith, now your Love, then your Fear; none of these
are placed in you, or are sanctified in vain. Retire much with God; learn and
habituate your selves unto secret converse with him; contemplate his Nature,
Attributes and Works for your excitation to holy Adoration, Reverence and
Praise.

And be much exercised in the open Solemnities of his Worship; there
endeavoring that though your inward man bear not the only, it may the
principal part. How delightful a thing is it, to be paying actual avowed homage
to the great Lord of Heaven and Earth before Angels and Men!

And never think your Religious and Devotional Exercises can acquit you, or
supply the want and excuse the absence of Sobriety and Righteousness. Exercise
a just authority over your selves. Keep your imagination, passions, sensitive
appetite under a due restraint, so as to be moderate in your desires and
enjoyments, patient as to your wants and sufferings: Do to others as you would
be done unto: Study common good: Endeavor, so far as your capacity can extend,
all about you may be the better for you: Forbear and forgive the injurious,
relieve the necessitous, delight in good men, pity the bad, be grateful toward
friends, mild and unrevengeful toward enemies, just toward all: Abhor to do
not only a dishonest, but even a mean and unworthy act, for any self-advantage:
And all this out of an awful and dutiful respect to God; by which the ordinary
actions of your life may become as so many acts of Religion, or be directed and
influenc't thereby, tinctured as it were with the savor of godliness. Pass
thus, in your continual practice, through the whole circle of Christian Duties
and Graces, with an equal respect to all Gods Commandments, not so partially
addicting your selves to one sort of exercise, as to disuse and neglect the
rest; which kind of partiality is that which starves Religion, and stifles the
delight of it.

There are those that affect the reputation of being sober, just, kind,
charitable persons, and do appear such, who yet are great strangers to God, and
to the more noble exercises of the Divine Life, know not what belongs to
communion with God, live not in his love and converse, savor not heaven; have
not so much as the taste of the great vital powers of the world to come.
Others, that pretend to much acquaintance with God, and are much taken up in
discoursing of his love, and of intimacies with him, that count Justice and
Charity mean things, and much beneath them; can allow themselves to be
covetous, oppressive, fraudulent, wrathful, malicious, peevish, fretful,
discontented, proud, censorious, merciless; and so glory in a Religion which no
one is the better for, and themselves least of all; and which is quite of
another stamp from the pure Religion and undefiled, Jam. 1. 27.
which the Apostle describes and recommends. And certainly, their Religion has
as little of pleasure in it to themselves, as it has of beauty and ornament in
the sight of others. So maimed a Religion can be accompanied with little
delight. Would it not detract much from the natural pleasure of a man's life, if
he should lose an arm or a leg? or have them useless and unserviceable? Or if
he should be deprived of some of his senses, or natural faculties, so as to be
incapable of some of the more principal functions of life? And if we should
suppose the new creature alike maimed and defective, will there not be a
proportionable diminution of its delight? But the Spirit of God is the Author
of no such imperfect productions; and therefore the total absence of any holy
disposition will not argue the true delight of such a one to be little, but
none at all. However, let all the integral parts of the new man be supposed
formed at first, and existing together; when this creature is thus entirely
framed, it is our business to see to the due exercise, and thereby to the
improvement and growth of the several parts, wherein if one be neglected, it
infers a general enfeeblement of the whole. Let patience have its perfect work
(says that Apostle), Jam. 1. 4.
that ye may be perfect, etc. Implying, That not only the absence of that one
grace, but its not being thoroughly exercised, would render us very defective
Christians. We may say of the several members of this Divine Creature, as is
said of the complex body of Christians, If one suffer, all the members suffer
with it; if one be honored, all rejoice with it. Therefore that you may
experience the delightfulness of Religion, see that in the exercise and
practice of it you be entire, through Christians.

5. Be confirmed in the apprehension, that Religion is in it self a delightful
thing, even universally and in the whole nature of it. Whereby a double
practical mistake and error will be avoided, that greatly obstructs and hinders
the actual relish and sensation of that delight.

1. That either Religion is in the whole nature of it such a thing to which
delight must be alien, and banished from it: As if nothing did belong to, or
could consist with it, but sour severities, pensiveness and sad thoughts. Or
else,

2. That if any delight did belong to it at all, it must be found only in
peculiar extraordinary assurances and persuasions of Gods love; and be the
attainment consequently of none but more eminent Christians.

That apprehension being thoroughly admitted, both these misapprehensions fall
and vanish. And it will take place, if it be duly considered, That there is a
delight that will naturally arise from the congruity and fitness of actions in
themselves, and the facility of them, that they flow easily from their proper
principles. Whereupon there can be no true vital act of Religion but will be
delightful. And we may appeal herein to the judgments of such as shall allow
themselves to consider, whether the matter do not evidently appear to be so
upon a serious review and revolving with themselves of the several gracious
operations that proceed from the holy rectitude mentioned in the former part;
as the acts of even Repentance, self-abasement, self-denial, self-devoting,
(appearing to be in themselves most fit and becoming things), and readily
without force proceeding (as they cannot but do) from a rectified and
well-disposed heart, how can they but be pleasant? And it is much in our way to
the experiencing of such delight, to be at a point with our selves, and
well-resolved wherein it is to be sought and found.

6. However all the acts and operations of true, and living Religion be in
themselves delightful, yet apply your selves to the doing of them for an higher
reason, and with a greater design than your own delight. Otherwise you destroy
your own work therein, and dispoil your acts of their substantial moral
goodness, and consequently of their delightfulness also. That is not a morally
good act, which is not referred to God, and done out of (at least) an habitual
devotedness to him, so as that he be the supreme end thereof. You would
therefore, by withdrawing and separating their reference to God, ravish from
them their very life and soul; yea and perfectly nullify those of them that
should be in themselves acts of Religion. So as that in respect of all your
actions, that separation were unjust; and as to these that should be direct
acts of Religion, impossible. Since therefore they are only delightful as they
are vital acts, proceeding from a principle of Divine Life; and that an
habitual devotedness to God, is that very (comprehensive and most radical)
principle; you should, by designing your own delight in them supreamly,
counter-act your self, and cross your own end; you should make them acts of
Idolatry, not Religion; and set up your own self as the Idol of Jealousy, that
receives the homage of them, instead of God: Whereby the unlawful pleasure
which you would engross to your selves, will turn all to gall and wormwood, and
be bitterness in the end.

That therefore you may taste the sweetness and pleasure which belongs to a
religious godly life, your way must be, to act on directly forward in the
simplicity of your heart, doing all that you do to and for God. And thus that
pleasure, because it is natural to such acts, will of its own accord result and
arise to you; and so much the more, by how much less you design for your self
in what you do. From that uprightness and sincerity of heart toward God it can
never be separated. But to be a Religious Epicure, to pray, hear, meditate, do
acts of justice and charity, only to please and humor your selves, and that
you may derive a kind of solace and satisfaction from your own work, is to undo
your design, and blast the Delight which you covet. It follows while you seek
it not; It flies from you while you so inordinately seek it.

7. Yet disallow not your self to taste and enjoy the pleasure of well-doing:
Yea, and (secondarily and in due subordination) to design and endeavor that
you may do so. It is in it self, a covetable and a lawful pleasure; so that it
be not sought and entertained out of its own place. Pro. 14. 14.
It is a promised pleasure, The good man (it is said) shall be satisfied from
himself; And it is by particular direction to be testified to the righteous,
they shall eat the fruit of their own doings. Isa. 3. 10.
It Is Gods gracious allowance to them, which it is a part of gratitude and
dutifulness to esteem and accept; yea, and with great admiration of the Divine
Goodness, that has made and settled such a conjunction between their Duty and
their delight; that has laid such Laws upon them, as in the keeping whereof
there is such reward; Psalm. 19.
when as they might have been enjoined a meaner servitude, and by the condition
and kind of their work, have been kept strangers to any thing of delight
therein.

That thankful acknowledgment of the bounty and goodness of God to them in the
very constitution of his Laws and Government, is become a part of their duty,
which cannot be done without previous relishes of the sweetness and goodness of
their other duty. They are required in every thing to give thanks: 1 These. 5.
And it is said, Isa. 51.
they shall go on in their way as the redeemed of the Lord, with everlasting
joy upon their heads; Psalm. 138.
That they shall sing in the ways of the Lord; Prove. 3.
which cannot be, if they take not notice that the ways of the Lord are
pleasantness, and all his paths peace. Therefore you should designedly set your
self to taste the goodness and delightfulness of holy walking. And to that end,
when you find the blessed cherishing warmth and vigor of Gods gracious
communication let in upon you, enlarging your hearts, making your way and work
easy to you, and helping you to do with an untoilsom facility, what he
requires and calls for, and to run the way of his Commandments; so that you can
do acts of piety, righteousness and mercy as natural acts, born up by the power
of a steady living Principle acting in you, Isa. 40.
(as it is said, They that wait upon the Lord shall renew strength and mount up
with wings as Eagles, run without weariness, and walk without fainting); You
should now reflect and take notice how good and pleasant is this! Make your
pauses and deliberate; have your seasons of respiration and drawing breath; and
then bethink your self, commune thus with your own heart; How do I now like the
way and service of the Lord? and a life of pure devotedness to him? a course of
regular walking in through subjection to his Laws and Government? and that the
course of my actions be as a continual sacrificing; doing all to him and for
him? what do you not now rejoice that you find your selves to offer willingly?
Can you forbear with gratitude and joy to acknowledge and own it to him, that it
is of his own hand that you do this? You should now compare your present with
your former state and temper, and consider how much better is it to me to live
in his fear, love and communion, than to be, as once I was, alienated from the
life of God, and as without him in the world! Now I can trust and obey, once I
could not: Now, when the opportunity invites, I am in some readiness to serve
him, created to good works, a vessel fitted to my Masters use; Some time I was
to every good work reprobate. Surely it is most becoming to take a free
complacency in this blessed change; That is not with a proud Pharisaical
gloriation to say, God, I thank thee, I am not as other men; or, trusting in
your self that you are righteous, to despise others; but with a mean estimation
of your self, and all you can do; and with that deep and constant sense, that
when you have done all you can, you are an unprofitable servant, you do but
your duty. Yet blessing God that since he has made such things your duty, he
also does in some measure enable you to do it; That he has reconciled and
attemper'd your heart to your way and work, and made it pleasant to you: Not
hypocritically arrogating all to your self, under the formal and false show of
thanksgiving to him; or aiming only more colourably to introduce a vain boast
and ostentation of your self, in the form of gratulation to God; but as having
an heart inwardly possessed with the humble sense who it is that has made you
differ, not only from other men, but from your self also.

8. And because that disposedness of heart unto such a course of holy practice,
may not be constantly actual, and equally sensible at all times (That all
delight in the ways of God may not hereupon cease, and be broken off, which in
those sadder intervals cannot but suffer a great diminution); You must take
heed, that as to the distempers and indispositions you now discern in your own
spirit, you do neither indulge your self nor despair; But take the proper
course of redress.

To indulge your self in them were mortal. Then down you go as a dead weight
into the mire and dirt, into the depths of the earth, and your swift and
pleasant flight ends in an heavy lumpish fall. You should therefore bethink
your self, That if you yield to a slothful sluggish temper of spirit, which you
now feel coming on upon you, shortly you shall have nothing (sensibly)
remaining to you of your Religion, but the dead and empty form; How waste and
desolate a thing will that be! A like thing as if you come into a deserted
house where you were wont pleasantly to converse with most delectable friends,
and you now find nothing but cold bare walls. How dismal will it be when only
the same duties, the same external frame and acts of worship remain, but the
spirit of life and power which was wont to breath in them, is retired and gone!
And what, will you take up with that delusive unconversible shadow, or be
content to embrace the stiff and breathless carcass that remains? You find
perhaps your spirit sinking into carnality, an earthly temper of mind gradually
seizing on you; worldly thoughts, cares, desires, fears, invading your heart,
by the same degrees that these come on, life retires; you grow listless toward
God; your heart is not in your Religion as heretofore: You keep up your fashion
of praying, and doing other duties which were your former wont; but you
languish in them: Can you here be content to lie still and die? And rather
choose to suffer the pains of death than of labor, by which your Soul might yet
live? Is this a time to roll your self upon your slothful bed, and say, Soul,
take thine ease, even upon the pits brink? Do not agree the matter so. Think
not of making a covenant with Death; It is not so gentle a thing as your
slothful temper makes you think; Account the state intolerable wherein you are
so manifestly tending toward it. Think not well of your self and your present
case: What reason soever any have to be pleased and delighted with a course of
lively converse with God, and of walking in the Spirit; so much reason you have
to be displeased with your self as your case now is; To dislike and abhor the
present temper of your own Soul. If the life of Religion, and its vigorous
exercises be delightful, by that very reason it appears its faint and sickly
languishings are not so.

Therefore know, that self-indulgence is now most unsuitable and dangerous.
Labor to awaken in your selves some sense of your condition. Think whither am
I going? Represent to your own Soul the terrors of Death. Admit the impression
thereof. Behold its frightful visage, and be startled at it. Recount with your
self what you shall be if God who is your life quite depart; If this shall
never be, yet know that your fear lest it should is the means of your
preservation. And let the apprehension of the tendency of your distemper excite
in you that just and seasonable fear. How sure soever you are of the principle
that God will never utterly forsake those that are his (as most certainly he
never will); yet you cannot be so sure of your application of it to your self,
as your case stands, but that there will now be room for this fear; Therefore
let it be entertained.

But though you admit a just and very solicitous Fear, be sure that you exclude
not Hope: Though you apprehend your case dangerous, look not upon it as
desperate. Your hope must not be in your self, but in him that raises the dead,
and calls things that are not, as though they were; yea, makes them exist and
be. But if you cast away all hope, you yield your self to perish. This stops
your breath; so that even all strugglings for life, and the very gaspings of
your fainting heart must immediately cease, and end in perfect death. The
danger of your case, as bad as it is, calls not for this; nor will the exigency
of it comport with it, when once the Soul says there is no hope, Jer. 2. 25.
it immediately procceeds to say, I have loved strangers and after them will I
go. Your Hope is as necessary to your safety as your Fear; Romans 8. 24.
we are saved by Hope, i. e. of the end it self, which therefore animates to
all the encounters and difficulties of our way, as well from within as from
without. Great distempers appear in you and often return; yea, such as are of a
threatening aspect and tendency. You should yet consider you are under cure: The
prescribed means and method whereof are before you. There is Balm in Gilead,
and a Physician there. One in whose hands none that trusted him ever
miscarried. It Is well if you find your self sick. The whole need him not, and
will not therefore commit themselves to his care. He has relieved many such as
you, that apprehending their case have been restored to him; let them despair
that know no such way of help. Say within your self, though I am fallen and low,
I shall rise and stand, renewed by thee, O my God. Was there never such a time
with you before, when in the like case you cried to the Lord and he answered
you, Psalm. 138.
and strengthened you with strength in your soul? Say within your self, Why art
thou cast down, Psalm. 42.
O my soul, hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of
my countenance (where health shows it self in lively, sprightly, pleasant
looks) and my God. And this very hope as it preserves life, so it does the
delight and pleasure of life from being quite extinct. The joy of hope is not
to go for nothing, when it can only be said; not, it is well, but, it shall be.
It is pleasant to consider that the state wherein Saints on earth are, is a
state of recovery; That though it be not a state of perfect health, yet it is
not (also) a state of death; but wherein they are tending to life in the
perfection of it. And their frequent (and very faulty) relapses shall be found
but to magnify the more the skill and patience of their great Physician.
Therefore however you are not hence to be secure, or imposing upon him; yet let
not your hearts sink into an abject despair and sullen discontent, that you
find a distempered frame sometimes returning. Let there be tender relentings
after God. Your heart ought often to smite you, that you have been no more
careful and watchful; but not admit a thought, that you will therefore cast off
all; that it is in vain ever to strive more, or seek to recover that good frame
that you have often found is so soon gone.

Instead of that apply your self with so much the more earnestness to the
proper course of remedy; and therein you must know your own labor and
diligence; your contentions with your self must have a great place: Otherwise
it would never have been said, Rev. 3.
Be watchful and strengthen the things that remain that are ready to die. And
give all diligence to add to your faith virtue, 2 Pet. 1.
etc. Such things would never have been charged as duty upon you if you had
nothing to do. You must expect to be dealt with as a sort of creatures capable
of understanding your own concernments; not to be hewed and hammered as
senseless stones that are ignorant of the artists intent, but as living ones to
be polished and fitted to the spiritual building, by an hand that reasonably
expects your own compliance and cooperation to its known design. Unto which
design though you must know you are to be subservient and must do something;
yet you must withal consider you can be but subservient, and of your selves
alone can do just nothing.

Therefore, if ever you would know what a life of spiritual delight means, you
must constantly strive against all your spiritual distempers that obstruct it
[in the power of the Holy Ghost].

And do not think that is enjoining you a course wholly out of your power; for
though it be true, that the power of the Holy Ghost is not naturally yours, or
at your dispose; yet by gracious vouchsafement and ordination it is: If it were
not so, Ephesians. 6. 10.
what means that exhortation, Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might; Gal. 5. 25.
and that, If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit; with the
foregoing prescription of Walking in the Spirit, v. 16.
that we might not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Does the Holy Ghost himself
prescribe to us impertinently, in order to our obtaining of his own imparted
influences? Does not He know the method and way wherein they are to be
conveyed? Or would he deceive us by misrepresenting it? In short, Walking in
the Spirit must signify something; and what can it signify less than
dependence on its power, and subjection thereto, with the continuance of both
these? These therefore are necessary to the making of that power our own:

1. Dependence and trust; Psalm. 71. 16
as that like phrase imports, I will go in the strength of the Lord God, etc.
Zech. 10. 12,
And that, I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down
in his name, at once shows us both the communication of the Divine Power [I
will strengthen them in the Lord], and the way wherein it is communicated,
[their walking up and down in his name], viz. in actual and continued
dependence thereon. The blessed God has settled this connection between our
Faith and his own exerted Power. As the extraordinary works of the Spirit were
not done, but upon the exercise of the extraordinary Faith, which by the Divine
constitution was requisite thereunto: So that the Infidelity which stood in the
privation of this Faith, did sometimes (so inviolable had that constitution
made that connection) in a sort bind up the Power of God, Mark 6. 5, 6.
(And he could do no might works there, -- And he marvelled because of their
unbelief. Mat. 17. 19 20.
-- Why could not we cast him out? -- Because of your unbelief). Nor also are
the works of the Holy Ghost, that are common upon all sincere Christians, done,
but upon the intervening exercise of that more-common Faith. Ephesians. 6. 16.
Therefore is this Shield to be taken above all the other parts of the Divine
Armature, as sufficient to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; therefore
are we said to be kept by the Power of God through Faith. 1 Pet. 1.
-- And more expressly in terms to our present purpose; Gal. 3. 14.
We are to receive the promise of the Spirit (i. e. the Spirit promised)
through Faith. Hereby we draw the Power of that Almighty Spirit into a consent
and cooperation with our spirit. So the great God suffers Himself, his own Arm
and Power to be taken hold of by us. He is engaged when he is trusted; that
trust being now in this case, not a rash and unwarrantable presuming upon him,
but such whereto he has given the invitation and encouragement himself. Prove.
1. 23.
So that when we reflect upon the Promises wherein the gift of the Spirit is
conveyed, Ezekiel. 36: 27.
or wherein the express grant there of is folded up, With many the like.
we may say, Psalm. 119.
Remember thy word to thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to hope.

And then surely he will not frustrate the expectation which he has himself
been the Author of. He would never have induced those to trust in him, whom he
intended to disappoint. That free Spirit which (as the Wind blows where it
lists) now permits it self to be brought under bonds, even the bonds of Gods
own Covenant, whereof we now take hold by our faith; so that he will not fail
to give forth his influence, so far as shall be necessary for the maintaining a
resolution in us of steadfast adherence to God and his service, and retaining a
dominion over undue inclinations and affections.

How express and peremptory are those words, This I say, (q.d.) (I know what I
say, I have well weighed the matter, and speak not at random) Walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh! And so much as this
affords great matter of rational delight, though more sensible transports
(which are not so needful to us, and in reference whereto the Spirit therefore
retains its liberty) be not so frequent. Therefore if we aim at the having our
spirits placed and settled in the secret of the Divine Presence, entertained
with the delights of it; If we would know and have the sensible proof of that
Religion which is all life and power, and consequently sweetness and pleasure;
our direct way is believing on the Spirit: That very Trust is his delight,
Psalm. 147. 11.
He takes pleasure in them that hope in his mercy. It is that whereby we give
him Divine Honor, the homage and acknowledgment proper to a Deity; confessing
our selves impotent and insufficient to think any thing as of our selves, 2
Cor. 3.
we rely upon his sustaining hand, and own our sufficiency to be of him. It is
his delight to be depended on as a Father by his children. He is pleased that
Title should be given him The Father of Spirits. Heb. 12.
To have the Spirits which are his offspring gathering about him (especially
those who being revolted from him and become sensible of their misery by their
revolt, do now upon his invitation apply themselves, and say, Lo, now we come
to thee, thou art the Lord our God), craving his renewed communications,
drawing vital influences from him, and the breath of life, adoring his
boundless fullness that fills all in all. And when we thus give him his
delight, we shall not long want ours. But then we must also add,

2. Subjection to our dependence; a willing obedient surrender and resignation
of our selves to the conduct and guidance of that blessed Spirit. A dutiful
yielding to his dictates, so as that they have actually with us the governing
binding force and power of a Law (The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ as it
is called Romans 8. 2
) Great care must be taken of grieving and quenching the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.
of rebelling and vexing it, 1 These. 5.
of resisting it, Isa. 63.
and of striving against it (which appears to have been the horrid crime of the
old world: Acts 7.
His Spirit it is intimated had striven when it is said it should no longer
strive; Genesis 6.
And that it had striven, implies a counter-striving that was now, by his penal
retirement permitted to be victorious, but to their own sudden ruin) of
despiting the Spirit of grace. Heb. 10. 29
A wickedness aggravated by the very style and title there given it, the Spirit
of Grace; and unto which only such a vengeance (as it is intimated in what
follows) which it peculiarly belonged to God himself to inflict could be
proportionable. When we permit our selves entirely to the government of the
Holy Ghost, thereby to have our spirits and ways framed and directed according
to his own Rules, His quickening influence, and the pleasure and sweet relishes
thereof will not be withheld.

And if the experience of some Christians seem not constantly to answer this,
who complain they pray often for the Spirit, and desire earnestly its gracious
communications, but find little of them, They are concerned seriously to
reflect, and bethink themselves whether their distrust or disobedience, or
both, have not made them desolate. Surely we are altogether faulty in this
matter, his promise and faithfulness do not fail, his Spirit is not straightened;
But we either do not entirely commit and entrust our selves to his guidance, or
we obediently comply not with it; but either indulge our sluggishness and
neglect, or our contrary inclinations, and resist his dictates, are intractable
and wayward, not apt to be led by the Spirit, and hence provoke him to withdraw
from us. Hereto we are in justice to impute it that we find so little of that
power moving in us, all the motions whereof are accompanied with so much
delight.

2. For Excitation. Little one would think should be needful to be said more
than only that we would bethink our selves what all this while we have been
directed to and are by this Text. If that be once understood, Has it not in it
self invitation enough? Do we need further to be invited to a Life of delight?
Do we need to be pressed with arguments to choose delightful and wholesome food,
rather than gall and wormwood, or even very poison? It is a sad argument of the
deplorate state of man that he should need arguments in such a case! But
because (moreover) much is to be said hereafter, to persuade unto delighting in
God considered in the stricter notion of it, and that will also be applicable
to this purpose; therefore little is intended to be said here.

Only it is to be considered, Do you intend to proceed in any course of
Religion, or no? If not, you are to be remitted to such Discourses as prove to
you the reasonableness and necessity of it: Which if you think nothing you meet
with sufficiently proves, Think with your self how well you can prove, that
there is no God, and that you are no Man, but a perishing Beast. For these
things they are concerned not fondly to presume and wish, but most clearly and
surely to demonstrate, who will be of no Religion.

But if you think that horrid, and resolve to own something or other of
Religion; Will you here use your understanding, and consider? Is it indeed so
horrid a thing to disavow all Religion? And what is it better to pretend to it
to no purpose? You find the Religion is all but show and shadow, mere empty
vanity and mockery, which is not delightful. If you will not choose a better,
because it is delightful, (as you are not advised to do for that as your chief
reason), yet at least choose that which is so, because it is in other more
considerable respects eligible, as being most honorable and pleasing to Him
that made you, and only safe and profitable to your self. And what shall your
Religion serve for, that will not answer these purposes?

And if you be not ashamed to spend so considerable a part of the time of your
life, as the exercises of your Religion will take up, in doing that (as was
said before) whereof you can give no account: Yet methinks you should be
afraid to make such things the subject of your vanity, as do relate to God,
either really or in your opinion. Can you find nothing wherein vainly to
trifle, but the sacred things of the Great God of Heaven, and the eternal
concernments of your own Soul? And shall the time spent about these matters be
peculiarly marked out as your idle time, wherein you shall be doing that only
which shall wholly go for loss and signify nothing? The Religion which is not
delightful can turn to no better account.

If therefore you will have a Religion, and you have any reason for that
resolution, by the same reason you would have any, you must have the pleasant
delightful Religion we speak of. You have no other choice. There is no other
will serve your turn. And therefore what has been said to divert you from the
other, ought to persuade you to the choice of this.

And besides, since there is so much of secret delight in true substantial
Religion, that ought not to signify nothing with you; If we did consider the
delightfulness of it alone, upon that single account, it surely challenges the
preference, before that which is neither profitable nor delightful.

And that it is in it self so delightful, if you had nothing to inform you but
the report of such as profess to have tried and found it so, methinks that at
least should provoke you to try also. How sluggish a temper does it argue, not
to be desirous to know the utmost that is in it! It were even a laudable
curiosity to resolve upon making trial; to get into the inmost center of it; to
pierce and press onward till you reach the seat of life, till you have got the
secret, and the very heart of Religion and your heart do meet and join in one.
Did you never try experiments for your pleasure? Try this one. See what you
will find in withdrawing your self from all things else, and becoming entirely
devoted to God through the Redeemer, to live after his will, and in his
presence. Try the difference between viewing Truths to please your genius, or
using Divine Ordinances to keep up the custom, to conform your self to those
you live among, and help to make a solemn show; And doing these things with a
serious design to get into an acquaintance with God, to have your Soul
transformed into his Image, that you may have present and eternal fellowship
with him. Try how much better it is, to have your lives governed by an awful
and dutiful respect to God, than to follow your own wild and enormous
inclinations: And whether it be not better, what good things soever you do, to
do it for the Lords sake, than from base and sordid motives.

And why should you be of so mean and object a Spirit, as to content your self
to be held at the door and in the outer Courts of Religion; when others enter
in and taste the rich provisions of Gods house? Why will you distinguish your
selves by so debasing a character? It Is a just and commendable ambition, to be
as forward here as the best. Why will you suffer this and that and the other
man to enter into the Kingdom of God before you; even that Kingdom which
consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost!

Think not so meanly of your self; impose not on your self that needless
unwarrantable modesty, as to account you are of a lower rank than all that ever
became intimately acquainted with the hidden delights of a godly life; At least
you are as capable of being thought worthy as any, for his sake upon whose
account all must be accepted: Therefore think with your selves, Why should I
not labor to attain as far in the matter of Religion, as this or that
Neighbor of mine? What should hinder? Who restrains or forbids me?

But you cannot, if you consider, but have somewhat more to assure you of the
delightfulness of it, than the mere report of others; For your own Reason and
Conscience cannot but so pronounce, if you go to the particulars that have been
instanc't in. If you acknowledge a God, and consider your self as a reasonable
Creature made by him, and depending on him; you cannot but see, it is congruous
and fit your spirit should be so framed and affected toward Him, toward your
fellow creatures of your own order, and all things else that do and shall
circumstantiate your present and future state, as has been in some measure
(though very defectively) represented; And that it must needs be very pleasant,
if it were so. You can frame in your mind an Idea of a life transacted
according to such rectified inclinations; And when you have done so, do but
solemnly appeal to your own judgment, whether that were not a very delectable
life? And thereupon bethink your self, what your case is, if you cannot
actually relish a pleasure in what your own judgment tells you is so highly
pleasurable. Methinks you should reflect thus, What a monstrous creature am I,
that confess that delightful wherein yet I can take no delight! How perverse a
nature have I! Surely things are much out of order with me; I am not what I
should be! And one would think, it should be uneasy to you to be as you are;
and that your spirit should be restless till you find your temper rectified,
and that you are in this respect become what you should be.

And will you dream and slumber all your days? How much time have you lost,
that might have been pleasantly spent in a course of godliness! Do you not aim
at a life of eternal delights with God? If you now begin not to live to God,
when will you? That life which you reckon shall never end with you, must yet
have a beginning. Will you defer till you dye your beginning to live? Have you
any hope God will deal in a peculiar way with you from all men, and make the
other world the place of your first heart-change? How dismal should it be to
you, to look in and still find your heart dead toward God, and the things of
God; so that you have no delight in them. Think what the beginnings of the
Divine life, and the present delights of it, must be the earnest of to you, and
make sure the ground (betime) of so great an hope.

Delighting in God, under the other more strict notion of it, viz. As the very
act of delight has its direct exercise upon himself. So we are to consider
this delight, not as a thing some way adherent to all other duties of Religion;
but as a distinct Duty of it self, that requires a solemn and direct
application of our selves thereunto. For though it seems little to be doubted,
but there is in this Precept a part of Religion put for the whole (as having a
real influence, and conferring with its name a grateful savor and tincture
upon the whole); it would yet be very unreasonable, not to take special notice
of that part from whence the entire frame of Religion has its name.

And having shown the nature of this Duty already in the former part, what is
now to be said, must more directly concern the practice of it; And will (as the
case requires) fall into two kinds of Discourse, viz.

Expostulation concerning the omission and disuse of such Practice, And

Invitation thereunto.

And in both these kinds it is requisite we apply our selves to two sorts of
Persons, viz.

Such whose spirits are wholly averse and alien to it. And

Such as, though not altogether unpracticed, are very defective in it, and
neglect it too much.

1. Both sorts are to be expostulated with; and no doubt, the great God has a
just quarrel with mankind (whom these two sorts do comprehend) upon the one or
the other of these accounts; wherein it is fit we should plead with men for his
sake and their own. And,

1. With the former sort; Them who are altogether disaffected to God, alienated
and enemies in their minds through wicked works, and (excepting such as deny
his being, with whom we shall not here concern our selves) at the utmost
distance from delighting in him. And as to such, our Expostulation should aim
at their conviction, both of

The matter of fact, That thus the case is with them. And of

The great iniquity and evil of it.

First, It is needful we endeavor to fasten upon such a conviction, That this
is the state of their case. For while his being is not flatly denied, men think
it generally creditable, to be professed Lovers of God; and reckon it so odious
a thing not to be so, that they who are even most deeply guilty, are not easily
brought to confess enmity to him; but flatter themselves in their own eyes,
till their iniquity be found to be hateful. The difficulty of making such
apprehend themselves diseased, that their minds are under the power of this
dreadful distemper, that it is not well with spirits in this respect, is the
great obstruction to their cure.

But I suppose you to whom I now apply my self, to acknowledge the Bible to be
Gods Word, and that you profess reverence to the Truth and Authority of that
Word, and will yield to be tried by it.

1. Therefore first, you must be supposed such as believe the account true,
which that book gives of the common state of man; That it is a state of
Apostasy from God; That the Lord looking down from heaven upon the children of
men, Psalm. 14.
to see if any did understand and seek God, finds they are all gone aside, i.
e. (that the return may answer to the meaning of the inquiry), gone off from
him. Every one of them is gone back, Psalm. 53.
(or revolted, as it is expressed in the parallel Psalm), There is none that
does good, Romans 3.
no not one; which is quoted by the Apostle to the intent, That every mouth may
be stopped, v. 19.
and the whole world may become guilty before God. This is then a common case;
And as the same Apostle charges it upon the Gentiles, Romans 1. 30:
that they were haters of God; so does our Savior as expressly on the Jews,
(who no doubt thought themselves as innocent of this crime as you), That they
had both seen and hated both Him and his Father. And when it is said of men,
that they were by nature the children of wrath, (they to whom he writes even as
others), do you think that is spoken of any lovers of God, as their present
state? Or that when all by nature are children of wrath, any are by nature
lovers of him, so as to love him and be under his wrath both at once? It is
likely then, that against so plain evidence, while you confess your selves men,
you will not deny you were sometime haters of God. Well then, is the case
altered with you? It is a conviction against you, that you are of humane race,
till it can be evidenc't you are born from above, and are become new creatures?
And what, do you find this? It is not expected, you should be able to tell the
very moment when you ceased from your enmity against God, and became his
friends; or give a punctual account of every turn or motion of thoughts in such
a change: But it is to be supposed, the work was not done upon you in your
sleep, so as that you could have no animadversion of what was doing. However,
comparing what you sometime were with what you are, what difference do you
observe? What were you, sometimes haters of God, and are you now come to love
and delight in him, without perceiving in your selves any difference? Bethink
your selves, is not the temper of your spirits just such Godward as it was
always wont to be, without any remarkable turn or alteration? That is a shrewd
presumption against you, that your case is most deplorable. But,

2. What is your present temper, in it self considered? You do love God and
delight in him, How do you make it appear? wherein does that friendly and
dutiful affection toward him evidence it self? Sure love and hatred are not
all one with you. Whereby would you discern your hatred toward one you did
most flatly and peremptorily disaffect? You would dislike the thoughts of him,
hate his memory, cast him out of your thoughts: Do you not the same way show
your disaffection to God? Do you not find, that so a wicked man (his enemy) is
branded and distinguished, Psalm. 10. 4.
God is not in all his thoughts? Are not they who shall be turned into Hell
described thus, Psalm. 9. 17.
The people that forget God; that is, who willingly and of choice forget him,
or from the habitual inclination of their hearts? And is not that your case?
What could hinder you to remember him, if you were so disposed?

Yea, But you often forget your friends, or those at least to whom you are sure
you bear no ill will; and what friend would expect to be always in your
thoughts? It Is answered, But you disrelish not the remembrance of a Friend; Do
you not the thoughts of God? You do not think on your absent Friends while no
present occasion occurs, to bring them to your remembrance: But is God absent?
Is he far from any one of us? Or have you not daily before your eyes, things
enough to bring him to mind; while his glorious works surround you, and you
live, move, and have your being in him, and your breath is in his hand? Have
you that dependence on any Friend? Are you under so much obligation to any? You
often do not think on Friends with whom you have no opportunity to converse;
Have you no opportunity to converse with Him? Your Friends can lay no such Law
upon you, to have them much in your thoughts. It argues a depraved inclination,
not to do herein what you ought and are bound to do. You cannot by the exercise
of your thoughts obtain the presence of a Friend; you might a most comfortable
Divine presence.

And what though you think not of many to whom you bear no ill will, nor have
any converse with many such; Is it enough to bear no ill will to God? Will that
suffice you to delighting in him? Are you no more concerned to mind God and
converse with him, than with the man you never knew, or had to do with? Your
unconversableness with God, and unmindfulness of him, can proceed from nothing
but ill will, who daily offers himself to your converse, who seeks and invites
your acquaintaince, would have you inwardly know him, and lead your lives with
him, Why is it that you do not so, but that you like not to retain him in your
knowledge? And that this is the sense and language of your hearts toward him,
Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; It can proceed from
nothing but ill will and a disagreeable temper, that you shun the converse of
one that seeks yours; that you will take no notice of one that often offers
himself to your view, one that meets you at every turn, and aims to draw your
eye, and cannot gain a look. When this is your deportment toward God, that he
passes by you and you perceive him not; he compasses you about behind and
before and is acquainted with all your ways, and with him and his ways you will
have no acquaintance, remain alienated from the life of God, and as without him
in the world; Is not this downright enmity? Or can this deportment agree with
habitual and the frequent actual delight in God which is required?

Again, Would you not be justly taken to disaffect one whose temper is
ungrateful, whose disposition and way is unpleasing to you? Is it not thus with
you Godward? When you hear of the purity and holiness of his Nature, his
abhorrency of all wickedness, and how detestable to him every thing is that is
impure, and that he will not endure it; Do not your hearts regret this quality
(as we must conceive of it) in the Nature of God? Which yet, because it is his
very Nature, does so much the more certainly infer, that a dislike of it cannot
but include disaffection to himself, and that habitual and constant, since his
whole way of dealing with men, and the course of his government over the world,
do (and shall more discernibly) savor of it; Do they not wish him hereupon not
to be, in this respect, what he is; which is in effect, to wish him not to be
at all? The same thing which the heart of the Fool says, No God; i.e. This
would please such a one to the very heart. And does this import no enmity? Can
this stand with delight in him?

Are you not disaffected to him, whom not being able to accuse of falsehood,
whom having the greatest imaginable assurances of the impossibility he should
deceive, you will yet by no means be induced to trust? Consider, What does your
trust in God signify, more than the sound of the Name? Does it quiet your
heart, in reference to any affairs you pretend to commit to him? Does it
purify it, and check your ill inclinations, in any thing wherein they should
be countermanded upon the credit of his Word? What does his Testimony
concerning the future things you have not seen, weigh with you, to the altering
of your course, and rendering it such as may comport and square with the belief
of such things? Would not the word of an ordinary man, premonishing you of any
advantage or danger which you have no other knowledge of, be of more value with
you? Constant suspicion of any one, without cause or pretense, most certainly
argues radicated enmity. You love him not whom you cannot trust.

Do you love him whom upon all occasions you most causlesly displease; whose
offense you reckon nothing of? Is that ingenuous toward a Friend, or dutiful
toward a Father or a Lord? How do you, in this, carry toward the blessed God?
Are you wont to displease your selves to please him, or cross your own will to
do his? Do you take delight in him whom you make no difficulty to vex; whose
known declared pleasure, though you confess him greater, wiser, and more
righteous than your self, you have no more regard to, wherein it crosses your
own inclination, than you would have to that of your Child, your Slave, or a
Fool?

Have you any thing to except against that measure and character of loyal
affection to your Redeemer and Lord, If ye love me, keep my commandments; Ye
are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you; This is the love of God,
that we keep his commandments? Do you not disobey the known will of God in your
ordinary practice without regret? Do not you know it to be his will, That you
strive to enter in at the strait gate; That you seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven; That you keep your heart with all diligence; That you deny your self,
crucify the flesh, be temperate, just, merciful, patient? Do you aim at
obeying him in these things? Can you say, Lord, for thy sake I refrain the
things to which my heart inclines? Has his prohibition any restraining force
upon your hearts? Do you not allow your self to be licentious, earthly, vain,
proud, wrathful, revengeful, though you know it will offend him? And is this
your love to him, or delight in him?

Do you bear goodwill to him whose reproach and dishonor you are not concerned
for, yea, whom you stick not to dishonor and reproach? whose interest among
men has no place in your thoughts, whose friends are none of yours, whose
enemies are your friends, whose favor you care not for, nor regret his frowns,
whose Worship is a burden to you, (that you had rather do any thing than pray
to him), and his fellowship an undesired thing? Make an estimate by these
things of the temper of your hearts toward God; and consider whether it
bespeak delight in him, or not rather habitual aversion and enmity.

It may be you will admit these things seem to carry somewhat of conviction
with them: But they concern many that are taken for godly persons and lovers of
God, as well as they do you. And it may be many such may take themselves for
godly persons and lovers of God, and be mistaken as well as you; And what will
that mend your cause? If these things will prove a person one that has no
delight in God, they equally prove it as to you and others, which will make
nothing to your advantage.

But if they who have sincere love to God, are in a degree peccant against the
Laws of such love (as that they are, they will hear in due time), They are more
ready to accuse themselves than other men; They abhor themselves, that they do
not more entirely delight in God, and repent in dust and ashes: It better
becomes you, to imitate their repentance, than glory in their sinful weakness;
which while they patronize not themselves, you should not think it can afford a
valuable patronage unto you. When did you check and contend with your own
hearts upon these accounts, as they are wont to do? And if these things, in a
degree found with them, prove their delight in God imperfect, their prevailing
contraries will prove it (however) sincere. And if you will not now understand
the difference, God grant you may not hereafter at a more costly rate, between
the imperfection and the total want of his love; between having your heart and
Soul imperfectly alive toward God and perfectly dead.

You may further say, God is out of your sight, and therefore how can it be
expected you should find a sensible delight in him?

But is he out of the sight of your minds? If he be, what would you infer, That
then you cannot delight in him at all, and therefore that you do not; the thing
that you are charged with all this while. But he is out of sight by the high
excellency of his Being; for which reason he should be delighted in the more,
i.e. with a deeper delight, though not like that you take in the things of
sense: And he has been so beyond all things, notwithstanding his abode in that
light which is inaccessible. This therefore is confession without excuse; and
would never be offered as an excuse by any, but those that are lost in flesh
and sense, have forgot they have reasonable Souls, and had rather be numbered
with Brutes than Men; As if there were not many things you have not seen with
the eyes of flesh, more excellent than those you have! Or as if you had no
other faculty than eyes of flesh to see with! Which since you have, and the
depravation thereof is vicious and sinful, as your not-delighting in God (the
matter of fact) seems to be yielded, and so you quit your first Post; It will
thence appear, that it cannot but be sinful too. And since at that you seem to
make a stand (as at your next Post), either thinking to deny or extenuate the
evil of it, our Expostulation must follow you thither, and be aimed,

2. To evince to you the greatness and horridness of that sin. Suffer your
selves therefore to be reasoned with to this purpose, and consider,

First, That you have somewhat of delectation in your Natures, i.e. you have
the power naturally inherent in you, of taking delight in one thing or other.
You have such a thing as love about you. Are not some things grateful and
agreeable to you, in which you can and do take complacency? Therefore herein an
act is not enjoined you which is incompetent to your Natures, or simply
impossible to you.

Next then, Do you not know, your delight or love ought to be placed on some
good or other that is known to you; and among things that you know to be good,
proportionably to the goodness which you find in them, and supreamly on the
best?

Further, Do you not acknowledge the blessed God to be the best and most
excellent Good? as being the first and fountain-Good, the fullest and most
comprehensive, the purest and altogether unmixed, the most immutable and
permanent Good? How plain and certain is this? How manifestly impossible is it,
if there were not such a Good, that otherwise any thing else should ever have
been good, or been at all? Is not this as sure and evident as any thing your
senses could inform you of? Whence is the glorious excellency of this great
Creation, the beauty, loveliness, pleasantness of any Creature? Must not all
that, and infinitely more, be originally in the great Creator of all. This, if
you consider, you cannot but see and own.

While then your own hearts tell you, you delight not in God, Do not your
Consciences begin to accuse and judge you, that you deal not righteously in this
matter? And ought it not to fill your Souls with horror, when you consider, you
take no delight in the best and sovereign Good? Yea, when you look into your
disaffected hearts and find, that you not only do not delight in God, but you
cannot; and not for the want of the natural power, but a right inclination?
Should you not with astonishment bethink your selves, every one for himself,
what is this that is befal'n me; I am convinced, this is the best Good, every
way most worthy of my highest delight and love, and yet my heart savours it
not! You can have no pretense to say, That because your heart is disinclin'd,
therefore you are excused, for you only do not what through an invincible
disinclination you apprehend you cannot do. But you should bethink your self,
What a wretch am I, that am so ill-inclin'd? For is not any one more wicked
according as he is more strongly inclined to wickedness and averse to what is
good? But how vincible or invincible your disinclination is, you do not yet
know, not having yet made due trial. That you cannot of your selves overcome,
it is out of question: But have you tried what help might be got from Heaven,
in the use of Gods own prescribed means? If that course bring you in no help,
then may you understand how much you have provoked the Lord. For though he have
promised, that for such as turn at his reproof, he will pour out his Spirit to
them; Prove. 1.
yet they who when he calls refuse, and when he stretches out his hand regard
not, but set at naught all his counsel, etc. may call and not be answered, may
seek him early and not find him. And that wickedness may somewhat be estimated
by this effect, that thus it makes the Spirit of Grace retire, that free,
benign, merciful Spirit, the Author of all love, sweetness and goodness, become
to a forlorn soul a resolved stranger. If you are so given up, you have first
given up your selves; You have wilfully cast him out of your thoughts, and
hardened your own hearts against him, who was the Spring of your Life and
Being, and in whom is all your Hope: And whether this malignity of your hearts
shall ever finally be overcome or no (as you have no cause to despair but it
may be overcome, if apprehending your life to lie upon it, you wait and strive,
and pray and cry, as your case requires); Yet do you not see it to be a fearful
pitch of malignity? and so much the worse and more vicious by how much it is
more hardly overcome?

That we may here be a little more particular* Consider,

1. How tumultuous and disorderly a thing this your disaffection is? You are
here to consider its direct tendency, its natural aptitude or what it does of
it self, and in its own nature lead and tend to. If you may withdraw your
delight and love from God, then so may all other men as well: Therefore now
view the thing it self in the common nature of it; And so, Is not aversion to
delight in God a manifest contrariety to the order of things? A turning all
upside down? A shattering and breaking asunder the bond between rational
appetite and the First Good? A disjointing and unhinging of the best and
noblest part of Gods Creation from its station and rest, its proper basis and
center? How fearful a rupture does it make! How violent and destructive a
dislocation! If you could break in pieces the orderly contexture of the whole
universe within it self, reduce the frame of nature to utmost confusion, rout
all the ranks and orders of creatures, tear asunder the Heavens, and dissolve
the compacted body of the earth, mingle Heaven and Earth together, and resolve
the World into a mere heap; you had not done so great a spoil, as in breaking
the primary and supreme tie and bond between the Creature and his Maker; Yea,
between the Creator of all things and his more noble and excellent Creature.
All the relations, aptitudes and inclinations of the Creatures to one another,
are but inferior and subordinate to those between the Creatures and their
common Author and Lord: And here the corruption of the best cannot but be worst
of all. Again,

2. What an unnatural wickedness is it! To hate thy own original! To disaffect
the most bountiful Author of thy Life and Being! What would thou say to it if
thy own Son did hate the very sight of thee, and abhor thy presence and
converse? especially if thou never gave him the least cause? If thou have been
always kind and indulgent, full of paternal affection toward him, Would thou
not think him a vile miscreant? and reckon the Earth too good to bear him? But
how little, and in how low a capacity, did thou contribute to his being in
comparison of what the great God did to thine? How little of natural excellency
have thou above him (it may be in many things besides this unhappy temper he
much excels thee) when thou know, in thy Maker is infinite excellency beyond
what thou can pretend unto? And what cause can thou pretend of disaffection
toward him? Many good works has he done for thee; For which of these do
thou hate him? Whereby has he ever disobliged thee? With how sweet and gentle
allurements has he sought to win thy heart? And is it not most vilely
unnatural that thy spirit should be so sullenly averse to him, who is pleased
to be styled the Father of Spirits? And in which respect it may fitly be said
to thee, Do thou thus requite the Lord, O foolish Creature, Deuteronomy. 32.
and unwise? Is not he thy Father --? If thou did hate thy own self (in a
sense besides that wherein it is thy duty, and in which kind thou have, as thy
case is, a just and dreadful cause of self-abhorrence); If thou did hate thy
very life and being, and were laying daily plots of self-destruction, thou
were not so wickedly unnatural. He is more intimate to thee than thou art to
thy self. That natural love which thou owe to thy self, and the nature from
whence it springs, is of him, and ought to be subordinate to him; And by a
superior Law of Nature, thy very life if he actually require it, ought to be
sacrificed and laid down for his sake: Thy hatred toward him, therefore is
more prodigiously unnatural, than if it were most directly and implacably bent
against thy self.

And yet also in hating him thou do most mischievously hate thy self too; and
all that thou do, by the instinct of that vile temper of heart toward him
thou do it against thy own life and soul. Thou cuttest thy self off from him
who is thy life; and art laying a train for the blowing up of thy eternal Hope.
All that hate him love death. Prove. 8.
Further,

3. It is the most comprehensive wickedness, and which entirely contains all
other in it. For as the Law of Love is the universal and summary Law,
comprehending all Duty, and even as it enjoins love to God (for love to men
ought to be resolved into that, and must be for his sake); so must disaffection
to God be comprehensive of all sin, whereinto every thing of it resolves it
self. Do thou not see then how thou cancellest and nullifiest the obligation
of all Laws, while thou have no delight in God? offerest violence to the very
knot and juncture, wherein they all meet and are infolded together? Not to
delight in God therefore, What can it be but the very top of Rebellion? What
will thy sobriety, thy justice, thy charity signify, if thou had these to
glory in, while thou art habitually disaffected to thy God? Let men value thee
for these, to whom thereby thou show some respect; But shall he, who in the
mean time knows thou bear none to him?

4. It is a most reproachful contemptuous wickedness! To him, I mean, whom it
most directly offends against! Carries it not in it most horrid contumely and
indignity to the most high God? It is a practical denial of all those
excellencies in him, that render and recommend him the most worthy object of
our delight; it is more than saying, He is not good, holy, wise, just and true.
Things may on the sudden be said that are not deliberately thought, and may be
retracted the next breath; but a man's stated, constant course and way signifies
the apprehension it proceeds from to be fixed, and that it is the settled
habitual sense of his Soul.

Yea, and since, as has been said, Thou delightest in other things whilst thou
delightest not in him; It plainly imports it to be the constant sense of thy
very heart, that those things are better than He. What is it then that has thy
delight and love? Whereon is thy heart set? Commune with thy self. Do thou
not tremble, when thou find this to be thy very case, that thou may truly
say, I can delight in creatures, but not in God; can take pleasure in my
friend, but none in him; I must confess it to be the temper of my heart, that I
love my Father, Mother, Son or Daughter more than Christ: Is it not then to be
concluded from his own express word, Mat. 10. 13
that thou art not worthy of him, Luke 14. 26
and can be none of his Disciple? Nay, may thou not moreover truly say,
that thou love this base impure earth more than God? That thou take more
delight in thy companions in wickedness; can more solace thy self with a
drunkard on the Ale-bench, with a lascivious wanton, with a profane scoffer at
godliness, than with the blessed God? That thou can allow thy self to riot
with the luxurious, and eat and drink with the drunken, and not only do such
things, but take pleasure in them that do them, yea and thy self take pleasure
to commit iniquity; but in the glorious holy God thou can take no pleasure!
Then would thou be content to carry the plain sense of thy heart written on
thy forehead, and proclaim it to all the world, as thy resolved practical
judgment, That thou accountest thy Friends, thy Relations, this vile and
vanishing World, thy wicked Associates, thine own impure lusts, better than
God? And do thou not yet see the horrid vileness of thy own heart in all
this? Art thou yet an harmless innocent creature, an honest well-meaning man
for all this?

Yea, will it thou not see, that thine heart goes against thy Conscience all this
while? That thou disaffectest him in whom thou know thou should delight?
That the temper of thy Spirit is a continual affront to thy profession, through
the perfidious falsehood and vanity whereof, thou do but cover hatred with
lying lips? Is not that an odious thing which thou so seek to hide; and
which, though thou art not loath to be guilty of it, thou art so very unwilling
should be known?

And since thou art so very loath it should be known, How can thou hold up
thy head before that eye that is as a flame of fire, that searches thy heart
and tries thy reins, that observes thy wayward spirit, and sees with how
obstinate an aversion thou declinest his acquaintance and converse? Will thou
stand before the glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, who knows thy
disaffected heart, and say, it is but a small transgression thou have been
guilty of, in not loving him and making him thy delight? Do thou think this
will pass for a little offense in the solemn judgment of the great day that is
drawing on? Or will thy heart endure, or thy hands be strong, when the secrets
of all hearts shall be laid open, thou shall stand convicted before his
Tribunal in the sight of Angels and Men, of having born all thy days a false
disloyal heart, full of malignity and ill will to thy Sovereign Lord, whom thou
wast so many ways obliged to serve and cleave to with delight and love?

When the difference shall be visibly put between those that delighted in God
and them that never did, and thou shall be marked out for one of them that did
in heart depart from him all thy days, and be thereupon abandoned to the
society of that horrid accursed crew, in whom only thou did delight: Surely
thou will not then say, thy transgression was small.

2. But we are also to expostulate with another sort; who, though they are not
altogether unacquainted with this heavenly exercise of delighting in God, yet
too much disuse it, and apply not themselves to it (as who do?) with that
constancy and intention of Soul as the matter requires. And these we are to put
upon the consideration of such evils, as either are included in this neglect,
or are allied unto it (and do therefore accompany and aggravate the natural
evil of it), as either causing it, or being caused by it. And,

1. Those whom we now intend are to bethink themselves, what evil is included
in their neglect of this part of holy Practice. And you are to judge of the evil
of it by its disagreement with such known and usual measures, as whereto our
practice should be suitable, and which in reason and justice it is to be
estimated and censured by; as for instance, The Divine Law, Conscience,
Experience, Obligation by kindness, Stipulation, Relation, Profession, Tendency
of the new Nature, Dictates of Gods Spirit, The course and drift of his design;
with all which it will be found to have very ill accord.

1. How directly opposite is it to the Law of God! Not only to his express
written Precept, but to that immutable eternal Law which arises from our very
Natures referred unto his! The obligingness or binding force whereof, does not
so much stand in this, That the thing to be done is such as whereto our Natures
were originally inclined, (which yet is of great weight, they having been thus
inclined and determined by our Maker himself, so that our inclination was in
this case expressive of his Will); but (which is indeed the very reason of
that, for we must conceive the Divine Wisdom in the blessed God to conduct all
the determinations of His Will), the natural unchangeable congruity of the
thing it self. And therefore as to the things whose constant fitness would
render them matter of Duty to us at all times, it was provided, inclinations
suitable to them should be planted in our Natures from the beginning: But things
that were to be matter of Duty but for a time, having only a present fitness
unto some present juncture or state of affairs, it was sufficient that the
Divine Pleasure should be signified about them in some way more suitable to
their occasional and temporary use, and that might not so certainly extend to
all men and times.

That great Law of Love to God (which comprehends this of delighting in him) is
you may be sure of that former sort, it being impossible there should be a
reasonable Creature in being, but it will immediately and always be his Duty to
love God supreamly and above all things; yea, that you must know is the most
fundamental of all such Laws. And therefore, when because original impressions
were become so obscure and illegible in our Natures, it became necessary there
should be a new and more express Edition of them in Gods written Word:

This is placed in the very front of them, Thou shall have no other gods before
me; Which signifies only the having of a God in Name and no more, if it does
not signify loving him before all other. Wherefore when our Savior was to
tell which was the first and great Commandment, he gives it thus, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, Mat. 22.
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. The thing
enjoined by this Law is most substantial, the life and soul of all other Duty,
and without which all that we can do besides is but mere shadow; for whatsoever
we are enjoined to do else, we must understand enjoined to be done out of love
to God, as the principle whence it must proceed; and not proceeding thence, the
moral goodness of it vanishes as a beam cut off from the Sun. For on this (with
the other which is like unto it, and which also hangs upon this) hang all the
Law and the Prophets. And what durst thou who know God, or rather art known
of him, neglect so great and substantial a Duty? This is not like the command
of wearing fringe on the borders of the garment, or of not wearing a garment of
linen and woollen; wherein sure they whom it concerned should have been very
undutiful to have disobeyed: But it is the very greatest among the great things
of the Law; A Duty upon which all Duty depends, even for life and breath!
Should not this have obtained in thy practice, that ought to run through and
animate all the rest? Or was it fit it should ly dead and bound up in the
habitual principle, and not go forth (or very rarely) into act and exercise? Or
did thou do thy duty herein, by being only inclined to do it? Or would not
the inclination, if it were right, infer (or otherwise is it like to last long
without) suitable exercise? Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3.
Why was so express a Law neglected, so often enjoined (or the practice
mentioned with approbation, Psa. 44. 19.
or the neglect of it animadverted upon with abhorrence, Job 27. 10. chapter 34. 9.
in the very terms, or in terms evidently enough of the same import) in the
Sacred Volume? Isa. 58. 14.
How could you turn over the leaves of that Book and not often meet with such
words, Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous; Psalm. 33. 1. 97. 12.
Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say to you rejoice, etc. Should not so
frequent inculcations of the same thing have been answered by the frequency and
continuedness of your practice of it? Phil. 3. 1. 4. 4.
Or was it enough now and then, as it were casually and by chance, to hit upon
the doing of what is so momentous a part of your Religion, and ought to be the
business of your life? Ought it not to cut your heart to find your self
convicted herein of a disobedient omission? And when the great God exacts that
stated homage from you, A frequent, practical, explicit, recognition and
owning of him as the supreme delight, the great solace, repose and rest of your
Souls, that you have been so little awed with the apprehension of his authority
and right in this case? When he has mercifully chosen, to make that the matter
of his command and claim, wherein your own advantage, satisfaction and content
does so entirely consist? That your practice is herein disagreeable to a Law,
speaks it sinful; that it transgresses so great a Law, highly aggravates your
sin: A Law so important, upon which so much depends, so express and plain,
legible in the very nature of things, and in reference whereto, the very
excellency of the object would suffice to be a Law to you, and dictate your
duty, if no command had been otherwise given in the case. Surely the neglect of
such a Law cannot have been without great transgression.

2. Your own Conscience you will acknowledge ought to be a Rule to you, when it
manifestly agrees with that former Rule, The supreme and Royal Law. Do you not
find your selves herein to have offended against that? It may be your sleeping
Conscience did not find your self to offend: But do you not find your self to
have offended it, now beginning to awake? This is not a doubtful and disputable
matter, (perhaps your minding such matters too much, has hindered you in
this), surely you will not make a scruple of it, a difficult case of
Conscience, Whether you should take the Lord of Heaven and Earth for your God?
Whether you should choose him for your portion, seek rest in him, and place upon
him your delight and love? And if in so plain a case your Conscience has not
expressed it self offended, you have offended against it, in letting it sleep so
securely, and not stirring it up to its proper office and work. And know, that
sinning against the light of ones own Conscience, does not stand only in going
against the actual deliberated thoughts which we have had, but also in walking
contrary to our habitual knowledge, and the thoughts and apprehensions which
thence we might and should actually have had; Inadvertency and disregard of
known duty, is the most usual way of sinning against Conscience. And besides,
Have you not in this often gone against the repeated checks of your own
Consciences! Bethink your selves, Have you not in your prayers intermingled
frequent confessions of your cold love to God, and that you have taken so
little delight in him? And were those only customary forms with you, and words
of course? Surely (though it might not be urgently enough) your Consciences did
at such times accuse you. And let that be a dreadful thing in your eyes, to
continue a course which, if you consider, you cannot but condemn. And,

3. Ought not your Experience to have been instructive to you; as it commonly
is to men in other matters? Have you not in this neglect run counter to such
instruction? By this means you are supposed to have known the sweetness, as by
that last mentioned, the equity and fitness of delight in God. Have not those
been your best hours, wherein you could freely solace your selves in him? was
not one of them better than a thousand otherwise spent! Did you never find it
good for you, Psalm. 73.
in this way, to draw nigh to God? and hereupon pronounce them blessed whom he
did choose, Psalm. 65.
and cause to approach unto him? And where is that blessedness of which ye
spoke? Have ye forgotten, that ye ever thus tasted how gracious the Lord was?
And it is like, you have by your taste found it also an evil thing and bitter to
depart from him. Methinks you should reckon it a great increase of your sin to
have gone against your own sense, when especially, your superior rule might
give you assurance it did not deceive you. And does it not expressly oblige you
to follow its guidance, Heb 5. 14.
while it puts the character of perfect, or of being come to full age, upon
them, who by reason of use (or accustomedness) have senses exercised to discern
between Good and Evil?

4. And what will you say to the great obligations which the love and kindness
of God have laid upon you? Will you not esteem your selves to have been thereby
bound to place your love and delight on him? Could you decline doing so without
putting a slight upon his love, who is infinite in what he is, and who is love?
was not his love enough to deserve yours? The love of a God, that of a silly
worm! Were you not obliged to love him back again, who was so much beforehand
with you in the matter of love? 1 John 4.
To love him who had loved you first? The first love is Therefore perfectly
free; the latter is thereby certainly obliged and become bounden duty. How
variously and with how mighty demonstration has that love expressed and
evidence't it self? It has not glanc't at you, but rested on you, and settled
in delight. He has so stood affected toward the people of his choice, and put
a name on them on purpose to signify his delight in them. Isa. 62. 4.
He rejoices over them with joy, Zeph. 3.
and rests in his love to them. Psalm. 149.
The Lord takes pleasure in his people. His delights have from of old been
with the Sons of men. Prove. 8.
Could He delight in such as you, and cannot you in him? Be amazed at this! How
mean an Object had he for his delight! How glorious and enamouring a one have
you! Excellency and Love in conjunction! whereas in you were met Deformity and
ill will! He has loved you so as to remit to you much. To give to you and for
you a great deal more, Himself and the Son of his delights. He then (thou
should recount) did invite thee to delight in him who has always sought thy
good, done strange things to effect it, takes pleasure in thy prosperity and
exercises loving kindness toward thee with delight? Who contrived thy
Happiness; wrought out thy Peace at the expense of Blood, even his own; Taught
thee the way of Life, cared for thee all thy days, has supplied thy wants,
born thy burdens, eased thy griefs, wiped thy tears. And if now he say to thee;
After all this could thou take no pleasure in me? Will not that confound and
shame thee? He has expressed his love by his so earnest (and at last successful)
endeavors to gain thine. By this, that he has seemed to put a value on it;
and that he desisted not till in some degree he had won it: Whereupon there
has been an acquaintance, a friendship, some intimacies between him and thee,
according as sovereign Majesty has vouchsafed to descend, and advance sinful
dust. And how disingenuous, unbecoming and unsuitable to all this is thy
strangeness and distance afterward! It it is more unworthy to cast out of your
hearts than not to have admitted such a guest.

5. How contrary is this omission to what by solemn vow and astipulation you
have bound your selves to? It has graciously pleased the blessed God in his
transactions with men to contrive his Laws into the form of a Covenant, wherein
upon terms, he binds himself to them, expecting (what he obtains from such as
become his own) their restipulation. Wonderful grace! that he should article
with his Creatures, and capitulate with the work of his own hands! And whereas
his first and great Law (and which virtually being submitted to comprehends our
obedience to all the rest) is as has been noted, Thou shall have no other Gods
before me; This also he gives forth often, as the sum and abridgment of his
Covenant, That he will be our God, and we shall be his people. Now this you
have consented to; and therein bound your selves, (as you have heard our
Savior expounds the first and great Commandment) To love him with all your
soul, etc. And how well does your neglect to delight in him agree and consist
with this? What, love him with all your soul in whom you can rarely find your
selves to take any pleasure? Surely your hearts will now misgive and admit a
conviction you have not dealt truly (as well as not kindly) in this. What, not
to keep Faith with the righteous God! To deceive a Deceiver some would think
not intolerable. But what pretense can there be for such dealing with the God
of Truth? You have vowed to him, What think you of this drawing back? Such
trifling with him; the great and terrible God who keeps Covenant and Mercy for
ever! How unbecoming is it! to dally with him as you would with an uncertain
whiffling man? To be off and on, to say and unsay, that he shall be your God,
and that he shall not, (for how is he your God if you delight not in him?)
imports little of that solemn gravity and stayedness which becomes a
transaction with the most High God. He takes no pleasure in fools; Wherefore
pay that which you have vowed. Eccl. 5.


6. Nor does it better agree with your Relation to him, which arises from your
Covenant. Thence he becomes yours and you his: I entered into Covenant with
thee, and thou becamest mine; and the Covenant binding on both parts, the
relation is mutual; so that thereby also he becomes yours: It is a most near,
represented therefore by the nearest among men, even the conjugal, relation;
Therefore how full is that Song of Songs of expressions importing mutual
delights suitable thereto! And what a bondage (as well as incongruity) were that
relation without delight? Have you repented your Choice? If not, Why take you
not pleasure? Why do you not rejoice and glory in it, even as he professes to
do over you? If he should repent, In what case were you? Not to take pleasure,
in God! Your own God! How strangely uncouth is it? You are not to consider him
as a stranger, an unrelated one. If he were such to you his own excellencies
challenge to be beheld with delight; But you are to reckon and say of him, This
is my Beloved, and this is my Friend, etc. I am his and he is mine. And how ill
do such words become the mouth that utters them not from the abundance of the
heart! even from an heart abounding and overflowing with Love and Joy!

7. And how does the temper of your heart and your practice, while you take not
actual, ordinary delight in God, clash and jar with your profession? For admit
you do not then make an express verbal profession of actual delight in God at
such times when you find it not, yet you still avow your selves, and would be
accounted and looked upon as related to him: And the just challenges of that
relation are not any way answered, but by a course of ordinary actual delight.
So much your Profession manifestly imports. Whilst you profess the Lord to be
your God, you profess him to be your supreme delight. And how is he so, when
you seldom have a delightful thought of him, or look to him with any pleasure?
and the temper of your Spirit toward him is usually strange and shie? And
bethink your selves, What would you then be esteemed? such as care not for him,
as value him not? Would you willingly be taken for such in all those long
intervals wherein your actual delight in him is wholly discontinued? Would you
not be ashamed the disposition of your heart toward him at such times should
be known? Do you not desire to be better thought of? What is there then at the
bottom, and under the covert of your yet continued profession at such times,
but falsehood? A correspondent affection there is not. Is not your very
profession then mere dissimulation and a lie? A concealment and disguise of an
heart inwardly bad and naught? but which only comforts it self that it is not
known; that is all day long full of earth and vanity, and wholly taken up with
either the contentments, delights and hopes, or the cares, fears, and
discontents that do naturally arise from these vile mean Objects, and so are of
a kind as mean and vile as they; Only makes a shift to lie hid all the while,
and lurk under the appearance such a one has put on of a Lover of God, and one
that above all things delights in him. But is this honest dealing? or was this
indeed all that was this while to be got of God, the credit of being thought
his?

Yet it may be you will somewhat relieve your selves, by saying you suppose for
all this your profession was not altogether false. For you hope there was still
a Principle in you by which your heart was habitually directed toward God, and
whereby his Interest did still live and was maintained in you, notwithstanding
your many and long diversions from him. And while your Profession did signify
that, it signified some real thing, and so was not a false and lying Profession.

But to this I say, Was this all that your Profession was in it self apt, and
by you designed to signify? Surely it was apt and intended to signify more
than habitual inclination. It carried the appearance of such actings Godward as
were suitable to your having him for your God; And you would it is likely have
been loath it should have been otherwise understood. And surely whatsoever it
said or imported more than the Truth was false.

And again, Can you be confident that so much as you suppose, was true? Are you
sure of this, that because you have sometimes found some motions of heart
toward God, it is therefore habitually inclined to him, when it very rarely
puts forth it self in any suitable acts, and for the most part works quite
another way? Whereby are Habits to be known but by the frequency of their acts?
Do not you know there are many half-inclinations and workings of heart with
some complacency Godward that prove abortive and come to nothing, as that of
the stony ground, and that of Heb. 6. 4. do more than intimate. Surely your
hope and safety more depend upon your repentance, your return and closer
adherence to God thereupon, than the supposition your heart is in the main
sound and right amidst those more notable declinings from him.

But we will admit your supposition true (which the consideration of the
persons we are now dealing with and the Design of this present Piece of our
Discourse requires) and take it for granted, that amidst this your great
neglect, you have notwithstanding, a Principle, a new and holy nature in you,
whose tendency is Godward: Whereupon we further say then, 8. And does not your
unaccustomedness to this blessed exercise resist the Tendency of that new
nature? And so your practice while your hearts run a quite contrary course (for
they are not doing nothing while they are not in this delightful way working
toward God) does not only offend against your profession which it in great
part belies; but against that vital Principle also, which is in you; and so
your very excuse aggravates your sin. Is there indeed such a Principle in you?
And whither tends it? Is it not from God? And does it not then naturally aim at
him and tend toward him? Being upon both those accounts (as well as that it
resembles him, and is his living Image) called a participation of the Divine
Nature? Yea, does it not tend to delight in him? For it tends to him as the
Souls last end and rest. What good Principle can you have in you God ward if
you have not Love to him? And the property of that is to work toward him by
desire, that it may rest in him by delight. Have you Faith in God? That works
by this Love. Faith is that great power in the Holy Soul by which it acts from
God as a Principle; Love is that by which it acts toward him as an End; By
that it draws from him, by this it moves to him, and rests in him. The same
holy gracious nature (dependently on its great Author and Cause) inclining it
both to this motion and rest; and to the former, in order to the latter: So by
the work of the new Creature is the Soul formed purposely for blessedness in
God and devotedness to him; its aspirations, its motions, its very pulse,
breath, tend and beat this way. But you apply not your Souls to delight in God.
You bend your minds and hearts another way; What are you doing then? You are
striving against your own life; you are mortifying all good inclinations
toward God, stifling and stopping the breath that your panting heart would
send forth to him; you are busily crucifying the new creature, instead of the
body of sin. There is somewhat in you that would work toward God, and you
suffer it not; And is that well? That Divine thing, born of God, of heavenly
descent, that has so much in it of sacredness by its extraction and parentage,
you fear not to do violence to!

If indeed such a thing (as you seem to hope) be in you; at sometime or other
you may perceive which way it beats and tends. The Soul in which it has place
is biased by it Godward; and though often it is not discernible, it sometimes
shows its inclination. Other men, and meaner creatures, sleep sometimes, and
then their most rooted dispositions appear not; when they are awake they bewray
them, and let them be seen in their actions, motions and pursuits. The renewed
Soul has its sleeping intervals too, and what propensions it has toward God
is little discernible, (and yet even then it sometimes dreams of him, at least
between sleeping and waking; Cant. 5.
I sleep, but my heart waketh, it is the voice of my beloved): But if you
seriously commune with your selves in your more wakeful seasons, you may
perceive what your hearts seek and crave; some such sense as this may be read
in them, Isa. 26.
The desire of our Souls is unto thy Name, O Lord, and to the remembrance of
thee. One thing have I desired, that will I seek after, Psalm. 27.
to behold the beauty (the delight, as the word signifies) of the Lord. And
when you observe this discovered inclination, you may see what it is that in
your too wonted course you repress and strive against. That Divine Birth calls
for suitable nutriment, more tastes how gracious the Lord is. You will have it
feed upon ashes, upon wind and vanity; or (although it had the best Parent, it
has so ill a Nurse) when it asks bread, you give it a stone, and let it be
stung by a Scorpion: And the injury strikes higher than at it alone, even (as
is obvious) at the very Author of this Divine Production; Which therefore we
add as a further aggravation of this evil, viz.

9. That it is an offense against the Spirit of Grace, whose dictates are herein
slighted and opposed; for surely with the tendencies of the new creature he
concurs: It is maintained by him as well as produced, continually depends on
him as to its being, properties, and all its operations. Nothing therefore can
be cross to the inclination of a renewed Soul, as such, which is not more
principally so to the Holy Ghost himself. And particularly the disposing of the
Soul unto delight is most expressly ascribed to him; Romans 14. 17.
that very disposition being it self joy in the Holy Ghost: And we find it
numbered among the fruits of the Spirit. Gal. 5. 22.
You may possibly be less apprehensive of your sin in this, because you find
him not dictating to you with that discernible Majesty, Authority and Glory
that you may think agreeable to so great an Agent. But you must know, he
applies himself to us in a way much imitating that of nature. And as in
reference to the conservation of our natural beings, we are assured the First
Cause co-operates with Inferior Causes (for we live, move, Act. 17.
and have our being in him), though the Divine influence is not communicated to
this purpose with any sensible glory, or so distinguishably, that we can
discern what influence is from the superior Cause and what from subordinate;
our reason and faith certainly assure us of what our sense cannot reach in this
matter: So it is here also, The Divine Spirit accommodates himself very much to
the same way of working with our own, and acts us sutably to our own Natures.
And though by very sensible tokens we cannot always tell which be the motions
that proceed from him; yet Faith teaches us from his Word, to ascribe to him
whatever spiritual good we find in our selves; inasmuch as we are not of our
selves sufficient to think a good thought. And if by that Word we judge of the
various motions that stir in us, we may discern which are good and which not;
and so may know what to ascribe to the Spirit, and what not. Whereas therefore
that Word commands us to delight in God, if we find any motion in our hearts
tending that way, we are presently to own the finger of God, and the touch of
his Holy Spirit therein. And what have you found no such motions excited, no
thoughts cast in that have had this aspect and tendency, which your indulged
carnality and aversion have represt and counterwrought? Herein you have grieved
and quenched the Spirit.

And if it have not overborn you into what you should have understood to have
been your duty, but have upon your untractableness retired and withdrawn from
you; Do not therefore make the less reckoning of the matter, but the more
rather; this carries more in it of awful consideration to you, and smarter
rebuke that He desisted. You must consider him as a free Agent, and who works
to will and to do of his good pleasure. His influence is retractable, and when
it is retracted, you ought in this case to reckon it signifies a resentment of
your undutiful and regardless carriage toward him. And ought you not to smite
upon the thigh then, and say, What have I done? You have striven against the
Spirit of the most High God; You have resisted him in the exeeution of his
Office, when you were committed to his Conduct and Government; you have fallen
out and quarrelled with your merciful Guide, and slighted at once both his
Authority and Love. This could be no small offense. And you are also to
consider, that when such a Province was assigned him in reference to you, and
such as you; and the great God set his Spirit on work about you. It was with a
special end and design, being the determination of most wise Counsel.

And how highly does this increase the offense? That,

10. You have herein directly obstructed the course and progress of that
Design; That could be no other than the magnifying of his grace in your conduct
to blessedness. This is that whereon he has been intent; and he has made his
Design herein so visible, that they that run might read what it was. The very
overture to you of placing your delights on him speaks its end; It Is that
whereby he should be most highly acknowledged and you blessed both at once. His
known design you ought to have reckoned did prescribe to you, and give you a
Law; It Is a part of civility toward even an ordinary man, not to cross his
Design which I know him earnestly to intend, when it tends no way to my
prejudice, or any man's; Yea, to do so would in common interpretation, besides
rudeness, argue ill nature and a mischievous disposition. Much more would duty
and just observance toward a superior challenge so much, as not to counterwork
him, and awe a well-tempered spirit into subjection and compliance; but a stiff
reluctance to the great and known Design of the blessed God, meant so directly
to our own advantage, speaks so very bad a temper* has in it such a
complication of peevish wilfulness, of undutifulness and ingratitude to him, of
negligence and disregard of our selves, that it must want a name to express it.

And now do you see what evil the neglect of delighting in God (accompanied as
it cannot but be with the having your hearts otherwise engaged and vainly
busy) does include and carry in it? Will you pause a while and deliberate upon
it? Do but make your just and sober estimate by the things that have been
mentioned.

Measure it by Gods Law, and it imports manifest disobedience in a matter of
highest consequence; by the judgment of your own conscience, and it imports
much boldness against light in a very plain case; by your experience, and it
speaks an uninstructible stupidity, or a very heedless forgetful spirit; by the
obligation laid upon you, by the kindness of this very counsel and offer
(besides many other ways), and it has in it great ingratitude and
insensibleness of the greatest love; by your Covenant, and it imports
treachery; by your Relation, much incongruity and undecency; by your
Profession, falsehood and hypocrisy; by the tendency of the new nature in you,
unnatural violence; by the Dictates of Gods Spirit, great untractableness; by
his known declared Design in this matter, a most undutiful disrespect to him,
with a most wretched carelessness of your selves, as to your nearest and most
important concern.

One would think it needless to say more; But why should we balk any thing that
so obviously occurs, tending to set forth the exceeding great sinfulness of
this sin? Therefore know, that besides its great faultiness in it self,

Much also cannot but be derived into it

1. Great blindness and ignorance of God; For is it possible any should have
known and not have loved him? or have beheld his glory and not have been
delighted therewith? and that with such delight and love as should have held a
settled seat and residence in them.

And can your ignorance of God be excusable or innocent? 1 Cor. 15*
The Apostles words are too applicable; Some have not the knowledge of God, I
speak it to your shame. Do you pretend to him, and know him not? Worship him so
often, and worship you know not what? Had such opportunity of knowing him, and
yet be ignorant? Psalm. 76. 1. 2.
at least it would be thought, In Judah is God known, and that his Name were
great in Israel, where he has had his Tabernacle and dwelling place. Here one
would think his Altar should not bear the same Inscription as at Athens, Acts
17.
To the unknown God. How express has his discovery of himself been to you! and
how amiable! What was there in it not delectable? or in respect whereof he has
not appeared altogether lovely? as it were composed of delights? You have had
opportunity to behold him clad with the Garments of Salvation and Praise; And
as he is in Christ, in that alluring posture, 2 Cor. 5.
reconciling the world to himself, wherein all his Attributes have visibly
complied to the reconciling design; His boundless fullness of life and love not
obstructed by any of them, from flowing out in rich and liberal communications.
If you had not excluded that glorious pleasant light wherein he is so to be
beheld, you would have beheld what had won your hearts fully, and bound them to
him in everlasting delight and love. And have you not reason to be ashamed you
have not known him better, and to better purpose? Alienation from the life of
God proceeds from blindness of heart, Ephesians. 4. 18.
i. e. a chosen affected voluntary blindness. Or if your knowledge of him be not
little.

2. Your little delight in him argues much unmindfulness of him; At least that
you have not minded him duly, and according to what you have known. It might
here be seasonable to suggest to you, how likely it is, that several ways your
great faultiness in the matter of thinking of God may have contributed to the
withholding of your delight from him. Consider therefore,

1. Have not your thoughts of him been slight and transient? Have they not been
overly superficial thoughts? casual only, and such as have dropped into your
minds as it were by chance, fluid and roving, fixed neither upon him nor into
your hearts? Too much resembling what is said of the wicked man, Psalm. 10.
God is not in all his thoughts; He has not been amidst them. Your thoughts
have not united upon him, he has not been situated and centred in them. Was
not this the case? You bestowed upon him it may be now and then an hasty
passant glance, the careless cast of a wandering eye; and was this likely to
beget an abiding permanent delight? Have you been wont to compose your selves
designedly and on purpose to think of him, so as your thoughts might be said to
have been directed toward him by the desire and inclining bent of your heart;
according to that, Isa. 26. 8.
The desire of our Soul is toward thy name, and to the remembrance of thee?
Whence it is that it is represented as the usual posture of them whom he reckons
among his Jewels, and for whom the book of remembrance was written, Mal. 3.
that they thought on his name. A thing that they might be known by, and
distinguished from other men; (wherefore it is observable, that their
remembrance of him, was thought worth the remembering, and to be transmitted
into records, never to be forgotten). The evil of your not-delighting in God,
has a great accession from your negligent thinking of him.

2. Have not your thoughts of Him been low and mean, such as have imported
light esteem? Compare them with those admiring thoughts, Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods! Who is like thee, glorious in
holiness! O Lord, our Lord, Psalm. 8.
how excellent is thy name in all the earth! How unlike have yours been to such
thoughts? Bethink your selves, how deeply culpable you have made your neglect
to delight in God, by your unworthy thoughts, by which you have detracted so
unspeakably from the Divine excellency! Hence you have more to account for than
merely not-delighting in God, a rendering him such to your selves, as if he
were not worthy to be delighted in. How ought this to shake your hearts!

3. Have they not been hard thoughts; full of censure, and misjudging of his
Nature, Counsels, Ways and Works? Have there not been perverse reasonings, with
dislike of his Methods of Government over men in this present state? As if he
had too little kindness for such as you would have him favor, and too much for
others; Judging his love and hatred by false measures? This seems to be much
the evil unto which the Injunction of delight in God is here opposed in this
Psalm; and whence it may be estimated, how directly that militates against
this, and prevailing, excludes it. Perhaps you have delighted so little in God,
because ye have thought (the thing that is so wearisom to him), Every one that
does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, Mal. 2. 17.
and he delights in them; and have said in your hearts, Where is the God of
Judgment.

Or have you not been more peccant in your apprehensions of his rules and
resolutions for the disposing of men as to their eternal states? Have you not
disbelieved the revelation he has given of his Nature, and express
declarations of his mind and purpose touching these matters? Was it not enough
for you to have known his gracious propensions toward returning sinners, that
desire him again for their God, and willingly accept the grace, and submit
themselves to the conduct and government of his Son? Should not this have
allured and won your hearts to him, and made you, with humble thankful
admiration of his grace, resign and yield your selves to be his for ever? Have
you not measured your apprehensions of him by the suggestions and misgivings of
your guilty jealous hearts; or by your experienced animosity, and the
implacableness of your own spirits toward such as have offended you; as if he
could forgive no more than you are disposed to do? Have you not opposed your
own imaginations of him to his express testifications of himself, that He is
Love; Slow to anger, and of great mercy, etc. And that as the heavens are high
above the earth, so are his ways above your ways, and his thoughts above your
thoughts? Have you not (against his plain word) thought him irreconcilable, and
averse to the accepting of any atonement for you? prescribed and set bounds to
him, and thought your sin greater than could be forgiven? And if hereupon you
have not delighted in him, and have found all ingenuous affection toward him
stifled within you, as your not-delighting in him, was a foul evil; the
more-sinful injurious cause (denying the infinite goodness of his Nature, and
giving the lie to his Word) has made it beyond all expression worse. And
further at least consider,

4. Have not your thoughts of God been few? Is not the meditation of him with
you an unwonted thing? The Psalmist, resolving to mind him much, Psalm. 104. 33.
To praise and sing to him as long as he lived, and while he had any being,
Does as it were prophecy to himself, that his meditation of him should be
sweet. Frequent (right) thoughts of God, will surely be pleasant delightful
thoughts: But your little delight in God too plainly argues, you have minded
him but seldom. And how full of guilt is your not-delighting in God upon this
account? How cheap is the expense of a thought? What, that so much should not
be done in order to the delightful rest of your Soul in God!

3. It supposes much carnality, a prone inclination and addictedness to this
earth and the things of it; And thereupon argues in you a very mean abject
spirit. While you can take no pleasure (or do take so little) in God, is there
nothing else wherein you take pleasure? And what is it? God has in this matter
no other rival than this world. It Is its friendship that is enmity to him;
something or other of it, Jam. 4. 4.
The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, or the pride of life prevails far,
while the love of the Father has so little place in you. 1 John 2*
Whither are you sunk? into how low and vile a temper of spirit, when you can
take pleasure in so base things, rather than in the blessed God; and quit so
high and pure delights for mire and dirt? What has thus carnalized your minds,
that you favor only the things of the flesh, and Divine things are tasteless
and without relish?

Nor are you to think more favorably of your case, if you take little actual
complacency in the world also; probably it is because you have little of it to
delight in; it may be you are more acquainted with the cares of it than the
delights; or your desire after it is much larger than your possession. It Is all
one for that. But what are your hearts most apt to delight in? or, what is most
agreeable to your temper? It Is the same thing, what earthly affection
predominates in you, while the temper of your spirit is earthly; and it is
thereby held off from God. Your not-having actual earthly delights to put in
the balance against heavenly, is only by accident. But all your cares, desires
and hopes of that vile kind, would turn into as vile delights, if you had your
wills. In the mean time, you are the more excuseless, and your sin is the
grosser, That even the cares and troubles of this world are of more value with
you than delight in God. How far are you from that temper, Psalm. 73.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and whom do I desire on earth besides thee?

4. And how sad an argument is it, of downright aversion and disaffectedness to
God, in a great degree at least yet remaining! Whence can your not-delighting
in him proceed, but from this, as its most immediate cause? What could hinder
you, if your heart were inclined? Are you not astonished, to behold this as the
state of your case, That you delight not in him, because your heart is against
it; that is, from flat enmity.

And what does more naturally import enmity to any thing, than to turn off from
it, as not being able to take pleasure in it. So God expresses his detestation
of Apostates, If any man draw back, Heb. 10.
my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. And his contempt of Jechoniah is
signified by the like manner of speaking. Do you not tremble to think that this
should be the temper of your spirit toward God, and that your estimate of him,
as if he were a despised broken Idol, Jer. 22.
and as mean a thing, as a vessel wherein is no pleasure? Reckon then thus with
your self; As your case stands, and things do lie between God and you, your
little delight in God can have no more favorable account given of it, nor be
resolved into any gentler or milder cause than enmity.

And if this seem to you not to be a cause, but to be coincident, and fall in
with it, so much the worse. By how much less this enmity has of antecedency to
your neglect, or the more it seems the same with it, so much the more it
discovers the evil of the thing it self. For by what worse name can we call any
thing than enmity to God? But we speak of your habitual temper, as that which
is the cause of your actual neglect. And since you have a discovery of God as
the most delectable Object, cannot pretend there is a better, have leave and
free permission to place your delight on him, yea are earnestly invited and
pressed to it, It Is plain, nothing else is in your way to hinder you; Therefore
you delight not in him, because your heart only is averse.

3. We also might insist further to show the evils that ensue and follow upon
this neglect: Such I mean, as do not follow casually and by accident, but which
have a very inward connection with it, and are its most natural consequents;
being some way caused by it, or which it does very directly tend to beget.

And yet these we need not be solicitously curious to distinguish, as things of
a kind altogether diverse from those last mentioned under the foregoing head.

For it is very apparent, the same things may both cause little delight in God,
and be caused thereby; As a person may therefore not delight in God because he
knows him not, and may therefore be the less apt to entertain the knowledge of
him, because he has no delight in him. And the case is the same as to the
other things spoken of as causes of this omission, i. e. that it and they may
be mutual causes of one another. But it however equally serves the design of
aggravating the evil of not taking frequent actual delight in God, that hereby
sin grows, whether in the same or in different kinds; There is still an
increase of sin, though but of the same sort that was in being before.

You ought to consider then, As you take so little delight in God from that
very bad cause, that you have not entertained the right knowledge of him, when
you had so great opportunity to get much of it, which makes your matter very
ill; Do you not also find that by your withholding your selves from delighting
in him, you have still less disposition to seek his more inward acquaintance?
And does not that make your matter much worse? If you already know somewhat of
him, you yet know but in part; your object is infinite, and this knowledge so
excellent, that you cannot fully attain to it, there is still more to be known.

Now therefore if you did delight much in God, Psalm. 63.
would you not be pressing hard after him? would you not be following on to
know him? Hos. 6.
And then would his goings forth be prepared before you as the morning, and he
would be still visiting you with fresh and increasing light; whereupon your
pleasure would be renewed and increased by every fresh view, and consequently
your progress would be from sight to sight, and from pleasure to pleasure;
whereas now this wheel stands still, or you are going back into darkness and
desolation. Have you not much the more to answer for upon this account?

The like may be said as to the rest. The irrectitude and great faultiness of
your thoughts of God, though that contribute not a little to your
not-delighting in him, yet also, if you did delight in him more, would not your
thoughts of him be more deeply serious, more highly raised? Would you not be
very unapt to take up injurious hard thoughts of him? Would not his thoughts
(once become precious to you) be also numerous, or innumerable rather, Psalm.
139.
as the sands of the Seashore? Would not your earthly temper, your strangeness
and aversness to him, vanish and wear off, if you were more exercised in actual
delightful converses with him? Therefore the permanency and increase of those
mentioned evils, and that they have got such settled rooting in you, is all to
be charged upon your not-applying your selves to more frequent actual delight
in God.

Besides what may further follow hereupon, The languishment and decays of your
inward man; The difficulty you find to trust in God, when you are reduced to
straits, (as who would commit his concernments to one he does not love?); Your
impatience of adverse and cross emergencies, that may often befall to you; Your
aptness to vexation or despondency; The easy victory a temptation has over
you, as surely he is sooner drawn away from God, or into sin against him, who
delights not in him); Your less-usefulness in your place and station; Your want
of courage, resolution, zeal for God, (which are best maintained by delight and
the relishes of a sweet complacency taken in him); Your sluggishness in a
course of well-doing; The sense of a toilsom heavy labor in Religion, that it
begets you weariness without rest, (whence you rather affect a rest from it,
than in it and by it); and lastly, Your continual bondage by the fear of death,
(which one would not dread, apprehending it only a removal into his presence in
whom I delight). All these things (which might have been distinctly insisted
on, and more expressly accommodated to the present purpose, but that I would not
be over-tedious, and that somewhere else some or other of them may fall again
in our way) do bring in great and weighty additions to the evil and guiltiness
of this sin, and much tend to lay load upon it, to fill up its measure, even
unto pressing down and running over. For how just is it, to impute to it what
it naturally causes, and lay its own impure and viperous births at its own door?

And though this Discourse have been drawn out to a greater length than was
intended, it will not be lost labor, if by all that has been said, any that
fear God shall be brought to apprehend more of the odiousness of this sin; and
the self-indulgent thought be banished far from them, that this is either an
indifferent matter, or at least (if it be somewhat a careless) it is one of
their more harmless inadvertencies and omissions.

Which good effect, if through the blessing of God it may accomplish, there
will be the less need unto such to read on, but take their nearer way to the
immediate present practice of this great Duty. And because also it is to be
hoped, that the evil of this neglect once apprehended, will prompt and quicken
serious and considering persons to set upon the enjoined Duty; It will be the
less necessary to enlarge much in that other kind of Discourse, which we now
come to, viz.

2. Invitation thereunto. Wherein yet we But how shall we go about it? We are
apt to grope as in the dark, even at noonday, and cannot find the door or way
that leads into a practice wherein there is so much both of pleasantness and
duty. Therefore as the case is, the Invitation to this exercise ought, if it
were possible, to be a kind of manuduction; and it is needful we be not only
called and pressed, but even led into it. This then we are to endeavor, the
giving of some plain Prescriptions, that may put us into an easy and direct
way of falling expeditely upon this delightful work.

And here it must be considered, that all (as has been said) are not in an
equal disposition to it; Some are more averse, others less, but all too much;
Therefore are we to begin as low as their case may require, who are less
disposed; and so proceeding on in our course, somewhat may fall in more suitable
to them who are in some disposition to it, but do yet need (as who do not?)
some help and furtherance in order thereto.

First therefore, It is necessary, that you do deliberately and resolvedly
design the thing it self. Propose to your selves delighting in God as a
business unto which you will designedly and with steadfast purpose apply your
whole Soul. Content not your selves with light roving thoughts about it, which
many have about diverse matters which they never think fit to engage themselves
in. Determine the matter fully in your own heart, and say, Many projects I have
tried in my time, sundry things I have turned my mind unto, to little purpose,
I will now, see what there is of delight to be found in God. The sloth and
aversion of a backward heart must be overcome by resolution; and that
resolution be well-weighed, deliberately taken up, deeply fixed, that it may
last and overcome. And why should you not be resolved in this point? Is this a
matter always to be waved? Know you another way to be happy? Are you yet to
learn, that a reasonable Soul needs the fullness of God to make it happy, and
that there is no other God but one? Can there be any dispute or doubt in the
case, when there is but one thing to be done, besides yiedling ones self to be
miserable for ever? And what need of that, while yet there is one way to avoid
it? Surely, that there is but one, is better than if there were a thousand. You
need not now be lnog in choosing; nor do you need to deliberate, becauseof any
doubt in the case, but that you may more fully comprehend in your own thoughts
that there is none, and that your resolution may hereupon grow the more
peremptory, and secure from the danger of any change.

To talk of any difficulty in the matter, is a strange impertinency; for who
would oppose difficulty to necessity? or alledg, the thing is hard which must
be done? Or must it be done, and never be attempted? or attempted, and not be
resolved upon? You have nothing to do to read further, who will not digest this
first counsel, and here settle your resolution, I will apply my self to a
course of delight in God. If this appear not reasonable to you, despair that
any thing will that follows. It Is foolish trifling, to look upon such writings
that profess their design, and have it in their fronts, that they are meant for
helps unto Christian practice, only with an humor of seeing what a man can
say. And if ever you will be in earnest, you must return to this point; And
will but waste time to no purpose, if you will not now set down your
resolution; that is, That you will seek an happiness for your Soul, (too long
already neglected!); an happiness that may satisfy and last; And (where only
it is to be found) in the blessed God; and in him by setting your selves to
delight in him; since nothing can make you happy wherein you delight not. And
that you will make use of what you further read, according as you find it
conducing, and apt to serve your purpose herein. Then next,

2. Consider your present state Godward. Must you, do you see you must come to
this point, of having your delight in God? In what posture then are your
affairs toward him? How do things stand between him and you? You do well know,
you were unacceptable to him, and his enemy; and that his Justice and holy
Nature obliged him to hold you as such, (though he never gave you ground to
think him implacable). Can you delight in an enemy? who (as matters in that
case stand) must be apprehended ready to avenge himself on you, and as having
whet his glittering Sword, and made the Arrow ready upon the string, directed
against your very heart? Apprehend this to have been your case, and most
deservedly, That you were an impure hateful wretch, deformed and loathsome, one
that could yield the holy God no matter of delight, full of enmity and
contrariety to him, and in whom he could not but find much cause of most just
hatred. Remember you were one of his revolted creatures, under his most
deserved wrath and curse. Know at how vast a distance you were from delighting
in him, or a state that could admit of it. Consider, Is this still your case?
And do not rashly think it altered; or that you have nothing to do, but out of
hand to rush upon the business of delighting in God.

3. Yet do not think it unalterable. Do not conclude it as a determined and
undoubted thing, that matters can never be taken up between God and you, or you
become suitable and acceptable to him. Look not upon your vile wicked heart as
unalterably wicked; nor upon him therefore as an irreconcilable enemy. Account
he waits for your turning to him, as being inclined to friendship with you;
Otherwise would vengeance have suffered you so long to live? Have you not been
long at his mercy? Has he not spared you, when it was in his power to crush
you at pleasure? Do not think therefore (what you have no pretense for) that he
has a destructive design upon you, and will accept of no atonement.

4. Acquaint your self with the way and terms upon which his Gospel declares
him reconcilable; that is, that he will never be reconciled to you while you
remain wicked, nor for your own sake, become you never so good. That a more
costly sacrifice than you can either procure or be, must expiate your guilt,
and make your peace. If this matter could have been effected in a less
expensive way, the Son of God had not (as you know he was) been designed
himself, and made that sacrifice; nor a work have been undertaken by him that
might as well have been done by common hands. And since he submitted and
undertook as he did, reckon with your self, how highly just it is, that the
entire honor of so merciful condescension, and so great a performance, be
wholly ascribed to him. But withal know, he shed his blood, not in kindness to
your sin, but to you: And that his design was at once to procure the death of
that, and your life; That you need his Spirit as well as his Blood; that to
recommend and reconcile you to his Holiness, as well as this to his vindictive
Justice; That as you expect ever to experience and taste the delights of that
communion, whereinto he calls you, you must not only have the blood of Christ
to cleanse you from all sin, 1 John 17.
but must also walk in the light, as he is in the light; That an entire
resignation, a betrusting and subjecting of your self to the mercy and
governing power of the Redeemer, is necessary to the setting of things right
between God and you; In whom only you may both accept God and be accepted of
him; That he must be the center of union between God and you; and that union
the ground of all delightful intercourse.

5. Make request to him, that he would draw you into that union with his Son;
unto whom none can come, Joh. 6.
but who are drawn by himself.

Do not dream and slumber in this business; but know your All depends on it.
Consider the exigency of your case. Do you find your heart sluggish and
indisposed to any such transaction with God and Christ? Does it decline and
draw back? Know, it herein does but act its own nature, and do as it is, or
like it self; Therefore stir up your self, Isa. 27.
to take hold of his strength; in which way, if you have mind to be at peace,
you shall make peace. Cry to him earnestly, Draw a poor wretch out of darkness
and death, that must otherwise be at eternal distance from thee, and be
miserable for ever. Join me to him who will bring me to thee, and make me one
for ever with thee. Hereupon,

6. Accepting Jesus Christ as thy Savior and thy Lord; accept in him, with all
humble reverence, thankfulness and admiration of divine mercy and goodness, the
blessed God to be thy God; surrendering and yiedling up thy self entirely and
fully to be his for ever. Do this unfainedly, and with great solemnity; And let
it be to thee for an everlasting memorial! Record it as a memorable day,
wherein thou did go out of thy self, and all finite, narrow, limited good,
and pass into union with the eternal, immense, incomprehensible and
all-comprehending good, and enter upon it as thine own! And what, will thou
delight in a God that is not thine? Can thou be content to look wistly on
him, as one unrelated and a stranger? Apprehend (and bless God that this is the
state of the case), that in this way he offers himself most freely to thee. It
were astonishing to think of purchasing so great a good! the matter were not to
be offered at. But how transporting is it, that nothing but acceptance and
resignation should be needful to make thee one with the great God, and make his
fullness thine! Therefore make haste to do this, and be not hasty in doing it.
Defer not, but do it with great seriousness, deliberation, and fullness of
consent; considering you are about to enter into an everlasting Covenant not to
to be forgotten; and doing a thing never to be again undone.

Now if herein your heart be sincere, and there be a real and vital exercise of
your very Soul in this transaction with God in Christ, so as that you truly
take him for your God, preferring him in your estimation and choice above all
things, and giving up your self absolutely and without reservation to him as
his, to be governed and disposed of by him in all things at his pleasure; You
are hereby brought into that state that does admit of delighting in him.

And what remains to be said, will concern you as persons in a nearer capacity,
and who have a kind of fundamental aptitude and disposedness of heart unto this
spiritual work; And will therefore be directed to you, considered according to
that supposition.

Only it is withal to be considered, in the case of many such, that they were
arrived hither long ago, and been (as was before supposed) hereupon somewhat
exercised and versed in this piece of holy practice, have had many pleasant
turns with God, and tasted often the delights of his converse: But have
discontinued their course, and are grown strange to him who was their delight;
have suffered themselves by insensible degrees to be drawn and tempted away
from him; or there has been some grosser and more violent rupture, by which
they have broken themselves off. It will be requisite to say somewhat more
peculiar to these, (for the reducing of them again even to this unitive point);
After which, what shall ensue, may in common concern them, and all that are
arrived so far, together.

For such therefore whose case this is, it will surely both become and concern
you to take this course:

1. Make a stand, and bethink your selves; Can you justify your carriage
toward him whom you have taken to be your God? Can you approve your own way?
Was this all that you obliged your selves unto in the day of your solemn Treaty
with him; Only to take on you the Name of a Relation to him, and so (excepting
that you would now and then complement him in some piece of external heartless
homage) take leave till you meet again with him in another world? And that in
the mean time this present world, or your carnal self (to be gratified and
served out of it) should really be your God, and He only bear the name? Was
this indeed your meaning? Or if it was, did you deal sincerely in that Treaty?
Or can you think it was his meaning, and that he would expect no more from you?
Can you allow your selves so to interpret his Covenant, and give this as the
summary account of the tenor of it? How would you then expound it to nothing!
And make a mere trifle of it! And make your Religion a fitter service for an
inanimate senseless Idol, than the living and true God; Do you not yet know what
the Name of God imports? Can he be a God to you that is not acknowledged by you
as your very best, the universal, and absolutely all-comprehending good? But if
you apprehend there was really more in the matter; and that you have been
altogether faulty in this thing. Then,

2. Represent to your selves as fully as you can the greatness of the fault.
What have you made God an unnecessary thing to you, while the Creature, your
very Idols, lying vanities, were thought necessary? And these were the things
upon which you thought fit to set your hearts! Which you have loved, which you
have served, after which you have walked, Jer. 8. 2.
which you have sought, and whom you have worshipped! (The heap of expressions
wherewith it seemed meet to the Spirit of God to set out the profuse lavishness
of Idolatrous affection). Think how monstrous this is! Revolve in your own
minds the several aggravations of your sinful neglect before mentioned; and
labor to feel the weight of them upon your own spirits; Think what time you
have lost from pleasant delightful walking with God! What damage you have done
your selves! How far you might have attained! How much you are cast behind in
your preparations for a blessed Eternity! What wrong you have done him, whom
you took for the God of your life, to whom you vowed your hearts and souls! How
little kindly and truly you have dealt with him!

3. Return to him with weeping and supplication. Open your selves freely to
him. Let him hear you bemoaning your selves, pour out your Souls to him, in
large acknowledgments and confessions of your guiltiness; which, while you keep
silence, will consume your bones and waste you to nothing. Remember whence you
are fallen, Rev. 2.
and repent and do your first works. Till then, He has this against you, that
you have left your first love. And consider, Is it not a grievous thing to you?
Does it not pain your hearts, that your Lord and Redeemer should have somewhat
against you (as it were laid up, noted, and put on record, kept in store, and
(as himself remarkably expresses it, Deuteronomy. 32.
(sealed up among his treasures); somewhat that sticks with him, and which he
bears in mind, and has lying in his heart against you? Is this a small thing
with you? when that must be apprehended to be his sense (and suppose him saying
to you) I remember the kindness of thy youth, Jer. 2.
the love of thine espousals -- And now since those former days, What iniquity
have thou found in me, that thou art gone far from me, and have walked after
vanity, and art become vain? How confounding a thing were it, if he should say,
as sometime to others in a case resembling yours (and why should you not take
it as equally belonging to you)? O my people, Mic. 6. 3.
What have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against
me: And while the case admits such sharp and cutting rebuke, and that it is the
matter of rebuke (not rebuke it self abstracted from the matter, i. e. if it
were causless) that should smart or wound; How becoming is it! and suitable to
the case, to cast down a wounded bleeding heart before the Lord, and be abased
in the dust at the footstool of his Mercy-seat! And though your sin be great
and heinous;

4. Yet apprehend you are before a Mercy-Seat; That there is forgiveness with
him that he may be feared. How would this apprehension promote the humiliation
which the case requires! A sullen despondency that excludes hope of mercy
hardens the heart; continues the sinful comfortless distance: Therefore apply
your selves to him; seek his Pardon in the Blood of the Redeemer; know you need
it, and that it is only upon such terms to be obtained.

Yet also take heed lest any diminishing thoughts of the evil of your sin
return, and make you neglect the thing, or wave the known stated way of
remission. We are apt to look upon crimes whereby men are immediately offended,
(and which therefore are of worse reputation among men), as robbery, murder,
etc. as very horrid. This is a matter that lies immediately between Spirit and
Spirit; the God of the Spirits of all flesh and your Spirit. You have had a
solemn transaction with him, and have dealt falsely: And though the matter were
secret between God and you, Is it the less evil in it self for that? If you had
dealt unworthily, and used base treachery toward a friend, in a matter only
known to him and your self, Would you not when you have reflected, blush to see
his face, till matters be composed betwixt you? And is there another way of
having them composed, and of restoring delightful friendly converse, than by
your seeking his Pardon, and his granting it? Could you have the confidence to
put your self upon conversing with him as at former times, without such a
preface? Or were it not great immodesty and impudence to offer at it? But that
when this has been the case between the blessed God and you, and you now come
with deep resentments, and serious unfeigned acknowledgments of your most
offensive neglects of him, to seek forgiveness at his hand, he should be easy
and facile to forgive; How should this melt you down before him! And this is
what his own word obliges you to apprehend and believe of him. Jer. 3. 12.
These words He has required to be proclaimed to you; Return you backsliding
ones, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful,
says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. v. 13.
Only acknowledge your iniquity, that you have transgressed against the Lord
your God, and have scattered your ways to the strangers under every green tree
(your offense has been Idolatry as well as theirs); Turn, O backsliding
Children, says the Lord; for I am married unto you --

What heart would not break and bleed at this overture! You can be recovered to
no capacity of delighting in God, as heretofore, till you sensibly feel the
need of great forgiveness, and have a disposition of heart inwardly to relish
the sweetness and pleasantness of it; Till those words do agree with the sense
of your hearts, and you can (as in a transport) cry out, O the blessedness of
the man (as the expression imports) whose iniquity is forgiven, Psalm. 32. 1.
and whose sin is covered! etc. And now when you are come thus far, if the
temper of your Spirit be right even in this, there will be in conjunction with
the desire, hope and value of forgiveness, at least an equal dread of such
future strangenesses and breaches between God and you: And that will be very
natural to you, which I next add as further advice;

5. Most earnestly seek and crave a better and more fixed temper of spirit;
More fully determined and bent Godward; That your heart may be directed into
the love of God; 2 These. 3. 5.
That the spirit of love, power, and a sound mind may bear rule in you. Be
intent upon the recovery of that healthy soundness, which wheresoever it has
place, will with a certain steady power, and a strong inclining bent of love,
carry your heart toward God. And take heed lest you be satisfied in the
expectation and hope of forgiveness, as to your former neglects of God, without
this.

There is a manifest prejudice daily accrewing to the Christian name and
profession, by the unequal estimation which that part of the Doctrine of Christ
has, that concerns the work of his Spirit upon us, regeneration, the new
creature, repentance, and an holy life; in comparison of that which concerns
his performances and acquisitions for us, expiation of sin, satisfaction of
Divine Justice, forgiveness and acceptance with God. How sweet ravishing
transporting Doctrines, and how pure Gospel are these latter accounted by many,
who esteem the former cold, sapless, unpleasant notions! Thence comes Christian
Religion to look with so distorted a face and aspect, as if it suffered a
convulsion, that has altered and disguised it unto that degree, that it is
hardly to be known; being made to seem as if it imported only a design to
rescue some persons from Divine Wrath and Justice, without ever giving them
that disposition of heart which is necessary both to their serving of God and
their blessedness in him. This is not to be imputed so much to the
misrepresentation made of it by them, whose business it has been to instruct
others, (though of them too many may have been very faulty in almost
suppressing or insisting less, or very little, upon Doctrines of the former
strain, while the stream of their Discourses has mostly run upon the other);
for it must be acknowledged, that by very many in our age, the absolute
necessity of the great heart-change has been both most clearly represented,
and as urgently pressed as perhaps in most that have gone before. But the matter
is plainly to be most attributed to that depravedness of man's nature, whence
there is a most unequal and partial reception of the Truth of God; and that
which seems (taken apart by it self) to import more of indulgence to sinners is
readily caught at, that which more directly strikes at the very root of sin, is
let pass as if it had never been spoken. And so men make up to themselves a
Gospel of this tenor and import, That let the temper of their spirits toward
God be what it will, if they rely and rest upon the righteousness of Christ,
God will be reconciled to them. And they think they need take no further care.
But whatever is said in the Gospel of Christ besides, of the necessity of being
born of God, of partaking a Divine nature, of putting off the old man, and
putting on the new, etc. is looked upon as if it had been thrown in by chance,
and did signify nothing. And the other, without this, is thought to be pure
Gospel; As if these were impertinent additions and falsifications. But will not
such men understand, that the detracting of any thing from the Instrument or
Testament of a man, as well as adding thereto, makes it another thing, and none
of his act or deed? And so that their pure Gospel, as they call it, is another
Gospel, nay (because there cannot be another) no Gospel? Or will they not
understand, how simply impossible it is, in the very nature of the thing, that
the end should be attained, of bringing men to blessedness, (i. e. to a
delightful rest in God), without their having a new nature, an heart inclined
and bent toward God, wrought to a conformity and agreement with Gods own holy
Nature and Will, unto which the offer and hope of forgiveness by the Blood of
Christ is designed to win and form them? For can men be happy in him in whom
they take no delight? or delight in him to whom the very temper of their
spirits is habitually unsuitable and repugnant? How plain are things to them
that are not resolved not to see!

Wherefore beware of contenting your selves with the mere hope, that upon your
having admitted a conviction, and felt some regret in your spirits for former
strangeness to God, you shall be pardoned; so as thereupon never to design a
redress, but run on the same course as before: And when you have hereby
contracted a new score, and the load of your guilt begins to be sensibly heavy
upon you, then betake your selves to God for a new pardon. What presumptuous
trifling is this with the Lord of Heaven and Earth! And what do you mean by it,
or seem to expect? Is it not, that God should instead of remitting your sin to
you remit your duty; cancel the obligation of that very supreme universal
fundamental Law of Nature it self, and excuse you quite from ever loving,
delighting in him, or setting your heart upon him at all? Think not forgiveness
alone then will serve your turn; it will signify as much as a pardon will do
to a Malefactor just ready to dye of a mortal disease; he, poor man! as much
needs a skilful Physician, as a merciful Prince; And so do you. And your matter
is nothing the worse (sure), that the person of each is sustained by the same
Jesus, and that both parts can be performed by the same hand. And know, that a
restored rectitude of Spirit Godward, a renewed healthiness and soundness of
heart, with your actual delighting in God thereupon in your future course,
stands in nearer and more immediate connection with your final perfect
delightful rest and blessedness in him, than your being perpetually forgiven
the not-doing of it; if this were supposed possible without that; But it is not
indeed supposable, for if God would not therefore hereafter banish you his
presence (as now he does not), you would for ever banish your selves, as now
you do.

6. Let there be a solemn recognition and renewal of your engagement and
devoting of your self to God. Again take hold of his Covenant, and see that it
take faster hold of you. Do it as if you had never done it, as if you were now
to begin with him; only that your own sin and his grace ought now to appear
greater in your eyes; that more odious, that you have added treachery to
disaffection; this more glorious and admirable, that yet he has left open to
you a door of hope, and that there is place for repentance, and that he is
ready to treat with you again on a new score. With what humility, shame, fear
and trembling, distrust of your self, resolution of future more diligent
circumspection and observation of your own spirit, trust and dependence on his,
ought this transaction now to be managed with the holy God!

And when you are thus returned into the way and course of your duty; Then may
what follows concern you in common with all other, that (being entered) desire
direction how to proceed and improve in this holy Exercise of Delighting in God.

Because therefore such as have been somewhat practiced in this course, and
being convinced of the equity and excellency of it, desire to make progress
therein, do yet find a difficulty in it; it goes not easily with them, they are
easily diverted and can hardly hold on in it; some what is intended to be said,
that possibly may, through the Lords blessing be of some use as to that
(too-common) case.

1. First then, Let it be your great study and endeavor to get a temper of
mind actually, ordinarily and more entirely spiritual. We suppose the
implantation of some holy and spiritual Principles in you already; But that is
not enough. For as a mind wholly carnal, only savours the things of the flesh,
will perpetually withdraw and recoil, if you offer it any thing tending
Godward; so, in whatsoever degree it is carnal, it will do thus in a
proportionable degree. If you say, let me now apply my self to some delightful
intercourse with God, while an earthly tincture is fresh with you, and it was
some carnal thing that made the last impression upon your spirit, many excuses
will be found out, there will be manifold diversions; It will never be thought
seasonable. Many other things will be judged necessary to be minded first.

Wherefore fence against the addictedness of your hearts to those other things.
And whereas, through the great advantages that sensible things have upon your
senses and imagination, you are in continual danger to be overborn and held
off from God; This you must earnestly intend to watch and fortify those
inlets, and not to give away your souls to sense and the things of sense. Trust
not your senses and their objects to parley, but under strict inspection. Never
suffer that they should let in upon you what is suitable and grateful to them at
their own pleasure.

You need to have somewhat else than sense, even a spirit of might and power,
that may counter-mand and overruled in every of those ports, and turn the
battle in the gate. Those use to be the places of most strength; and surely
here there needs most. Your case and present state cannot admit that you
securely give up your selves to unmixed unsolicitous delight even in the best
Object. If you intermit care and vigilance, you will soon have such things come
in upon you, as will make a worse mixture in your delight than they can do, and
corrupt and spoil all. Your delight were better to be mixed with holy care,
than with sinful vanity; that tends to preserve, this utterly to destroy it.
Your state is that of conflict and warfare: You must be content with such
spiritual delight, as will consist with this state. In a time of War and
Danger, when a City is beset with a surrounding Enemy, and all the Inhabitants
are to be intent upon common Safety, their case will not admit, that they
should entirely indulge themselves to ease and pleasure: And surely it is
better to bear the inconvenience of Watching and Guarding themselves, and enjoy
the comforts which a rational probability of Safety by such means will allow
them, than merely with the mad hope of procuring themselves an opportunity and
vacancy for freer delights, to throw open their Gates, and permit themselves
and all their delectable things to the rapine and spoil of a merciless Enemy:
Understand this to be your case. Therefore strictly guard all the avenues of
your inward man. It is better resist there and combat your Enemy, than within
your Walls; who is more easily kept than driven out. There cause every occasion
and object (even that importunes and pretends business to you) to make a stand,
and diligently examine the errand. Let also for this purpose a spirit of Wisdom
and Judgment reside here, (The Gate was wont to be the place of counsel and
judgment, as well as strength), that may prudently consider what is to be
entertained and what not; and determine and do accordingly. Prove. 25. 28.
But if you will have no rule over your own spirit, but let it be as a City
broken down and without walls; If you will live careless and at ease, and think
in this way to have delight in God, your delight will soon find other Objects,
and grow like that of the Swine wallowing in the mire, become sensual, impure,
and at length turn all to Gall and Wormwood.

It may be you have known some of much pretense to Piety, that would allow
themselves the liberty of being otherwise very pleasant in their usual
conversation; by which you may imagine delight in God (which you cannot suppose
such persons unacquainted with) may fairly consist with another sort of
delight. Nor indeed is it to be doubted but it may; For the Rules and Measures
which the Holy God has set us import no such rigorous severity, nor do confine
us to so very narrow bounds, but that there is scope and latitude enough left
unto the satisfaction of sober desires and inclinations that are of a meaner
kind. He that has adjoined the inferior faculties we find in our selves to our
natures, and at first created a terrestrial Paradise for innocent man, never
intended to forbid the gratification of those faculties, nor has given us any
reason to doubt but that the lower delights that are suitable to them might be
innocently entertained; Nay, and the very Rules themselves of Temperance and
Sobriety which he has given us, for the guiding and governing of sensitive
desires, do plainly imply, that they are permitted. For that which ought not to
be, is not to be regulated, but destroyed: But then, whereas such rules do so
limit the inclinations and functions of the low animal life, as that they may
be consistent with our end, and subservient to it; How perverse and wicked an
indulgence to them were it, to oppose them at once both to the Authority of him
that set us those Rules, and (therein) to our very end it self! That
delectation in the things of this lower world, which is not by the Divine Law
forbidden and declared evil, either in it self, or by the undue measure,
season, or other circumstances thereof, is abundantly sufficient for our
entertainment, and the gratification of this grosser part, while we are in this
our earthly pilgrimage; and so much can never hurt us, nor hinder our higher
delights. God has fenced and hedged them in for us (as a Garden enclosed) by
his own Rules and Laws set about them; so that we cannot prejudice or empair
them, but by breaking thorough his enclosure. Our great care and study
therefore must be, to repress and mortify all earthly and sensual
inclinations, unto that degree as till they be reduced to a conformity and
agreement with his Rules and Measures; unto which they who have no regard, and
do yet pretend highly to spirituality, and delight in God, It Is apparently
nothing else but mere hollow pretense; they only put on a good face, and make a
fair show; look big, and speak great swelling words of vanity, as they must be
called, while their hearts taste nothing of what their tongues utter. Spiritual
delight and joy is a severe thing, separated from vain and unbecoming levities,
as well as from all earthly impurities* and only grows and flourishes in a Soul
that is dead to this world, and alive to God through Jesus Christ.

See then to the usual temper of your spirit; and do not think it enough, that
you hope the great renewing change did sometime pass upon it; and that therefore
your case is good and safe, and you may now take your ease and liberty; But be
intent upon this, to get into a confirmed growing spirituality, and that you
may find you are in your ordinary course after the Spirit; Romans 8. 5.
then will you savor the things of the Spirit; And then especially will the
blessed God himself become your great delight, Psalm. 43*
and your exceeding joy. Retire yourself from this world, draw off your mind
and heart. This is Gods great rival. The friendship of this world is enmity to
him, Jam. 4. 4.
which is elsewhere said of the carnal mind; Romans 8. 7*
that is indeed the same thing, viz. a mind that is overfriendly affected
toward this world, or not chastely; wherefore also in that forementioned
Scripture, they that are supposed and suspected to have made themselves, in
that undue sense, friends of this world, are bespoken under the names of
Adulterers and Adulteresses. You must cast off all other Lovers, if you intend
delighting in God. Get up then into the higher region where you may be out of
the danger of having your spirit ingulpht, and as it were, sucked up of the
spirit of this world; or of being subject to its debasing, stupifying
influence. Bear your self as the inhabitant of another country. Make this your
mark and scope, that the temper of your spirit may be such, that the secret of
the Divine Presence may become to you as your very element, wherein you can
most freely breath and live, and be most at ease; and out of which you may
perceive you cannot enjoy your self; and that whatever tends to withdraw you
from him, any extravagant motion, the beginnings of the excursion, or the least
departing step, may be sensibly painful and grievous to you. And do not look
upon it as an hopeless thing you should ever come to this; Psalm. 27. 4.
some have come to it; One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord, all the days of my life, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

Nor was this a transient fit only with the Psalmist, but we find him
frequently speaking the same sense, Psalm. 23. 6*
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I will
dwell in the House of the Lord for ever, And again we have the like strains;
Psalm. 84.
How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord God of Hosts! My Soul longs; yea,
even faints for the Courts of the Lord: Blessed are they that dwell in thy
House, etc. And what was this House more to him than another House, save that
here he reckoned upon enjoying the Divine Presence? So that here was an heart
so naturalized to this Presence, as to affect an abode in it, and that he might
lead his life with God, and dwell with him all his days; He could not be
content with giving a visit now and then.

And why should this temper of spirit in the clearer light of the Gospel be
looked upon as an unattainable thing? A lazy despondency, and the mean conceit,
that it is modest not to aim so high, starves Religion, and stifles all truly
noble and generous desires. Let this then be the thing designed with you, and
constantly pursue and drive the design, that you may get into this disposition
of spirit toward God. His Spirit will not be restrained, if it be duly sought,
and dutifully complied with and obeyed; if you carefully reserve your self for
him, Psalm. 4.
as one whom be has set apart for himself. If you will be entirely his, and
keep your distance, using an holy chaste reservedness as to other things; that
is, such things as any way tend to indispose your spirit toward him, or render
it less suitable to his converse, He will be no stranger to you.

And that it may be more suitable and fit for him, you should habituate and
accustom your self to converse in the general with spiritual things. You will
be as the things are you converse most with; they will leave their stamp and
impress on you; wandering after vanity, you will become vain; minding earthly
things, you will become earthly; Accordingly, being much taken up with
spiritual things, you will bear their image, and become spiritual.

Think how unworthy it is, since you have faculties (and those now refined and
improved by Divine light and grace) that are capable of being employed about so
much higher objects than those of sense, That you should yield to a
confinement, in so great part, to so low and mean things; whence it is, that
when you should mind things of an higher nature, it is a strange work with you,
and those things seem odd and uncouth to you, and are all with you as mere
shadow and darkness, that you should be most familiar with. Urge on your
spirit; make it enter into the invisible world. May you not be assured, if you
will use your understanding, That there are things you never saw, that are
unspeakably more excellent and glorious than any thing you have seen, or than
can be seen by eyes of flesh?

Why should your mind and thoughts be limited within the narrow bounds of this
sublunary world; so small and minute, and (by the apostasy and sin of man) so
abject and deformed a part of Gods Creation? Do not bind down your spirit to
the consideration and view of the affairs and concernments only of this Region
of sin and wretchedness; where few things fall under your notice, that can be a
comfortable (or so greatly edifying and instructive a) prospect to a serious
spirit. But consider, That as certainly as you behold with your eyes the
wickedness and miseries of this forlorn world, that has forsaken God, and is
in great part forsaken of him; so certainly, there is a vastly greater world
than this, of glorious and innocent Creatures, that stand in direct and dutiful
subordination to their common Maker and Lord; loving, and beloved of him;
delighting to do his will, and solacing themselves perpetually in his blessed
presence, and in the mutual love, communion and felicity of one another. Heb.
12.
Unto which happy number (or innumerable company rather as they are called) the
Redeemer is daily adjoining such as he recovers and translates out of the ruins
and desolation of this miserable accursed part of the Universe.

Reckon your self as someway appertaining to that blessed Society. Mind the
affairs thereof as those of your own Country, and that properly belong to you.
When we are taught to pray, That the will of God may be done on earth as it is
in heaven; Can it be supposed, it ought to be a strange thing to our thoughts,
how affairs go there? Surely Faith and holy Reason, well used, would furnish us
with regular and warrantable notions enough of the state of things above, that
we should not need to carry it as persons that have no concern therein; or,
when we are required to be as strangers on earth, that we should make our
selves such to heaven rather.

Let your mind be much employed in considering the state of things between God
and his Creatures. Design a large field for your thoughts to spread themselves
in, (and you will also find it a fruitful one); let them run backward and
forward, and expatiate on every side. Think how all things sprang from God, and
among them Man, that excellent part of this his lower Creation; what he was
toward God, and what he is now become. Think of the admirable person, the
glorious excellences, the mighty design, the wonderful achievements and
performances of the Redeemer; And the blessed issue he will bring things to at
length.

Think of, and study much the nature, parts and accomplishments of the new
creature; get your mind well-instructed and furnished with apprehensions of the
whole entire frame of that holy rectitude wherein the Image of God upon renewed
Souls does consist; the several lovely ornaments of the hidden man of the
heart, how it is framed and habited, when it is as it should be toward God and
toward men. Cast about, and you will not want matter of spiritual employment
and exercise for your minds and hearts; nor have occasion, if any expostulate
with you, why you mind this earth and the things of sense so much, to say, you
know not what else to think of; you may sure find many things else. And if you
would use your thoughts to such converse, and thus daily entertain your self,
In this way you may expect a spiritual frame to grow habitual to you; and then
would the rest of your business do it self. You would not need to be pressed and
persuaded to delight in God, any more than to do the acts of Nature, to eat,
and drink, and move, yea and draw your breath.

2. Endeavor your knowledge, or the conception you have of God, may be more
distinct and clear. For observe whether when you would apply your self to
delight in him, this be not the next (or at least one) great obstruction after
that of an indisposed carnal heart, That though you would, and you know it is
fit you should do so, you know not how to go about it; for you are at a loss,
what or how to conceive of him. But is it fit it should be always thus? What,
ever learning and never arrive to this knowledge? It Is most true, We can never
search out the Almighty unto perfection; And it will always be but a little
portion we shall know of that glorious incomprehensible Being: But since there
is a knowledge of God, we are required to have our Souls furnished with, and
whereon eternal life depends, with all gracious dispositions of heart toward
him, that are the beginnings of that life; Certainly the whole compass of our
Duty and Blessedness is not all laid upon an Impossibility; And therefore, if
we do not so far know as to love and delight in him above all things else, this
must be through our own great default; and more to be imputed to our
carelessness and contentedness to be ignorant, than that he is unknowable, or
has so reserved and shut up himself from us that we cannot know him. There are
many things belonging to the Being of God which we are not concerned to know,
and which it would be a vain and bold curiosity to pry into: But what is
necessary to direct or practice, and tends to show how we should be and carry
our selves toward him, is not (such has been his gracious vouchsafement)
impossible or difficult to be known. We may apprehend him to be the most
excellent Being; and may descend to many particular excellencies, wherein we
may easily apprehend him infinitely to surpass all other Beings.

For we most certainly know, all things were of him, and therefore, that
whatsoever excellency we can observe in creatures, must be eminently and in
highest perfection in Him, without the want of any thing, but what does it self
import weakness and imperfection; And has it not been His errand and business
into the world, Joh. 1. 18.
who lay in his bosom, to declare him? And has not he, who at sundry times and
in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the fathers by the Prophets, in these
last days spoken to us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things,
by whom also he made the worlds, who is the brightness of his Glory, and the
express Image of his Person? He has been on earth the visible Representation
of God to men; The Divine Glory shone in him; Joh. 1. 14.
The glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth; Was
not that Divine?

Suppose we then, we had seen Christ in the flesh, and been the constant
observers of his whole conversation on earth, (and though we have not seen it,
we have the sufficient Records of his Life and Actions in our hands); Let us I
say suppose him from day to day before our eyes, in all his meek, humble,
lovely deportments among men; and withal in the beams of Majesty that appeared
through that vail wherein he was pleased to inwrap himself: If we did observe
him going to and fro, and every where doing good, scattering blessings wherever
he went; with what compassion and tenderness he healed the sick, instructed the
ignorant, supplied and fed the hungry and necessitous; how he bare with the
weak, forgave the injurious (even against his own life), and wept over secure
and obstinate sinners; with what mighty power he cast out Devils, raised the
dead, commanded Winds and Seas, and they obeyed him; with what authority, zeal
and conviction he contested against an hypocritical generation of hardened,
impenitent, unbelieving wretches, casting flames of holy just displeasure in
their faces, and threatening them with the damnation of Hell: And now suppose
the veil laid aside, and the luster of all these excellencies shining forth,
without the interposition of any obscuring cloud or shadow; And such a one is
the blessed God. For this was the express Image of his Person; and as he
himself tells us, They that have seen Him, Joh. 14. 9.
have seen the Father. And do you not now see one to be delighted in?

But yet further, Can you not frame a notion of Wisdom, Goodness, Justice,
Holiness, Truth, Power, with other known Perfections, all concurring together
in a Being purely Spiritual (not obvious to our sense), and that was Eternally
and Originally of Himself, the Author and Original of all things, and who is
therefore over all and in all, infinite and unchangeable in all the perfections
beforementioned? Surely such conceptions are not impossible to you? And this
is He in whom you are to delight.

Lift up then your minds above your senses and all sensible things; use your
understandings, whereby you are distinguished from brute creatures. Consider,
this is he from whom you and all things sprang, and in whom your life is. Do
you perceive life, wisdom, power, love in other things; these must all have
some or other fountain. Other things have not these of themselves, for they are
not of themselves, therefore they must derive and partake them from him; and
thence it is evident, they must be in him in their highest excellency. Of this,
your understandings, duly exercised, will render you as sure, as if you saw
that infinite glory, in which all these meet, with your eyes; and will assure
you, it is so much more excellent and glorious, for that it cannot be seen with
your eyes. You see the external acts and expressions of these things from such
creatures as you are: But life, wisdom, power, love themselves are invisible
things, which in themselves you cannot see; yet you are not the less certain
that there are such things. And do you not find, that the certain evidence you
have, that these things meet in this or that creature, do render it lovely and
delightful in your eyes? especially, if you have, or apprehend you may have
nearest interest in such a creature? The blessed God not only has these things
in himself, but is these very things himself; therefore must be invisible, as
they are; And because he not only has them, but is them, therefore they are in
him perfectly unchangeably and eternally, as being his very Essence. Think then
of a Being that is pure, original, substantial, life, wisdom, power, love; And
how infinitely amiable and delectable should that ever blessed Being be unto
you!

Converse with the Word of God. Read his descriptions of Himself; And do not
content your selves to have the words and expressions before your eyes, or in
your mouths, that represent to you his Nature and Attributes; but make your
pauses, and consider the things themselves signified by them; that is, when you
read such passages of his own holy Book, as that which tells you his name, that
He is the Lord, Exodus 34.
the Lord God, gracious and merciful, etc. Or that tell you He is light, He is
love, He is God only wise, He is the Almighty, God all-sufficient, He is all in
all, and that the Heavens, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain Him; Or wherein
you find him admired as glorious in Holiness; Or that say, He is what He is,
that He is the first and the last, the Alpha and Omega, etc. Labor to fix the
apprehension and true import of all such expressions deep in your mind; that
you may have an entire and well-formed representation of him before you, unto
which you may upon all occasions have recourse, and not be at a loss every time
you are to apply your selves to any converse with him, what or how to conceive
of him.

And because mere words, though they may furnish you with a more full and
comprehensive notion of him, yet it may be not with so lively a one, or that
you find so powerfully striking your heart, compare with that account his Word
gives you of him, the Works which your eyes may daily behold, and which you are
assured were wrought and done by him. To read or hear of his Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, etc. and then to have the visible effects within your constant view,
that so fully correspond to what his Word has said of him, and demonstrate him
to be what you were told he is; How mighty a confirmation does this carry with
it! You may behold somewhat of him in every creature. All his Works do not only
represent, but even praise and commend him to you.

Above all, since he is only to be seen in his own light, pray earnestly and
continually to the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.
the Father of Glory, that he would give you the spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him. From such as so desire to know him, he will
not conceal himself. This is your more direct following on to know the Lord;
Hos. 6.
in which case he has said, you shall know, and that his going forth shall be
prepared as the morning. By your craving looks, and the expecting posture of
your waiting eye, you draw forth and invite his enlightening communications,
which do but wait for an invitation. For it is most reasonable you should feel
your want, and express your desire of what is so precious, before you find it.
Hereby you put your selves amidst the glorious beams of his vital pleasant
light; or do open your Souls to admit and let it in upon you. Who when he finds
it is with you a desired thing and longed for, takes more pleasure in
imparting, than you can pains in seeking, or pleasure in receiving it.

Nor yet, when you have thus attained to some competent measure of the knowledge
of God, are you to satisfy your selves that now you are not altogether
ignorant: But,

3. Employ your knowledge in frequent and solemn thinking on him; which is one
(and the next) end of that knowledge, and a further great means to your
delighting in him. Your knowledge of God signifies little to this purpose, or
any other, if, as it gives you the advantage of having frequent actual thoughts
of him, it be not used to this end. Not having this knowledge, when you would
set your selves seriously to think on God, you are lost in the dark, and know
not which way to turn your selves; And having it, you will be as much strangers
to delight in him, if you let your knowledge lie bound up in dead and spiritless
notion, and labor not to have it turned into active life and fervent love, by
the agitation of your working thoughts. By your musing this fire must be
kindled. Do you suppose it possible, to delight in God and not think of him? If
God be the solace and joy of your Souls, surely it must be God remembered and
minded much, not neglected and forgotten. My soul (says the Psalmist) shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63.
and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips; when I remember thee on my
bed, and meditate on thee in the nightwatches. Psalm. 104. 34.
And he at the same time says his meditation of him shall be sweet, when he
says he will be glad in the Lord.

It Is not a brutal delight you are here invited to. Even such creatures have
their Pleasures also; and do need thereto, besides a suitable object, only the
help and ministry of their senses. Your delight in God can find no way into
your hearts, but by the introduction of your exercised minds. There the matter
must be prepared and formed, by which your delight is to be nourished and
maintained. Hereto then you must apply your selves with design, and with
serious diligence, and take pains with your recoiling thoughts. Do not make
that fulsom pretense, to excuse your slothful neglect, that you cannot command
your own thoughts. The thing it self is unquestionably true, and that you are
not of your selves sufficient to think any thing that is good, as of your
selves; and so you may truly enough say, that you cannot think any thought at
all without God* or so much as draw a breath. Only, as besides your natural
dependence on God for the support of your natural life and being, there must be
that course taken, and those things done, by which in an orderly course of
Providence you may live; so for the maintaining of your spiritual life (which
very much stands in delight and joy in God) you must join a spiritual
dependence for that special influence and concurrence which is necessary
hereto, with the doing of such things as by Gods appointment and prescription
are to serve this end. They who complain therefore they cannot attain to it, to
delight in God, or their delight in him is faint and languishing; while in the
mean time they use no endeavor to bend and direct their thoughts toward him,
do make as idle a complaint, as he that shall say, he is in a miserable
straving condition, and nothing nourishes him, who wanting nothing suitable for
him, is so wretchedly slothful, that he will be at no pains to prepare, or so
much as eat and chew his own necessary food. You may not imagine, you have all
that is needful for the well-governing of your spirits in your own hands and
power. Nor ought you therefore to think, that what is simply needful is not to
be had. God is not behind-hand with you; He is no such hard task-master, as to
require Brick and allow no Straw: But may most righteously say, ye are idle,
and do therefore only complain like the sluggard in his bed, whose hands cannot
endure to labor. You dare not deliberately go to God, and tell him, you do all
you can to fix the thoughts of your hearts on him, and yet it will not be; or
that he gives you no help. Though he can be no way indebted to you, but by his
own free promise; He gives meat to them that fear him, being ever mindful of
his Covenant, (yea he does it for Ravens and Sparrows); He will not then famish
the Souls that cry to him, and wait on him; Their heart shall live that seek
God. It Is becoming and suitable to the state of things between him and you, that
he should put you upon seeking that you may find. Your reasonable nature and
faculties (especially being already rectified in some measure, and enlivened by
his Grace and Spirit) do require to be held to such terms. It is natural to you
to think; and there is nothing more suitable to the new creature, than that you
apply and set your selves to think on him, and that your thoughts be set (and
held) on work to enquire and seek him out. Know therefore, you do not your
parts, unless you make this more your business: Therefore to be here more
particular;

1. Solemnly set your selves at chosen times to think on God. Meditation is of
it self a distinct Duty, and must have a considerable time allowed it among the
other exercises of the Christian Life. It challenges a just share and part in
the time of our Lives; and he in whom (...) to place our delight, is, you know,
the prime and chief Object of this holy Work. Is it reasonable that he who is
our Life, and our All, should never be thought on, but now and then, as it were
by chance, and on the by? My meditation on him shall be sweet. Does not that
imply that it was with the Psalmist a designed thing to meditate on God? that
it was a stated course? whereas it was become customary and usual to him, his
ordinary practice to appoint times for meditating on God, his well-known
exercise, (which is supposed) he promises himself satisfaction and solace of
soul herein.

Let your eyes herein therefore prevent the Night-watches. Reckon you have
neglected one of the most important businesses of the day, if you have omitted
this, and that to such omissions you ow your little delight in God* Wherein
therefore are you to repair your selves but by redressing this great neglect?

2. Think often of him amidst your other affairs. Every one as he is called (be
his state or way of living what it will, 1 Cor. 7.
be he bond or free) is required therein to abide with God. And how is that but
by often thinking of him, as being a great part (and fundamental to all the
rest) of what can be meant by this abode? How grateful a mixture would the
thoughts of God make with that great variety of other things which we are
necessarily to be concerned in, while we are in this world! If they be serious
and right thoughts they will be accompanied with same favor and relish of
sweetness, and at least, tend to keep the heart in a disposition for more
delightful solemn intercourses with God.

It is a sad Truth (than which also nothing is more appar^nt) that whatsoever
there is, either of sinfulness or uncomfortableness in the lives of those who
have engaged and devoted themselves to God, does in greatest part proceed from
their neglect to mind God. A thing, if due heed were taken about it, so easy,
so little laborious, and the labor whereof (so much as it is) were sure to be
recompenc't with so unspeakable pleasure; that they are so often lost in
darkness, drowned in carnality, buried in earthliness, and overwhelmed with
miseries and desolations of spirit, and all this for want of a right employing
of their thoughts, is from hence only; They set their thoughts upon things that
tend either to corrupt and deprave their spirits, or to disquiet and afflict
them.

At this inlet, and by the labor of their own thoughts, sins and calamities
are brought in upon them as a flood; which very thoughts if they were placed
and exercised aright, would let in God upon them, fill them with his fullness,
replenish their Souls with his light, grace, and consolations. And how much
more easy an exercise were it to keep their thoughts employed upon one object
that is ever full, delectable and present; than to divide them among many, that
either lie remote, and out of their power, to be pursued with anxiety, toil,
and very often with disappointment; Or, being nearer hand, are to be enjoyed
(if they be things that have an appearance of good in them) with much danger
and damage to their spirits, and with little satisfaction; or (if they appear
evil) to be endured with pain and sorrow! So that the labor of their thoughts,
among those many things, brings them in torture, when their Rest upon God
alone, Psalm. 25. 13
would be all pleasure, delight and joy: Here their souls might dwell at ease
or (as those words import) rest in goodness (even with that quiet repose which
men are wont to take by night; for so the word we read Dwell peculiarly
fignifies, after the weariness which we may suppose to have been contracted by
the labor of the foregoing day.

And if no such sweet and pleasant fruit were to be hoped for from the careful
government and ordering of our thoughts, Is the obligation of Gods Law in this
matter nothing with us? whom we are bound to fear, and love, to trust and obey
above all things, of him are we not bound so much as to think? And what is
loving God with all our mind, so expressly mentioned in that great summary of
our duty toward him? Or what can it mean, after the required love of all the
heart, and all the soul, to add so particularly, and with all thy mind, when as
the mind we know is not the seat of love? Surely it cannot at least, but imply,
that our thoughts must be much exercised upon God even by the direction of our
Love, and that our Love must be maintained by thoughts of him; That our minds
and hearts must continually correspond and concur to the loving of God; and so
our whole soul be exercised and set on work therein.

What does it mean that our Youth is challenged to the remembrance of him?
Eccl. 12. 1.
What, is our riper Age more exempt? Do we as we longer live by him ow him
less? Does it signify nothing with us that (as was hinted formerly) the wicked
bear this brand in the Scriptures, They that forget God. Psalm. 9. 16.
That it is a differencing character of his own people, That they thought on
his Name? Why do we suppose our thoughts exempt from his Government, or the
obligation of his Laws? Why should it be reckoned less insolent to say our
thoughts, than our tongues are our own, who is Lord over as? May we do what we
will with our thoughts? Who gave us our thinking power, or made us capable of
forming a thought? And now, Will we assume the confidence to tell God we think
on him all that we can? How many idle thoughts in the day might we have
exchanged for thoughts of God! and every thought have been to us a spring of
pleasure, and holy delight in him! Know then that if ever you will do any thing
in this great matter of deligbting in God, you must arrest your thoughts for
him, and engage them in more constant converse with him: And withal mix prayers
with those thoughts; or let them often be praying, craving thoughts, such as
may carry with them annexed desires; or wherein your heart may breath out
requests, Psalm. 86. 4.
such as that (for instance) Rejoice the Soul of thy Servant; For unto thee, O
Lord, do I lift up my soul, etc. See they be spiritful thoughts that carry life
in them, and aim to draw more.

But now our thoughts may be conversant about him under very various
considerations, and all of them very delightful. And this variety may much
increase our delight, while our minds converse with him, now under one notion,
then under another. They are apt to tire and grow weary, being long employed
the same way upon the same thing. And it were an injury to the blessed God
himself, when he presents himself under various aspects and appearances, so to
take notice of any one, as to overlook and neglect the rest. Therefore,

4. Look often to him according as absolutely considered he is in himself the
most excellent Being; and as in reference to his creatures, he is the Supreme
Author and Lord of all.

There is an unspeakable pleasure to be taken in him so beheld. Too many while
their distrust, or their carnality and strangeness to God holds them in
suspense concerning their own special relation to him, are apt to fancy
themselves excused of delighting in him: It belongs not to them they think, but
to some familiar friends, and great favorites of his to whom he expresses
special kindness, and on whom he places the marks of his more peculiar
good will. But do you think so to shift and wave the obligation of an universal
Law upon mankind, and all reasonable nature? You are to remember (as has been
said) your delight in God is not to be considered only as your privilege, but
as an act of homage to him that made you, and put an intelligent apprehensive
spirit into you, by which you are capable of knowing who made you, and of
beholding your Makers excellency with admiration and delight. And if now you
are become guilty and vile; Will you run into darkness and hide your selves
from him, or close your eyes, and then say, the Sun does not shine, and deny
the blessed glorious God to be what most truly and unchangeably he is?
Whatever you are or have desired he should be toward you, yet do him right.
Behold and confess his glorious excellency, every way most worthy to be
delighted in. Nor have you rendered your selves so vile, nor had so much cause
of apprehending his displeasure toward you, by any thing so much as this, Your
not having taken delight in him all this while; and your neglect to take the
ways (spoken of before) tending to bring you thereto. If you think you have no
special relation to him, Do you think you ever shall if you continue, in the
temper of your spirits, strangers to him, and look upon him as one in whom you
are to take no delight? Surely it is your dutiful affection toward him and
complacency in him, that must give you ground to hope you are his, and he is
yours; And therefore the beginnings and first degrees of that complacency and
delight must be in you before; being begotten by the view of that excellency
which he has in himself antecedently to his being related to you.

Yea, and if your relation to him were already as sure and evident to you as
can be supposed; yet are you to take heed of confining your delight in him to
that consideration of him only; or of making it the chief reason of that your
delight. For so your delight in him will be more for your own sakes, or upon
your own account than his. Learn to look upon things as they are, and not
according to their aspect upon your affairs. Is it not a greater thing that he
is God, than that he is yours?

It is a purer, a more noble and generous affection to him you are to aim at,
than what is measured only by your private interest. Is that boundless fullness
of life, glory, and all perfection (treasured up in the eternal and
incomprehensible Being) to be all estimated by the capacity and concerns of a
silly worm? That consideration, therefore, being sometimes laid aside, sit down
and contemplate God as he is in himself, not disowning (as it is not fit you
should) but only waving the present consideration of any more comfortable
relation, wherein you may (though most justly) suppose him to stand to you; and
see if you cannot take pleasure in this, that he is great and glorious, and to
have a being so every way perfect before your eyes. Try if it will not be
pleasant to you to fall down before him, and give him Glory; To join your
Praises and triumphant Songs to those of Saints and Angels: And how much yet
also it will add to your satisfaction to behold and acknowledge him exalted
above all blessing and praise. How great delight has been taken in him upon
such accounts! In what transports have holy souls been upon the view and
contemplation of his Sovereign Power and Dominion; his wife and righteous
Government; his large and flowing Goodness, that extends in common to all the
Works of his hands! Labor to imitate the ingenous and loyal affection of this
kind, whereof you find many expressions in the sacred Volume. For what has
been matter of delight to Saints of old, ought surely still as much to be
accounted so. To give instances.

You sometimes find them in a most complacential adoration of his wonderful
Wisdom and Counsels. Romans 11. 33.
O the depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Chapter 16. 27.
And again, To God only wise be glory, through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

To the King Eternal, 1 Timothy 1: 17.
Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God be honor and glory for ever, etc.

To the only wise God our Savior be Glory and Majesty, Jude 25.
Dominion and Power now and ever, etc.

Elsewhere we have them in transports admiring his Holiness. Who is like unto
thee, O Lord, Exodus 15. 11.
among the Gods! Who is like thee glorious in Holiness! There is none holy as
the Lord; for there is none besides thee, 1 Samuel 2. 2
neither is there any rock like our God! And this is recommended and enjoined
to his holy Ones as the special matter of their joy and praise: Psalm. 97. 12
Rejoice in the Lord ye Righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness.

At other times we have their magnificent Celebrations of his Glorious Power,
and that by way of Triumph over the Paganish gods; Our God is in the heavens,
Psalm. 115.
he has done whatsoever he pleased. Their Idols are silver and gold, Psalm. 21.
13
etc. Be thou exalted, O God, in thine own strength. Psalm. 71. 18
We will sing and praise thy power. Forsake me not until I have showed thy
strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to come, etc.
This is given out as the Song of Moses and the Lamb, Who shall not fear thee, O
Lord, and glorify thy name? Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty, etc.

And how do they magnify his Mercy and Goodness both toward his own people,
and his creatures in general. Psalm. 31. 19
O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
that thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the children of men!
Psalm. 33. 1. etc.
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for praise is comely for the upright:
Praise the Lord with harp: Sing unto him with the Psaltery, -- The earth is
full of the goodness of the Lord. I will extol thee my God, Psalm. 145. 1, etc.
O King, I will bless thy name for ever and ever. Men shall speak of the might
of thy terrible acts, they shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great
goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness. The Lord is gracious and full of
compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. To insert all that might be mentioned to
this purpose, were to transcribe a great part of the Bible.

And in what raptures do we often find them, in the contemplation of his
Faithfulness and Truth, his Justice and Righteousness, his Eternity, the
boundlesness of his Presence, the greatness of his Works, the extensiveness of
his Dominion, the perpetuity of his Kingdom, the exactness of his Government;
Who is a strong God like unto thee, Psalm. 69.
and to thy faithfulness round about thee! Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the
heavens, Psalm. 36.
and thy faithfulness reaches unto the clouds. Before the mountains were
brought forth, or ever thou had formed the earth, or the world, Psalm. 90. 2.
from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold the heaven and heaven of
heavens cannot contain thee. 1 Kings 8:
The works of the Lord are great, Psalm. 111.
sought out of them that have pleasure therein. His work is honorable and
glorious, etc. All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall
bless thee; they shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, Psalm. 145.
and talk of thy power. To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and
the glorious Majesty of his Kingdom. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
thy Dominion endures throughout all generations.

And his Glory in the general (which results from his several Excellencies in
conjunction), How loftily is it often celebrated with the expression of the
most loyal desires that it may be everywhere renowned, and of greatest
complacency, in as far as it is apprehended so to be. Psalm. 104. 31.
The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever. They shall sing in the ways of
the Lord, for great is the glory of the Lord. Psalm. 138. 5.
Be thou exalted above the heavens, let thy glory be above all the earth. Psalm.
57. 7, 11.
Let them praise the name of the Lord, Psalm. 148. 13.
for his name alone is excellent, his glory is above the earth and the heavens.
When you read such passages as these (whether they be elogies or commendations
of him, or doxologies and direct attributions of glory to him), you are to
bethink your selves, with what temper of heart these things were uttered! with
how raised and exalted a spirit! what high delight and pleasure was conceived
in glorifying God, or in beholding him glorious! How large and unbounded a
heart, and how full of his praise does still every where discover it self in
such strains; When all Nations, when all Creatures, when everything that has
breath, when Heaven and Earth are invited together, to join in the consort, and
bear a part in his praises! And now eye him under the same notions under which
you have seen him so magnified, that in the same way you may have your own
heart wrought up to the same pitch and temper toward him. Should it not
provoke an emulation, and make you covet to be amidst the throng of loyal and
devoted Souls, when you see them ascending as if they were all incense! When
you behold them dissolving and melting away in delight and love, and ready to
expire, even fainting that they can do no more; designing their very last
breath shall go forth in the close of a Song! (I will sing unto the Lord, Psalm.
104: 33.
as long as I live, I will sing praise to my God while I have my being!) How
becoming is it, to resolve, This shall be my aim and ambition, to fly the same,
and if it were possible, Psalm. 8, 48, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, etc.
a greater height. Read over such Psalms as are more especially designed for
the magnifying of God; and when you see what were the things that were most
taking to so spiritual and pious hearts; thence receive instruction, and aim to
have your hearts alike affected and transported with the same things. Frame the
supposition, that you are meant, that the invitation is directed to you, O Come
let us sing unto the Lord, let us come before his presence with thanksgiving,
and make a joyful noise to him with Psalms; for the Lord is a great God, and a
great King above all gods, etc. And think with your selves, Is he not as great
as he was? Is he not as much our Maker as he was theirs? Is it not now as true,
that the Lord reigns, and is high above all the earth, and exalted far above
all gods? Now since these were the considerations upon which so great
complacency was taken in him, set the same before your own eyes. And since
these were proposed as the matter of so common a joy, and the Creation seems
designed for a musical instrument of as many strings as there are Creatures in
Heaven and Earth; Awake, and make haste to get your heart fixed: Lest the
heavens rejoice, and the earth be glad, the world and all that dwell therein:
Lest the sea roar, and the fullness thereof, the floods clap their hands, the
fields and the hills be joyful together, and all the trees of the wood rejoice
before the Lord, while you only are silent and unconcerned.

And seriously consider the kind and nature of that joy and delight in God
wherewith the hearts of holy men did so exceedingly abound; Which is to be
collected from the expressed ground and reasons of it, for the most part,
wheresoever you have any discovery of that joy it self; This general and
principal character may be given of it, that it was a sincerely-devout and a
loyal joy; not a mean, narrow, selfish pleasure, an hugging of themselves in
this apprehension merely, It is well with me, or I am safe and happy whatsoever
becomes of the world. This was still the burden of their Song; The Lord is
great, and glorious, and excellent is exalted; and most high over all. And it
is to be observed, that as this was the common and more usual strain and temper
of holy Souls, in the ages whereof the Scriptures give us any account; so were
doubts, and fears, and troubled thoughts concerning their own interest in God,
a great deal less usual and common in those days. So that in proportion to the
other pious and holy exercises of such as were true fearers of God and devoted
to him, there is little account given us of any thing of that kind in the
sacred Writings, and especially in the New Testament of our Lord* An argument,
That such as were sincerely religious were most taken up about the interest of
God and Christ in the world, rejoicing either in the observation of its growth
and increase, or in the hope and confidence that it shall grow: And that they
were much less concerned about their own interest; yea and that this course did
thrive best with them. While they were most intent upon the affairs of their
common Lord, their own were well enough provided for.

We cannot hereupon but note therefore by the way, how altered a thing Religion
is now become. Almost the whole business of it, even among them that more
seriously mind any thing belonging to it, is a fear of going to Hell; and hence
perpetual endless scruples, doubts and enquiries about marks and signs, and how
to know what is the least degree of that grace which is necessary to their
being saved. As if the intention were to beat down the price to the very
lowest, and dodge always, and cheapen heaven to the utmost, it may be feared
(as too many) with a design not to aim at any thing higher than what is merely
necessary to that purpose only, and never to mind being excellent, but only
being saved.

And yet also it were well, in a comparative sense, if that it self were minded
in good earnest by many that profess beyond the common rate; And That whereas
their own interest is the thing they most mind, it were not their meanest and
least considerable interest, even that of their sense, and flesh, and secular
advantage; and that under the pretense too (which makes the matter so much the
worse) of much love and zeal Godward, and devotedness to his interest; which
they supposed involved and wrapped up wholly with theirs. Whence also all their
delight and joy is measured only by the aspect of the world, and of public
affairs upon them and their private ones: And they are either overwhelmed with
sorrow, or transported with joy, according as the state of things does either
frown upon, or favor their concernments. In the days when the interest of
Christ lay more entirely and undividedly among one sort of men; and more
apparently, their contests being less among themselves, and chiefly with the
Infidel world; and they had, for the most part, no enemies but those in common
of the Christian Name and Cause: So that any common state of suffering to them,
was the visible prejudice of that Cause and Interest:

Why, what, Did they delight and please themselves in nothing but a warm Sun
and Halcyon-seasons? Surely they had matter little enough for that sort of joy.
And what, Did they therefore dejectedly languish and despond, and give
themselves up to sorrow and despair? Nor that neither; unless they had all had
but one neck, and that also perfectly in the enemies power, it had been an
impossible thing to stifle and extinguish their delight and joy: So fully did
Christ make it good to them, That their sorrow should be turned into joy, and
their joy should no man take from them. For even that increased it which aimed
at it is suppression; and the waters thrown upon their flame, became rivers of
oil. They had got a secret way of rejoicing in tribulation, of counting it all
joy when they fell into diverse tentations, of taking pleasure in reproaches for
the sake of Christ, of turning difficulties and hazards into matter of triumph,
of taking joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and glorying to be counted
worthy to suffer any thing for so excellent a name. Insomuch, that though their
Head and Lord was in a most ignominious way taken from them, and they left as a
despised party of men in the midst of an outrageous world, under the
(seemingly-hopeless) profession of addictedness to the interest of a Man that
died upon a Cross among Thieves but the other day: And though many of them
never saw his face, but had their knowledge of him by report and hearsay, yet
believing they rejoiced, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. The matter and ground of their joy was
not so uncertain and changeable a thing, nor so light and unsubstantial as the
worlds kindness and favor, and the smooth face of a serene Sky. These were
true Lovers of Christ; and such as counted him worthy for whom they should do
all that lay in their power, and suffer all which it was in the power of any
others to do against them upon his account.

They that rejoice and place their delight in the blessed God himself through
Jesus Christ, have for the Object of their joy the Everlasting I AM, Him who is
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. And whose excellent glory may be
clouded indeed and eclipsed to the world and the eye of Sense; but still shines
in it self, and to the eye of Faith, with the same bright and undiminish'd
luster.

That delight will then be continued and permanent, and ever springing up in
fresh liveliness and vigor, which is taken in this blessed Object, considered
as it is in it self; and that has place in a Soul that acts in a steady direct
course toward that Object, without sinister respects, or any selfish ones, of
even the highest kind, otherwise than in that subordination which will be
suitable to the vast disproportion and inequality between Gods interest and
ours; that is, (looking upon our own external concernments as unworthy to be
named in the same day), That though we reckon what there is delectable in God
will make for our eternal advantage; yet to consider that advantage of ours so
much less, and to be so much more pleased and satisfied, that he is in himself
blessed and glorious, as it is in it self a thing more considerable that he be
so, than it is what becomes of us, or of any creature, or of this whole
Creation. We are not indeed concerned, nor may think it warrantable to put our
selves upon any such severe and unnatural trials of our love and fidelity to
him, as to put the question to our own hearts, Could we be content to lie in
Hell, or be in the state of the damned for ever for his Glory? For it were a
most injurious and vile supposition of somewhat inconsistent with his own most
blessed Nature, and eternal, essential felicity, (for his happiness cannot but
be much placed in the benignity of his Nature), to imagine that ever he can be
pleased, or esteem himself glorified by the everlasting miseries of any one
that truly loves him. We ought to abhor the mention or imagination of such a
thing* as a blasphemy against his infinite goodness; the denial whereof were to
deny his Godhead. And it were also an absurd and self-contradicting
supposition: For none can be in the state of the damned, but they must be also
in a state of extreme enmity to God, and of all wickedness and malignity
arrived and grown up to its highest pitch; Which indeed is the very horror,
and immost center of Hell: Wickedness and eternal misery differing (for the
most part) but in degree, as grace and glory do. So that to put our selves upon
this trial of sincerity toward God, were to ask ourselves, Whether we would be
willing to express our sincere love to God, by everlasting hatred of him; and
the Truth of our grace by being as maliciously wicked as the Devil and his
Angels? The expressions of Moses and Paul so frequently alleged can be
wiredrawn to no such sense. This is no place to discuss the importance of them.
But i^ were certainly most imprudent (whatsoever they import) to seek marks of
sincere love to God thence, which may be fetched from so many plain texts of
Scripture. But it is out of question that we may and ought to mind and take
complacency in our own blessedness, in a degree inferior and subordinate to
that which we take in the glory of the blessed God, without making the sinful
and absurd supposition of their inconsistency: Or that we can ever be put to
choose the absence or privation of the one as a means to the other. And such
complacency and delight in God as arises upon such grounds is of the right
stamp and kind.

See then that yours be a well-complexion'd delight, and such as inwardly
partakes of the true nature of Religion i. e. that has in it entire
devotedness to God as the very life, Soul, spirit of it: And if this be not the
thing but merely self-satisfaction which you chiefly have in pursuit under the
name of delight in God; you beat the air, and do but hunt after a shadow. For
there is no such thing as real solid delight in God any-where existing, or ever
will be, separately and apart from a supreme love and addictedness of heart to
him and his interest as our chief and utmost end. Which temper of spirit
toward him, must be maintained and improved, by our fixed intuition and view
of his glorius greatness, and absolute excellency and perfection; and the
congruity and fitness which we thereupon apprehend, that we and all things, (as
all are of him) should be wholly to him, that he alone may have the glory.

5. And though you are not to prefer the consideration of your own interest in
God as a good suitable to you, or to give it the highest place in your delight;
yet also you must take heed of neglecting it, or of denying it any place at
all. For though we may plainly observe, as has been said, That it was the
usual temper of holy Men of Old, to be most taken up in admiring God upon the
account of his own Excellency and Glory in it self considered; and may thence
collect that to be the genuine right temper of a gracious heart when it is most
it self: Yet also it is as evident, That they were far from neglecting their own
interest in God, and that they counted it not a small matter; Yea, that it had
(though not the principal) a very great influence upon their delight and joy in
him. No one can read the Bible, and not have frequent occasion to take notice
of this. For how often do we find him spoken of under the names of their
Portion, Heritage, etc! And in what raptures of Joy do we often find them upon
that account! So the Psalmist considers him, when he says, The lines are fallen
to him in pleasant places, Psalm. 16.
and he had a goodly heritage. How often do we find them glorying in their
relation by Covenant, and making their boasts of him as their God; Psalm. 18.
I will love thee, O Lord, my strength, etc! You have [my] no less than nine
times repeated in the beginning (the first and second verses) of that Psalm, My
strength, my rock, my fortress, my deliverer, my God, etc. And afterward How
glorious a triumph is there raised, and in what exultation do we behold them
upon this! v. 31.
Who is God save the Lord, and who is a Rock save our God? And again, The Lord
lives and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be exalted. And
this was some of the last holy breath uttered by that anointed one of the God
of Jacob, 2 Samuel 23.
and the sweet Psalmist of Israel; He has made with me an everlasting Covenant
ordered in all things and sure. And this is all my Salvation and all my Desire
-- With this, How well satisfied and pleased did he expire, and go down to the
grave! And the People of God are sometime represented as so taken with this
apprehension of their peculiar relation to God that they cannot be content to
know, but they proclaim; it; nor was it enough the present age should know, but
they must have it told the following generation; Let Mount Sion rejoice, etc.
Psalm. 48.
Mark -- That ye may tell the generation following -- For this God is our God.
See their ostentation of him, This God! q. d. Behold what a God have we! View
him well, and take notice how glorious a God he is. And as they glory in the
greatness of the God to whom they were related, so they do in the eternity of
the relation. This God is our God for ever and ever! etc. And how unexpressible
was the inward pleasure wherewith we may suppose those words to have been
uttered, Psalm. 67. 6.
God even our own God shall bless us! How delightful an appropriation! as if it
were intended to be said, The blessing it self were less significant, it could
not have that savor with it if it were not from our own God. Not only
therefore allow but urge your spirits thus to look toward God, that you may
both delight in him, as being in himself the most excellent one, and also as
being yours; for know, you are not permitted only, but obliged to eye, accept
and rejoice in him as such. It is his first and great Law, and the form of his
Covenant which he requires you to enter into with him, To take him for your
God. Herein to be shie and decline, is to rebel. And when he offers himself in
all his rich fullness to be your Portion and your God, How vile ingratitude were
it to neglect and overlook the kindness of the overture. It is his glory to
have indigent souls satiating themselves in him, drawing from him their vital
breath, living upon him as their All: Confessing they cannot live, but by his
vouchsafed communications. And if you should say you love him, but so he be
ever glorious in himself, you care not to be happy; It would sound like an
hollow complement. You are not to deal with a God upon such terms. It becomes
you not, nor is suitable to him. It is fit for you to own it to him, that he is
your Life, that you are a mere nothing in your self, and must seek your All in
him. Psalm. 42. 8.
Your Song and your Prayer must be directed to him as the God of your life. You
do not own him as God, except you own and adore him as your all-sufficient
Good, and that fullness which fills all in all. You detract from the glory of
his Godhead, if you attribute not this to him; And if accordingly, as one that
cannot live without him, you do not seek union with him, and join your self to
him, and then rejoice and solace your self in that blessed conjunction.

And if you be not sure as yet that he is yours, your delighting in him is not
therefore to be suspended and delayed till you be. But in the mean time delight
in him as willing to become yours. To disbeleive that he is willing, is to give
him the lie. It is the great design of his Gospel so to represent him to you.
See that your hearts do embrace and close with that as a most delightful and
lovely representation: The great and glorious Lord of heaven and earth offering
himself in all his fullness to be thine! Thy portion and thy God for ever! How
transporting should this be to you! Nor, if you suspect the sincerity of your
own heart toward him (which is the only thing you can have any pretense to
suspect, for it were a blasphemy to his Truth and Goodness to intimate a
suspicious thought of him) may you therefore spend all your time in anxious
enquiries, or in looking only upon your own evil heart: But look most, and with
a direct and steady eye toward him. Behold and view well his glory and his
love, that by this means your heart may be captivated and more entirely won to
him.

This makes delight in God a strange thing in the hearts and practice of many.
They find too much cause of complaint concerning their own hearts, that they
are disaffected, and disenclin'd Godward. And what is the course they take
hereupon? Their Religion is nothing but complaint. And all their days are spent
in beholding that they are bad, without ever taking the way to become better.
They conclude their case to be evil and full of danger, because they find they
can take no delight in God: And they will take no delight in him because they
have that apprehension of the danger of their case. And so their not-delighting
in God resolves into it self. And they delight not in him because they delight
not in him. It Is strange the absurdity of this is not more reflected on. And
what now is to be done in this case? To rest here is to be held in a circle of
sin and misery all your days: And would signify as if delighting in God were a
simple impossibility, or as if not to delight in God, were a thing so highly
rational as to be its own sufficient self-justification; And that it were
reason enough not to delight in him because we do not. There can be no other
way to be taken but to behold him more in that discovery of him which his
Gospel sets before your eyes, and in that way seek to have your hearts taken
with his amiableness and love, and allured to delight in him. And labor in
this way to have that delight increased to that degree, that it may cease to be
a question or doubt with you, Do I delight in God or no? Whence when you
reflect and find that you do; Then shall you have that additional matter of
further delight; That whereas you before took delight in him because being in
himself so excellent a one he has freely offered himself to you to become
yours; You may now delight in him also, because you are sure he is so: Whereof
you cannot have a more fatisfying assurance than from his so express saying, 1
John 4.
I Love them that Love me; Prove. 8.
and we love him because he loved us first.

6. Take especial heed of more apparent and grosser transgressions. Nor account
your security from the danger of them so much to stand in your being ordinarily
out of the way of temptations to them, as in an habitual frame of holiness, and
the settled aversion of your heart to them. Endeavor a growing conformity to
God in the temper of your spirit, and to be in Love with purity; That your
heart may no more endure an impure thought, than you would fire in your bosom.
If you be herein careless and remiss, and suffer your heart to grow dissolute,
or more bold and adventurous, in admitting sinful cogitations; Or if you have
more liking or less dislike of any wicked course wherein others take their
liberty, you are approaching the borders of a dangerous precipice. And if some
greater breach hereupon ensue between God and you, what becomes of your delight
in him? A sad interruption of such pleasant intercourse cannot but follow, both
on his part, and on yours.

On his part, a suspension and restraint of those communications of light and
grace which are necessary to your delight in him. He will be just in his way of
dealing toward those of his own family, as well as merciful. It appears how
much David's delight in God was intermitted, upon his great transgression,
through Gods withdrawing from him, when he prays he would restore the joy of
his salvation. Psalm. 51. 12


And on your part, will ensue both less liking of Gods presence, and a dread of
it: Your inclination will not be toward him as before; though the act of sin
be soon over, the effect will remain; even a carnal frame of spirit that
disaffects converse with God, and cares not to come nigh him. And if that were
not, a guilty fear would hold you off; so that if you were willing, you would
not dare to approach him: Your liberty taken to sin would soon infer a bondage
upon your spirit Godward, unless conscience be wholly asleep; and you have
learned a stupid insolent confidence to affront God, which surely would
signify little to your delight in him. Thou shall put away iniquity from thy
tabernacles -- Then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty; Job 22.
and shall lift up thy face unto God. The conscience of unpurged iniquity, will
not let you lift up your face or appear in that glorious presence.

7. Cherish the great grace of humility; And be ever mean and low in your own
eyes. That temper carries in it even a natural disposition to delight in God.
How sweet complacency will such a Soul take in him! His light and glory shine
with great luster in the eyes of such a one while there is not a nearer
(imagined) luster to vie therewith (Stars are seen at noon, by them that
descend low into a deep pit). They will admire God but little that admire
themselves much. And take little pleasure in him, who are too much pleased with
themselves. And how sweet a relish have his love and grace to an humble lowly
soul, that esteems it self less than the least of his mercies! With what
ravishing delight, will Divine mercy be entertained, when it is so unexpectedly
vouchsafed; when this shall be the sense of the Soul now caught into the
embraces of Gods love, What I vile creature! impure worm! what, beloved of God!
Expectation, grounded especially upon an opinion of merit, would unspeakably
lessen a favor, if it were afforded (as also expected evils seem the less when
they come). But the lowly soul, that apprehends desert of nothing but Hell, is
surprised and overcome with wonder and delight, when the great God expresses
kindness toward it. Besides that he more freely communicates himself to such:
To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit,
Isa. 66. 1, 2.
etc. And he looks to such with a design of habitation; Heaven and Earth are
not to him so pleasant a dwelling. Down then into the dust, there you are in
the fittest place and posture for delightful converse with God.

8. Reckon much upon an eternal abode in that presence where is fullness of joy
and pleasures for evermore. Enjoy by a serious believing foresight the delights
of heaven, labor to rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Look beyond this your
present state. Confine not your eye and delight to what is now to be enjoyed,
but think of what shall be. Set before your eyes the glorious prospect of the
blessed God communicating himself to that vast Assembly of Angels and the
spirits of just men made perfect, in clearest discoveries of his glory, and
richest effusions of his goodness. The best appearance of things in this world,
makes but a dull scene in comparison of this. If you look toward God according
to what now appears of his glory in the frame of the universe, and the course
of his administrations and government over his Creatures, He has not, it is
true, left himself without witness. And you may behold much that would be to
you the matter of delightful admiration; If your eye be clear, and can pierce
through clouds and darkness and a manifold veil. He has made this world and is
everywhere in it, but it knows him not. His light shines in darkness, that
does not comprehend it. Beams of his glory do everywhere break forth, through
every Creature, Providence, Law, and Ordinance of his. But much of his glory
that shines in the Creation is hid by a train of second causes, through which
few look to the first. His Laws men judge of according to their interests and
inclinations, while the holy glorious Majesty that enacted them is out of
sight. His work in the world is carried on in a mystery; His interest lives,
but is deprest; They who are most devoted to him are supported indeed by his
invisible hand, but are, in the mean time, low, for the most part, and
afflicted. If you now limit and confine your apprehensions of him to his
present appearances, the matter of your delight is real, but much diminish't:
But conceive of him (as your Faith can behold him at a distance) in that
posture wherein having settled the eternal State of things he will finally show
himself. Conceive him as having now gathered home all that that have been
recovered to him out of the apostasy, and joined them to those numberless
legions of innocent and pure spirits about his throne that never offended:
Conceive him as dispensing rewards, pouring out blessings upon the loyal heads
and hearts of them that expressed fidelity and duty to him in the time and
state of trial and temptation; Letting his Glory shine out with bright and
direct beams, to so many beholding and admiring eyes; Giving forth the full and
satisfying communications of his love, and making Rivers of pleasure flow
perpetually to the replenishing the vast enlarged capacities, of so innumerable
a multitude of grateful adoring spirits, to whom it is now sensibly to be
perceived how his fullness fills All in all. Take this view of him; and let
your Faith and Hope thus enter into that which is within the veil: And remember
there is only a little time between you and that blessed state; That then you
are to enter into the joy of your Lord; so that the very element and region
wherein you are to live for ever, shall be nothing else but delight and joy. In
this way of believing foresight, and by this lawful and allowed prepossession
of future blessedness, much surely would be added to your present delight in
God. Should not the thoughts of him be pleasant to you from whom you are
expecting so great things? If your delight in him be any at all, upon what you
have already found and experienced of his goodness; It should be abundantly the
more upon what you are by his Word encouraged to look for.

And having thus given some account in what way delight in God is to be
exercised and improved; It were a charitable hope that there would be little
need to propound arguments to persuade unto it: But it were an hope not
grounded upon common experience, which too plainly tells us, that though such
directions as these are plain and obvious, not unknown to Christians; but only
less considered (whence it was not needless here to recommend them), yet
delight in God obtains little place in the practice of the most. There will
therefore too probably be still much need of excitation to it.

And yet because it is not multitude of words that is likely to do the
business, but the weight of things, urged on by a more powerful hand than that
of man, and that much may be collected to this purpose from what has been said
of the sinfulness of the omission; I shall, with great brevity, offer these
things only to be considered.

Is it not a merciful vouchsafement that the holy God allows you to place your
delight on him, and invites you to it? How much Grace and Love breaths in these
words, Delight thy self also in the Lord! Trust in him was recommended before,
and now this being added also; How plain is it that your ease and rest is the
thing designed! Is it fit to receive so much kindness with neglect?

Again, He delights in you, I speak to such of whom this may be supposed. Prove.
8.
And it is indefinitely said His delights were with the sons of men. Think what
he is, and what you are; And at once, both wonder and yield.

And what else have you to delight in? what thing will you name, that shall
supply the place of [GOD] or be to you in the stead of him?

Moreover, Who should delight in him but you? his friends? his sons? those of
his own house?

Think what life and vigor it will infuse into you; Nehem. 8.
and that, The joy of the Lord will be your strength. How pleasantly will you
hold on your course! and discharge all the other Duties of this your present
state! You must serve him. Dare you think of throwing off his yoke? How
desirable is it then to take delight in him whom I must serve! which only makes
that service acceptable to him, and easy to my self!

Further, This is a pleasure none can rob you of; A joy that cannot be taken
from you. Other Objects of your delight are vanishing daily. Neither Men nor
Devils can ever hinder your delighting in God, if your hearts be so inclined;
And were you never brought to take pleasure in any person or thing to which you
had a former aversion; One that had wronged you might yet possibly win you by
after-kindness. Give a reason why you should be more difficult toward the
blessed God that never wronged you! and whose way toward you has constantly
imported so much good will!

And consider that your condition on earth is such, as exposes you to many
sufferings and hardships; Which by your not-delighting in him, you can never be
sure to avoid, (for they are things common to men) but which, by your
delighting in him, you may be easily able to endure.

Besides all this, seriously consider, that you must die; You can make no shift
to avoid that. How easily tolerable and pleasant, will it be to think, then, of
going to him with whom you have lived in a delightful communion before! And how
dreadful to appear before him, to whom your own heart shall accuse you to have
been (against all his importunities and allurements) a disaffected stranger!

To these I add the consideration in the other part of the verse; And he shall
give thee the desire of thine heart.

By Desire] it is plain we are to understand the thing desired which is usual.

By the thing desired, we must not be so unreasonable as to think is meant, any
thing whatsoever it be, that, even with the greatest extravagancy, we may set
our hearts upon; as worldly possessions, riches, honors, etc. For it were most
unbecoming that delight in God should be so mercenary; or be propounded as the
price of so mean things. Yea, and if the matter were so to be understood,
delight in God were a means to the attaining of these things as the end; which
were to make the blessed God an inferior good to these. Nor can we suppose
that one who delights in God should ever esteem any reward or recompense of
another kind, greater than what he finds in this very delight it self. And
besides, we are very prone to desire things that (as the case may be) would
prove very hurtful to us. If God should gratify us with every thing we fancy
he should many times please us to our ruin. And do we believe that when he
has won a person to place his delight and take pleasure in himself, He will
requite him with a mischief?

Since then we may not understand him to mean that whatsoever we desire, if we
delight in him, we shall have; We are to enquire further. And it is plain the
things that can be supposed to be desired by such persons as are here spoken
to, must be of one of these two sorts: Either things of a spiritual nature,
that tend directly to the gratification and advantage of the inward man; Or
else external good things, that make for the support and comfort of this
present life.

We will suppose it to be the one or the other of these. And shall show that
whichsoever sort it be that is desired, Delighting in God does naturally infer
the satisfaction (some way or other) of such desires.

1. Supposing they be spiritual good things that are desired, Delight in God is
most directly the satisfaction it self of such desire. Whatsoever purely
spiritual good we can desire is either God himself, or somewhat in order to
him. If it be God himself we desire, so far as we delight in him we enjoy him,
and have what we would have; And can only enjoy him more fully, by more entire
and composed rest and delight in him. If it be somewhat in order to him, He is
still supreamly and ultimately desired in that very desire; so that in
delighting in him, we have our end, and that upon which this desire does lastly
terminate. And now should not this be a great inducement to us to delight in
God, that hereby our desires, the motions of our working hearts directed
toward him, do immediately find in him a peaceful and pleasant rest, and turn
into a satisfying fruition?

2. Supposing the things we desire be those of an inferior kind; Delight in
God does not a little to the satisfying of them also.

It does not, as was said, entitle us to the things themselves we desire
whatever they be, or how unsuitable soever to us.

But first, It moderates these desires, makes Not my will Lord, but thine be
done. He may desire the same thing that others do, yet not with the same
peremptory and precipitant desire, but with a desire tempered with submission,
and with a reserved deference of the matter to the Divine pleasure: This thing,
Lord, I desire if thou see good. So that the general object of such a ones
desire is only that which in the divine estimate is fit and good for him. And
though he desire this or that particular thing, yet not as it is this thing,
but as supposing it possible this thing may be judged fit for him by the
supreme Wisdom, whereto he has referred the matter. But if it shall be judged
otherwise; This thing falls without the compass of the general object of his
desire, and in just construction he desires it not. For he desires it not
otherwise than on that condition that God see it meet for him; And not longer
than till he find he does not. In which case the sobriety and submissiveness of
his former desire, appears in his cheerful patient want of the thing which he
finds God has thought fit to deny him. So that even then, his desire is
satisfied, that is, It does not (as often it is with a carnal heart) turn,
being crossed, into rage and madness; But into a complacential peace, and rest in
the Divine will. He is satisfied in what God has thought fit to do. Yea the
very thing is done which he would have done: God has given him his hearts
desire. For let the question be put to such a person, Do you desire such a
thing though God judge it will be hurtful to you or unfit for you? And no doubt
he will, not in faint Words that have no sense under them (as almost any other
man would) but from his very heart and Soul say, No. And if he deliberate the
matter of his own accord, or by any ones enquiry be occasioned to do so, This
will be found the sense of his heart, (though his desire has inclined to this
or that thing in particular): And this would be his Prayer in such a case,
Lord, If thy wisdom, which is infinitely more than mine, see this thing not
fit, cross me, deny me in this desire of mine. And this general desire at
least, which is the measure of the particular one, is sure to be accomplished to
one that has God for his delight. Romans 8. 28
For the promise is express and cannot fail, All things shall Work together for
good, to them that love God.

And this love to God, or delight in him, as it entitles such to that his care
and concern for them which is expressed in this promise; So it does in its own
nature dispose their hearts to an acquiescence and satisfiedness therein. For
love to God, where it is true, is supreme, and prevails over all other love to
this or that particular good. Whence it cannot be, but, if this love be in act,
(as, the Text must be understood to call unto actual and exercised delight in
God) it must subdue, and keep the heart so far subject to the divine good
pleasure, as that its desire and addictedness to this particular lesser good
(concerning which there may also be a just and rational doubt whether it will
be now a good to him yea or no) shall never be a matter of controversy and
quarrel with him who is, unquestionably, the Supreme and universal good. How
will that one thought overcome, if such a one shall but apprehend God saying to
him, Do thou love me above all things, and wilt yet contend with me for such
a trifle!

And we may by the way note, That upon this ground of the dubious mutability of
external good things (which, by circumstances, may become evil to this or that
person) As they are not here, so nor can they be any-where the matter of a
general absolute promise, to be claimed indefinitely by any ones faith. The
nature of the thing refuses it. For suppose we, that what may, in this or that
case, become evil or prejudicial to this or that person, does now actually
become so, and is the matter of an absolute promise, now claimable by such a
person, What would follow? That an evil is now the actual matter of a promise!
Than which what can be said or supposed more absurd? when nothing can further
or otherwise be the matter of a promise, than as it is good. Wherefore that
promise would, in the supposed case, degenerate (as the matter of it is by the
present circumstances varied) and turn into a threatening. Wherefore when that
condition or proviso is not expressly added to a promise concerning a temporal
good, the very nature of the thing implies (and requires) it to be understood.
For it is not, otherwise than as qualified by that condition, any way a
promise. Now he that is in the present exercise of delight in God, has his
heart so set upon God and alienated from earthly things, as that the present
temper of it bears proportion to the natural tenor of such promises; And is not
otherwise than by the cessation of this delight, liable to the torture of
unsatisfied desire in reference to these lower things: Although the fig tree
shall not blossom -- yet I will rejoice in the Lord etc. Hab. 3. 17, 18.


And as delight in God does thus reduce and moderate desires in reference to
any inferior good; so that, if it be withheld, they admit a satisfaction
without it, and the want of is easily tolerable. So secondly, If it be granted,
Delight in God adds a satisfying sweetness to the enjoyment. A lover of God
has another taste and relish, even of earthly good things, than an
earthly-minded man can have. He has that sweet Savor of the Love of God upon
his spirit, that imparts a sweetness to all the enjoyments of this World,
beyond what such things in their own nature have with them. Psalm. 37. 16
This makes the righteous man's little, better than the great revenues of many
wicked.

Upon the whole therefore, This is, if duly weighed, a mighty and most
persuasive argument to delight in God. For it imports thus much, which I add
for a close to this discourse.

If you place your delight here; You are most certainly delivered from the
vexation and torment of unsatisfied desire. The motions of your Souls are sure
to end in a pleasant rest. Your lesser desires will be swallowed up in greater,
and all in the Divine fullness; So that you will now say, Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and there is none on earth I desire besides thee. Psalm 73. 25.
If you take no delight in God, your own Souls will be a present Hell to you.
And it may be it is not enough considered, how much the future Hell stands also
in unsatisfied desire; Which desire (all suitable Objects being for ever cut off
from it) turns wholly to despair, rage and torture. And that ravenous appetite,
which would be preying upon external Objects that now fail, turns inward, and
as an insatiable Vulture, gnaws everlastingly the wretched Soul it self.

And the beginnings of this Hell you will now have within you, while you refuse
to delight in God. The sapless, earthly vanities upon which your hearts are set
give you some present content, which allays your misery for a little while, and
renders it less sensible to you: But they have nothing in them to answer the
vast desires of a reasonable immortal spirit. Whereby you certainly doom
yourselves to perpetual disrest. For in these false vanishing shadows of
goodness, you cannot have satisfaction, and in the blessed God you will not.

Imprimatur,

Aug. 9. 1674. C. Smith.

THE END.
THE Blessedness of the Righteous, Opened and further Recommended from the
Consideration of the Vanity of this Mortal Life: In two Treatises, On Psalm. 17.
15. and Psalm. 89. 47. By the same Author.

And are to be sold at the Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1674.


