AN EXACT MODEL OR PLATFORM OF GOOD Magistracy: OR A SERMON Preached before the
Governor, Council, and Assembly, at their first Meeting at Saint Jago de la
Vega, in Jamaica, Feb. 1. 1671.

By Henry Houser, Minister of Gods Word in St. Katharines Parish.

Psalm. 82.6, 7. I have said, ye are Gods, and all of you are Children of the
most High; but ye shall die like men.

London, Printed for Francis Tyton, at the Sign of the Three Daggers in
Fleet Street. 1673.

To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Lynch, Governor and Commander in Chief of
his Majesty's Island of Jamaica, etc. As likewise, to his Honorable Council,
and Gentlemen of the Assembly, continuance of all Grace, and Peace, through
Jesus Christ.
IT was far from my Thoughts, as being conscious of my own private Weakness.
that this: poor Sermon should gain such Acceptance with you, as to judge it
worthy either of your Thanks, or of public View: But seeing your Pleasure is
to Order the Publishing of it, I do humbly Obey. And therefore take the
boldness to Offer and Consecrate the same even to you, who are the Head and the
Representatives of this whole Land, and have commanded both the Preaching and
Printing of it: Yea, and it is my Duty which Obliges me to make you this
thankful Acknowledgments for the many singular Favors and Courtesies,
particularly that of your last Liberal Bounty and Kindness bestowed and fastened
upon me; so that I must say as Ruth said once to Boaz, Chap. 11.10. Why have I
found grace in your Eyes, that you should take knowledge of me, seeing I am a
Stranger. Verily I can ascribe and impute it to no other cause; but unto Gods
infinite Mercy, and your own Goodness. The great God of Heaven, who is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, so direct your Hearts, that all and every one of you
may truly, and indeed (according to Jethro's Counsel) approve your selves to be
Men of Ability, fearing God, men of Truth, hating Covetousness: That you may
truly and indeed (according to the Power God has entrusted you withal) oppose
the violent stream of all Lewdness, and Wickedness, and Prophanness, and be a
lively Example to the Practice of Piety, of Holiness and Godliness: Yea, that
you may have both the Caurage and Zeal of Moses, to Defend and Protect the true
Religion and Worship of God, against all Opposers thereof. And this the Lord
expects at your Hands, in regard of the depth of your Interests: You are more
concerned in the Public welfare of this Island, than others of a more private
Station, and therefore you are bound to seek and to promote the Good and
Welfare of this Island, more than others. It is a Maxim in Divinity,
Beneficium postulat officium; Those whom God calls to the Highest places, he
calls withal to the Highest services: Therefore it behooves you above all
things to remove all Impediments which might hinder the Advancement of the
Glory of God, the Flourishing of the Gospel, and the Happiness and Prosperity
of this Island. If this be your chief Study and Care, then certainly the God of
Heaven will be with you, and bless you in all your Doings, in all your
Consulations: Then indeed, this great Keeper of Israel will keep and preserve
you in all your Ways, both in your going forth, and in your coming in, from
this time forth and for evermore.

And this is the daily Prayer of your humbly Devoted Servant, H. H.

EXODUS 18.21. Moreover thou shall provide out of all the people able men, such
as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness.


Exordium.
GReat Conjunctions of Heavenly Bodies are usually attended with great and
notable Changes. Beloved! I hope that your present Conjunction will operate and
conduce much to the happiness and welfare of this Island. To the obtaining
whereof it is most necessary that you especially (who are the Representatives
of this whole Land) would study to approve your selves (according to the
direction of Jethro unto Moses) to be Men of Ability. fearing God, Men of
Truth, hating Covetousness. This Jethro was Father in Law to Moses, who seeing
and observing the great Care, and Trouble, and Pains, that Moses took in
Judging the People, wisely foresaw that at length it would prove a thing too
heavy for him alone to perform: and except he did speedily remedy it, it would
not be long ere it would utterly consume his spirits, and wear away his
strength, and health, and life, in taking upon himself alone all the care and
trouble of giving Judgment among the people from morning until evening.
Therefore to prevent all inconveniency, Jethro by his sage and wise advice,
counsels Moses to take unto him such fit and meet Assistants, who by their
just government of the people might ease him of that heavy burden, and help
him to bear the same with more comfort and ease. And this counsel of Jethro is
expressed in the words of the Text, saying, Moreover thou shall provide out of
all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness.
Here is the first draught of Magistracy, which Moses himself (the greatest
Lawgiver that ever was) followed and practiced with good success; and
therefore I have chosen it at this time for my Text, to show and declare unto
you especially, who are upon this day come and Assembled together for the Good
and Welfare of this Island, how to perform your Duty, and to Discharge your
Trust with a good Conscience, that you would be pleased to set before your
Eyes, this most perfect Model and Platform of the best Magistracy in the Text,
and according thereunto Exact and Direct all your Consultations to the Glory of
the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, the Advancement of the Church, and the
Happiness and Prosperity of this Island. And all this grant He who is the great
Monarch in Heaven and Earth for Jesus Christ his sake.

The Parts of the Text are two:

I. The Counsel of Jethro, (...).
which he gives to Moses; in these words, Thou shall provide. II. This Counsel
is Described and Particularised by four Essential Characters, Membrum I.
or Properties of good Magistrates: They ought to be, 1. Able Men. 2. Such as
fear God. 3. Men of Truth. 4. Hating Covetousness.

I begin with the Frst, viz. The Counsel of Jethro which he gives to Moses; in
these words of the Text, Moreover thou shall provide. The word in the Original
(...) imports great Care, and Curiosity, and Circomspection, that is to be made
in the choice or election of Superiors and Magistrates. In the New Testament
we have the word (...), Look ye out, Acts 4.3, It is added in the Text (...)
Out of the People; the Magistrate must be chosen out of all the People, he must
be a choice Man, one of a thousand, culled and selected out of all the People:
Moreover thou shall provide out of all the People. This is the first part of
the Text.

In the second, Membrum II.
it follows to be considered how this Counsel is described, and
particularized by sour essential Characters, or Properties of good Magistrates:
Requisita ad pium Magistratum pertinentia.
They must be. 1. Able Men. 2. Such as fear God. 3. Men of Lruth. 4. Hating
Covetousness.


I. I. Virtus and Potentia.
The prime and first Character then required in good Superiors and Magistrates
is Ability; they must be (...) Vire potentes. Able men. This Ability includes
strength of body, whereby they are enabled to undergo and execute their Places
and Offices with the more diligence and industry. It includes greatness of
Estate and Descent, of Riches and Wealth, of Birth and Blood, which oftentimes
puts Spirit and Courage into the Souls of Superiors and Magistrates. These are
but accidental and complemental Ingredients belonging to Superiors and
Magistrates: The main and essential parts, that are comprehended under the word
Ability, are following; a. Understanding and Wisdom: Therefore Solomon prayed
to God for an understanding heart, 1 Reg. 3.4. Give thy Servant an
understanding heart to judge thy People, that I may discern between good and
bad. b. Another substantial thing comprised under the word Ability, is
moderation of Mind, which enables him to Rule and Govern his Passion and
Affection: A thing very necessary in a Magistrate, who must not suffer his
Judgment to be overruled and overswayed by his Passion.

Fortior qui sese, quam qui fortissima vincit
Moenia --
Such an one is stronger then he that subdues and conquers the strong Citadel.
c. The last and principal Virtue comprehended under the word Ability, is
Courage and Fortitude; as the Lord charged Joshua, Chap. 1.9. Be strong and of
good courage, be not afra^d, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is
with thee whithersoever thou go. Oh what Courage and Heroical Spirit and
Resolution ought he to be endued withal, that must Encounter and Oppose the
violent Torrent of Wickedness and Vice? You are Met and Assembled together, to
begin and to perform a great work among us; to Advance the Glory of God, to
Countenance the Gospel, and the true Professors thereof, and to reform all that
is amiss; and therefore you have need of Courage. You must confute the Sins of
the mighty; you must support the work of the Ministry against all Opposers of
Gods true Religion and Worship, especially against those proud Phanatick
Emissaries, who under pretense of New Discoveries, and New Revelations of the
Spirit wander from place to place, from one Quarter of this Island to another,
and in opposition to the true Light of the Gospel cry out New Light, New Light;
whereby they Seduce, Deceive, and Delude the Hearts of the Poor, Simple, and
Ignorant People; and therefore you have need of Courage. You must be (...), a
living Law, and be an Example to all Good; and therefore you have need of
Courage. You must help the Poor to their right, you must defend the Widow and
the Fath^rless, against them that are too mighty for them; and therefore you
have need of courage. Therefore awake and put on courage, you that sit at the
Helm and Covern the Ship of our Commonwealth, steer a straight and right course
without swarving to the Right or Left Hand for fear or favor. Neglect and
despise the Displeasure and Frowns of Great men, and Rescue the Poor out of the
Hands of the Oppress our. Therefore be strong in the Lord, faint not, be not
weary of well doing, but be courageous, though in Rowing and Guiding the Ship
of our Commonwealth, the Winds blow, and the Seas rage, Christ Jesus by his
Divine Providence and Protection, will support and uphold it, that it shall not
Sink, he will send a calm and bring it safely ashore. Wherefore let me proclaim
and speak as Gideon in the Ears of all the Faint-hearted, Judge. 7.3. Whosoever
is fearful and afraid, let him return Home and depart. On the other side I say
unto you that are of Ability, of Wisdom and Courage, as the Angel did to
Gideon, Judge. 6. 12, 14. The Lord is with thee, thou mighty Man of Valor; go
on in this thy might to save Israel: Prooceed and go on from st^e^gth to
strength. And so much of the first Character of good Superiors and
Magistrates, they ought to be men of Ability.

II. II. T^^^r Domini.
The next Character of them, from whence all the rest proceed, is the Fear of
God; they must be (...) Timentes Deum, Fearing God: They must be such as fear
God, not slavishly with a servile sear, but truly, sincerely, with a filial
fear wrought in them by Faith, and the assurance of Gods Love and Favor. He
that has this Virtue wants none, and without this true fear of Justice, a
Receiver of False-Witnesses, a Patron of Violence and Oppression? The principal
scope and intent why God has appointed and ordained Superiors and Magistrates
to Rule and Govern the World, is that they may advance his Glory, countenance
the true Riligion and Worship of God, and protect the Church and Commonwealth:
Now for these things what cares a profane and uncircumcised Vice-god, who
fears not God, who bears the Sword in vain, and minds nothing else here on
Earth but his own Profit and Pleasure? As for the Church or Commonwealth, Sink
they, Swim they, all is one to him. So that it is certain, that the fear of God
is the chiefest thing required in a good Magistrate, who is the Minist^r of
God, and his Sword bearer; nay, it is the whose Duty of man, as Solomon speaks,
Eccles. 2.13. Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of
Man Hence it was that the Lord commanded the King, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. To write a
Copy of the Law in a Book, and to Read therein all the days of his Life; that
he may Learn to Fear the Lord his God, and to keep his commandments, and to do
them. A Magistrate, in whom God has planted his holy Fear, he will Judge
others as one that remembers he must be Judged himself; he will help the
Orphans to their Right, and defend the cause of the Widow: He is (...), no
Respecter of Persons; He will neither condemn the Innocent, nor justify the
Wicked: He will set a watch over his Eyes, that they behold no wrong, over his
Ears that they hear no false Accusation, over his Tongue that it pronounce no
unjust Sentence, over his Hands that they receive no Bribe. When an unlawful
Suit is commenced by Favor or Friendship, by Power or Policy, he answers with
Job, Chap. 31.14. What shall I do when God rises up? And when he visits what
shall I answer him? This, this is the man that fears the Lord. By this
Character, now it will appear what to think of those many profane and wicked
Vice-gods, who sell themselves to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord; who
give themselves to all Good Fellowship in the world, to all excess of Riot, and
hate to be Reformed:

-- Stat pro ratione volunta.
Their Will is their Law, and their Conscience too. Such I mean as hold
Religion a disparagement to Gallantry and Gentility, who fear nothing more then
to have a Name that they fear God; who think when they have gotten an Office,
they may Swear by Authority, Oppress by License, Drink and Swill without
Control. What shall I say of such? Are these Gods, or Children of the most
High? Devils they are rather than Deputies for him; far better becoming a
profane and drunken Alehouse, than a grave and sober Assembly. Let me take up
the words of the Prophet Jeremiah, and say to such profane Esaus, Chap. 5.22.
Fear ye not me? Says the Lord: Will ye not tremble at my presence, which have
placed the Sand for the bounds of the Sea, by a perpetual Decree that it cannot
pass? If the wrath of a King be as the roaring of a Lion, as Solomon affirms,
Prove. 20.2. O then how terrible is the wrath of God, who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords? He himself will be one day a swift witness against such, Mal.
3.5. I will be a swift Witness against the Sorcerers, and against the
Adulterers, and against false Swearers, and against those that Oppress the
Hireling in his Wages, the Widow, and the Fatherless, and that turn away the
Stranger from his Right, and fear not me, says the Lord of Hosts. Men commonly
are afraid of Goals, and Dungeons, and Gibbets, and this makes them abstain
from Murder, Felony, and the like: And why then will ye not rather fear him,
who is able to cast both Soul and Body into the everlasting Dungeon of
Hellfire, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth? Him I
say Fear. I conclude this Point in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.10, 11,
12. Be Wise now, O ye Kings; be Instructed, ye Judges of the Earth: Serve the
Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling. Kiss the Son, lest he be Angry, and
ye Perish from the Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little.

III. III. Amer Veritatis.
And so I come to the third Character of good Superiors and Magistrates; they
must be (...) Viri veritatis, Men of Truth. This is required in every
Magistrate, in all those that are employed in the Commonwealth, they must be
good men and true, they must be, (...) Lovers of the Truth: They must search
out the truth out of the labyrinths of Error and Falsehood, and not suffer
Justice to be perverted, but bring Judgment to the Balance of Truth and
Righteousness. They must be of his Temper who said, Amicus Plato, Amicus
Socrates, magis autem amica Veritas: Plato is my Friend, Socrates is my Friend,
but Truth is my greatest Friend. Oh that our Rulers and Magistrates might truly
say with Job, Chap. 29.14, 15. I put on Righteousness, and it Clothed me: My
Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem. I was Eyes to the Blind, and Feet was I to
the Lame: I was a Father to the Poor, and the Cause which I knew not, I
searched out. Alas, may not the Lord complain at this day, as he did in the
days of Jeremiah, Chap. 5.1. Run ye to and fro through the Streets of
Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the Broad places thereof, if ye
can find a man, if there be any that executes Judgment, that seeks the
Truth, and I will pardon it. And Isaiah 59.14. Judgment is turned away
backward, and Justice stands a far off; for Truth is fallen in the Street,
and Equity cannot enter. Therefore (O ye Rulers of the Earth) study to be men
of Truth; suffer not your selves to be corrupted by flattering Tongues, but
maintain the Truth against all oppositions of the world: Let this be your
Resolution with the Prophet David Psalm. 101.7. He that works Deceit shall not
dwell within my House; he that tells Lies, shall not tarry in my sight.
Though you must undergo Hatred and crosses, and Scorn, and Reproach for a time,
for the Truths sake; yet he that is Amen, the true Witness, yea Truth it self;
will certainly reward you in the end, with Temporal and Spiritual Blessings:
While on the other side, he will shut out with the Dogs all such as love and
make Lies, according to that fearful Threatening, Apoc. 22.15. Without the
Heavenly Jerusalem are Dogs and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers,
and Idolaters, and whosoever makes a Lie. I close up this Point with the
Exhortation of Solomon, Prove. 23.23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not.

IV. And this leads me to the Fourth and last Character required in Good
Superiors and Magistrates, they must be (...) Abhorzentes avaritiam, hating
Covetousness, they must be such as hate Covetousness, which is the root of all
Evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. Covetousness is an inordinate love of money, and is compared
to the Dropsy, Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae; The more they have,
the more they will have. Oh! that we might not complain at this day of many
Superiors and Magistrates. Jer. 6. ^^. For the least of them, even unto the
greatest of them, every one is given to Covetousness. Therefore, O. ye Rulers
of the world, flee these things and hate Covetousness with a perfect Heart:
Follow the counsel of the Apostle, Heb. 13.5. Let your Conve sation be without
Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have; for he has said, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Let the words of the Lord be written
and engraven over your Doors, Deuteronomy. 16.19. Thou shall not wrest Judgment, thou
shall not respect Persons, neither take a Gift, for a Gift does blind the Eyes
of the Wise, and pervert the words of the Righteous. Let all sordid and filthy
Lucre be abominable, all ill gotten Goods execrable: Remember that the curse of
God goes along with unlawful and unrighteous Gains, and is like moth and Rust,
to corrupt and canker them: Male parta, male dilabuntur, Goods unjustly gotten
thrive not, a man shall not long enjoy them: Vix gaudet tertius haeres. It is a
venture, but some Unthrifty Heir will waste and melt it away as fast, and as
ill as ever his Father got it. See the words of the Apostle, James 5.2, 3, 4.
Your Riches are corrupted, and your Garments are moth eaten, your Gold and
Silver is cankered, and the Rust of them shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were Fire: Ye have heaped Treasure together for the
last days: Behold the Hire of the Laborers, which have Reaped down your
Fields, which is of you kept back by Fraud, cries, and the Cries of them which
have Reaped, are entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath. These are the
four cardinal virtues of good Superiors and Magistrates, they ought to be men
of Ability, fearing God, men of Truth, hating Covetousness.

Hearken then, Application.
O ye Mountains and little Hills, you Gentlemen of this present Assembly,
listen to this charge of Jethro in the Text, approving your Selves to be men of
Ability, such as fear God, men of Truth, hating Covetousness. Put on courage to
help the Poor and Needy, to defend the Widow and the Fatherless, and to
neglect the Frowns of great Ones: Fear God, set him always before your Eyes,
and be a living Example to Holiness and Godliness: Study to be men of Truth,
and set not a good countenance upon a bad cause: And lastly, hate Covetousness
with a perfect Heart, and esteem Godliness the greatest gain. Plead for Christ,
and he will plead for you, that so every one of you may appear at the Tribunal
of God with joy and comfort, and receive that sweet Sentence, Mat. 25.2. Well
done thou good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things,
I will make thee Ruler over many things: Enter thou into the joy of the Lord.
And verily it is now high time, you should earnestly Study, and Practice this
excellent Lesson in the Text, To be Men of Ability, such as fear God, Men of
Truth, hating Covetousness; especially in consideration of the abundance and
continual increase of Sin in this Land. How does every Street ring with
Cursing, and Swearing, and Profaneness? How little conscience do men make of
this day, to live in open Filthiness, and Laciviousness of the Flesh? The
Minister may Teach and Preach what he will, and Threaten as long as he list,
yet the Gallants of our time, like Galio in the Acts of the Apostles, they care
for none of these things. We are fallen into those Times, where Prophanness and
Licenciousness, have generally prevailed every where: Sin is grown to such an
height, as if the Word of God were but a Scare crow, and all Religion but a
Fable: we are brought to this wosul pass, to mock and scoff at Holiness, and
Godliness, at Piety and Religion, as if God were neither to be feared, nor
cared for. Truly wickedness raigns in every state, in every condition, in every
place: And now even at this time, as if we would defy God to his Face, and
call upon him to hasten his Judgments upon our Land, upon our Families and
Persons, every one strives (as it were) who shall outdare him most in our
Atheism, Libertinism and Prophanness, in all Riot and Excess, in Impenitency.
Oh that some Jehosaphat would visit and Reform! Oh that you especially, who are
the Head of the Principal members of this Island, would Redress some part of
these Grievances, lest Sin and Wickedness get the upper hand, and cause our
Ruin! And this the Lord expects at your hands, in regard of those many
singular Favors, and Divine Blessings bestowed upon us even in this Land: We
have had Peace within our Walls, and Plenteousness within our Dwellings, while
Thousands of our Brethren and Neighbors, were smitten with Gods manifold
Judgments and Plagues: The Lord spared us, and kept us safe even to this day,
Defeating and bringing to naught all mischievous Plots and Policies of our
Enemies against us. Oh then, give thanks unto the Lord, because he is Good, and
his Mercy endures for ever: Let the House of Levi say, his Mercy endures for
ever: Let the House of Judah say, his Mercy endures for ever: Let our Fields
and Plantations say, it is his mercy that we be not all spoiled: Let our Towns
and Dwelling-Houses say, it is his Mercy that we be not all Burnt: Let our
Churches say, it is his Mercy that we be not all rased; yea, let this whole
Island say, it is his Mercy that Fire, and Sword, and Pestilence, and other
Miseries and Calamities did not Prey upon me, as upon others. O Lord, who is a
God like unto thee, thus to Bear, thus to Spare, thus to Bless? Had not thy
Mercies exceeded all Limits, our sins ere this had sunk us all, our Island had
been made a second Sodom and Gomorrhe! Oh that yet, yet we all of this Church,
of this Land, would meet the Lord with Fasting, and Weeping, and mourning, and
make our Peace and Reconciliation with him, while Peace is to be had! Oh that
you especially, who are now met and Assembled together for the Good and Welfare
of this Island, would begin now, even now by wholesome Laws and Ordinances, to
beat down Sin and Wickedness, and Reform and Amend all that is amiss! For this
is the only way to keep our Island from mourning and misery, and to prevent the
Desolation and final Destruction of it: And this will be Done and Accomplished,
when you shall truly and really Study and Practice this profitable Lesson in
the Text, To be Men of Ability, such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating
Covetousness: Then indeed may you expect a Blessing upon all your
Consultations: Then as the Prophet Amos speaks, chap. 5.24. Shall Judgment run
down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream. Then shall you, and we,
and every one: of us be able to go Home in Peace, sit down under our Vines and
Figtrees, follow our Callings, and that which is the chiefest of all, lead a
Quiet and Peaceable life in all Honesty and Godliness: Then shall the Earth
increase, all People shall praise God, and God even our God, shall Bless us,
and all the ends of the Earth shall fear him. Oh blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, who only does wondrous things; and blessed be his glorious Name for
ever and ever, and let all the Earth be filled with his Glory. Amen. Amen.

(...).

FINIS.
A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS.
THere is newly Printed, a Book Entitled, The Worm that Dies not, or Hell
Torments in the Certainty, and Eternity of them: Plainly discovered in several
Sermons, Preached on Mark 9.48. by that Painful and Laborious Minister of the
Gospel William Strong, Published by D. Thomas Manton, and Mr. John Row,
Minister of Gods Word, in 12o.

Also a Book entitled, Heavenly-Mindedness, and Earthly-Mindedness, in two
Parts; with an Appendix concerning laying hold on Eternal Life, by J. Row,
Minister of Gods Word, in Octavo.

Also newly Reprinted, Divine Arithmatick; or, The right Art of Numbering our
Days, by S. Patrick, D. D. in Octavo.

Also newly Reprinted, Christ's Power over Bodily Diseases, Preached in several
Sermons on Matthew. 8.5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, verses, and Published for the
Instruction especially of the more Ignorant People, in the great Duty of
Preparation for Sickness and Death, by Edward Laurance, Minister of Gods Word.

There will be Published within a month, a Book Entitled, The Fountain of
Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and Mediatorial Glory.
Wherein the Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ, is orderly and
unfolded, as it was begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant
Transactions, mysterious Incarnation, solemn Call and Dedication, blessed
Offices, deep Abasement, and supereminent Advancement: In all, which the great
Supernatural Mysteries of the Wisdom and Love of God in his most gracious,
Plenary, and wonderful Salvation of Sinners by Jesus Christ, is distinctly
Explicated, and in its several Parts, as well as generally Applied, for the
winning of Unbelievers to him, and Confirmation of all that do Believe in him,
by John-Flavel, Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ at Dartmouth, in Devon.

FINIS.

