Mr. HOWARD's SERMON Preached Before The Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
LONDON, AT THE Cathedral Church of St. PAVL, upon Trinity-Sunday, Anno Dom.
1700.

Levett Mayor.

Jovis 20 die Junii, 1700. Annoque Regni Regis Willielmi Tertii, Angliae, etc.
Duodecimo.

THIS Court does Desire Mr. Howard to Print his Sermon, Preached on
Trinity-Sunday last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City, at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul's.

Goodfellow.

The TRINITY Asserted.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE The Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of LONDON, AT
THE Cathedral Church of St. PAVL, upon Trinity-Sunday, Anno Dom. 1700.

By JOHN HOWARD, M. A. Rector of Marston-Trussel in Northamptonshire.

LONDON: Printed for J. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry. 1700.

To the Right Honorable Sir Richard Levett, Lord Mayor of the City of London.
My LORD,
IN Obedience to the Order I received from your Lordship and the Court of
Aldermen, I have now Published the Sermon lately preached before you, with the
Addition of some Things, which, through the Straitness of my Time, were then
omitted, and do most humbly present it to your Lordship. I should not have
thought it fit for Public View, after so many Excellent Discourses as have
been printed within a few Years, in Defense of the Doctrine of the Trinity;
neither would I have ventured to preach to such an Auditory, upon so Great and
Venerable a Mystery, if the Time, to which I was confined by a Particular
Providence, had not required it. But as that Providence will, I hope, Justify
me in Choosing such a Subject; so the Authority of your Lordship and your
Honorable Brethren will Vindicate me in Publishing my Discourse upon it.

I pray God convince those Unhappy Men in our Days, who have deserted the Faith
they were baptized into, and deny the Lord that bought them, (for I am sure a
mere Man could never do it,) that they may escape the Destruction he has
threatened to them. And that the same God would continually bless your
Lordship, and give Success to your Pious Endeavors to suppress Error and
Wickedness, in an Age and Place that need all your Authority and Zeal to that
End, is also the hearty Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and Faithful Servant, John Howard.

1 JOHN V. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.


BEFORE I speak to the Doctrine contained in these Words, it will be necessary
to say something toward the removing an Objection that has been made against
them, as if they were not a Genuine Part of this Chapter; because they are
omitted in some Greek Copies. In Answer to which, It might be enough to
satisfy unprejudiced Men, to say that they are in the Best and most Ancient
Greek Manuscripts, and have been constantly retained in the Vulgar Latin, (as
several worthy Authors assure us;) and they might more easily be left out in
some Copies by an Oversight in the Transcribers, than fraudulently inserted
into others: Yet because it has been said by some (who would have the World
think so,) that this Verse was added in Opposition to the Arians, I must say
farther, that this could not be, De Unit. Eccles.
because we find it quoted by St. Cyprian before ^rius his Time. And indeed the
Orthodox, as they had no need to do this, having the Scripture so plainly and
fully on their side, in many other Places; so they must have ventured such an
Hazard in it as no wise Men would expose themselves to. For the Detection of
such a Forgery, which they would have Reason enough to fear, would have done a
great Injury to their Reputation, and to a Cause which they valued more than
their Lives.

It is therefore more Reasonable to suppose that the Arians razed this Verse
out of such Copies as they could come by; for their desperate Cause did more
need the miserable Supports of Fraud and Sacrilege, and the Men were fitter for
the Practice of them. Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 32.
And some of the Ancients complain of their corrupting several Places of
Scripture, and particularly of this Epistle; and there is no Expression in it
they could take more Offense at than this, Hist. Tripart. l. 12. c. 4.
though there are several others that plainly condemn them and their impious
Doctrines. Besides these Testimonies, the Verse it self does, I think,
sufficiently assert its Right to this Place, by the Agreement it has with the
foregoing and following Verses.

The Apostle's main Design in this Chapter is to prove that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God; that is, the Eternal Son of God, of the same Nature
with the Father, as well as Man; (as I shall prove in the following Discourse)
and this he does by the Witnesses mentioned at the 6, 7, and 8 Verses. But the
Water and the Blood in two of those Verses, whether we understand them
literally, as they came out of our Savior's Side, when his Body was pierced
upon the Cross; or in a figurative Sense, for his Holiness and Sufferings, can
prove no more than the Truth of his Human Nature; nor the Spirit that is joined
with them, if it be meant of his Soul which he yielded up to the Father upon
the Cross, as some understand it. And if we take it for the Spirit of God, as
it was given to our Savior in an extraordinary measure, it does not
necessarily prove any more than the Excellency of his Person as a Man, and that
he was highly in Favor with God the Father. Though there are other Things to
be said indeed concerning the Spirit, that infallibly prove the Divinity of
Christ, which will more properly be spoken of him, as he is mentioned in my
Text.

Now if nothing more had been said by the Apostle in this Place than what is
asserted concerning these Three Witnesses in the 6 and 8 Verses, they would
have afforded us but a dark Proof at the best of what he mainly intends; but
his adding Three more at the 7th. Verse, puts the Matter out of all doubt. I
might further show the Agreement between this and the other two Verses, and how
Defective the Sense of this Place will be without it; but I hope what has been
said already is sufficient to prove the Divine Authority of these Words; and I
am so far from thinking the worse of them for the Violence done to them by
sacrilegious Hands in some ancient Copies, that I cannot but have a greater
Veneration for them, in that they have suffered a kind of Martyrdom in that
Glorious Cause which they assert.

In speaking to these Words, I shall I. Endeavor to show you what these Three
are that are here mentioned. II. Give some Account of the Record they bear
concerning the Messiah.


I. I shall endeavor to show you what these Three are in the following
Particulars: 1. Every One of these is the Great and Most High God. 2. They are
not so many different Names of the same Person, but Three Subsistences, or
Persons really distinct from one another. 3. I shall show what Relation they
have to each other. 4. I shall prove that these Three are One God.


1. Every One of these is the Great and Most High God. 1. The Father is so; but
I need not say any thing to prove this, because it is acknowledged by those who
deny the Trinity, that all the Glorious Titles, Perfections and Works of the
Deity are attributed to him, and that to him belongs Divine Honor and Worship
from his Creatures: That he is an Infinite and Eternal Being, Glorious in
Holiness and Fearful in Praises; a God of all Power and Might, Truth and
Righteousness, Wisdom and Goodness; in a word, that of Him, and through Him,
and to Him are all Things. Therefore I proceed, 2. To speak of the Word, or the
Son, who also is God, in the same Sense with the Father, as will abundantly
appear to all unprejudiced Men from the Names by which he is called, the
Perfections ascribed to him, the Works he is said to do, and the Honor and
Worship which all Intelligent Creatures are required to give him, in the Holy
Scriptures.


1. The Names he is called by; as, the Name of God, Jehovah, the Son of God,
and the Word.

The Name of God is very frequently given to Christ both in the Old and New
Testament. The Psalmist speaking of him, Ps. 49.6.
says, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever; and the Prophet Isaiah calls
him the mighty God. Isa. 9.6.
St. Thomas plainly owns his Divinity in these Words, Joh. 20.28
My Lord and my God. When St. Luke says of the Jews, they stoned Stephen,
calling upon God, Acts 7.59.
and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; he teaches us, that Jesus is the God
he prayed to. And St. Paul in exhorting the Elders of Ephesus to feed the
Church of God, Acts 20.28.
which he has purchased with his own Blood, does assure us, that the same
Person who shed his Blood for us upon the Cross is the God of the Church. Romans
9.5.1 Tim. 3.16.1 Joh. 5.20.
This Apostle tells us also of Christ, that he is over all, God blessed for
ever; and that God was manifest in the Flesh: And St. John affirms of him, that
he is the true God. Now if it be said of one or two of these Places, that the
word [God] is not in some ancient Copy or Version, this Omission might easily
happen through the Mistake of a Transcriber, and ought not to be accounted any
Prejudice to those Places, seeing they are entire in all other Copies. And though
some object, that the Name of God is given to Magistrates in the Scripture, and
therefore does not prove the Divinity of Christ, they ought to see that it is
applied to him, after a very different manner, and with such Distinctions as
cannot belong to any Creature: For what Christian durst ever call a Magistrate,
my God, as St. Thomas calls our Savior? or say, he is God blessed for ever, or
the true and mighty God, as the Scripture terms him?

The Name Jehovah, which is the incommunicable Name of the Great God, is also
given to him. Those Words, Psalm. 102.25. Thou have laid the foundation of the
earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands; are applied to Christ, Heb.
1.10. and yet the same Person, of whom they are spoken, is called Jehovah no
less than seven or eight times in that Psalm. The Prophet Isaiah, speaking of
Christ and his Forerunner, says, Chap. 40.3. The voice of him that cries in
the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make strait in the desert a
highway for our God. There is no question but the Person, whose Way John the
Baptist (who is here meant by him that cries in the wilderness) was to prepare,
was Christ the Son of God; therefore it is he whom the Prophet calls, not only
our God, but the Lord, (that is Jehovah,) in the 2d. and 5th. Verses of that
Chapter. But the Prophet Jeremiab is yet more express, when speaking of the
Messiah, as a righteous branch, and a King that should descend from David,
Chap. 23. he says, Ver. 6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall
dwell safely: and this is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness. A Place sufficient, one would think, of it self, to satisfy any
that Christ is the True and Eternal God, were it not obscured a little by the
Repetition of it with some difference, Chap. 33.16. where it is in our
Translation, This is the name wherewith she shall be called. The Lord our
Righteousness. And some Interpreters understand it in the same Sense, as if
this Name was applied here to Jerusalem, or the Church; and from hence some
conclude it is not the incommunicable Name of God, and that nothing more is
said of Christ in the Place beforementioned than of the Church in this. Now
how well the Words in the Original will bear that Interpretation, I shall not
determine; but I think they are very capable of another, (which has been also
given them by some Learned Men,) namely this, And he who shall call her, (that
is, Jerusalem beforementioned,) is the Lord our Righteousness. And though there
is some difference in the Hebrew, between this and the other Place, yet the
Authors of the several Learned Versions taking the Sense to be the same in
both, do not only apply this to the Messiah, but render it in the same Words as
they do the other, with very little Alteration in any of them. And if we allow
of that Interpretation which applies this Name to Jerusalem, yet it can belong
to it no otherwise than as the Church has a Relation to him, and is Interested
in his Righteousness who is properly called by it.

The Name of the Son of God, as it is given to Christ, and is to be understood
of his Only-begotten Son, as he is sometimes called, is a further Proof of his
Divinity: For this denotes a more Eminent Relation than that which belongs to
his Human Nature, either from his Conception, or his Resurrection from the
Dead: For though he was conceived by the immediate Power and Operation of the
Holy Ghost, and for this Reason is sometimes called the Son of God, yet we
cannot say he had much the Advantage of Adam in this, who by the same efficient
Cause was formd out of the Dust of the Ground, as Christ was of the Substance
of the Virgin; and therefore Adam is called the Son of God in a peculiar Sense,
distinct from that Relation which other good Men have to him. Luke. 3.38.
The Holy Angels have also the same Relation to God, for this Reason, who made
them eminently Partakers of his own Nature, and constituted them in a State of
Happiness and Immortality.

And though our Savior was made the Son of God, in another Respect, by his
Resurrection from the Dead, as Saint Paul explains the Words of the Psalmist,
when he says, God has raised up Jesus again; Acts 13.33.
as it is also written in the Second Psalm, Thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee; and he may from hence be fitly termed (as he is) the firstborn
from the dead, and the first fruits of them that slept; yet he can no more be
called the Only-begotten Son of God for this Reason, than the Firstborn of a
numerous Issue can be said to be all the Children, or the First Fruits the
whole Crop: For it is evident, from many Places of Scripture, that the Church
shall be also raised to a Glorious State, and those very Terms, the Firstborn
and the First Fruits are used to assure us of it; and on this Account they are
called the Children of God by our Blessed Savior, who says, Luke 20.35, 36.
They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage, neither
can they die any more: For they are equal unto the angels, and are the children
of God, being the children of the resurrection. Now what difference soever
there was between the Perfections of Adam and Christ, as Man, or between the
Glory he was raised to, and that which the Saints shall have hereafter, this
cannot properly distinguish his Relation to God the Father from theirs: For
though a Firstborn, who has many Brethren, should have a greater Inheritance
than all of them, and a Right of Dominion too (as the Ancient Patriarchs had)
over the whole Family, yet he cannot justly be called the Only Son for these,
or any other Advantages he might have above the rest.

Christ is therefore called the Son of God, chiefly in respect of his Divine
Nature; and so the Ancient Jews understood this Term, as it was applied to the
Messiah. Therefore, upon Occasion of Christ's calling God his Father, it is
said, The Jews sought the more to kill him, Joh. 5.18.
because he not only had broken the Sabbath, but said also, that God was (...),
his own, or his proper Father, making himself equal with God. Jesus was now
generally looked upon as the professed Messiah, because John the Baptist had
given a Public Testimony concerning him, which was confirmed on all Occasions
by his Disciples, and had been confessed by himself: Therefore the Jews having
a Notion of that Eminent Relation which the Messiah had to God the Father, as
his Eternal Son; when they heard our Savior mention God as his Father, put a
very different Sense upon these Words from what they would have done from
another Person; and because they did not believe him to be the Christ, they
interpreted them to his Disadvantage: For though they themselves were ready to
say, upon Occasion, Joh 8.41.
We have one Father, even God; yet they accounted such an Expression from our
Savior to be Blasphemy, and attempted several times to put him to Death for
it. And this was the pretended Crime for which he was at last condemned: For
the High Priest having not such Witness against him as he desired, Mat. 26.63,
etc.
put an Oath upon him to tell him whether he were the Christ, the Son of God;
to which, when our Savior had intimated his Consent, the High Priest rent his
clothes, saying, he has spoken blasphemy; and asking the judgment of the
council concerning it, they all pronounced him to be guilty of death.

But the Disciples believing that he was the Christ, did also acknowledge him
to be the Son of God (in the Sense beforementioned) in several Confessions
which they made to him: But I shall now only take notice of such as were
attended with some Remarkable Circumstances, which will help us to understand
the Meaning of them. When our Lord had done two Miracles together, walking
himself with Peter upon the Sea in a Tempest, and causing the Wind to cease on
the sudden; Mat. 14.33.
so soon as he was come into the ship, the disciples, and others that were with
them, came and worshipped him, saying, of a truth thou art the son of God. By
which Words, it appears they acknowledged him to be God, because they gave him
Divine Worship at the same time: And if they had committed a Mistake in these
Things, there is no question but our Savior would have corrected it in them.
The like Adoration was also given to Christ by the Man who was born blind, Joh.
9.38.
so soon as he understood from him that he was the Son of God.

But nothing is more Remarkable to this Purpose, than Martha her Confession,
who, when our Savior had asked her, Joh. 11.25, etc.
whether she believed him to be the Resurrection and the Life, (that is, that
he could by his own Power raise Men from the Dead to Life again) and that Faith
in him would save them from Death, and make them Partakers of Everlasting Life?
she answers him, Yea, Lord, I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God,
which should come into the world. So that this Confession did imply as much, in
her Opinion, as that Christ was Omnipotent, and the Great Object of a Divine
and Saving Faith: And in that she says, the Son of God, which should come into
the world; this supposes it was formerly believed the Messiah should be such a
Person.

There are several other Testimonies in the Gospel to this Purpose, but I shall
add but one more from St. John himself, which gives a great Confirmation to all
the rest, who speaking of the Signs which Jesus did, says, These are written,
Joh. 20.31.
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God; and that
believing, ye might have life through his name. These Words, Jesus is the
Christ the Son of God, are certainly meant of his being God as well as Man,
because many Signs done by him did plainly prove it. And in this Chapter the
Apostle mentions two of them, namely, our Savior's Appearing two several times
in a miraculous manner to his Disciples; the latter of which Appearances drew
that Confession from St. Thomas, My Lord, and my God. And it is Remarkable,
that immediately after these Words, and Christ's Answer to them, the Apostle
adds, many other signs did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are
not written in this book; but these are written that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God; which Words have, no doubt, a particular
Respect to Thomas his Confession, as those which follow have to our Savior's
Answer to him: For Christ having said to Thomas, Because thou have seen me,
thou have believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.
The Apostle tells us how far this Blessing goes, even to Eternal Life, in
these Words, and that believing, ye might have life through his name.

And indeed, the Occasion of St. John's writing this Gospel, and the Arguments
that are every where contained in it, do sufficiently prove this Truth: For
this Gospel was written by him at the Request of the Elders of Ephesus, and
other Christians, as we are assured from good Authority, in Opposition to the
Ebeonites and Cerinthians, who denied the Divinity of our Savior; and
whosoever reads it, may see the Apostle makes it his main Business to assure
the World that he is God. This he affirms at the very beginning of his Gospel,
and records many of our Savior's Sayings, by which he asserted it, and several
of his chief Miracles, by which he proved it, that are omitted by the other
Evangelists. And if this appears to have been his chief Design in this Gospel,
(as certainly it was) who can doubt of his Meaning in the Place
beforementioned, (which is near the Conclusion of it,) where he says, These
are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God? Now
this, with the other Citations which I mentioned before, will clear the Sense
of those Expressions in this Chapter of my Text; Ver. 1. Ver. 5.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God: And who is he
that overcomes the World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
that they assert him to be God as well as Man: And therefore this is the
Doctrine which the Apostle proves in the following Verses, as I said before,
and I hope have now made it more evident to you.

The last Name which I shall mention, as given to Christ, is (...), rendered
the Word; under which Name St. John says, Chap. 1.1. that he was in the
beginning, that is, before the World was created, as appears not only from the
same Expression used in that Sense in the first Chapter of Genesis, but because
all things are said to be made by him, ver. 3. which supposes he was before
them; and because Time began with the Creation of the World, therefore the Word
which was before it must be Eternal: And the Apostle here expressly affirms,
that the Word was God, and that this Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us,
and was the only-begotten of the father, v. 14. the same person whom John the
Baptist bare witness of, namely, Jesus Christ, as in the following Verses. And
the Notion of (...), as it is understood of a Divine Person, who, together with
God the Father made the World, was well known amongst the Jews, as appears from
many Places in the Chaldae Paraphrase, where the Word is added to explain the
Sense more fully when there is only [God] or [Lord] in the Original; (...) Vid.
Bishop of Worcest. Vindic. of Trin. p. 128.
and it is rendered by such a Term as several Learned Men assure us is used
there to signify the Word only in the Sense of a Person. And I think any
indifferent Reader would understand it of a Personal Word in many (if not all
those) Places wherein it is found, and particularly in these. It is said in
that Paraphrase, Genesis 6.6.
It repented the Lord, with his word, that he had made man upon the earth. Then
shall the word of the Lord be my God. Genesis 28.21. Ex. 19.17. Lev. 26.46. Deuteronomy.
1.30.
Moses brought forth the People to meet the Word of God: These are the
statutes, and judgments, and laws, which the Lord made between his word and the
children of Israel. The word of the Lord your God, which goes before you, he
shall fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your
eyes. The word of the Lord the God is a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4.24. Chap.
31.6.8. Job 42.9, 10, 12.
a jealous God. The word of the Lord thy God will go before thee, he will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee. The word of the Lord accepted the face of Job. And
the word of the Lord turned the captivity of Job, etc. So the word of the Lord
blessed the latter end of Job more than the beginning.

Now to be chosen by Jacob as his God; to meet his People; to be a Party in a
Covenant between himself and them; to conduct his People, and fight for them;
to accept of Job's Person, to turn his Captivity, to bless and enrich him; and
to be a consuming Fire, a jealous God; do all suppose a Person, and some of
them plainly assert that he is God. The ancient Jews therefore, who had a great
Veneration for this Paraphrase, and were obliged to read it constantly with the
Hebrew Text, did believe, from these and many other Places in it, that there
was a Divine Substance called the Word, by whom God made the World.

So Philo the Jew, speaking of God the Father of all, mentions another Divine
Person, Quaest. and Solut. De Agricult.
whom he calls the Word, and his Only-begotten Son, by whom he made the World.
From whence we may conclude, that St. John first received the Notion of (...)
from the Jews; and he speaks so briefly of it at the Beginning of his Gospel,
because it was commonly known to them. Though it is true also, that many of the
Heathens had received the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Notion of (...) the
Second Person in it, either from ancient Tradition, or the Scriptures, which
were read by several Learned Men amongst them. But Plato was especially noted
for it; therefore when Amelius, who was one of his Followers, read this Gospel
of St. John, he challenged this Notion of the (...), as if it was taken from
Plato. But there is no Reason to think he received a Notion from any Heathen,
which he knew was better understood by the Jews, and was well acquainted with
those Places of Scripture upon which it was grounded.

Now St. John does not only call Christ the Word in that Place, and in my Text,
but mentions him also as the Word of Life at the beginning of this Epistle; and
speaking of him, Rev. 19.13. he says, His name is called the word of God.
Neither is St. John the only Writer of the New Testament who applies this Name
to Christ; but St. Luke seems to use it in the same Sense, Luke 1.2.
when he speaks of the Apostles as eyewitnesses and ministers of the word; for
that Word of which they were Eyewitnesses, was our Lord himself. And this
Sense of that Place is more probable, because St. Peter uses the same
Expression with respect to Christ, and says (of himself and the other
Apostles) that they were eyewitnesses of his majesty: 2 Pet. 1.16.
And in the Epistle to the Hebrews this Divine Word is mentioned, and the
Omniscience of God attributed to him; The word of God is quick, and powerful,
Heb. 4.12.
and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart: That is, he perfectly sees the State of our
Souls, knows all our Thoughts, distinguishes between what is good and evil in
them; he can awaken our Consciences to feel Remorse for Sin, and work what
Change in us he pleases. And then it follows, Neither is there any Creature
that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and opened unto the
eyes of him,(...), concerning whom we speak, or with whom our present Business
is, and that is Christ, who is the Subject of this latter part of the Chapter,
and mentioned as well before as after these Verses I have read to you.

2. The Perfections of God are ascribed to the Word, or the Son. Some of these
I have occasionally mentioned in speaking to those Names which are given to him
in Scripture, and therefore shall now speak more briefly to them. His Eternity
was hinted to under the Name of the Word, at the beginning of St. John's
Gospel, and the Name Jehovah does also imply it; but there are several
Expressions more full and plain to this Purpose. Isa. 9.6. Rev. 1.8, 17.
The Prophet Isaiah calls him the everlasting father; and he himself says, I
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending; which is, and which was, and
which is to come. And again, I am the first and the last; the same which God
says of himself, Isaiah 44.6. I am the first, and I am the last, and besides
me there is no God. So Christ asserts his Eternity, Joh. 8.58.
when he says, Before Abraham was, I am; where he uses the very Term by which
God made himself known to the Israelites, Ex. 3.14.
which denotes his Eternity. This appears also from those Places in the Gospel,
where Christ says, he came from God, from Heaven, etc.

The Infinity of Christ is also asserted by himself, when he says, Mat. 18.20.
Chap. 28.20. Joh. 3.13.
Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them; When he tells his Disciples, I am with you always, even unto the end of
the world; and when he affirms, No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that
came down from heaven, even the son of man which is in heaven; where we are
plainly taught, that at the same time Christ was upon Earth, he was also in
Heaven, and therefore filled all Places. And it is remarkable, that he here
calls himself the Son of Man, to assure us, that he who was Man, was also the
Eternal and Infinite Son of God, and so was one and the same Person in two so
distinct Natures.

The Omnipotence of God, which we had Occasion to take Notice of in our Savior
before, is attributed to him by the Apostle, Heb. 1.3.
who says, he upholds all things by the word of his power; and plainly
intimated in that Promise of Christ, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, Joh.
14.13
that will I do, that the father may be glorified in the son: For he must have
all Power who can do whatsoever his People shall desire. Yea, he has expressly
told us, Rev. 1.8.
that he is the Almighty.

His Omniscience, of which we had before a remarkable Proof out of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, where he is called the Word of God, is also attested by St.
John, where he says of some of our Savior's Followers, Joh. 2.24, 25.
that Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men, and
needed not that any should testify of man; for he knew what was in man. It is
acknowledged by St. Peter, in these Words, Lord, Joh. 21.17.
thou know all things. It is affirmed by St. Paul, when he says, In him are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; Col. 2.3. Rev. 2.23.
and it is asserted by himself in these Words, I am he which searches the
reins and hearts; and I will give unto every one of you according to your works.

In a word, he has all the Perfections of God the Father; for he says, All
things that the father has are mine: Joh. 16.15.
So that the Essence, the Attributes, and the Glory of God do belong to him.
And St. Paul assures us, Col. 2.9.
that in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. None can deny that
Christ is meant in this Place; for the Apostle is speaking of him here for many
Verses together: He mentions his Name several times, and immediately before
these Words. And it is evident that they ascribe all the Perfections of the
Deity to Christ, as plainly as any can do. The Word [bodily] indeed that is
here added, is capable of different Interpretations; but whether we take it for
wholly and entirely (as it may well be meant) or essentially and personally,
because it was usual with the Greeks (as it is with us) to call a Person, a
Body; it does not only confirm what was said before, but denotes the
hypostatical Union of the Divine and Human Nature in Christ. Or, if we will
allow it to be only meant, in the Body, or, together with it; though in this
Sense it adds nothing to the Character of his Divinity before given, yet it can
detract nothing from it. On the account of these Perfections in Christ, Col.
1.15.
he is called the Image of the invisible God; the Brightness of his Father's
Glory, Heb. 1.3.
and the express Image of his Person; Phil. 2.6.
he is said to be in the form of God, and equal with him.

3. The Works of God are also attributed to the Son. He tells us himself, that
what things soever the father does, these also does the Son likewise. Joh 5.19.
And as it is said in the beginning of St. John's Gospel, that he made all
things; so the Apostle affirms that God made the Worlds by him, Heb. 1.2.
(not as an instrumental, but a principal efficient Cause.) The word (...),
there rendered the Worlds, properly signifies Ages; but because Time was
created together with the World, and it is the Measure of all material things,
therefore it is sometimes used siguratively for the World, the Creation of
which is ascribed to Christ again, Ver. 10.
in these Words, Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the
earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands. The Sense of which Place
is expressed more fully and particularly by St. Paul, when he says, Col. 1.16,
17.
By him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him and for him. And he
is before all things, and by him all things consist.

The Works of Providence are also his; for he is said to uphold all things;
Heb. 1.3.
and this he could not do without infinite Wisdom and Power, to supply every
Creature with what is necessary to maintain its Being. He forgives sins against
God, Luke 5.21.
which none but God can do; as the Scribes and Pharisees argued truly, though
they misapplied it with respect to our Savior. To these Things I might add the
Miracles wrought by him, which did also attest his Divinity, because he did
them by his own Power; the raising himself from the dead, sending the Holy
Ghost upon his Disciples, and enabling them to do the same miraculous Works as
he himself had done.

4. We are to give Divine Worship to the Son, the same that is due to the
Father. Our Savior, in saying to his Disciples, Ye believe in God, Joh. 14.1.
believe also in me, does teach them that he is an Object of Faith and Worship
equally with God the father; and tells them, that all men should honor the
son, Chap. 5.23.
as they honor the father. The same is required of the Angels too, Heb. 1.6.
in those Words which the Apostle quotes out of the Psalms, Let all the angels
of God worship him. And yet that is an Eternal Law which our Savior mentions,
Mat. 4.10:
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Therefore
(to say nothing of the Apostles refusing Worship several times from others,
because they were but Men) when St. John (through some Mistake) went about to
worship an Angel that spoke to him two several times, Rev. 19.10. Chap. 22.8, 9.
he charges him strictly not to do it, because he was but the Servant of God,
(and the best of Creatures, even Christ himself in his Human Nature is no
more,) and referrs him to the true and only Object of Worship, which is God.

But we read of many worshipping our Savior upon different Occasions, without
any Prohibition from him, and amongst others, his own Disciples did it, both
before and after his Resurrection; yet they received not the least Check for
it, neither did our Savior at any other time caution them against it, or give
them any Hint that he was displeased with it; though he did ever most freely
instruct, warn, and reprove them, as there was Cause for it. And can it be said
our Savior was less zealous for the Honor of God than the Angel that appeared
to St. John? Or was there a Dispensation granted to the World to worship a
Creature, during our Savior's Ministry, which was not allowed either before or
after it? No, the Adversaries to the Doctrine of the Trinity have a Fetch
beyond this, That Christ was made God, and is therefore to be worshipped. But
what is made, cannot be truly God, because Eternity does necessarily belong to
his Nature; and whatever is made, is a Creature, and Servant to him that made
it, and therefore is not to receive Divine Worship, as the Angel argues. But
our Savior being the True and Eternal God, as well as Man, did not only suffer
such Worship to be given to him, but has taught us that it is a General Duty,
(as was said before;) and therefore when St. Stephen had a Vision of him, a
little before his Death, Acts 7.59, 60.
he kneeled down and prayed to him to receive his Spirit, and to forgive his
Murderers.

I have now said what I thought necessary to prove the Divinity of our Blessed
Savior, and have been the larger and more particular upon it, because the
Belief of the Trinity does mainly depend upon this Proof. I shall therefore be
very brief in speaking to what follows.

3. The Holy Ghost is also the Great and Most High God, as appears by the very
same Arguments which prove the Divinity of the Word, or Son, beforementioned,
taken from the Names, Properties, Works, and Worship of God.

1. The Names of God are given to him. He is called God by St. Peter, Acts 5.3,
4.
speaking to Ananias in these Words, Why has Satan filled thine heart to lie
to the Holy Ghost? Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God: And by St. Paul,
when he says, 1 Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells
in you? Which Words plainly show, that the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, is that
God which dwells in his People.

Yea, the incommunicable Name Jehovah is also given to him. Numb. 12.6.
God says, If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self known
unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. But this Lord (or
Jehovah) is to be understood of the Holy Ghost, as appears from the Words of
St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.21.
The prophecy came not in old times by the will of man; but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

2. The Properties or Perfections of God are ascribed to him; as his Eternity,
Heb. 9.14. where it is said, Christ offered himself to God through the eternal
spirit. His Infinity is supposed in those Words of the Apostle, Romans 8.9.
Ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God
dwell in you. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his:
For that Spirit which may be in all Men, must be every where present. And that
the Holy Ghost is so, the Psalmist also intimates, when he says, Ps. 139.7.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
His Omniscience is asserted also by St. Paul, in these Words, 1 Cor. 2.10.
The spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God.

3. The Works of God are attributed to the Holy Ghost; for Job says, by his
spirit he has garnished the heavens; Job 26.13.
and the Psalmist, that by him he has made all the host of them. Ps. 33.6.
And our Savior intimates, Mat. 12.28.
that he cast out devils by his power as well as his own. To which I might add
(if it were necessary) his inspiring the Prophets, appointing Bishops and other
Ministers in the Church, enduing many of them with miraculous Gifts,
sanctifying our Souls, adopting us to be the Children of God, etc.

4. The Worship of God is also given to him. St. Paul calling him to witness
what he is about to say, Romans 9.1. does acknowledge his Omniscience, and
perform an Act of Divine Worship to him. And he prays to Him, together with the
Father, and the Son, in that Blessing which concludes his Second Epistle to the
Corinthians, and so makes the Three Persons of the Trinity equally Objects of
Divine Worship, as every Christian does also by receiving Baptism in their
Names.

I have now showed you, that every One of these Three, mentioned in my Text, is
the Great and Most High God; and the Proofs I have cited for that Purpose, are
so plain and convincing, that many who were not willing to own the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and yet could not resist the Evidence of these and other
Scriptures to the same Purpose, have thought that these Terms, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, were but so many several Names to signify the same Person.
Therefore, to remove this Mistake, and to give a farther Confirmation to the
Truth I have been asserting,

2. I am come to show, that these are not different Names of the same Person,
but Three Subsistences or Persons really distinct from one another. And the
very Design of the Apostle in this Place is enough to prove it; for he brings
them in as Three Witnesses of the Messiah, which Three Names cannot be, in the
Sense which is here intended. So our Savior speaking of the Father's Testimony
concerning him, Joh. 5.32.
faith, There is another that bears witness of me; and he afterward tells
his Hearers who he is, in these Words, The father himself which has sent me,
Ver. 37.
has born witness of me. And again, Chap. 8.16, etc.
If I judge, my judgment is true; for I am not alone, but I and the father that
sent me. It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.
I am one that bear witness of my self, and the father that sent me bears
witness of me. Chap. 16.32.
And he further tells his Disciples, Behold the hour comes, yea is now come,
that ye shall be scattered every one to his own, and shall leave me alone; and
yet I am not alone, because the father is with me.

We see therefore that the Father and the Son are Two distinct Persons; and
that the Holy Ghost is a Person distinct from both of them, is evident from
those Words of our Savior, John 14.16, 17.
I will pray the father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth, etc. where Three Persons are
distinctly expressed, with different Actions belonging to each of them; the Son
prays, the Father answers his Prayer, and gives his Disciples another Comforter
who shall always abide with them. So these Three are expressed in the Form of
Baptism, the Apostolical Benediction, and in several other Places of Scripture.
And it is absurd to think our Savior requires us to be baptized into Three
Names, and that the Apostle in blessing the Church, would use Three Names, with
particular Distinctions to each of them, if he intended but One Person.

3. I proceed therefore to show what Relation these Three Persons have to each
other. And as to the Father and the Son, their very Names suppose that the One
has his Being from the Other; not as if he were made by him, for then he could
not be Eternal, and therefore not Truly God; but as proceeding from him by
Eternal Generation: And hence he is called the Brightness of his Father's
Glory, the Word of God, etc. The Holy Ghost has his Being both from the Father
and the Son, as eternally proceeding from them: For our Savior tells his
Disciples, Joh. 14.26.
That he proceeds from the Father, that he himself will send him, and that the
Father will send him in his Name. Chap. 15.26.
And St. Paul calls him the Spirit of Christ, and of the Son. Romans 8.9.
Therefore we have the same Reason to believe the Spirit proceeds from the Son,
Gal. 4.6.
as from the Father. As the Relation therefore between the Father and the Son
is founded upon that Eternal Generation by which the Son has his Being from
the Father; so the Relation of the Holy Ghost to them both, is founded upon
that Eternal Spiration whereby he has his Being from them. But what this
Generation and this Spiration is, as also the manner of each Person's
subsisting distinctly in the same Divine Nature, I may say with the Prophet
Isaiah, who shall declare it? Isa. 53.8.


4. I am to prove, That these Three are One God. And this is evident from all
those Places of Scripture where God is said to be but One: Deuteronomy. 6.4. Chap.
4.35. Isa. 45.5.
As, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. Unto thee it was showed,
that thou might know that the Lord he is God; there is none else besides
him. I am the Lord, and there is none else, there is no God besides me. There
is one God and Father of all, Ephesians. 4.6.
who is above all, and through all, and in you all, etc. To which we may add,
that our Savior several times affirms, that He and the Father are One; and
that He is in the Father, and the Father in Him. And as this Unity of the
Godhead is so plainly asserted in Holy Scriptures, so it is also taught by the
Law of Nature; for what is Infinite and Omnipotent can be but One, for it is
against the Nature of Infinity to be in more; and if One can do all things,
there is no need of any other. Therefore it was the Opinion of the wisest
Heathens, that there is but One God, though they suffered the People, who were
fond of Superstitions, to worship many.

Thus we see the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Nature is
plainly asserted in many Scriptures; so that it these Words of my Text had been
quite lost, through the Malice of Heretics, the Mistake of Transcribers, or
any other Accident, the Doctrine contained in them would fully appear in the
Places beforementioned, and many others: For as often as the Scripture
attributes to each of these Three the Names, Properties, Works, or Worship of
God, it asserts them to be so many Divine Persons; and where ever it affirms
there is but One God, it teaches us that these Three are One: And therefore we
may justly wonder so much Offense has been taken by some Men at several
Expressions in the Athanasian Creed; as, The Father is God, the Son is God, and
the Holy Ghost is God; and yet they are not Three Gods, but One God, etc. These
Expressions they are bold to charge with Contradiction, and yet they cannot
deny that the Scripture plainly asserts the same many times over; and therefore
they would do well to consider upon whom this Charge of Contradictions must
light.

And their Boldness is the greater, not only for the Plainness of Revelation in
this Case, and the Greatness and Excellency of the Subject so treated by them;
but because it is far above the Judgment of their Reason: For a Man must
understand the Nature of an Infinite Mind, or Spirit, and what is the true
Notion of different Hypostases or Persons in that Nature, before he can say it
is a Contradiction to assert them. Therefore they would better employ their
Reason in finding out such Contradictions they are sit to judge of, and I will
put them in mind what looks very like one, and that is, to acknowledge the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and yet deny some Doctrines plainly
delivered in them, because they cannot understand the manner of those things
that are asserted by them; and though they say they do understand it, yet this
shows their Boldness and Ignorance the more, when we know the wisest of them
will be easily puzzled about the meanest Production in Nature, and may find a
thousand things in themselves to baffle their Reason; and therefore it must be
very unfit to judge of the Divine Nature and Sibsseveral timesstence. And if we
observe what ways they take to evade those plain Scriptures beforementioned,
we shall quickly see their Reason is not very formidable in Matters of Faith,
whatsoever it may be in other things: For some of them they deny to be
Scripture (as they do these Words of my Text,) others they put such strained
and foreign Interpretations upon, and use such miserable Shifts to escape the
Force of them, that one would think they are passionately in love with Heresy
that defend it at this rate. But these Things have been answered, to their
Shame, by several worthy Authors, and I hope also to the Conviction of some of
them.

Their Exception against the Word Person, as applied to these Three in my Text,
is also impertinent: For he to whom those Names, Actions, and Prerogatives,
beforementioned, do belong, must be a Person, though he were not called so in
Holy Scripture. Heb. 1.3
But the Father is there termed a Person, when the Son is called the express
Image ((...)) of his Person; and it is hard if a Son, who has all the
Perfections of his Father, may not be called a Person too. But whether these
captious Men will, or no, the Scripture has given him that Denomination, with
respect to his Divinity, 2 Cor. 2.10. If I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave
it, for your sakes forgave I it ((...)) in the Person of Christ: Where the
Apostle affirms, that when he forgave or absolved a Penitent, he did it in the
Person of Christ, that is, in his Name, as his Deputy and Representative, who,
as God, has Power to forgive Sins. From these Places there is Warrant for
those Terms, (...) and (...), which the Greek Fathers commonly used to signify
a Person in the Trinity. And when we find them thus applied to the Father and
the Son, who can deny them to the Holy Ghost, since the Glorious Properties and
Works of the Deity are also ascribed to him?

Thus have I given you some Account of the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it is
discovered to us in Holy Scriptures, which has been constantly believed and
defended by the Churches of Christ in all Ages. And seeing we have such
Evidence from Scripture, and so General a Consent for the Truth of this
Doctrine, we may with great Satisfaction believe and confess it. And because
our Faith in the Trinity is of the greatest moment to us (as we are assured
also from the Scripture) and very much for the Honor of our Religion, and the
Author of it, we ought zealously to defend it against those Antichrists in our
Days (as St. John calls them) who deny the Father and the Son. 1 John 2.22.


2. I should now say something of the Record that these Three bear, that Jesus
is the Christ the Son of God. But this will not require much Proof after that
which has been given o^^^^ly concerning his Divine Nature, and does consist of
Testimonies from the Three several Persons of the Trinity. Therefore to these I
shall only add, That this is witnessed by them to the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, who have the Beatisick Vision of the Glorious Trinity, and particularly
of the Divinity of Christ united with his Human Nature. It has been attested
from Heaven, by the Voice of God the Father, at our Savior's Baptism and
Transfiguration; asserted by Christ himself several times, who said also, that
he came from God, and was one with him; and manifested by the Holy Ghost, when
he descended upon Christ in a visible Shape at his Baptism, and upon the
Disciples in a miraculous manner, according to our Savior's Promise. From
whence it appears, that as these Three are One in their Essence or Nature, so
also in their Testimony concerning the Messiah, which some think is only meant
by those Words, These Three are One. But because they are true in an higher
Sense (as I have proved to you) and the Words are in a General Form, they ought
chiefly to be understood of that, and from hence an Unity in their Record or
Testimony will necessarily follow.

The Holy Ghost does also constantly give this Testimony in the Holy
Scriptures, and in his Effects upon the Hearts of his People: Which may
probably be meant of that Witness which he is said to bear in Earth at the 8th.
Verse of this Chapter; and one of these Effects is afterward mentioned, Ver.
10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself. Let us
therefore daily pray to God for this excellent Grace, which will assure us of
the Truth of such Doctrines as we cannot comprehend. And that we may receive
it, together with an Improvement in all Divine Knowledge, let us sincerely do
all those Duties God requires of us, and then he will certainly discover
himself, and the Mysteries of Salvation more to us.

Now to the Ever-blessed and Glorious Trinity, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One Eternal and Only Wise God, be all Honor,
Praise, and Dominion, both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry.
Two Sermons by the Reverend Mr. John Howard. THE True Interest of a Nation:
Or, The Duty of Magistrates, Ministers, and People, in order to the further
Settlement and Prosperity of these Kingdoms. A Sermon preached at the Assizes
held at Buckingham, July the 5th. 1692.

The Evil of our Days, with the Remedy of it. A Sermon preached at a Visitation
at Ruthwel in Northamptonshire, October. 12.1697.

MR. Pool's English Annotations on the Whole Bible; wherein the Sacred Text is
inserted, together with the various Readings and Parallel Scriptures, etc. In
Two Volumes. Folio.

The Works of the late Reverend Mr. Stephen Charnock. In Two Volumes. Iolio.

The Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter; with the History of the Times he
lived in. Written by himself, and published by Mr. Matthew Sylvester. In Folio.

Mr. Lorrimer's Apology for the Ministers who subscribed only unto the Stating
of the Truths and Errors in Mr. Williams's Book, from the Exceptions made
against them by Mr. Trail. Quarto.

-- His Remarks on Mr. Goodwin's Discourse; Proving, That the Gospel Covenant
is a Law of Grace: And answering the Objections to the contrary, etc. Quarto.

Mr. Shower's Thanksgiving-Sermon on the Discovery of the Assassination-Plot,
April the 16th. 1696. Quarto.

-- His Mourners Companion: Or, Funeral Discourses on several Texts. The Second
Edition. In Two Parts. Octavo.

-- His Sermons on Isaiah 55.7, 8, 9. God's Thoughts and Ways above ours,
especially in the Forgiveness of Sins. Octavo.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Nath. Oldfield, Dec. 31. 1696. Octavo.

A Preservative against Deism: Showing the great Advantage of Revelation above
Reason, in the two Great Points, Pardon of Sin, and a Future State of
Happiness. With an Appendix, in Answer to a Letter of A. W. against Revealed
Religion, in the Oracles of Reason. Octavo.

A Discourse of the Nature and Necessity of Faith in Jesus Christ: With an
Answer to the Pleas of our modern Unitarians, for the Sufficiency of bare
Morality or mere Charity to Salvation. Octavo.

A Brief Discourse of Infant Baptism. Twelves. These Three last by the Reverend
Mr. Nathanael Tailor.

The Whole Duty of Man Epitomized, for the Benefit of the Poor; with select
Prayers, suited to every Petition. In Twenty fours. Price Bound, Six Pence.


