THE English Mounsieur. COMEDY, As it is Acted, at the Theater-Royal, By His
MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

By the Honorable JAMES HOWARD Esquire

LONDON, Printed by H. Bruges for I. Magnus near the Piazza in Russel Street
Covent Garden, 1674.

The Names of the Persons.
MR. VVelbred, a wild Gentleman, Servant to the Lady Wealthy. Mr. Comely, his
Companion. Mr. Frenchlove, the English Mounsieur. Mr. Vain, one who to gain
the reputation of a Debauch; belyes himself, and all women he knows. Jack Arch,
his Footboy. Two Parsons. Gripe, a Scrivener. A Hector. English. Tailor, and
Milliner. French. Tailor, and Merchants. William, a Wilt-shire Clown.
Lacquies. Porter. Servants. Fiddlers. Lady VVealthy, a rich Widow, in love with
Welbred. Two Ladies, of her acquaintance. I. Mrs. Crafty, II. Mrs. Crafty.
2 Courtizans, and Mistrisses to Frenchlove, and Vain.
Elsbeth, a Country Lass; Sweetheart to William. Waiting woman, to the Lady
VVealthy.
SCENE, London.

The English Mounsieur.
ACT the first, SCENE the first.
Enter Mr. Welbred and Mr. Comely. SCENE Covent Garden. Well. FRenchlove is come
then it seems.


Com. I spoke with one that saw him?


Well. And what Composition is the Man -- of since his Travels.


Com. Why I am told, that he is absolutely composed of Frigaces and Essences.


Well. A very admirable character of a man, I p^rcieve he is e^ne no better, nor
no worse, than an effected English man -- translated into a ridiculous French
man -- I believe such a fellow as thy -- were he but given to Poe^ry -- would
be continually making of Verses in praise of French Tailors -- French Cooks --
and French Merchants -- which are but of the lower rank of English P^lars.


Com. Well -- I am very glad he is returned so accomplished a person -- to make
sport with -- he will serve to pass away many a tedious hour -- and make us
laugh more then a wiserman --


Well. Faith you are in the right -- ^'me resolved he shall be our Physi^ian
for the Spleen.


Com. You know we have another too a; eminent in folly as he, though in a
different kind -- you guess who I mean.


Well. Who Mr. Vain?


Com. The very same, that fellow is a Coxcomb of great value, his humor is
very pleasant, he loves to be thought a debauch, in all kinds, and is none;
brags of his, great acquaintance with women -- and their kindness to him, and
yet he knows not one in the whole Town.


Well. Prithee look yonder and behold the approaching shadow of the man we were
talking of: Substance he has none.


Enter Mr: Vain, and Jack A^ch his Footboy. Com. The Gentleman spies us
already.


Vain. I see Mr. Welbred and Mr. Comely, now I will speak so loud to my Boy,
that they may hear -- Sirrah, go to those six several Ladies that sent to my
Chamber this morning, and say your Master cannot possibly wait on them to
night -- and d'hear Sirrah, take heed that on^ Ladies Chambermaid does not
dog you to the next Ladies Lodging, for their jealousy makes them as watchful
over me as so many Cats.


Well. O -- impudent Rascal


aside. Vain. And when you return with your answers, Be sure remember to
deliver the same messages to me As you are wont to do before Company.


aside to the boy. Com. I believe that word in private, Is to instruct the boy
what message he is to bring back.


Vain Make have Sirrah.


Boy Yes, yes Sir, -- now must I stay just such a time away, as I might really
have dispatched these feigned errands -- -- To these six Ladie-No-bodies -- and
then return with Six huge lies -- now let all the world be judge if there Can
be such another Rogue as my Master.


Exit boy. Well. Mr. Vain, we overheard you Message to your boy, you are A
happy man, wrapped in your mother's smock.


Vain What de'e mean Sir.


Well. Nay never let your modesty deny what we heard, no Less then women by the
half dozen in love with you -- Very good! when other men are writing
Petitioning-Letters For admittance, -- you are sending excuses that you cannot
come.


Vain. Well Gentlemen, since you have overheard me against My will, I wonder
you should think me happy, that Am troubled with the importunity of so many
women.


Well. If that be your misfortune, Sir, would you would make us Sharers with you,
and bring us acquainted with some Of these Ladies -- we would help to ease your
burden.


Vain. Alas Sir, they poor hearts would take it unkindly From me, because their
affections are particularly to My person.


Com. We don't question that, but by your slighting them We might get into
favor.


Vain. Troth I have used them to that a great while, and do not find it lessens
me in their esteem -- past the recovery Of a kind visit.


Well. Are you acquainted, Sir, with the widow, my Lady Wealthy.


Vain. I Sir, I think I am.


Com. She Is a great Fortune, I wonder you don't think of marrying her.


Vain. Faith, Sir, I Am too great a Libertine to think of settling -- Pox on it,
I made a great debauch last night with wine And women.


Well. This fellow is the wonder of impudency


Enter Vain's boy. Boy. Sir, an please you the Ladies are very much unsatisfied
They cannot rest till they behold you.


Vain. Blook-head who bid you deliver your message aloud When you see company
by?


Boy. E'ne your lying Worship --


Aside. Vain. Well -- Gentlemen I must beg your excuse, that I Cannot wait upon
you any longer at this time.


Com. 'Twere uncivil to desire it, Sir, hearing your urgent occasions, Your
humble servant. It Is impossible to believe there could be any such fellow as
this -- in nature -- did we not know him -- now let us go make a visit to
Frenchloves.


Well. Agreed.


Exit Well. and Com. Vain. Now, do wonder at my self of all men living, what
kind of devil possesses me, to make me do these things. I excuse my absence to
six women, that know not one, as many as there are in this town -- I told them
too, I was drinking and wenching last night -- if I were, 'twas my Landladies
small beer, and she was my wench, whose body is now so old, that death has laid
claim to it by course of nature above these forty years -- I cannot imagine how I
first came to be of his humor, unless 'twere hearing the Orange Wenches talk
of Ladies and their Gallants. So I begun to t^ink I had no way of being in the
fashion, but bragging of Mistrisses.


Boy, Sir, I think I deserve more then two Liveries a year in your Worship*
service -- because I think I do more business then other Gentlemen's footmen.


Vain, In what boy;


Boy, In lying for your Worship an't please ye:


Vain, Well sirrah I Will consider of it.


Boy, He dares not deny me for fear i will betray him.


Exeunt. Enter French love, with two dirty Lacquies at his heels, newly come
out of France and arrived at London. French. Hei Lacquies go to Le Fronys and
bespeak for my supper a Pottage, a Frigacie, and some lardid Patridge, Attande
vo^s.


Lacquies Ovy Mon --


Ext. Lacq. French. Curre ^ll Mont* It Is some comfort yet that in t^is vast
Beef-eating Ci^y, a French house may be found to eat at -- for the most of the
streets I have rode through from the Bridge to Covent Garden, are Butcher rows,
where I saw the butchers strewing the fle^h of their distressed Beefs with
Rosemary as the English do a Corpse at a Funeral. The Devi^ in*t that this
England should be my Country, I cannot think my self the least a kin to it,
since I have been in France, 'twould vex me plaguly were I not a Frenchman in
my second nature (that is) in my fashion, discourse and clothes. I cannot
devise it: this whole City of London, how to find out any one Divertisement,
Let me see (first) I must go ask blessing of my Father and Mother. Diabol! what
a damned English fashion is that, then they cry O welcome Son, you must stay
and dine with us, we have a good rump of Beef in the pot for dinner: A rump of
the Devil, that I should have an English father and mother, and they a French
son.


Enter Lacquie. Lacquie, Monsieur your French supper shall be ready presently.


French. Et bein, methinks there is a gust in that* word French supper, but the
very sound of an English supper, takes away the stomach of a person that is well
bred.


Enter Mr. Welbred. Well. Mr. Frenchlove, you are welcome into England, and to
Spring Garden -- I suppose this to be the best Diversion we can enter (...) you
with, since it is a place will afford the sight of all our English Beauties.


French. Sir, I thank you, but you must pardon me; if the memory of French
Ladies be so fresh in me, that I doubt I shall hardly esteem the English women
equal to them.


Enter Lady Wealthy and two other Ladies. Well. Sir we will not tell the Ladies
your mind, for fear they should despair, yonder are some of them, if you please
let us -- walk up toward them, and discourse.


Lady We. O -- Madam yonder is Mr. Welbred, and the new arrived Mr. Frenchlove.


1 Lady, By what I have heard, he is a sight worth seeing.


Lady We. Look how he throws his legs as if he would fain be rid of them --
what distance there is between 'em -- I believe there are not a pair of legs in
the whole Town so great strangers one to another as his.


French. Oh fie I surfeit of those Ladies already.


Well. What before you see their faces.


French. They are so narrow with their feet that they but, in France they will
not give a Souse for a Horse that does so?


Well. No more will they in England.

Frenchlov' makes two or three ridiculous legs. Madam Mr. French love newly
come out of France. I need not tell you how accomplished a person Since his Boon
mean will answer for him.


Lady Weal. You Are welcome into England, Sir, you are come to run the hazard of
English women falling in love with you, and that we are apt to do with persons
so much Frenchified as your self.


French. Madam I confess though an English Nurse taught me to go, a French
Dancing Master taught me to walk.


L. Wealth. Sir, I guest that seeing you come toward us. It sets us women
already a longing to see you dance, I hope you will grant us that savor upon
better acquaintance.


French. Madam I am sorry I cannot promise it, for I doubt my ear will not
endure the scraping of English Fiddlers, since I have been used to the sound of
the French Violins.


L. Weal. Sir I fear all our diversions in England will be but Dis^ses to your
nature.


French* Truly Madam, unless they were French, I shall not affect them at any
rate -- -- I Am very sorry I can continue no longer in the honor of your
Ladyships company, for I am going to employ my Eyes in the view of some French
Clothes and Garnitures that are newly brought me out of France, which is a
business of grand concern to a person that has seen the world.


L. Weal. Sir, we will not detain you from so great an affair, What ever our
inclinations are to your company.


French. Madam I hope you will be pleased to suffer a personal visit from me,


Well. What a Devil does he mean by a personal visit,

he makes ridiculous legs and goes off. Sure he does not mean to send his
Lacquie as an Envoy,


L. Weal. Mr. Welbred, I confess you are not worse Then your word in showing us
this Monsieur


Well. Madam the reason why London is more pleasant to live in, Then the
Country is because all sorts of fools come to it.


L. Weal. Indeed I think this fellow not inferior to any kind of Ass, that ever
yet I saw -- pray let us make good use of him.


Well. Madam my life on it, we will handle him to the best advantage but -- hark ye
-- one word in private as to the old business, when will ye marry me.


L. Weal. Old business d*e call it, sure it is new to you, for you have not me yet.


Well. Pish, pray tell me when ye will marry me.


L. Well. When will I marry you -- when will I love ye, you should ask me first.


Well. Why don't ye.


L. Weal. Why do I, did you ever hear me say I did


Well. I never heard you say you did not.


L. Weal. I Will say so now then if you long.


Well. By no means say not a thing in have, you may Repent at leisure.


L. Weal. Come leave your fooling or I Will swear it.


Well. Don't widow, for then you will lie too.


L. Weal. Indeed it seems it is for my money then you would have me.


Well. For that and something else you have.


L. Weal. Well, I Will lay a wager thou have lost all thy money at Play, for then
you are always in a marrying humor. But do you hear Gentleman, do you think to gain me
with this careless way, or that I will marry one I don't think is in love with
me.


Well. Why I am.


L. Weal. Then you would not be so merry, people in Love are sad and many times
weep.


Well. That will I never do for thee widow.


L. Weal. And why?


Well. 'Twould argue me a child, and I am confident if thou did not verily
believe I were a man, I should never be thy Husband -- weep for thee -- ha, ha,
ha, -- if e're I do


L. Weal. Go hang your self.


Well. Thank you for your advice.


L. W. Well then shall I see you again?


Well. When I have a mind to it -- Come, i will lead you to your Coach for once.


L. VV. And i will let you for once --


Exeunt. Enter Tailor and Milliner. Mill. 'Twere brave if we could get his
custom.


Tailor. I doubt it not, I Have workt for his Family above this twenty years. I
warrant thee, if he accept of me for his Tailor i will prefer you for his
Milliner.


Mill. This is his Lodging, -- let us knock,


They knock. Enter Enter French Lacquie. Lacquie, Qui est la:


Mill. What do he say kill.


Tailor. Sir, we would wait upon the Right Honorable Mr. Frencklove


Lacquie, That be my Matre, me tell him


Exit Lacquie. Tailor. I don't like these French faces about him, they will
persuade him from buying of us.

Enter Frenchlove. God bless your Honor, you are welcome into England again, I
have made many a white coat for your Worship, when you were a child, I workt
for your Father these twenty years, and hope to have your Honors custom, I
have brought Suites ready made up, for your Honor to see.


French. And who is that other man?


Tailor, A Milliner that has the best choice in the Exchange.


French. Why these are all English things you show me.


they open their ware. Tailor, Yes Sir we knew what would please your worship.


French. Ye are two mistaken Cockines.


In the mean time enter a French Tailor and a French Merchant. Mill. What means
he by Cockines?


Tailor, It Is Rogues in English, I heard two Frenchmen call one another so in
the street, and a man that stood by, interpreted the words to me.


Mill. We are like to sell much ware then.


Enter second Lacquie. Lacquie, Mounsieur -- the Merchant of France and the
Mounsieur Tailor of France are come.


French. Bring 'em in.


E. Tailor, Plague of his French throat, I had rather he would brought news of two
Devil's, we shall be finely served now.


Enter two Frenchmen. F. Tailor. Mounsieur we have brought you the new fashions
of France for Clothes and Gairntures. Mounsieur Le Merchant and my self sold
the same to the King of France for the last grand ball.


French. See the difference of the French fashions and the damned English.


F. Tailor. You have the English Tailor and the Pedlar in your Chamber, begar
they look like sheep.


E. Tailor. Say you so Frenchmen you shall find us wolves.


aside French. Do You hear me Gentlemen, if you stay I Will give you forty Candies
of Battons for your ware.


E. Tailor. An't please your Worship, how much is that in English money? for we
shall take any reasonable price to gain your Custom.


French. Why that sum in English, comes to forty swinging blows with an
extreme tough cudgel.


Mill. O Sir we can'^ take that, our ware stood us in more.


F. Tailor. O -- Mr. Englishman you understand some French.


E. Tailor. May I never eat slice of liquid beef again, had I that French
Rogues Tongue in my mouth if I would not bite it off as close to the root as
ever Barber sha^'d beard.


Mill. We will watch their coming out and beat 'em


E. Tailor, Agreed.


Exe. E. Tailor and Milliner. French. Well, what is your lowest price of these
things?


F. Tailor. Ma foi, a hundred Pistol.


French. Lacquie, bid my Vale de Chamber pay a hundred Pistol -- adieu.


F. Tailor. Mounsieur votre serviteur tres humble:

Exe. French Tailor and Merchant, they meet with the E. Tailor and Milliner who
wait for 'em. We did much disgrace the English Man's.


Merchant, Begar me laugh to think how they sneakt away.


E. Tailor. And do you know the faces of those Englishmen again if ye see them.


Merchant. Methinks they be very much like you in visage.


Mill. You are in the right, we are the men you called sheeps in Mounsieurs
Chamber.


F. Tailor. Begar me no like that they have -- the English anger in their face,
now would me could take five strides for one to be rid of 'em*


E. Tailor. My fine Mounsieur we staid here to have the honor of being better
known to you, and do intend to do your ears the favor in making them
acquainted with our fists. -- Therefore thus with our fists we salute your ears.


They throw 'in down and beat them hugely. F. Merchant. Is this the English
fashion to take acquaintance? begar the English butcher takes acquaintance with
his Calf -- so that he bills him.


F. Tailor. The French Gentleman does no fight with his hands, but with his
Rapier, therefore we challenge you to meet us to morrow in the field to give
Mounsieur la Merchant and my self satisfaction.


Mill. Well we will meet you to morrow in Southampton fields, -- there we shall be
private.


Exeunt. Finis Actus primi.
ACT the II.
SCENE the I.
Enter Mrs. Crafty alone. Mrs. Crafty. THis life of mine can last no longer
than my Beauty, and though it is pleasant now, I want nothing whilst I am Mr.
Welbred's Mistress, yet if his mind should change, I might e'ne sell Oranges
for my Living, and he not buy one of me to relieve me. It came into my head
last night that this ridiculous fellow Mr. Frenchlove I might get for my
Husband by the help of fortune, and a little Parson that uses to marry
privately. If I could but light handsomely into his Company, I am confident I
know a rare way to tickle this Trout. They say he affects all things that are
French, and despises English, therefore will I affect the garb of a French
woman, and jear at all English women and their fashions. This is the French
shop where he uses to buy Essences and Gloves, thither will I go. And if I can
meet him luckily, I shall feel his pulse to know what Physic is fit for my
Mounsieur's Diseases -- yonder comes the Mounsieur, my wished for object.

Enter French love. Fortune begins as if she would be my friend. Have you any
thing that is newly come out of France?


Shopkeeper. Ouy Madam, me have all the rarest things of Paris, the smell of
the Orange Jessemy, Violet and Rose, all grow in my Gloves and Essences as
natural as upon the trees.


Crafty. Come show me some French Pendants and Gloves of^ the pretty French
fancy.


Shoop keeper. Madam, I shall show you the Rarity of France.


Crafty. I must make use of some Discourse to please this

aside. French love's ears -- I came from the Exchange, where I saw a flock of
English Ladies buying taudry trimmed Gloves, of the dull English fancy; Pink,
Scarlet and Yellow together one chose; another Black, Red and Blew, and
Pendants like Hawks Bells, and these Ladies were making themselves fine for a
Ball in the City, where they enamour the hearts of every foreman of the shop,
and they to express their passions, instead of languishing, eye-casts and sighs
do stare and groan, as if they were giving up the Ghost for those Ladies.


French. This must be some person of Quallity that has been in France, I know
by her despising the English women.


aside. Crafty, Such Ladies as these are fit for our dull English Gentry, give
me a young Gallant that after his being in France, returns so well bred, that
he laughs at his own Country -- the fool looks pleased at my discourse, he
shall have more on it.


French. I must speak to her, she has charmed my eyes and ears.

aside Madam let me not appear a rude English man, by this presumption, of
speaking to you, if it be a crime, you ought to pardon it, for I have seen no
woman since my coming out of France, that would cause my admiration, but your
self, besides your Celestial beauty, I adore the truths I heard spoke by your
fair tongue.


Crafty, It Is my opinion, Sir, concerning our English Nation.


French. O -- Madam your opinion is beautiful as well as your face.


Crafty, Here Mounsieur how much must you have for your gloves*


Shop keep. Twenty, Madam.


Crafty, There is eighteen -- Sir your servant.


French. O Madam, I must be farther bold:


Crafty, In what Sir?


French. In beging leave to kiss your Ladyships hand.


Crafty, Sir though I would not coyly refuse you -- like an English woman, yet
I know not how to grant that.


French. I most humbly beg it.


Crafty, It Is not modesty in me upon this small acquaintance.


French. Madam if you will give a beggar a piece of Pread that is starving, deny
me not this Alms.


Crafty, Well Sir I am loath to let you sue for so small a thing, yet I must
blush and turn away my head to grant it.


French. Heaven reward your Charity.


Frenchlove leads her to the door and makes his reverence: she looks back
again. Crafty, Your servant Sir.


French. Give me leave to wait on you to your Coach.


Crafty, Now help me Fortune, and I Will snap wise Mr. Frenchlove in an English
trap.


Exit Crafty. Exit French. at another door. Enter the English Tailor and
Millener into the place appointed to fight with the Frenchmen. Milliner, These
French Rogues are not come yet.


Tailor, But what shall we do with this Mattock and Spade.


Mill. I Will secure thee, they are weapons shall do us more good Then our
Swords, let us fall a digging a couple of Graves.


Tailor, Well and what of that.


Mill. Why I believe the very sight of it will be so terrible to our two
Frenchmen, that mere fancy will make them turn Astrologers in their own
defense, and guess the sat of their own Stars, -- is for them to be buried in
these two Graves we are digging, if they fight with us -- O yonder they come.


Enter French Tailor and Merchant, they look about and see not the English. F.
Tailor, The devil a one English man be here.


Merchant, Begar me post 'em up in Paris for the two Coward.


F. Tailor, And me tell the King of France's Tailor, come let us begone.


Eng. Tailor, Dee hear you Frenchmen stay a little, the two English Cowards you
think will not come, are here already.


F. Tailor, Me have no one eye then to see 'em.


E. Tailor, Yes yes, cast your French eye a little this way, and you will see the
men you challenged.


F. Tailor, O -- methink you be the men.


E. Tailor, Indeed we are so, and have been digging two Graves to bury you two
in, and now are ready for you;

The French start back, and draw. Nay pray hold a little before we go to it,

Mr. French Tailor -- I must take measure of you.


F. Tailor, Why do you do so Mr. English.


E. Tailor, Only to see if I have made your grave fit? Faith it is just, now as
concerning our wager, I will lay thee the price of the triming a suite of
Clothes, that I hit my Frenchman at the first thrust, in the swallow, that he
shall never eat again.


Mill. And I will lay thee the making up of a suite of Clothes, that I cleave
my Frenchmans head just in the middle, for I Am resolved to fight with this
Mattock, therefore deliver up both your Swords, and agree to all our demands;
first give us half the money you took for your ware in Mr. Frenchlove's Chamber,
when you hindered us of -- Custom: in the next place, when ever we have any
thing to sell, you shall carry it to him, and say it came out of France.


F. Tailor. Well Mr. Englishmen, we'd dye before we would do this, if it were
not to teach you two rude Englishmen Complizance.


Exeunt Omnes at several doors. Enter Welbred and Comely. Com. Come prethree
let us contrive how to make some sport with Vain and Frenchlove.


Well. Let Us invite my Lady Wealthy and the other Ladies to a Ball, and have
Frenchlove and Vain there.


Com. Agreed, I like it well.


Enter first Crafty. 1 Crafty, I would not expect a better beginning, then my
first opportunity, I will impart my design to Mr. Welbred -- O yonder he is.


Well. Mrs. Crafty well met, your head looks full of business.


Crafty, I have some with you Sir --


takes him aside. Well. You have non that I will not do, if it lies in my power.


Crafty, I thank you Sir (then this it is) I suppose you know Mr. Frenchlove.


Well. Very well, would you were married to him.


Crafty, Shall I have your assistance?


Well. Withal my heart.


Crafty, I have been in his company already, I heard of a French Shop he
frequented, there I designed to meet him, there I did, and affected the garb
and humor of a French woman, hearing he despised all English: I could not
expect better success in my first adventure, then I found. For he seemed to
like me so well, that he begged leave to wait on me at my Lodging, to which I
seemed very unwilling, but at last granted it, not a word of this to Mr. Comely.


Welbred whispers Comely and tells him. Well. Why so, by all means let him know
it, he is a person will assist you.


Comely, Fie Mistress Crafty, I take it ill you bid Welbred not tell me of your
design, I shall further it all I can, you have a fister too that am obliged to,
whom I will endeavor to get married to Mr. Vain.


Crafty, I thank you Sir, Mr. Welbred your Servant, I cannot stay now, for I
expect Frenchlove at my lodging.


Exit Crafty. Well. These two fellows, Frenchlove and Vain are like to be well
Wiv'd.


Comely, I hope the plot will take; -- here comes my Lady Wealthy, and other
Ladies.


Enter Lady VVealthy and other Ladies. Well. Madam, this fine Evening is our
friend since it has brought you hither.


L. Weal. 'Troth Welbred had I thought to have met no other Company then you, I
should not have come.


Well. That is to say, you would not have come two hours ago, when I was not
here -- but you would have come now Widow.


L. Weal. Well Sir, i will have nothing to say to you till you can leave this
impudent way of Discourse -- Mr. Comely, when shall we have the fiddlers and be
merry.


Comely, As soon as you will command them Madam.


L. Weal. To night then, and let us have Frenchlove and Vain.


Comely, I dare engage for Frenchlove, but for Vain I know not what to say,
for he is a fellow that so belies all Women, that I could never get him near any.


L. Weal. I never saw this ^ellow yet --


Well. No, nor never shall Madam -- for we asked him one day if he were
acquainted with you; and he answered us with a counterfeit smile -- as much as
to say, he was intimately, so that he will as soon be shut up with a Lioness in
her Den, as come near you.


L. Weal. This fellow shall be your Rival, for he is yet a degree more impudent
then you.


Well. Away, I shall never live to see him or any man else, My Rival.


L Weal. How now manners, de'e think I cannot love no body else but you.


Well. I think as good, I think you shall not.


L. Weal. Take heed young man you will show your teeth too soon,


Well. Faith Widow I Will show thee all I have to do thee good.


Enter Frenchlove leading Mrs. Crafty. L. Weal. Who comes here?


Comely, Upon my life Frenchlove with his Mistress.


L. Weal. Why who is that.


Com. One Mrs. Crafty.


L. Wea. That gentlewoman I hear has been very civil to you.


Comely, If she has Madam, I am endeavoring to return it, in geting her
married to Mr. Frenchlove.


L. Weal. That shows good nature in you, but I dout you will want a Wife your self
then.


Well. No that I shall not do as long as you live.


L. Weal. Well Sir, please your self with that fancy.


Comely, Madam let us conceal our selves in this Arbor, we shall either see or
hear some very pleasant thing of Frenchlove as he walks with his Lady.


they stand close. French. Madam, leading your Ladyship put's me in mind of
France.


Crafty, Why Sir.


French. Because you lead so like the French Ladies.


Crafty, This is because you lead me like the French Gentlewomen.


L. Weal. O -- cunning Wench.


aside. French. I must confess I do so Madam, and really unless a person has
been long in France, he knows not how to lead a Lady with a boon grace.


he looks on the ground. Crafty, Sir, why look you so earnestly on the ground.


French. I Will lay a hundred Pistols, here has been three English Ladies walking
up before us.


Crafty, How can you tell Sir?


French. By being in France.


Crafty, -- What a Devil can he mean.


aside. French. I have often in France observed in Gardens, when the Company
used to walk after a small shower of Rain, the impressions of the French Ladies
feet, I have seen so much boon mean in their footsteps, That the King of
France's Matre de Dance, could not have found fault with any one tread amongst
them all. In this walk I find the toes of English Ladies ready to tread one
upon another.


Crafty, I must confess Sir, so nice an observation as this* Belongs only to a
person of great breeding.


they laugh concealed. L. Weal. O -- rare Wench.


French. Madam I esteem my self very happy in this hour wherein I have
opportunity to present my passion to you in a French garb, that I may not look
like dull English love.


Crafty, Sir, I shall endeavor to requi^e it by receiving it after the French
way.


L. Weal. O -- notable Wench -- come let us meet them,

aside. they discover themselves. Mr. Frenchlove, you are met very opportunely,

We designed to have your company to night at a Ball,

Which I now desire of you.


French. I shall not fail to kiss your Ladyships hands.


L. Weal. I hope you will favor us with your company too,


Crafty, I shall wait upon your Ladyship -- Mr. Welbred, I hope you have not
told my Lady Wealthy?


Well. But I have, and these your friends,


Exit Lady VVealthy, and the rest at one door. L. Weal. We shall expect you
both.


Crafty, I see all Ladies desire your company.


French. I know not upon what score, but I must confess French-Englishmen are
not common, though none can command my heart, but your Illustrious eyes --


Exeunt. Enter Vain in his Chamber, with Jack Arch his Boy. Vain. Boy what is a
Clock.


Arch. What need you know Sir, you sit in your Chamber all day.


Vain. Pox on it how this Rogue, he knows my course of life to a Hair, -- why
sirrah would you have me go abroad.


Arch. Yes Sir, I would have wait upon Ladies as other young Gentlemen do.


Vain. Why so, I would sirrah with all my heart, but thou know I am
acquainted with none; do thou know any, Arch?


Arch. Yes Sir, I know one.


Vain. Who is it?


Arch. Why Sir, it is my Mother, she lives in a little Cellar yonder in Holborn.


Vain, Out -- you impudent (...).


Arch. Nay Sir; be not angry, I meant it for your Entertainment, that you might
not sit at home all day in your Lodging.


Vain, Sirrah, don't you think I should speak to a^ Woman very well, if I were
acquainted with any?


Arch. I cannot tell that, but ^'me sure you speak o^ 'em very largely, that is
one reason I would have you make my Mother a Visit, that I might hear you talk
to her, to know what manner of Discourse you would make use of, i^ there should
ever happen an accident of your getting acquaintance with any woman.


Vain, Saucy boy* thy Mother is -- no Gentle woman.


Arch. Yes Sir, I have heard her say. she is by the Fathers side.


Vain, Why sirrah, you told me she was a Tradesman's daughter.


Arch. True Sir, most Tradesmen's Children are Gentlemen by the Fathers ^ide.


Knocking within. Vain, Go see who knocks at door.


Arch. Sir -- Mr. Welbred.


Vain, Wait on him in, and be sure sirrah remember your Cues, if you here me
talking of women.


Arch. You Will raise my wages then.


Vain, Well, well, sirrah.


Enter VVelb^ed. Well. Sir, it is a wonder to find you in your Chamber.


Letters lie up and down the Table superscrib'd for women. Vain, 'Troth Sir, I
have been dispatching some Letters.


Well. I see you have Sir, and every one of them directed to women.


Arch. Sir, what answer shall I give my Ladies Gentlewoman.


Vain, Sirrah, I shall cut out that Tongue of yours.


Well. Nay Mr. Vain, be not angry with the boy, it is no secret, your great
acquaintance with women is known all over the Town. Sure no man did ever lie
before this Fellow, i will try how great a lie I can make him tell.

aside As I was coming along the street, I met a Funeral, and they said 'twas a
maiden hearse.


Vain, Alas poor heart, she was buried to night it seems.


Well. Why Mr Vain, did you know her.


Vain, Yes Sir, the Doctors said they could not find what killed her, but Mr.
Welbred, betwixt you and I, 'twas grief.


Well. O Mr. Vain, I apprehend you, 'twas for love of you, I find.


Vain, I don't say, so Sir; but I must confess I had some expressions from her
upon her death bed, indeed the last words she said were Oh! Mr. Vain, Mr.
Vain!


Well. And the last words I say of your Worship, are O Mr. Liar, Mr. Liar


aside Well. Well Sir, I come to tell you that your Company to night at a ball
is desired by my Lady Wealthy, and other Ladies.


Vain, I shall not fail Sir, unless some great business hinders me.


Vain waits on him to the door Exit Well. Well. Your Servant Sir --


Vain, What a Devil made me say I would be at the ball, I have so belied all
women, that I dare no more come where they are, then a Rat would into a Room
where there is nothing but Cats.


Arch. Sir, with your Worships favor, you are the greatest liar that ever was,
for you not only belly the Bodies of women* but their Souls too, the first word
that ever you heard of this woman that dyed was by Mr. Welbred.


Vain, Sirrah hold your prating.


Arch. I am resolved to go serve Mr. Welbred, if you will not now raise my
wages -- and tell the whole course of your life.


Vain, Well sirrah i will give you twenty shillings a year more; this humor of
mine keeps me in awe of my own foot boy, and yet I cannot leave it.


Exeunt. Enter Lady VVealthy and other Ladies, and Comely as to the Ball. L.
Weal. Truly Mr. Comely, I have ^ot heard of better natured men then you and
Mr. Welbred, for endeavoring to get your Mistrisses well married; but most
commonly you young men never think of those kindnesses ^ill you are weary of the
Faces: It seems you reserve Mr. Vain for your Mistress.


Comely, Indeed Madam, I think we have pi^ch'd upon two as ^itting* Husbands
for 'em as can be, for they want wive^ wi^h wit, and the women Husbands with
Money.


L. Weal. I wonder Frenchlove and his Lady are not here yet, pray speak to the
Music to play --


They play As the Music is playing; Enter Frenchlove and Crafty after he has
made his reverence to the Company he beats the time of the Corant false.
Alsworth, Sir, you don't beat the time right.


French. How Is that, then it is damned English time you play --


Alsworth, Yes Sir, it is so.


French. Oh -- that is the justness of my ear, that only keeps French time.


Alsworth, Sir, French time and English time, and all one.


French. Hold your prating Fairie Fiddler.


Alsworth, Sir, Upon account I will play with any man in France*


French. I do intend to speak to the King to morrow in a business that shall be
for your advantages.


Fiddlers, We give you thanks Sir.


French. It is that ye may be allshipt away for France, and I shall give every
one of you a Letter of Recommendations to the King of France's Violins to
entertain you as their Servants, and so teach you the French way of play, and
de'e hear you Alderman Fiddler, don't you love Beef extremely.


Atkins, Yes Sir.


French. Leave eating on'^, you will never play a good Base else; you must all
expect to be dieted when you are in France, and Dine of cold Salle^s three
times a week.


L. Weal. Come Mr. Frenchlove, will you dance a Corant.


French. Withal my heart Madam, if these Fiddlers could play the right French
time.


They play, and he takes L. Wealthy by the ^and a^ to begin, but finds fault
with their playing and will not Dance. L. Weal. Let them try.


French. Madam, excuse me it is impossible to Dance to their playing.


L. Weal. This fool cannot Dance, and so puts it off.


aside. Enter Welbred. Welbred, What are you all mad good people, to have
Music and no Dancing, why, how now Mr. Frenchlove will not you let these Ladies
see your rare Quality.


French. Sir, it is impossible to Dance with the French Violins: Madam I shall
beg the favor of a song from your Ladyship.


1 Lady, Mark Madam, how I will catch his French Judgment Now first I will sing
you an English song, and then a French one to have your opinion of both.


aside She sings now I confess. F. Dial. Englishmen make songs of stormy works,
as if they meant fighting -- not loving, Madam, by your pardon bestow a French
song upon us.

What Excellent words, and Air French songs are made of


she sings a foolish French song. L. Weal. Sir, I admire your matchless
Judgment in all things, and envy Mrs. Crafty, who I hear has the pleasure of
your Company from all other women, you show your Judgment in placing your
affection upon so deserving a Person as she is, for Beauty and Breeding.


Well. Hark ye Comely, your Mrs. stays without to speak with you, so when the
ball is done i will wait upon the Ladies home, that you may stay.


aside L. Weal. Come Ladies it is late, let us go, Gentlemen your Servant.


Exeunt all but Comely. Enter Second Crafty. Comely, I was coming to you,
welbred told me you were here.


2 Craf. I have but just time to tell you concerning the business of Mr. Vain,
how my sister has advised me in it; he is a fellow comes near no sort of Company,
so that I know not how to get acquainted with him, she bid me therefore write a
Letter to him full of modest admiration of his Person; I told her this would
make him smoke it, and think -- Impudence in a woman


Comely, No, no, he has advised you well, to any knowing man ^'would appear so,
but to such an Idiot as he, 'twill take as quick as tinder. Is the Letter gone?


2 Crafty, Yes, yes, and I expect him here, I writ him word I would be walking
in the Spring Garden.


Comely, My life on it the design takes -- O yonder he comes, let us conceal our
selves.


Enter Vain and Jack Arch. Vain, Pre^hee Jack look once more upon the
superscription, I cannot believe it is to me from a woman.


Jack, Yes, yes Sir, it is for the Right Honorable Mr. Vain Esqui^.


Vain, Prithee read the Letter once again.

Sir look not upon the weakness of a woman with a despising eye, since '^is my
Affection to your Person and Parts causes this shameful confession of mind,
wherein I own I have a greater value for you than all mankind, blushing I set
my hand to this.


Jack reads Vain, Jack, between you and I, this Letter I fear may be only to
bring me hither, and so trepan me into a beating; for I have spoken so largely
of all Women, that I expect it one time or other.

Now do I apprehend meeting some overgrown Hector that knows I am a Coward,
and then i am sure to have forty blows more from him than any other man.

Therefore Jack have a nimble eye.


Jack, Sir, O, my Conscience yonder comes such a kind of man as your Worship
was speaking of, for his shirt hangs out at his wast, and his Collar is
unbutton'd.


Enter Hector. Vain, It Is so, let us slip aside to avoid him.


Hector, By Jupiters great toe i will walk here these two hours, but i*ll catch
this slave, and if I light on him i will beat him after the new way that I and my
brother Kins man invented last night, which all old fashion beating is nothing
to.


Vain, This is very hard, I am not only designed to be beaten here to night,
but after a new way to boot: Pox of all new fashions say I O Jack, what a fool
was I to think any woman really could write such a Letter to me.


Hector, It Is the time he promised to be here, well the longer he stays away,
the longer will I be a swinging him.


Vain, This fellow is finely resolved, there is no way but one Jack for me to
escape; all Hectors ever want money, therefore do thou go and offer him these
five pieces to be pacified


the Hector walks furiously. Jack, Sir, I suppose you know my Master.


Hector, I suppose you lie sirrah -- your master may be in Hell for ought I
know.


Votne, 'Twas well guest, so I am, if Hell be a place of Torment.


Jack, A'^ please you sir, are not you employed as being a stout man to beat a
Gentleman here this Evening.


Hector, I boy -- it is your master then it seems.


Jack, Amongst friends, it is so sir.


Hector, I do intend to try if he be stockfish.


Jack, Nay pray sir, my Master has sent you five pounds to lay your ^ury, and
protests he loves you dearly


He takes the money. Hector, O -- I had forgot, your master's name is Mr -- Mr
--


Jack, Mr. Vain an' please you sir.


Hector, I, I, the same, he is an honest Gentleman, if he be here boy tell him I
am his humble Servant,


Jack. I Will bring him to you strait*


Jack goes to his Master. Hector, This was rare luck, to get five pieces to
forbear beating of a man, who for ought I know might have beat me: But now will
I get more money out of my unknown Customer.


Mr. Vain comes to the Hector. Vain, My Noble Friend, your Servant,


Hector, Damme sir -- upon what acquaintance, I know not one feature of your
face, not so much as your Nose.


Vain, Sir, my boy was with you but now with five pieces I presented you with.


Hector, Five Devils sure, you have a countenance looks as if you would be run
through.


Vain, Pardon me sir, I don't desire it -- but indeed I sent you five pieces
to forbear me.


Hector, Well sir, you did, and to tell you truth, I never intended, nor was
employed to beat you; perhaps you over heard me talking of Cudgeling one, but
'twas not you.


Vain, Nay then Sir, give me my money again.


Hector. Hold there, by the mistake I find you are a fellow that both will, and
deserve to be beaten, so that if you don't give me five pounds more you shall
have it strait.


Vain, To show you I don't value five pounds, here it is.


Hector, Now Sir, though this wont teach you Courage, yet it will reach you
against another time not be a Coward before you need, and so your money and I
bid you farewell.


Exit Hector. Enter Second Crafty. Comely, Now do you appear.


Vain. Was there ever such ill Luck as this Jack?


Jack, True Sir, but yonder I think comes as good, I believe the Lady that writ
to you.


Vain. Now I am so daunted, that I fear it is a man in woman's clothes, prithee
peep Jack, and see if she has not a sword under her Coats, let us walk twice or
thrice by her, before I venture to speak to her.


they walk by one another before they speak. 2 Crafty, I am confident this is
he, by the description Comely gave me of him, I must use some means to make him
speak to me; O -- it is he, O that I were no woman, that I might take
acquaintance with him.


aside. Vain, She means me Jack, now will I speak to her, Madam may I ask your
name?


2 Crafty, I do not use to tell it men, and yet I will to you, My name is
Crafty?


Vain, The very sound does sanctify my ears. Know you this Letter Madam?


2 Crafty, Would I could say I did not, for then this face would wear a
thousand fewer blushes then it does, however these Lines have betrayed my mind,
Worthy Sir, think it not amiss of me, '^is the first folly Love e're prompt'd
me to!


Vain. So far I am from such a thought, as I adore you, yet truly Madam '^is
not the first Letter by forty that I have received from women in this kind,
though I never esteemed any but yours, pray pull off that envious Mask, i^
clouds my Heaven. So through thickest clouds, when Phoebus break's, She pulls
off her Mask. his light appears more glorious. May these eyes ever look upon me
with Pity, and then I am blessed.


2 Crafty, Did not you hear a great noise in the Garden just now.


Vain. Yes Madam, one of these talking Hectors was prating very loud, and I met
him, he began to Huff me, not knowing who I was, but afterward he asked my
name, and that quieted him.


Craf. I am very glad Sir, it came not to a quarrel, and now I must take my
leave for this time, desiring you to forget the letter I writ to you.


Vain, Madam my heart must still remember you, and all things of you, before
you go, I crave admittance to wait upon your Ladyship at your Lodging, as often
as my love, to you, desires it.


2 Crafty, Sir after so great a show as I have made to you already of my
kindness; 'twere folly in me to deny it! Your Servant.


Vain, Give me leave to wait on you to your Coach?


2 Crafty, No Sir, 'twill not be convenient, there are Ladies in the Coach stay
for me.


Vain, Farewell Transparent-Diamond.


Exit Vain and his Boy. 2 Crafty, Farewell thou Transparent-Fool.


Comely appears. Comely, O VVench the Plot has took rarely,


2 Crafty, Beyond expectation!


Com. Come let us away, and thank Fortune for what is past, and court her for
what is to come.


Exeunt. Enter Lady- VVealthy as in her own House with her Woman. L. Wea. As
sure as can be this Gaming servant of mine has been at play, that I have not
seen him lately.


Woman, Truly Madam, for all that humor of his, I believe he loves you very
well.


L. Weal. Hark, some body knocks at the Chamber door?


Woman goes to the door. Woman, It Is Mr. Welbred, Madam.


Enter Welbred with a little Parson. Well. Stay you here till I call.


L. Weal. O Sir, I thought you had been lost?


Well. No that I am not, but I have lost, that is worse.


L. Weal. O -- your money at play, I thought as much by my being honored now,
with your presence; why I have not seen you this seven years.


Welbred, I am glad you think so Widow, but I tell you 'twas not half an hour
ago since you saw me.


L. Weal. Why, how so prithee?


Well. 'Twas but half an hour ago since I cleared my Pockets.


L. Weal. But you don't reckon, how long the time was since you had money.


Welbred, No Faith, nor did I ever in my life; take it upon my word, a winning
Gamester can never reckon, those pleasant minutes. A Plague of all ill Luck, I
lost seven to four at least, half a dozen times to night! I Will make you
understand the severity of my fortune, it is so much a better chance than four,
as I think of my conscience I could lay thee upon it, against hundred pounds in
Gold.


L. Weal. I thank you for your Demonstration, sweet Sir, and I do verily
believe were I in your power, you would lose me at play too, in one week;
therefore you and I will keep at a distance.

What your Foot-mans in mourning for your losses, and he is as impudent as his
Master, he comes into my Chamber without knocking.


Little Parson comes in. Parson, Mr. Welbred will you be married to day.


L. Weal. What Is the meaning of this?


Well. He Is no Footman Madam, he is a Parson.


L. Weal. A Parson; what makes a here?


Well. Truly I brought him along with me to marry us, if you are in the same mind
as I am.


L. Weal. Now cannot I hold from laughing at thy Extravagant humor, thought I
could find in my heart to have you beat down stairs!


Well. Prithee Widow be not angry, by my lost Maidenhead, I love thee, a thing
if I had again, I would bestow it upon thee -- with a good will. I shall make an
excellent Husband, very kind and very often.


L. Weal. Hark y'e, I command y'e begone, i will never see your face again else?


Well. Nay then I Obey, come Parson, you and I must defer this business till
another time, and Widow give me leave to tell you, you stand in your own
Light, and have lost a fair opportunity of being well married.


Well. and Parson are going out. L. Weal. Stay Mr. Welbred, i will take your
council, i will have you before you go.


Well. Oh -- is your stomach come down.


Parson, So, then i will make ready my Book, and put on my Spectacles.


L. Weal. I suppose you know the Vow I have made?


Well. Not I, what is it?


L. Weal. Why it is, that the Parson who marries us, shall have ten Pieces in
Gold, if you love me so well, you will not refuse to give him that.


Parson, A very Pious Lady.


Well. Parson you lie, she is a wicked woman, she knows I have not a Groat; well
Widow, if you will disburse the money, ^'le pay you again out of your first half
years Rent:


L. Weal. Another time, Sir, but I will not stay you now, I shall keep you so long
from the groom Porters!


Well. O thou gilting woman;


L. Weal. Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Colli^r.


Well. Come Parson let us march, she has made a Fool of me, and I have made a
Fool of thee.


L. Weal. Unkind Mr. Welbred, you will go then, I shall sigh This two days,
ha, ha, ha,

Hark ye, give the Porter warning when ever he comes next, not to let him till
he calls you, and then do refuse to let him see me, unless he can show you an
hundred pound in G^d an^ say, I gave you this order; I fain would break him of
this -- (...), because I love him?


laughs at him as he goes out. Woman, It shall be done Madam.


Exeunt. ACT the III.
SCENE the. I
Enter the two French Tradesemen, and the two English. Eng. Tailor, HEre, these
things you must sell off for us to day, we will give you something out on it for
your pains Friend; And watch your coming out for fear you cozen us.


He knocks at the door. Enter Frenchlove French. O welcome, have you brought
more things out of France*


F. Tailor, Ouy Monsieur,


French. Methinks ye speak very melancholy;


F. Tailor, Monsieur, the English air no agree with the Frenchman.


Enter Comely. Comely, Mr. French, your Servant, what you are always buying
the rare fashions of France:


they show him new fashions French. Sir, are they not very fine?


Com. O extreme!


French. Sir, it is impossible the hand of an English Tailor should have set on
any on^ knot of the Garniture of these two suits.


Comely, Now will I hold my life they were mad by an English Tailor.


French. Well, what must you have for these Clothes?


F. Tailor, Mounsieur, 150. Pistols for the two suits and the Feathers;


French. Here, I have just such a sum in my Pockets.


F. Tailor. Monsieur, serviteur tres humble.


goes away. French. Hei Lacquie, lay up these clothes.


E. Tailor, O you have sold our Ware it seems, come, to the next Tavern and
then we will have our Money.


Ex. French and English. Enter VVelbred and Vain. Well. Mr. Frenchlove your
servant, I have brought a very worthy Gentleman to kiss your hands, Mr. Vain.


they salute. French. Gentlemen if you please let us dine together?


Well. Agreed.


Vain, I know a Cooks shop has the best boiled and roast Beef of any in Town.


French. Sir, since you are a stranger to me, I only ask you what you mean, but
were you acquainted with me, I should take your greasy proporsion as an
affront to my pallat.


Vain, Sir, I only meant by the consent of this Company to dine well together.


French. De' ye call dining well, to eat out of a French house -- an English
Cook's shop is Hell.


Vain, Sir, I understand y^'e as little as you do Beef.


French. Why then, to interpret my meaning plainly, if ever you make me any
such offer again expect to hear from me the next morning.


Vain, What, that you could not dine with me?


French. No sir, that I will fight with you.


Vain, I see you are excellent good Company Mr. Frenchlove by your ralling.


French. Per dein sir, I don't rally, neither shall you with my pallet.


Well. Mr. Vain, don't pursue this Discourse, you are both Gallant men, and
there may be bloodshed; besider sir, this is a Gentleman that has writ an
History of all the best French Cooks that ever was, and will discourse more
Leardnedly upon this subject than any man in the world.


French. In short sir, I can only tell you that I had once a Dispute with a
certain Person in this kind, who defended the English way of eating: whereupon
I sent him a challenge, as any man that has been in France would have done, we
fought, and I killed him, and where about (...) guess I hit him?


Vain, I warrant you in the small guts.


French. I run him through his mistaken pallat, which made me think the hand of
Justice guided my sword.


Vain, I like not this fellow's Conversation Gentlemen, I must borrow my self
from your Society, for I am to dine with a Lady in Lincoln's-Inn-fields.


aside. French. How Is that (...)? where abouts lives that Lady?


Vain, Lives, why? here -- in my breast.


French. Why then, give me leave to tell you she has but a stinking life on it,
since you are so great a Beef Eater; but to be more plain, where does she lodge?


Vain, In one of the New Houses.


French. Diabol, I fear it is my Mistress, if it be, and this fellow stout, I am
undone, however I Will put on a Face Sir I have a Mistress liv's in the same Row,
and therefore along with me and show me this House; if it proves the same, one
of our shirts must be dyed with another color.


aside Welbred, Nay Gentlemen, we will not leave you to your selves in these
distempers, we will wait on you; Comely, this will be a pleasant scene of mirth,
thou know the two sisters live in this house, let us offer our selves to be
their seconds.


Comely, Agreed.

Mr. Vain, be pleased to let me be your second in this business; and thus much
I assure you, Frenchlove is a rank Coward.


Vain, I am glad to hear it. aside Sir if he fights with me, I had rather he
were as stout as Hector.

Mr. Frenchlove, let me serve you with my Sword, I Will secure you, Veins an
errant Coward.


French. Sir, I shall be the ^orrier for it if he fights with me, but I would
not for a 1000 Pistols he were otherwise.


aside Well. Come Mr. Vain, will you go?


Vain I Am ready sir.


Comely, Mr. Welbred, you are Mr. Veins friend, and I am Mr. Frenchloves, then
lead us the way and we will follow.


Exeunt. Enter two Sisters walking, as in Lincoln's End Walk. 1 Crafty, I
wonder I have not seen my ala-mode Servant to day.


2 Crafty, Nor I, my new sprung Mushroom sweetheart.


1 Crafty, Sister if ever we get them for our Husbands, we will change every half
hour for diversion.


2 Crafty, Well, they have both very good Estates, and therefore very fine
Gentlemen, take heed we don't reckon our chiken before they are hatched.


1 Crafty, No, no, we are reckoning our Calves when we talk of them.


2 Crafty, Thou art a mad wench.


1 Crafty, Faith not so mad as they will be if they marry us* Come let us sit
under th^se trees, and talk of them and think of others.


They sit down. Enter the four as to the Duel. SCENE IV.
French. Now, sir, which is the house.


Vain, It Is that (...) against us.


French. The very house my Saint inhabits. Mr. Welbred, not that I care to
know, but are you sure Vain is not stout?


Well. I am upon my word.


French. Sir, your owning the house makes my blood boil within me, therefore
without farther examination pull off your Doublet* passion and love unbuttons
mine and throws it off.


Vain, Mr. Comely, not that i would give two pence to know, but are you sure
Frenchlove is not stout?


Comely, It Is, true, believe me.


Vain, The same causes that pulls off your Doublet, as quick shall pull off
mine.


French. Gentlemen, what mean you by this delay in such a business, if you're
at your prayers, they are too long for this occasion.


Comely and Well. whisper. Well. O Comely, we are ruined.


French. Why, what is the matter, will ye not fight?


Comely, Yes, but this Devil must be turned another way.


Vain, As how?


Well. We two must fight against you Gentlemen; we can clear your mistakes by
our own misfortunes. They are two beautiful sisters, lives in that house, we
have long been hopeless Servants too; now our despairs are more increased by
being Rivaled by you two: Mr. Frenchlove you being the man that enjoy the
affection of my Mistress the eldest.


Comely, And you Mr. Vain the man that has the heart of my Mistress the
youngest: Indeed a friend of ours told us these sad truths this morning, so Mr.
Vain go you to Mr. Frenchlove's side and then we are ready for you.


French. By your pardon Gentlemen, no man shall be my second that commends an
English Cook* or that ever thought ^eef good meat.


1. Crafty, Sure yo^der are four men with their Double^ off, as if they were
going to fight.


women spies ^em they come up close to them. 2 Crafty, It Is, so, let us hasten
to prevent them. Gentlemen, hold your hands.


1 Crafty, Mr. Frenchlove, Heaven defend, are my eyes fall or is it you?


2 Crafty, Bless me and Mr Vain, what means this dismal sight, French. Madam,
there is no hurt done; but truly I think here had if Mr. Vain had loved the
French way of eating.


1 Crafty, How so I pray sir?


French. Why, then he would been my second, for I have resolved no man ever should
that eats after the English way.


1 Crafty, A happy deliverance, but what is the quarrel?


French. Concerning your two fair selves, with these two Gentlemen.


1 Crafty, Who, Mr. Welbred, and Mr. Comely? I wonder they can be so impudent
to fight for us, since we have always slighted them.


Well. Will you still continue your Cruelties, Ladies?


1 Crafty, Will we live you should ask us.


Well. O what a sad day is this*


2 Crafty, Sure Mr. Comely you have known few better as to us.


Well. Come let us be gone, we shall but hear our miseries repeated; we slighted
Lovers are only fit companions for our selves.


Exeunt Com. and (...) French. To tell you truth Madam, the occasion that
brought us hither into the field, was a mistake betwixt this noble Gentleman
and my self; for he was talking of going to a Lady, whom he was a Servant to,
living in

I demanded of him to show the house, which proving to be yours, and not
knowing you had a sister, Jealousy then en^am'd my love, immediately we drew,
and to it had gone, but that the other two Gentlemen cleared the mistake.


Vain, Yes indeed, we were just running a til^ one at another.


1 Crafty, No 'twas running tilt one from another.

aside Thanks be to Heaven that you are both safe now, and pray Gentlemen
hereafter avoid having any disputes with one another, ^wil make my sister and I
unhappy, since we have both concerns.

And truly Mr. Vain, a (...) Mea^s, Clothes, Powders, Essences, and those kind
of things cast your cap at 'em, and never argue i^ with Mr. Frenchlove; for
he is an absolute Demonstrator in such cases.


Vain, Madam, I am perfectly Mr. Frenchlove's humble servant, but I must
confess I don't love to hear boiled or roast Beef spoke against.


2 Crafty, I sir, but extreme wel-bred persons value it, but as the flesh of a
Beast.


1 Crafty, Sister we must stickle between these two Coxcombs, for they will be
falling out every day.

Gentlemen be pleased to walk in, and share with us in an ill Dinner.


aside Exeunt. SCENE V.
Enter VVelbred as going to my Lady VVealthies House. Well. Well I find when
ever my Pockets are emptiest of money, I am fullest of love, therefore will I
go make the other visit to my widow, and see if this windy woman sit's in so
cold a corner as she did when I left her.


knocks at the door, Porter appears. Well. Is your Lady within?


Porter, I am not sure sir, but i will inform you strait, your patience a little
sir.


Well. This fellow knows not my humor, I am always very patient when I have no
money.


Enter La. Gentlewoman. Well. Is your Lady within Mistress?


Gent. Yes sir.


Well. I am glad on it --


be offers to go in Well. Gent. Nay sir, whither so fa^?


Well. What a question that is? why to your Lady:


Gent. Why Sir, you must not see her unless you can show (...) a hundred pieces
in Gold.


Well. How Is that?


Gent. Nay it is true Sir, she has given me such order.


Well. Pish, pish;


Gent. Nay never pish, I am not in ^est;


Well. I, but your Lady is I hope!


Gent. No but she is not.


Well. Why then the Devil take her in earnest, and keep her till she is out of
this humor, and so farewell to ye both.


(...) he is going away, L. Wea. calls him out of the window. L. Weal. Mr.
Welbred, I hope you will pardon me, I am at Le umbre and am a great winner, and
then I never receive any visit from a losing Gamester.


Well. Tyranizing Widow, I hope thou wilt lose all back again, and ten times as
much more, mai'st thou never draw for a black Dice, but it may prove redder
then a Country wenches cheeks, may thou never take up a Card, but Traies and
Sixes* may thou pay as often as I did the other night, which was ten times
together.


L. Weal. I see you love me, Sir, by wishing me equal to your self.


Well. Love thee, I wish thy body may be a widow these fourscore years, that
thou may curse the cause that made thee lose thy Maiden-^ I hope the King
will have a mark set upon the name of all widows for men to avoid them.


La. Weal. Be not so passionate dear servant, f^aith me thinks thou art a (...)
fellow at this distance: I (...) (...) good looks so well, (...).


Well. And is the (...) (...) as come this year, (...) tongued female, hold thy
peace and let me in, else will I (...) (...) Murder to be hanged, to make thee
cry for me.


L. Weal. I like thy way of being revenged, therefore prithee about it (...).


Well. Well take your pleasure, farewell and be hanged as you said you would.


Exeunt. ACT the IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Comely in a Riding Garb, with his servant. Comely, LEt my Horses be
brought ready to the door, for ^'le go out of Town this Evening.


Exit servant Enter Welbred. Well. Why, how now Comely, booted and spurred?


Comely, Marry am I*


Well. For how long?


Comely, Why, for this seven years for ought I know, I am weary of this Town,
and all that is m't; as for women I am in love with none, nor never shall, I find
I have a pretty strong defense about my heart against that folly. O here comes
the Ladies very opportunely for me.

Enter Lady VVealthy and two other Ladies. To take my leave of them.


L. Weal. Mr. Comely your Servant -- what in a Riding Garb?


Comely, A dress fitting for a Country Journey Madam.


L. Weal. Why, can you ever leave this Town?


Comely, That I can truly Madam, within this hour.


L. Weal. I cannot believe it.


Comely, Were It not uncivil to get up a Horseback before you* I would convince
you strait; ^ay, I did think I should be wondered at by you all, as much as an
Owl is amongst Birds: Very like now if I were in love with any one of you
three, though I were on Horseback, a kind look might dismount me again; but I
thank fate I never had that perpetration of the heart; ye^ ^ Disease -- as
malignant and as catching as the Plague; and Reig^s as the Plague does
altogether in London: So that for my future health i will retire into the
Country for Air, and there Hunt and Hawk, Eat and sleep so sound, that I will
never dream of a woman, or any part about her -- This resolution of mine has
made me turn Poet, therefore before I go, you shall hear a Song called my
farewell to London and women, boy sing the Song.


The SONG.
1.
LAdies farewell, I must retire,
Though I your faces all admire;
And think you Heavens in your kinds,
Some for Beauties, some for Minds:
If I stay, and fall in Love,
One of these Heavens, Hell would prove.
2.
Could I know one, and she not know it,
Perhaps I then might undergo it!
But if the least she guess my mind,
Straight in a Circle I Am confined;
By this I see who once does Dote,
Must ware a woman's Livery Coat.
3.
Therefore this danger to prevent,
And still to keep my hearts content:
Into the Country I Will with speed,
With Hounds and Hawks my fancy feed!
Both safer pleasures to pursue,
Then staying to converse with you.
L. Weal. Now Mr. Comely, would I give the world (...) see yo^ foundly in Love
after this Farewell Song of yours to all Wom^* I have heard the healthiest
persons when once they fall into a ^ver, are most distempered.


Comely, Lady, faith you will never see me so, perhaps you may hear when I am in
the Country, that I am in love with my Hounds if they run well, but as for
falling in love with Woman, when ^ver I do ^'le sell all my Estate, and
purchase Bedlam to have it to my self, for 'twill be a house fi^ for no other
kind of Madmen.


1 Lady, Come Madam, since the Gentleman's in such have, let us leave him, he will
think we are f^nd of his Company, and would stay him in Town.


L. Weal. Mr. Comely, I wish you a good Journey.


They take leave. Com. Ladies, your most humble Servant.


Exeunt Ladies. Well. You will go then it seems?


Com. Yes indeed will I, and dear Welbred, fare thee well, and since you are in
Love, I wish thee good luck with thy Widow.


Well. I find then you have not heard of my last visit to her?


Com. Why what is the matter?


Well. I Will tell thee, when I came to the door, I was examined by her
Gentlewoman, who told me her Lady had given her orde^ not to let me in, unless
I could show an hundred pounds in Gold, I could sooner have raised the Devil,
for he was in my Pocket; so that I was forced to retreat; and as I was marching
off, she calls to me out of the window, and Jears me.


Comely. Welbred, She shows thee this trick only because '^is thy humor never
to make her a Visit, when thou have any money: All the Town know she loves thee,
therefore prithee apply thy self close, and get her for thy Wife, she is a great
Fortune ^or a younger Brother. One thing more I have to say to thee before I
go* concerning the two Sisters whom we designed to get married ^o Mr.
Frenchlove and Mr. Vain: Make Vain believe the cause of my leaving London, is
his enjoying the affection of my Mrs. and use all means for the marrying the
two young women, and ad^u, and when thou art weary of the Town, come live with
me in the Country.


Exit Welbred. he is going off in ha^ and me^ts Will* a Clown and Elsbeth Pretty*
and (...) Welbred, Farewell dear Friend?


Comely, Now i will away, a country life Shall be my Mistress and my Wife.


William, Pray Gentleman, is not this the place where the King and the Queen do
walk,

Thou art the first man Elsbeth and I have met with since we came to this huge
Town, that wear Boots like our Gentlemen in Wiltshire.


Comely, And did you two come to Town only to see the King and Queen?


Will. No, no, we come about this Maiden's Vather's Will.


Comely, And what is this maids name.


Will. Wouse man, one would a thought thou had been a better Schollard then
to have asked her name before mine,


Comely, Cry mercy friend, what is thy name.


Will. Friend do call me, how can tell I Am thy friend before thou know
my name, I am called (...) by all the folk that know me in Wiltshire.


Comely, Honest William then, what is this Damsels name?


Will. Why her Cursen name is Elsba, her next name to that, I wous is Pretty.


Comely, By all the charms of Beauty, a name as fit for her, as if Nature had
Christened her, and were her God-mother as well as Mother.


aside. Elsba. Pray Sir, is there but one King, and but one Queen at London?


Comely, No pretty Mrs. Pretty.


Elsba. Hark William, he names my name twice in on breath*

Why Sir, then the King goes no finer dressed then another man, no^ the Queen
then another woman, else William i will swear by that thing you are to have of me
when we are married, we saw bove vorty, Kings and Queens to day.


Comely, Well, i will carry William and you one day to see the King and Queen at
Dinner.


Elsba. Thank ye Sir.


Comely, But are you to be married?


Will. Elsba and I are both for^worn else.


Comely, Methinks that troubles me; it is but a fancy sure.

aside When are you to be married?


Elsba. To morrow God send's fair weather.


Comely, My heart's disturbed to hear it, what can it mean, that I should find
disorder in my breast because this Country wench is to be married: I needs
must ask again.

aside To morrow is the day you have set then?


Will. Prithee, if thou will not believe, come to St. Brides and thou shall see
the Parson join our hands.


Comely, The very hearing of it repeated makes me feel something, I know not
what, methinks more then a usual heat is now within me.

aside Is it not very hot to day?


Will. 'Vous Elsba. And I have reason to say so, for we have walked all about
London to day; we don't intend to leave one fine sight unseen: We were at a
place where a huge rough thing (a shame take 'em) had like to have bit Elsba by
the Leg, and then the beast had utterly spoiled her new stockings which I
bought her at our last Fair.


Comely, Prithee let us see what color they are off


shows her leg. Will. That thou shall, if thy eyes don't hinder thee.


Comely, 'Twas a beast indeed that could have bit that leg.


Elsba, Why -- how now Will. will you offer to show my leg at London, have ye
not heard there is more danger in showing a maids leg at London then in the
country?


Will. No indeed Elsba there is not, as long as I have thy leg in my hand.


Comely, Sure I would handle those legs more gently, what would I give now to
be that Clown; i will ask them where they lodge

aside By which means I may have opportunity to break my mind to her -- And
where do you two lodge whilst you are in Town, i am resolved to come and see
you.


Will. Where thou shall be welcome -- we lie in the* Strand, at a House my Va^her
uses to lie at, next door to the (...) Heart When comes about Law Suits -- Come
Elsba thee and i will go home, I begin now to be hungar'd.


Comely, Why do y'e use to sup thus early?


Will. I warrant thee man Elsba and I go to bed before Candle tinding.


Comely, Sweet Mistress Pretty you will bid me welcome too I hope.


Elsba, Yes indeed very kindly sir.


Comely, O -- that she would as kindly as I could wish.


Will. Good Den t'y'e, come Elsba.


Elsba, I William.


Exeunt Clown and Elsba. Enter Servant. Servant, Sir 'twill be too late for
your Worship to go out of Town to Night.


Comely, I think so too, set up my Horses, what sudden fate has changed my
mind! I feel my heart so restless now as if it n'ere knew rest, sure i am in
love; yet how I should find that who never was before, a man that is sick of a
Disease he never had, knows not what it is till the Physician proves it, yet
i am acquainted with my new distemper, as if I had lingered in it this twelve
months: how finely shall I be laughed at now if the cause of my staying in
Town be once discovered, I that have taken the liberty all my life time to Jeer
at peoples being in love.


SCENE II.
Enter Welbred, and with him a Scrivener going to my Lady Wealthies House.
Well. BElieve me honest Gripe, I Would have this hundred pounds in Gold but just
to show my La. Wealthies Gentlewoman.


Gripe, Sir, you have had so ill a run at play, and I have lent you so much
already, i am resolved not to part with af^rthing more.


Well. I tell thee Gripe I will not borrow it, i will hold it in my hand but half
a minute, and thou shall have it again.


Gripe, What good can this do you?


Well. Good? -- Why 'twill be the absolute losing of my widow if thou dos't
not do it, i will only show the Gold at the door, then i will slip it into thyhand
again.


Gripe, Well Sir, if this be all, here is the money for yo^, but (...) hold you
by the tip of the Coat to be se^ure of my money (...) yo^ enter.


VVelb^ed k^ocks Well. Is your Lady within?


Enter Gentlewoman. Gent. Yes, Sir.


Well. Why look ye then, I am come to see her, my Pockets are full of Gold,
here is a hundred of u'm.


Gent. I Will call my Lady immediately.


Gripe, Come sir, my money now you have done showing it*


Well. What will not you let me keep it in my Pockets till I come out again.


he gives the money. Exit Gripe. Gripe, No, no, no sir.


Enter Lady VVealthy to him. L. Weal. Mr. Welbred, I find Miracles are not
ceased altogether, by your making me a visit when your Pockets are full.


Well. Madam, I wonder you could ever have such thought of me.


L. Weal. I do y'e wrong I warrant ye.


Well. In that behalf Madam, you wrong my heart, that loves you equally in all
Conditions.


L. Weal. That is to say, you care not a pin for me at any time* Prithee, what
is thy love Welbred?


Well. It Is your fair self.


L. Weal. By my troth i am sorry to (...) it* for then I am nothing.


Well. Nay widow, why so (...) (...) that values you above his life?


L. Weal. I believe you do at any time you have lost your money, for then
you are weary of living; No, Gentleman, if a winning hand can be my Rival, a
losing hand shall be yours*


Well. But why so sharp widow* ^ow I have convinced you that i am not of this
humor.


L. Weal. Convince me for once, sure you think I am ^very fond loving Lady*
perhaps if you keep at this rate for a whole twelve month -- a year after that
I may tell you my mind.


Well. Why will not you marry me to day?


L. Weal. Why should you think i will hang my self to morrow?


Well. Nay prithee be more mild, faith I love thee truly and nobly, end
fooling and be kind to me.


L. Weal. No, no, to be kind to you, is to begin fooling.


Well. Well I Will hold my peace, a woman sometimes loves to be Courted with the
Eyes, and not with the Tongue, so that for this time i will convey my love to
thee by looks; but, hark ye, though you don't care for me, I hope you love me
better than another man.


L. Weal. Yes, that I think I do.


Well. I am glad to hear it, I have not lost my widow, and yet have kept my
humor.


aside Enter two Ladies. 1 Lady, Madam your Servant, we came to wait on you, to
know if you will take the Air.


L. Weal. VVithall my heart, the Evening is very sweet.


1 Lady, Me thinks we miss Mr. Comely's Company already.


L. Weal. Truly at the rate men go now adays, many of their Companies are
well spared.


Well. That Is for me again, particular concerns make women speak in General.


1 Lady, Bless me! I think the Devil we were talking of, is appeared.


L. Weal. It Is either Comely or his Ghost.


Enter Comely. Comely, Nay, never start Ladies, you may approach, I am no
Spirit.


L. Weal. Why, I thought you had been settled in the Country by this time.


Comely, I settled in the Country, why, who do you think I am? i will lay five
pounds not one of you here know me.


L. Weal. We have very short memories the^, are you not Mr. Comely?


Comely, No marry am I not, I am no such body.


L. Weal. Why then, thou art the Devil in his likeness.


Comely, No, no, view me well, I have too tame a look to be the Devil, no Devil
ever had such a melancholy Eye; and to show you I am neither the Devil nor Mr.
Comely, I am a miserable thing, that scarce thinks the day long enoug to sigh
in; I suppose none of you ever knew Mr. Comely or the Devil guilty of this.


L. Weal. What means this Riddle.


Comely, Ladies be pleased to pard^n the Intrusion of this Visit, since I am a
stranger to you all, and so your humble Servant.


( offers to go. L. Weal. Nay, pray Sir stay, we like your company well, and
would fain hear some more of these Mysteries.


Comely, Why pray what do you take me for?


L. Weal. A man Sir.


Comely, You Are deceived in that too, I Am none, I want the chief Intral a man
should have; Ladies have you a mind to laugh for an hour?


L. Weal. Withal our hearts, if we had but a fitting subject.


Comely, Why then laugh at me.


L. Weal. By no means Sir, not at a stranger.


Comely, Come, come, you all know me well enough, and yet I tell you, I am
plaguely altered since you saw me last.


L. Weal. Why what is the matter?


Comely, I am a Pox on it -- I am a Plague on it -- I am in Love,


L. Weal. In Love -- what Mr. Comely, in Love?


Comely, Nay, nay, nay, come begin the laugh, and let it not last above three
hours, that is all I ask.

( they laugh a great while. Well have you done?


All Ladies, No, not by a great deal.


they laugh on. Comely, I must have patience till you have.


L. Weal. Comely, do you remember the house you talked of purchasing if e're
you fell in love with a Woman, me thinks '^were time now you took possession
of Bedlam.


Comely, O that care's, taken by my short experience, I find a man is in Love
and in Bedlam both at one minute.


L. Weal. But how had you the Confidence to come near us in that condition, you
that have despised our whole Sex.


Comely, How unreasonable a thing is that, to ask a man why he does any thing
after being in Love?


L. Weal. Don't you expect to be laughed at, more then another man?


Comely, And have not you all laughed enough yet?


L. Weal. Enough? why we shall laugh at thee this Twelve Months, every day,
but prithee where is the face has done thee this mischief?


Comely, Nay, '^is no London Female, she is a thing that never saw Cheese-cake,
Tart, or Syllibub, at the Lodge in Hide-Park orat the


L. Weal. I warrant it is some mimping Country Gentlewoman.


Comely, No, it is a Country Farmer's daughter.


L. Weal. Bless me, what an Arrow* Cupid has found out to wound thee with?
Faith the blind god has fitted thee.


Comely, You must know I have not been a step out of Town; for immediately
after I had taken my leave of you, and was going to get on Horseback, I met
with this Creature and her Sweetheart a West country Clown, I had scarce
exchanged six words with her, but I found the constitution of my Eyes quite
altered, which heretofore had passed swiftly over all women's Faces, as hasty
shadows over Hills, but then so firmly fixed upon this Object, as if they never
meant to look another way.


L. Weal. Is she so very Pretty?


Comely, Indeed she is, in spite of the strange dress she is in, which is a
straw Hat, a Quaif, a red Wastcoat, and a green Petticoat not long enough by
two handfuls, and yet me thought 'twas not at all two short, since 'twas the
cause of showing two such pretty Feet.


L. Weal. Well Mr. Comely, we hope you will show us this rare Thing, and so we will
leave you in your Transe, but you must give us leave to point at you before we
go?


they point. Comely, As you please Ladies.


Exeunt Ladies. Well. Well, little did I ever think to have seen this day with
you!


Comely. Nay, prithee leave this wondering now, and pity me.


Well. Why it is no matter, the more you love the more pleasure you will have,
since you need not doubt success with such a kind of woman.


Comely, Well, f^re thee well, I must go see her. It Is strange that Love
should be a welcome Guest, That enters uninvited to the Breast.


Ex. at several doors. SCENE the III.
Enter Frenchlove at one door, Vain at another. Vain, MOnsieur French love,
well met.


French. I cannot say the like to you, Sir, since I Am told you have done a
damned stinking English trick.


Vain. In what?


French. In finding fault with a pair of Tops I wore yesterday, and upon my
Paro^, I never had a pair sat better in my life, they were never so much as
washed in England yet, and I Am sure any person of Breeding must say they fate
so well, that my Leg looked in 'um not at all like an English Leg.


Vain. Sir, all that I said of your Tops, was, that they made such a rushing
noise as you walked, that my Mistress could not hear one word of the Love I
made to her.


French. Sir, I cannot help that, for I shall justify my Tops in the noise
they were guilty of, since 'twas A-la-mode of ^rance, can you say '^was an
English noise.


Vain. I can say though your Tops were made in France, they made a noise in
England.


French. But still Sir, 'twas a French noise?


Vain. But cannot a French noise hinder a man from hearing?


French. No certainly, that is demonstration; for look you Sir* a French noise
is agreeable to the air, and therefore not unagree^ble; and therefore not
prejudicial to the hearing (that is to say) to a person that has seen the
World; but Mr. Vain, I cannot much blame you for this Error, for to understand
French things thoroughly require seven years being in France, no English man
that does not absolutely abandon his dull English nature, can ever be a
competent Judge of the sitting of Tops, or the garniture of Clothes, or
mounting of Feathers, and all other things of this kind, that belong to the
judgment of a right French accomplish'^ person. So Sir, for this time I shall
pass over this English mistake of yours, considering withal, you are a servant
to the sister of my Mistress.


Vain. Indeed I am a very Zealous Adorer of that Lady.


French. And l'me confident you are a person she values, but had it been your
fortune to have fallen in Love with her sister, you must have died hopeless, for
nothing ever could have gained her but a French Address; which I being Master
of, made me successful in her Esteem, she has told me no English love could
ever have reached her heart: at times when I have been expressing my French
Passion to her, upon my Parol my Clothes, Garnitures, Feathers and Tops, have
sat so that you would have thought they had been sensible of my Amor.


Vain. Here come the two Fair Sisters, they seem very merry.


Enter two Sisters with a Letter, laughing and reading to themselves. French.
Ladies your humble Servant, you laugh heartily.


1 Crafty, I, and so will you when you know the business:


French. Pray what is it.


1 Crafty, Here read this Letter.


2 Craft. And do you read this Mr. Vain.

they read. Madam your kindness to Mr. Frenchlove distracts me, consider how
long I have been your Faithful dying Servant, therefore show me some pity for
Heavens sake.


Vain, My Letter's just the same.


1 Craf. What two Fools are these, to expect any favor from us, who have
despised them this Twelve Months* Mr. Frenchlove, you are not jealous of your
Rival I suppose?


French. Madam, the favors I have reciev'd from you, forbids me, besides this
Letter bears no French style of Love, and therefore i am confident can take no
impression in your beauteous thoughts.


2 Craf. Mr. Vain, you need not doubt me.


Vain, Madam the assurance I have had from you, and this Sword shall guard me
from any Rival.


2 Craf. Are not these two pretty believing Fools sister?


aside. 1 Crafty, O; They are the fitter to make husbands.


Vain, Hark Mr. Frenchlove, though I don't doubt my Mistrisses Constancy, yet
I am resolved to ask her to marry me with all speed, because so fair a woman as
she is, will have many Sui^ers. When do you intend to ask your Lady the
question?


French. At some agreeable time Sir, when the French fancy is most in her head.


1 Crafty, Gentlemen you must excuse us, we have some business that requires
have.


Vain, Shall we wait on you, Ladies?


1 Crafty, No Sir, your pardon at this time if you please.


French. Madam your most humble Servant.


Vain, Madam your most devoted Creature.


they are going. French. Look ye Mr. Vain, though my Mrs. denied me waiting of
her, yet 'twas a denial with a French tone of a^voyce, so that it was agreeable.


Vain. I did not understand it so at all.


French. Diabol Sir, you are Englishly mistaken then, therefore draw.


French. steps back, lays his hands upon his Sword, hearing 'em speak high, the
women step back again. 1 Craf. Bless me, what is the matter? what means this
sudden heat 'twixt you two?


French. Madam, Mr. Vain does not understand that though you denied us waiting
on you, 'twas with a French tone of a voice:


1 Craf. Yes Mr. Vain, 'twas indeed.


Vain, Say you so, too Lady?


2 Craf. Yes truly 'twas!


Vain. Nay then i will not dispute it?


1 Crafty, No pray Sir, nor never do things of this kind with Mr. Frenchlove,
he is so understanding in 'em; your servant gentlemen.


French. Do You see Sir, how she leaves us, she walks away with a French step.


Vain, Nay Sir, that I cannot see.


they turn back again. French. Not see'^ mort deiu -- then draw your Sword.


1 Craf. Bless me, are you quarrelling again, what is the matter?


French. Madam he says now, you did not walk away with a French step.


1 Craf. O indeed Mr. Vain I did, for Heavens sake no more of this, 'twill
keep my sister and I i^ perpetual fears for both our concerns.

Gentlemen, once more your Servant. Sister were there ever two such Coxcombs,
what boot betwixt your Fool and mine, but we must pray for their health now,
till we are married, and have our Joyntures settled; And then let the Bell tole
for them both as soon as time pleases, let him make as much have as he will.


Exeunt Women. French. Well Sir, I suppose these are all willful mistakes,
therefore I am not angry, but am your humble Servant, I must leave you now, for
I am going to view some French things newly come over.


Jack, The Devil Sir, why are you kept in awe by this Frenchlove? why did you
not draw to justify your Opinion?


Vain, Jack, thou talk like a Fool, this Frenchified fellow fences
Plaguely, they will put a Thrust in quart or in the twinkling of an eye.


Jack, Sir, if you will give me leave, next time he draws, i will have one English
Pass at his French body.


Enter VVelbred. Welbred, Mr. Vain your Servant, i am glad I have met you,
will you go see a Play this afternoon?


meets Vain as he is going out. Vain, Troth Sir no, 'twill not be convenient
for me.


Well. Why Sir?


Vain, I shall meet so many Women there of my acquaintance, and if I speak to
one more then another, there will be exceptions taken.; I was ^'other day at a
Play and there was a Lady (who shall be nameless) sounded away upon the sudden,
all the company guest it was at a Duel upon the Stage, but Sir (let it go ^o
farther) it was at my whispering with another woman; and to tell you true, I am
going to see this Lady now, for she has kept her Bed with the conceit on it ever
since.


Well. And will she be reconci^'d to you again, do you y'e think?


Vain, Upon her own Pe^il if she (...), (...) too great ^ Libertine to be tied
to one woman. I Would give this hand, I could less^ my acquaintance with 'em.


Jack, Sir, unless you will raise my wages ten shillings more this quarter, I will
immediately discover to Mr. Welbred, this honorable Lie you have told.


Vain. Well Sirrah hold your peace, I will.


Well. What Mr. Vain, I shall not have your company the^?


Vain. No Sir, I crave your pardon this time, your

Exit Vain, and Jack. Devoted servant.


Well. Farewell to thee and all thylyes, certainly this fellow has robbed the
Devil of his whole Treasure; so that the Devil has not one lie left for
himself. Now to my Widow if I can but find h^ in a good humor, I shall get
her Consent this time,

Oh here comes my Scriv'ner.

Enter Gripe. Whom I appointed to meet me here with an hundred pounds to show
again at the door, else I shall not be let in, have ye brought the hundred
Pieces?


Gripe, Yes Sir.


Well. Give u'm me.


Gripe, You Will restore u'm unto my hand before you enter?


Well. Yes, yes, as I did before.

he knocks Enter Gentlewoman. Is your Lady within?


Gent. Yes Sir.


Well. Look ye i am come again to see her with a 100 pieces in my pocket.


Gripe, Now Sir my money.


Well. Well, well, here it is.


Gent. Ha! what have I spied! he gives the Gold to that fellow? am confident
it is some Scrivener he has hired to send him a 100 pieces only to show, and the
fellow will not trust him out of his* sight, but comes always with him, have I
found you?

aside Sir I don't know certainly if my Lady be within, but i will go see and
bring you word immediately.


Porter, Madam it is so ^'le assure you,


she goes in and brings out her Lady presently. L. Weal. Let me alone, I
warrant you i will fit him; O Mr. Welbred, now I begin to think you love me
indeed, since you continue visiting me with your pockets full.


Well. Alas Madam, 'twas ever a great mistake in you to believe winning or
losing could either decrease or increase my love to you.


L. Weal. But I used never to see you when you had a winning hand.


Well. You may believe now that was never the reason, younger Brothers have
oftentimes troublesome business, and that might be the cause.


L. Weal. Well i will believe you, go call my Cousen hither, and bring some
Cards; Mr. Welbred we will go to two piece Le umbre for an hour or two, i am sure
I please you in that motion.


aside Well. Madam, you shall ever please me; but at this time I had rather she
had asked me to have gone to the Devil, for I have not one farthing of money to
sit down with: how to come off now I know not, I fancy I look like an

a Table and Cards are brought. Ass already.


Enter Cousen. L. Weal. Come, come Cousen you will make one at Le umbre.


1 Lady. With all my heart Madam.


Well. O -- I cannot fetch by breath for fear of my approaching shame, head
help me out now, or else would thou were off.


L. Weal. Come Mr. Welbred take your seat.


Well. Faith Madam I have a foolish fancy now, i am sure you will laugh at it.


L. Weal. Why, what is it?


Well. I Am resolved not to play unless you will lend me forty pieces of your Gold.


L. Weal. Fie, what a senseless conceit is this, when you have a hundred in your
pockets?


Well. Nay I will not touch a Card unless you do.


L. Weal. Nay prithee leave fooling, here the first Spade deals.


Well. Nay, nay, no, no, not I, S'life I had almost forgot, I must run away a
Gentleman stays at the Fleece Tavern to pay me a hundred pounds I won of him
last night.


L. Weal. Hold, hold, you shall not go, i will tell you a thing will stay you, to
show you how well I love you; I have a Chaplain of my own in the house, I will
marry you strait before my Cousen.


Well. Troth this is nobly done, what does this woman mean?

aside I begin to think she suspects I have no money, but how she should come
to know it I cannot imagine, dear widow i will step to my Lodging and make my
self a little finer, for i am resolved I will not be married in these Clothes.


L. Weal. Nay, you fhan't go for that, it is all one as long as I like you in
u'm.


Well. O my heart aches damnably, I find by her willingness to marry, she has
discovered me: O that I were out of the room.


L. Weal. Come Mr. Welbred, don't you be so liberal now, and give my Chaplain
fifty pieces of Gold for marrying of us, but as I told you before ten pieces
you must give him.

Enter Parson. Come Sir, you must join our hands, I am resolved to take this
Gentleman for better for worse.


Well. Now had I as lieve see the Devil as that black Parson. (...)


aside L. Weal. Mr. Welbred you shall give him your ten pieces before hand.


Well. Faith i will go put on other Clothes first.


L. Weal. No, no, i will take you in these; come why don't you produce your money?


Well. I must go home and smug my self up a little, and then i am for you
widow, Heart, Body and Soul --


L. Weal. Gentleman, I have found you out, though you thought to hove cozened
me; you have not two pence in your pocket, and come to see me, a Scrivener has
lent you a hundred pieces to show at the door, but would not trust you to come
into the house with u'm, shall I fetch you a Glass to see how like an Ass you
look; no, no Sir, the way lies there, you may go now as soon as you please, and
put on other Clothes, though not to marry me in.


Well. Provoking widow hold that biting ^ongue, and Parson get you up to your
Closet, and pray heartily for your Lady she will be damned else for promising a
man marriage and never intend it.


L. Weal. Something 'twas indeed you would not play at Le umbre unless you had
forty pieces of my money -- O my dear cunning Servant.


Well. I Will be gone, for should I stay, that very Clock of thine would make me
set fire on thy house about thy ears.


L. Weal. O! Gentleman -- you had brains enough, but you wanted wit to make
this cunning Exeunt Welbred at one door, and women at another. design of yours
take.


ACT the V.
SCENE the I.
Enter Comely. Comely, SUre this pretty Creature cannot love her Clown so well
as me, if once I can but find a time to talk with her: I Will to her Lodging,
yonder she is I think without her sweet heart too, fair one where wander ye?

Enter Elsba crying. What makes you weep?


Elsba, A lack a day Sir, I have lost William, I have not seen him this four
hours, and he told me when he went out he would go but just to the May Pole in
the Strand to see if it were as tall as ours upon our Green in the Country;
many a dance has William led me about our Maypole, therefore i would be loath to
lose him now.


Comely, But what think you of losing William and finding me your sweet heart
instead of him?


Elsba, No a vous Sir, my heart has gone pit a pat for William, and no man else
this many a day.


Comely, Are you sure you can never love me?


Elsba, Not as long as my sweet William lives, and if he were dead I think I
should never sing Song again Milking my Vathers Cows. Pray Sir, was never any
body lost in London?


Comely, Yes marry, some are drowned.


Elsba, My William said he would never come upon the huge Sea that runs by the
Kings Majesty's window.


Comely, How equally her Innocence and Beauty charms me

aside Fairest Creature!


Elsba, I di^own the name Sir.


Comely, Then you wrong Nature that has made you so.


Elsba, Nature, whose that I pray, for I would willingly injure no body?


Comely, Nature thy Mother pretty one, thy partial mother, that to thy Face has
given thee all her stock of Beauty.


Elsba, Indeed she is none of my Mother, I left her in the Country. My love is
heathen Greek to this fair Innocent


aside Comely, Well Mistress Pretty, when William comes will you give us both a
hearing, let him speak his love, and i will speak mine, and then see which you
like best.


Elsba, With all my heart Sir, but William will be too hard for you, he is a
Parsons man at that wous, this heart can tell.

O here he comes.

Enter William. O William, where have you been all this while?


Will. Been Elsba? where I wished thee twenty times, such a sight I think was
never seen by any body but me, and such as have seen't before. O Elsba, I saw
two huge rough hai^'d things led by the Nose, with two strings, and a huge Bull
like ours in the Country, with a brave Garland about his Head, and an Horse,
and the least Gentleman upon him that ever I saw in my life, and brave Bagpipes
play before u'm. I warrant thee I followed them close every street, till thick
little Gentleman a Horseback rode into his own House, then I was fain to leave
them.


Comely, It Is Bear-baiting day, and he has met with the Bull, and the Bears,
and the Jack an Apes a Horseback; it is a very hard case this Clown must be my
Rival.


Elsba, William, Mr. Comely desires that he may speak his love to me, and you
speak yours, to see which I like best; I think William if you could remember
those things you said to me at first, before you knew I loved you.


VVil. A wous I h'a them all down in a Book I warrant thee.


Pulls out's Book. Comely, William do you begin.


Will. Agreed Elsba, I do love thee, I find by the Comfashiousness of my
heart, I could suck thy Eyes out of thy head, I could eat thy lips though I
were not an hu^gard, I could lick thee all over as our Cow does her Calf. O
Elsba, my heart do Thunderclap my breast when I think of thee, a wou's methinks
sometimes though I never am angered with thee, I could tear the clothes off thy
back, Smock and all, my heart does leap and ^aper when I do see this leg and
thy Coats ^uck't up as thou come home from Milking Vathers Kine.


Elsba, I think Mr. Comely this very speech of Williams has spoiled you.


Comely, Come fair Soul.


Will. Nay, if thou have a mind to speak, speak of her body.


Comely, If nothing I can say can warm thy cold heart with pity, I am most
miserable; that I do love thee, my Eyes do speak.


Will. He Is out at first dash Elsba, that cannot be, there is no Tongue in the
eyes.


Comely, Oh if that beauteous frame of thine were in my Custody i would guard it
safe as Angels do the Holy, nothing should e're approach it but my love, and
that so gently too, as when I touched thee, it should be as Nurses handle Limbs
of Infants; i would never Kiss thee but with Lips per^um'd with purer love, and
gaze on thee with maiden eyes that n're kn^w love before, no sigh from me
should e're come near thy heart, but it shall be as chaste a present, as if an
Infants brea^h had sent it, i would sit and wish away the night, because her
darkness would conceal thy beauty, and thank the day for bringing light again
for me to gaze on thee with wishing eyes, thou should be my Saint, and I
would pray to thee.


Will. Hark Elsba, the man's a Papist.


Elsba, Sir, you had best spare your pains, I told you William would give you
the go by; if he had used no other talk to me then these, he would gone without me.


Will. Come Elsba le^'s go home, good den to ye Sir.


Exeunt Clown and Elsba. Comely, What is my fault that Heaven thus has punished
me, to make me love a Creature wholly ignorant of a noble passion, I might as
well have told my talk to a Marble Statue and have found relief as soon?


Enter VVelbred. Well. Why, how now Friend, why so melancholy? what f^r being i^
love with a wench you may have when you will?


Comely, Thou art mistaken, there is as much impossibility in that, as in
Nature, her heart's so wholly in the Clown's possession, it is past the Art of
any sweeter ^ound of Love to draw it thence.


Well. Prithee, in what kind art thou in Love with (...)? for a bit and away, or
how?


Comely, Now if there be any purer Love on earth then ever was, I have it here
for her.


Well. Nay then, Lord have mercy upon thee, but hark ye now, hear a little of my
misery, my widow has quite* dis^arded me, ^me never to see her more.


Comely, Why, how so?


Well. She had given Order to her Gentlewoman every time I came, not to let me
in unless* I could show a hundred pounds in Gold; wherefore when I had lost all
my money, I was (...) to hire a Scrivener to let me have a hundred pieces to
show at her door* who went along with me, and before I entered I was fain to
slip the money into his hands again, for he would not trust me farther, which
her peeping Gentlewoman espied, and told her Lady.


Comely, Well I Am sorry for thy ill luck, bu^ I have so much to do to pity my
self, that I cannot think of thee; I Will go walk in some melancholy place, for
when I cannot see her, I would see nothing else. farewell.


Exit Comely. Well. And i will to my widow once more.

Enter Lady VVealthy, spies VVelbred, runs over the Stage from him. S'life here
she is.


L. Weal. The Devil, how came I to meet thee, avoid Satan, avoid.


Well. Stay thou cruel ^eet widow, or I Will send a Bullet, after you, shall
spoil your Race.


Pulls out a Pistol. L Weal. Murder, murder, murder.


Well. Stand still then and I will not kill you.


L. Weal. Well, what have you to say?


Well. Do you believe I Love you?


L. Weal. No indeed don't ^.


Well. As you hope to be sa^ed?


L. Weal. Hark ye, if I were given to swear as thou a^ when thou have lost all
thy money, I would now make use of all those Oaths to swear thou do not care
a pin for* me, nor I for thee.

Why, my poor losing Gamester, how could thou have the Confidence ever to
look me in the face again after your last Visit.


Well. Well to show you I love you of all things in the world, I Will Pistol my
self strait, if you will not ma^y me.


L. Weal. Pish, I Will be hanged then.


Well. Do you dare bid me kill my self three times together?


L. Weal. Yes, do I.


Well. Come begin and try.


L. Weal. Stay, is the Pistol charged and primd? now VV^lbred if you love me
kill yourself.


Well. Well, there is once.


L. Weal. Because* I Would have you make haste Welbred, if you love me kill
yourself.


Well. There Is twice, S'life i am afraid she will play the fool and bid me the
third time, she has been damned quick in the two first.


aside L. Weal. Well now my departing Servant settle your Countenance with a
dying kind of look, and then i will pronounce thy last Sentence, i am pleased to
think how prittily thou wilt look in a winding sheet, i will have thee decently
buried, and thy Epitaph shall be

Here lies a Games^er that will play no more,
Guess at the reason made him give it ^'re.
Now are you ready?


L. Weal. Why, then present


Well. Well said pretty Captain.


L. Weal. And now give -- you long for the next word now.?


Well. Try.


L. Weal. Come you know I will not be guilty of Murder, that makes you so
courageous.


she offers to run away. Well. Nay, stay, stay, i will kill my self yet, if you
will not promise to marry me, speak quickly?


L. Weal. Prithee let us throw up cross and pile then whether it shall be a
match or no.


Well. Not I, i will trust to no chance now.


L. Weal. Come, most at a throw at Dice, that you will like i'^e sure.


L. Weal. No, no, absolutely promise me to marry me to morrow morning.


L. Weal. Well if it must be so, I will.


Well. Upon your Reputation?


L. Weal. Upon my Reputation come to my House, and we will be married where your
Friend Comely shall be my Father, and give me to thee, for i am loath to do
such a foolish thing my self.


Well. You shall never repent this Noble Act, for what I want in Fortune, i will
make up in Love.


L. Weal. I n^'re considered, we will exchange, you shall have one for the other.


Well. I Will love you truly and ever.

Adieu till to morrow.

Ex. at several door^* Time be my Friend, and swiftly bring that hour.


SCENE II.
Enter Comely and Elsba Pretty. Comely, SWeet Mistress Pretty.


Elsba, It Is the flowers in my boso^, Sir, not I.


Comely, If you can love me, all the fine Ladies you have seen at London shall
not have gayer Clothes then you, you shall wear holland smocks li^'d with Lace
of 40 ^. a ya^d, Gold Petticoats and Wastcoats, Diamonds in your Ears, Pearls
about your neck, Bracelets of Rubies about your hands, Silk Stockings on your
legs, and Gold and Silver Shoes on your feet.


Elsba, O woeful! William would not know me in all this bravery, but Sir if you
would give me all these things and Roastmeat twice aday into the bargain, I
could not have the Conscience to take my heart from William, he and I are going
just now, if you will be my Father and give me, i will thank you?


Comely, I Would rather give my self to Beasts to be devoured*

aside Farewell hard-hearted pretty Creature, I cannot but love her too for
being constant to her Clown.


Exit Comely Enter William. will. Come Elsba, I believe the Parson stays, I have
brought thy Ring, '^is beaten Silver i will sure thee, and because '^is at London
where things are dearer then in the Country, I do intend to give the Parson as
much as our Landlords eldest Son gave when he was married, which was three and
a Groat; so that this money will ajus^ do it* here is two thirteen p^nce half
penny pieces, three Groats, nd a single penny.


Enter Frenchlove, 1 Crafty, Vain, and the other going to be married. French.
Madam you will pardon me, that I did not provide a French Parson to marry us, but
upon my Parol there was not one in London.


VVil. What, you two come hand in hand, as if you two couple were going to be
married as well as Elsb^ and I?


French. Make way English Clown.


VVil. Wo^s, but we will not; first come, first served, ^o Elsba and I will go
before.


Exeunt Clown and El^ba. Exeunt Omnes. SCENE the III.
Enter Lady VVealthy and Gentlewoman, and two other Ladies of Quality. L. Weal.
IN short, let the best of all Varieties that can be had be got for Dinner.


G^nt. They shall Mada^.


Exit Gent. L. Weal. Co^n, I believe you little thought ever to have seen me
married to Mr. Welbred.


1 Lady, Pardon me Madam, I ever believed it would be a Math^, i am confident
you will be happy in him for all his youthful gaming trick^.


Enter Comely. L. Weal. Welcome Sir, I have chose you to be my Father, to give
me to your Friend Mr. Welbred this Morning.


Comely, I shall willingly serve your Ladyship, and do him that Honor.

Is he here?


L. Weal. No, which I wonder at, for it is past his hour, I have invited Mr.
Frenchlove, and Mr. Vain, who are married this morning, you have promised the
thing you love will be here for us to see.


Enter VVelbred's Boy with a Letter. Boy, Madam, my Master presents his Service
to you with this Letter.

she opens and read* Dear Widow excuse me for an hour, for I am now at play,
and am a great winner, and the Persons whom I am at play with have five hundred
pound more in their Pockets, therefore it is not prudence to give over, where so
much ready money is to be won, I hope I shall make a Richer Husband to thee
then I thought,

Thine for Ever.


L. Weal. Was there ever the like?


she storms 1 Lady, What Is the matter Madam, I hope Mr. Welbred's come to no
mischance?


L. Weal. Mischance, would he had broke his neck.


1 Lady, Bless me, what is the matter?


L. Weal. There, read this Letter.

she reads This vile Fellow has vexed me so, I could curse him all day long, if
I could invent Curses bad enough, he is laid an open shame upon me before all my
Friends and Kindred; they must needs think by this, I am so fond of him, that I
would have forced this Marriage on him, would he were bed rid, and bound to lie
all days of his life upon a Bed stufft with Dice instead of Feathers, and that
he might dream all night long of throwing on it; i am resolved to hire as many
Link Boys as shall set him on fire with their Links, now can you blame me?


1 Lady, Indeed I Am very much amazed at him.


L Weal. Pray come all up with me to my Chamber and help me to Curse him.


Exeunt all SCENE IV.
Enter Welbred. Well. Was there ever such luck, to be 500 l. a winner, and now
have never a Groat left? and have lost my widow into bargain, so I am shut
out, I find no more entrance here, then I had at a Back-gammon all this night,
i will call at the window.

knocks 3, or 4, times. Why, Widow, widow.


L. Weal. What rude voice is that?


Well. It Is thy Servant VVelbred come to be married according to thy promise.


L. Weal. Away scritch Owl, away, how can thou show thy face again after all
thy Villainy?


Well. Show my face, what de think i will be married blindfold?


L. Weal. Married, thou shall be hanged as soon, my kitchen wench ^an't have
thee.


Well. No faith, I believe thou can not spare me pretty Rogue.


L. Weal. Oh Impudent fellow hold thy prating, for i will n'^re see thy face
more.


Well. Then thy house shall be shut up, as if the Plague were in it, for i will
besiege it this week, and if e're it opens i will come in.


Comely, Madam, be not so angry, shall I desire one thing of you? I know him to
be a Person of Great Worth, and one that loves you, and this is only a fault
and miscarriage of his youth, pray follow me down, and stand behind the door,
you shall trust your own eyes and ears, and not believe me, because you think I
am his partial Friend.


L. Weal. Sir, I will, but cannot conceive to what end this is.


both come down and Come ly enters to Welbred. Comely, Come away with me, stay
here no longer, you have quite lost the widow, she calls you all the Rogues
and Rascals and Cowards in the world, and says the meanest slightest things of
you, that she will have you beaten by Porters; therefore e'ne come along with me,
it is but time lost to stay, never think of recovering of her.


Well. No, no, i will stay here till I starve before I Will stir, I know I have
committed a great fault, and if she does hate me I deserve it justly; but as I
did ever love her truly, so I do now, and so I will do whilst I have breath,
though she slight me never so much.


Comely, Fie Welbred, this Resolution is folly now, since i am sure thou art
the only thing of mankind, she hates most, and as' have been thy Friend ever,
so will I show it now when thou have most need of me.


Well. In what?


Comely, I have a Cousen that has twenty thousand pounds to her portion, and
she is wholly at my disposal, she is handsome into bargain, her shall thou have
for thy wife; therefore come along with me, and never stand here for an
impossibility.


Well. Noble Friend I thank ye, but could I have a more beauteous woman that
Nature ever yet made, and had she the Indies to her portion, she should not be
my wife; nothing but my widow now or a Grave i am resolved.


Pulls Lady Wealthy from behind the door. Comely, Nay widow, come out and take
him for ever and a day, if he spoke all his life time he could say no more;
come come take him by the hand, Thou ^ast him by the heart already.


Comely Ioynes their hands. Well. My dear widow -- and shall we bring both
ends together at last.


L. Weal. It seems Fortune will have it so.

We Madam I need not tell you now I Love you, you heard me say so when I
thought you did not.


Enter French love and Vain both married to the two Crafties. L. Weall. Well I
believe you.

Welcome Ladies and Gentlemen, God give you all Joy.


Enter Page. Page, Mr. Comely, here is a Country wench and a Clown at the door
would speak with you.


Comely Madam, will you suffer them to come in, and you shall see the thing I
fell in Love with, and the kind of Beast that is my Rival.


Enter Clown and Elsba. Elsba, Mr. Comely, William and I are both bold to take
leave of you, we are going home, the Wagon stays for us.


L. Weal. Well Sir, i will leave laughing at you, and say I cannot blame you for
being smitten with that face it is so very pretty, I warrant she can Dance well,
she treads so nimbly with her feet, -- ask her.


Comely, Can you Dance?


Elsba, Yes Sir, our Town Jigg.


she Dances French. Fie, fie, this is English, Madam pray do you Dance a
little, and show the difference of the French Movement. Diabol, you Dance like
an Englishwoman too.


She Dances like an English woman too. 1 Crafty, Sir, you may see how well I
Love you, since only to gain you for my Husband, I have hitherto affected the
Garb and Fashion of Frenchwomen, though contrary to my Nature. But now I am
your perfect English Loving wife.


Enter English and French Tailors. French. How am I cozened?


E. Tailor, Sir, one word with you -- you owe me 500 l. for Ware which you
thought had been French, because 'twas sold to you by the hand of this French
Tailor; therefore pay me or i will tell it before all this Company.


French. Peace, peace, come for your money to morrow morning to my Chamber
Diabol, sure this damned England has infected my eyes.


Vain takes French aside. Vain, Hark ye Mr. Frenchlove, I believe you and I
are whisk't with a couple of Wives, for Mr. Welbred, and Mr. Comely pretended
to be in love with them, and the Devil a bit there is any such thing; besides,
i am told they have been both Mistrisses to Mr. Comely, and Mr. Welbred, and
that they are of very mean Quality.


French. Pray Sir, no more of these English Informations, they are not
agreeable to my ear.


Comely, Mrs. Pretty, though you cannot love me, i will give a hundred pound a
year for your Life.


Elsba, I thank you Sir, and i will assure you i will love you best next to William
as long as I live.


Comely, Madam farewell, Heavens send you many a happy day with my Friend
Welbred, i am glad I was the Author of Reconciling you to him.


L. Weal. Sir, I cannot give you many thanks now, but hereafter if Experience
tells me my Husband be worth it, i will be out of your Debt.


Well. Dear widow, doubt it not, i will throw away my Life when ever it appears a
thing unsensible to you; and to show you i will a void those things that have made
me so often hazard the loss of that kindness, i will never touch Card or Dice
again.


French. De hear Lady, i will carry you into France next week, I see you will make a
direct English Wife else.


Jack, Hark ye Master, take my advice, and return with your Bride: For by what
I hear, you are wiv'd to the purpose.


Vain, You say well Jack.


Comely, Now will I go Travel, and try if the Air of another Country can Cure
me of the Disease I have caught in my own: Hereafter if any man shall tell me
he can never be in Love, i will not believe him

For by my self I find,

Whilst there is a Woman no man knows his mind.


FINIS.

