Caroloiades, OR, The Rebellion of Forty One. In Ten Books. A Heroic POEM.

Virg. Encid. Lib. 2. -- quis talia fando
Mirmidomum, delapumve, aut duri Miles Ulyssi
Temperet a lachrymis --
Licensed, May 22. 1688.

R. Midgley.



LONDON, Printed by J. B. for the Author, and Published by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall in Ludgate Street, and are to b^ Sold by most Booksellers in
London and Westminster, 1689.

THE PREFACE.
WHosoever has Inspected the History of that Unhappy War which commenced in the
time of King Charles the First, will grant that its wonderful and various
events adminster as much Subject for a Poem of this Nature as has been Grounded
on former Story: However deplorable the disparity may be as to our Historical
facts and revolutions, in regard that these, from their horrid effects and
contrivance, appear less credible then true, and propably shall have no future
Parallel.

That the Character of that Sovereign, which gives a Denomination to this Poem,
may with no less Magnitude (considering the Excellency and Grandeur of his
Endowments) be as renowned a figure for Heroic Poesy, as any which Homer or
Virgill have attributed to the Greatest of their Heroes must be granted by all
that are not Ignorant of their Nations Glory, or detractive from the Fame of
that Incomparable King.

I shall not presume to adorn my Preface by displaying the especial and various
dignities of Heroic Poesy which in my Case might savor of Ostentation, or not
unlike an Architect that should endeavor to applaud some high performance of
his Science to Insinuate his own desert in a work of the same Intendment: Being
rather desirous to referr my Reader to what the Judicious have Celebrately
expressed, in reference to this extraordinary sort of Poesy, without giving it
any other Panygerick from my Pen. However I stand obliged so far to Vindicate
my undertaking as to show that it is duly grounded and concenters with such
requisites of Invention as have been allowably conceded to perfect an Epique
composition.

That this structure has been from the Pens of the most famous Authors, raised
on some known Historical Truth, as the Basis or fond of such a Poem, is evident
from what the first Grandees or Guides of this Science have left to the World.

But if known story gave rise to their design, they relied upon the strength of
Fiction, in order to the beautifying and completing the Model and shape of
their contrivance: Not unlike the skillfull Sculpturist, that out of some rough
Mass of Stone polisheth and forms his several figures suitable to the
representation he Intends them.

True it is that known occurrences may something Agrandize a Poem, and the
Readers esteem will be more pathetically moved by Transactions that are within
the compass of Man's knowledge, however enlarged by Poetical License, then what
he adjudgeth to be totally Fabulous, being induced to accept, on that account,
what could not without Intermixtures and supplements of the Muses be elevately
conveyed.

Nor did the most remarkable Poets otherwise deliver the essential part of
Historical Verity, then accompanied with Notions whereby they rectified the
will or practical conduct of the Mind, by improving Moralities to the most
useful and exemplary Comprehension: By which gloss and varnish of Imagination
story was acceptably rendered, that otherwise had been restrained by too
narrowly Circumscribing the sphere of Invention: and would be no less absurd
then to expect a History instead of a Poem, and if it be simply the first it
cannot deserve the name of the latter.

Besides, it is very Notorious, that few Historians compile all considerable
deeds or events, whose business is to observe Public and General occurrences,
rather then the particular discovery of Personal concernments as they relate to
Characters: Which ought to be the undertaking of the Poet who is Priviledg'd to
suppose what he Judges should be emphatically declared if possibly Cohering or
Assimilated to whatsoever might, by way of resemblance, in any respect, be held
Creditable; so that any Poetical Assertion, if thus Managed, must have a
Legitimate Pass port from the Authority of the writer, and this may be Termed
the History of the Poet, without which the vulgar or known cannot have to do
with the Muses. Thus it appears that Narrations taken from the Trojan War did
rather enlarge then confine the Pens of Homer and Virgil, to which they not
only added the Embelishment of their Fiction, but Introduced what Characters
they held proper to fill up and conspire with the Ornament and vigor of such
as had their parts in the subject they treated.

Neither would they limit their Inventions to the Ethical distributions of
things, as they Naturally result from humane Cogitation, but occasionally
advanced the intellect of the Reader to the most sublime apprehension of such
speculations as entertained with delight and wonder the contemplative faculty;
and this they effected by grounding their Fictions on supernatural Causes and
effects consonant to received Belief: Either as they represented Miracles and
Spiritual appearances of good and bad Existencies, as also extraordinary
Prodigies, Dreams, Magical* Enchantments, Witchcrafts, and the like; that by an
admirable Allegory did concur and agree with the deeds and descriptions of Men.

And were this manner of Writing separated from the most famous Poets their
repure would fall to a far lower Orb of Esteem then the Monuments of their
Ingenuity have deservedly Obtained; which shows us that they well understood
the value of this sort of Invention, and how necessary it was to the Royalty of
Parnassus.

Another supercilious Mistake has been Improved by some from their affected
supposition that a Heroic Poem cannot be produced, Consonant to Christianity,
with that requisite Latitude that was used by Poets of Ethnic persuasion.

To answer which conceit, whosoever shall undertake to avow it, there is
nothing more evident then that all Necessary use and Comprehension of Metaphor
and Allegory relating to supernatural power existencies and beings, is as much
ours as it was Assistant to the Ancients, though redounding from their Largest
Catalognes of Deities and Fictions.

And this was well perceived by the late Judicious and Learned French Critique
Rapin in his admirable reflections on this sort of Poesy, to whose exquisite
observations, not to insert any remarks of Mine, I think fit to referr my
Reader.

In the mean time, to come closer to my purpose by alleging such Authorities
as have the most undoubted Modern reception: I need but mention the Great
Tasso, and our famous Spencer, by whose Poems, though the Productions of Latter
Times, and agreeable to Evangelical persuasion, it is very clear that neither as
to Fiction or Allegory, they wanted any Necessary Ingredients or supplements,
if compared with such Poets who had been precedent to Christian Belief. I shall
not present my Reader with any Inspections into the Poem of Spencer, it being
upon the matter wholly Allegory, and therefore not so proper to the Application
I intend.

But as for Tasso, his Poem, though appertaining to Christian Achievements, and
a Modern Story perfectly known to Chronology as any extant, is Intermixed with
as many Episods and speculative Allegories as he could with any convenience
find room for in his Godfrey of Bulloigne: Where in his handling of that
History, we find that his Muse is conversant with Good and Bad Angels,
Miraculous Shapes, Predictions, Dreams, Fantoms, Magical Dialogues,
Fascinations, Flying in the Air, Obscure conveyances of the persons of Men by
Diabolical contrivement, the stupendous opening of Trees, that seemed to
disclose objects of wonderful variety to entertain admiration by rendering of
his Characters more superlatively observable, all which are the main body and
design of his Poem. Yet this was never made his Crime, by what the most
accurate Critics have remarked on him: perhaps they may have taxed him for
being excessive or tedious in* his Narrations and descriptions of this high
Import, but never charged on him to the diminution of his esteem, or as an
Illegitimate License, unbeseeming a Poet. And this our famous Ben. Johnson.
well understood, whose mature Judgment gave as little room to extravagancies of
the Brain as any that preceded him, by his introducing Sylla's Ghost whereby to
infuse on the wicked Genius of Cataline a more Hellish and Irresistible
Temptation to perfect his Impious design, which could not have been so
execrably Insinuated by any other Method.

An Example that enough assures us that he approved the Allegorical part of
Invention, and that it is as Legitimately ours, as it could be claimed by any
of the Ancients, when properly applied. I held it convenient to instance these
particulars, that the Reader may not wonder if I have in some passages and
fictions followed the example of so great a Poet, as well as others that
famously preceded him in that manner of Contrivement.

It has been erroniously supposed by not a few, that are less knowing then
Critical, whereby they render in their Judgments an Epique Poem more difficult
to be accomplished, that whatsoever is supernatural, is therefore Incredible;
not considering, that Fiction may imply an imaginary resemblance of truth, in
its remotest suppositions, when allied to the Conceptions and Tenants of Men:
And thus Medea might be granted as much a Sorcere^s as the Witch of Endor: And
Niobe, though but on the Credit of the Inventor, Poetically held by the decree of
Heaven, Metamorphos'd into Marble, no less really effected, then the
Transformation of Lot's Wife into a Pillar of Salt.

The only Author, I know of, that has totally relinquished Allegory,
notwithstanding he gives his Poem of Gundibert a Heroic Title, was the late Sr
William Davenant, a person of no ordinary Ingenuity, however he thought sit to
decline this manner of Writing, either because he would be singular in his way,
or that he designed to surpass others by producing of something that should be
great, without being of kin to the Grandeur of former Presidents: But instead
of perfecting what he intended, the deficiency of his structure was soon
perceived by the judicious.

And this appears, because that work of his is wholly diffused into sententious
Moralities and Actions that have too constant a Tendency to the same Level of
thought, instead of a requisite Intermixture and Elevation of the Mind by
entertaining of the spiritual or contemplative faculty.

I am far from making this Inference with any Intention to attract Applause to
my self, or to lessen the fame of that Author, since as his Poem stands
composed it has my value: And I well know, notwithstanding the derogations and
severities of some, that it contains many exquisite and remote expressions,
insomuch that I admire that his undertaking appears so well performed as I find
it, however destitute of that refining of speculations and characters which has
been the judicious and superlative Management of all that preceded him.

That the Introducing of Heroins was allways held an ornament to Heroique
Poesy, is evident from the Constant usage and authority of the most
Considerable Pens: And their reason I conceive was to Impress a Transcendent
value on the splendors of Beauty when accompanied with Grandeur of mind, and
thereby more suitable to the devoirs of their Masculine Admirers: which
Celebrated instances are very frequently read in Poets of most repute, as is
understood by every eye that is acquainted with their productions. And though the
Examples are peculiar to some extraordinary Figures of Female greatness, yet
not dissentaneous to what has been verified from authentic Records, in which
we may find not only the daring exploits of a Joan of Orleans, but the prowess
of Queens; witness that Gallant Katherine, Wife to our King Henry the Sixth;
besides many of every degree that for Martial renown are formerly registered.

This I judge may sufficiently Apologize for what is related, or Charactered by
m^ especially in that of Flavira, by whose Heroine Description I would be
understood to Include the Magnamities of other Noble and Generous personages
that might otherwise deserve their particular mention.

And he that has Informed himself of the Courageous Actions of some conspicuous
of that Sex, besides others of lower Stations, relating to the unfortunate War
I write of, will soon grant that their resemblance may claim a signal room in
this Poem.

The next thing that I am obliged to be accomptable for, is the Liberty I have
used by representing of Persons by such Nominations and descriptions as are not
derived from Historical certainty: And this method I take to be allowable by
the practice of all that have Merited the Esteem of Epique Writers.

As for Proper Names, it must be Granted, if but for the advantage that is in
the sound of words as they ought to run in Verse; that our English Tongue does
not usually furnish us with such names as are proper for Poetry, as we may
observe from every ordinary Argument and Dialogue, that has to do with the
Muses, in which Authors Insert or Borrow such denominations of persons as are
most suitable to their purpose, and none I believe can with any color except
against the same Liberty I have used here.

If we consider occurrences of whatsoever Magnitude, as they result from story,
they cannot have Latitude enough, as they relate to things and persons, to
embody or Capacitate a Poem of this Quality: In respect that no Truth can of it
self complete a Poetical Character, which would on those Terms, in its utmost
extent tend to no more then the known sense and concernment of persons, whereby
the due Consummating of their figures would be Impaired, and which can be no
way perfected but by the Artifice of Feigning in their behalf to render them
more exact and complete in themselves. A License undoubtedly conceded by all
approved Critics, in respect that Persons are delivered by that means rather
as they ought to be represented then as they are found, or deduced from
Historical Narrations: By which method the worthily Virtuous are advanced to a
higher excellency, and the depravations of others delivered more perfectly
Evil.

There is yet a farther advantage that redounds from this Liberty of
personating of Characters, in regard that by the aptitude of one person, either
in reference to Science, conspicuous deeds, Passions, or affections of the
Mind, diverse may be signified, or in a general Sense described as to whatsoever
Emergencies are to be understood that proceed from the facts or disposition of
humane conduct.

And this requisite is pertinent of Poesy grounded on History, since without
that additional supplement the most Renowned Personages would appear too
solitary figured on the Poetic account: Or like an Imperial Palace, that
should Consist only of an outward shell instead of Variety of Apartments,
Furniture, and Attendants, to Illustrate its Fabric.

Nor is it a tolerable objection, if any shall undertake to avow it, that
because this Poem does contain Transactions that arose within the Compass of
the Age we Live in, it should therefore be denied the Perquisites of the Muses
that were the former ornaments and advantages of Writers; in respect that so
much as they used of Historical Verity is as fully discernable in them, from
what they Poetically annexed, as in any Invention I have Inserted: And there is
no Eldership in Wit that can of right Challenge more freedom, in order to
Legitimate Fable, then is to be conceded to Modern Ingenuity.

On our English Theater it is sufficiently acceptable if the ^cene be laid at
home, though the nomination and facts of Characters be devised either as they
resemble or enlarge some known Truth: And I assure my self there is no Man but
will grant as full a latitude, if not a greater, in some sense, to a Poem of
this contexture then he would allow to any Dramatick Composition. But I have
said enough, as to the substance of what I have here produced, to all Candid
apprehensions, or such as are not resolved to be perverse or Ignorant opposers.

And I dare thus far aver in behalf of my Subject, that no Rebellious, and
Tragical dissentions, were ever carried on with more Hypocritical pretensions,
Subtle and Treacherous Intrigues; or contrarily more famously replenished with
Personal Gallantries, or the most touching and Noble Concerns of Duty and
Passion, relating to Heroicks of both Sexes, then what was occasioned by that
wicked and unparalled War.

And above all for the Eminent display of the surpassing Character of a
Monarch, more excellent then fortunate, as I have endeavored to Manifest it as
highly as my Ability extends, and I wish it could deservedly Erect his Monument
of Fame and Glory.

Postscript.
HAving touched in general the construction of a Poem of this Nature, I thought
fit to annex to my Preface some brief remarks that more particularly relate to
the method I have used, and what the Critical Reader might Expect for his
Satisfaction.

As to my Verse, I have avoided Stanza's; and my reason is, because I conceive
them not so proper, as the freedom of Heroic Measures for a Poem of this
Structure; and this choice of mine is not only suitable to the manner of Virgil
and other Ancient Poets, but agreeable to the most approved sense of Modern
Criticism: I need not but instance the Judicious Rapin, who assures us that the
Compiling of Stanza's was the mistake of some late Italian Poets, who first
introduced them into their Heroic Poems, and that they weaken the beauty and
flame of Verse in the length of their periods, on which, for the most part, the
main substance of their sense does depend.

And here I cannot but acqaint my Reader, that I took care that this work, as
it is of great Signification and Import, should be advantaged by the Inspection
of some few Persons, which caused me not only to correct but to add some
hundreds of Lines; by which means I did, as much as in me lay, Ultimam Manum
Imponere.

As for the Moral of my Poem, the Soul of a work of this Consistency, it is
Chiefly terminated in the exemplary greatness and virtues of the Royal Person I
have endeavored to delineate; whereby the unity of Action and other
Accessories, that ought to be Incident to such a Composition, are properly, I
conceive, observed: Yet with that Regard to History that the most Considerable
Battles and facts of War are either related, or instead of room for all their
particular, which had been more cumbersom to read then necessary to be Inserted
in a Poem, Collaterally included by some pertinent and general mention.

And whosoever shall duly Consider what is here delivered, as it referrs to
deplorable truth: will judge it rather a Divine then a Poetical Summons, to
detest those Execrable deeds, Prophanations, and Hypocrisies, that tended to
the Subversion of Holy Religion, together with all Moral Obligations of highest
Import, as they were at once the Unparalled Misfortune, and deformity of
Three Famous Nations.

To the Worthy Author of Caroloiades, etc.
LOng I expected that First Charles should Live
In such a Poem as the World you give.
His Character so highly did Excel,
That I admire to find it Writ so well.
No Royal worth did e're in King appear
But was in him, and such I read him here.
And as his Sacred Virtues you rehearse,
I fully grant 'em Canonized in Verse.
His Famous Queen, by you described, I find
Like her self Beauteous both in form and Mind:
Vandiks best Art could neither of 'em show,
So far his Pencill does give place to you.
Smooth and succinctly great still run your Lines,
A Genius in which Wit and Nature shines.
Though hard an Epique Poem it is to Write,
That can with that just Temper raise its height,
Our British Heroes, though to story known,
Have no Record like yours of their Renown.
Thus Lucas and brave Lyle to Fame are read,
Best as you Write their deeds and what they said:
Whether as Heroes or as Lovers they,
By Noblest Passions are expressed your way.
The Rebel Patrons, and their dark designs,
Are found by your Clear Lamp that flames in Lines:
Stories their Actions but in parcells show,
Whilst their Black Souls I fully see from you.
And doubtless it approves your Muses skill,
That could describe their excellence in Ill.
Prodigious Noll, whose rise and wondrous height,
I thought too big for the whole Nine to Write,
Does from your Muses Grandeur so appear,
As he is, full sized, a mighty Villain there.
Usefully great your Poem is designed,
And Allegory unto Actions joined,
And sure none will of such a Muse complain
As to Embellish Truth can duly ^eign.
And who would not that Artifice allow,
Forfeits his Judgment justly unto you:
But what need I prompt Men to do you right,
When your Performance value does Invite.
J. S.

To the Author On his Poem of Caroloiades.
WHen I a Painted story do behold
Strongly designed, and figured smoothly bold:
I judge it wrought by some proved ancient Hand,
Whose Skill could Life and nature best Command.
But as your Muses Pencill well I view,
It renders equaled Ancient Wit by New,
Our Stories figures so in yours are shown,
That in their likeness truth more pleased I own.
If some by travel distant parts have seen,
And what their greatness now and past has been;
Yet never there, like yours, could poem Read,
Written so well of men alive and dead.
With how much joy will Living Heroes see
Their deeds recorded thus of Gallantry:
And what their Youthful toyls in Bettells were,
Or Wouuds by prowess felt in that times War.
Nor less the lineage of great Captains dead
Will be obliged as their fames by you spread.
Thus does your Pen Old Loyalty renew,
And from its pattern fortifies the new.
G. M.

To the Author of Caroloiades.
Though I no Muse pretend to, as do some
That to give Pass-ports unto Wit presume:
And judge if their Muse does the Author stroke,
The favor, on the World, must pass his Book,
I Will leave that part to such as can bestow
On under-graduate Wit probation so.
Whilst your works value best it self Commends,
As to Pernassus top its flame asconds.
Morally great, Philosophic, and Divine,
Yet nothing te^ious in your Grand design.
Throughout your Lines emphatical I see
The Genius of Heroic Poesy;
A Skill I sometimes thought above the Height
Of English Tongue, or Poet best could Write.
Fully I wish, to heighten Christian fame,
That Brave Lorrain, and Great Bavarias name
Could find a Muse that might their Actions tell
High, as your English Heroes do excel.
That worth is yet remaining for your glory
When your Pen will add Grandeur to their story.
The Macedonian Victor, who for praise
Envied the Muse Achilles deeds did raise,
Unless that such a Homer, his might sing,
From whose Immortal Verse did to others spring.
Surpassing either, to the World conveyed,
I read First Charles, whose fames by you displayed.
Thus brighter often, in the Caelestial sphere,
The Setting Sun then Rising does appear.
Great M^ro, to complete his Troj^n* Prince,
From Heavenly race derives his excellence;
But had he this Kings attributes renowned,
His Virtue above Demy-god he'ad found.
Thus far has C^rolo^^des out done
Aeneidos, the Theme* which Virgil sung.
T. C.

To his Worthy Friend Author of Caroloiades.
SIR,
YOu having been pleased to afford me the perusal of your Poem, aptly styled
Caroloiades, when it was in its first rude, and rough draught, and before it
was better shaped and corrected by you, I did freely give my sense and opinion
on many passages, and you seldom differed from my sentiments therein. For though
I am no great Judge of Poesy (as you may see by my writing to you in Prose) yet
I am an Admirer of those refined Wits, who by the sweet harmony of Verse have
conserved the History of those Ancient Wars, which might have been lost had
they been wrote in Prose; and the Iliads of Homer, and other Antique Writings
might have ran the same fate of time, with many other excellent Histories,
which perhaps perished, because they wanted the spirit and soul of Poetry to
conserve them.

The subject, Sir, on which you have chosen to Write, is worthy of an Heroic
Poem; Our Wars more then Civil, with the ultimate Tragedy thereof, is such a
period as is sufficient to silence all the Muses, and cause them abruptly to
break off in sighs and lamentations. I know not how it comes to pass, that for
these Forty Years, since which these Wars have been ended, that none of the
Elevated Wits of our Age have taken upon them to describe these mighty Actions
in Heroic Verse, until you happily took up this subject so worthy of your
Pen, which I wish may delight as well as inform the World; and that when
Histories fail, and are exstinguish'd by time, your Poem may survive and give
knowledge of what we have seen to future Ages.

I am, Your very humble Servant, Paul Rycaut,

CAROLOIADES, OR, The Rebellion of England. Begun in the Year, 1641. A HEROIC
Poem.
The Argument of the First Book.
Unhappy War begun in Forty One,
The Causes Mischiefs, here the Poets Song
Briefly relates: The Houses from their King
Highly divide, whence discords soon increase,
Nourished by Pasquills, Libells, Threats, Demands.
Nor Royal Acts of Grace suffice to calm
All daring Vulgar rage: The Queen departs,
And Heroine-like undaunted Seas does pass.
THE Wars and period of a Mighty King,
Which did from furious Crimes of Subjects spring:
My Muse presumes here to describe by Verse,
And Hero's deeds of Brave Renown rehearse.
Whose English Valors, on account of Fame,
Are no less blazed then Greek or Roman Name.
Their Grandeur weighed, and such admired Designs,
As give high Theams unto Heroic Lines:
Had Homer them, or Mighty Maros's wit,
Unto Times Future admiration writ;
With every Fiction, as should intervene,
For silling Glory to each weighty Scene.
And had their Genius, like some Sacred Merit,
Left with Pernassus Legacies of Spirit
To be Implored from thence, I well might now
That Supplication to my Soul allow:
As wondrous Actions here my Verse relates,
And things Prodigious formed against high Estates.
No Civil War did e're so Impious sway,
When Subjects durst their Sovereigns least obey.
And though thy Reign First Charles sills no Record
With spoils of Nations, or a Lawless Sword:
The bad example of most Neighbor Kings,
Whose stern Ambition unjust ruin brings:
Yet in the even Conduct of thy Mind
Was Grandeur above Scepter unconsin'd.
Not more dismayed when unthought Storms appeared,
Then in best Calms whose change was causless feared.
And to Celestial Councels only known,
Why he, whose Virtue did adorn his Throne,
Should so accomplished not successful be
Against the Wicked when his Enemy.
Vile in their rise, and in that more Accursed
Because proceeding from Peace loathed first
By Graceless hearts, which were too proudly bred,
And from their Peace and Riches Ranc'rous fed.
Whence Faction's Itch did more envenomed sprout,
Contagion spreading through the Vulgar Rout.
And like quick Plagues, when mingling with their breath,
The Crowd Infected e're they feared their death.
With these high Evils poisonous Libels joined;
Fame's Vulgar Magic, aptly then designed
By men whose Subtleties could full delude,
And to their ends engage the thoughtless Crowd.
And next, themselves did wholesome Patriots blaze,
More to allure the Vulgar's Giddy praise.
Divulging faults where none Just fault could find,
Or call that Crime which they for Crime designed.
Nor less Supine against Church then State durst rail,
Whilst Scots helped England with their Pious Tale:
Or Covenant formed that speciously might bring
Both Nations to Oppose their Laws and King.
How did their knotty evils then awake,
The Just Repose our Monarch's Rule did take?
Abroad he saw Peace blessed him every where,
No Less Made Foreign Wonder then their Fear:
Nor more, at Home, did Troubles apprehend,
Who thought, his Good might others Evil mend.
Whence Heavens permissive Will did him allow
Much ready Justice with a Sword too slow.
A Merit that on bad Men little gains,
Whose fear, not love, their duty most retains.
Now Pop'lar fury, with it hoped for Swinge,
Had set Commotion on the smoothest Hinge.
When Lowed desires brought Parliament Estates,
To color more three Kingdom's wretched Fates:
In hope the Scepter without blow might fall,
Or shared by Lords and Commons at their Call.
No Negative Will their Sovereign they would admit,
All they would Act, nay kill as they thought sit.
Thy blood Great Strafford foremost must be Spilt,
His Head their fear, and death no loss their Guilt.
Whilst Poz'd the Senats Artisice to Maintain,
That Law did Treason in his Case Explain.
Whose fall his Princes Cares did much Augment,
Who grieved, yet grieving gave his wronged Consent.
Flattered with hopes of future good from Men
That were bad first but to be worse again:
And shows to Kings how dangerous they Comply,
When they (with evil) Subjects Gratify.
Nor less the Multitudes unruly Fate,
Who thought his Blood more prosperous days should Date.
Not judging Heaven had but deferred the time
When they must bleed to expiate their Crime.
All which the Politic Houses had foreseen,
When left to Crowds Seditions welcome Scene.
Well knowing that such must for their Crimes be stroak'd,
Before they could be more subservient yoked.
Or Grants obtained, Be aiding unto more,
That should confirm an everlasting Power
To sit and Vote; To which their Prince Agrees,
Hoping to winn them with Benignities;
And this High gift like which none e're had been
By Subjects asked, or given by English King.
Whilst they neglecting his too facile Grace,
Give to their asking still a bolder Face.
Resolved to Compass such Disloyal things,
As should dethrone him with his line of Kings.
No thoughts like these did complicate his Cares,
And pierced him deeper in his Consorts Tears:
Her Person Menaced and defamed by those
Who most did high disorders then dispose.
Which though against her Ingloriously applied,
Yet no occasion she her Soul denied,
That to her King her Value could assure,
Or tell the World what she would for him endure.
To whom, with Mien and Greatness duly Joined,
She briefly thus expressed her Glorious Mind.
What Fate soever in these Commotions lies,
Or sury staring in your Peoples Eyes;
Should it shame Stars that such presages guide,
Or to your Rebel Subjects join their side:
No day, from aiding you, shall me deterr,
How dismal e're may look the face of War.
Too sure your friend, your Foes do me suspect,
Since my Soul most your Cause must needs affect.
Like which no Glory from my Life can spring,
Or Courage in the Wife of such a King.
What Ally will not your Wars concern embrace,
Or Prince descending from a Royal Race,
When I your praises shall to them declare,
And how Complete to Rule your Virtues are:
These, your best Standards, I Will abroad display,
If through the Occean Stars assist my way.
To these obligements of her Soul to him,
Whose Virtue best their Merit could esteem;
He thus replies: If Heaven designs to me
By Peace or War a due prosperity:
The greatness of thy Mind and Love I Will own,
Above Attempts that may support my Crown.
My Kingdoms dangers threaten every where,
As from black Clouds Men future Thunder (...)*
Fierce Pop'lar rage above its Region swells,
Whence few discern where most the mischief dwells:
But more severe that Crime unto my Heart,
As your affliction has with mine its part.
What Absence can you sever from my mind,
Where like another Soul your value's joined.
Whilst I assisting of thy Just Retreat,
Show my Affection's no less kind then Great.
Nor would I that true Annals should disperse
My Acts of Glory, and not Thine rehearse.
His Queen in whose Heroic Soul did meet
All things that Love and Majesty complete*
Yields to depart, with so Serene a Grace,
That Gries seemed vanquished in her Tender Face.
Much kindness she expressed, and more forbears;
Lest Words too sadly should produce her Tears:
Or that her Soul to utter wanted power
How kind she would leave him in that dismal hour.
Such Nobless as with Duty did attend
On this Departure, how did they contend
To six Impressions on their Souls that might
Admi^e the Grief and Grandeur of this sight?
Nor Judged they sorrow could enough Address,
With tears their wives and daughters did Express*
As they feared evils from that hour would spring,
That destined was to part a Queen and King.
Thus they Lamented; and next Jointly pray,
That Heaven might safely guide on Seas her way.
And from the Glory of her Voyage yield,
Fa^r famed Assistance to her King in field.
Winds soon their wishes take, whilst Neptun's face
His Azur'd Curls and smoothest Billows grace:
Proud that his Swiftest waves her freight must bear,
As her stout Ship to Belgic ports did steer.
Had former Poets this Atcheivment known,
Not their verse Thetis Queen of Seas would own.
Since Love and Glory more Sublimely raise
A Consort to our Empire on the Seas.
The Queen thus to a Foreign Coast retired,
Where Highest Potentates her worth admired,
And how she more then Woman's skill applied,
That her Kings Cause might soonest be supplied.
When Belgian States (so long obliged had been
To Famed Elizabeth our English Queen;
By whom their Body-Politique did rise
In spite of Spain then held so Great and Wise)
She with Pathetick words did highly move,
Wishing their Power as Grateful as her Love.
Since by a sad Vicissitude of Fate,
The English Crown Courts their obliged State:
Letting 'em know to what a Glorious end
They may for ever be called Englands friend.
To which the Belgic State, with Supine pride,
(The effect of Power and Riches) thus replied;
What er's the Cause that this Address does bring,
Thus Honored by the Queen to Britains King.
An Envoy, which our Greatness must confess,
Does more then Humane Majesty express:
Far be it that our now Mighty-States disown
Their past Oblig'ments to the English Throne,
By whose brave Aid's we did best force obtain
On Land and Sea to Curb Aspiring Spain.
And what is more, did next advantage take
Our selves (of Subjects) Mighty Lords to make.
For which Spain Lowdly did us Rebels call,
Who durst hope Safety by that Scepters fall.
A bold Necessity which Subjects brings
First to oppose, and then Dethrone their Kings.
Whether the British quarrel be the same,
Or from a specious greivance would disclaim
Like us their Monarch's Rule; in either Case
We cannot the English Crown's demand embrace.
Least held our States high Blemish to resist
Our Prince at Home, and one abroad assist.
We with most Kings a free Commerce Maintain;
Whose coin may Ships, Arms, Men, from us obtain.
No Princes Wanting Cause our States espouse,
To gain's our business when our Neighbors Loose.
The Queen by prudence and experience taught,
Disdains to utter the Contempt she thought,
These Courser States deserved, though well she knew
How few Dominions are to others true,
And what a Cold redress most Princes sinde,
When Fortune is to their affairs Unkind.
Yet with her self concludes (though stripped of all
That could a Monarch's suffering Spouse befall)
Nothing to Mis-imploy that can assure
Her King's great Safety, or his Aid procure.
Such Matchless Gemms whose Luster did adorn
The Diadems which English Queens had worn;
She, as her Glorious Offering did bring
To purchase aid, more Sacred, for her King.
No sooner Covetous Belgians these behold,
But they Comply (on such) to lend their Gold:
Though adding to the Sum before denied,
So Sure are Mortals by their profit tried.
But oh the Fate of Princes that deplore
Their want of power as well as being poor,
Orange, who from Imperial Lineage Came,
Had by Alliance no less mingled same,
In seeing late wedded by his hopeful Son,
The eldest Princess of the British Throne:
With Generous Greatness to the Queen thus speaks,
Since my Blood Glory from the Rule partakes
Of your Just King, 'twere mean should I deny
My Purse to aid his Injured Majesty.
Wishing my Treasure could alone Complete
Such Noble sorce as might his foes defeat.
And did not Age forbid, with such affairs
That here Employ my person and my Cares,
I Would like a Soldier amongst his Bravest Fight,
And Honored if my death his Cause could right.
The Queen thus furnished by this Great Ally,
To purchase Arms and Men she does apply
Her soonest Care, Next Martialists consults;
And then does ponder from their bold results,
How best to guide her Force, what Port to find,
Wishing her Love could wings add to the Wind.
That soon returning with well-formed Power,
She might her Charles assist some useful hour.
The Queen thus active in a Foreign State;
My Muse shall by her Measures here relate,
A further Progress of Intestine broils,
And how our King prepared for Martial Toyls.
Whose Rule, by stubborn Evils then oppressed,
Though it so long Ungrateful Subjects blessed:
Who Kingly Grace and pardon durst neglect,
The Balms which Public Cures so often effect.
Which Impious arrogance did then Improve
In such, who their Prince would not fear, nor Love.
And Notion'd thus the Impetuons Crowd was taught
To vent defyance, to his Palace brought.
Whitehall his Sacred residence beset
By Crowds, for Threats and Terrors there had met,
No Humane Violence could with this Compare,
But in Men-Monsters who denied to Fear
The Heavenly Scepter Jove was thought to hold,
When he Olimpus saw attaqu'd of old.
The King, enough deploring, soon beheld
The Inflamed vulgar Fury unrepell'd
By London Magistrates due advice or aid,
Where more then Law was Factions then obeyed.
Who durst his Palace wish despoyl'd by such
That Royal Mansions thought for Kings too Much,
The King less greiv'd from his Loved Court to move,
Then there to trust such Pledges of his Love,
Whose Tender years could not his have partake,
Nor Left behind securely for his Sake.
His Lands, Towns, Treasure, soon to be possessed,
By such as wished his Crown should be oppressed.
Whilst he retiring (like that Trojan Prince,
Who could no longer be his Troy's defense,
Yet with high Courage Res^n'd there from Fut^
The Princely Heir of that declining State,)
^ad many dangers passed that round him stood,
When saved the Blooming Hero's of his Blood.
^is Prince of Wales and York's Duke young in years,
Preserved from Foes by his Supremest Cares:
And by their Fathers Suss'rings grew to know
The Streights to Glory they must undergo.
Who though he Kingdoms had, and Cities Great
Which owed obsequiance to his Regal State,
Yet in their vast Circumference knew not where
'Twas best to Influence first his Martial Sphere.
Till too like Private Majesty removed,
And Journeying far his Prudence had approved
The North's The City of York.
Metropolis, to which adjoined
Regions to Loyal Glory full Inclined.
And being a Prince resolv'dly Great and Just,
In Law supporting as his Scepters trust:
Thought Heaven and he divinely were obeyed,
When Subjects should his Cause most dauntless aid.
Soon did the Nobles then themselves convey
Unto their King, scorning from him to stay,
Or with time-serving Disobedience stain
Their part of Honor in his Glorious Reign.
The Generous next their Brave Example take,
Whilst soon, their worst remains, both Houses make:
An Impious Body-Politique to sit,
Where future Parliaments may blush to sit.
Since from that Fatal late abused Name,
A spreading evil kindled first its flame.
Unhappy Westminster so often to be
The Seat of Public Good and Infamy.
Our Second Edward and our Richard tell,
How black, from them, thy Records there do dwell.
And what adds more unto thy Monstrous Date,
The Best of Kings there doomed to wicked Fate.
Which Deeds with their Prodigions Story may
Unequalled stand to the World's ending day,
Nor could the Houses subtlest Gloss evade
Reflections by the Wise were early made:
When Actlons, how-e're worded, did imply,
They pointed at the fall of Monarchy.
Designed by such, to Rule, would force their way,
Though, Slave-like Fellow Subjects them obey.
From which Ambition (often man's proner Curse
When tempted by bold perils to be worse)
The face of War did gradually appear,
Foreseen by more then durst divulge their fear.
Seditious Scotland, that had first begun
To form Rebellion before Forty One,
And from their wicked Presidents had been
Slily instructed in this Impious Sin;
That where known Story most Allegiance blots,
'Twill doubtless yield to History of Scots.
England they saw they could not then compel
To grant them Seats where they might warmer dwell.
For which our King they envied, though their own,
But most, because most Happy in our Crown.
Craft thus employed that subtly had enclosed
Their labored Mischiefs, which they thus disposed:
Their Schism and Faction, unto England brought,
Intrigu'd so firm that with their Snares 'twas caught.
Which to uphold both Houses joined their Vote,
That with Armed Scots their Arms they might promote.
Reb^^liou^ Ireland, that could not stay
'Till Sc^ch and English Blood was cast away,
With headstrong guilt begins this wicked Time,
Few apprehend which Nation's greatest Crime.
The King his Person offers to oppose
Against his Irish Rebels, yet not knows
Which Kingdom would to him most safety yield,
Or where best first for him to take the Field.
England, his dearest Pledge, employed his Grief,
Whilst bleeding Ireland called for soon relief.
Which lest he should Conduct the Houses pray
That he at home as unsecure might stay.
Resolved their Power his Arms should first oppose,
More to encourage every where his Foes.
Fearing lest he from Just occasion might
Others subdue, and next them stronger fight.
No Sword by their Consents with him they would Trust,
Whose great Revenge they feared, yet knew 'twas Just.
Essex, whose stubborn Will and sullen Pride
Had with this Poplar Faction long complied,
With greater Zeal Heads their Rebellious Cause,
Nor grants it is guilt to fight against the Laws.
Who fway'd by specious Arts, and thirst of Fame,
Discerned not then a Loathed General's Name.
Forgetting whence Nobility did spring,
Or how it is stained when Armed against the King.
Thus crowded into Power he Leads that Force,
Which the bold Houses Vote their Foot and Horse.
Numbers no Less then Mighty to Empower
The evils which that Age did soon deplore.
What was thy Crime, O London! then to be
The Numerous Aid of this Calamity:
Was it because thou were too richly great,
Or too long pampered in a blessed Estate;
That thy Ungrateful heads then seemed to ache,
And by pretended flame a Fever take,
An Artisice to worst Delusions joined,
As Zeal transported had the Peoples Mind.
And if my Verse a Prospect duly take
Of what did then so fierce Transactions make,
Truth soon declares that 'twas no public Sense
That had diffused so vild an Influence.
But heatfull Parties that within their Frames,
For ends devised, had raised such horrid flames;
And but the name of Parliament did feign,
On purpose to convey a larger stain.
And which no well-form'd sense allows to be
That full Conventious Public Infamy.
A Constitution Great to all effects,
As it our Good discerns and Bad detects.
From whence the Nation best their Pulse perceives,
And when it is sound more soundness then receives.
If Crazed, or will not other help endure,
That proved State-Phisick can complete the Cure.
And what, beyond all Treasures, Aid Imparts,
It both receives and gives the Peoples Hearts.
An Envied Glory through which Nations see
Cause to repine our just felicity.
When wild exorbitance of Pride and heat,
In other Rules have their pernicious date.
And more detects our Late Unhappy Times,
In which Men boldly strove to heighten Crimes:
Kindled by such on each side did Convey,
Their fiery Ends the most destructive way.
By perverse Parliaments the Factions sought,
That low and poor their Monarch might be brought:
Denying, for their ends, their public Aid,
As first their Niggard purse him disobeyed.
Which forced Prerogative, by Royal Right,
To claim, for Common good, the Purses Might:
An Aidfull Power that Scop^*
Lest Subjects ill retain what Crow^s should (...).
Though Pop'lar Patriots did this Act di^own,
And cast aspersions on the Straightened Throne;
As they against Shipmoney disgusts proclaim,
With high Contests, which to Tribunals came;
That their Great Monarchs Rule might want supply,
Till Senats should less peevishly deny.
When this famed King, whose Soul was full propense
To give his Royal Claim no wrong defense,
Consented to give Law it is due repute,
That Legal Process might his Plea promote.
Which Misconceived in a furious Time,
When Jealousies and fears durst vent their Crimes,
By deeming things undutiously amiss,
That men might thence distrust their Nations Bliss:
Ceased not their Rancour, though by By Act of Parliament Ship Money was damned,
by which and other Gracious Condescensions the King endeavored to prevent the
future Miseries of his Nation.
Act of State
This Tax abolished was to Lasting Date,
As they abetted a Disloyal fear
Of Oblique Motions in the Royal Sphere:
Whence Crowds were Taught more strictly to embrace
What then was called their Senat's sighting Case:
Lest that subdued they might be next undone,
And Lives and Fortunes grant by Conquest won.
A Sense devised by obloquies of Fame
To blemish their King's Rule and Sacred Name.
Thus some did with most horrid Arts devise
How to Impose on all more Just and Wise.
Such subtle Members as the Houses swayed,
Soon their Delusions takingly conveyed:
With what by Vulgar Fury could promote
The Cause which their sierce Patrons first did Vote.
To which their violent Spiritual Guides complied,
Who taught Rebellion then was Sanctified.
Was It not enough that former Ages found,
How such Incendiaries did then abound:
That Pulpits must afresh divulge their flame,
And, stead of Beacons, public Broils proclaim:
Provoking Heaven and Inauspicious Stars
To haste the bloody Aspects of our Wars.
When in their Orbs the rest began to fear
Lest Mars, in spite of Jove, should domineer.
Nor less the Azur'd Regions did presage
Prodigious Fights and Battles in that Age
Arms, against Arms, to men's affrighted eyes,
Seemed as arrayed Battalions on the Skies;
Where flashings did like Guns discharging show,
And Flames resembled Pikes in Skirmish too.
Most feared what these strange Visions should portend,
Or hoped Heaven might by them bad men amend.
Whilst nothing the fierce Houses then restrained,
Or that rough Of Essex, who was the first General, and Head of this Grand
Rebellion.
Earl whose Conduct they had gained,
Not, as they did for Blood and Treasure thirst,
Or would for Horrid Spoils of War be Cursed:
More specious they seem Laws and King to treat,
So subtly Mortals would their guilt abate.
The SECOND BOOK.
The Argument.
Intestine Discords by what Method spread,
The Quarrel the unhappy Title bears
Of King and Parltaments opposed Arms.
And like the body of the State confused,
The Members differ: Towns, Cities, Counties,
Miserably behold their Magistrates,
Though Guardians of their Peace turned Enemies,
And armed in this destructive War appear.
WAR thus prepared and boldest Summons sent
T'Incite more swiftly Minds to Fury bent,
Without perceiving the Impetuous Source
Of boundless Evils, which their Crimes did force.
Or that Peace seemed their Universal pain,
'Till after War 'twere begged of Heaven again.
A Crisis often gives Furious Tempers ease,
When War's rough Physic proves their worst disease.
What man can in most touching Numbers show
The various Ills with that Time's License grew:
When neither tie by Blood, or Parents Tears,
Nor Conscience which man's Soul diviner fears*
Could Son or Brothers daring heart deterr
From being allied more guilty by this War.
Or not with headstrong fury soon oppose
The side their dearest Friends for safety chose.
Nor did the Aged then forbear to show,
That Peace was withered no less then their Brow:
Conspiring in the Autumn of their Time,
To misguide others by their Graver Crime.
Whence Evils with more Grandeur did augme^t,
As Age taught Youth so little to repent.
And by their joint endeavors did assure,
That this Wars fatal flame would long endure.
The Forts and Castles that had slighted been,
And by their Ruins told Wars Ancient Sin;
Laborious hands did Numerously repair;
And with their Dusty Toils obscured the Air.
Whilst distant Men affrighted did behold
New forms of Terror far surpassing old.
When but Bows piercing Shafts from Bulwarks flew,
And not so horridly -- as Guns Men slew.
Thus some Lamented, whilst the Many strove
Their Nations fury highest to improve.
And did Tumultuous Rage through Regions spread,
With Thefts from Wars bold License sadly read.
Some total Plundered and their Persons sent,
Reviled by Crowds, to loathed Imprisonment.
Whilst others forced from Houses and Estates,
Were left like Wanderers unto wretched Fates.
Though Charged upon their Souls no other Crime
Then not to Aid the Mischiefs of that time.
When violent Men Delinquencies durst make
In such as would not Peace with them forsake:
Or hoped that Moderate quiet might be had,
When but to live secure was counted bad.
Number the People's Monster, like the Birth
Of that vast Giant famed the Son of Earth;
Its own unweildy Power did roughly bring
To Aid Intended Arms against the King.
Who though his Life and Crown he soon might Stake,
Beheld his Leavies for his Cause too weak.
Courage his Hope sustained, and Conscious Right,
Which to defend Best Kings renown'dly fight.
But e're his Enemies did near him join,
Or Re-inforcements further their Design;
Their strongest Parties vigor he would first try,
And teach them from his Sword 'twas Just to fly.
Whilst then his Power in Horse began to spread,
And by most Generous Blood of English Led;
Of whom he thought no praise enough could be,
Or Greatness joined unto their Dignity,
Until Great Rupert, his Renowned Ally,
He made First Captain of their Cavalry.
A Prince that did in his High Lineage join
Best German Race with England's Royal Line.
And what did most embellish his High Blood,
No less in Story famed for Brave then Good.
Who for this Expedition duly chose
Troops best approved to meet the hardy Fo^^.
Worcester that had Allegiance early shown,
When many Cities were disloyal known;
(Though her distress from future Fate did bring
A Second Charles to live an Exiled King.)
Implored of Heaven a soon Auspicious hour,
As near her then took Field the Royal Power.
To which Campaign the Houses eager Vote,
That War, on their part, should its haste promote,
Had sent their firmest Regiments of Horse,
In hopes they would there succeed by strenuous force.
Sands had these Glittring Troops; resolved for Fame,
Led to this Field with full Courageous Flame.
His thought's with Number raised and boldest Pride,
To be held early signal by his Side.
Not as he would the Juster Cause maintain,
But Glory sought mixed with pernicious Gain:
Which profitable Encomium much did sway
Men that the Houses served for Praise and Pay.
His Troops encountered, swift Resistance find;
And next like Stubble scattered by the Wind
With a Confused Haste their flight confound,
Whilst with their gasping Friends Death strows the Ground.
Their Resolute Chief whose Courage could not yield,
Timely to grant his Foes the Conquered Field,
Too deeply wounded is a Captive made;
The Prince, with Courteous grief, his Cure assayed
By best skilled Surgeons who his wounds explore,
But found, too far past aid, his Vital Power.
Nor did his Valor harden so his end,
As't did his Cause then Courage more commend.
Great Rupert prosperous thus and filled with hope
To gain by future Conquest further scope;
Unto his Royal Uncle did retire
With many Trophies of his Martial Fire.
The King with Temperate Thoughts so poyz'd his Mind,
That no events in him a Change could find:
To his Brave Nephew, with Indulgent Grace,
Did thus express; Though of my Princely Race,
I gladly prove thy Valor such as may
Preserve my Scepter in each doubtful day,
Should my Opposers fiercely still adhere
To stain their Crimes more deeply by this War:
Yet it is my Royal Soul that bids confess,
That I must welcome less, then they, Success.
Though they fight to resist what I maintain,
Yet still my Subjects are on both sides slain.
Wherefore so Lead my Battles that I may
When Victor show more Mercy still then they.
As with Calm Glory thus the King expressed,
A Warlike heat enflamed Great Rupert's breast:
Who thus replies, Since your severest Foes
Cannot your steady Greatness discompose;
In nothing I Will be wanting to incite
Your boldest Troops with forward Zeal to fight.
Nor shal't be said that I one Peril shun
Where Service can for you by Arms be done.
Unto your Powers Heaven daily does dispense
Aids undiscerned by Humane Providence.
Your Royal Standard no where is displayed,
But Welsh and English gladly are Arrayed.
Who, when War's Discipline improves their Might,
Will soon for you undaunted Soldiers fight.
The King though in his Nephew thus beheld
Example's Grandeur, which had often upheld
Daring Attempts by forward Captains Led
Who Fortune's briskest Smiles had sometimes had:
His Nobless, Gentry, to Achievements prone,
That most Magnanimous might assist his Throne.
Yet could not ^e allay such Anxious thought
As his Affairs in prospect to him brought.
His Forces newly raised and thinly Armed,
And more the Sinews of their Hearts uncharm'd
By Coins alluring force, his Treasure spent,
Or greatest part, unto his detriment!
By the bold Houses rigidly possessed,
And in that Nerve of State him first distressed.
Whilst, to his grief, his wanting Files might say,
That Duty set off almost ali their Pay.
All which did in their Grievances declare
How deep the King concerned and Nation were.
Throughout its Parts and Orders un-intire,
And Notion'd as did least their Peace conspire.
Some Vassals, with their Lords, themselves array,
Others their Lords by fighting disobey.
No State or Birth their due distinction find,
Whilst mean and bad then joined their worst design.
The Swain his tilt neglected in despair
Of what his Globe might yield another year,
Judging that Camps would better him sustain,
Then his disordered toil for future Grain:
No Aid whatever but did reception find;
Wars Darling, Force, is best with Number joined.
Essex from London marched with highest State,
When thro^ (...) ^s did his Soul clate,
By th'Houses man^ent, and Crowds designed,
To heighten Fervor in his Poplar Mind.
Who with their Sanguine Zeal had less conspired,
Had not Fame's Tinder so his Temper fired.
By which Impulse, or from the Fate of things,
That Rugged Souls to proner Violence brings:
He soon his Army full completed Led
Near to Campagnes in which the King's was spread.
Not doubting but his Numerous Warlike Force,
So well accoutred by the Houses Purse,
Would soon the King's best formed Powers defeat,
When they should boldest his in Battle meet.
And that his Cause no smooth pretext should lose,
Which for its Vail the Senate's Votes had chose.
Unto the King a specious Errand sends,
That to his Sovereign safety recommends:
By wishing he would from Perils soon withdraw,
Since no respect can flying Bullets awe:
Or Swords promiscuoully in Battles kill,
And may, amongst Lower Blood the Highest spill.
So plausible would men their Figures take,
If words, for their Offense, can Varnish make.
The King, whose even Greatness did compose
His Person to the wonder of his Foes,
Thus to the Earl's delusive Message says;
Tell the bold man who for Inglorious praise
Does near Imbattel'd to our sight appear;
And dares by Arms to bid his Sovereign fear.
That Phoebus may as soon decline his Lighr,
When Cloudy Meteors would obstruct his sight,
As witness my Just Glory I disown,
Or Deeds my Scepter highest can renown,
Though with my Pers'nal Sufferings should combine
The worst that Armed Subjects shall design.
The King here ends: And next Great Lindsey spoke,
Since Me, Great Sir, your General you make,
Suffer that I unto this Earl commit
What may my Honors Station well besit.
He is a Captain and I Would have him know
My Prowess shall him equaled that way show:
But if before the fury of this day,
He Will singly Combat me a Soldiers way.
Our Persons shall our Battel's Signal be,
As we begin to fight for Victory.
This Errand thus returned; Essex declined
All other Fight then with his Army joined.
Who judged that'twas a much securer course
To wave then meet Brave Lindsey's single force.
The King from Edge-Hill's top, like Jove on high,
When Mortals once against Heaven Encamped did lie
Undaunted saw the near Campaign disclose
Power that durst him divine on Earth oppose.
And as a Royal Chief did next descend
Strictly to view if orderly extend
His Battle, Wings, of Infantry and Horse;
Inspecting next if their Souls vigorous force
Stood on their Looks, and how each Persons Face
Spoke daring Conduct in his Martial place.
Amongst these, as Valors Ornament, he saw
Best Peers and Gentry Glistring Swords to draw.
Not readier to Command then to Obey,
Where Volunteers they ranked themselves that day.
Mingled with these he more Intent beheld
Some by him least obliged or favored hrld,
T'inlarge his Royal Files did there resort,
Without expected Gift or Place from Court.
Whilst others by his Royal Bounty raised
To Honor, Wealth, never in their 'Scutcheons blazed;
Ingratefully from his Just Cause withdrew,
Or against him did worst Renegado's show.
Which frontless guilt when well the King compared
With such, full-Soul'd with Duty, him revered;
Their Loyalty unpamper'd by his Gifts,
Whilst Falsehood had in others gainful shifts.
How might this Prince hope Heaven his Crown won'd right,
Since Conscience thus for him won hearts to sight?
When Factions did the Houses Votes maintain,
Blended with various Interests and Gain.
Some Bankrupt Commons and of Gentry such
Who safe Estates and Lives would others grudge:
And purposely Commotions did Create,
To share Large Gleanings by their Nation's Fate:
Which gave the King occasion to deplore,
Where his Arms lost they lessened Virtues Store;
And could but low retaliation find,
If Blood they vanquished mean or unresin'd.
Essex, whose Talent was in words not great,
Or like such Chiefs whose Oratory's heat
The fervor of their Militants could raise,
And by apt Speech and Conduct mingle praise:
Yet Lest his Soul too heavy seemed to fill
His Organs, or unbent his Armed Will,
He boldly owned to Heaven, a specious way,
His Lawless Cause as he pres^'d to pray
With Canting Teach^, who could Prayers devise
And Texts expound Rebellion to disguise:
Besitting well the Factions of those Times,
And men who fought and begged success for Crimes.
Thus, to his Name's reproach, his Files he Led
In Keinton-Field against his Nations Head:
Where soon both Armies furiously Engage,
That English might kill English on that Stage.
When first from loudest Canons Bullets slew
And Ranks of Men at remote distance slew.
Some viewed their severed Limbs e're they could dye
In parts by Deaths severest Cruelty.
Others were slain outright by one huge blow,
And happy whom such Guns had killed so:
Or were by stunning Shot bereaved of breath,
As Canons, without wound, enforced their death.
Some Horse throw Riders wanting Limbs to tread,
Others by Bullets torn in halfs lay dead.
Thus with Man's Fate the servile Beast complies,
And in Wars method most alike him dies.
This Thundering Prologue ceased, the Scene did fill
With thicker Mischiefs, though less Engines kill.
Which Musket's close opposing Peals convey,
Numerous as Attoms when the burning day
Provokes their intermingled globulous flight,
And by their adverse motions seem to sight.
Which Slaughter past another did ensue,
That gives some death who had escaped Powders blow.
And did as dismal Prospects soon expose,
As these fierce Legions closer fought their Foes.
Foot against Foot their brandished Pikes employ,
And with bold Stands no less the Horse annoy.
Such soonest fall as would most daring live,
In so short time Fames Stage can Honor give.
But now as Fortune would the King assist,
Or teach his daring Foes less to resist:
His Cavalry with furious drift had chased
The Enemies Horse on their Right-Wing were placed.
Whilst vanquished through this spacious Field they fly,
Nor thought to stop however by flight they dye.
So strangely fear produced Ignoble haste,
Though Fate they proved o'retook their Lives too fast.
Great Rupert who the Royal Cavalry Led,
And had too far pursued Brigades that fled,
Remembered then the Friends he left behind,
And how distressed perhaps he them should find.
With whom the King might highest dangers share,
Until relieved by his Valiant Care.
Thus he presaged, and in his Mighty Mind,
As much his boundless Valor then repined;
That had surpassed occasions Limits so,
As Fortunes Time did from him backward go.
Whose Minutes slipped she proudly does disdain
The self-same favors to bestow again.
Whilst in that hasty hour the Thirst of Spoils
Too soon had mingled with his Soldiers Toyls.
Some seizing Baggage of the op'lent slain,
When others vaster Booty strove to gain.
Their Fatal Profit, as too early they
Would have the Gleaning of the Field that day.
Which by this Prince discerned, with res'lute Brow
And highest Indignation bids them throw
To earth mean Pillage, and with boldest Might
Return with him unbroken Ranks to sight.
Being rallied thus, like Billows on the Main
That with more furious Tides revolve again,
He forced his passage back through Armed Foes,
And Horse and Man Impetuously o'rethrows.
His Soul Impatient to accomplish more
Then he had left behind undone before.
Yet could not his Attempts, though praised by Fame,
Prevent the froward Cast of Fortunes Game;
When the Essexians with great Valor fought,
And the King's Battle unto hardship brought.
Whose Valiant Infa^ry though o'repowr'd with force,
At once Encountered t^ both Foot and Horse.
Whence many various sad effects ensued,
As here Death had her T^k Scene pursued.
The hardy Pikemen that sometime withstood
The strenuous Charge of Horse with loss of Blood:
Amongst Broken Foot, defended least by flight,
In much disorder was enforced to fight.
Their Front compelled to mingle with the Rear,
And many killed confusedly sighting there.
Some trod to death by Horse in furious have,
Others by Cruel Leisure fell more fast.
Too many cannot resist, resist would fain,
So much their Valor of their Fate did gain.
Such Generous Chiefs as could no longer guide
Their bravest Conduct against the prevailing side,
With their distressed Militants now yield
To fall the Glory of this Bloody Field.
Where Fortune dreadful revolutions wrought,
As if the Destinies her Aid had sought.
When Valiant Bands, which like a Sacred fence
Had stood the Royal Standards stout defense,
Disordered were, yet then disdained to fly;
Or cease to fight, but as they would fighting die.
Belford who res'lutely his Squadrons Led
To force their room by laying Files first dead,
With Steps well died in Blood a passage made
Where the King's Standard's Glory was displayed.
Which matchiess Trophy he aimed to surprise
As his bold Present to the Houses eyes.
Whilst Loyal Sir Edmund Varney, Standard Bearer to King Charles tho First.
Varney, who with Valiant Trust
That highest Ensign's safety hoped to boast;
As he with signal Prowess sometime stood
Unconquered though expending Streams of Blood,
And as Life had thus bravely from him fled,
The Standard fast supported held when dead.
But this Knight's fall, though in desert alone
Enough to save that Emblem of the Throne,
Could not without conjoined Atchievments bring,
Sufficient rescue to their The King being Represented in his Standard with his
Sword Drawn.
Figured King.
Which Glory valiant Sir John Smith.
Smith with others gained,
And to retire the Enemy constrained.
A Prowess with their Fame must still survive,
Whilst deeds in Keinton-field with Story live.
What Epithites in Verse can aptly raise,
Trophies, that may perpetuate their praise.
Or History that gives Truth such a Test,
As Famous deeds are thence recorded best.
Too Numerous for my Measures to preserve,
Or what my Muse may doubt she cannot deserve.
The day just spent (and well it happened so
When both sides still to fight resolved did show)
As if Heavens Conduct auxiously took care,
How Men against their wills should Mankind spare.
And thus Night severed both these mighty Powers,
So fiercely was Employed that days sad hours.
Night, in which Terrors most accost man's thought,
And shapes bad deeds in worser forms then wrought;
What apprehensions might her hour's instill,
On such, whose latest Guilt had been to kill.
Nor did the rising day to them appear,
Less dismal to their Conscious Crimes or fear.
The Sun beheld far more then usual red,
If not his blush when viewed the blood here shed.
As sometimes Heaven does prodigies bestow,
To Frighten Mortals for Misdeeds below.
And might then op'rate whilst with like decree,
Both Armies quit the Field, yet neither flee.
Essex to Warwick does his Forces guide,
Enough exulting that his Stubborn side
The King's had sought, and unsuppress'd could own,
Such spoils of Dead and Living his were known.
And what Fate most peculiarly did prize,
Brave Lindsey (after made his Prisoner) dies.
Lindsey, whose great Example valor taught,
In perils bold, yet these not heedless sought;
A Captain aptly in a Hero Joined,
As is for Honors Masterpiece designed.
And in that days fierce Harrass like a Chief
Of Infantry, On Foot led Foot's relief;
Till overpowered, and weakened much by wound,
His foes him seized, near dead upon the ground.
Completed thus his Memory does Claim
A lasting mention from the Tongue of Fame.
The King his Camp to Oxford next removed,
Where his Commands were full obeyed and loved.
As Arts to ^mpire must obsequions be,
And Measure thence their best Felicity.
The Court and Camp no sooner settled here,
(...) fresh Emergencies of War appear.
(...), on which the King did most reflect,
As a wide source whence slow'd the sighting Sect:
That for the Houses s^cest did oppose:
To check which heat he did this season choose.
Besides he judged that in that Mighty Town
Were many Subjects highly did disown
The Interest, which the Factious managed there,
And might abate if his Force nearer were.
But London's Temper would not then Endure
To cease Rebellion by his force or Cure.
T'approach that Town to Bransord he arrives,
Where Silver Thames its useful Current guides:
And like Vicissitude in Humane things,
An Intercourse of Ebb and Flowing brings.
But here he finds his March obstructed so,
That he must sight or else not forward go.
The Streets and Avennues with Men beset,
Who here (surviving Keinton-field) had met;
And with like resolution durst defy,
The sorce Conducted by armed Majesty.
Hollis's Regiment being first at hand,
Was led to combat by his bold Command.
Soon were the Streets with gashly slaughters filled:
Some Houses Ransacked, and their owners killed;
The Town obscured from sight by smoke and fire,
As if with Lives designed to expire.
The Kings stout foot that would not yield to be,
Repulsed by dangers worst Extremity:
Had the opposing Infantry Compelled,
To quit the Post which they so dauntless held.
And full of Resolution did proceed,
To give their Vigorous force more Gallant speed.
Until observed that London Powers were brought,
To aid the Squadrons that already fought,
Then which; Not Mighty Seaven-hill'd Rome had shown,
Legions more splendid Armed, and expert known;
Though their unhappy Guilt that bloody time,
To be Defenders of their Senat's Crime.
These Essex heads in hopes next to repair,
His Parties loss, so much the Zealous care
Of many smart and Comely City Dames,
Who to his Strenuous Cause applied their Flames:
And might his Manhood else not much regard,
As doubting he too long lived Nature's Ward.
The King who did in this Conjuncture know
Timely the Reinforcements of the Foe,
Consults such Chiefs in Conduct most excelled,
And round his Person no less great beheld;
Then famous Hero's did of old appear,
When Armed in Field's they King's Advisers were.
And as Fame does such high concernments blaze,
Her Warlike records must these Worthies praise:
Who did their subtle Enemies deseat,
And in despite of more as bold retreat.
Whilst with nine Ensigns won, and other Spoils,
The Royal Army then renowned their Toils.
Though Kings by Martial Glory least obtain,
When by their Subjects loss they Trophies gain.
Or so enforced to Vindicate their Right,
As their just Arms must their delinquents sight.
Who as their Swords in battle Princes daro,
From dread of Justice Mercy next despair.
Nor Law Infringed more Resolute defy,
Then Conscience, the Soul's inward Majesty.
Now had the Sun his Autumn Glory spent,
When longer hours of Cold to Night were lent.
And fields did in their fading Green appear,
The Change of Livery Nature gives the year.
Which season not admitting longer stay,
Abroad for Armed, both sides withdrew their way.
So Bees in Clusters from fierce Battles Come,
By cold enforced unto their waxen Home:
Until refreshed by ease and warmer Air,
Their busy files to sight again prepare.
Essex near London does his Quarters spread,
Where by the Houses Votes they are warmly sed.
And nothing's wanted might his loss Recruit,
At Keinton-Field, or Bransord's later Rout.
Yet Neither Boasted strength, or joys best Guise,
Could tears repel from the Lamenting Eyes
That grieved for dear Relations wanted were,
As in Death's Muster read their Numbers are.
Though Pop'lar Conducts such Accounts most hide,
Lest People thence their dangers less abide.
Or from the sum of Lives profusely lost,
Perceive how dear such aid themselves must Cost.
The Royal force to Oxford next returned,
Where Joy's were high and some disasters mourned.
As with Auspitious deeds of War appear,
Bays that must needs some sanguine Tincture bear.
Whilst here the Court, that had with spendour fixed,
Shined as with fading Glories Intermixed.
Where Noble Matrons feared what Threads of Life
Fate would allow their Consorts in this Strife.
No less did Beauties (fain would Love espouse)
Dread in their Lovers more then Life to loose.
Which high Asllictions Civil War does find
To throw on best repose of Humane Kind.
Yet now as Fame her Festival would raise,
For Celebration unto future days:
Her Record swift she sends on Rum'rous Wing,
As her high Present to be given the King:
By which from his Illustrious Queen was known
Her Person safe, and soon would meet his own;
Though Neptune more her Greatness to display,
Allowed his boldest Seas t'opose her way.
Which did the far admiring world inform;
How she, Our Heroine, vanquished Waves and Storm.
Great Maro so did Famed Eneas blaze,
His Glory heightened on the highest Seas.
The King whose Love was servent to his Queen,
By whom he, to her Fame, obliged had been,
As she his Cause did to her peril aid:
To meet her Person no delay he made.
Attended by the Eminent of his Court,
Fully completed in their Noblest sort.
Beside applauded Beauties that did wait
On this so high Concern of Love and State.
That Poets thence may future Copies take,
When they would Diana's Chorus brightest speak.
Next unto these their Hero's did attend,
Whom ^ame for Warlike Deeds could best commend.
Edgehill, so near to Keinton-Field adjoined,
Was then the Sphere where all these Lustres shined.
Though Mortals that would bad Presages make
From accidental Causes or Mistake,
Might wonder that this Scene should here display,
Where Time must still Inroll a Bloody day:
As if that Heaven by Circumstantial things
Foretold Disasters, which the Future brings.
The Queen whose Mien and Looks was Great beheld,
And in her Persons figure too excelled.
More Comely did to distant eyes appear
Then fullest Moon when shining in her Sphere.
As here the King his Consort did behold,
High Wonder did a while his words withhold.
To show her then Attractions pierced him more
Then all the Darts that she had beamed before:
Which high surprise did on his Soul impose
A Sense, above what Speech could soon disclose:
Until his Thoughts found strength enough to tell
How far she did Supreamest praise excel:
And to what Peril she her Life resigned,
To be more Great to his Assistance joined.
To which the Queen with humble Greatness said,
What Earthly Glory higher is obeyed,
Or Power of Love, if lasting Time thence know
That I your Virtue no less loved then you.
A Greatness which my Life too cheap had cost,
If I had for your sake in Storms been lost.
When late th'assaulting Billows of the Main
Opposed my safe return to you again.
And Winds so highly Combated in Course,
As if to Seas in Skies my Wreck they would force.
Though Love then gave me such Heroic power,
That most your Loss in Me, I feared that hour:
'Till Heaven whose Scepter Boundless Floods obey,
Through their deep dangers me did safe convey:
With Valiant Numbers fresh esteem have won
In distant Climes; may that be far outdone
As they your Aid and Safety do assist,
How stubborn e're your Foes shall dare resist.
And should these not Success for you obtain,
Worse Seas I Would venture more Recruits to gain.
Though Merit seems too narrow for my Breast,
Who in your Love am more entirely blessed.
And if Kings Beds throughout the World were seen,
Yours would contain the most obliged Queen.
What Admirations might this Dialogue bring,
Or desert heighten in this Queen and King.
Whilst throngs in Counties did applauding wait
On their Great Persons, 'till with Royal State
At Famous Oxford Gloriously arriv^d;
And which of Cities stands most beautified
By Stately Colleges, and Learning known,
And then the Center of the Camp and Throne.
When for the welcome of the King and Queen,
This City was more great and splendid seen,
Then former time could her renown declare,
Or highest Orb of Science in her Sphere.
And as she then did Celebrate her Joys,
The Camp its mighty Engines too imploys;
Which as they figure best loud Tongues of Fame,
To Regions far applauses did proclaim.
And next best Trumpets, (Like to such of old
By Mars held Sacred when their Charms more bold
The Armed Inflamed, or for the Conquered Field
Their loudest Music did to Triumphs yield)
Had ears remote delighted with their sound,
And Echoes that no voice before had found.
And what did eyes as far removed employ
T'Admire the Skill was here and signs of Joy:
The Famous Engineer had made by Art
Bodies that acted beyond Natures part:
When Fireworks did in varied Forms arise;
Some like to Meteors blazing in the Skies:
Others like fiery Bullets seemed to ^ly,
Or shot Grenades Leaguer'd Towns do ply.
Which being past, the men whose active Might
In Running, Wrestling, Shooting, took delight:
Or durst by hardy Arms for Prizes play,
In Imitation of Romes Ancient way;
Had places proper unto them assigned,
Where Chiefs and Hero's as Spectators Joined.
And what sublimest does man's thought extend,
The Learned as Emulators did contend
How their Address they should profoundest make;
Or in as many Tongues refin'dly speak
As once The Apostles did, though Scriptures tell
The Spirit on them for that purpose fell.
Nor did the Eloquence of Schools outdo
The Gloss which Preachers did on praise bestow.
Though Holy Writ no Person did convey
That like this King so well could Love and Pray.
As full his Consort's Soul they had Admired,
If for Rome's sake they had been then Inspired.
Next these some Poets gladly did dispense,
In this high Juncture, their sublimest Sense.
With what might most their Sovereigns Fame commend
Whose Merit long on Feet of Verse should stand.
Though of all Science, least the Muses date
Concessions that, from Court, their value rate.
In which high Orb few Gaudy things admit
Their smallest deference unto better Wit.
A vain neglect most Pens dare boldly slight,
That can of Courts and Men resin'dly write.
Which Glory then the Muses chiefly sought,
As that Kings Style our Tongue had smoothness taught*
Whose Book so matchless does his figure raise,
As his Soul perfects there Immortal praise;
And against his Foes such Eloquence does spread,
That they will ever thence be conquered read.
Well might Wise Poets him to Fame commend,
Whose Wit and Virtue Divine Glory blend.
These Celebrations past, the King and Queen
No less Conspicuous in their Courts were seen.
Where busy Joys and Whispers filled the Ear:
If Joy, could Joy be called and War so near;
Whose hours so roughly to their Periods flow,
That Heaven does them by Angry Stars foreshow.
The THIRD BOOK.
The Argument.
The Wretched State of England in the Year
Of Forty Three, the Poet's Pencill draws.
The King abused by false Intelligence,
(The Corrupt Minions often ^ntriguing Art)
The Authors Numbers in a borrowed Name
Full represent, with Dornland's figure shown,
And for his Loyal praise, by Power of Verse,
To after Story raised, with how occurred
The Councills, Stratagems, and deeds of Arms.
THe year recovered had it is usual Spring,
When blooming hours Wars fatal growth did Bring,
And Echoes did with Timorous Voice resound
The dreadful noise of Armed Troops around:
As by them spacious Randevouz were filled,
Wars Schools, where Men in killing most excelled;
Yet would the effect of discipline that deem,
That War might have from wicked Art Esteem.
Essex who had some time at London spent,
Enough regretted, as the Houses Meant.
His March by all their vigorous Votes to have,
That he no time of Action then should wast.
Or, from deliberate thought, dispose his mind,
Less Violent then their rigid Votes designed.
Which he their Armies Head might so diffuse,
As in that Body Nerves might vigor loose.
The danger most they Feared by his delay,
And next him to confirm the smoothest way:
Their Pop'lar Charms, which most his soul did fit,
They, Syren-like, had Modeled by their Wit.
For which Address a Person they select;
Who thus begins, If our Votes can effect
Praises sufficient to complete your worth,
Or deeds to come by Valor you will bring forth:
Know Great and Honored Earl, the Houses will,
By due Obsequiousness admire you still.
Nor shall they your applause less valued deem,
Then worthy of the Height of their esteem.
Though Envy mourn, or talk her self then dumb,
To see our Crowds to you with Laurel come.
You, more then Chief, did first espouse our Cause,
When The by our displeased King and Laws.
Your Father did to Pop'lar deeds add Grace,
Though Termed by some the headstrong of his Race.
Which Obl^^^y, or Court design might blaze,
When dreading most the Compass of his praise.
Contemn all Motives would your conduct stay,
The Peopl^s (...) often Cools by small delay.
The ^arl who little did applaud the Sense
Of soothing words, the dress of Eloquence:
Or had for quick reply no ready brain;
Little returned unto this speech again.
Like one, that would be understood to be
Their Creature by his prone Credulity.
And next unto his Army did repair,
Where shouts like sudden winds flew through the Air.
From which applauses, and a soul well filled
With such designs the Houses had instilled,
Boldly resolved, he does toward Redding guide
His Armies March; a Town the Royal side
Had strengthened well, and Conduct duly placed,
That had with famous trust in War been graced.
Redding a Borough of a large extent,
Yet greater far in the Emolument.
Commodious Thames does plenteously convey,
And opulent Freights from London stem their way.
Besides a Pass, that might no less withstand
A far Commerce with England's East by Land.
Which prejudice the Houses hoped to Cease,
By soon Compelling by their Power that place.
But e're this Town's vast Danger we rehearse,
Some things at Oxford first require our Verse.
Which for their strangeness darkly Story'd are,
Or left for heedfull Poets to declare;
Whose thoughts do Records most remote sublime,
And perfect Deeds unfinished left by Time.
Poets are Authors, when they Actions tell,
That suit with Truth, or it resemble well.
And even the real Deeds I here pursue,
Seem no less strange, then if allowed untrue.
Which did so vild from these Commotions spring,
That all their Changes did still worser bring.
The King perplexed, how things might further tend,
(As Mediums bad with like effects do end)
His Subjects ruined by a wretched War;
Some near him spoiled, whilst some from Countries far
Quit their Aboads, whence they were forced to fly
As Objects of their Nations Misery.
The Generous Born of their Estates bereft,
And unto Want and Wars wild Ruins left:
Who thus despoiled by men of Vulgar Race,
That strove to level all above their place,
Were forced by Arms to vindicate their Right,
And, to their loss the Low of Mankind fight.
Whilst none by suffering more renowned was known
Then Valiant A Name here used by Poetical License to describe in his Character
the Sufferings of many Eminent Persons in behalf of the Crown.
Dornland, in whose sigure shown
The Muses Pencil Story may direct,
How there his Fame best Copied should be Left.
Who having dangers Past; and sharp distress,
His worthy Life, and duty did address.
And had affairs of that Importance brought,
As did require his Sovereigns Ear and Thought,
And witnessed that his future deeds should be
No Less renowned for dauntless Loyalty.
Whilst from delays, and slights of Court he found
Some (Though too near the King) in heart unsound.
Who could with flattering Mean their Courtships pay
For Treacherous ends, and Gain, the subtlest way.
Whence too Indulgent Princes often find
Their Favors with their Fate too nearly Joined.
This Generous sufferer full perplexed that he
Could not yet meet sit Opportunity,
By which he to his Sovereign might convey
Things that he found himself might safest say.
At Last A borrowed Denomination to avoid what otherwise in his Character might
reflect on the Honor of any known Name or Family.
Sydesmond passing by him saw,
To him he steps, and said, ere you withdraw
Acquaint the King, his Loyal Subject here
Waits to Impart what is fit for him to hear.
Sydesmond with a Glaring Parasits Look
Surveying first the Man, to him thus spoke.
Alas! mean friend, for thou in Clothes seem poor,
And for thy wants perhaps would Coin Implore.
Could thou no better furnished now appear;
And hope, for Cause of thine the Courtiers ear.
We favors do to Sprucer Men convey,
And who no Less us quaintly give then pray.
Perhaps thy person Merit would Import,
Merit, a Drugg that slowly vents at Court.
The King's Cause glorys in their Sufferings most
Wh'are Poor and Loyal at their proper Cost.
If thou art So, in time the King may know
How many kind words he to thee does owe.
And how thou dare thy person too expose
With any Mony-Less against his foes.
When if well maimed perhaps I Will thee Commend
Unto some Hospital thy days to end.
Aboads, I grant, few varnished Shrines Destow
That half-Lim'd Hero's with their exployts show.
Things which brave Souls will never there repine,
That can their relics to their Crutch consine.
Excuse my have, I must on Men attend,
Can frankly Give, or will their money lend.
All ways are welcome Treasure may disburse
To wanting Courts, or such as guide their Purse.
Thy Name I should have asked, or let it be
(With thy Address) hereafter known to Me.
Dornland's the Name (false Minion) I do own,
And wish you to your Prince, so just were known.
Whose Royal Cause I never did despair,
Or felt in Soul one mean relenting Care,
When other Loyalties did make their Halt,
Lest Ruin, like to mine, should them Assault.
All this I quit and gladly offer more
Then what my single Merit could explore.
Things, that your ready favor might endear,
Though you move nearest to your Sovereigns ear.
Perhaps a Story aptly may unfold
The means of gaining Loyal Friends and Gold.
At which Sydesmond shifts his wayward look,
And with a feigned Embrace to him thus spoke.
Alas kind Gentleman! how soon amiss
May man judge man in such a world as this?
Though not unlike to thee one the other day
No less glad Tidings did by me convey.
And know, (if thou have Courts but slightly read)
That even Best Kings are often by profit led.
Papers I guess thou have, and would present;
Enough, the King shall soon know thy Intent.
The Noble Dornland thus being lest alone;
Employed his Leisure aptly to bemoan
The sad effects, which Minions might prepare,
As they give Pass-ports to the Royal ear:
And by their Fawning Avarice design
How best their Interests may their Purses line.
A Paper reads, which next his Breast he wore,
Some well known Poet written had before.
And did black guilt of Parasists describe,
And how to Pride and Sin allied their Tribe.
Which his Emphatick Verse does thus relate;
It Is told (says he) e're Lucifer by Fate
Was cast from Stars, or Heaven did him Intend
Of all Internal Powers supremest Fiend.
A Daughter then was his of Mighty Fame.
Called Sycophama, if none her Misname.
Sprung from his Beams, what could Serener look, took.
That Stars, some tell, with her smooth Court were
A Tongue so Glibb might Tongue of Fame supplant,
And for worst deeds, no Glozing words did want.
Composed thus, and Garnished with a Dress,
No Painter could by Drapery express,
Or like to what Aurora best does wear,
When welcomed Phoebus to his early Sphere.
Which Flattering Beauty, being thus adorned
(As if for Sins allurement then Suborned)
With soothing Gestures to her Haughty Sire
Did thus address: Since Jove and Fate Conspire
That shining Seats no longer now must be
The Wide Extent of your Sovereignty.
Though to Celestial Records 'twas unknown
That any Sublime Power could Star dethrone.
But grant that Heavens decree does you remove
^ the Illustrious Sphere is yours above.
^ Command that Lower you descend
^ Unfathomed Sea, or Earth extend:
^ you over Churlish Fiends, and Ghost must Reign,
^ win even them to obey without their Chain.
And if your Rule repute would varnished raise,
Sin shall from me receive the smoothest praise.
Me I am sure you will not leave behind,
So well my Arts may to your Throne be joined.
This Court addressed unto her Stately Sire,
She fawning kn^els to perfect her desire.
To which her Haughty Father, thus replied,
Hard 'twere smooth Daughter, if to you denied
What Greatness by my Scepter may be given,
Though that must fall beneath my Orb in Heaven;
Where next my shining Pomp I joy'd to see
The taking Mien and Gestures formed by thee.
A Greatness Angry Jove to me denies,
Lest even in Hell thy Quaint Hypocrisies
Should those quick Spirits heighten to be worse
Then does consist with Heavens precedent Curse.
Though for thy Glory Highest Powers do grant,
That thou no Greatness shall below e're want.
Courts there thou't find most gladly thee will own,
And make their Arts, in thine more taking known.
And should none Earth their Paradise now call,
Thou't least, of any there, repine thy fall.
This said, he downward fell with confused have,
No Thought did ever Time surprise so fast.
Though some suppose that 'twas no more then when
A Star doos seem to fall to sight of Men.
His Daughter left, his Counsel she obeys,
And swiftly unto Earth her self conveys.
Kingdoms and States were soon made her abode
(So pronely Sin finds out the Largest Road.)
Where more her Artfull Flatteries to disperfe,
She leaves her Fame to future Prose, and Verse.
The Generous Dornland having pondered well
The useful Sense, which wiser Poets tell,
When they by choicest Allegories teach
How man's best Morals Vileness should Impeach.
Commits this Poet's Verse to further thought,
With what Instructions might from it be sought.
Grieved, that he did so long his Sovereign wait.
E're told what did import his Royal State.
Which apprehension soon did lessen here,
As he beheld the King in Person near.
Whom by his Speech he humbly thus does move:
Since you, Just Prince, oblige no less the Love
Of Loyal Minds, then what their Souls should dare,
When utmost Perils would Impress their fear.
Howe're's the plight in which I Am now beheld;
From Friends, Lands, Houses, Impiously compelled
My Life unto a Cruel end Designed
^y that strong Rage against your Powers combined.
Which Fury, tho'it late did me surround,
When Guards and Scouts were my Pursuers found:
Whom as I flew through uncouth Tracts and Woods,
And swimming (more then weary) dangerous Floods;
Some Star's compassion me did hither guide
To serve your Cause, and to express besides
Things which my Duty would to you impart,
And full assure the Conduct of my Heart.
The King took thought awhile e're he replied,
(Sydesmond having whispered him aside)
And next to Dornland turning, thus did speak:
What-e're's the Figure thou would seem to make,
Think not that it is unto thy King unknown
How vilely men for ends have falsehoods shwon.
And have sometimes deceived our Royal Ear,
As one can witness that attends Us here.
Proof I expect of what thou would express,
And if thy Flight's from London as I guess,
Supplies from thence I secretly expect:
'Twas told thy Errand might the like effect.
However proceed, that I may surely know
Whether thy Merit be mistook or no.
Tho'Souls of Kings (next Heaven) there is nothing can
So high oblige as well-deserving Man.
Since, Mighty Sir, you do admit that I
Attest before you my Integrity.
Which (without Blush) I wish as much to some
That to your favors hold the nearest room.
Alas, I fear you are too far betrayed
By such as should your Royal Counsels aid.
And with sincerest Faith preserve untold,
What Souls corruptly guided sell for Gold.
Your Secret Counsels by the soothings found
Of Men unto your safety most unsound.
Friends thus deterred would else profusely show
Their Coin and Persons offered unto you.
With whatso'ere your Cause might best supply,
If fighting so, they unbetray'd may dye.
Nor shall Lights Orb one days bright Measure run,
Till in that revolution deeds be known.
That most perniciously themselvos display,
And show what Serpents move too near your way,
Toward Redding, now does March a mighty so^de,
I saw Roads thickly ^ill'd with Foot and Horse.
Whence Clouds of Dust so strove to darken sight,
As if they next would smother air and Light.
Essex their Chief amongst them too I saw,
His Looks confused, as if some thoughtfull awe
Hung on his Soul, or that he did devise
How he might soon that eminent Town Surprise.
Which Lest my Sov^, should not timely know,
What I have passed, I willing un dergo:
Nor shall your Cause Assistance want from me,
What ere's my Cross or Future destiny.
More he had said, but that some sudden thought
Too deeply on his Soul Impression wrought;
Of what had been predicted for his Fate,
And might too nearly to his King's relate.
Which Gracious Prince did Dornland further Grace.
Beholding strictly his firm Mean and Face.
And next thus speaks, excuse thou did not sind
More quick remembrance from our Royal Mind.
Though better then by sight thou art known to Me,
So well thy Merit, and thy Fame agree.
Thou did before, Intelligence Convey,
Which gives thy story Credit too this day.
Releif for Redding I Will command in time,
Though some in Trust, cannot discharge their Crime;
Who by Improper Correspondence sail,
Or would by faithless ends themselves avail.
From which this useful observation springs;
Few, Earth affords, Heaven duly serve, or Kings.
Sydesmond, let it be thy Task to show,
By what we give, how more to him we owe.
The King withdraws, whilst false Sydesmond stays;
His eyes fresh Garnished by their fawning rays,
Like Glozing Parasits, some Courts have known,
When to their Princes Smiles they faign their own.
Dornland discovered had this Minion well,
(Whose Mean did partly what he Looked for tell.)
Next lets him know, since it is his ^'hriving way
To hold it meet Men should for favors pay:
He Will something add to what he can expect,
If but one Just Obligement he will effect:
Which was, that if his Covetous Soul could be
Induced to value Future Honesty,
And that his Royal Master's Cause sustain
No Mischief from his Tongue, and Impious Gain:
The Gift the King to Dornland lately gave,
He now (to bribe thee honest) bids thee have.
Which said, this Generous sufferer next departs;
Enough observed by him some Courtly Arts:
With what neglects endured and cold delay,
Men's expectations their attendance pay:
Whilst busy rumor soon his Name had spread,
And how endangered he from London fled,
Escaping perils of a various Form,
Like some stout snip that boldly stemms a Storm.
Besides the fast assurance he did bring
Of being a brave Assistant to his King:
Soon won the Most Heroic in those days,
To serve his person and advance his praise.
Who next unto the Royal Camp repaired,
Where high Caresses soon his worth declared;
In which bold Station my Pen leaves him now,
Till future deeds his value ampler show.
This Age so strange a Curtain did undraw,
And Scenes, of various wonders, thence had saw.
That Hoary Time might (Novice-like) behold
Such new Amazements as surpassed the old.
And must (his future perspective disclosed)
Confess ensuing hours for ever posed.
Whence this Wars Story finds too narrow room
For deeds that did so thick together come.
Though wise Historians with less Care relate
The small occurrences and Arts of Fate:
Then Councills, Battles, and such mighty things
Which Fame applauds in Hero's and in Kings:
Permitting Time some lesser deeds to vail,
Or cheaply leave 'em to their own Entail.
Which method, if my Lines can here pursue;
Selecting facts, and things as likely True:
With such besides, that Nature would present,
(Whose gloss on Story to the Muse is lent)
Enough Parnassus is Implored by me,
Or Time allowed Supremest dignity.
Though nothing can effectually deplore
What did ensue on this Wars Fatal Score:
No wicked age before so dear did cost
That Blood and Treasure had profusely lost.
And what if well Employed, had Conquered more
Then all Great England owned in France before;
And forced the bold offensive French to be
Confined unto their Just Capacity;
Whilst now their prosperous Arms so daring spread,
As France appears a universal dread.
How many Countries seized and more in Claim
By such dependencies, he is pleased to name.
As if the World he would by like parcels take
(...) (...) Netherlands their ruin speak.
An apprehension better understood
When more composed our Mode of public good.
'Till when, it is left with Mysteries of State
That with their Leisure best their Sense dilate.
And now my Story closer to declare,
Which might some space for this digression spare:
(As usefully sometimes the eye is stayed
When Prospects near it aptly are conveyed.)
To Redding, next my Muse directs her Course,
Which Town was compassed by the Houses Force.
And if made theirs, would the Advantage bring
Of straitening more the Quarters of the King.
Which known Inducements, with applause of Fame,
The Earl's slow Genius Jointly did inflame.
A Man that Pop'lar Motions much indear'd,
Though for their Compass he too slowly Stear'd.
And sitter seemed his Conduct to make strong,
Then with their eager Flames to hold it long.
As Furious Crowds the Man will most admire
That kindles from his Soul the quickest Eire.
Skippon a Leader by the Houses Chose,
To shape and act Designs when ripe for Blows;
And had in Belgic War repute obtained
From Towns by bold Attacques or Sieges gained.
Besides a powerful Talent in him lay
T'Inflame his Party their own Canting way.
Which Scripture Furies strongly did incite,
For who adored Enthusiasms much could fight.
Being thus composed, he Essex does present
With Zeal Harrangu'd, instead of Complement.
Letting him know, that Heaven, by Mighty Love,
Did his Stout Spirit for their Cause approve.
A Cause that boundless Sanctity extends,
And for which Holy Light within contends.
Captain Messiah sure the Houses Led
When their Votes you for Gospel-Conduct sped:
An Act the pious Souls of Saints espouse,
And, like the Holy Tribes, Life fearless lose.
You are their Moses, and but bid them sight,
They Will outdo wonder by their Spiritual Might.
Can Redding stop us, should Bulwarks be its Wall;
Alas, like Rabbah, soon 'twill yield to fall.
You lead as Trusty Israelites as they,
Against that strong City, could both Fight and pray.
Our Guns are Mounted, our Approaches sixth,
Let prayer with these be timely intermixed.
Next let our Shot the distant Regions stun,
Or tell how Loud we fight 'till Redding's won.
This Pious Leader, if reputed so,
Did in those days for Major-Gen'ral go:
And if men did his Genius rightly weigh,
He could not bolder sight then he durst pray.
Essex, who had this Zealot calmly heard,
Though he for Modern Zeal but little cared,
Or found much struggling in his Thoughts to know
Whether his older Faith were best or no.
Besides some Tinctures of Allegiance still
Had intermixture with his Stubborn Will:
Did his divided mind perplex'dly pose
How to discern what thought could best propose.
Though such who strictest have his Soul desin'd,
To Moderation grant him most inclined.
Whilst soon this War expended so much heat,
As Calmer thoughts could not it is rage abate.
And shows how men taste Politics by Rote,
That Mischiefs stir and next would Good promote
And thus this Peer, who less his Cause admired
Then Pop'lar Courtships to which he aspired:
(Though seldom Crowds their fondness long allow,
So near their Plaudits, their detractings go.)
Did in this Juncture res'lutely intend,
That Reddings Siege should him to Fame commend,
When he to Skippon, and some eager Chiefs,
Thus did express, to gain their smooth beliefs:
What-e're the busy World of me can say
Through cold mistake of my advised delay:
Or that, no Feavour in my Veins I raise
To vent hot Blood, or rashly sight for praise.
Which Caution if some Tempers do despise,
They Will learn from Foes to grant my Conduct Wise.
Nor shall this Town long hope to be so bold
As against our Power its own defense to hold:
Though for its succor Aids from Oxford come;
Unless, through Trenches, they can force their room.
Aston against us does this place Command,
A Captain much approved I understand:
And adds to our esteem and Warlike use,
If against his Conduct we this Town reduce.
Which said, his weighty Shot does Redding ply,
Like force of Thunder bursting from the Sky.
Walls, Houses, Roofs, their scattered ruins show,
As what withstands the Canons mighty blow:
Whose monstrous Strength does various ruin force,
And like no other thing Kills out of Course;
As it by confused deaths does lives Bereave
Of Children, mothers, whom worst foes would save.
So much beyond Man's Aim his brain designed,
When wicked art did this huge murderer find.
Great Redding thus distressed, quick rumor flew
With noise of Guns whose sounds the danger show
With what approaches made and more begun,
That soon the Town might be by Essex won.
Whence Subsequent Expresses swiftly bring
More Fatal News unto the asslicted King.
Letting him know, as there vast bullets flew
That roofs had torn, and their hard ruins threw
High, as the Sulpherous blast of Etna bears
Stones, that like Thunderbolts from Rocks it Tears;
Which falling Low, might Men or Creatures Maim,
As here bold Aston's harm was much the same.
Who from a Tile, that by extravagant Chance
A Shot had forced against his head to Glance,
Received so deep a Wound upon that part;
As doubted 'twas above a Cure from Art.
A strange disaster, and of more Import
Because 'twas Aston's, by whose brave effort,
And well proved conduct, Redding might have found
Her Story, from his Valor, full Renoun'd.
But Destiny had otherways designed
Glory unto his End ensuing Joined:
As Fatal Ireland did in Future show,
And long as stands Sir Arthur A^on slain at the taking of Tredah by Oliver
Cromwell, where all that bore Arms were put to the Sword.
Tredah his deeds 'twill Know.
Feilding by Marshall right did then succeed
To hold the Town in wounded Aston's stead;
A Chief by many held approved in War,
Though for what Cause his Genius did appear
At that time Clouded, has a dubious sense,
Or darkly read from past Intelligence.
Some tell, that he too soon occasion gave
That Essex might the Town surrendered have.
Although no power he wanted to maintain
What his Opposers durst attempt to gain.
Others, that he a Treaty wisely chose;
Lest he was forced a strengthless place to lose,
Which from the Circuit and the large extent,
Might less Conspire with Warlike Management.
Which Martial Sense if prevalent in him,
Did much excuse where others would condemn.
A further Search my Measures need not guide
Of things which Story-Criticks best decide.
The FOURTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Essex with high surprise unto the King
Besieges Redding, Aston disabled by
Acasual Shot, The place his Conduct wants.
Mean while the Poet finds an Interval:
The Love of Lysle and Lucas to rehearse,
Whose objects here denomination have
In Beauteous Rosalin and Flavira's flames.
The fight at Cawsham-bridge described, and how
Fielding by Treaty did the Town surrender.
THE strange surprisal which these Tidings gave
The King at Oxford, next account must have.
Who soon did then a Martial Counsel call
To prevent Dangers Redding might befall.
For which he Ruthen, Rupert, Lucas, Lyle,
Chiefly selects, with others whose brave Toil
Their deeds renowned, and from Emergents knew
What did Import their Conducts most to do.
Great Ruthen, whom the King had General made
Of his Fierce Infantry (when Lyndsey paid
His debt to Fame and Nature) though of Race
Beneath his Predecessor's Noble place,
Full of Experience and in Courage great,
An union which best Captains does complete.
To him, as order duly did require,
The King thus speaks, to what may Fate aspire
Whilst my Opposers Redding now surround,
When Aston Lies disabl'd by a wound:
And what my fuller Trouble does Increase,
Feilding already Treats to yield the Place:
The Cause, or Prudence, I Will not now dispute:
Or what bad Men too near me might promote;
Who not by False Intelligeance alone
Perplex the Sense and Safety of my Throne,
But in my Methods so themselves disguise
As they Impead my being singly wise.
Though ^is no season now to Count such deeds,
Whilst Eminent Redding our Assistance needs:
How Strong so e're that Garrison is Manned
With such that dare their Enemies withstand:
Did Feildings Soul their Valor not abate,
As for the Towns Surrender he does Treat.
When no Command of mine did him dispose
To yield the place on offered Terms by Foes.
Think timely now what aptest you would advise,
That to save Redding looks both great and wise.
Ruthen, whose Education did Impress
No Courtly Mean or words of Splendid dress;
But rather as a Soldier roughly taught,
Could act the Sense which sound Experience Brought.
Unto the King, he then did thus reply,
Much Circumspection in Attempts should lie.
That Seiges would from Towns by force remove,
Where men their Strengthened Stations first approve;
With Lines, Redoubts, and Bulwarks strongly made,
To Cut off all that shall such Posts Invade.
And if experience best confirmed we prize,
It Is safe to fear the worst from Enemies.
Nay rather some Improbables allow,
Then slight the Conduct of an Armed Foe.
From which Contempt, how often have I known
Some Captains fail that else deserved Renown.
Believe me Sir, that Conduct's chiefly wise
Which has most dread of Prudent enemies.
A Skill grown old in Foreign Feilds I sought,
And saw where headstrong Valor Mischeifs brought;
Whence torn and Shattered Armies did Lament
The Blood which they so dismally had spent.
Next him great Rupert speaks his Martial Sense,
And Soul Inflamed with highest Conscience.
Telling the King how much he was betrayed
By some who near his Ear themselves conveyed.
What else does this Surprising Leaguer show,
By Essex guided before Redding now.
It Is not because he slights your forces there,
Or that his Soul does thence less slow appear:
But his Incitement raised from some may own
Neglect, or worser Crime within that Town.
Small cause there is else to doubt opposers can
The place obtain which your Powers fully Man.
Yet this Conjuncture such debates ^ll suit,
As stay releif from Nicely spun dispute.
Better to trust some perril to a Day,
Lest Reddings Loss be charged on faint delay.
Though Clouds of Force do now begirt that Town,
Which when removed on yours will six renown.
Some days I hear to Feilding yet remain
Ere his Cold Treaties will effect obtain.
Perhaps within that space he hopes to find
Royal Assistance from your Arms designed:
In straits of War the best resolves I hold
Are such as in Attempts appear most bold.
Lucas and Lyle this Council soon approved,
Whose Warlike Souls less dangers feared then Loved
Strict in embracing deeds of brave Import,
And from their Valors friendship gained effort.
None more Heroic in affections were,
And like the Twins of Honor lived as dear.
Which in our Course of Story we will rehearse,
With what their Fame, and end deserve from Verse
The King (who like the Sun could Beams dilate
Conspicuously Serene and calmly great)
His quickening Rays, and looks diffused a space;
And next their persons by apt speech did grace.
Expressing his Obligements from above,
That him befriended with their worth and Love.
Besides the Gallant Leavies that did own
Much Valiant aid and duty to his Throne.
Which soon could Numbers in each County spread,
Though lately he scarce Chief or Soldier had.
When forced his vast Metropolis to leave,
And like a Common Man his person save.
This from Unruly Faction did Commence,
Which heightened more the Senates Inflamed Sense.
Whilst there, and in Great London many were
Who duly did their Prince both Love and fear.
Until Compelled by fury to submit
To others Vile disordered Rule, and Wit,
From which harsh guilt No outward Comso^ Min
But did to humane Sense, as soon decline.
My Consort suffering in my Crowns distress,
Not all my Children safe, or seen to Bless.
My Subjects round me by divisions rent,
Nothing entire, but my within Content.
The Scepter by Heaven's aid I Would chiefly rule,
That Piety may strengthen most my Soul.
If this desert in me did first lacite
My Subjects prowess to Assist my right:
When Treasure and all other Motives failed,
That Scepters in distress have most availed;
My Soul's bright Banner will my Cause renown,
Should Ensigns boldest Led not save my Crown.
Let my Example well with yours conspire,
That Vileness from our Camp may soon retire.
With such Licencious Evils that Combine
T'avert the good I beg of powers divine.
Think not the better Cause will have Success
From such Assistance Heaven disdains to bless.
Believe your King, that Courage best prevails
Which joined with inward virtue Foes assails.
O, might my Force but thus Confirmed proceed,
And with that Glory Aid for Redding Lead.
The King concluding thus; his Cheifs admired
The temperate thoughts within his breast Conspired;
So Steadfast in worst Exigents of State,
As showed his Greatness far Surpassed his Fate.
Much had this Council heedfully expressed,
Before agreed what seemed that Juncture best.
Some, Nimble Fortune would allow most kind;
When Quick resolves to bold attempts were Joined.
This Mighty Caesar's high Atcheivments tell,
Whose fortune did in swift dispatch Excel,
His Soul no Bays more blooming e're did prize
Then such with Bold and soon attempts did rise.
And were now Redding his, the self-same thing
(Would be his Measure) here advised our King.
Others that well celerity Approved,
By different Methods their discussions moved.
Who though allowing expeditious Fight,
Debated much to State that Course aright;
Besides disasters pondered often befell
Aggressors when strong Sieges they would repel.
Some did for Caution and delay dispute,
Urging that Time advantage might promote:
Whose hours in War should thriftily be spent,
Lest Lives profusely lost they next repent.
Nor could it to sound Captains be unknown,
How Armies but in sight of Leaguers shown
Had on their Foes such Terror often Impressed,
As they left Towns which were before distressed.
And better we attempts should yet delay,
Then add to Reddings loss a worser day.
So variously Wars Science does admit
Fineness to Polish its destroying Wit.
Whilst in such Stratagems Nice Reason lays;
The Beast, resembles Man, that subtilest preys.
Soon did the effect of these debates appear
In the Fierce Measures a^ then Acted were,
Much quickened by occasions hasty call,
Lest the Beleaguered Town to Essex fall.
The King's Commanders whose bold prowess stood
Heightened by Native Glory of their Blood,
And what their Warlike Ancestors had done
In Public Exigents to gain renown:
No sooner did their ready Flames receive
Summons to March, but their Impressions gave
Terror to all such Militants they led;
And what did most a vigorous Influence spread:
The King his Person to this March designed,
And for their Grace his forward Conduct joined.
But e're my Muse such horrors does rehearse
That must have room within her Martial Verse;
Some Gentler passions represent their Claim,
If Verse can give their Merit unto Fame:
Or sing Courageous Lucas with brave Lyle
High as their worth deserved or Martial Toil.
And to the Muses glory next declare
Illustrious Love sublimed by Souls of War.
This great Example Female Charms do show,
When in a Hero's Joined a Lover too.
Nor shall Flavira thy bright Story be,
Heaped in Oblivious dull Calamity.
With what the Beauteous Rosalin's soft flame,
May Merit from Records repriv'd by same.
Many renowned these splendors had admired,
Whilst their Souls wishes differently conspired.
In Rosalin's smooth breast remained no space
Where full affection did not Lucas place,
Yet so screnely calm did that admit,
As spoke her flower of Love and facile Wit.
Flavira more severely did apply,
^o heighten flames of Magnanimity.
Judging that perils to her Lover brought,
The Haughty Trophies by her wishes sought.
Nor would she yield Fames trusty Tongue could blaze
Valor that equaled Lyle's Heroic praise.
Too proudly glorying, that her powerful Charms
Joined with her Lovers Soul propense to Arms.
Forgetting that too often Stars denied
To Crown the Ends of Woman's daring pride.
These Beauties that did ^in^ally derive
A Generous Blood did worthily Contrive,
How they might strictest Amity complete,
And like their Lovers prove in Friendship great.
Often they prolonged discourse till setting Sun,
Rehearsing deeds this dreadful War were done:
Often had they broke repose in hope to hear
Events of Fights in which their Hero's were.
Nor did the Objects of their passion ^ind*
No different Method to their Values Joined.
In Lucas Valor fiercely did abound,
And firm as Hanniball in Conduct found:
When Fields were most Imbrued with bloody streams,
Or Foes were charged Renowned for Martial flames.
But in Great Lyle another Scipio seemed,
Calm as best Fortitude would be esteemed,
Or Soul that is mild and Tracticably great,
And, like that Roman, Prowess could complete.
These Hero's who did gloriously contend
How each might most appear a signal friend,
Had mixed with Intervalls of Martial thought,
The soft discoveries from loves Text were taught.
Dilating much Fl^vira's sprightly Charms,
Her darting Beams with her applause of Arms.
Besides the Epithites they did allow
To Rosalin's smooth Grace and Feature due.
And might pose aptest Story to convey,
Where love and Merit best direct their way.
Lucas, whose Soul was filled with daring flame,
And thirst of deeds that siercely purchased fame:
R^lentless to all softness of the mind,
By which his M^rtial heat might be declined:
Unto Courageous Lyle did thus express;
Much is my heart obliged to confess
Admired Rosalin's serenest Praise,
And what her blooming splendors yet may raise.
Nor is it unknown to me how many Brave
At Beauty's Tempting shrine vou^hsa^'d to crave:
This even Achilles did when he obeyed
Deidamia's Charms, though Greeks then missed his aid.
But never of Lucas story shall relate,
That Amorous leisure stayed his warlike heat.
Or that for him Gay Hymen's Tapers burn,
Whilst Loyal bloods obliged it is loss to mourn:
Or Foes shall dare their Prince oppose with Arms,
However I value woman's lovely Charms.
This speech the worthy Lyle severer thought,
Then what loves Maxims usually had taught;
And could not but with Generous pity see,
The Grief of Soul which Rosalin's might be.
Whose sense though Calm, as dawn of Gentlest day,
Might yield resentment at unquoth delay.
But much had Lyle Flavira's sense repined,
And known Caprice unto her Value Joined:
Prone to exact from his Atcheivments more
Then he wished Men should from his deeds explore.
Discerning well how often Mortal praise,
Does less Man's Merit then detraction raise.
These apprehensions in the worthy Lyle,
Conveyed by looks instead of words their style.
An outward proneness Nature does dispense
When genuinly discribed her inward sense.
And from the Soul's Internal worth implies
Some Trouble in the Face that truth denies.
In which strict Mirror Lucas soon perceived
The Emotions which his Lyle within had grieved.
And held it no less worthy to Assay,
If Martial thoughts con'd his concerns allay.
To whom he thus delivers, if great friend
Thou would with me thy Gallant worth extend;
Think not the Harmony of Lute and Voice,
Or Face which the Effeminate Man can most rejoice;
Should mix their Gentle Fervors with the Flame
That Spirits deeds which spread a Soldiers Fame.
Not that I Love perversely do decline
In the Attractive form of Rosaline:
Enough my Soul her value can admire,
When Mars there leaves a space for Amorous fire.
This said, to their Commands these Hero's speed,
As aptest Stations whence their same should spread.
The Royal Forces before Redding drew,
When like a dismal Round they soon did view
An Armies Compass to a Leagure formed,
Not from Intent the Town should then be stormed;
Since as in Course of Story has been told,
Feilding did Treaty for surrender Hold.
And e're the Kings Battalions thither came,
The time of yielding fully known to Fame.
Treaty, best Captains sometimes wisely choose,
That by Concessions they may cheapest loose.
Deeming that he too much provokes Fate,
Who leaves to Fortune all that force may get.
But Wars intrign's when of this saving kind,
Rarely obliging disquisitions find.
Whilst most their boldest Criticisms bestow,
On deeds that Caution more then Valor show.
Beside close Contracts might from gain arise,
Since Gold did often strongest Towns surprise.
Propensly Judging that each worldly Fact
Does private Interest most delign'd compact.
All which from Fonds of fraud in Humane Race,
And Coveteous Guilt too aptly Men embrace;
To such Constructions Mortals do incline,
As like their vileness others they define.
The King whose Prudence greatest was alone,
Might from Events have been Auspitious known:
Had not his Gentle Soul been too propense,
Withdrawn by other far Inferior Sense.
And from that Times important Juncture shows,
That Princes best their perspectives dispose,
When they discern, from Councills they receive,
That wiser to themselves their Souls can give.
Some that would to the King presage success,
Added unto their hope their Garnished dress.
Judging that Kings such Courtship well Allow
That Grandieur seem in Exigents to show.
Others assured that Feilding would not fail,
By a Courageous sally to prevail:
If first the Royal Conduct gained some Post
That might impead the bold besiegers most.
Which Motive being less Circumspect through have,
Occasioned Perils to ensue as fast.
Whilst Essex Cawsham-Bridge had then possessed,
And of his daring Arms there placed the best.
Yet over this pass 'twas res'lutely decreed
That relief should to distressed Redding speed.
By many censured a Pernicious Course,
Since Nature there had posted too her Force.
Besides 'twas thought some Leaders least perceived
What might that time have better been Achieved.
On Barkshire side, where large Campaigns abound,
(The Scopefull Blessings of that fertile Ground)
And through which (Straightened less) the Royal Power
Might Reddings Leagure have attacqu'd that hour.
But Heaven determined Cawsham-Bridge should name
That days Events which wonder gave to Fame.
Rupert, his Station took to force this pass,
(And sure 'twas hot where his the onset was)
No Jove when painted with a dreadful Brow,
Bidding his Lightening burst with Thunders Blow,
Could represent this Princes Conduct then,
Or Shot far surer Thundered deaths to Men.
Though losses on his side were many found,
Whose Soul enough taught daring to abound.
Whilst smoke and Flame did so promiscuous blend,
As Fames best eye, which she did thither send,
Was forced with some disorder to relate
How Chiefs renowned and Soldiers mingled Fate.
Though no bold deeds or Life profusely lost,
Nor what did praise their res'lute Conduct most,
Could from the hardy Foes their post obtain,
Who thought no loss too dear could that Maintain.
And by recruited Courage soon Supplied
The Rooms where Lives before had Stoutest died.
But leaving thus this Prince engaged in Fight,
Some other prospects do my Muse Invite:
Whereby this days fierce exit may be known,
Though not each Circumstance nor Action shown:
Which tedious Chronicles more aptly spread,
And Stories where their Lumbers fully read.
Ruthen a Captain long approved by Fame,
In Wars harsh Winters passed and Summers Flame;
And by Time Tutored, in himself beheld,
How Ruff experience in his years excelled.
Nor less the King his Ancient prowess graced,
In being (as told) his Captain General placed.
And had the Soldiers part as sully shown,
In his Attempt to save the sieged Town.
No Chief his Conduct could have then outdone,
If Fortune had been that day to be won.
Much did his brave example then incite,
His Soldiers Valors led by him to sight;
And where observed less hardy to Assail,
He Strove by speech to win them to prevail;
Which as his Martial plainness did admit
(The dialect his Soul did Chi^sly sit.)
He then did utter, much in words like these:
Known it is to me how hardly Men appease
The Hearts disorder, when with Terror shook,
Or cannot undaunted on disasters look:
Which should least disassect stout Soldiers Mind,
And his increase of Honor, thence declined.
No step like that in Bloody Fields I sought,
Or when Commanded shrank in Act or Thought.
This Me from lowest Files did Gradual rais^,
Until attained a steady Captains Praise.
By the same Method let your Actions show
That I your General am, and Leader now.
This Speech delivered with a Soldiers Grace,
And Brevity well suiting Time and place,
With what his long proved Conduct did Import
To give their hope and Courage more effort:
Soon did his drooping Militants dispose
More vigorously against their daring Foes.
And now Deaths Language soon by Guns was spoke,
Limbs scattered were with halfs of Bodies broke.
Some Vali^nt Heads shot oss, and as men Tell
Their Trunks a while stood headless e're they sell.
And where perhaps hereafter may be found
Limbs (with their Bodies) never went under ground.
Whilst Lives that by such Separation fall,
Seem less to further Resurrections Call,
If, in that Instant, Missing parts must find
Their bodies though to distant dust confined.
What Man can doubt how various death was here,
Or how much thin'd by loss Files did appear.
When Peals against Peals Death concey'd in Course;
Like Leaves, Men dropped, that feel rough ^utumns fo^ce.
Though this from no side sury could withdraw,
Where Danger could not English Courage awe.
Whilst Fortune yet a wavering Station held,
Who least to Arms grants favors uncompell'd.
Essex w'had thought his hope enough secured,
Began to doubt how he stood then assured:
The Bridge, on which h'ad placed his stoutest Files,
Strow'd thick with Bodies there gave up their Toils.
The Gentle streams that underneath did Glide,
With louder Sobbs seemed then to haste the Tide;
As through this Bridge the Billows had took flight
With greater Noise and Trembling at this Fight.
When breathless Corpse into this stream were Thrown,
And on the Fleeting Billows gashly shown:
Till in some Calmer hour (in stead of Graves)
They sunk to Earth at bottom of these Waves.
These sights the res'lute Earl did little please,
Besides disturbed how he might next appease
The Clamorous Houses, should his Conduct fail,
Or not as was Expected then prevail.
Enough observed how sti^^y some had strove
To draw from him the Ruling Parties Love:
And did their new Erected Creatures raise,
That subt'ly blemished his Loud vulgar praise.
And as they spread the value of their own,
Had their Neglects on his Atchievments thrown.
Whose Poplar Soul by all Attractions sought
To be Fames Jewel in the peoples Thought.
Detesting all that did aspire to rise
Like him Conspicuous unto Common Eyes.
Or bid him doubt that, with few steps of Time,
Some other Grandeur to his height might Climb.
Which apprehensions he could least depress,
Whilst doubtful seen by him that days success.
Skippon, whose bolder Zeal was strictly Joined
To what their sighting party had designed:
And as a Prime Enthu^^ast won on Men
Who chose their Saints from sturdy sighters then.
His Martial Consolation then applys
(Fitting that Juncture) with erected Eyes.
Thou Peer, said he, Heavens darling, whom Gods call
Has set to own his Cause before us all,
And does this day our pious Breasts Inspire,
As was that Chiefs when full of smoke and fire.
He saw the Bush, a Flaming Tipe to him
That Isreal's Force should Enemies consume.
Though at that sight his stoutest Nerves did shake,
(As with us Zealots may be said to quake)
Till more confirmed how 'twas a Heavenly sign,
That God's select should Valors flame resine.
Let this our boldest Enemies perceive,
And from their daring hazards death receive:
As over this pass their Files would force their way,
Till full by ours repulsed this signal day.
Doubt not but '^will even Keinton-field exceed,
Or what at Brand^ord might have been Achieved,
If sirmer Soul'd our conduct on had brought
The Cheerful zeal that for us that time fought.
All which I Instance with a Godly Flame,
That your deeds now might more exalt your fame.
The Earl who did not much in words abound,
Or Canting Glosses then were frequent found
With Scripture Hero's, little seemed to say,
Or what enough approved to sight their way.
And now both sides had surious Conflicts brought
As high as Valors Zenith ^ou'd be sought.
If not, to be yet more Supremely Brave,
Wished that their Souls unbody'd force might have,
Or unconsin'd unto such outward parts
Whose power was less then vigor of ^^eir hearts.
The Royalists like fierce Aggressors strove
The Essexian^ hardy prowess to remove.
Though these like firmest Rock their Station held,
Too roughly fixed to be by Waves repelled.
Whilst Bands of Billows against their hardened Might
Bursting retire as more supply their Fight.
And thus the Terrors of this day were seen,
With dismal Slaughters that did intervene.
Some loudly asked what Motives could Confine
Fielding that Instant within Reddings Line.
And not his vigorous Sally then apply
TO divert at least the Stubborn Enemy.
Considering how much Blood was cast away
In expectation of his aid that day.
Others with grosser Murmurs did reflect,
Upon the Cause they ^udg'd of his neglect:
And thus by virulent speech his Honor stained,
Which to that hour unquestioned had remained.
So various seemed the Sense and Deeds of some,
That would the Soul and Facts of others doom.
And which were here too tedious to repeat,
With all that Died or Lived Heroic Great.
As needless 'twere bold Lucas's worth to tell,
Or how undoubted Lyle did then excel:
Who did in Warlike Actions so aspire,
As posed Hyperboles to advance them higher.
But Valiant Dornland since thy Mighty Mind
Had much peculiar Glory then adjoined,
And such as did thy Eminent Figure raise
Above the Level of Associate Praise.
My Muse shall here preserve thy Copy so,
As most Transcendent thou alone must go.
Who though a Voluntier that day did serve,
That uncommanded thou might more deserve:
And with an Active Courage uncon^in'd,
Unto the Bravest Actions foremost joined.
When judging that his P^rties Strenuous Fight
Must lessen, if not reinforced their Might.
And fearing that some Messengers Mischance,
Or Falsehood hindered Feilding's soon Advance,
In some like Ominous Pendants hung too near
The Grace vouchsafed them by the Royal Ear:
Since he conceived the Kings Will did import,
That Feilding, by some Sally's bold effort
Should passage gain for his Stout Foot and Horse
To aid the King, and his Relief enforce.
Revolving thus, his fearless Steed he guides,
Swimming the River 'twixt these sighting sides.
To this adjoined a Meadow's wide extent,
(Whose Pregnant Green more Liquid growth was lent
When this Stream's spreading Arms did smoothly glide
T'Imbrace the Surface as a T^^ming Bride)
And having passed it starts his Valiant Race,
Where he beheld direct and open space,
That from the River to the Town did lead,
And that way guides his swi^t and hearty Steed.
When Fortunes aid, that best Designs can wing,
Did Dornland then unlet or danger'd bring
Within the Town's Command; but what surprise
This bold Adventure gave his Enemies,
Or how prevented, in that Dismal Hour,
From Intercepting him by Armed Power:
Must sound Conjecture no less wonder give,
Then what admiring Men from Fame receive.
Whilst like swift Bird, that Wings the Airy wa^
Where Ravenous Fowl dispers'dly watch for Prey,
Yet with their Greedy Gorges must attend
Until with ^lower Feathered they contend,
Or with more swift surprise their Tallons bring
To grasp the Bird did them before out-wing:
He then arrived; and next to Feilding spoke
Briefly this Sense, with Mien composed and Look.
Enough my have the King's Concern implys,
As those sight yonder, if so far your eyes,
With any Brave by you Commanded here,
Did from sad Optics their Allarums share.
And shame 'twere Redding such should now confine,
That Blush to stand within a Leaguer'd Line;
Like rows of Cyp^^rs to no use amount,
Unless, in you, an Unite guides their Count;
E're Royal Bands their forced discomsits show,
Though unfought Feilding, saw them vanquished so.
If you no timely Summons yet has found
That bids you have your Drums and Trumpets sound,
And to your Kings Assistance win your way:
By me it is said, nor apprehend this day
But with Courageous odds you will enforce,
What Is yet undone by Royal Foot and Horse.
Our Foes enough their Consternation feel,
Who else had hindered my Steeds nimble heel,
Which passing near their Parties faces brought
Me hither, by no bold Pick^^rers fought.
And if to guide or aid your resolute way,
You Will any Stress of Conduct on me lay;
Be well assured that Dornland shall be thine
As far as worthy Motives can enjoin.
These words delivered with perspicuous Grace,
To Feilding's Soul amazement gave a space:
Before by speech he uttered this reply;
What Sense will your Heroic worth deny,
That thus contemning Perils brought you here,
Your Valor too adorned with Loyal Care.
Yet know that Fieldings heart none need incite,
Who scorns to live and to be bid to sight.
By Stars I vow, and all Supreamest Good,
No chill nor disaffection in my blood
Shivers my heart, or bids me turn unjust
Unto the Reputation of my Trust.
Believe me, worthy Man, I Would rather choose
This day with other Brave my life to loose,
Then stand such Peevish censure which I know
Some meanly Soul'd will on my Value throw:
Did not my Sted^ast honor me restrain,
And Treaty, that adds links unto the Chain;
Which I admitted after well observed,
The Place too weak, by me, to be preserved.
Were Redding else invested this bold hour,
With all the Houses best confirmed Power,
The King should not have fought and I stand still,
Had no express to Feilding spoke his will.
But Prudence Joined to Warlike Justice* stays
Me from Attempting so inglorious praise.
O That my Prince might this soon understand,
Ere he to loss does longer ^ight Command:
Or hope my Conduct may him now repair,
Since in my breach of Faith his Cause would share.
Much had this speech the Generous Dornland moved,
Who Strict Integrity in Man approved;
Judging no Fortitude deserved that name,
Unless best Justice does Complete the claim.
Which Thought well Pondered, next he Feilding leaves,
And unto Courage and his Fortune gives
His Persons Safety, resolved his Trusty steed
The same way back unto the King should speed.
But soon Perceived his Foes had Stations chose,
Where they could fiercely his return oppose,
Or any durst with daring hazard bring
Intelligence or Errand from the King,
That might th'engaged Feilding's Soul relax,
And Essex leave a fruitless Truce to Tax.
The valiant Dornland seeing now how fast
The Furious Enemy did accost his haste;
Before, behind, and round about him spread,
Admiring how they failed to leave him dead:
Whilst Shot, like Lines unto a Point designed,
Fl^w as no Center but his Heart 'twou'd find.
On all sides in his flight he fought with some,
Through others to their Fate he forced his room,
Until his Nimble Courser and his Fight,
At once out-did his swift Pursuers Might.
And in this bold Adventure did receive
Such Marks of Glory with best Verse may live.
His Vesture torn with Shot, as Ensigns show,
When Eyes the Bearers Valor thence allow.
Besides some Scars upon his Visage seen,
Which told how sharp his perils then had been.
Thus he returned and to the King made known
Nobly, what Sense of Feilding was his own,
With all Averments by that Chief were made,
Why he his Princes Mandate disobeyed:
Since he obliged by Truce must Redding yield,
And not to save that help to win the Field.
The King now Dornland's worth perceived more,
Then from observance first he did explore.
Resolving thence that with his Kingly Grace
He Would such remark upon his Merit place,
That should most aptly unto Fame convey
The Loyal value he atcheiv'd that day.
Saying, Thy Prince this Jewel gives to thee;
And if presage of his Auspicious be,
His Cause shall prosper with renowned success,
Whilst thee, to wear this gift, Heavens will shall bless.
This worthy Man's Intelligence thus told,
Soon moved the King to bid that his force should
No longer suffer by continuing sight
Which so much Fruitless prospect gave to sight.
And thus both sides with too great loss withdrew,
Since English blood did that more precious show.
Much like to Ships with Masts and rigging tore,
And Men disabl'd, next must tack to shore,
Where with most leisure and industrious Care,
Their dismal loss and figures they repair.
The FIFTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Redding delivered, by a Martial Call
The Actions Taxed, and Feilding doomed to dye.
Conduct depraved the Court and Field affects,
Which Dornlands Soul does ominously revolve:
Who unto Polyaster next repairs,
From his deep Science prospects to discern
Of this Wars fature Actions and Events.
THe Tongue of Fame, whose Ensign is the Crowd,
When various Clamours she disperseth Loud,
Or Throws on Mortals multiplied Mistake,
As they through Errors-Glass their Prospects take.
Whence often to Vulgar thoughts such Mediums rise
That feed the Ignis-fatuus of their Eyes.
Nor seldom do contests in Camps proclaim
How boldly Militants Impose on Fame.
To which Court-Minion^ their concurrence yield,
When they with Martialists Intrigue in field.
And would on Measures (by the Armed chose,)
Their complisance most plausibly dispose.
Whose Souls are to such gaudy Mo^als joined,
As least unto adversity are kind;
Or genuinly the deeds of men Express,
When Int'rested their value to depress.
All which unhappy Feildings Case now proved,
Against whom both Court and Camp displeasures moved.
Nor less then dreadful Martial sense must free
His person charged with Faithless Infamy.
Which did the Kings just Temper more Incense,
As Reddings Loss was aggravated thence.
And thus before this Rigid Bar did come,
The once Famed Fielding, to receive his doom.
Whose former worth no Mitigation gained,
As he then seemed to Honors Jury stained.
By whose strict Verdict sentence soon was past,
And day appointed that must be his Last;
From Executioners that Mars does call,
When his Delinquents should most daring fall.
Though Honored held if they by Engines dye,
That Force with utmost dread the Armed to ^^y.
Whilst he with Constant ^ortitude Complied
To bear th'Infliction against his Life d^creed.
Whence many worthys had more value placed
On him so ^^conc^rn'd his end embraced.
As Generous confidence, when Death is near,
Implys the Soul disdains her Cause to ^^ar.
Which worth in him Compassion more Inclined,
With such discernments as might aptost find
Regards of Mercy, if those Motives might
His death prevent and wounded Honor right.
Considering next if like a Soldier He
Had yielded Redding to the Enemy,
On Terms that prudent Captains would embrace,
When they would surrender fortified place.
The Situation weighed and what might thence
Induce him not to hazard its defense.
All which discurssions with their Calm and heat,
Found soon Conveyance to the Royal Seat:
Which Pallace-Perdu's watchfully attend,
That their Address may thither first ascend.
Whilst, of Court Intercessors most admired.
Supposed to be the then Duchess of Richmond.
Beauty for Feildings safety then Conspired:
And with the Eminent Lusters of her Face,
Begged for this Chief her Sovereigns Act of Grace,
With Tears that most resistless, Men surprise,
When made the grief and Prayer of women's eyes.
Which Far Compassion in her Sovereign moved,
Who Chastely Female Gracious spendors loved.
And held no Bounty by their Charms obtained,
But was their value when with Virtue gained.
And to this worthy of her Sex thus said,
Happy is Fielding for whom you have paid,
The Value of your pity shed in Tears:
Though Warlike Sense a Ruffer course often Stears.
Then Mercies Milder Orb or Conduct show,
Whose Beams from Breasts of Kings, most boundless flow.
Nor has Attentless ear to Mercies call
Been e're my Crime, or Subjects unjust fall.
Which Candid mildness shined throughout my Reign,
When Sanguine guilt did other Scepters Stain.
And if Offenders I less prone forgive,
Their Souls may in their bodies blush to live.
But Providence, whose secret Acts of Grace
Incline the hearts of Kings to Mercies Case;
And like Heavens bounties in the Orbs above,
Do Sovereign Conduct more benignly Move:
To which within the Royal Sphere was joined
Wales blooming Prince, whose soon compassion shined.
As Princely Souls, when most enriched by Heaven,
Have Mercies Talents early to them given.
What verse his Royal Graces can declare
In Acts (his Mirrors) so transparent are.
And in a Second Charles the Former known,
As Kings whose Souls no Interregnum own.
And thus unto his Royal Father said,
The Address that for your Gracious Pardon's made
By this fair object, let my Heart conspire
To aid as her attractive Beams require.
Nor is it denied that with my youthful years
Compassion flows where Woman sheds her Tears.
By whose bright Sex I early do explore,
That hard it is to deny when they Implore.
These Intercessions of a Royal Son
Much on the Kings forgiving Nature won.
Glad that his Princely Heir did then appear
So Ripe in Mercy e're his Manhood year.
As if presaging that in Future Time,
When evil Men had highest raised their Crime,
His Famed oblivions should make Subjects know
How much the Father by the Son they owe.
When first the Condemned Feilding Lived to see
Himself acquitted by their Clemency.
After a Warlike Counsel had decreed
He should to Mars as Sacrificed Bleed.
By which it is seen how often the Impeached find
Their Fellow Subjects less then Monarchs kind.
Much did this Gracious Act the Court divide,
As parties there did different Measures guide.
Who under Princes Good Improve the Skill
Of being most Artfull as they save or kill.
And in extremes of things such thoughts Impart
As little show the Courtiers Candid Art.
Or as some late Caballs disposed were,
That could for interest love or hate endear:
Seldom permitting Just concern to come
Nearer the Heart then their cold Lobby-Room.
Though Applications early visits make,
In hope a kinder Patron next may wake:
Or not Transcendent vileness so extend,
As, more then Prince, would present ends befriend.
Which Sense that Season did with some abound,
(And with their veiled Treason after found)
Held with the Subtle Houses to Conspire,
To whom they Royal secrets sent for hire.
Of which not few suspected were that time,
But most the false Sydesmonds impious Crime,
Who could such specious Measures give to things,
That Serpent-like his Soul deceived the Kings.
No Palace e're did such a Synon know,
As Measures yet to come will fully show.
Often he had unto the Foe conveyed,
How by his Sovereign Wars designs were laid.
And whence the wary Enemy might wave,
Attempts intended, or advantage have.
All which Clandestine Arts had greater source
From the Composure of the Royal Force.
Whose Ranks most filled with Generous blond and flame,
That with profuser courage Courted Fame
Then Martial caution strictly did allow,
Occasioned their disasters to ensue.
At Night their quarters forced when sometimes they
Watchless, or more supine disordered lay.
The Generous Dornland this had duly weighed,
And how through their Miscarriage, or betrayed;
The Loyal Mil'tants often defeated were,
And from Enormous loss might Tax their care.
But more did Dornlands busy thoughts debate,
The gift and strange Prediction which so late
His Sovereign on his Merit had bestowed,
And like Kings Souls remote import foreshow'd.
And next revolving in his Anxious mind,
If lettered Man could Explanation find
Of thuoghts abstrusely on his sense prevailed,
And must by deepest Science be unvailed.
None like the famous A Denomination under which is here described a Character
of Science.
Polyaster He
Deemed fit to Salve this seeming Mystery;
By Emblem might the Kings concern unfold,
And what of Dornland was to be foretold.
Polyaster who might weighty Story Fill,
With all that could Illustrate humane skill;
Having to wonder Arts and Science shown,
And was then Poet more Paophetick known.
Whose then abode near Oxfords confines stood,
Adorned with shades and the adjoining flood.
Like Mansions by the wiser Ancients chose,
When they would from Worldly cares themselves repose.
Or had on purpose thoughtfull leisure took
T'unfold the secrets of Great Natures Book.
Him Dornland visits when most Mortal eyes
Were closed by sleep, and only restloss skies
To Usher night their sparkling Tapers lent*
Till the Worlds eye surveyed the days extent.
Celestial Motions, with their Sublime Powers,
Observed by him in many useful hours
Which careful life was in his Visage seem
Where in his comely Age did ^^t^rven^
Wrinckles, which shew^d his Soul enough opp^est,
Though in that Warfull Time no sword depress't
The Peaceful Contemplation of his mind
Who did like the great Archimedes the Famous Mathematician of Syracuse.
Syr^^use^n find
Esteem that spread with largest wings of Fame,
And with his Accurate knowledge blazed his Name.
His Life's Strict Method did example raise,
The Reg'lar Ancients most approved praise,
With Contemplations so disposed that he
To Heaven and Time might still least debtor be.
Whose precious Hours his richest thought employed,
When he, as life's best Steward, them enjoyed.
Admiring how the Prodigalls of Time
Durst, that debauched, Annex unto their Crime.
As if the Worlds swift eye did beams bestow
For slothful Man's Excentrick use below:
Or Stars, that owed the Sun vast sums of Light,
Did shine to aid the wicked deeds of Night.
With Prayer he first began, that aid divine
Might to his Sublime thoughts assistance join;
Nor did he close his Eyes at Night to rest,
Till kneeling he had owned days founder blessed.
Wondering that Mortals largely could receive,
And Heaven, the Author, Thanks so sparing give.
Nor more his outward form of life composed,
Then sitting what his inward Gifts proposed.
His Food with best proved Temperance did agree,
When healthful Life had long Antiquity:
And Simple meats the bodies Strength resin'd
More suitably Assistant to the Mind.
This wisely Ancient Contemplations raised,
When Temperate life and Science were most praised.
Nor pains or Conduct did he then remit,
That more divine might raise his sublime Wit.
And when his Studies Intervall required,
By that diversion too his Soul aspired.
His Room of Contemplation duly graced
With niches, where Compendiously were placed
Statues of such whose Learning did impart
Truths Maxims, Crowned by Mathematick Art.
That like the Queen of Science does convey
Proofs too Divine for Men to disobey.
Of these he most Intentively beheld
Such as to Britains Glory most excelled.
And whom of all had most admired been,
The Matchless Napier, here was likened seen.
Who seemed by Figure in his hand to bear
Hs Logorithim-Tables which his fame declare.
Above what former demonstration wrought,
Or Problems by men held inspired were Taught.
Of whom another Euclide well might learn,
Or Ptolomy his works outdone discern.
Whilst this famed Scots Arithmetic does teach,
What Power of Numbers never before could reach.
And easier far did Archimedes sind
Sea-Sands o^tsum'd then Napiers profound ^^ind.
Whose Numbers added Multiplication serve,
Subtracted nothing from Division swerve.
Which Art did to Astronomy Convey
High Computations his most facile way.
And taught Geometry to lay aside
Old Sines and Tangents long a tedious Guide.
Wonder of Man that gave such knowledge Birth
As did at once oblige both Heaven and Earth.
Next him Polyaster did with Reverence view
The Famous Briggs, whose Admired products show
The Science in his Orb he did extend,
And, unto Former, improved Talents lend.
The Artsull Staturist so his form expressed,
That his fled looks seemed warm in Stone to rest.
Beholding Strictly as with lively sight,
The Trig'nometrick skill he brought to light;
Which lines did represent in Bodies Cut,
Before him on a neat Supporter put.
Besides the Reg'lar Solids, and the Art
His shadows on them did to hours impart.
Next whom renowned Outred's Figure stood,
No less approved the Carvers Art in wood.
Whereon a Cirdle round his Loins was wrought
Deep Analytick questions by him Taught.
At which, as emblem'd, hung that wondrous key,
His Mathematick Clavis did Convey.
These Famed, with many other Learned were
Preserved in Image by Polyaster's Care.
His Mind, Invited, by their Figures seen,
To be in Science great as they had been.
By which Impulse he often computed things,
Remotest Art to humane Knowledge brings.
Rvolving if the Circles long sought Square,
Past Computations do aright d^clare.
And how the Wonder of the doubled Cube
Had been attempted, or a Clearer Tube
Then Galileus skill had brought to pass
By Optic Doctrine, or his wondrous Glass.
Leaving Men doubtful whether Orbs above
Did Worlds within their rapid Circles Move.
Or how the Earth did to his Tube appear
To roll, instead of Sun, her Annual Sphere.
Like which high Theorems did Polyaster sind
Results of his no Less Stupendous mind.
Who by his Mighty knowledge did Complete
Productions worthy all Precedent great.
Next these the mighty Hobs he well beheld,
Whose Modern Soul with Giant reason filled,
O're-match'd past Phylosophick strength of Thought,
By Science in his Natural Method Taught.
Discharged of Terms, the Schools Imposed Dress,
Where Art Framed words, the proper sense few guess;
And in their Lettered Ocean undescry'd
The Chart that more refined could knowledge guide.
Whilst this vast man opposed the Worlds mistake,
And did his Learning Nature's Patron Make.
To Honor whom Polyaster did allow
His Form in Cedar Curious Carved should show,
And as that Substance does in Trees exceed
The height of all in Forests Tallest Breed,
So the Transcendent Genius of his Mind
Was, in his Likeness, thus to Fame designed.
Nor less was his peculiar value shown
To Persons whom the Muses did renown,
Their outward Forms with such high Life designed,
As naught seemed missed but their Aetheriall Mind:
Above Apelle'es Pencill to express,
Or what from stroke of Sculpturists Men guess.
No Imag'd Looks or Artfull Features tell
How the Souls Venus does with Mortals dwell.
Which Sublime Thought by Polyaster weighed,
And wit this Islands Glory far displayed,
Through Powerful Sons of Phoebus by whose sense
The Mighty Nine best raptures did dispense.
With these around their brows were Lawrells placed,
Large next to those Apollo's Temples Graced:
Of which, he Chaucer, Spencer, much beheld,
And where their Learned Poems most excelled.
Though words now obsolete express their Flame,
Like Gemms that out of Fashon value Claim.
Near these in Statue witty Shakspere stood,
Whose early Plays were soonest next to Good.
And Like a vast Dramatick Founder showed
Bounties of Wit from his large Genius flowed.
Whose worth was by this Learned duly weighed,
As in Essigie there he stood displayed.
But more stupendous to his Soul appeared
Proportions which great Johnsons Form declared,
Whose deep Essigies he wished longer date
Then Polished art in stone could Celebrate.
Admiring next the wit that Crowned his Bays,
WhoseScenes were works, when most fell short of Plays.
So aptly by him Characters expressed,
That showed his artfull hand and Learning best.
Whilst other Dramaticks like Planets were,
Rambling to find their Center near his Sphere.
A Province Phoebus did on him bestow,
When made his Wits Lieutenancy below.
As duly he did Fletchers Soul explore,
The Stages most Luxurian witty Store:
With worthy Beamount to his Figure Joined,
Adapted most the Muses Twins in mind:
Whose Genius so conspired that Beamount Might
Divide with Fletcher wit by equal right.
Nor less then past some present he admired.,
Whose work for Envys darts too high Aspired:
Or black detraction or abusive Pen,
Fowl'd often to Stain the worth of living Men.
Thus did Polyastor usefully transmit
These wondrous Authors of best Art and wit
To Future Age, wishing their Souls renown,
Might long survive their Forms in wood and Stone.
Admiring Dornland had beheld a space
This Learned Worthys Comely years and Grace,
Before his wonder gave expression way
By words to utter what he meant to say.
Who thus with grave humility began,
Father of Science more then Soul of Man
Has yet Imbellish'd, or by Heaven allowed
To look through Vails which inmost Nature shroud;
Or Starry Providence, that to Vulgar sight
Appears like Spangles, which Vain Souls delight.
As if that Heaven profusely did bestow
Such eyes above as saw not things below.
O, tell me then, if to thy search it is shown,
What Future issue may be sadly known
Of this outrageous War, or thence shall be
The King and Publicks suture Destiny.
The Noble Dornland this no sooner said,
And Polyast^r had his looks surveyed:
But his discerning eyes began apace
To power their Tears upon his Aged Face:
E're he his deep Conceptions thus expressed;
Pardon thou worthy Man the soul oppressed,
Which more, then Niob's drops, deserves to fill
Fountains where passions might be Emblem'd still.
When I consider well this Furious Age,
Such Hero's Numbered on a Martial Stage,
That for their high descent and Graces spread
Times Fatal Annalls larger then yet read.
As if our Isle had now profusest been,
Aided by Nature to exalt her Sin.
When many best of these alas must find,
War, to their Gold of Virtue, too unkind.
Little 'twill please the Living Great to know
What hapless periods they must undergo.
Though hard to Destinies accounts to come
Where Martial deeds their broken reck'nings sum;
Tallyes, which Providence least Strikes above,
That for Fates Bankers would no Chequer prove.
How far Heavens beaming eyes may piercing see,
Yet not divert Man's ragefull Misery,
Divines can bolder by their Maxims Teach,
Then Reasons Philosophic Aid can reach
From the Elaborate Alphabet above,
Where Consonants and Vowells wordless move
In Stars that Heavens own Algebra Compute,
And in their Question worked must leave some doubt.
All which the wise Creator might dispense,
To give his Conduct the remoter sense.
And like Heavens heightfull distance men allow,
Loses Man's thoughts that winged would thither go.
Much I esteem the Soldiers Valiant Art,
And in my youthful years in Field took part
Where Mighty Kings and Chiefs did battles guide,
Nor did I less then others for my side:
Whilst I with grief some Monarchs then beheld
Unfortunate, though Just their Cause in field.
This I observe d before I did Employ
My Soul on thoughts that peaceful bliss enjoy:
And to be nearer Heaven did Improve
My search of dispensations from above;
Where Gentlest Stars did seldom Council call
To rescue such themselves exposed to fall.
If not so shined in their Excentrick Course,
As more Irregular rendered deeds of Force,
T'Inspect which Scheme my disquisition spare,
Lest my Art tell what you would unwilling hear.
To which Magnanimous Dornland thus replied;
Most Learned Patron, hard 'twere by you denied
The Information my Desires implore,
And which beyond Mankind you can explore.
Yet think not so I Would prove your sublime Art
As thereby cautioned to unfix my heart,
Where Blood I breed that would not Lise delay
By aid of Stars, if out of Honors way.
My Life's too worthless so your Skill to Court:
No, it is my Sovereign's most Supreme Import,
Which in this War such various progress shows,
And other Circumstance my Thoughts propose,
That bid me thus address, if Science may
Inform my Soul a more propitious way.
To which Polyaster gravely this adjo^n'd,
Think not fai^ Son that it is to man desin'^
The Certain Methods Providence does guide,
Whose O^ flows no^ Ebbs like other Tide.
When things Emerge they often abscond the why
They were produced from Reesons broadest Eye.
How far obscurer then must Mortal's doom
Things ^re abstruce with future Causes come.
If Man the Universe could search around,
And weigh all Causes and effects there found,
Though in that Compass dues appear to sight
One Total Wonde^ (...) in ^th and height:
Could he assure how Stars, or things ^elow
Come to (...) as we ^ehold'em now.
Or how Heaven did the worlds first Virgin hour
Give womb of Time a future Issues power.
Whence prying Man as doubtful might Convey
The Worlds first Life as ^ix its dying day.
Who from this mighty round cannot understand
More boundless being but at Second-hand.
Since nothing so remote perfection shows,
As thence Man his Creators essence knows.
Whilst all the Miracles which the World do fill,
Pose us to search the unknown Founders skill.
Thus even the Lowest Tide of Earthly things
Often directs us to supremer Springs:
Like Rills, through easy Channels seem to Creep,
Have Causes that Concealed on Mountains keep.
How then shall Man the Gordian-knot unty,
That Is knit by much sublimer destiny.
Or that way Kingdoms revolutions find,
By far obscur^^ Providence designed.
Yet what this Inquisition would require,
(Though I could wish declined thy strict desire)
My Vig'lant studies shall as far Impart,
As I can pierce with my Acutest Art,
And know that I have often revolved with Care
The direful* progress of this wicked War,
With such Catastrophe's I could convey
To Future Time my Hieroglyphick way.
On which, 'till now, no eye I did admit
To guess that dumb Prophetic sigur'd wit.
Behold these Scrolls which are in number Three,
(Units whence springs odd Cubick Mystery.)
The First I offer English deeds contains,
With Sieges, Sallies, Battles fought on Plains.
And next in Course this Faithless Irish shows,
Steeped deep in Blood as here it figured flows.
The Third Disloyal Scotland represents
With their Fallacious Co^'nanted Intents.
In all of which thou feast how many fall,
As Honors Catalogue best sums them all.
Of these observe selectly such set ^orth
Who most their Nations honored in their worth.
Of which some Worthies may to thee be known,
As here in likeness dead or living shown.
If my Art's Prospect duly shall relate
Their Story yet reserved to future date,
And in this Studied Copy things foresee
To no Original yet can liken'd be.
With Actions that most signally declare
The high Intrigues and Fury of this War.
No Strife so dear shall other Nations cost
In Noblest Blood and Valiant Gentry lost,
Which in these Fields, by Fate's regardless powers,
Fall but to wither with less precious flowers.
More to Impress their Love and Valor's due;
See, in what Series here deplored do show
The several Fights and Skirmishes when they
Caused in their loss their Lovers Mournful day.
As seemingly those espoused forms appear
To drown their Souls and Looks as they weep here.
Next these a mournful Spectacle is seen
Of pitied Virgins, whose soft flame had been
Plighted to Warlike Lives and Glories ^^ed,
With Joys expected from the Marriage Bed.
(As Mortals less their Blessings prize possessed,
Then such by Wishes valued are or guest.)
And from their liken'd Lustres here do tell,
That their Forms could with Grief unfaded dwell.
As Lillies when in Rains they Tears do show,
Caused by rough Storms where their smooth ^^^tures grow;
Their Native Beauty does impairless Stay,
Or their last Glory in their dying day
Thus Man with Grief these evils must explore
That would with full Compassion them deplore.
Which in this Martial Landscape here present
So sadly near and distant Detriment:
With Turb'lent change and Mischiefs that ensue,
As unto sight these dreadful Visions show.
And whence the meanly born as bad conspi^e
To raise by vile degrees their Orb still higher.
Whilst Heaven when pleased to join A^llictions worst,
From Low and Impious fonds their mis^hiefs burst.
Next, well inspect this face as't here appears,
Mark well his Subtle gestures, looks and T^ars;
And how his Sanguine Nose does him betray,
As Bloody Beaks denote the Birds of prey.
Observe him rising too from low Commands
By boldest Stepps, till there ho General stands.
Then Mark his Fawning and his Lips of Zeal,
That more divinely he Men's Souls might Steal.
Or Crowds seduce who seldom can adjust
How unsafe it is bad deeds and Prayer to Trust.
Then view him here assaulting his Kings ear,
With Crocodile drops distilled to shape a Tear.
Next see how he does shift his Janus's Face,
And slights supinely offered Sovereign Grace.
Then forward move thy eye to shadows there,
Which in the Artfull Pencills strokes appear.
And though thou do no Visage of them see,
Suppose 'em great as English blood can be.
Their Coats of Arms above their heads displayed,
Like Gilded fame on refined Honor laid.
Besides a Crown that seems to hang in Air,
As if the Head were wanted it should wear.
Observe the Figures do this Curtain hold,
Which vails these highly Em'nent yet untold.
As if the Destinies, that cannot relent,
Concealed the Horridness of their Intent.
Do they not represent the Furies when
Their dreadful aspects Join with Impious Men;
Or in their Snaky Tresses would Invite
Some one to Act Hell's boldest Proselite.
See how they court this Bloody Chief to rise
Yet more detested unto Humane eyes.
And how his armed hand is stretched to Seize
The Crown, thou see, in hope of Aid from these.
Stay thy Inquiry here, for it is a Text
My Soul*s strict Comment has too far perplexed.
Heroic Dornland in whose steady Breast
No apprehensions had so deep Impressed,
As these by Learned Polyaster shown,
If Times dark Footsteps were to man Foreknown:
Or in such Hieroglyphick Shapes expand,
When Deaths black Trumps most sill her winning hand.
Besides the Figures of Peculiar Friends
Fully described with their Severest ends;
Some stripped in Fields, and in that ghastly plight
Their wounds discerned through which their Souls took ^light.
Who Like the Natural Fall of Humane kind,
(Whose Endless Issue must to Clay be Joined)
Embracing Earths smooth Surface Seemed to Lie,
The Eve that Last must Join Mortallity.
More (...) his Inward Soul these sights Lament,
Then outward Grief could Saddest represent.
Moved from the Tragic Postures by him seen,
And objects did as dismal Intervene.
Though in dark prospects they to him were shown,
As Light that dimly breaks through Clouds is known,
With many Gallant persons high esteemed
And some, of living friends, he dearest deemed,
Nor did he well discern where sields seemed spread
Thickest with bodies of the Valiant Dead,
Whither the Pencills shadow might not place
With others, there observed, his dying Face.
Yet all these apprehensions did Convey
No such ^emo^se of Death or dying day:
As what these figured visions might portend,
Which by this Artists skill had vayl'd the end,
That through this Wars Success and Cruel strife
His Sovereigns Cause might ruin with his Life.
And caused the Loyal Dornland to Consult
What from Polyaster's Knowledge would Result.
Whom thus he moved; Tell me thou Famed of Men,
How far this Pencill from your Thoughts and Pen
Took the Stupendous Methods I behold,
And but your Science only can unfold,
Or Taught more happily from your sense to know,
Designs our Sovereign Fortunate may show;
With Bravest Nobles of this Martial Isle,
And Generous Blood exposed to Furious Toil.
Or that prevented which my doubtful Thought
May sear to your deep prospect's sadly brought.
To which the Great Polyaster thus replied,
Think not fair Son the Thread is soon untied
That Subtle Destinies conspire to Twist,
And what more high Guides Causes which they list.
Of such, how Stars incline, Art may declare,
Though they like Nightly guides to Science are,
Consigned from Beaming the Sublimest Light,
Os ^rovidence; Then worlds of Suns more Bright.
The first high Author only can display,
Though pleased sometimes to use the darker Ray
Of Heavenly Bodies, whence sound Art may find
Effects disposed but no disposers mind.
So far may Humane Calculations reach,
Though no Celestial Text they higher Teach.
My Studied skill perhaps might so ascend
In seeing deeds over Kings and Men impend:
Though it is a Round no even influence shows,
And like the World to Situation owes
Much vari'd Seasons and distempered Times,
The hot Meridians sorce or colder Climes.
That bolder Men too pronely may admire
Why the Creators Conduct did conspire
To form a World proves so unequal Great,
Or Tempered like some headstrong acts of Fate.
Let this thy Further Strict enquiry Stay,
And where Art's helpless think it is best to pray.
The Noble Dornland having heard how wise
This Learned Man did things profound disguise,
Allowed his Modesty no more to ask
By giving Science a severer Task.
Hoping that Powers above might Overruled
Thoughts that were too Incumbent on his Soul.
Whilst thus from Polyaster he retires,
And far beyond expression him admires.
The SIXTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Essex by Dream his Fathers Ghost behold,
By which is told his Future Deeds and End,
Chalgrave*Field, and subtle Hampd^n slain:
Lansdowne fierce Day and Valiant Grenfields fall,
Waller on Roundway-Hill enforced to run,
Hugon, by Spell from Sorc'ress, Faction aids,
Gloucester relieved and Newberry's Bloody Fight.
THE Sun past ending Aprils various Hours,
Where Stars in Taurus Influence growing Powers,
Had to May's Gemini advan^'d his height,
When Eyes far North behold no Cloudy Night:
As Ph^^bus Beams dissolve Seas frozen there,
And never set for some Months of his Year.
'Till when they rarely see the early Sun,
Or how his shining hours on Dyals run.
But to their homes, their Winter Graves, compelled,
'Till Night's long Cold by days increase expelled.
An aidfull Providence that helps to Tame
Men that in Frozen Climes breed fiercest Flame:
Which in our British Region did appear,
As Winter checked War's speed this Fatal Year.
In which, betime the King had Redding lost,
And could not that prevent with bloody Cost.
From whence the haughty Houses thought to raise
Further Achievements to their Armies Praise.
Though in their Conduct and their Counsels were
Divided Factions moving in each Sphere.
Whilst some, from sad effects of Mischiefs past,
Seemed less propense to forward others have.
Which Sense the Earl, though Redding then possessed,
Found to lie heavy on his troubled Breast.
Who by Success could not so swell his Mind,
As moderate thoughts no room in him did find.
Besides his Soul was more Apal'd to see
The Hand of Heaven his open Enemy.
As in his Camp Contagious A great Plague in the Parliament Army soon after the
Surrender of Redding.
Plague had killed
Numbers that late his Hardy Legions filled.
Nor could their Loudest Priests by Prayer obtain,
That Heaven should cease the Infection these had slain.
Which much their grieved Gen'ralls Heart oppressed,
His Army Lessened thus and hopes deprest,
Of being Improved by Soldierly Repute,
And Pop'lar Fame which his Soul would promote.
These Thoughts, which on his Mind had fixed their weight,
By sleeps soft aid he hoped to abate.
Which Night invites, as Natures Time of Cure,
When Souls, less easy, waking sense endure.
And their Essential Attributes enlarge,
As Sleep the bodies Clog does most discharge.
Whilst from the boundless working of the Mind,
Souls seem in bodies to Live unconsin'd.
Now had the Earl Reposed some hours of Night,
As Stars ascending reached their Midnight Height:
And Gloomy Meteors had Condensed the Air,
Whence Forms, some Judge, do Thicker outsides wear:
Or mode when Sprites their thin extensions Hide,
And in contracted shapes their beings guide.
Or Ghosts assume, as Frightfull Stories tell,
Bodies resembling such in Graves do dwell:
Which Fantoms much this Chief asslicted then,
Dreaming on Battles past and dying Men:
Some War deploring with their Latest breath,
Others the quarrel Blamed at point of Death.
Or charged their Loss upon his Pop'lar Guilt,
That first Allured the Blood was after spilt.
Besides which Vision, to his greatest dread,
He dreamt of Graves at Keinton-field of Dead:
Which like to Mighty Tombs of Old remain,
When Hills of Earth did Cover heaps of Slain.
And in Idea next his Soul had sight
Of Brandsords day, and Reddings siercer sight;
Doubting lest Angry Ghosts should near him wait
To scare his Soul who caused their bodies Fate.
At which his Inward Horrors did Arise,
Seen by his Mind without her bodies Eyes.
Then sleeping Starts, next fears his sleep to break,
Lest his Souls dream should fright him worse awake.
As thus he lay perplexed with various thought,
Fancies All-forming Power had Figured brought
His Fathers Person, much in looks and Mien,
And Martial habit like what his had been.
His Beaver pi^rc'd with shot, as 'twas that time,
When he in London formed his daring Crime;
And in his haughty rage and passion Strove
To force his Queens Imperial Power and Love.
Which Guilt, as if acknowledged e're he spoke,
Seemed on his brow impressed and paler look.
And next he uttered to his Son this Sense;
Take from me dead my surest Penitence:
Since Fame Stands well confirmed that Spirits walk,
And Organ'd, of this World and the other, talk.
And know I come to bid thee soon decline
The Ambitious Steps that were too Lofty Mine.
When Phaeton like I did attempt to rise,
Yet in the offer fell the scorn of eyes.
Much blood thou'st spilt and I had done the same,
Had not the Power of Justice quenched my Flame.
Else had Crowds faithful proved, no Armed hand
Could have Rule boldier changed within this land.
As much perhaps thy Pop'lar Soul would do,
When Giddy Vulga^^ shall resist thee too.
More Battles thou will sight and then resign
Thy Power to Factions that Supplanted Thine.
Who after Aided by some Stepdams Art,
Shall by quick Poison kill thy Stubborn heart.
At which he stopped, and Tears profusely shed.
To whom his Son, in Trance, thus thought he said.
O Hapless Father in your Ghost to come,
And next your Fate declare how Stars me doom.
That from your pure Existence I should find
How Separate Souls Paternally are kind.
Then Thinks he kneeling did his Blessing pray,
And wished that Souls might oftener find their way
From deaths recesses, and Teach men to see
Their bad deeds past and future misery.
Next Thought he strove t'Imbrace his Fathers knees,
Whilst like to Air repressed his figure flees:
Or as the Gloomy Horrors of the Night
Vanish with dreams at days approaching Light.
Thus he awaked, and soon revolved in thought:
The sad concern his slumbers to him brought.
With Visions that did dreadfully deterr
His further Heightening this destructive War,
Which Nourished Factions that might soon conspire
To lay him Low, and raise their Creatures higher.
Whence Peace he wished, though far removed from Men,
Might, as the Souls Poetically said to be the God less of Piety and Justice.
A^^rea, come again.
Yet feared Heavens wrath was easier to assuage,
Then the stern Houses full determined rage.
Though that rough Medium he resolved to Try,
As Time gave Calmer opportunity.
Till when on other Causes he could lay
The Motives did his Martial flame delay.
Mean while the King, that wondrous year of War,
Which adds to Fames Heroic Calendar,
Had weighed maturely in his Prudent mind,
What against his Active Foes was best designed:
Knowing the Voting Houses had decreed,
That their Vast Force should yet more daring spread:
The North with Mighty Yorkshir's far extent
Committed to the Warlike management
Of that Lord Fairfax and his Valiant Son,
Who, by their Conduct there had gained Renown.
These how-e're held, in Soul too bravely Just
For such who then allured them to this trust
Infusing subtle Notions of a Cause,
That well disguised seemed to support the Laws;
Strenuously did their Friends and Interest guide
TO Oppose within that Sphere the Royal side;
Against whom the brave New Castle did appear,
Generous of mind and resolute in War.
Whose high repute did many Hero's raise,
That, next his Acts, on Story fix their praise.
But none surpassing his admired Ally
Heroic Brother to the then Earl of Devonshire.
Cavendish, in whose prowess Lie
Deeds that Fames wings must as her Trophe's bear,
And verse that could his Grandeur full declare.
Nor less the Senates party did Imbroil
The West of Englands rich and pop'lous soil.
For which attempt they Active Waller chose,
A Knight whose Zeal could mighty things propose,
And whom their Votes did Celebrate so high,
As he then Marched their Western Excellency.
That far as waves there wash the British shore,
He might all vanquish by their Haughty power.
And was their requisite expedient thought,
Since Who were both Slain as they led^ their Cornish Countrymen. The first of
whom Sr Bevil Greenville, being killed at Lansdown, as is afterward* mentioned
in this Poem; and the other Sr Nicholas Slanning, dying of a wound that he
received at the taking of Bristol.
Greenville, Slanning, had stout Cornish brought,
That won at Stratton-field a mighty day,
Which Stories with their Future worth display.
And by their Prince more grateful understood,
Since this, of his Successes, cost least blood.
Whose Temperate Spirit wa like Heaven's designed,
In being to Offending Mortals kind.
Yet hearts so hardened had his Rugged Foes,
That they durst Royal Grace with power oppose:
However the discomposed, or cold delay,
Of Timing Essex, would their Fury stay.
Whilst powers conjoined from other Camps appeared,
With such the Vig'lant Houses had de^la^'d
From his must be detached, and by Chiefs led
Whom they less doubted then this Peer their head.
And did unto Campaigns near Oxford guide,
The well-form'd Numbers of their daring Side.
Though Fame and Rumor used their swiftest Wing
To speed the bold Allarum to the King.
With these, a Leader, subtle Hampden joined,
Vast. in his Parts and deep contriving Mind.
Who by his Conduct and his Sword thought ^^t
To aid the Quarrel Patron'd by his Wit.
And more t'Inflame his fierce Assistants then,
Did thus express: If with our Armed Men
Reason avails, or Maxims that have found
Where fast Designs their strong assurance ground;
Know these are ours, with Swords that only can
Sever Prerogative Bonds Infesting Man.
How-e're such Gordian Knots Miraculous reach,
From Thrones to Subjects, as some vainly teach:
Or speciously the Lawyers Brain might find,
When Courts the Peoples Purse had theirs designed.
This e're our Senate sat, I first withstood,
And held it then a Cause worth English Blood.
Though now unsafe at Wrongs redressed to stop,
'Till surplusage of Power we further Lop.
That like the Limbs of some far-spreading Tree,
Shaded too long our growing Liberty.
Which res'lute force will perfect and design
That do the Foxes part and Lions join.
'Till when the Houses wisely must disown,
How Level they intend to lay the Throne.
On which account, this day I welcome here,
And full resolved with you in Arms appear.
Whilst from this Chalgrave-Field where Mr John Hampden was first said to be in
Arms for the Parliament by raising the Militia in order to ^uppress the King's
Commission of Array, and in that Field afterward received his Deaths wound.
Field our hopes improved must spring,
Where late I prosperous Led against the King
The Houses bold Militia, whence first grew,
'Twixt him and us, the Quarrel we pursue.
Thus he expressed, like one that could Cajole
With powerful words the Soldiers daring Soul.
This Speech scarce ended Rupert did appear,
With Troops well Formed to join ^ierce Battle there:
Swift, as the Trumpet's sound, his Prowess led,
And in that haste saw scattered Foes lie dead.
The Orange Scarst, the cognizance made then
Of Resolute Essex and his Fighting Men,
Were in their Gaudy Habits forced to run,
And turn their Tawny backs against the Sun,
Wishing that Parthian-like they now could fly,
And by back-shooting kill their Enemy.
Which Stratagem to Rome's bold Legions brought
D^s^sters as that People flying fought.
(...) how should these act any Conducts Part,
When headlong Fear had first surpised their Heart:
(...) close pursued, as all must needs agree,
Where Rupert's Valor forced his Victory.
And thus confused unto their Camp they stray,
Where Essex, hoping better Tidings, lay.
Hampden, amongst the rest, the Field had left,
By deadly wounds almost of Life bereft.
Few days him end, whilst much his Party grieved
That Fate, of such a Grandee, them bereaved:
Lest from Death's have they but in Emb^io find
The change of State which his strong Brain designed:
Or left unmodell'd by deceased The ^ousie Disease, of which he was reported,
about that time to dye o^*
Pym,
Who subt'ly to their Cause Intrigu'd esteem.
Tho'by a homlier Fate the latter fell.
Whom Lice by Legions slew as many tell.
So Herod full of Pop'lar Vogue and Pride,
Attacqu'd by these most vulgar Vermin died.
Rupert, successful thus in this Campaign,
Where Foes thought Fame by Cavalry to gain,
Which on their side more numerous did consist,
Had they been Soul'd as boldly to resist:
Such dread diffused through all their mounted Force,
As long they feared to fight such Loyal Horse.
And did in Essex Soul improve delay,
Caused by disgnst and Fortune of that day.
Which gave the King apt Leisure to dispose
Embodied Powers against his Western Foes:
Whom Active Waller had combined with care,
More Pop'lar now then Essex in this War.
The Noble Hertford, sit for Royal Trust,
And Int'rested in those parts to Adjust
His Sovereign's Cause, did from an Honest Fame
Deserve, by him unsought, a Generals Name.
Little he had of Wars experience known,
And therefore did refuse to guide alone.
T'assist whose conduct by the King was chose
His Newphew Maurice Daring unto Foes:
Great Rupert s Brother, which enough does tell
How like to him his Prowess did excel.
G^ville, to whom brave Who in the breaking out of the Rebellion, being forced
from his Habitation in Somersetshire, Retired for his Safety privately into
Cornwall, where he was not only worthily received by the Chief of that Country,
but as they Armed for the King entrusted to Command them.
Hopton did withdraw,
When first Rebellion had Infringed the Law,
Worthy of Lineage and conspicuous known
(...) Generous deeds that Cornish hearts had won;
And blood best valued in that fertile Soil,
Who Gladly joined with his, their Warlike Toil:
And had with high repute stout Numbers raised
To add to those at Stratton-field were praised.
Their Country cleared from Foes, they next prepare
For their Kings Cause in distant climes to War.
And with due sense of Hopton's Merit, gave
Consent that he Supreme Command should have.
Since he, from home removed, had for them fought,
And by his Conduct proved Advantage brought.
Soon did their Monarch's Summons them direct
Where they by Hertford Maurice should be met:
And with their conjoined power of Foot and Horse
Oppose the Impetuous growth of Wallers Force.
Near Chard, a Ville of Fertile Somersetshire,
Their joyful Juncture was, and echoed there.
So when kind streams in one Joint Current slow,
Their Waves embrace and sounds of Gladness show.
The Royal Power by Infantry Improved
Of Gallant Cornish, in bold Order Moved
Unto Campaigns the Enemy to Find,
Who then on Lansdown-top his Camp designed.
Uneven Ridges do that Hill Surround,
By Waller chose for his Advantage ground.
The Assent and Avenu's, with care Possessed
By Files and Squadrons he reputed best.
Whilst Posted thus some Troops he does Employ
To Skirmish so as they might Foes decoy:
Bidding that they when charged should soon retreat,
And Tempt pursuers on to their defeat.
Assuring them that on the Royal side
Were Chiefs whose Courage Dangers so defied,
As sometimes in pursuit of Glory they
Had scorned in fear of Stratagem to stay.
The Zealous Haslerig, on Wallers part,
Does first attempt to prove his Warlike Art.
Armed Cap-a-^e his Militants appeared,
Who'd think they shock of Foes or Guns had feared:
Or that their Iron shapes should not endure
The Charge of such whose Breasts were less secure.
Since for them better then the Royal Side
Fortune did Wars Accoutrements provide.
But however Fenced, their Bulks less hard they find
Then Bosoms that Enclosed the harder Mind.
And thus the Royal Cavalry that day
Through Armed Squadrons did enforce their way:
Whose Foes confused, with a precipitant haste,
In spite of Orders given, retired too fast.
So hard it is in Wars Exploits to find
Men's practiques to their Theories adjoined.
The Royal Chiefs perceiving that the Foe
Withdrew with loss and in disorder too:
Judged that occasion, Fortune's useful Guide,
Would add Achievements to their Gallant side;
But lest they should obstructed find their way,
Where opposite Files in Pass or Ambush lay:
The Co^nish Foot, with Greenville at their head,
And This General mention, intended to include an (...) P^ons as are most (...)
in Story, i i^ this a^ (...) (...) of this Poem so to be understood that
Prolixity may be avoided in repeating of proper Maines.
Chiefs whose Deeds in Fames Records are read,
Did in despite of disadvantage Ground
Repel their Foes, where Posted they were found.
Who upward unto Wallers Camp withdrew,
Like Deer that to their Herd from Hunters flew.
Their Stout Pursuers after them ascend,
And on the Hill Embattell'd boldly stand.
The Royal Horse, the Avenu's now cleared,
To Second Cornish Gallantry appeared.
But e're their Squadrons were to Order brought,
Their Van had Wallers Force successless fought.
Here Valiant Sir George Loer, a Gallant Gentleman, then Major to the Regiment
of Col. Thomas Howard, since Earl of Berks, Slain in this Battle.
Loer left a Crimson flood,
And many with him slain of English Blood.
Besides such Numbers that from Death or Wound,
In Wars Memoirs Conspicuously are found.
But Youthful. That the Lord Dencourt was found Dead as is here described is
known from History.
Dencourt for whose Noble fall
Fame does, from Verse, peculiar value call;
Appropriate to the Manner of his End,
Which Truth does in these Measures recommend,
Wrapped in the Enemies Colors dead he lay,
That he won for his Winding Sheet that day:
Ho H^roe could in Bed of Honor dye
Trophy'd more Glorious by Wars destiny.
The Fight renewed, each side by Prowess Try
To force their stout Embodied Enemy.
Nor would they Leisure to their Guns afford,
More forward to destroy with Pike and Sword.
Waller who this Campaign had first Possessed,
Some Forces so disposed to Aid the rest,
As what from sight or order could accrue,
He judged was fully his advantage now.
The Cornish Infantry that long had stood,
And would no Foot withdraw to save their blood;
His best reserves their Legions next Assail,
And against their Valor something too prevail.
Greenville disdaining this, an Ensign takes,
And fixing it in Earth by it he makes
His dauntless stand, resolving there to dye;
Or Live approved for signal Loyalty.
Whilst Fame to give his Death a lasting date
Perpetuates his By which is intimated both the Heroic end of this Gallant
Person, and the Noble T^tle of Baron of Lansdown given to his Posterity by King
Charles (...) Second.
Glory in his Fate.
Whose Trusty Militants when they beheld
Their Loved Chiefs fall, Fury revenge compelled:
Until his Death retaliated by Blows,
And the ground strow'd with Carcasses of Foes.
Pity that vulgar Gallantrys should be
So sparingly conveyed by History,
As but their General mention does appear,
Instead of single Rooms of Glory there.
Whilst Partial Birth, Monopolizing Fame,
Contracts Man's value to the highest Name;
Leaving the Low, however by Nature Brave,
To go without Encomium to their Grave.
Thus War, the mean destroyed, in heaps conceals,
And but their sudden ends, like Plague, reveals.
Till setting Sun both sides prolonged their sight,
Though Wallers, as appeared, first wished for Night.
Who to be safe the next succeeding day,
The Time of darkness chose to March away.
And as in haste, some Thought, had left behind
Huge Loads of Powder: whether so designed
By Craft or Fate, few ^ellers rightly know;
Or from what cause did Burst that Fatal blow.
Sooner then Moment did the Flame arise,
And seemed to pierce with pointed fire the Skies.
Like a vast Pyramid its Bottom spread,
And left within that Compass many dead.
Which Sulphurous force transformed their Persons so,
As they did Blacker dye then Ethiops show.
Some Blasted lived in Bulks to wonder swelled,
And with a sad Amazement were beheld.
Others survived, though Maimed in every part:
Who'd not for their sakes curse the wicked Art
That first these seeds of Mischief had designed
For a destructive fuel to Mankind.
By this fierce Blow in this disastrous Night,
Hopton had Perished too or Lost his sight:
Had not Heavens Aid the Powders force withheld,
Though scorched his Visage and his Limbs beheld.
Which Griefs with Magnitude of Mind he Bore,
Till Time his Pristine Strength did full restore.
This dire Mischance with other Motives gave
Occasion to the Royalists to Leave
That fatal surface, and their march intend
Where due refreshments might their Toyls befriend.
T'ward the A Large Borrough-Town in the Middle of Wiltshire.
Devises they assigned their way,
When Waller who had feared their longer stay,
Assumed new hopes, from Artifice or Fate,
To vanquish them whom late he could not Beat.
Close to their Rear, as Stars reached Midnight height,
His Van he led the next ensuing Night:
Judging that they, who had few hours before
Repulsed at Lansdowne-field his stoutest power,
Would least suspect that he did then pursue
Their Marching Force from which his Lately flew.
Whilst to conceal what by design he meant,
By Trumpets sound his Martial Complement
He first to Noble Hertford does convey,
Since he as General had precedent sway:
Next lets him know that if his Arms could bring
The spacious West subjected to the King:
E're Sun did set he would that Value Stake,
In A Lordship that did belong to the Earl and therefore speciously Nominated
by Waller, the better to disguise his intended design.
Cherston Fields if there he would Battle make.
The Earl to this with Modesty replied,
That he by Challenge never had him defied:
Wherefore he wondered that in Waller's name,
So Bravo like, this By the Author of this Poem Personally observed, he being
in Arms all the time of that Western Expedition.
message to him came.
Hopton,
With whom the Earl this Errand did debate,
Though full of Malade from preceding fate,
With clear Perception unto him declared
That Guile should more then Swords of Foes be feared:
Since War by wicked Maxim did allow,
That ^raud Conductress might to Valor go;
Besides all which impossible 'twould be,
Should, to this proffer, his resolvs agree;
To move with wea^i'd Foot a te^us way,
And Battle give in compass of one ^ay.
This message Answered and they Marching on,
The Insidious part of Waller soon was known:
Who that they might not think his Army near,
This Errand sent e're he Attacqu'd their Rear:
Which in few moments furiously he sought,
And by a fierce surprise disorder brought
Unto some Bodies on the Royal Part,
Till better formed they Stood his force and Art.
Nor could they March unto the Post designed,
But as they moving fought their Foe behind:
And thus retreating they continued Fight,
Till to Devises come by Evening Light.
Soon as Arrived a Martial Court they held,
Composed of such that for Conduct excelled:
Debating how their Powers might there subsist,
And orderly the Enemy resist.
Whilst now in Crowds their Horse and Foot possessed
The Town, too strait to yield them food or rest:
However by fight and March they Harassed show,
And were besides in Ammunion low.
Which to repair and to detatch more Force,
Determined 'twas that all their strength of Horse
Should from the Town that Night make their retreat,
Till Reinforcements they from Oxford meet.
Hertford and Maurice with them marched away,
When Hopton and such Chiefs behind did stay
Whose Conduct best the Insantry could Guide,
And by example Animate their side.
Which, though alone, by Duplicate renown,
Resolved to Conquer Foes and keep the Town.
And had for several days Successful fought,
Till want of powder to distress them brought:
Which known to Waller soon his Stars he Blessed,
That thus Advantaged him to win the West,
And Noblest Enemies his Captives see,
Whence he would Triumph by Parliament decree.
This Exigent as Royalists deplored,
And fruitlessly had searched for Powder stored,
A Trusty One Pierce an Inhabitant of the Devises, who discovered to t^^ Lord
Hopton where for some time he had hidden Powder.
Townsman makes himself their Guide
Unto enough of his to aid their side.
Provided thus, with bold Joy they defy
By Peals of Shot the daring Enemy:
And with recruited Fury Sallies make,
Where Posted Foes they kill and Prisoners take.
Scorning that Works their Valor should Confine,
Who durst the Place defend without a Line.
Waller who hoped that some Impending strait
Would have enforced his Opposits to Treat,
That he the Town by render might obtain:
Now doubts he Trophies there designed in vain.
When unto him his trusty Scouts declare;
That Bodies of recruited Foes were near,
By Princely Ma^rice and Brave Wilmot led:
From whose Vancurriers they had swiftly fled
Th'Allarum taken, he withdraws his Force,
Except some Parties of his Foot and Horse,
Designed to Skirmish and amuze the Town,
Lest there too soon 'twere known that he was gone.
Few Miles he marched 'till to a Hill he came,
Whose Downy Surface men do Called from the Village Adjacent Round-way-Hill or
Down, but since by way of Joque called Run-away-Hill, Alluding to the confused
flight of the Rebels there.
Round-way name,
Where speedily, as Order could admit,
He did for Fight his strong Battalions sit.
Rejoiced to see with what an eager Course
His Foes arrived, though but Empowered by Horse.
Concluding that his Cavalry and Foot,
By joint Advantage would their Bodies rout.
Whilst Maurice, Wilmot so their Troops dispose,
As by their Conduct first they come to Blows:
And Ranks disperse that would resist their way,
Till Flight they forced as their Swords numbers ^lay.
Fiery Sir Hazelrig a Zealous Republican.
Arthur, who, on Zeals account,
Had thought all other Horoes to surmount:
Or that Enthusiast in an Armed plight,
Was terrible as Basilisk to sight;
Proved that his Figure dwindled in that day,
As on his Pegasus he flew away.
And like a Fowl that guides the flying Train,
Did routed Squadrons lead along the Plain.
When some that hoped their soon escape to make
By Steps that none in their pursuit would take:
Down the Hill's steep, from Miracle of Fear,
A Gallop took and broke-Neck'd perished there.
The Field being cleared of Horse, the Foot remained,
That with some Volleys had a while maintained
Their daring Files, 'till hopeless to resist,
By Horse forsaken that should them assist:
Their Heels, instead of Arms, for safety tried,
But soon were Captives to the Conquering side.
This signal Victory was the dearer got
As with Foes killed Fate did to death alot
Some Personages whom Story does rehearse,
Enough perspicuous without aid from Verse:
Yet here for them and for Brave The reason for Introducing this Character is
so fully give^ in the Third Book, as it needs not be here repeated.
Dornland's fall
My Muse does for a Tear-Heroique call.
He that had raised Example to the height
Bydeeds that Generous Loyalty complete:
Unhappy 'twas that his brave end should be
No stop unto his Nations Misery.
Or that the Crisis of his Life's last hour
Should imply Fate unto his Sovereigns power.
Which his Kings Lips Prophetickly declared:
And from Polyasters Science had been feared.
But now as if the Destinies reversed
Events, which some Prognostics had rehearsed:
By the King's Power was op'lent Bristol won,
And round strong Gloucester next his Leagure known.
Though much admired by discerning Men,
Why that Town's Siege was undertaken then:
When Rumor had on London fear Impressed
From Waller beaten and subdued the West:
The Factious Senate too divided there,
And did their Cause and Person's safety fear.
Their Party wavering or inclined to yield,
Instead of raising numbers for the Field.
Essex demurring, and his Army weak,
And no March, if recruited, cared to take.
'Till Glocesters bold Defense their Courage raised,
And By whose Conduct Gloucester was preserved, though afterward he had cause to
repent it being persecuted by his own Party for not complying with their
Antimonarchical Designs if not suspected to have remorse of Conscience for
opposing of his Sovereign.
Massey her Defender loudly praised.
Unhappy Prince whom Stars had thither brought,
That by no future Aid repaired the fault.
So Hannibal before Tarentum stayed,
And lost Romes Conquest by time there delayed.
Nor was then Glocester's bold defense alone
The King's Misfortune but Hull's stronger Town.
Before which Brave Newcastle then did lie
Besieger by one Fatal Destiny.
His Number great and the vast Northern Clime
No less then Western vanquished at that time.
And but his Enemies worsted Relics left
To man this place of other Aid bereft:
As then Lord Fairfax and his Valiant Son
For their last refuge fled unto this Town:
By Nature strong and fortified by Wall,
That seemed for Scaling-Ladders, built too tall.
Famed Troy, though Neptune's Fabric said to be,
Not like to Hull did find support from Sea.
Where through vast Sluices Humbers Waves may run,
And the Adjacent parts to distance drown.
So strongly did rough Neptune's Trident here
Against King Charles his Scepter Leavy War.
Whilst the Renowned Newcastle soon beheld
His Trenches, Bullwarks, Tents, with Streams orewhelm'd.
Until his Camp, thus made a watery Lake,
He did, with loss of Men and Time forsake.
Which Suffrance withered his sam'd Army's Flower,
And former Conquests gained by Warlike Power.
Who else Victorious might have Eastward gone,
And, with his Sovereign joined, have London won.
When Stars from Fate's Similitude decreed,
That both at hapless Leaguers should be stayed.
But what the Counsels of that Time allege
For undertaking Hull and Glocesters Siege:
My Muse no Descants here presumes to make,
Since from Event appears their gross mistake.
Which gave to London's Senate wished for scope,
From their Disasters to erect their Hope.
Not doubting but, from them diffused, 'twould bring
Increase of Fury to Oppose their King.
Though they perceived, amongst the Crowds of Men,
The Fervor of the most abated then:
Wearied by War, or dubious whether Right
Stood on that part which them allured to Fight.
When By whose Character I suppose the Reader may judge that the Infamous Hugh
Peter, who may not be improperly termed the most Artificial Canter of that
time's Pulpit-Traytors was Intended; (...) he has the Authors consent so to
understand this Nominal.
Hugon did to Vulgar Minds apply
His Tempting Zeal and strenuous Industry.
Hugon, who in this Story room must find,
From Comic part and Tragic badly Joined:
Whose Artifice could men to Fight dispose,
But Laughed at all that died in Field by Blows.
No Levite called, though often in Pulpits known,
Where Don-Quixot he played without a Gown.
With Patriots of that Time in high esteem,
And ruling Females Amorous of them.
But how his Genius to this height arose
My Muse by this ensuing Wonder shows.
It Is told a Witch, on Puritan Begot,
Came from New England to aid (...)
Comely in Figure, though se^ Stories (...)
That Dames of Magic did in Form ex^:
As if that Venus Pluto's Lips to spite,
By Course Amors attr^ed his delight.
Demure in Speech and (...) was her Mean,
And on her dies; a (...) where Veil was seen.
At distance Z^ did her Beams admire,
When told that (...) could love and Cant Inspire.
And when the Sorc'ress would the Harlot play,
On him she doted that could Faithless pray.
Near London Suburbs was her then abode,
To whom by search had Hugon found the Road.
Admitted to her close Apartment there,
Her Beauty he adjudg'd above compare:
And, as it is thought, Charmed by her taking sight,
His Nerve was risen above usual height.
Busy as Sybil soon he her perceives,
Inscribing Scripture Texts on diverse Leafs.
And as she moved her wan and words did speak,
Around her head a trembling flight they take:
And when descended on her Table find
The Order which for them she first designed.
Wonder, above what Sybils Leafs could show,
If this on Fame's account be granted true.
Not many words this admired Charmer used,
'Till kissing him she Love and Zeal infused:
Letting him know that she would improve his Sense,
By bold Intrigues and Pulpit Impudence:
Since well she knew his Soul did little care
Though retrograde to Heaven he vented Prayer.
Then takes a Leaf on which a Text was wrote,
On purpose Charmed his Faction to promote:
And with a tickling whisper next infused
The Spiritual Gibberish by him after used.
Which on his Knees it is said he did receive,
To show th'Adorement he th'Enchantress gave.
His Conge taken, the ensuing day
He broached in Pulpit a new Canting way.
Which being Inspired by the Devil's Wit,
Some Insides did of Men and Women fit.
Whence fervent Matrons soon for fight designed
Their Husbands, whilst to Whore they stayed behind.
Nor did the Virgins, with a Blush that Time,
Present their Gifts to aid the Public Crime.
Who with a shameless Confidence declaimed
Against all such from War would be reclaimed.
This Female Vogue, and Moneys loved Command,
Soon did incite the Soldiers Armed hand,
And London Legions to the rest adjoined:
As Essex them for Glocesters Aid designed.
Who now his hope, though lately drooped does raise,
Of Meriting by Conduct renewed Praise.
Skippon, he Led, with Chiefs of bold Import,
Rounded by Guns, that like a moving Fort
His Army did in wide Campagnes appear,
And Fruitless Charged by By which is Intimated the Attacque that was given by
the Kings Cavalry, Commanded by Prince Rupert, to my Lord of Essex his Army
marching to relieve Gloucester near Stow an open Part of that Country.
Rupert when met there.
Too strong for Let, the Earl still forward goes,
'Till Glocesters Joy his bold Arrival shows.
The King when thus approached his Foes he saw,
By Night, does from that Town, his Force withdraw:
Fatal that Night, as Elements did show
By Thunder, Storms, and Winds that loudest blow.
This grand Relief offected by this Peer,
Return to London next employed his Care.
And how his Warlike Caution might contrive
That he might thither without Fight arrive.
Lest other Actions should his Fame impair,
E're he received, for this, Applauses there.
When Stars decreed, that for a Bloody Day,
He should in Newberry's Field his Files Array.
Where overtaken by the Royal Power,
Both sides engaged as rose the Morning hour.
Profufely Blood was soon on each part shed,
No Verse can here enough lament the Dead:
Amongst whom Canarvan, Valor's Glory, fell,
And Faukland by the Muses Loved so well.
Obliging Sunderland here also slain:
What Field like this from Noble Blood bears Stain?
The Earl, amongst his Dead some Brave had lost,
Though this Advantage much his side could boast
That they with cheaper Metal had supplied
Their Cause, against which opposed the Nobless died.
So few of their High Station then were known
That would in Field the Houses Quarrel own.
Never more poised was Battle by Event,
Or Armies known more hours of day had spent
With equal Prowess, so hard it is to know,
When English Valors Fight, which bravest do.
Both sides in Warlike form appeared next day,
When Essex first withdrew and marched his way.
Nor did the Roy'lists hold it prudent then
To tempt him, in Retreat, to fight again.
Weighing the Order in which he withdrew,
Themselves o'retoyl'd with March and fighting too.
On each part yielded that they could no more
At that time Combat as they did before.
O Fatal Soil that must next year contain
A Second Battle, and more English slain,
Where Essex did his rallied Ensigns lead:
Better that he over furthest Seas had fled,
Or died by Shipwreck on the Cornish Shore,
When Treaty saved his there A very Important Remark, the Earl having left his
Army in a Strait in Cornwall he took Shipping for London and left Skippon
behind him to Treat for the Army of which the Infantry had Terms leaving Arms
behind them, their Horse having broken through one Wing of the Kings Army:
These very men fought resolutely, above others, soon after at the Second
Newberry Fight as is intimated here, and in Fight were heard to express their
desire to revenge the Kings success in Cornwall.
deserted Power:
Then with bold Legions, so reprieved, display
Rebellions fury here another day.
Yet this Last Battle, Though uncurb'd his Sword,
No Future Trophy did to him afford:
Or Lessen the Disgust that was expressed
Against his Late Misfortune in the West.
Whence the Imperious Houses did decree
That he, their wars first Guide, removed should be.
And other Conduct chosen to Enhance
Deeds, which they Judged he slowly did Advance;
However his Faction did with theirs Comply.
In being their Sovereign's Common Enemy.
But how Intrigu'd their Parties and Designs,
Would tedious render this brief Poems Lines:
Wherefore we must from Passages descend,
And that may give our Story closer end.
The SEVENTH BOOK.
The Argument.
The Houses their new Modeled Army raise,
And Fairfax, though but Knight, their General made.
Cromwells bold rise and Counsels verse relates.
Direful Events the Nation apprehends.
Lov's passion and concern with War Intrigue.
The King by Furious Storm does Leicest^r win.
Fairfax to Oxford does his Army Guide:
Which Action the Kings Northern March diverts.
ESSEX removed, the Houses soon decree
That Fairfax should their Captain General be.
Not mean his Birth, of Disposition sit
To be subservient to their ruling Wit.
A Complysance they did believe Improved,
As they had the more haughty Earl removed.
By Martial deeds this Knight had gained renown,
And for the Houses was Successful known.
Implicitly he could their rule Obey,
Which most Endeared them to his Fighting way.
Whose Brain more with the Soldiers part conspired
Then Ends by which to Factions Men Aspired.
Or how Presbitery's Interest was wain'd,
As Independency Improvement Gained
Both in the Houses and the Armies Sense,
Who did their high Caresses then dispense
Unto aspiring Cromwells growing Name,
The darling Leader of Fanatique Flame.
Poor had he Lived, although Gentilely born,
His Interest despicable and sorlorn:
Whilst his Life past, to Shame had vicious bin,
Till he, by Covert Zeal, Transformed his Sin.
And now 'tho but Lieutenant-Generall made,
By craft was more than Fairfax soon obeyed.
And had this new formed Army so Cajoled,
As all therein seemed for his purpose Soul'd.
Thus was the Man, and thus his figure rose,
Above what story, most Prodigious shows.
But how he made progression to this height
The Mediums tell, which briefly we will recite.
Essex discarded by that Factions Power,
Of which then Cromwell was esteemed the Flower,
This Subtle Man to Grandees next proposed
How Martial Force might surer be composed:
If from their Numbers they would Scelectly take
Men that by zeal their valors fiercer make:
And with them, so devoted, Legions fill,
Prepared by Conscience for their sakes to kill.
Declaring how Persuasion hardens fight,
And how men Motiv'd so, all perils slight:
Though Stetes Subverted are or Thrones removed,
The Action seems to them by Heaven approved:
Who deem it Sublime Glory to destroy
Prophaner Rule which Mortals would enjoy.
Nor feazibly will this our war proceed,
If Hardened conscience does not foremost Lead.
Each man is more then man whom that Inspires;
The Spiritual Gideons which no money hires.
And tells how fruitlessly we conquest sought
As men for us of hireling Genius fought.
Who but for Muster pay to Fields make have,
And would Wars hours in Plenteous quarters waste.
The Armed Drones that National Treasure Spend,
Without a sting of Spirit to Contend:
Let Votes, Instead of them, Bold Godly choose
To Fight our Battles, and our Cause espouse.
Nor think that Militants, with softer Flame,
Can the Fierce Honor of the Kings side Tame.
This zealots Speech, like Tinder's catching fire,
Did with the Houses servent votes conspire:
Which by a Their self-denying Ordinance so called, because it allowed no
person of either House to have Military Command, though purposely formed to lay
aside the Earl of Essex and some others (...) him: notwithstanding which
Cromwell was so favored as by particular dispensation to serve under Fairfax.
self-denial Named decree
Ordained their Army should new modeled be:
Over which, though Fairfax General we find,
His Power to Cromwell ward-like was designed.
The Knight but factions Nominall allowed,
Whilst Cromwell rose the Phaenix of their Crowd.
Fatal Conjunction, as their Actions Tell,
That direful on their King and Nation fell.
But how their Crimes arrived unto that height,
Our sorrowful Measures will in Course recite.
Well did the Commons House Approve the Choice
Of this new Model and in hope rejoice
Events they judged from such a Power would spring,
That they held keenest formed against the King.
And though in the other House, the sitting Peers
Had long concurred with Voting Commoners:
And had to Lapse of Honor vilely been,
Abetters of this Wars designed Sin;
Yet in this Juncture had this Act withstood,
From sense perhaps of their Neglected Blood,
By which the Furious Commons did require
The Knight's Advancement and his Hardy Squire.
However unto their Essex thought disgrace,
And Peerage then denied a Generals Place.
Thus did Inferior Votes the Higher Sway,
As Lords did Commons, in effect, Obey.
And now this Novell Army does prepare
To raise their Faction by Succeeding war.
For whose Success, were many prayers said,
By such as held themselves most Sanctified.
Though Prayers, hopes, wishes, had their different Crime,
As London's Juncto varied at that time:
Where for disbanded Essex's party's sake,
The Presbyterians high disgust did Take.
And from Regret could Inwardly Scarce pray
For Independents on their fighting day.
Lest that sierce Party, on a Martial Score,
Should end what The Other Left undone before.
Whilst highly Fairfax and his Cheifs Caress
Their Soldiers to attain by Arms Success.
And with Bold confidence their March designed
Where ever they might the Royal Army find.
When rumors from this Movement every where
Busied the thinking Heart and watchful ear;
As men did Problems and conclusions draw
From what they heard, or Judged their Souls foresaw.
Whence various Expectations filled the Mind
As to the King or Houses they Inclined.
Or did their forward Emulations guide
By Gallantries observed on either side.
Nor did some Beauteous of their Sex decline
Glory, which love to Valor could Assign:
If not by Speech their Rivaldries declare,
As they did Hero's Martial Acts compare.
When in Flavira's Character and Deeds
Was passion found that womans's Soul exceeds.
Brave Lyle she Loved, as is declared before,
And thought it Heroine valor to explore
His Fame in war, the Jewel of her heart,
Like which she Judged no Hero's valiant part.
To whom a visit Rosaline now makes,
Of whose bright figure verse precedent speaks,
Pensive in Mind as she for Lucas sake,
Did prospect of wars fatal dangers take,
And thought she did that Instant him behold
Leading his Troops too desperately bold,
And how his wounded Horse did three times bound,
And threw him off as it fell dead to ground.
Wishing that, from such chance, Flavira might
Less prompt her Lovers Soul to dangerous fight.
And now Flavira as if she perceived
The Sentiments that Rosaline had grieved:
By complysance and General converse,
From what Fame did in Town or Court disperse,
A while directs her Language and her mean,
And seemed without Caprice a Lover then:
Or that she had on Glory solely Laid
The Pride of Passion which her Soul obeyed.
Reflecting on the Exigent of Times,
And how Improved by men's degenerate Crimes:
From which Mean Source the Chills, to valor spring,
As some relentingly assist their King.
Tender perhaps as Ladies please to Fear,
That would their Hero's Softer Toyls endears
And think it is Glorious if their choicer Beams
Do from Campaignes withold their Lovers flames.
Know Rosaline, says she, Flavira shall
Never, her Lovers honor, so Enthrall.
Let it her Emulation rather be,
To heighten others by his Gallantry.
What verse can tell how Rosaline was moved,
When these words heard, whose Soul more calmly Loved.
Posed, as she would her apt return now fit
Unto Flavira's speech, and sprightly wit;
And could not but with troubled mind explain
Her Sense which in these words did utterance gain.
Highly your valo^ Madam is Confessed
By my hearts def'rence to what yours expressed:
Whereby your Admired Loyallty appears
Unto our Sovereign, whom my Soul revers.
Nor shall e're my Affection Arm withdraw
That can in Field his Rebel Subjects Aw.
Begging of Heaven that Titulary Stars
May Loyal Lives defend throughout these Wars.
And that the Jewel Life which Love would save,
May not from Bloody power a Period have.
Little this Speech did with Flavira weigh,
Whose eye was then removing to Survey
A painted Story, where the Pencills Art
Did her Great Hero's deeds to Life Impart.
And where with proud delight she did behold
Fields, in which Lyle renownedly was bold.
And how, before him, shot had Numbers slain,
As his Files vanquished, or did post maintain.
Inspecting next how in last Newbery Fight,
His valor did Amaze beholders sight:
When to Encourage Soldiers not to Fear,
He did their Leader in his This manner of Gallantry in Lyle, as a brave
Encouragement to Militants, whom he commanded at the sight above mentioned, was
observed by many, and lest it should not have an Honorable Record from History
is here mentioned.
Shi^t appear.
Which Posture so Flavira's Passion pleased,
As her soft Arms his Picture's form embraced:
Next kissed his Lips, and to the Pencills Grace,
Admired the figure of his Valiant Face.
When Rosaline did from this action find
The high Transport that ruled Flavira's Mind:
And how she from Excess of Spirit gave
Encomiums by comparing of the Brave:
Whilst Jealous Honor might in others raise
Excess of Daring to gain Woman's Praise;
She from Flavira with a modest Grace
Retired, and pitying Lovers wept apace.
Fame's watchful Tongue not only from this Scene,
But what before Flavira's words had been,
Promulg'd to Martialists that Woman's heart
Encited Emulation on their Part.
Whence some of either Sex did make their claim
To Love and Honor by a Rivall'd Fame.
Or did, with Animosity, Contest,
As they affected or Judged actions best.
This known to Lucas, in whose Gallant mind
Desert and Glory did their Center find:
Above all Boast, the varnish of the Proud,
Or Men whose Tongues, to Fames deceit, are Loud,
As Surreptitionsly they would six renown
On deeds, they would be fancied to have done.
Yet from prevailing Sense of Honor thought,
Himself disparaged if to Balance brought
With any, to the Van of Fame had rose,
Or to him were compared in lighting Foes.
And as a Lover loved the praises too,
Which Heroine Beauty Valor did allow.
These thoughts had given some trouble to his breast,
When Lyle, on Wars concern, to him addressed:
Nor had he his Loved person till that Hour
Beheld, since his return from Marston-Moor;
Where Lucas did to wonder fight maintain,
And of successful Foes had many slain.
A Bloody Victory and deplor'dly great,
Since that In which as some write were killed on both fides Nine Thousand Men.
day Dates the King's first grand defeat;
The Northern Counties wholly lost thereby,
And Numerous Lives renowned for Loyalty.
As soon as Lyle beheld brave Lucas Face,
With h^y kindness he did him embrace:
Wishing that if in War, by Heavens decree,
Their Lives must have a Fatal destiny:
That one days Bloody Period both might end,
And in one Grave be buried friend by friend.
This sense of Lyl's so generously kind,
Impressed such passion on the others Mind,
That his Soul yields a noble Tear to shed,
E're for reply he these words to him said.
Highly thy kindness Valiant Lyle I own,
And the remarks of Honor by it shown,
Nor do I doubt but that some future Field,
Shall to us Jointly Crops of Glory yield.
Though Rebels did at Marston-Moor succeed,
Where Loyal valors did profusely bleed:
Of whom perhaps some Ghosts less quiet rest
As they discern Men's former worth deprest:
Or by Capricious Fame Misunderstood
The value of their deeds and Warlike blood;
As Tongues of Envy she to Camps does send
That to Impede Man's Glory there contend:
Or unto Piekes dispose the Martial Breast,
As Actions by Compare are deemed best.
A way, some Ladies for Loves sake rejoice,
When they to valor give their casting voice.
These words and what their Tendency might mean,
Seemed to prepare some unexpected Scene.
Well known to Lyle the high disgust of Spirit
That Lucas had to descants on his Merit:
Or any fond Perceptions that Implied,
Though by a friend, his valor equaliz'd.
Whence Lyle was sorry that Flavira's Mind
Was, for her Lovers sake, to Boast inclined.
And now he bends discourse another way
To Wars designs, and Battles future day:
Telling they soon must Enemies oppose,
By Fairfax, Cromwell, Lead, their active Foes:
Who for fierce Wars increase in Soul conspire,
Like fuel added to some spreading fire,
May Heavens decree all dire presage restrain,
As Royal Powers their Cause in fields Maintain:
Let their bold Chiefs their private Grudges slight,
That Stars may aid their Union as they fight.
No matter if Fond Tongues Incline to Scan
The Martial Deeds of this or the other Man:
Or from peculiar favor would prefer
Some they admire to Fame's first Room in War:
An Emulation that should least Infest
The steady Temper of the valiant Breast.
Know dearest friend, that Lucas does concede
And Love the rule by which thy Soul is led.
Granting with you that valors noble part,
In spite of tongues, resideth in the heart:
Yet though there seated, still the Bravest must
Their Overt-acts by humane praise adjust.
As Men from use this gross advantage have,
That Jury-like, they honor kill, or save.
No Soul of Glory will a Vaunter be,
Or by formed speech declare its Gallantry.
Yet could Man's valor high ascend as Star,
I Would have it thought at least Mine went as sar.
Suppose Flavira's Lips your praise should tell,
Or boast that your atcheivments all excel.
Were not Inglorious If from Rosaline,
Prowess, should want her tongues applause, i^ mine.
Though with a Blush she should my deeds declare,
And them with Lovers Boasted Fame compare.
Love does me to that Competition draw,
Without Intended Breach of Freindships Law.
When Lyle the Purport of this Speech had weighed,
His Modest replication thus he made.
Vain 'twere for us, Brave friend to Canvas words,
Which woman's tongue, (with Passion swayed,) affords:
Or think they Lessen honors Complete Sum,
As from their Partial value Plaudits Come.
Believe my heart, which never so conspired
With woman's Soul, for deeds to be admired
Though hardly Man resentingly will blame
Affection, when Indulgent to his Fame
I grant that woman's Love is highly great,
Said Lucas, that would honor Stimulate:
And thereby Loyal valor so Inhance,
That with it Love's best Glory may advance.
Such Rivaldry I willingly allow,
And in a friend it bravest must Avow.
Give me thy hand as valiantly we make
This contract for our Love and honors sake:
Who of us can Most foes by Conduct slay,
Or Pers'nall Gallantry next Battles day;
Let him unto his Lady that report,
Or for more Grandeur Publish first at Court.
To which Lyle did, with some Surprise, reply,
Brave the Proposal is none can deny:
Yet who until this time, of Chief e're heard,
That would by this bold Method be preferred.
And if Agreed it is left to Martial Chance,
Which of our Swords or conducts 'twill advance.
Where accidents sometimes Attempts do Aid,
That could not else Auspiciously be made.
Know, Answered L^cas, it is not Fortunes power,
That Slurrs the Dye of war some winning howr,
That can Impair this Actions high des^rt,
Or from Success Select the Bravest heart.
What if resolved Like us few have been known,
Or that to Camps the brave Novell we own:
The examples rise, our Glory will be Found,
And others teach in valor to abouud.
Lucas said Lyle, enough I do embrace
This offer, upon which you value place:
Without enquiring by a stricter Sense,
Why the proposal does from you Commence.
And well I know with us some Cheifs Conspire,
That the worlds talk should most their facts admire:
And think they bid for Fame by Trumpets sound,
If by Compare they find themselves renoun'd.
Whence Jars and sierce Contests the Soul's divide
Of Proved Commanders on the Royal side
Who so their An^mosities prefer,
^s Loyal Duty Slackens in this war;
And Judge it is brave if one another they,
In stead of Foes, by Arms attempt to slay.
To cease such Ills if our example may,
I Will gladly Fight as you propose the way.
And others te^ch, that competitions vye,
To turn their Force against the Enemy;
And less for Fame then for their King Employ
The Hectors part, as they his Foes destroy.
Now replied Lucas, I Am endeared more
Unto thy Soul, If possible, then before;
That with such Grandeur does conspire to raise
Example Jointly to our Loyal praise.
Which to attain the Motive first was mine,
The Applications Glory I grant Thine.
And ^ls the world thy Soul does war Approve,
N^ (...) ^he Blood or Spoil too many Love,
But t^ uphold thy Sovereigns right and Laws,
And with a heart unblemished serve his Cause.
No G^dy hopes or fury Leads thee on,
But worth to act what should be Glorious done.
Thus war's thy honor, and if decrees above
Permit that foes my Life shall first remove;
I beg of Heaven, that my then dying Face
May be last valued by thy Loved embrace.
This Caress passed, they next resolved to act
According as here told their Gallant pact.
And if our Muse can give their deeds a Glory,
They shall have lasting Fame within her story.
Now Rosaline within whose tender Breast,
Terror and bad presage had Grief Impressed.
And sinding though by Speech and blushes tried,
Flavira's heart could not be Mollify'd:
Who had, with disregard to other Merit,
Allowed to Lyle the most Heroique Spirit:
From whence might dangerous Emulations (...)
^f Fame did such discourse to Lucas bring.
And his sierce mind Incite for love of her,
His value by his peril to prefe^:
Occasion gave her sorrow to Revolve
The Apprehensions of her tender Soul:
As firmest Love her restless Fears did weigh
From her first waking time to end of day.
Nor could she take her soft repose at Night
For dismal Dreams that did her more assright.
By which she thought in Vision she beheld
Her Lucas wounded, or to Death compelled.
And Judging that her presence nor her Fears,
Or Love, though Interceding with her tears,
Could him, her Soul affected, now deter
From forwarding his Perils in this War:
Resolve she does her person to remove,
However obscure she grieved or died for Love.
A Servant old she had of firmest trust,
Whose Paps her Beauteous Infancy had Nursed:
Whom solely she acquaints with her Intent,
And why from Oxford she would now Absent:
Though to her grief, she did from him depart,
Whose Love she still must carry in her heart;
Wishing her Breast, when shot flies thick i^ field,
Might Interpose and be her Lovers shield.
Then asked her Nurse, if she could find a way
Unto some place where she unknown might stay.
To which her Matron Servant thus replied,
Your Gracious Mother sometime e're she died,
Me, by her will, your Gardianess designed,
No Less then Natural Mother to you kind:
E're since your Infant Lips first Sucked my breast,
And kissed as you did in my Bosom rest.
But why, my dearest Child, must your presage,
Even to despair, your Tender heart engage.
Don't other Beauties, this sad Time, behold
The Armed Lover, and observe when told
His Martial acts, although their gentle car
Would softer Sounds perhaps desire to hear:
Yet, who of these, Society or place
For this Cause leave, or sight of Warlike Face
By them beloved; And wherefore should you more
Then other hearts your Sorrow thus explore.
Grant me said Rosaline, by thy Compare,
More Tender Soul'd then many Lovers are:
And that when Drumms do beat or Trumpets Sound,
My Breast, by inward Grief, receives a wound:
Least their bold Summons should the armed hand
Of him I Love too desperately command.
Be this the Cause, or let thy Soul devise
Any for my remove, more kind, or wise.
Her careful woman having Pondered well
Her Ladies Grief, and Tears that from her fell;
Her sleep disturbed, and how she made her moan
In Love's ^ad accents as she walked alone:
Nor could her Lute, or Music of her Voice,
At which when heard Birds did in Groves rejoice;
Assuage the Apprehensions of her Soul,
The waves that in her heart did restless roll.
Unto Fair Rosaline, thus briefly said,
Loves Fear I see has your Loves torment Bred:
And hard it is, I Judge, by your remove
To leave behind the fears that spring from Love.
But since in being Spectator here you find
That terrors have their pastport to your Mind:
I can your Fair removal so contrive,
As Wars events shall not to your ears arrive.
And where, with welcome, you may seasons spend
By harmless ease till Battles have an end.
Guide me kind Foster-mother to the place,
Where I may that Content in Soul embrace:
And for my Lover there devoutly Pray
That Heaven may him defend each Fatal day.
Her wise attendant having these words weighed,
No longer did her Ladies stay persuade.
Since in that Juncture expectations were
Busied by dangers of ensuing war,
And rumor'd then that to perform some deed,
By boldest Prowess, Lucas stood obliged.
Wherefore she with her Ladies have conspires,
After she her had Clothed in sit Attires.
And over these a Black silk-robe had hung
To vail her visage as they passed on.
But for her own disgnise took no more care
Then on her head a Travelers hood to wear.
And thus Night come, they 'riv'd beyond the Line
Which Oxford works and Ramparts did confine.
When by few steps the appointed place they ^inde,
Whether a Trusty Sorvant was Assigned
To wait with Horses, on which mounted they
With all Convenient speed did have away.
Neatly the Virgin could her Palfrey guide,
Enured for pastime mettl'd steeds to ride:
And as hers sometimes now remisly trod,
His fault she told him by her rein, or rod.
With care her woman to direct her course,
Before her rid, though worse she ruled her horse.
Yet with best diligence Employed her eye,
That timely she might uncooth Tracts espy:
That from her Horses steps her Ladies might
The safest tread, as on they passed that Night.
No Pilate, Sailing dangerous Creek or straight,
When Orient Pearls the riches of his freight,
Could with more vigilance his Compass steer,
Then for her Lady was her woman's care.
Who knowing long that Countries site and coast,
From Roads she to less usual ways had Crossed,
Where least she thought might plundering Soldiers stray,
Or Troops that Foes by Starlight sought to slay.
And as securest way she thought to Choose,
Nights Gloom Increasing, the designed did loose.
This Guide now frighted for her Ladies sake,
And dangers might ensue from her Mistake:
No step her horse did tread on Leaf or Grass,
But she feared Notice gave where they did pass.
And if some spiry Bush by her was seen,
She doubted it might armed Man have been.
Her Lady seeing thus perplexed her guide,
To lead her boldly on, did foremost ride:
Imploring, from above, her Journey's aid,
Who was too Innocent to be afraid.
And thus she sometimes wrong and sometimes right,
Had forward led till hours near spent of Night.
When she by Chance a Candle did perceive
That from a Cottage some Small light did give.
Whither she rid and calling at the door:
A Hoory Dame, from spinning on her floor,
Opening her wicket, with a churlish flame,
At first word gave to her a Harlot's Name.
Saying, that she had lost both food and rest
By Drabs that with their Troopers her oppressed:
Nor doubted but such horrid Queans were they,
And swore she would not aid them if lost their way.
Old woman, said the Virgin, pray forbear
Words, that from bad mistake, offend my ear.
We to no other purpose hither came,
Save to enquire the road toward Buckingham:
Which I suppose thy Pity will not deny,
Or let this piece of Gold that kindness Buy.
The Money handled, soon the Belldame made
A homely Curtsey, and her pardon prayed:
Saying insooth Fair Mistress, I perceive
I was mistaken, since you frankly give.
We Countrey-folk, God wot, kind words best savor,
When they do likewise us with profit favor.
And wish that all as truly served their King,
As we take pains to get and love his Coin.
Your way, when passed this Gate, the right hand shows,
And whither you intend directly goes.
So hard it is a Kindness to Obtain,
Of Rugged Natures, unless won by Gain.
The knowing Matron by this little aid,
Her Ladies passage without error made.
Toward a forest where she did Intend
Their Journeys trouble should receive an end.
And thus they forward safely passed some Miles,
When Mornings face appeared with rosy smiles;
As Birds seemed Notes on purpose to prepare,
Thereby to ^en this soft Virgin's Care;
And bad pr^sage which often her mind did fill,
Who could not as she rode but Tears distill:
Or blamed sometimes her fear, though caused by Love,
That her from Lucas sight did thus remove;
And him, if wounded, not in person Aid,
Or by her Skill, Or Tears, his Balsom made.
Thus thoughts revolved within her troubled Breast,
As with her faithful woman on she past.
The Morning Smooth as was her Infant Face,
When Heaven did New born light in Skies first place.
Nor less Auspicious did appear the way
On which they forward rid that Early day.
No Terrible man beheld, or noise was heard,
That might their further Progress have dete^'d.
Until arrived unto a parting road
That led unto another by a Wood:
From whence, as if in Ambush laid before,
Of Armed Horsemen Twenty if not more,
By speech Outlandish, and of Visage Grim,
With rugged fury apprehended them.
And like a Dove, when by a Vulture seized,
This Virgin Beauty was by these surpised.
Whilst she, as Boistrously they her surround,
From ready thought had this expedient found;
As them, to spare rude search, she frankly gave
Her Coin and Gems, and what then all she would save,
A little Picture Jewels did adorn,
And next her breast for Lucas sake was worn.
When these they had, and from her woman too
Had taken what they found about her now;
Like fierce Banditti's that could not decide
How amongst them Stolen Booties to divide:
From horrid words to Oaths their threats arose,
And next prepared to force their keenest Blows.
Till some more Temperate did advise the rest,
That since by Power these women they possessed,
And things of value, dutcous 'twas that they
Should to Vanbralders presence them convey:
To whose Decision their contests should yield,
He being their Supreme Officer in Field.
Persuaded thus to stand to his award,
Their lovely Captive toward him they Guard.
No Beauteous Saint, when to be Martyred led
By Faces dreadful as the Gorgon's head:
Could more Serenely resolute appear,
Then Rosaline did amongst such figures here.
Walloone Vanbralder was, and hither came,
As Verse relates, to raise his Martial Name.
When many of his hardy That some Numbers of Walloons were entertained by the
41 Parliament, for their Military ^ervice, is well known to all that are
acquainted with that Time.
Nation were
Paid by the Houses to assist their War.
When this Bold Leader Rosaline had seen,
And well observed her Comely form and Mein:
His Looks were troubled and Amazed his Eyes,
Like one from sudden wonder felt surprise;
Unto his Breast Throbs did Allarums Beat,
And raised within a Lovers ardent heat.
T'^njoy her Person fully he inclined,
But by what Method no less posed his Mind:
So Love and Honor struggled in his Soul,
Where hard 'twas found to yield them jointly rule.
But now to seem Composed, however he meant
To Manage or Complete his Loves intent;
He kindly Bowed, and to her words addressed
That Gentle seemed; yet others with them mixed*
Which told that Martial Trust severe must be,
Against whoever befriend the Enemy:
Or such that might Intelligence Convey,
Though of her Sex, by any Subtle way.
Or should, excuse Me that I put the Case,
More to deserve some Chiefs desi^'d Embrace:
From Camp to Camp a Beauteous spy arrive*
And Teach him next our ruin to contrive.
A Crime like this the Houses did of late
Detect, in handsome Lady, *against their state.
Wherefore you must expect before you go,
That I your person will and business know:
Your taken Jewels you may have again,
But Lucas Picture shall with me remain.
The cause this whisper briefly shall declare,
And such as will require your kindest Ear.
What thought can guess how her Soul was perplex^,
As this man had thus coucht his amorous Text.
Whilst she, that for loves Pity only fled,
Must here detested Lovers Presence dread.
But since his words, at which her Soul took fright,
Had not as yet arrived to wicked height:
She thus with modest considence replied;
Justly by me your Inserence is denied,
Since I have nothing done against your cause,
Or what may Interfere with Martial Laws.
Wars daring Conflicts and their sierce result,
Have been my dread but never my consult.
And were the Motive of my Journey known,
Enough 'twould prove the truth which here I own.
Well I discern (said he) that Woman's thought
Can speciously evade or excuse fault.
But know that to my power no less it is free
To tax your Crime as it appears to Me:
Or send you to the Houses under Guard,
Who may you long Imprison before heard.
Though unto you I gentler am Inclined,
As to my heart your Beams do passage find.
Perhaps you will call this Love, and next expect
That honor should in Me cause its Neglect:
And you by Passport to your Hero send,
That story may my Temperance Commend.
To which, for glorious praise, I might comply,
Though Honor by that Act should Love deny:
Did not Me other obligation sway,
To discharge which, I must your person stay.
Then Venus, Martial Sir, it is I perceive
That has Commenced within you this Intr^gue.
And whence my persons safety you propose,
If with your wishes mine would kindly close?
Are you a Soldier, and thus guide your Charms,
Which Cupid would despise did he wear Arms.
Or is it some stratagem, I cannot discern,
That you in some loose Foreign Camp might learn.
Be It what it will, my Virtue I dare trust,
However to Honor you would appear unjust.
When this return, this Walloon-Chief did hear,
Guilt touched his Soul, where love would guilt endear;
Whilst as she Pleaded Virtues cause to him:
His lov's Transport he then did greatest deem.
Her Grace, looks, Speech, by Natures special Art,
He Judged designed Allurements to his heart:
And thought she did luxuriously adjust
That Beauty had no Virtue by her trust.
From this Course Principle he does design
How Fraud with Lust should wicked aid combine,
And by a fond device so manage Time,
As might complete his vile intended Crime.
And thus does by Fictitious Story tell
That sad disaster late had him befell:
As he a Beauty, to his Soul most dear,
Had lost by rude surprise this Time of War.
Perhaps concealed by some Chiefs rigid Power,
That but too soon her Person may deslower.
A Lady lately, whether her or no,
From full report I cannot certain know,
By Lucas was detained I understand;
If so, his Pledge in you is in my hand.
And if Exchange of Beauty compass may
Her wished return, yours shall her ransom pay.
But should I apprehend, which Heaven avert
From e're a^^^cting of her fair desert,
That any Impious Man, by Lustful force,
Has stained her Person to her Souls Remorse:
The same I Will act on you, unless I find
That your Embrace proceods from yielding mind.
Let chance the valiant Lucas hither Bring,
To fight at once for his Love's sake and King:
On Terms resolved defiance I Would express,
And tell that I his Rosaline possess.
This Synon-Lover having formed this Tale,
His wicked Ends pretextly to avail;
And by feigned Cause some seeming Grandieur add
Unto the Method of his being had:
Concludes, that soon his Subtle Terrors would
This Virgins mind unto his purpose mold:
And to her blushes join a yielding sense,
Till kisses won her total Complaisance.
Whose breast now filled with sorrow, and her eyes,
Like drops engend'ring in serenest Skies,
Though big with tears, yet did allow no grief,
By which, from this vile Man, she would ask relief:
But look upon him with a Scornful ray,
That more then words did her disdain convey.
Her faithful woman, though attending near,
Could, not the sense Vanbralder uttered, hear:
He having, aside some steps, her Lady took,
Before he had his lustful accents spoke:
Yet in her prospect of his dismal Face,
Where Red and Pale did varied Horrors place:
His rough aspect and eyes that siercely rolled,
As Comets when Prodigious Acts foretold;
She saw her Ladies danger, and by Tears,
Shed in abundance, did imply her Fears.
And with a woman's fury next designed
T'upbraid the fervor of his wicked mind:
Or else to kill him by some proper way,
Though Guarded by his Troops, in open day.
And if the Fact her Lady could defend,
She Would gladly forfeit life to give his End.
But otherwise it was above decreed,
That this Libidinous Foreign Chief should bleed.
Whose hasty Scouts to him now Tidings brought
Of Marching Powers, on good Terms might be fought:
Their Numbers less then he Commanded there,
And to the next Campaign arrived were.
Adding that Lucas as Intelligence said,
Before them as Supreme Commander Led.
When fierce Vanbralder heard brave Lucas's name,
He bid a Guard surround the Beauteous Dame:
And next, her to some rising space convey,
Whence she might view the action of that day:
And with what Courage he would her Hero Fight,
Or kill him, if he could, her love to spite:
Then with stern visage does a march Command,
Till near arrived where did Embattled stand
His valiant Foes, and next a halt he makes,
And to his Trumpetter this Message speaks.
Tell Lunas, if he Leads the Troops I see,
That here Vanbralder stands his Enemy:
Not only as I act the Soldiers part,
But as a Lover more ^n^lam'd my heart.
The Object I admire he will pronely guess,
When told that I fair Rosaline possess.
And might allege, if his belief 'twould gain,
That cause besides does bid me her retain.
Who am from chance of War perhaps of late,
In my lost Mistress full unfortunate.
As just it is, that I his Lady stay:
And if occasion calls, some future day,
Her person as a fair exchange allow
For her I lost, and would recover now.
This Picture too which Rosaline did wear,
As his Loved figure, to him likewise bear.
When Lucas this strange Errand understood,
Horror and rage fomented in his Blood.
And to express his Detestation said,
What Theory has vicious Man displayed
Like him who does Ingloriously confer
Fowlest dishonor on the Name of War:
And observations more Fruitful make
When heinous presidents from Camps they take:
As if their Circuits, which the Schools should be
Of Ethics raised to bravest dignity,
Did worst conducters unto Vice contain,
Or such, who pronest Lives with vileness stain.
Wherefore for Honors Cause, and Glorious War,
Against him my Soul and Sword desiers are.
And if my Arms cannot Rosaline relieve,
May Heaven her Virtue happy safety give.
Enough I Have spoke, and let Vanbralder know,
My Trumpet soon a warlike charge shall Blow.
This Messenger returned; in Martial form
They led their Powers: so Pilots, when a Storm
Is near approached, with utmost conduct try
To s^em the adverse Waves their Enemy.
Loud neigh'd the Horse, and with erected Ear
Fierce noise of War courageously did hear.
Whose eager strength would fain his Guider slight,
And without Reins now carry him to Fight:
Whilst as the Surface hears his Trampling Feet,
Earth sounds, and vents a Feverish fume and heat.
Tedious was time by Gallant Lucas thought,
Until his opposits he closely fought:
Impuls'd at once for his Kings cause to kill,
And Loves revenge, which fury did instill:
And as their Forces now just meeting were,
Vanbralder does aloud to his declare:
That who of them so boldly could succeed,
As to leave Lucas on the Surf^ce dead:
With Plumes and gifts he should rewarded be
For killing his Chiefs hated Enemy.
Smartly alike both sides their onsets made,
And first with shot no time of death delayed.
Yet scarce a man had room, when killed, to fall;
As close they fought in Warlike posture all.
So poised their courage and their strength of Horse,
As neithers shock a while had greatest force.
When Steeds did opposite Steeds with Fury Bite,
That could not spurred bear Ryders on to Fight.
Whose shining Swords, as yet not coming nigher,
Enforced from their keen clashings sparkling sire.
And sometimes severed by their Strenuous blows,
Instead of Limbs, the Weapons of their foes.
Till Lucas, Lyon-like, his way did Force,
Killing a stout Commander of their horse,
And with his wounding Sword attained Room
For other Valors after his to Come.
Whilst thus he charged, three fierce and huge Walloons
Attacked his Person, to one of which deaths wounds
He swistly gives, and kills the Second so
That boldly sought, and some think hurt him too.
The Third Man, seeing this, away did fly,
And dis-inhearten'd his strong side thereby.
Which by degrees, as Lucas Troops pressed on,
Did Courage slack and from their Fury run.
Bold and upright, then all more Big and Tall,
Vanbralder rid, and with stern voice did call
His Militants to kally, or he Swore
By lot the Tenth man else should dye, or more.
Expressing what a shame it was to them
On Foreign Soil to fly or desert him.
And though by words he could but few persuade,
Yet with those few, to charge, resolved he stayed.
When Lucas in pursuit near him arrived,
And by his Plumes and Scars the Man descried
To be the person he that day had sought,
And would on Loves account have chiefly fought:
He bids, with ready voice, the Walloon know,
That he might singly fight with Lucas now.
Who would not by success or Numbers stay
Him yet from gaining a victorious day:
If by Encount'ring hand to hand he would try
Which of them two in Field should boldest dye.
Glad was Vanbralder to receive this word,
And charged him home with Pistoll-shot and Sword.
The first of which had almost Lucas stunned,
Though not enforcing any Bloody wound,
As against his Headpiece did the Bullet light,
And left thereon a sign of this fierce sight.
But Lucas, soon recovering, near him got,
Hoping to kill this mighty man with shot:
Unto whose face his Pistol he advanced,
Which would not sire however so it chanced.
And now their Combat was to end by Sword;
And one would judge that Method did afford
No small advantage to this huge Walloon,
Who had so vast a Weapon of his own.
Or near as great as that appears to Eyes
That in th'Tower for Conqueror William's lies.
As here this mighty Sword Vanbralder weilds,
Whose Edge he thought would cut through hardest shields,
A furious blow he at Brave Lucas makes,
Who by his steeds quick motion it escapes:
And, by a Nimble manage, turned again,
He Cuts his Foes hand off and bridle Rein:
Whose furious Horse, thus sreed from rule by Bi^,
Disdains his riders Weight should on him sit:
And boundeth often unto a wondrous height,
As this, or that way moves his ruleless might:
Till down a Precipice he takes his way,
And does by fall his Mighty Master slay.
Thus Providence did death Vanbralder give,
Whose Soul, in Body, was too bad to live.
The King's Troops many, besides Walloon foes,
Killed here of English we may well suppose:
But to what Number Fighters fell that day,
Our Muse does no Particulars convey.
Though near a thousand Horse on each side fought,
If from her Computation deeds be sought.
What strange dis^ay by fears and doubts was then
The A^^^iction of the Beauteous Rosaline:
Who Guarded by Vanbralders Power might see
The Bloody Toils of that days Victory.
And more concerned in Soul perhaps beheld
Her beloved Lucas engaged in that Field
With Stout Walloo^s, or huge Vanbralders might,
As they two did in Terrible Combat fight.
Who having fully now dispersed his Foes,
To free her Person next he boldly goes.
Whom ^ierce Vanbralder had placed under guard,
Which now its bold Attendance soon discharged:
After beheld the fortune of this day,
And to prevent their danger fled away.
When he to her arrived and saw a space
The ghastly paleness of her lips and Face:
And how her Cheeks were sometimes drawn awry,
Like Mortal whom Convulsive sits do ply;
And as the fixed Stars appear in Skies,
Moveless beheld the Glory of her Eyes.
And thus within her woman's arms she lay,
Who diligent was by every careful way
Her Lady in Life's conflict to Assist,
And by her help her grievous pains resist:
As sometimes she her Beauteous Temples strok'd,
Or had by Prayers and Tears heaven's aid Invoked.
In have had Lucas from his steed removed,
Yet feared to see the face of her he Loved:
As he beheld her Cheeks Impaired of red,
And features, like remains of Beauty dead.
When from his Souls deep anguish thus he said;
If Speech by me to Rosaline here Made
Can passage find, and welcome from her ear,
It Is begged that she would think Lucas now does fear:
And that his Soul that never yet could weep,
Or suffer from his breast a sigh to creep,
When his blood by most desperate wounds was shed;
Or seen in fields his bravest friends lie dead:
Does both, as he her danger does behold;
And if his Lips from hers could remove cold,
He Would willingly by it Loves power explore,
If that might her Life's pristine warmth restore:
At Least he would take it as his Last farewell;
If her Soul must on earth no longer dwell.
But whilst he thus did his Lov's passion vent,
Her woman on her Ladies Cure intent,
Had from a Violl Cordiall-drops conveyed,
Which Polyasters skill it is thought had made,
And 'twixt her Lips disposed so much of them,
As did her Life from Danger soon redeem.
Though to that weakness brought she scarce could speak,
As by the hand he kindly her did take:
Whilst all she uttered was but to express
Why she removed, and love of him Confess.
Which soon he granted, who before perceived
The Cause that had her Gentle Temper grieved:
And how for love of him, and kindest fear,
She had withdrawn to her disaster here.
Yet would not further passages relate,
That to her Mind disquiet might create:
And chiefly did conceal how with brave Lyle
He had conspired to Ryvall Martial Toil.
But to oblige heroickly her Sense,
From his Souls Greatness did these words dispense.
Sorry is Lucas that he now must ^ay
That he cannot Love appoint a Nuptial day:
Since vowed I am that Hymen never shall light
Taper for me, till Rebels cease to sight:
Nor Houses sit that by obtruded vote
Dare Arms in Field against their King promote.
But when with smoothest Brow peace yields her smiles,
And rightful war requires no more my Toyls:
I Will then fair Rosalines embrace desire,
And meet her wishes with a Lovers fire.
Till when to Heaven's protection I Will her leave,
And place she Judges best may her receive.
Or where she least may of fierce Battles hear,
Or what in them my Martial perils are:
And whenso'ere I full perceive their end,
The welcome News to Rosaline I Will send.
In whose behalf her woman does declare,
Her Lady, as yet weak, and speech would spare,
That well the Method he proposed conspired
With what, by present thought, she most desired:
Assuring him that when they fixed on place,
He should have notice in Convenient space.
Being thus resolved, and by Brave Lucas seen
That in few Minutes perfectly Serene
The Beauteous form appeared of Rosaline,
And strength restored by wondrous Medicine:
He gently lifts her to her Saddles seat,
And, with his kindest farewell, kissed her feet.
And that she might the more securely ride,
Appoints, to aid her way, a knowing guide.
But to what place her person she withdrew,
My Muse, in proper time, Intends to show.
Whilst valor, Loyalty, and Love's high Glory,
Commends this Hero's worth to future story.
Who having then obtained a Glorious day,
With Trumpets Sound he Marched his designed way.
Thus raging war fermented every where,
By Fates decree, this most unhappy year:
In which the King, though much his Force Impaired,
As against him had the Houses four years warred;
Their Interest Mighty and no less their power,
From Londons Endless Srength, and Treasures store:
Was Northward Marched, as many did suppose,
T'encounter in those Regions Scottish Foes;
Who would not Grant that duty should compel
Their Persons in their colder Clime to dwell:
And Southward to Assist the Houses came,
Their Friends by League, but with more zealous slame
Their bold partakers as they hoped to share
Treasures and Spoils of England by this War.
Yet nearer then these, Enemies were found,
That against the King, at that time did abound.
Thus was great Leicester filled with fighting Men,
That the King might not there have passage then:
But be repulsed in case he should assay,
To Curb that daring City in his way.
The King his Summons sends to this bold Town,
Which, like to others Principled, did own,
That Royal Power did not of right Command,
Whilst it the Houses Arms in Field withstand.
So far Allegiance badly then decayed,
As Men by Power or Interest were swayed.
Affronted thus, the King soon Storms the place,
Which Stiffly did resist some few hours space:
Till often attaqu'd by res'lute Foot and Horse,
Like Boistrous Waves that break through Bays by force,
This City they by Strenuous onset take,
And with its Spoils their numbers richer make.
This Action great, yet Signally must be,
By the Permissive will of Heavens decree,
The last Successful that the King obtained,
As he by Arms his Crown and Life maintained.
Forward the King meant to have Northward gone,
His Soldiers heightened by this City won:
And were for number and reputo the Flower
Of his remaining Millitary Power.
But soon diverted was his designed course;
As Fairfax led his sierce New modeled force
In sight of Oxford, and dread to Create,
Seemed, Siege-like, there his Army to dilate.
Hoping that Town, the Kings Force not at hand,
Durst not, if frighted well, his Power withstand.
Nor did he want Intelligence within,
That could avail him from A Remarkable Parasite and Traitor as he is de^^ri^^d
in the Third Book of this Poem.
Sydesmonds Sin:
Or others by the Houses money paid,
As useful Tidings they to them conveyed.
The Queen who with her Court and Ladies there
Resided then, what unkind cause of fear
Did this Appearance to her bosom bring,
Though the dear Consort to a Mighty King:
Since Londons furious Senate durst decree
Her Person Guilty cause their Enemy:
And that she like a Kings Imperial Wife,
Endeavored to preserve his Crown and life.
When her concern was by Fame's speedy wing
Carried unto the most Indulgent King:
He as a Lover and a Sovereign Chief,
Resolved to give his Heroin Queen relief.
The EIGHTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Fairfax does sometime before Oxford stay.
The Queen a prospect of his Army takes.
A Martial Habit's by Flavira worn,
In which she deeds to wonder does perform.
Sydesmond subtle Cromwell does deceive
For private Gain, not service of his Prince.
Naisby's Fierce Battle, and the fatal loss
The Crown there suffers, after which the King,
His Forces every where declining, is
By the vile Armies power sometime Restrained;
And next Imprisoned in the Isle of Wight.
SMall was at Oxford Loyal hearts repose,
As Eyes there saw how bold and numerous Foes
Begirt the Town, and as appeared days light
Allarum'd all within to Arm for Fight:
If as Defendants Bulwarks they would maintain,
And posts that did least Fortified remain;
Or for more Glory skirmishes design
By daring parties led beyond their Line.
Whilst youthful Students Colleges forsake,
And Pikes and Guns, to defend Science, take.
To lead whom Gravest of the Long Robe joined,
And unto Arms their Pupills disciplined:
Inciting them from apt and Learned Phrase,
To Merit, Next the Muses, Martial praise.
When the fair Queen and Ladies of her Court
Early awaked, and with a Glorious port
Ascended to a Turret raised on high,
That faced the thick arrayed Enemy.
Where being seated, by each Mean and Grace,
She added to the splendors of her Face:
Or such from Grandeur of her Blood relate
To Daughter of French Henry the Great.
And now Magnanimously beheld the force
Of her Opposers ranks of Foot and Horse:
Their Martial equipage and daring Spirit,
And what their valors she allowed might Merit
Did they by rightful War their King assist,
Or Foreign powers by his Command resist.
Next pitying their bold errors dropped a Tear,
Whose Soul, in perils, never had wept for fear.
The Female Nobless waiting round the Queen,
Like lesser Stars in Constellations seen,
When one of supreme Magnitude and height
Appears the most conspicuous to sight:
By aptest words did sev'rally extol
The serene worth of her Majestic Soul:
Wishing that for her sake, Time did allow,
As heretofore when Dames used dart and bow,
That they might with Men hardy Courage vye,
And force them, when arrayed, by arms to ^^y.
This Glorious Spectacle by Fairfax seen,
And known that there spectator ^ate the Qu^^n:
His Modesty, that always did attend
Actions that do his Va^our most commend,
Produced his Blush, and thought his Cause less brave,
As their perfections it desiance gave.
But Cromwell hating all superior sway,
And Legal power which Subjects should obey:
Projected had in his aspiring thought,
How he would to supreme height himself promote:
As gradually the Ligaments of State,
He Would sever, and vile Factions animate;
That in the end he might subvert the Throne,
And Line of British Kings so famous known:
And in this juncture gladly would have gained
This Town, where for security remained
The Queen and Royal Children, whom to surprise
He now and after blackly did devise.
And calling Hugon, on whose preaching part,
Aided besides it is thought by Magick-Art,
He much relied to fascinate the Soul,
And spirit Men against their Sovereigns rule:
To him thus said, well I discern thy Gifts
In Prayer and Preaching, and such Spiritual shifts
As do Enthusiasms usefully disperse,
For which I cannot enough thy Fame rehearse;
When I revolve that quaintest Pulpit-cheat
Could but thin schisms heretofore dilate:
Whilst thy Insinuations Men incite
To Aid our Cause, yet know not why they sight.
Which Mighty Nothing, from thy Preached sense,
Does fruitful use of Souls to us dispense.
Over Church and State Faith's Chaos first must spread,
E're here Created Rule Improveth dread.
Then Hugon hugs, and bids him apt Texts find
T'^nstruct their Forlorn hopes when next designed.
To which this Canting Imp did thus reply,
What words enough can Cromwell magnify:
Fairfax too meanly were to you compared,
As you for Brain and Valor stand revered.
Heaven has throughout your Visage Sprinkled grace,
Like Moses shines your elect Nose and face.
Each of your Features do by Semblance speak
A Scripture Hero, and his Context make.
When to New England banished for a Crime,
By Prelates held Sedition at that time,
In dream I there Prophetique Vision had;
And saw, as now, your Person Armed and ^lad.
And how at Marston-Moor a Cannon shot,
By Miracle swarv'd, that else had missed you not.
For Joy asleep I smiled, and will some day
To applaud you my dream in Pulpit say.
Accept this List, in which you will some perceive,
That to our Cause their lives will fearless give:
^,
^ and Plot.
Their Courage ^^tly will this Town oppose:
(Where Bookmens rules assist our greatest foes)
The Goths that sacked old Superstitious Rome,
Did not more fierce destroyers thither come,
Then these would Oxfords Libraries despoil,
And Profligate the Studious Gownmens Toil.
Thy Catalogue, said Cromwell, I embrace;
And for facin'rous deeds against this place,
Such Principles and Swords I will Employ,
As, Our Foe, prating Science, shall destroy.
And thou a Spiritual Renagado known,
Our Army shall for that Compliance own
Thee Chaplain-General, and Empowered to preach
Sworded when e're thou men would boldest teach.
To aid our counsels few we must s^elect,
Though in that manage Fairfax we neglect:
Or else allure his easy Nature on,
To forward deeds he meant not should be done.
But now the motions of this Town let us see,
And how to oppose prepared the Enemy.
Mean while Flavira, who from height of Mind
Fame to her Sex and beauty had designed:
And would not grant that Natur's elder choice,
Or cu^^om, deemed by her man's partial voice,
Should Prowess most on Sex of men confer,
And Value heightened by their deeds in war:
Excluding women by a tender Name,
And habit, from advent'ring life for fame.
Or seldom raised to higher future Glory,
Then to adorn, with Men, a painted Story.
And next Magnanimously does disdain
That woman's habit should her Soul restrain
From such Atchievments, Hero's might admire,
And in her brave esteem, her Sex raise higher.
Discreetly weighing the Commanding Cause,
That Subjects called to Fight for King and Laws.
And though no woman Summoned it to Aid,
None were forbid, she judged, if not afraid.
Nor did she doubt but in Lyles Gallant Mind
Her virtues would sublimer value ^inde:
If as her Soul his valor did esteem;
His might, on that account, her worthyer deem:
And by alternate Glory next Improve
The estimate of Fame as well as Love.
But her designs she so resolved to Guide,
As for Flavira she would be not espied:
Whilst habited like man to fields she would go,
And there encounter with the warlike Foe.
Her woman-dresser did not now explore
Further her Ladies sense then told before:
Thinking that to raise Mirth, by some Surprise,
She did intend her person to disguise.
Or from her love of Arms and sprightly Mind,
To visit the Kings Camp, thus clad designed.
Perhaps that valiant Lysle might there confess
How well she did become a Heroine dress.
But this she might intend her waiter thought,
When way from Oxford might be safer sought:
Or chiefly to take pleasure in her glass,
By seeing how, Armed, her Figure Beauteous was.
By quick degrees her Lady she undrest,
And on her slender Body placed a Vest,
For mode and Color like the youthful wear,
Of such as Gayest then led Troops of war.
Next compassed round her tender wast with Steel,
Which though her pain she seemed no pain to feel.
Upon her helmet a white Cross was placed,
To show that Spotless Faith her valor graced,
And Just defyance of the bloody Crime
Of Boundless Heresies that Fatal Time.
A Negro Page she for attendant took,
That to her Horse and Arms would careful Look:
Charging her woman, if inquiry made
Of means by which she undiscerned conveyed
Her personal remove, she was to say
The wonder must remain to future day.
When in convenient time she should receive
Notice to come and serve (...) if alive.
And mounted on her Steed by ea^ly day,
Through Lanes and Streets she took the privat'st way,
Till beyond Oxfords outworks she had Joined
With Forces for stout Skirmishes designed.
Where with a dauntless ear she heard the Noise
Of Canon, that most terribly destroys;
And saw how shot off heads from bodies fiew,
And Comely Limbs whose want the Owners slew.
Nor brandished weapons, nor the arrayed field,
Or grimmest looks which Foes embattell'd yield
Could her concern, as with a gentle Brow
These Horrors with contempt, she then did view.
Whilst boldly weilding of her Naked Sword;
She thought it is bright reflection did afford
More beauty to her face then e're before
She from her clearest Mirror could explore.
And like some youthful Squire that had abroad
Attained in Camps a generous warlike Mode:
She courteously to Militants then speaks
As room amongst their marshall ranks she takes.
Adding besides, their courage to Incite,
The Causes Just concern for which they sight.
And how though young, She early had Inclined
To season with best fortitude her Mind.
Whilst other Tempers, if but sine in face,
To meaner charms, in stead of War's gave place.
As she had thus expressed some Troops appear
That to attaque her Party ordered were.
Which when observed, she blamed Cheifs of her side
That now too slow, she thought to charge did guide,
Longing to come to Strenuous handy blows,
And dye her Maiden Sword in Blood of Foes.
Engage they sharply did, and for a while
Fairfax his Party something did prevail:
For they selected Bodies were of Men,
By Cromwell held most Zealous sighters then.
But soon Flavira, wanting other guide,
Did rally into Form her worsted side:
And by renewing of the Charge again,
Not only did the opposi^g Force restrain:
But them pursuing to their body threw
A hand Granade, which firing diverse slew.
Some tell it near to Cromwells Horse did light,
As with reserves he seconded the sight:
But howsoever same does her deeds report,
It Is sure that he observed her brave effort:
And blamed his Soldiers 'cause they could not slay
One that so boldly fought their Rancks that day.
And swore, by Lord of Hosts, that they should try
Once more to slay this daring Enemy.
For sure some Spirit it is, or not the least
Of Devils in a lusty Popish Priest:
As by the Cross I plainly apprehend,
That does upon the Youngsters H^lmet stand.
Such Crossing Enemies I Would first dest^^^,
That with their Catholic Arms our Cau^oy.
And will be Loyal to their Sovereigns trust,
Though his Laws their Faiths safety don't adjust.
Away and lose no time by longer halt,
Lest valor cool e're you again assault.
It Is but a party, however ^old they are,
And yours is more if Numbers we compare.
Our General would scorn it should be said,
That he detached more Troops to give you aid*
And if you cannot leave all that party dead,
I Will him reward that but the Crosiers head
To me presents: a Superstitious fool,
That after Crossing fights without a Rule.
Commanded thus, they readily assail,
And hope their valors ^iercely may prevail.
When Oxfords Chiefs no less courageous led,
That both sides received loss from Numbers dead.
But this could not Phanatique Fury stay,
Which through the opposing party sorc'd its way.
That in some haste the bravest did retire,
Whilst Friends and Foes Flaviras Soul admire.
Who sometimes turning fought, then sled to sight,
Then ^iercely wheels and destroys Foes by sight.
A many blows at her opposers struck,
Yet blamed their force when viewed her beauteous look.
Perhaps rejoiced as by indulgent chance,
Their Swords her face did miss, and sideway glance.
If so her visage pleased in Ragefull toil,
What man would not admire her kindest smile.
And as she thus engaged, some sighters stayed,
That boldly fought for her defense and aid:
When ^the^s rallying, onsets made again,
And did their ground successfully maintain.
Till ^ence ^ad obliged 'em to retire,
As they beheld more Numerous parties nigher,
Which Fairfax from his mighty Camp had brought,
And could not be by power of Oxford sought.
When Cromwell saw his parties forced retreat,
Whom most Flavira's Courage did defeat,
He bit his Tongue for rago, and cursed in mind,
As bloudily revenge he then designed.
And could not in his Visage for a space,
Compose the usual Cousenage of his face.
Till looks and speech conspired his Canting way,
Or when for wicked ends he would fast and pray.
Vowing that for the Crossed Champions sake,
He Would vengeance on that Christian (...) ^ke.
For as in front, a Cross that figure bore,
Who was by Metaphor a Romish Whore,
So in the Forehead of each Church we see
Erected is a Harlots Dignity.
Wherefore 'twill well become our Zealous ^lame
To ruin Crosses, and so Churches mai^,
That Saints before most comely figured there,
May without Nose or Limbs provoke our jeer.
And sure his power by Time was bolder known,
That Silver-shrin'd Diana melted down,
And her admired Temples structure razed,
Then he, by holy Cost, there first her placed.
Hugon when heard these words did laugh for joy,
Since thus Commissioned Churches to destroy:
And plunder from within them what was left,
Since Abbys fall enriched their growing Sect.
And next declared, although by Heavenly will,
They did not then the daring Crosier kill:
That better 'twas as he would disperse a tale,
Which more, then killed the Imp, should them avail.
And how True-Protestant Children to devour,
This serious thing was sent by Romish power:
And unto wonder could, instead of Meat,
A Wooden Cross with Superstition Eat.
And, should the King prevail, had power from thence,
T'a^ict our sleshly friends by Penitence.
And force our Dames, that Thimbles, Bodkins, wear,
By Crosses figured on 'em Crimes to fear.
This I consess last audience I forgot,
As I had long discoursed of other plot.
Cromwell, the Tale approved, and bid when next,
On this occasion, he should choose a Text:
To Fairfax so to preach as might his Soul,
Unto their change designed, devoutest Fool.
And now bids Hugon him amuse by Prayer,
Made against Kingly Rule and Spiritual Power,
Whilst Cromwell would with Ireton Counsels join,
That sitter was to further their design.
Yet, though some days faced Oxford, little more
Their Army did then was performed before.
Now had the Sun, within the Western Main,
Some hours his Steeds refreshed, as Poets fain.
When the Moon's Orb with Stars, Nights twinkling eyes,
Arose to comfort Earth with Beams from Skies.
A season that designing Man fits best,
Whilst others would Indulge their harmless rest.
When Fairfax had strict Guards near Oxford set,
That passers thence and spies might Intercept,
Of which some had detained a single man,
Who from that City hastily moved then;
Like Cassock'd Scholar Grave his Robe appeared,
And no less Reverend seemed his face and beard;
For Priest they took him, which enough that time,
If but for Function sake, was deemed a Crime.
And searching of him found a written pass,
By the Queens Royal hand inscribed was.
Death in worst shape they unto him declare,
Thinking, for Popish Fighters, he made Prayer,
Or with the Armed Crosier Joined of late,
Whose Valor boldly did their force defeat.
Smiling he heard their threats, and told that he
Would Cromwell, if brought to him, satisfy.
To whom conducted, Cromwell took no care
Further a while t'inspect the man's affair:
Or thought to hang him without more ado,
Since that he was a Priest he judged true.
Till he maturer some concerns did weigh,
That possibly this Man could soon betray,
Either as Fear of death or torture might
His Soul unto discovery affright.
And taking him apart, the man he found,
To be Sydesmond, to his purpose sound:
Who holding of his false beard in his hand,
Like part on stage that undisguis'd does stand,
Fawning Address he thus to Cromwell makes:
See Famous Chief what pains Sydesmond takes,
That dangerously his person does Commit
To diverse perils whilst Employed his wit,
For your Assistance, and the Cause you serve,
What'ere of King and Queen such deeds deserve.
Kind Lady, she her pass-por^ ^e allowed,
That none might me Impede when I removed
Where Royal powers Command, in hope that I,
As promised 'twas, would against yours prove a spy.
I took the pass that you might better see
The Considence these Sovereigns have in me.
Whilst I do now my utmost Care Employ
That they may Oxfora's rule small time Enjoy:
And how Triumphantly your Army may
This Teeming Fagle and her young ones Slay.
Observe this persons Name I here present,
Whom I corrupted have to my Intont.
And shall to you betray an Oxford-port,
By which the Town you will gain by small effort.
But first I must make good the Promised Coin
That is assured him upon word of mine.
Not doubted by the Houses that for gain
Unto their Cause, I such Intrigues maintain.
Cromwell embraced the Motion, and professed
Sydesmond was most dear unto his Breast:
And should Advantages to come receive,
By which his favor richly he would perceive,
Since he endeavored so their power to aid,
As Martial prospects would be surer made.
And who'd not in a Per'lous Journey Try
The shortest way, if more Secure thereby.
Here take this Gold, and let the Care be thine,
In proper time, to perfect this Design.
The Coin Sydesmond takes, and when alone
Laughed well to think how smooth his cheat had gone.
And that by his device he could Cajoal,
The subtle Cromwell's disbeleiving Soul.
Since neither Hell nor he did know the man
That would give up a Port in Oxford then.
And was a fiction for his ends devised,
And by his craft might be enough disguised;
As things at Oxford changed, or aid arrived,
E're this design, if true, could be contrived.
And hasting his return unto the Queen,
'Twas sure he told her not with whom he would been.
Who by a tale well feigned another way,
Expected from her bounty thanks and pay.
The Senat's Army that before this Town
Some days had staid and nothing Signal done:
Drew off, referring unto future Hour
What might be there effected by their Power:
Either as Force or Powerful Gold should aid
Designs, that might in time be surer laid.
Having from best Intelligence now heard,
That the King did his Northern March retard.
And after Leicester by Storm bravely won,
Designed to guide his Army toward this Town.
Least in his absence Oxford straightened were;
And siege, or Storm make his Foes Victors there.
Fairfax who had with res'lute Cromwell thought,
Time long e're they the Royal Army fought:
Their numbers great, and full composed of Men
That against the King were siercest fighters then:
Resolved with all convenient have to find
Some fit Campaign where Battle might be joined.
Oxford thus freed, and Supernumeraries there
Which well the Town could in that juncture spare:
The Prudent Queen and Council did detach
Troops thence of Cavaldry strictly charged to March
Unto their Sovereigns Camp the nearest way,
And boldly aid him on next Battles day.
With these Flavira, full resolved that fame
Should to her Martial deeds give lasting name,
Like some young Hero rides a Voluntier,
To meet in far Campaign's severest War.
Di^a's Form, when brightest Armed in Field,
Could never such chaste and sprightly lusters yield,
As did her comely Beams and Warlike Grace;
Ensoul'd by Mars, though Venus was her Face.
And Journeying thus till Night for rest did call,
The worst bed sometimes to her Lot did fall.
Yet with no Niceness, Beauties resin'd Care,
She did that way her persons hardship spare.
Nor doubts my Muse that such shift then she made,
Though seeming Man, that none were with her Laid.
Whose Last days march more admired then the rest,
As accidents are by our verse expressed:
Has such relation unto persons here,
As will to wonder, speak their shame or fear.
A Yeoman's wife, handsome, young and Gay,
Black-eye'd, to boot, whence darts slew Cupid's way:
Was Landlady when from these Troops did come,
Commanders to her house for quarter-Room.
Amongst whom Flavira did arrive unknown,
And hoped, within her walls, to ly alone.
The Beauteous housewife, as does story tell,
Loved youthful Soldiers Dalliance full well:
And was especially it is thought that Night,
Enamored of one there of goodly plight.
Her Husband old and Jelous to despair,
Observed her looks abroad, at home, at prayer:
And if her eye betrayed a wanton Roll,
It deeply frighted his Suspicious Soul.
But she found means to keep his humor low,
Lest his words should her Amorous Genius show;
Saying that man does worst himself Cornute,
That from suspicion would discourse promote:
And how their Gentile quarterers might Complain,
If she to welcome them, should Smiles restrain.
For which some Testy husbands in that time
Plundered had been to punish their harsh Crime.
This Motive most the Covetous man Cajoled,
Who above all things feared to lose his Gold.
At Supper pleased they stoutly fed and quass'd,
And with the Beauteous house-dame talked and Laughed.
And as amongst Chiefs here Brave healths went round.
Their Trumpets did a cheerful music sound.
When fair Flavira, as in Course arrived
The Cup to her, had some excuse contrived:
Or that it would not with her health conspire
To drink beyond what nature did require.
Until a Health, to famous Lyle begun,
To her was offered as it passed along:
Who blushing could not choose but kindly sip
The Liquor as this Health required her lip.
Which some observed, who little did suspect
That love did, in her Visage, blush effect;
And thought it caused from want of use and Mien,
That this supposed youth was bashful seen,
As he to War amongst jolly Hero's came,
And did by modest looks their License blame.
Some questioned if in Beauteous Man there were
Form that with her smooth figure might compare:
Or singly wished that their chance so should light,
As they, in Bed, might solve their doubt that night.
Supper well past, and time of rest being come,
The better sort had Beds within that home:
But so far straighten'd, as the most of those
Did there with Bedfellows accept repose.
Unto Flavira's lot a sole Bed fell,
Because pretending that she was not well.
Or was hers by the House-dam's special Grace,
Who ready was t'oblige a Comely face.
A transom Lattise did divide that Room,
Where to another Bed one was to come,
That had been to the gay House-Mistriss known,
And for her sake was not to lie alone.
Her Husband next she carefully disposed
To watch his house, lest if in bed reposed,
Some Camp retainers to these Persons might
Imbezzell from the House his goods that night.
Her Husband thus employed, the Gayfull Dame
To the appointed Bed and Lover came.
But e're they fitted were for full Embrace:
Her Jelous Husband, by a stealing pace,
Himself by Moonlight to the Room conveyed,
And on Flavira's bed along he laid:
Which well he knew might one Man lodging spare,
And was convenient for his eye and ear.
So zealous is Man's jealousy to find
Facts that when known do most afflict the mind.
The Virgin waked, and feared 'twas some Man,
By drink made ruleless, that disturbed her then.
And as she was resolving soon to rise,
His gentle whisper he to her applies,
Desiring she would a while her self contain
Within her Bed, and quiet there remain:
If she, at his request, would prove so kind
To him that sadly grieved was in mind.
These wo^s she heard --
But could not their intended sense desine,
Or what he lying by her might design:
Till Judging that he did her Sex mistake,
She seemed to rest and to him nothing spoke
Whilst ear he closely to the Lattise laid,
And heard the Jog's within his Wifes bed made:
At which he sighed, but sighed with greater pain
As he lov's motion heard renewed again.
Flavira wondering why the man thus grieved,
And judging he might be by help relieved:
Naked, unto her smock, from bed she rose,
Intending to put on her Manly Clothes.
When from the Amorous Wife the Gallant came,
And clasped her round with a surprising flame.
The Virgin soon for her defense prepared,
As thus he, in his shirt, to her appeared.
When he by earnest words did much desire
That she would now unto her bed retire;
And net, whatever she guessed, the fact disclose
That had that time disturbed her soft repose.
His last request she grants, and smiled in thought
At the adventures which that night had brought.
And next her habit for her March put on,
That she from this bad quarter might be gone.
How afterward did Man and Wife agree,
My Muse thinks no concern to her, or me.
Though she deplores the vices of that time,
Too pronely then the Royal Parties crime.
Strong in Recruits and Valiant force the King
His Army did to fatal Naseby bring.
Not dismaller was Romes Th^ssalia^ f^^e,
When Pomp^y there overthrown and Roman State,
Then the Essusion here of Loyal blood,
By wicked Arms that King and Laws withstood.
The Mornings Called Aurora by Poetical denomination.
Queen soon clouded did appear,
And seemed her mournful Purple Robe to wear;
As she did her sad Throne Ascend that day,
And saw the hapless King his Powers array.
When Fairfax against him did Embattell'd stand,
That Fortune might be won by armed hand:
Who with his Chiefs accustomed to success,
Thought Stars their Rebel Swords did therefore bless:
When but permitted for a scourge to Crimes,
That were their Nations in those horrid times.
Now Heavens Omnipotent Pencil did in Skies
Delineate marvells to observing eyes;
By Figures, that to wonder did declare
The just, and unjust Cause, of this vilde War:
If, on Fames word, my Muse here aptly may
Such Prodigies to future age convey.
Three Mighty Shapes above did then appear,
Vaster in Form then Constellations there:
Whose Characters perspicuously were read,
By large Inscriptions placed over every Head:
The First of these did Piety renown,
Beauteous her Face, and wore a Diamond Crown:
White was her Robe, yet brighter far then Rays
Of Phoebus when he finest them conveys.
To Sov'reignty, which next to her did stand,
She gave a Scepter from her holy hand:
His Vesture such as on a Solemn day,
Our Kingly Power and Majesty display.
Though all the pur^led Stars that it adorned,
For earthly Clory, dark on sudden turned.
Yet still his figure Royally looked great,
Like to King Charles when most distressed by Fate.
To wonder next State Order was beheld,
Or such as under Sceptred Rule excelled:
Where Myter'd Dignity, by Sovereign Grace,
Before all Civil has an honored place.
And where in several Magnitudes appear
Degrees of Nobless in the Royal Sphere.
The short Robbed next, who from the studied Law,
Judicial Reverence to their Science draw;
On Seats of Judgments gravely seemed to sit,
And aid the Public by their learned wit.
Close unto these were seen the ruling Gown,
And order of the Incorporated Town;
Where Royal Charters, God-like do Create
The body Politiques Eternal State.
Nor did best Science, or Man's useful Art,
Want in this Vision their becoming part.
Or how from Kingly Rule their values rise,
By honor given to Humane Industries
Opposed to Piety fierce discord stood,
Her Monstrous figure clothed in Robes o^ (...)*
And seemed to feed on Serpents as they hung
Upon her Sanguine Person all along.
Her hands did round the Horizon Libells Throw,
Worst seeds of ill when e're in States they grow.
Furious her Eyes, and had a Throat so wide
As some thought Churches down it then did slide.
To Aid her, proud Rebellion claimed a part,
Demure in looks and Speech, but base in heart:
Various as Popular Sense, her Person dressed,
And thus she lies to Vulgar ears Expressed:
Sister to fame, Fame did her now allow,
And gave this Gyantess a Trumpet too.
A Crown she wore and on it stood upright
A Sword, whose point seemed to touch Skies to fight:
Near to her side wild Anarchy did stand,
The confused guide of worst disposed Man:
Heads from her head and body seemed to grow,
Whilst her vast hands amongst Crowds did firebrands throw.
No humane measure could her compass take,
For she was of the Devils Legion-make.
These Visions if to Allegory joined,
All without help of Verse their sense must find*
Wherefore a while we will leave 'em in the Air,
And this fierce Battles deeds in brief declare.
For challenge both sides fired their loudest Gun,
E're here that early morning*fight begun;
When soon their bodies siercely did engage,
That blood might quench their hearts inflamed rage.
Brave Rupert first the Foes Right wing does meet,
And gave their daring Troops a quick defeat:
Pursued, and killed beyond their Armies Rear,
Which Victor like he boldly Summons there.
But no return from them he could receive,
Other then what their Cannon-mouths did give.
Fully resolved, in spite of this bad cast,
That Fortune's Nick would win for them at last.
This valiant Prince, who in Wars d^^ing Toyls
Had to his Peril often led foremost Files:
Was destined more by onset to attain,
Then his succeeding Conduct could retain.
Which sad disaster had been his before
At Edgehill Fight, but worse at Marston-Moor.
And now had by attack dispersed the Force
Of Zealous Ireton's Phanatick Horse.
And him his Captive did a while retain,
Till from his fierce pursuit returned again,
He met with foes that forced him to resign
The taken Ireton, and the field decline.
But e're verse does such accidents display,
That gave a period to this Fatal day:
My Muse reserves, for Lyles especial Grace
And fair Flavira's deeds, a signal place.
Whilst other valors, to contract our story,
Are left unto more large Records of Glory.
This Gallant Virgin from Loves power had chose
A Warlike Room where Ranks did nearest close
To a Batallion then Brave Lyles's Command,
And sought to aid him with an armed hand:
Whilst as she saw the perils of that Field,
His dangers there she most concerned beheld:
And when in doubt lest he might want her aid,
Her Soul, that else could not, was then afraid;
So bravely did her mind Loves fear Employ,
Till she, to assist him, did Foes destroy.
And as she now ^d his (...) ess perceived,
In Tears she fought and killed till him relieved.
Whose valiant person having fallen to Ground,
Enforced by weight of Blows and bleeding wound:
She leaping off her Steed did him embrace,
And being not known, perhaps then kissed his face;
Helping him soon unto his horse to rise,
And guided next his way from Enemies.
Heroic Lyle whom grief did ^ndispose
Far more then toyls of War and hurts from soes:
As then he weighed disasters of his King,
And consequence which that days loss might bring.
A Soldiers thanks to her he gave in brief,
Conceiving her to have been some youthful Chief
That him relieved, and thus they Galloped on
Till he lost her among the ^lying throng.
When furious Cromwell had dispersed this Wing,
As he with bloody Swords approached the King:
And stout Commanders had and Soldiers killed,
That Furrows there with Sanguine streams were filled.
When the Magnanimous Sovereign this beheld,
And saw his powers by Subjects force compelled,
As Irrecoverable did appear the day;
Yet he as Chief, and Soldier did assay
His Men to ^ally, and with cheerful look
Encouraged them to stand the utmost shock.
But how could Majesty or duty win
Persons to sight when fear enforced their Sin.
Who now, instead of stop, so rudely run
As the King's forced to fly amongst their throng.
So Boystrous waves an approved Ship convey,
Against the Pilots will, to remote Sea.
The Royal General thus compelled to flight
By those, though led by him, that would not fight:
With such becoming Grandeur bore that fate,
As suited Majesty's afflicted State:
Or Prince, that of best Fortune never was Proud,
And would not by adverse in Soul be bowed.
The wondrous f^gures that Spectators stood
In Sky, (as here displayed a Scene of blood)
And Order showed and Grandeur of his state,
Now Trembled to behold this Battles fate;
And a^t^r him, like Storms in Clouds, did fly,
Until obscured, to sight, below the Sky.
But Piety, Heavens Influence on his heart,
That in extremes was his conspicuous part;
Above, as here described, attends his flight,
By his Soul seen, though not by other sight.
Whilst Discord, Rebellion, Anarchy, that then
Was hovering over the Houses sighting Men,
Did with their Iron-hands such Clappings make,
As seemed the Fabric of the Heaven*s to shake.
The Royal Infantry of aid bereft,
As the Kings Cavaldry the Field had left:
(Which Fate in mighty Battles does foreshow
The valiant Foots ensuing overthrow)
Endeavored now by valor to repair
The loss, however of Fortune they despair:
As boldly they their Ensigns waved on high,
And closing of their Files did foes defy.
Brave The ^arl of Lindsey, Lord Ashly, Noble Colonel Russel, all then Eminent
Commanders under King Charles the First.
Lindsey, Ashly, Russell, led their Ranks,
And, though they wounded were, *both Fronts and Flanks
Had by their valiant Conduct long maintained,
With other Chiefs that with them Glory gained.
Stoutly they here their Enemies compelled,
And had, often charged, their flying backs beheld.
Till Fairfax led against 'em Horse and Foot,
Whose Number more then Valor caused their Rout.
Too tedious 'twere all actions here to tell,
Or what by wounds or death the Brave befell:
Nor shall my Muse by Catalogue convey
The Names or Sum of Captive men that day:
Let volum'd stories such particulars treat,
Whilst her A Method in all the Martial parts of this Poem chiefly observed, to
avoid a prolix mention of Proper Names, the Clogs of Poetry, and are more
properly enumerated by Historical relations.
Compendium does enough relate;
That all the brave, by Heavens permissive doom,
On the Crowns side at Naseby were overcome.
Of whom some Thousands hence were Prisoners sent,
And for the Houses Triumph after went
Like Slavish Captives thorough London's Street,
When foes durst there rejoice their Kings defeat.
Though this to Fairfax Honor may be said,
However bad Cause, for Crime, to him is laid;
That to the Conquered he was never unkind,
But Gentle, as became Heroic Mind:
If not so modest that to them his Mean
Was liker on^ subdued, then Victor seen.
And had not wicked Men his Soul abus'^
By Counsels which they speciously infused:
From his Compliance no such Ills had been,
That did Inhance his Armies bloody Sin.
Yet here, from verse, to give their valor praise,
With the Encomiums Naseby's-field does raise:
As became English blood their persons fought,
And marks of prowess, to their fame, thence brought.
Of whom the daring He was Major General to the Parliament Army, as is
mentioned before in this Poem, and he was no less a knowing Commander, then
valiant in Person.
Skippon did appear
Highly renowned for his Achievements there:
Who would not, though much wounded, leave the field,
But fought till all, to give off fight, did yield.
So bravely wicked were some in that time,
Whose fortitude was depraved by their Crime;
Or not so happy from their Souls to know,
How great a Sin was to their valor due.
This Field thus lost the unhappy King no more
Displayed his Standards as he would done before:
Or with joy heard Drums beat or Trumpets sound,
As daily he his forces weaker found:
O'repower'd by Foes and routed every where,
Until to aid him longer they despair.
When some to Foreign Countries took their flight,
Hoping, in future time, for him to fight.
With these Flavira did unknown retire,
If truth does rightly here with Verse conspire.
Where we shall leave her unto after day,
When of this H^roin's worth we more shall say.
Thus swistly had the Royal Cause declined,
The Field first lost and Garrisons next resigned;
As them the Enemy pleased to Command,
Or Marched to Force 'em by an Armed hand.
Whilst full distressed the best of Kings could gain
No loosers Peace, which Subjects now disdain:
As they at Westminster did Voters sit,
And thought all Kingly Rule below their Wit.
Neglected thus he Oxford lest at last,
And unto Scots Besieging Newark past:
When Noble A Noble accomplished Person, now living, who Gallantly ^^fended
that Town against all Opposers.
Bellace bravely did oppose
Attempts of English and worst Scottish Foes.
Until his Sovereign out of Prudence thought,
'Twas ^it Scots there should not be longer fought,
But have the Town surrendered to their force,
As for Crimes past they seemed to own remorse:
And promised to allay the Houses heat,
That their King might with them the gentler treat.
To which effect the Scots did, for a space,
Speciously give their deeds some Loyal face.
As they to the Houses applications made:
And in dispute, on both sides, sharp things said;
That words did seeming difference promote,
Till money came to give the casting Vote:
For which the Scots soon sold their Gracious King;
Whom Guarded back, the Houses Power did bring:
And him to Holmby Palace next removed,
And kept by Preshyterians they approved.
But this their saucy Army did resent,
And Said to have been a Tailor by Profession*
Joyce an Independent Cornet sent
With fifteen hundred horse to sieze from thence
The Royal Person by high Impudence.
Thus to this Army was the King conveyed,
And marched their Prisoner till a Plot they laid:
That turned him over to the Isle of Whight,
Where Cursed Ha^mond with a Jaylors spite
His King Imprisoned, in the highest Sense
Of Subject turned to Traitors impudence.
And thus restrained he lived above a year
Under vild Guard in Carisbrook Castle there.
Debarred from all best comforts his had been,
Since hopeless then e're more to see his Queen:
Or Royal Children whom Heaven did Ensoul
For highest Glory of Monarchial Rule.
When nothing for his solace here remained,
But what his Piety from above obtained.
The NINTH BOOK.
The Argument.
In England, Wales, and Scotland Subjects rise,
To free their King from vil'd Imprisonment:
The Houses force dispose these to subdue.
Till when on Loves account the Poet spares
Verse, by which Rosaline retired is found,
And Old Hermanders character described.
Flavira's Gallantry and Fate expressed.
Famed Colchester surrendered, and the deeds
Of Lyle and Lucas with their ends declared.
WHen Impious Men by Series of Bad Deeds
Do one Complete that all the rest exceeds:
What Satyr can the horrid fact explain,
Or spread it is Mediums by their broadest stain.
Thus Gradually appeared the wicked Course,
Both of the Houses and their armed Force:
The Last of which compelled 'em to obey,
And vote for Militants the vildest way.
As Jointly they their King a prisoner made,
And all possessed of his they could Invade.
To subdue next his Mighty Soul they strove,
Whilst outward Comforts they from him remove;
Not suffering Friends, or spiritual men to pray
With him, against bloody ends, a Christian way.
And when their Hellish spite this deed had done,
They Feared his Contemplations most alone:
Lest his Majestique Thoughts, and heavenly wit,
Should in his words to Tax their Crimes be writ.
On which account, they Pen and Ink deny,
Though to the Sacred hand of Majesty.
Whilst thus their Evil deeds their King afflict,
Heaven would by outward wonders them Convict:
As by his holy Touch the Lame and Blind,
Their That the King by his touch did cure some persons that were brought to
him, being Infirm, as abovementioned, during his Imprisonment in the Isle of
Wight, was cr^ly Reported.
Cures from him Miracalously find.
Though, like the world's Redeemer, he was then
Rejected by the Crowds of faithless Men.
Whilst some admired that in his Zodiocks line
The Sun could uneclips'd at that time Shine;
When Royal Beams, far more divinely great,
Obstructed were by Interposing Fate.
Though virtually no Closure could withstand
The Kingly Influence which he did expand
Throughout his Nations, however Captive he
Was made by guilt of armed Impiety.
When many their Kings sufferings did deplore;
And some, who'ad been his Enemies before,
Renounced the Houses Cause, and next contrived
That by Fresh power their Prince should be releiv'd.
However, against prevalent Foes, the Outward Face
Of war was Intermitted then a space.
Though Loyal hearts disdained Pacisick hours,
As their King lived restrained by wicked powers.
Whilst some from Noble sorrow died for Grief,
Because despaired their Sovereigns Just releife.
Others unto their homes, in hope retired,
As with their Friends they Loyally conspired
To arm again the most Heroique way,
And by a Second war Opposers slay.
Thus had affairs some Monthly periods stood,
And no Campaign fresh stained with English blood.
An Intervall in which verse does design
To find out the retired Rosaline,
Whom Lucas Love and valor Nobly freed
From the Intended Rape which was decreed
By Fierce Vanbralder, whom he bravely killed,
And to her wish releiv'd her from that field.
Who by her woman's help found the abode,
Of old Hermander, Standing far from Road:
And to the Chase of Whittlewood adjoined,
Where he to quiet life himself Confined.
Whose age compared, 'twas hard to find a Tree,
Within those shades, that older was than He.
His abstinence prolonged his wondrous years,
Which hardened were by his austerities.
Often Fasts he kept condoling wicked Life,
And bloody deeds, that time of Impious strife:
And to Chastise his body allways Lay
'Twixt hair-cloath Sheets, yet slept enough that way.
Generous by birth, and was by Blood allied,
As from our Muse his Mentions verified,
Unto the Attendant of fair Rosaline,
Whose Care her Lady thither did design:
Comely his Face, as smooth there white and red,
As when a youthful Prime his visage had:
His hair nor Beard by age changed as they hung
In locks that Curled unto his Bosom Long.
Clear seemed his eyes, yet could no sight retain,
But when by wonder he did that obtain:
At other times no glimps he saw of Light,
Or object usual unto humane sight.
Yet could in shaded paths, to him long known,
Near to his dwelling steadfast walk alone.
Tall and erect his figure did appear,
As he a comely Robe of Green did wear.
With him had long a faithful Servant lived,
Who though both dumb and deaf the words perceived
His Master uttered, by whose Lips he knew,
If Speech-like moving, what he would bid him do,
When first his kinswoman had with him spoke,
And told why thither she had undertook
To guide her Bea^teous Lady, to whose fame
Virtue and Love did Merit Jointly claim.
Unto fair Rosaline he bowed Low,
And his full welcome did on her bestow:
Telling how he obliged was to that day,
By woman's beauty the Refinest way.
Though now no Leave unto his eyes was given
To view her Feature, till the act of Heaven
Should from those Orbs obscurity remove,
And manifest to her his wondrous Love.
Which in due time he doubted not to show,
That his esteem of her she thence might know.
Much she admired at what this person said,
And why to her he had address thus made:
And more because by age deprived of sight,
He talked of seeing Beauty with delight.
But Judged 'twas best, however passed in Mind,
From Time the meaning of his speech to find.
Wherefore beyond thanks, an obliging way,
For her reception, little she did say:
And thus a while without his house they talked,
Till handing of her kindly In they walked.
Pleasant and Clean his dwelling though but small,
And rooms enough contained to serve 'em all.
Of which he One appropriated with Care,
For pious use, and called his place of Prayer.
A decent Altar on that Surface stood,
Raised by his hands, and blessed by him the wood.
To this place first he guides his beauteous guest,
And kneeling with her there some prayers addressed.
Which done, to an appartment her he Led,
That Neat was and contained a Handsome Bed.
A Room within it where her woman might
Lodge, and be near her Ladies call at night:
Telling fair Rosaline, that he had Chose
That Bed to give her person soft repose:
In which an admired beauty once did rest,
And at that word he three times Crossed his Breast;
Adding that he, for her sake, hoped to find
The Soul of Rosaline unto his kind.
These words unto the virgin seemed yet more
Misterious, then some spoke by him before.
Wherefore she blushing asked him to dispense
His meaning, and unriddle so his Sense.
To which he answered, that as yet no (...)
He had, that could presage the hour;
On which account the explanation must
Be left to time, which might the deed Adjust:
Wherefore he then no more to her expressed,
And after Supper, brought her to her rest.
Fully contented Rosaline was here;
Who quiet valued above Costly Fare.
Though sometimes to make delicate her Food
His Servant caught choice birds in field and wood.
Thus had this Virgin past some Months away,
Yet still did longer here desire to stay:
A place remote, and whither none did come,
The Master Blind and Servant deaf and dumb.
And where unknown she might best thoughts enjoy,
Not hearing when fierce War would more destroy.
Betimes her Bed devoutly she forsook,
And next of Natures Mirror prospect took:
More pleased then in her Morning glass to view
Reflections, which could there her beauty show.
The early Lark she often observed on high,
As mounting he Sung Carrolls to the Sky.
And saw how other birds did next awake,
And their Love-Songs in Joyful Couples make.
Happy she thought these birds, that could appear,
So like Immortalls, in an earthly sphere:
Resembling as they Sing and as they Love,
The Joys, by Blessed Souls, perceived above.
But when she saw the furious Hawk affright
These from their used abode and Lovers sight;
And that in Air, as well as earth, lived Foes
That could disturb the Mated hearts repose:
She Judged It might with her distress compare,
And what, for Lucas sake, obliged her Fear.
Yet, this war ceased, she saw some birds could meet,
And for past dangers Chaunt their Lovers Treat.
May Heaven she wished such Bliss for her ordain,
And unto him she would sing when met again.
Thus several days she passed, till one did more
Amuse her Soul then all spent there before.
Which time Hermander met her in a Grove,
And unto her again discoursed of Love:
Letting her know that she had understood
From him, in part, what now he should make good.
If with him there a space she would remain,
Till his Love's Secret might it self explain.
Much did the virgin his addre^^ ^esent,
Doubting is modest were the Love he meant:
Since she had heard of men though old and blind,
That had warm appetites for womankind:
And as she vi^^'d his smooth atd Ruddy Look,
Her virtue ^en afresh allarum took:
And thus concerned she moving was away,
Till on his knees He begged her longer stay:
Which spoken, soon by them was heard around
A Harmony beyond Lute's choicest Sound,
And such as heaven might give to humane ear,
If blessed with music of the moving sphere:
When of the finest Substance of the sky,
An Airy form descended to their eye;
That first, Chimera-Like, appeared to sight,
Yet did, though Shapeless seen, their view delight.
It Is various Beams did most refined convey
The Diamond, Ruby, and the Emralds ray:
Till by degrees contracted was it is space,
And changed to woman's comely shape and Face.
Her vest of Azure-Colour, like the morn,
When Brightest Estearn Streaks her sphere adorn:
Her amber-locks, unto her Bosom long,
In shining Curls to admiration hung;
And dallying with the air did seem to play,
Like finest Gossamours in Summers day:
And as they moved was seen the Ivory white
That in her neck's soft form displayed to sight.
Whose presence did, by miracle, Restore
Sight to Hermanders eyes, though blind before.
^drous Intervalls to him was given,
^'s account, by the sole Act of Heaven.
^ld, toward her his eyes did move
Kind as when they, time past, assured Love.
Though something more did her soft Beams Imply,
Then Languishments of Love in Beauteous eye.
And sometimes bIush'd, and sometimes smiled a space,
Whose Blush her smiles, whose smiles her blush did grace:
More Gay then such on virgin Cheeks are shed
On the first night within th'espouss'd bed.
To kiss her Rosy Lips he did assay,
As bashfully she seemed to yield him way:
But when he thought t'arrive unto that bliss,
He could not feel the Lip he thought to kiss.
Which she excused, and said no sense could find
The Method by which she to him was kind.
A Secret that hereafter he would perceive,
When Heaven his Soul Eternity should give.
To Rosaline, who had devoutly kneeled
Since miracle, she Judged, this sight revealed,
She kindly spoke, and bid her understand
That she would Commune with her hand in hand:
And thus a while this vision with her walked,
And of refined Souls divinely talked;
Assuring her that Love could only be
In Heaven possessed by full felicity:
Which she found there because her youth Inclined
T'affect Hermander with no earthly mind.
And promised had, If she that Grace could Merit,
To visit him, as thus beheld in Spirit:
A Miracle he had perceived before,
When Heaven to see her did his sight restore;
And from above had leave now to appear,
As by Hermander was desired by prayer,
That she might unto her Sublimly tell,
Whose Grace and Beauties mortals much excel,
How she hoped soon to meet her form above,
Where no Fate could be Enemy to Love.
But Rosaline, who'ad of Prognostics heard,
By holy Spirits said to'ave been declared,
Doubting lest words by this bright vision spoke,
Were Ominous to her Loves mortal hope:
Whose tender Soul, not willing to allay
The wishes which she placed on future day;
When she might Lucas see from dangers freed,
And to her Bosom peaceably decreed;
Desirous was some such presage to hear:
When soon this Beauteous form dis^ers'd to Air.
And as it did now wond'rously depart,
Voices were heard that sung by Heavenly art:
As such Stupendous accents then did sound,
That in no Humane Speech were ever found.
Which done Hermander Leads her back again
And, this sight past, did after Blind remain.
When Rosaline had these strange deeds admired,
And of his wondrous Love enough Inquired:
He kindly told --
That since she Leave did to her virtue give,
In his Society and home to Live:
The entertainment that he deemed most great,
He had Implored as his divinest Treat:
Which in his Loves bright vision she perceived,
And Heavenly Comfort had from thence received.
An object that, till then, no other eye
But his restored by wonder could espy:
Which Intervall so filled him with delight,
As he to see her only Cared for sight:
Thus his discourse had of this Subject end.
At other times he his converse did Blend
With pleasant stories of his younger years,
And things most facile to divert her Cares.
Relating how his youth in war had been,
Where bold he fought yet no wound received then.
And wished that her renouned Lover might
Be so preserved when next engaged in Fight.
But wishly told her, that though humane Mind
To welcome best events was most Inclined:
Yet when no adverse-fate the Soul could ply,
God-like appeared it is then Security;
And next, his prudence suitably advised
Her Guardianess, near unto him allied:
Whom he obliged, should Martial tidings Come
To her, by means unthought of to his home:
No sad Intelligence or actions to declare,
That might provoke her Ladies Grief or fear.
Since after he had Fasting Spent a day,
That with more Zeal he for his King might pray:
By Dream he bloody Battles saw at night,
And persons slain in cold Blood after fight.
Some shot to death, some Murdered to disport
Of Impious Men, and their Mock-Justice Court:
Where, to his horror, he in Vision saw
His King Condemned against Imperial Law.
After which dream he little had desired
To hear of War, or how bad men conspired.
Wherefore he did with caution her advise,
Lest Rosaline were grieved with Novelties,
That she would no Cruel sights to her relate,
Or what, to him she Loved, might bode ill fate.
To which his prudent Kinswoman replied,
How she her Circumspection had applied,
That no bad Tidings might such passage sind,
As should afflict her Ladies tender Mind.
Tho'in due time by promise she must tell
Great Lucas where his Rosaline did dwell;
However remote her person might reside
From hearing Novells that might worse betide.
Thus they expressed --
Whilst, as by dream, Hermander was soretold,
His Nation Wars Irruptions did behold.
As Duke Hambleton who before had been, for some Miscarriages of his or doubted
Loyalty, Imprisoned by the King at Pendennis-Castle, and being after freed,
marched into England in the year 1648 and was taken, and beheaded soon after by
the Impious High-Court of Justice, which wicked Tribunal had first Sentenced to
death K. Charles the First.
Hambleton had Scottish powers prepared,
And against the Houses forces had declared
Hostility, that the Imprisoned King,
He might by Arms to Royal freedom bring.
Brave Langdals Levies met him in the North,
By Risings Seconded which first brake forth
In powerful Kent, where Goring, Capell then,
With Lyle, and Lucas, and renowned Men
Were Numerous formed the Houses to re^st,
And by bold deeds the Royal Cause a^ist.
These Voluntary Files of Kentish force,
Led by reputed Chiefs of Foot and Horse;
Besides the Insurrections then begun
In Wales, to aid what in the North was done:
Occasion gave the Houses to provide,
That to sight these their Army should divide;
Who Fairfax to make War in Kent Enjoined,
Whilst Cromwell to march Northward was designed.
But first to reduce Wales they him Employed,
E're by his Conduct Scots must be destroyed.
At Maidstone Kentish valor did exceed
Wonders, which Martial Men in stories read:
When long there Fairfax Army did Assail,
Before his powers by Fighting could prevail.
And if a foot of Ground they seemed to win,
With greater fury 'twas forced back again.
The Women here their Heroine Leader sought,
And under her, like Amazons, then fought.
Not Penthesilia, to assist Troy's King,
So siercely did her Warlike Females bring,
As these at Maidstone, for their Sovereign's Aid,
To repel Foes by Valor had assayed.
Whose dauntless seed in Girls and Striplings young,
To second them, against daring force, did throng.
Who with sharp Stones, instead of shot, some killed,
And streets, where late they sucked, with Foes blood sill'd.
What eye could not have wept to'ave seen this sight,
Where Children did for bleeding Mothers Fight:
And the fair Virgin, and young Beauteous wife,
Died, to aid Fathers, or the Husbands Strise.
As here from Evening unto Midnight past,
Against Enemies, did bloody Combats last:
Thus bravely they had long this Town maintained,
Till from both Sexes Fairfax it obtained:
Glad that his Trophies might that Glory share,
Since women, brave as Men, opposed him there.
Soon many Valiant did from hence Retreat,
That they to make War might in Essex meet.
Where Goring, Capell, had with Lucas joined,
And Levies, which to aid them were designed.
Though much the loss at Maidstone did impair
The Assistance they expected in this War.
When many, dreading of the Houses Force,
Declined to bring them promised Foot and Horse.
That some held sit to take into Debate,
Whether not Wisest then to separate.
And more recruits not Venture to obtain,
After their first attempts in Kent proved vain.
But Gallant Lucas, in whose Soul was found
Courage, that did in Wars Extremes abound:
With some disdain such Counsels then did hear,
That seemed, though Wise, accompanied with fear.
And with a Steady Considence thus said,
Let Rebels be of their vild Cause afraid,
And Prompt their wicked Senate to Confess,
That Civil War was Voted wickedness:
E're Loyal Man to oppose them should cease,
Or, to give up his Sword, obliged by Peace:
Unless he would a Tame Spe^tator live,
On Slavish Terms, which such Dictators give.
Or Pitiously his Kings restraint bewail,
And Nation ruined, and yet not armed assail
The Foes of Both: Let rather Stories say
That Lucas, against his Life, advised this day:
Who is resolved, if but one Valiant File
Of Militants shall company his Toil;
The Royal Cause shall not deserted be,
What e're his Stars unhappily decree.
When Goring, Capell, and brave Lyle did hear
This Martial Speech with all their Armed there:
Like Men whom Mars, to wonder, had inslam'd,
Their full resolve to do brave deeds proclaimed.
And next their Valiant Chiefs, to quicken hearts,
Declared their hope of aid from Northern parts;
As Hambleton his March did thither guide,
And promised had to aid the Royal side.
In Essex many discontented were,
And against the Voting Houses welcomed War:
After Imprisoned by their force the King,
To whom for Peace they would duly nothing bring.
Incited thus, a hasty March they made,
And Colchester well Strengthened with their aid:
Resolved their Enemies there to withstand,
And Conquer, when besieged, by Armed hand.
Whose Garrison Numbers could not soon prepare
Materials for their bold subsistence there:
No Granaries they, wanting Time, could sill,
Or Magazins of shot that Foes should kill:
Nor leisure had they Regular line to form,
^hilst nobler Fortified to repulse Storm,
^n Courage they for their defense rely,
Eowe're assaulted by the Enemy.
When Fairfax soon his Army thither guides;
Contriving, their distress, all ways besides.
And in his first Attempt perceived the Town
To bravely Manned, by onset to be won.
Where Goring, Capell, Lyle, and Lucas were,
And famous Chiefs, who to increase siles there,
Like Common Militants, for Glory's sake,
Did ranks of Foot and Horse more Gallant make.
Which Fairfax sinding, by Wars saser mode,
He timely straightens them with want of food.
That Famine might force them to yield at last,
Since no Hearts long can fight whose Mouths do Fast.
Thus leaving him before this Leagur'd Town,
My Muse a prospect takes of what was done
By Cromwells Conduct, as he Marched through Wales,
Where against the Valiant Welsh he soon prevails;
And Gallant Owen, Powell, Laughorn, Poyer,
With others famed, made Captive by his Power.
Which being done, and full subdued that Clime:
His furious Soul does next delay no time,
That he with Scottish Hambleton might meet,
And him in Field by armed force defeat.
At Preston soon these opposite Armies fought,
Where this Scotch Duke received a Total rout.
Nor could brave Langdail with his Loyal Powers,
Joined with this Peer's, prevail by blood those hours:
When adverse Fortune had inclined to bring
Ruin on all, that by War served their King.
And more admired, because this battles day
The odds of Number on the Kings side lay.
As hapless had some Risings been before,
In Surrcy made against the Houses Power:
Which The Earl of Holland who as the Chief Commander Rose with (...) (...) ^f
Buckingham (...) (...) the Ld. ^rancis, who was k^^d in that Action, and other
Persons of Quality.
Holland did, and Loyal Nobles Head,
And with blood lost were swiftly vanquished.
So ominously did Stars that time conspire;
As best Men were deprest, and bad raised higher.
Thus Fatal War had Royalists undone
A Second Time, and every Strong hold won
But Colchester, where unto highest Glory,
The deeds of Heroes fix their Fame on Story;
Full forty days had they been distressed there,
By all the Miseries of Cruel War:
Their numbers much impaired by bloody Fights,
And wasted by long hardships days and Nights.
When Fairfax and his Mirmidons thought sit,
That straits should force that City to submit:
As Monster famine, whose hungry Hectic kills,
And seems to eat, though her Gorge never fills,
When her devourings Jaws and Bowels wast,
And them compel to Pining deaths at last:
Did by degrees her Ghastly Visage Spread
In Colchester, where scarce was Meat or Bread:
And could not long or healthfully sustain
Valors, that nobly did that place maintain.
To Forage Fields they often foes assayl'd,
And sustained lives as that way they prevailed:
When their bold Swords did food the Aged give,
And Mothers, on whose breasts, did Insants live.
Some Virgins wept in Fear what would betide
The Men to whom their Souls had been allied.
Whilst other Females, more Heroique hold,
To aid their Lovers durst sierce weapons hold:
And like Virago's with locks loosly spread
On Naked breasts, and tucked up Vests did speed
Their ready Courage to defend the Post,
That then required such fierce assistance most.
Thus bravely had they Loyalty endeared,
And neither Enemies Swords nor famine feared:
Resolved whilst they life's sinews could sustain,
Though by course food, no Force the Town should gain.
Flavira now returned from Foreign soyls,
Where she experienced more her Martial Toyls;
And hearing of this City's sad estate,
With what thence might unto her Lyle relate:
By quickest means had gathered Loyal force,
Composed of Relics of brove Langdall's Horse,
Which joined with others that dispersed were,
As Holland rose in Surrey to make War,
About an hundred Cavaliers in Sum,
As from Fame's Lists they to us Numbered come;
Who deeming that she was some youthful Chief
Employed to give the Royal Cause relief,
Gladly did to her sprightly Conduct yield,
As she to lead 'em had appeared in Field:
Discreetly cautious, as that time required,
When for Brave Deeds men secretly Conspired.
Whilst want of Circumspection ost did bring
Ruin to such as Rose to serve their King.
Her Tru^^ Bla^^-a-Moor Page to Lysle she sent,
Letting him know by Letter her intent
Was, with that Party, toward the Town she led,
To aid him there or leave her person dead.
And where the posted Enemy she would charge,
And by her Prowess match to him enlarge;
Resolved that she, by days next Early break,
Would this attempt with her best Conduct make.
Obliging him, whatever might her befall,
That he would her Name and Sex conceal to all.
This Message highly did Famed Lysle surprise,
Her danger weighed, and ^ed extremities
The Town endured, which could not many hours,
In all respects, withstand opposing powers.
Yet much admired her Loyalty and Love,
That would thus signally their worth approve:
Though with a Lovers great and tender Mind,
He wished no Perils to her Glory joined.
But judging that she would not now recede
From Acting what this juncture she decreed,
As honor and Assections brave Effort,
Did to her Soul with Fames best pride resort:
Soon he determined, when she should Invade
Their Common Enemies, that he would her valor aid.
Imploring Sta^s her person to desend,
And make her Victr^ss, though his Life they end.
By help of Nigh^ his Answer to her came,
Her Page in passing having Swam a stream;
And now as soon as Mornings Blushing light
Streaked the Horison's Cheek; to Furious Fight
The dauntless Virgin led her Party on,
And from the daring Foes had passage won:
As Lyle to aid her boldly then assailed,
And thus both Lovers equally prevailed.
When to their Camp their sierce opposers fled,
And of their Numbers left some persons dead.
Impow'r'd by Victory these Lovers met,
What Martial Glory e're appeared so great;
Their greeting such, as in some glorious Field
One Armed Chies would to another yield:
When to endear their Valors prosperous toil
The heart rejoices as the Eye does smile.
Though Love it is sure did in their looks convey
Some intermixtures of his kindest Ray.
But how to serve her who such deeds had done
For his Affection, and her Souls renown;
Not less his thought Employed, then caused his grief,
As hopeless he judged Colchesters relief:
Where sood was wanted to support the brave,
Whose Valors did that place to wonder save:
Doubting lest fair Flavira there might and
Distress, which above all would grieve his mind.
However his Soul did signs of Comsort place
Upon his looks, for joy to see her Face.
Whose kindness with such Grandeur could appear,
As she might least his straits or peril sear.
And now, as they retired toward the Town,
Discoursing of some deeds in War were done:
The Enemy did force in Ambush lay,
To Cut off them as they withdrew that way:
Furious the Conssict was, as Love did Guide,
And Noblest Valor Engaged on their side.
When sometimes Lyle did sighting interpose
'Twixt her and peals of shot, and Swords of Foes.
Whilst she, his wondrous Courage to requite,
Her Person him defends by dangerous Fight.
Fame tells that she, by Combat then in Field,
Had a Fifth-Monarch brawny Champion killed:
And how an Antinomian's Head she lopt,
That for a space upon Earths surface hopt.
Which seen the Amazed Enemy retired,
And at more distance his loud Muskets fired.
These Acts she did, and doubtless more had done,
Had not a shot, too dismally was strong,
Her Armor pierced and body by its force,
That dying she was falling from her Horse;
Till Lyle, full grieved, had staid her on her Steed,
At which her Soul revived with so much speed,
As her Arm closely did his neck embrace,
And seemed to kiss him with her dying face.
Astonishmen^ and sorrow filled his breast,
More then by words and Tears could be expressed:
In which sad posture back with her he moved,
Her snow-white arm yet circ'ling him she loved.
But as he stood obliged by her request,
Resolved that uuto none should be Confessed
Her Name and Sex: and next as Time gave leave,
With Decency conveyed her to her Grave;
Whatever account the future Age may gain
Of this famed Heroine buried thus or slain.
So Fatally had Love a period here:
When soon the worst extremities of War
The Town endured, as want of foods support
Enfeebl'd Nerves of Heroes and th'Effort
Of bravest Militants, who now Lament
That they cannot longer keep Cursed Famines Lent;
And that the hungry Housewife Nature should
So meanly Humane Composition Mold;
As unfed Bowels might the Soul distress,
Although Immortal, when for food they press.
Thus had Complained the Valiant late and strong,
Impaired by Fights and Hunger suffered long:
And saw their stoutest Soldiers Famished dye;
Or killed, near starved, when fought the Enemy.
The Steed that had courageously before
His Gallant Rider in fierce charges bore,
Now fallen in Crest and shrunk in Body stood
Imploring, of his wanting Master, food.
Who then instead of yielding him relief,
Whose strength by routing Foes had fav'd his Life,
Ungrateful made by Famines rigid Force,
Murders, to feed himself, his beloved Horse.
Yet even this food too soon their Persons spend,
That sust'ring did thus Col^^^ster defend:
When Carcasses of Steeds that tainted lay
In Fields, where shot did them and Riders slay,
By Force they seize, their Valor to sustain,
Till this vild Meat no longer they could gain.
Thus Famine, still encroaching, them Compelled
On Warlike Terms unto their (...) to yield.
Which Fairfax did Indefinite Mercy c^ll,
Though by their coment not then meant to all:
As that false Court of War condemned to dye,
Brave Lyle and Lucas, to their Insamy.
The wicked Ireton whose subtle Tongue,
And Pen, had Mischiefs dispersed all along;
Demurest seemed, with his White-Liver'd Face,
When his Soul Bloody ^nds designed apace.
And against these renowned Chiefs had Impious spite,
Because their Conducts worsted his by Fight:
Whose wiles had now his easy General won
To kill these Heroes in Cold Blood with Gun.
Thus Cromwell whilst he Managed other War
In Ireton had his Cruel Deputy here,
Who with his bold Associate Mis^reants laid
The Tragic Scene which Colchesler displayed:
And unto Englands lasting shame could kill
Their fellow-Natives by their Merc'less will.
Whilst Goring, Capell, for succeeding fate,
Must on the Houses dismal sentence wait.
These Noble persons, Great in Soul and Birth,
Strove to overcome, when Men, the shame of Earth,
Their King Imprisoned, and by wicked Guilt
The Blood of Subjects barbarously spilt:
Whilst they, from perfect Magnitude of mind,
Were more then Stars to aid their Monarch kind.
And should disloyal Arms still prosperous prove,
Resolved the Conquered Cause they would dying (...).
Or if enforced at Lawless This referrs, for want of other Room in this Poem,
to the Trials of these two Peers before the then pretended High Court of
Justice, which was Subsequent to the death of King Charles the First, when
Goring Earl of Norwich was saved (as was thought) by the favor of Lenthall,
Speaker to the ^arliamentary Usurpers, but the other, the Lord Capell,
Sentenced to death, whose Heroic Speech and End is well known to Story.
Bars to stand,
They Would defy Rebels without Armed Hand:
Deeming if there vilde power their death design,
'Twould Honor add unto their Noble Line.
Brave Lucas first must by their direful rage
Be brought to dye on their appointed Stage:
By Stars designed his Theater of Fame,
Where his last act most Elevates his Name.
Serene and Resolute appeared his Brow,
As when in Fields he faced the Armed Foe;
Or from disastrous War endured distress,
That could no Greatness of his mind suppress;
Who thus beholding the Commanded Files
Ordained to kill him by his Enemies:
And how amongst spectators some there were
That for him wept, whilst he did shed no Tear.
With an Erected Countenance thus said,
Death's ghastly prospect no surprise has made
In Lucas, who would not by Mercy Live,
If Begged to take it, which the guilty give.
Nor can their Guns or all their pointed Steel,
Give me more wounds then gladly I would feel:
If killing me they would their Crimes relent,
And to their Injured King, on Knees, repent:
Then bids 'em boldly shoot against his Breast,
Whilst in his Looks such courage he expressed,
As Valiant A Famous Commander under Julius Caesar highly renowned in Story for
his extraordinary Achievements and Fortitude at his death: to whom Heroic
Lucas may be deservedly paralleled.
Scaeva did for Caesar's sake,
When he by Numerous shot did Life for sake.
Next whom, stout Lyle his Tragic Scene must end,
By the same Guns that slew his Valiant Friend.
Death he before had wished, as he beheld,
In Cruel Fight, his Dear Flavira killed,
And had from Loves Impulse then sought to dye
By desperate charges of the Enemy:
Had not his Loyalty and public Spirit,
Been more endeared by him then his Loves Merit.
Not much he spoke, resolved that Actions more
Should win on hearts, that would his worth explore:
And witness how brave Subject and best friend
In him conspicuous were to his Life's end:
Who as he Lucas body did perceive,
Lying near the place where death he should receive,
Often he kissed his friends yet dying Face,
And whilst he kissed his Eyes shed Tears apace.
Then with expanded Arms their shot receives,
As his last word his Murderers forgives.
Thus died these Chiefs, above what verse can blaze,
At least such here, as would Inscribe their praise
Longer then Sculptured Lines in Marble tell,
How Gloriously at Where King Charles the Second soon after his Restoration,
in (...) of their Memory, erected a stately Monument.
Colchester they fell.
The TENTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Wars last great stake at Colchester thus won,
The Bloody Armies Insolence Improves,
As on the Houses Members they Impose,
And violate the Treaty with the King.
In shape of Friend the Devil Cromwell Tempts
By w^ck^dest Ambition to aspire.
The ^ray^'rous Court and Characters described
That Murdered by their Doo^ K. Charles the First.
THE Army Leaders who by Faithless guilt
Had Cruelly Heroic Blood thus spilt:
Soon sound how English hearts their deeds did hate,
And wished the Authors an accursed fate.
T'Imprison'd King, whose Soul had hoped to hear
Some happy progress of that furious War,
(Which his Brave Subjects for his Scepters Aid
And pers'nal safety Loyally had made)
Too soon, alas, descern'd the sad Novell
That told what them and Colchester befell,
And how the Valiant Lyle and Lucas were,
In Cold Blood killed, by Conquering Rebels there.
Heroic Capell, Goring, and of Fame
A many Chiefs whom verse here needs not name,
Forced to surrender and attend the will
Of Tyrant Subjects as they would save or kill.
Which Tidings Hammond by the Juncto made
Their Sovereigns Jailer, boastingly conveyed:
In hope that Grief his Kings Soul might depress,
As his Tongue durst these Horrid facts express.
Whilst Guns, for wicked Joy, from Carisbrook Towers,
And shouts of Foes divulged these dreadful Hours.
The Royal Breast where streams of sorrow flowed,
Above what Parent e're for Children showed,
Piously did in Secret Thought complain
That he should Live, at that Time, King in vain: (...) A Castle in the Isle of
Wight in which the King was then in Prison, and had been there Restrained by
Hammond for several Months before.

Since Heaven did not his Sword and prayers allow
Mighty enough the wicked to subdue.
Whilst grievously restrained, he heard the Sounds
Of his best Subjects deaths, and Kingdoms wounds.
Wishing that Heaven had his Life's end decreed,
When Bravest Men for his just cause did bleed
At Keinton-field, or Naseby's Fatal Toyls,
Where as a Sovereign Chief he led bold Files.
Or if Clandestine Fate must be his doom,
Why did not This Heinous Traitor had been employed by some of the Army to
Pistol the King in Carisbro ^k-Castle, where he was restrained; but as ^e
endeavored to make two Gentlemen his Assistants, that there ^en'ed on the
King, he was discovered, and accused by them: but (...) that wicked Time ^ound
favor enough to save him from death contrary to his demerit.
Rolph to kill him sooner come,
Or was discovered e're his Piistoll shot
King Charles had ended by their shortest Plot;
Then to their shame let him surviving see
A longer series of their Villainy.
Happier he thought was Second Edwards fall,
Or Richards, next to that, deplored by all:
Since by a quicker guilt, usurped Power
Forced on their distressed Lives their dying hour.
So Seldom imprisoned Monarchs period have
Other, then Murdered laid within a grave.
Yet how'ere dreadful unto humane sense,
Such terrors might their dismal shapes dispense,
He Judged, in Prince, 'twas next the Sin of Fear
To apprehend Fates steps, however near;
If Impious Men who had no right to Live,
Could killing power unto Deaths Scepter give.
Resolved, what'ere his foes against him designed,
His glory to his Soul should still be Joined:
Cofirm'd by patience full to undergo,
What Royal fortitude could suffering show.
And as these words unto himself he said,
A Circling Flame around his head displayed;
Is not some brightest Angels spreading wing,
That did to him Caelestial comfort bring.
As thus the King divinely great here spent
Severest hour's of his Imprisonment:
His Loyal friends, far more concerned th^n (...),
Feared that their Sovereign would soon Murdered be:
As Fame's bold Tongue dispers'^ly did relate
Deeds that Conspired with that sad Juncture's date.
And as swist means such horrors did convey,
By Fatal accident they passed a way
That near was unto Rosalin's abode,
Where then her Woman walking on a Rode,
Had met a Passenger that did declare
How Lucas died and Lyle at Colchester.
She having been by Wise H^rmander taught
That by her means no Tidings should be brought
Unto her Lady, that her heart might grieve,
Or worst of wounds for Lucas death receive.
This prudent Female having these words weighed;
T'amuse fair Rosaline, on purpose made
^story, that no other stress displayed,
Then that great Lucas was by Foes decree
Banished his Country for his Loyalty.
Having on purpose so contrived this Tale,
As't did not only Lucas death conceal,
But to her Lady apt occasion give
To travel, where she thought he yet might Live.
When Rosaline did graciously Address
All that her thanks and wonder could express
Unto Hermander, bidding him farewell;
And next declared she was resolved to dwell
By choice an Exile in Outlandish Clime,
Hoping abroad to hear in happy time
Of her Loved Lucas: where her woman's Care
Long kept sad Truth from coming to her ear.
But how her person she disposed when known
His fatal Loss, or how she did bemoan
Her Lov's Misfortune, verse cannot fully say,
Or in what Cloister was her ending day.
Thus Noblest passions deepest did deplore
The Impious progress of Usurping power:
Whilst in this Nation no Just state of Life,
But did Lament that War's prodigious strife.
When Haughty Cromwell did in Embrio Lay
Aspiring thoughts, to rise a future day.
If he could first his Sovereigns Life destroy,
And next by Bold degrees his Throne Enjoy.
To aid which ends he Bloody Men Cajoled,
That for King-killing were alike him Soul'd.
But these thoughts caused some struggling in his breast,
As guilt of Conscience would have them suppressed;
Though at a time when his proud heart was Swelled,
By routing the Scotch At Preston in Lancashire, where Duke Hambleton was
defeated by Cromwell in the year 1648.
Duke, and risings quelled
Throughout the Nation, which the Royal side
Did unsuccessfully that Season guide.
One Evening as he Toward London went,
Pondring past deeds and what to come he Meant:
His Inward horror did his Soul assail,
And against his dire ambition did prevail
So far, that now his haughty Mind did yield
To force of Conscience all his Bosom's field.
And as he thus awhile had walked alone
Near to a lofty Grove perceived by None:
Fixed to the Ground, on sudden, his feet seemed,
As he upright then stood in trance, or dreamed;
Amazed his looks, erected was his hair,
Like one that did some dismal object fear.
When for more wonder round him figures stood,
That from their Bosom's toward him spouted blood:
Like streams that from the Marble Image flow,
Whose Sculptured shape does some ^am'd person show.
Their visage resolute as he had beheld
Them sighting, or in fu^ious Battle killed.
But as amongst these he did Which Noble Gentleman was said to be killed by the
Secret Intimation of Cromwell to his Soldiers, when he might have saved his
Life.
Cavendish view,
And s^w the wounds that his brave person slew;
And called to mind the whisper that he gave
Which caused the death of this Illustrious Brave;
As he unliors'd Surrounded was by Foes,
And stead of quarter received killing Blows:
Unto remorse his Soul did him affright,
And seemed to wish he never more should sight.
Admiring that throughout his wicked part,
No Sword or Bullet had yet Pins'd his heart.
Thus far did strength of Conscience overruled
Horrid Designs of his Aspiring Soul,
Inciting him to hate his former Cant,
And Specious guilding of his black Intent,
Whence he might Simulations past deplore,
And vow by which he promised to restore
His Gracious Sovereign when at At which place Cromwell having formerly seized
the King by his Contrivance at Holmby, where he was kept and attended by
Commissioners of the then Parliament, he solemnly engaged a^ Redding to restore
him: Insomuch as this afflicted Prince said openly, if Cromwell had a Soul he
should be restored to his Throne.
Redding he
Weeping assured that act of Loyalty.
Whilst Conscience thus her Ensigns had displayed,
And by resistless Onsets victrix made:
He thought he now could happily awake,
When all these figures that before did take
Their Sangnine Station to affright his eyes,
By saddest Instance of their Tragedies,
Appeared no more, nor had left sign of Blood
Where he thought they had round him bleeding stood.
At which rejoiced, on Bended knees he prayed
That their death's guilt might not on him be laid.
And thus his Crazy Conscience for a while
Past deeds resented, and the wicked Toil
Designed by him in future, 'till his eye,
As he was kneeling, did to wonder spy
A Throne, that from Earths Bowels seemed to rise
Adorned with all Majestique Dignities.
At which, tho something penitent in Trance,
He could not choose but cast a Liquorish Glance.
As when a Wolf does see his beloved prey,
He Licks his Jaws and turns his Eyes that way;
Although his Entralls had been Clogged with store
Of Carnage that he had devoured before:
So did this Man, as he the Throne had viewed,
And from that Object appetite renewed.
But as he saw the Bloody streams and Rills,
That sprung from Vales as well as highest hills,
Till Joined in Current, 'twixt him and the Throne,
They in a Crimson River seemed to run.
This Vision more then the other him assrights,
Who thought it caused, to tempt him, by Hells sprights.
When three times a strong voice bids Cromwell come,
And boldly seize a Royal empty Room.
I cannot, he answered, and behold this Scene
Of Horrors, to my Conscience, Intervene.
Then Conscience, not Ambition is the Choice
Of Haughty Cromwell, Laughing said this voice.
Next personated unto him appears,
And with a The Devil who in the shape of a dead friend, more to Insin^ate his
Execrable Delusion and Temptation, is thus supposed to have appeared to
Cromwell.
Friends embrace this Chief endears;
Having in Soul, a Patriot been, some say,
That had in Body fought a certain day
At Chalgrave-field, and there did wounds receive
That did his Mortal life a period give:
Bidding the Mighty Cromwell from him know,
That there was no such thing as Hell below:
Or Malefactor damned at Pluto's Court,
Which he assured, and smiling made his sport
At all such Tales; Nay asked him if he thought,
As he his figure freely to him brought,
That Souls had ever felt Insernal pains,
Or in Hells Newgate dragged about their Chains.
Who without leave, if called by Grand Import,
Can to aid Mortals Night and Day resort.
Then handing Cromwell, however yet in dream,
Boldly Conducts him over the bloody stream;
Bidding him look if Sanguine Tincture lay
Upon his person as he passed that way.
The Chief admired to see on him remain
No spot, as he through Blood of Thousands slain
Had thought he moved; and to the Feind declared
That Fopp-like Dreaming he had Conscience feared;
Which never more enfeeble should his mind,
Or from his Speech a Nomination find,
Other then as he would speciously Cajole
Such Factions, as for ends, he meant to Fool.
Then swelled in heart upon the Throne he sits,
Where being Robbed, Hells sprights, like to some Wits*
Whose eloquence did him in future treat
When he with Grandeur took his Princely seat:
In Long and Short Robes did they Reverence pay;
As some did there both Canting speak, and pray.
A Monstrous Register of Hells vast size,
That was to Book and Proclaim destinies,
Which by Fates Rigid Sisters had been spun;
To Crowds of Ghost, with a hoarse Giants Tongue*
Declared, the English Nation to despite,
That Mighty Noll, the darling Son of Night,
After his horrid deeds did height obtain,
Should Bloudily Five years Protector Reign.
Which words pronounced, Dark Vapors overspread
The Surface, with which Mist-like vanished
The Throne and Visions, as himself he found
Stretched out, like to dead Corpse, upon the ground.
Till wakened from his Trance, by some such Wind
As blustering Poetically taken for the God of Winds; and by the subsequent
Verses is here Intentionally described the prodigious Tempest at the death of
this horrible Usurper.
Eolus did for him find,
When on his dying day the tumbling Sky
Did roll his Soul to sad Eternity:
Upright he boldly stood, and hoped the Noise
Did but resemble future Cannon Joys:
Which from this Vision he judged should succeed,
As he resolved to heighten wicked Deed;
And by his daring Spirit Ghosts affright,
If they should him deterr by day or night.
Like one, whose fortune and his ^^most go^d
Could have no other Fond then deeds of ^lo^^
To dispose persons for his purpose ^^t,
He well Cajoled the Men of Impious Wit:
But most the Armed, of whom then many were
That over their Nation strove to domineer.
But lest they should not to his methods Bend,
As to aspire above them was his end,
He covertly does that Ambition Guide,
And seemed but Isntrumental to their Pride:
As their bold Power should King and Laws take down,
And be Joint Sharers of a Conquered Crown.
Soon with him Ireton, Lambert, Harrison joined,
And others that as heinously combined:
To whom this falsest Man, thus Glozing spoke;
How great I would your approved Valors make
Heaven is my Witness, as I zealous pray,
And seek God with you our s^elected way:
If words of mine can prompt you to be wise,
And from Inferior Orbs to higher rise,
As you may spoils of Majesty soon seize,
And feast at will in Royal Palaces;
Where your brisk Wives with an exulting slame
Shall you Embrace, and in their Queens Beds Teem.
Church and Crown Lands we will make spoils by force,
And Command Senats by bold Foot and Horse:
If first the Sovereign owners blood be spilt,
And 'stead of us, on him laid this Wars guilt.
From which bold deed such powerful rule will spring,
As shall have Rise from us without a King.
These words when heard by men who before sought
How vile designs might be to Issue brought,
Like Harpies waiting for a Luscious prey,
Agreed to fill their appetites his way.
Who though their Masters with the King then were
In Which was held with the King in the Isle of Wight by Commissioners from the
Houses, notwithstanding which hi^ (...) was (...) in the time of treaty by the
force of the Army.
treaty to prevent all future War;
And near obtained such grants as without shame
They could not Royal Condescensions name;
When they asked more then Subjects did become,
And left for Kingly Rule a narrow room:
As Armed Usurpers they all Methods break,
And once again their King a Prisoner make.
Next purged the House of Members that did own
Compliance by their Treaty with the Throne.
When a Caball of Traitors left behind,
Of their vilde Senate, horridly combined
How a Prodigious Court they might devise,
That should the Murder of their King disguise:
By such pretexts as sub'tly they would Infuse,
And that way People, the deed done, Amuse.
That famed The Painted Chamber in Westminster the usual place for
Parliamentary Conferences.
Appartment where to serve the State,
In happy times often Lords and Commons Met,
And to their Loyal Glory did Confer,
On means to make Kings great in Peace and War:
Gave now reception to a Crew of Men,
Whose figures Liken'd Feinds in Pluto's den:
When in their dismal shapes they Counsels Join,
And vent with Forked Tongues their black design;
Whilst from Earth's deepest Caverns winds arise
That Sigh as they would Alarm Earth and Skys,
By telling how Hells Boldest Imps Employ
Wit, more then usual Wicked, to Destroy.
The Bloody Cromwell, in whose Direful Face
His Nations Fatal Comet seemed to Blaze,
Had Impious Men Enrolled that by his skill
Were guided to advance his Monstrous will.
Ireton his Ghastly Son in Law Accursed,
Prepared their Regicidall plotform first;
When Harison, a Butchers Son by Birth,
Cruel by Nature like these Sons of Earth,
And in Cold Blood, as fame his figure draws,
Instead of Beasts slew men to Glut his Cause:
Thought he possessed deservedly a Chair
Amongst such Regicidall Patriots there.
With whom had close Caball'd the Plodding Vane,
Who had more Subtle Theorems in his Brain
Then Schoolmen teach when Ubi's they desine,
Or Entities which no Space can Consine.
From some such resin'd Sistems perhaps He
Resolved that Rules of State Immense should be.
And if the Sovereign Power were laid aside,
Designed no order Longer should abide
Then the Ideas of his Brain should please,
That with no Government could be at ease.
Who thought the Pop'lace but his Lump of Clay,
Which he would, Pro^ietheus like, still ^old his way.
And was for Pious phrase and Mean admired
No less then if the Man had been inspired.
Whilst Scot and Martin who did not pretend
By Inspiration Men or State to mend,
Did from their Vicious Taint and Lawless Soul,
Avow that Change was Luxury of rule:
And thought new Government was like fresh Choice
Of Women they would Lasciviously rejoice.
And as this Lustful Tenent they explored,
In fancy they with the Republic whor'd.
Thus these debauch'dly had their Wit employed
That the best King and rule should be destroyed,
By such pernicious Maxims they would convey,
And Martin used at this Courts Meeting day:
Letting 'em know that in loud Vulgars Name
They must their Sovereign, e're destroyed, defame;
And if the Charge, by which King Charles shall dye,
Be called the Peoples, who dare say we Lie.
Well, Answered Harrison, thou have d^vis'd,
For which thou Merits to be rebaptiz'd
Amongst the Godly unto whom I Preach,
And to asperse the Man did such words teach.
Nor can ought The very wicked Expression that Harrison was (...) with at his
Trial when Condemned for this Ex^^rabl^ Treas^^.
blacken more his Rule and Fame,
Then to sall Charged in the Loud Peoples name.
Thus they conspired as each here took their seat,
Where Regicides with plaudits them did Greet:
And fully Numbered, by their Mutual Vote
Did Br^dsham their grim President promote;
Whose petty fogging Genius soon embraced
That wicked Grandeur however Law debased.
Which tells that if worst Cause be gainful found,
'Twill want no aid from Malefactor Gown'd.
Hugon in Black Coat like Hells Pestor there,
As Feinds, it is said, sometimes that Livery were,
Dissembling of a Gospel Mean and face,
Prayed for their sakes without all sense of Grace.
And had 'twas thought by help of Witches spell,
Who was his Punck, though Succubus to Hell,
Conveyed with Scripture such Prestigious sense,
As more Inflamed their bloody Impudence.
This vast stupendous wickedness thus laid,
Whose Horrors did all Loyal hearts Invade,
And like worst prodigies that Men amuse,
More then unusual terrors did Infuse;
When some by grief were Metamorphis'd so,
As they Gray-hair'd before their time did show:
More stunned with sorrow then in that sad day
When London in vast heaps of Cindars lay,
And Crowds by Millions did with dread retire
To Fields, where Bedless they deplored the fire;
Hopeless that from her ashes e're should rise
A Fairer Phoenix to delight their Eyes.
In Zeal to Westminster a many went,
At Sacred Tombs of Sovereigns to Lament,
Doubting that Foes presumptuously would be
With Royal Relics there at Enmity.
Or worse then Goths or Vandalls soon destroy
Repose which dust of Monarchs did enjoy.
Though to their wonder each Essigy'd Face
Of Kings should weep, to pity this King's case:
And the Famed Virgin Queen Elizabeth.
Queen with Blushes shed
Tears, in her sigure, on her Marble Bed.
One Man that Night who from devoutest Zeal
Found means a while his Person to conceal.
Addressed to Holy King Edward the Last of the Saxon Monarchs, and for his
Holiness of Life Sirnam'd the Confessor.
Edwards sacred Shrine
For Saint-like aid unto the Royal Line:
When he conceived a Voice thus to him said,
Heavens high permissive will must be obeyed,
Nor think Great Charles less Glorious shall dye
Then Martyred for his steady Piety.
Whose Faith, though not called by Catholic Nam^*
Shall have a Universal Christian Fame.
And from the Merit of his Sacrifice
Agrandiz'd shall the English Scepter rise;
And in a Second Charles and James dilate
Above what e're in British King was great.
These accents uttered, or else fancied so,
As Thought sometimes may suture things foreshow,
This devout person from the shrine retired,
And as Heavens words th'Imagin'd speech admired.
Thus holy Men sought Comforts from above,
Whilst Impious hearts were eager to remove
The Life of Majesty, and next that deed
Settle a Deformed Rule without a head.
Cromwell, whose Cous'ning face could Laugh or C^y,
As Grave or Comic was his Villainy,
With feigned Humility did them desire,
Not in the least to judge he would aspire,
But serve their Common ends, like one that fought
To raise their State, whilst he no greatness sought;
Who to no An^alls did pretend or Line,
That could him more then private Life assign:
Wishing his Wife and Children might partake
No Blessing, if sincere he did not speak.
Thus he allured 'em, whilst his Inward Soul
Smiled to think how he would their Ambition sool.
And now their Bloody Court presumed to sit,
Where Bradshaw Mouthed what he and they thought sit:
Like Judge to Pluto was he seated there,
And Men, that Feind-like his Pack'd-Jury were.
Furious his looks, his Gown high Crimson Red,
Who sat for Blood and suitably was clad.
If Poets past had like this heard of Court,
Their Indignation had raised their transport
Beyond what they of Stygian Monsters tell,
Whose loathsome rout Tribunalls sills in Hell;
And had, instead of those, to us described
The Representment by ^mps here Contrived:
Since never of Hells deeds, or Earths it is read,
That Goblins there or here so Judged their Head.
Yet worse then such this wicked Court durst do
Against the best Prince till then the World did know.
The Excellent King being brought unto this place,
Where none of them deserved to see his face,
With reason, as Majestique as his Cause,
Bassl'd their Sense, and showed to them his Laws.
But this must not confute their horrid Crime,
However Monstrous left to future Time:
When soon their Haughty Feigned by Poets the Judge of Hell, and may in some
sort resemble Bradshaw President of this wicked Court.
Minos did reply
That they could O'rerule pleas of Majesty,
By power, which they held much a finer thing
Then yielding due submission to their King;
Yet could not better reason for it give,
Then that it might with Vagabond Commons Live;
As these course representatives in fact allowed,
Who had no other title to their Crowd.
Whilst their Solicitor, Sputtering Cook, did plead,
That Justice was by them too long delayed:
And of his Lordship much did it entreat,
To make their farce-Tribunal seem more great.
As thus Currs did the Royal Lion bait,
And by their forked Tongues designed his fate,
Far more Inglorious then the pointed steel
That Caesar did from Romes packed Senate feel.
None there was found that durst by Loyal Speech
This horrid Courts high wickedness Impeach:
Until a Wife to the Lord Fairfax, General of the Army.
Lady did with Grandeur say
Words, that her Husband should have owned that day,
By which, she did, unto their guilt, imply
Their bold Contempt of Royal Dignity.
So far the Woman did the Man outdo,
Whose power could not correct their fury now.
Above Treasons height this Court soon Sentence passed,
Deeming time long whilst their Kings Life did last:
That at his end, Regalios of the Throne,
By Sacrilege before that time unknown,
Might with Church-Rapines to them Incom's yield,
As if the spoils of Heaven they would won by Field.
The Rebel Soldier who from Thirst of Gold,
And Lawless power, thought conscience richly sold,
Conducted by the Scum of Humane-kind,
That on State Ruin had their rise designed;
By sound of Trumpet and by beat of Drum
Prepared for Triumph, when the hour should come,
In which by a New-Modell'd Jewish way,
The King, their Nations Savior, they would slay:
And like Unchristned Files when Martyrs fell,
His Blood by parcells for their Lucre sell.
To fast and pray their Who for the most part were the meanest of their party,
and of Low Extraction.
Leaders durst pretend,
When to no rules of Heaven their Souls did bend:
And could their prayers so horridly Intrigue,
As they still more Improved with Hell their League.
And since by Upstart force they much had won,
And Men of place and dignity undone;
They defied Scutch'ons because never said
That Coats of Arms had Rebels famous made:
Or such, in Birth, did with Plebcians snare,
And ought, by right, to be disarmed there.
Yet this truth could not their course Pride abate,
Who raised were, in spite of Fame, by Fate.
Their Rampant Wives and Daughters that before
Had never comely Tire or Garment wore,
Now pampered with best Meat and pleasing Wine,
Chose their Gallants, and, Lady-like, kissed fine.
As thus depraved of Mankind did aspire,
And by their Monarch's death sought to rise higher:
The Generous English, who in Field before
Had bravely fought to aid Majestique power,
Now being con^in'd to homes and full oppressed
By Methods which the Juncto's Votes expressed:
Wished that their separate Numbers could unite,
And though disarmed with Armed Rebels fight.
When many hearts that had before endeared
The Senates Cause, Abhorrers now appeared,
As of that Body was a Faction made
Of Men that endless Scenes of Mischief laid:
And had appointed by their heinous power,
To the Worlds wonder, their Kings dying hour.
One worthy person who sometime had been
A bold Complyer with the Houses Sin,
At Midnight time did to the place arrive,
Where a Caball was sitting to Contrive
The Circumstance and manner of this deed,
That to the Nations shame was to succeed.
Half Naked was he, upright stood his hair;
And like distracted Man his Eyes did stare:
Who to them these words spoke --
Dumb for some days I Have been, and at this time
My Speech restored by Heaven to speak your Crime.
Too long alas, as my wounds may declare,
I was assistant to your Cause in War.
And now my Soul Englighten'd is to know
What guilt was Mine, and how much worse you do.
As you to Supreme wickedness Ascend,
And guide the blow meant for your Sovereigns end:
In hope to plume your Junctos Callow State,
Which before fledged shall with you dissipate;
As your own Armed will ^leight your sway and birth,
And move you from your Seats with scornful Mirth.
Does Cromwell, your Ulisses, want deceit,
Or Soul that swells with hope of being great;
Though low your heads presumptuously he lays,
And for his Brow Usurp Imperial Bays.
But when his Bloody Rule shall have an end,
You shall with one another next Contend:
Till Anar^hy, the Leveller of State,
Does give your confused force a final date,
As unto Royal Power without won field,
Your Armed Bands and Nations hearts shall yield;
Destined by Heaven, as its restoring day
The Throne shall have an Admired splendid way:
When Regicidall Patriots soon shall find
That against their hearts an Arm of Steel's designed.
This and much more to me by Vision's shown,
Which I this dreadful Night to you must own.
And if Fates terrors may your hearts unsear,
Or slack the Iron Crimes yet hardened there,
Know with affright and sorrow I beheld
Your quartered Limbs on Towers and Steeples pil'd.
And like your Treasons height erected high,
Heads that on Bodies here I now espy.
And Cromwell think, though Deathbed end you will have,
And with vast pomp born to an Usurped grave,
Where for base Glory, amongst Royal du^t,
Your Carcass shall be impudently thrust:
That Sacred Vault it shall not desile long,
Before thy Bones with Tyburn-Rebells throng.
And as thy head did Monstrously aspire,
Its Skeleton shall be advanced higher
Then any loathed Skull whose brain with you
Plotted both King and Nation to undo:
Till yours and their vil'd relics to dust fall,
As the Suns angry Eye will burn 'em all.
Enough I'ave said, and if by heavens decree
I Am Dumb again, and still so doomed to be;
The Sacred Power that prompted this address,
If penitenco it does on you impress,
Will grant, for your sakes, whensoe're I Am dead,
That on my Grave that Epitaph be read.
The Cruel Grandees when they heard this speech,
That did their King-killing design Impeach,
On which they placed their Avaricio^s aim,
And thirst of Rule which did their hearts inflame:
They bit their Lips, and with a haughty frown
Denoun^'d that he his Life should soon lay down;
Till when to their Loathed Prison him they send,
And hasten with more rage their Monarchs end.
Soon to the World did Fames loud Tongue relate
The Kings distress and his sad Nations fate:
When Foreign hearts no less then English strove,
For this Great Prince, to blaze their grief and Love.
As passionately their Souls did apprehend
That just dominion every where would end:
Since Englands rule in him, on Earth the best,
Could not upon its Royal Fabric rest.
Thus as the World had one great Mourner been,
And feared the dire effects of Englands Sin,
As Kings and Subjects did at once lament
The Horrid Nature of that President:
Like which none burdened e're the Tongue of Fame,
Or for Man's Overt Act had Treasons name;
That against all Crowned Heads durst vent despite,
And vulgars give, to rule at will, bold right.
Allaru^'d thus, Sc^pters and Mighty States
Soon owned themselves this Junctos opposites.
Yet did to serve King Charles so condescend,
As, by their leave, their Envoys low might bend
To such who had no Right to seats they claimed,
And for their Actings worser far defamed.
But when the August Deputies appeared,
And Sovereign Rule before vile Grandees cleared,
Letting 'em know th'Injustice of their cause,
With its offense to Majesty and Laws:
By Natures Scepter to Mankind conveyed,
When the World her prime Monar^hy obeyed.
Nor could they sever Ligaments of State
Which Heaven did in the Souls of Men create.
Though Fortunes sl^^ has on your Nation past,
When for your side Wars winning Dye was cast,
Expect that she will soon her mean cheat scorn,
Since you it raised, who to obey were born.
And if with due submission you will rely
On duty, and your Princes Clemency:
Like Envoys from great States we will Intercede,
And beg his Pardon for your boldest deed.
The Grandees stung to hear these words addressed,
Which in the Worlds large sense their guilt expressed,
Bearing their Noses high presumed to say,
That of their power and right they would judge their way:
What e're the dictates were that Foreign Prince
Or testy. States by Narratives dispense;
Whose wav*ring Politics, like Winds that blow
Over Seas their Envoys, back and forward go:
Whilst by a t^i^^ing Grandeur they assord
Threats by Legations when fast sheathed their Sword.
Nor did we judg^ when our Votes did decree
The Ruin of the English Monarchy,
That Princes Souls, where State Intrigues reside,
Could ^e to Kings Misfortune ^irm allied.
Since by their practiced Maxims more they fear
A Monarchs Grandeur then employ their care
To support Prince, whose power successless falls,
Or rounded by Wars straits for their aid calls.
This our assurance was when first we armed,
And next by bolder deeds the world allar'm'd;
When your great States were calmly lookers on,
Till our force had in field King Charles undone.
Nor fear we, as proved Legions us surround,
If denounced War on Sea and Land does sound.
Which told your Masters, Menacings they will cease,
And Court us next to be allied by Peace.
Thus spoke this daring Juncto, swelled with Pride,
As Crowns and States with scorn they vilify'd:
Of which some where, as verse must needs confess,
Who to their disrepute did soon address,
Below their greatness, such barefaced Intrigues,
As did with these vild Regicides make Leagues.
And shows that Kings distressed like other Mortals find
The Courtly World in words, then deeds, more kind.
Great Britains Queen who left no means untried,
That on this high concern could be applied;
Which she from Mighty Potentates obtained,
Over whom she judged her Royal Husband Reigned
A King of Hearts: And hoped that she might hear
(Since for his Life Crowns Intercessors were)
Such comfort as would in her Soul allay
The dismal thought of his Life's ending day.
But finding that unhappy rumors flew
With sad Novells, unto her grief found true;
Her Soul, Heroic highly proved before,
Had chose that juncture to avow it more,
By all expressions that a Royal Wife
Could make to save her King, or with him end her Life.
Who thought it was too Womanly to own
That death should her destroy by grief alone;
Or not salute his Lip his dying day,
And next his fall ask death the self same way:
Of her Kings vile Condemners did desire
To which purpose the Queen sent a Letter to Lenthall, the then Speaker of the
pretended House of Commons.
Passport to him, and with him to expire.
This offer, (though the Queen had been decreed
By them to dye, as they durst vote the deed)
Was held too great for their Sense to allow,
Who wished her dead but feared to kill her so.
Thus was the Period of this mighty King,
Whose end Three Kingdoms did to ruin bring,
Presented by all such unhumane spite
As could display Men Monsters unto sight.
When on a Scaffold raised by Crimson guilt,
The Sacred Royal blood was to be split;
As in disguises, worse then Hangings bear
When Russian Murderers are figured there,
Two Persons were in Beards and Vizards found,
More dreadful looked then Bradshaw had sat gown'd:
Designed by wicked Execution to complete
What he pronounced on his false Judgment Seat.
By armed ^iles that were to see him dead,
The Holy King to this dire Stage was led.
Who but a Bishop, whom his Soul had chose
For his Attendant, then desired to use;
When standing on this Peerless Trayt'rous floor,
His Royal Speech corrects their guilty power:
Whilst gloriously, exceeding humane Race,
Appeared his words, his gesture, and his face.
The Antic Villain, who the Axe must hand,
Emboldened was to strike by his Command.
So highly great does his End raise his story
Above what could have been his Earthly Glory:
That even the Tragic Theater of his fall,
Adds reverence, by his death, unto Whitehall.
FINIS.

