SUFFICIENCY OF THE SPIRITS TEACHING WITHOUT Humane Learning. Or a Treatise
tending to prove Humane Learning to be no help to the Spiritual Understanding
of the Word of God. Written (if it may be) for the silencing of such false and
scandalous Reports as have been rumoured about concerning this matter; and also
for the information of all such as desire to know the Truth.

By SAMUEL HOW.

Prove. 14.5. A faithful Witness will not lie, but a false Record will speak
lies.

Esaias 57.14. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling
block out of the way of my people.

Mal. 2.1, 2. And now o ye Priests, this Commandment is for you, if ye will not
hear it, nor consider it in your heart, to give glory to my Name (says the
Lord of Hoasts) I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your
blessings, yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not consider it in
your heart.

Mat. 11.25, 26. At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee o Father,
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise, and
men of understanding, and bast revealed them unto Babes, even so Father,
because thy good pleasure is such.

Luke 16.15. Then he said unto them, ye are they that justify your selves
before men, but God knows your hearts, for that which is highly esteemed among
men, is abomination in the sight of God.

Seen, allowed, and first printed by some friends of the Author. 1639.

Newly printed, and are to-be sold by William Larnar at the Blackmore near
FLEET-BRIDGE, 1655.

To all such as love the truth in Sincericerity, Light, and Understanding, be
multiplied through JESUS CHRIST.
GOds Gracions Promise it is (Christian Reader) that by the 2 These. 2.8.
breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming he will reveal the Man
of Sin, and Son of Perdition: Yet thus witnesses the Spirit, that when it
shall so come to pass, That the Vial of Gods wrath shall be Rev. 16.10, 11.
poured upon the Throne of the Beast, to the darkning of his Kingdom, and
discovering of those strong Delusions, whereby he has long deluded the World,
that then the men of that throne shall gnaw their tongues for sorrow, and shall
blaspheme the God of Heaven.

All which to me appears to be fulfilled and made good concerning this
following Treatise: 1. That when as the Lord by his Word, the breath of his
month, has blown out some smoke of the Bottomless Pit, which I conceive to be
Humane Learning, which is so much magnified, as being a help, whereby to
understand the mind of God.

This matter has so vexed and tormented the men of that Throne, that even J. G.
He himself, at whose request I was moved to open this portion of Scripture, 2
Pet. 3.16. has (as I am credibly informed) reported about this City, that I
made a Calf (meaning a false and unsound exposition) and when I had done,
danced about it; herein exposing not only me, but the very Truth it self, which
I in this point delivered, to the derision, and contempt, and Table-talk of
such as had rather be deceived and believe their learned Teachers (as men call
them) on their bare word, (having the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of Glory with respect of Person) then to receive and justify the Truth of God,
if the Messenger be weak and contemptible, and his message in power, much
plainness, and demonstration of the Spirit, and not beautified with the
excellency of speech, and swelling words of man's wisdom, which is enmity to
God; it crosses and opposes the simplicity of his way in the dispensation of
the glorious Mystery of the Gospel. And therefore God has said of it, as Simon
Peter said to Simon Magus, Act. 8.21. 1 Cor. 1.19.
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter.

But yet (methinks) such men Ephesians. ^.4.
as would carry the show of godliness, should remember the counsel of the
Apostle, That such carriages are things not seemly, though for my own part, I
bless the Lord for it, being to me a more strong confirmation, that I have the
Truth on my side: For thus was Lu^^ ^ 14.
Jesus Christ our Lord served by the wise and learned Pharisees; when as he
taught them such a Doctrine as pleased them not: And thus was Paul the Preacher
of Righteousness dealt by of the learned Act. 17.18.
Athenians, even for preaching Jesus, and the Resurrection. Likewise I read in
Heb. 11. that this in former times was part of the Trial that the Lord
exercised his Witnesses withal, even mockings, verse 36. And therefore as our
Savior teaches me, I have in this case great cause to be glad and rejoice,
for they having so served Jesus Christ. my Lord, and his faithful followers;
then what am I, that I should be one of that number, that have so large ^^t.
5.12.
encouragement and reward promised? I shall therefore quietly pass by all such
things, and only Job 21.3.
with Job in his distressed condition, cr^ve that he and all you that have done
this thing will suffer me to speak, and when I have spoken mock on; seeing as
the Job 12.2.
Servant of God said, Indeed, because ye are the people only, Wisdom must die
with you; so will I make bold to say to you also: Yet for all his
understanding, and such others as heard me, they failed of their zeal for God
and his glory, in that they sought not to suppress and throw down that Calf of
dishonor, which must needs (being an Idol) be a very high provocation in the
eyes of his Glory, which he that put me upon this Exercise, having excepted
against it when it was finished, and with much passion manifested his great
dislike thereof before many witnesses, ought especially, and was obliged to
have done, being then lovingly requested by a friend that was there present,
for the satisfaction of all that Assembly, to instance (if not in all) yet at
least in some particular Scripture, wherein I had perverted it, seeing he had
openly cast an aspersion on all that I had said; but neither he, nor any of his
Profession, though many were then present, did undertake this task, nor yet to
this day has he, or any of them endeavored it: So it may appear my Error was
not so great, or none at all, that they could prove; or else their zeal to God
and his Truth, and their charity to me and others very small. And if there were
a Calfe, it was their Humane Learning and Wisdom which the men of this Throne
set up, and themselves danced about it, whilst I, to their great grief and
discontent, was laboring with all the power and might that God assisted me
with, utterly to cast down, grind it to ponder, and to blow it away with the
Word of God with the breath of his mouth: Whether it be thus, or no, I commend
now to the judgment of all such as love and know the Truth, not doubting but
there will be some found, that out of love will reprove what is amiss, and so
turn the sinner out of the error of his way, though some others, as Job ^;
Job says, forge lies (as I could name diverse) who are Physicians of no value.

For God who knows the hearts of all men, knows that it was not my intent at
all at that time to have meddled in this Argument, nor with this Scripture, not
till the night before I spoke of it, and all because I knew if I did, it would
be offensive, as it has proved; and what I did herein, it was by the advice of
Friends; But now I see that Gods hand was in it, and I doubt not but for good,
though it is, and may be my portion deeply to suffer for it; and for men to be
offended at the truth, and such as declare it, is no new thing, even for the
Psa. Acts 4.1 Esaias 8.14, ^
builders themselves to stumble at the stumbling stone: But leaving all such to
stand or fall to their own Lord.

Something remains to be spoken concerning the matter following, for the
preventing of such things as may further be objected against it.

1. Though the matter be the same in substance that it was at the first
delivery, yet somewhat may be wanting, and is, which was then said, and more is
added in other respects then at that time was spoken, which I thought fit to
give notice of.

2. Another exception, and that of great moment, is, that I have blasphemed
against Jesus Christ, in saying, that he was without Humane Learning.

Now besides what is answered hereunto in the first Objection belonging to the
first Doctrine, if any yet remain unsatisfied, and will affirm the contrary,
let them declare, (as the Romans 11.34, 35.
Apostle says) who was his Councellor? and who taught him? and he shall be
recompensed. The Scripture cells us, that he grew in wisdom and stature, and
so couples them alike together. Now none will affirm, that he learned his
Stature; then from the like will I affirm, that he learned not his Wisdom, no
more then he did his Stature; and so if none taught him, then must it needs
follow, that he was without Humane Learning; for we in common speech call them
unlearned, which were never taught, as did the John 7.15. Act 4.13
Jews; and Learning presupposes one to Teach; so that (methinks) it is but
requisite, if any did so affirm, that they should declare his Teacher, which if
they cannot do, why then should they affirm him to have Humane Learning? And
methinks, the matter being rightly considered, it will be found blasphemy for
any to affirm that He had Humane Learning, seeing that in so doing, they call
in question the perfection of His Manhood, as if there were others that could
add unto Him: Seeing all grant that the Master is above the Scholar; and the
Scripture witnesses for me, that at Luke 2.46.47.
twelve years old, such was His Wisdom observed amongst the Doctors, as that
they were astonished at his understanding and answers; and doubtless this was a
part of their grear wonder, seeing that He never Learned, as it was the
Councels wonder also concerning Act. 4.13.
Peter and John. Therefore for any to affirm him to be by men taught, is to
take that glory from him which he had of His own, and so they are most like to
be them that blaspheme.

3. It is also very likely that Pride and Vainglory will be imputed to me, as
it has been already, that I being as I am, should undertake to maintain that
which all godly and learned men are contrary to me in.

God to meet with such hard measure, even for declaring of the truth; for so
was Joseph Genesis 37.8.11.
dealt by even of his Father and Brethren; and so was Sam. 17.28.
David used for speaking for the Lord: And Paul you shall sind was Act. 17.18.
coffed at by the learned Athenians. And seeing that it has always been so
with Gods Servants, why should not I affirm with the Cor. 4.3.
Apostle, not to pass to be judged of men, whatsoever they be, though godly,
wise, learned; seeing that as the Apostle says, it makes no matter to me, God
is no Gal. 2.6.
accepter of persons: And therefore I hold it a defense sufficient with David
to say, 1 Samuel 17.29
Is there not a cause? seeing that there is none that I know of that will stand
up for the Lord against those that defy the Host of Israel, because that they
be not Goliath like Men of stature, having Bows of brass, and such like
furniture, as that the fl^shly hearts of men dare not lock such in the face,
and all because that they be so strongly furnished with Man's strength: Though
that the Soldiers of the Lord of Hoasts may with one blast of a Rams horn,
through the might of God, Josh. 6.20.
blow down the strong Wall of this spiritual Jericho; seeing that the Lord
has said, That by the Mat. 21.16.
mouth of Babes and Sucklings he will perfect his praise; and this if Babes
should neglect to do, the stones would cry. Whence it is to be observed, our
Savior descends from Babes to Stones, and not from Babes to Learned men, for
he has chosen such to bring forth His Righteousness as the light; for He
himself does not despise the day of Zach. 4.10.
small things. Now these things considered, why should any with the proud Mat.
21.15.
Pharisees disdain at what the Lord will do, but lay their hands upon their
mouths and say nothing, because He Psalm. 39.
does it; And seeing it is the Lords Psalm. 118.23.
doing, why should it not be mavelous in our eyes? Though I doubt not but the
Lord will in his good time bring forth one learned Moses, and another as
excellent that ways as was Paul, and cause them, disclaiming that Humane
excellency, to magnify the foolishness of God, 1 Cor. 1.
to be wiser then the wisdom of men, and so every way convince them of their
folly, this way to his praise.

And in the mean while let them that can receive this for truth, receive it,
and let none be so conceited of Learned men, as if the Word of God came only to
them, and from them; as Paul said to 1 Cor. 14.36, 37.
some that were puffed up. But let such as are Spiritual know, that the Lord
reveals his Mysteries to whom he pleases, and where he will; and therefore the
eye of none should be evil because he is good: But we should learn, as the wise
in an says, That Eccles. 9.11.
the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong; but it may
so prove, that little David, without Saul's Arm or, only with a Sling, and a
stone through the Name of the Lord, may so wound great Goliath of Gath, the
enemy of God and his people, as that he may receive his deadly wound, and lie
grovelling on the ground, to the dismayment of all the Host of the Philistines,
and great rejoicing of the Israel of God, and this the Stone that is he wen out
of the Mountain without hands, is only able to do. Therefore let all that fear
the Lord take heed that they lean not to their own wisdom, but so much the
more that any ^f us have wisdom, and Understanding, Memory, and such ^ike
natural parts, above other, so much the more let us be watchful and careful
over our selves, as knowing that the Romans 8.7.
Wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, and is ready to butt against the
Spirit. And now to draw to a conclusion of all in the words of the Prophet,
Esaias 44.25.
The Lord frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes the Diviners mad,
turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge foolishness.

If any shall except against the matter for the rudeness of it, as that it is
without form or learning, all such are to know, that it is but suitable to the
whole argument, and that if it should be otherwise, I should condemn that in
practice, which I justify in words, and so make my self a Trespasser. Thus I
commit this my labor, with all those that out of love to the truth shall seek
information in this matter, to the blessing of the most High, and remain an
unfaigned well-willer of all them that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity. The
25. day of the first month, 1639.

WHat How? how now? has How such learning found?
To throw Arts curious Image to the ground:
Cambridge and Oxford, may their glory now,
Vail to a Cobbler, if they know but H^w:
Though big with Art, they cannot overtop
The Spirits teaching in a Cobblers shop.
Reader, if thou an humane Artist be,
Let Humane Learning be no Judge for thee:
Lay down thine Arts; then try this Cobblers end,
And see if it be by the Spirit penned.
Mean time adue, ye Arts and Artists all,
The Spirits teaching may attend the Aul:
And thou brave Cobbler, blow another blast
Upon their learning, though thou blow thy LAST.
R. O. THE SVFFICIENCY OF THE SPIRITS TEACHING WITHOUT HVMANE LEARING.
The Text, 2 PETER 3.16. As one that in all his Epistles speaks of these
things, in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are
unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures unto their
own destruction.


THese words, that I am By J.G. and S.B. Ministers of London.
allotted to speak from at this time, have respect, as it should seem, to such
things as the Apostle had spoken of before, which things seem to me to be those
that are contained from the beginning of the second Chapter, to the end of the
13. verse of this third Chapter, and the 14. verse contains Peter's exhortation,
strengthened in the 15. verse, by his Brother Paul's writings, who in all his
Epistles speaks of these things, as of the Christ second coming mentioned in
all Paul's Epistles.
coming of the Lord Jesus, and other things, such as are herein contained,
among the which (that is) Paul's writings in his Epistles, some things were hard
to be understood, and so indeed was the coming of Christ Jesus, which it should
seem was hard of them to be undersood, and that appears by his earnest w^iting
to the 2 These. 2. at the beginning.
Thessalonians, where he exhorts them, That they should not suddenly be moved,
neither by Word, nor Epistle. as it were from him, as if the day of Christ were
at hand, for there were many things to be fulfilled first, as a departure from
the Faith, the rising up, the perfection and the consumption of the Man of Sin;
and this it should seem, though he had told them of it before, yet to them it
was hard to be understood, which had the true learning here meant, which things
they that were unlearned and unstalbe perverted, as they did other Scriptures,
to their own destruction; therefore the great thing here to be minded, is to
find out what this learning is that Peter here intends. And secondly, who they
be that are the unlearned ones, and by that we shall easily find who they be
that are the perverters of the Scriptures to their own destruction. For this
end therefore I will consider what this learning is not, and then what it is.

What learning it is not.
It is not Humane Learning: That I may not be misconceived about it, I will
here lay down my understanding in it; and by Humane Learning I do not mind the
knowledge and understanding of our own language, which every man, of what Tongue
soever he be, might in some measure be taught of another, as the Parents teach
their Children, and they learn of them; of this there is a natural necessity,
as the Apostle says, How shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? Now the hearing there mentioned, Romans 10.14.
must needs be a natural hearing, seeing it is set before Faith; and this
hearing must needs be the understanding of the sound of words spoken. Now thus
Peter and John, and all the rest, learned the foolish things spoken of, 1 Cor.
1.21. And thus I acknowledge that there is none but in some measure have this
learning, and must of necessity have it, to understand Gods mind in an ordinary
way: But by Humane Learning, all along in this matter, which I oppose, it is
the knowledge of Arts and Sciences, diverse Tongues, and much reading, and a
persisting in these things, so as thereby to be made able to understand the
mind of God in his Word; this is it that I condemn from the Word of Truth, for
being that, by which any is made able spiritually to understand the mind of
God, which the Apostle says, cannot be attained to by the words which man's
wisdom teaches; all which, these excellencies are said to be: ^or. 2.13.
So that by Humane Learning, I do here understand, that whereby certain men do
excel, and are far above and beyond other ordinary men; and in this sense do I
understand, that the Council judged Peter and John to be no such learned men:
Act. 4.13.
For we in common speech do oppose a learned man to one that otherwise can read
and write in his own Tongue, though he do not understand the grounds of his own
speech, as the other man that is learned does; as may appear by the Book called
the English Schoolmaster; and so such learning do I not conceive to be here
meant, which I conclude for these reasons.

1. Because that then Peter must of necessity condemn himself, 1 Reason.
for he was a man, that in the Act. 4.13.
Councels knowledge was such an unlearned man, and so must needs himself lie
under that blame that he lays upon others; therefore Humane Learning is not
here that which he intends. 2. Because Humane Learning is a Col. 2.8.
rudiment of this world; 2 Reason.
hence it is that our Savior acknowledges that his Mysteries were hid from
the Luke 10.21.
learned; but they were not hid from his Disciples, For unto them it was Mar.
13. Col. 2.8.
given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom: And the rudiments of this world
are not after Christ, the Apostle tells us; therefore Humane Learning cannot be
it that Peter here minds. 3. Because the Or carnal.
natural man cannot 1 Cor. 2.14.
perceive the things of God; 3 Reason.
but a mere natural man, may be a great worldly learned man, as were the
Egyptians, and Babylonians, and as are many of the Romish Priests and Jefuits;
therefore for this cause, that is not the learning here meant. 4. Because such
of Gods Servants, 4 Reason.
as have had such kind of learning, when as they came to know Christ, they
forsook it all: As Moses, when he came to age, though he was Act. 7.32.
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, yet by Faith he forsook all the
treasures of Egypt; and this being one of Aegypts treasures, he forsook this
also, for when he says treasures, there is none excepted; therefore in as much
as learning was one, as well as riches and honors, he forsook that also, as
seeing by Faith a better treasure in the worst condition among the people of
God, then in the best condition in the world, suppose it be learning.
The like is to be seen in Paul, who counted all things loss and dung that he
might win Christ, even the righteousness of the Law it self, which is far
beyond all this, and all this he did, that he might know him: Wherein the
Apostle gives me to understand, that all such things were but hindrances to
keep him from the knowledge of Christ to salvation, which is it that here I
mind also; therefore likewise this is not the learning here meant, seeing it
was rejected of them, therefore it was no help nor furtherance to them to know
Christ by, but lets and hindrances, and so much appears by those Converts in
Acts 19.18, 19. Who when they believed, are said, such of them as used curious
Arts, to burn their Books, The price whereof was fifty thousand pieces of
silver.
declaring that how they had met with learning of far greater worth, then their
curious Arts, and therefore now they burn their Books, declaring that now they
had no more need of them; and so I conclude, that such as this was not the
learning here meant.

What learning it is.
I now come to manifest what learning it is the Apostle here intended.

Now the learning here intended by the Apostle, it is as I understand, that
sound knowledge and sure information that every Christian has in Jesus Christ,
whereby he is so deeply rooted, Col. 2.7.
and so surely grafted into him by Faith, as that he abides unmoveably settled
in him, Ephesians 3.17, 18. Pet. 2.6.
as thereby he abides stable in the sure knowledge and understanding of the
Word of Christ; and so much here methinks the Apostl^ gives us to understand,
how that the unlearned, they be unstable; then on the contrary, the learned
they are stable, believing, and being laid on the true foundation, they shall
never be confounded, or ashamed. Now such as these are, that are learned, as
the truth is in Jesus, these may well say to the greatest wordly learned ones,
as Philip said to the Eunuch, Understand thou what thou read? and not
only so, but such may teach them the understanding of the mystery, saying,
These are taught and instructed by the Teachings of the Spirit of God,
agreeable to these Scriptures: 1 Cor. 2.10.
That it has not entered into the heart of man to conceive of that which God by
his Spirit (which searches the deep things of God) has revealed unto us. And
this the Apostle further explains, That as no man knows the things of a man,
save the spirit of a man which is in him; so the things of God knows no man,
(no not a worldly learned man) but by the Spirit of God: And so he goes on, to
difference the Spirit of the World A difference between the teaching of Gods
Spirit, and the worlds artificial Tongues.
from Gods Spirit, and shows, that that is it whereby the things of God are
known, and also manifested to others; so that all the things of God, both for
matter and manner, flow from the wisdom of Gods Spirit, and not what man's
wisdom teaches, which is to compare spiritual things and carnal things
together, as Tongues and Arts, and such like; but Gods Spirit teaches us to
compare spiritual things with spiritual things; and so he goes on, and
declares, that only such that are taught by the Spirit, are capable of true
discerning of spiritual things, without being justly condemned of any, as
truly having the mind of Christ, rightly and truly knowing the things that are
of God; and with this agrees the witness of John 1 John 2.^6, 27.
saying, These things have I written unto you concerning them that deceive you;
whereby it appears they had deceivers about them, and those things were written
concerning such: But says the Apostle in opposition to their deceivings, ye
have received the Anointing of him that dwells in you, and this anointing that
they had received does he oppose to their deceiving, as being able thoroughly to
teach them so, as that they needed not that any man teach them, save as that
anointing taught them: Then seeing that that anointing never did teach them
such Tongues or Arts, as were humane, therefore the Saints by the Apostles
grant had not need of any such learning, and yet this anointing taught all
truth and obe^i^n^e in it also. And yet, further John 16.7. with 13.
our Savior himself concludes this point, showing, that when he has sent the
Comforter, the Spirit of Truth to them, that then he shall lead them into all
truth. Whence I do conclude, that for the Disciples knowledge of the truth,
there was no more necessary, according to the mind of him that was Truth, but
the Spirit of God to lead them into all truth without all error, teaching by
no humane means; the reason why is rendered, because it is sufficient, and that
is, because it speaks from the Father, agreeable to that of our Savior taken
from the Prophet, That John 6.45.
we shall be all taught of God; and so indeed being taught of the Spirit, we
are taught of the Father and the Son also, which are all one; and so our
learning comes to us, being taught of the Father, Son, and Spirit, for all our
Instructers and Counselors, and this is all the lear^ing that we need, to know
the things that are of God by, agreeable to his will. So from these words thus
interpreted, the conclusion comes to this.

That such as are tought by the Spirit of God, Proposition.
destitute of Humane Learning, are the learned ones, that truly understand the
Scriptures, according to Peter's mind.

I say, such as are taught by the Spirit, without Humane Learning, are such
persons as rightly understand the Word: And this (methinks) the whole Council
of Jerusalem, as wicked as they were, did in effect conclude, Act. 4.13, 14.
considering Peter and John, though unlearned men, yet they knew they had been
with Jesus by their boldness, and so they had nothing to say against it; and
yet though men should oppose it, Christ Jesus our Lord Luke 10.21. to 24.
justifies it, with great thankfulness to his Father, that having hid these
things from the wise and prudent, he had revealed them to Babes: Now that
revealing must needs be by the Spirit, according to that, 1 Cor. 2.10. And on
this manner is it that our Lord comforts his Disciples, telling them, that all
things were given him of his Father to reveal; and so in that regard he tells
them, that blessed are the eyes that see that that they saw, which was, as the
Apostle says, God manifested in the flesh, which many wise men and Kings
desired to see, but could not see it; and so that was now made manifest to
them, which before was hid from wise men and Scribes, and so was at the present
also; for few of the wise could attain to the knowledge of him and his
doctrine, as they did. Now with this also agrees what our Mat. 22.23.29.
Savior affirms to the Sadduces, who by reason of their wisdom and learning
thought to have entangled him, he tells them, that they erred, not knowing the
Scriptures, for all their great learning being destitute of Gods Spirit. Now by
these Scriptures, this point being thus confirmed, good reason also may by Gods
Word be brought for the further justifying of it: As

Salvation in great contempt and enmity to man's wisdom: Hence is it that the
Apostle says, that he preached Christ crucified to the Jews a 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.
stumbling block, and to the Grecians foolishness: For the Jews, we read, in
great contempt refused him; as Pilate bid them behold your John 19.19.21.
King, presently they cry, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. And so
when Pilate had wrote on the Cross, that he was King of the Jews, they took it
as a great prejudice to them, and therefore wished him to write, That he said
he was King of the Jews.

And so as Peter tells them in Acts 3. They denied him, and desired a murderer
to be given them: And to this agreed the Gentiles, for they had their hands
also in his death: And we find that when as Paul preached him at Athens, Act.
17.18.23.
that then this saying of the Apostle here is made good, both of Jews and
Gentiles; and indeed they both agree to hang him, betwixt heaven and earth, as
being in their esteem worthy of neither, and yet even in this crucified Jesus,
lies contained the salvation of Act. 4.12.
all (both Jews and Gentiles) that are saved; and in this despised Jesus, are
all to rejoice with the 1 Cor. 2.2. Gal. 6.14.
Apostle to salvation; for in him, thus dishonorable and unmeet in man's
wisdom, lie hid all our heavenly Col. 2.3. 1 Cor. 1.20.
treasures of wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption; for he is
the wisdom of God, and power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.

Humane Learning, come thus to know Gods mind, is, That (as the 1 Cor. 1.29.
Apostle declares) no flesh should rejoice in Gods presence; now this learning
is but fleshly and carnal: Now the Apostles advise is, though we had known 2
Cor. 5.16.
Christ Jesus after the flesh, yet now coming to be after God, we should
henceforth know him so no more; and here is a sufficient reason, because
knowledge is subject to puff us up, as says the 1 Cor. 2.8.
Apostle: When as love, and the learning of the Spirit, keeps us low in our own
eyes, and causes, as Solomon says, our minds to be good, making us suitable
to the Apostles exhortations, Romans 12.16.
saying, Be not high-minded, but make your selves equal to them of the lower
sort; be not wise in your selves, but Phil. 2.3.
let every man esteem others better then himself; and if any glory, let him 1
Cor. 1.31.
Here glorying in the Lord is opposed to vainglory, or haughtiness.
glory in the Lord. Now he that has these things, as Humane Learning and
Wisdom more then another, let him weigh and consider duly with himself, whether
he does not think, and conclude, that he in regard of these things, is not more
to be respected, then they that are without them: Now then 1 Cor 5.
this rejoicing is not good, for it is a rejoicing in the flesh, and suitable
to Romans 4.
works, and so not of God; and yet so is it, that for our hearts we cannot but
think better of our selves for these things, then of others without them; and
so we may see the Apostles words fulfilled, that the wisdom ^f the Romans 8.3.
flesh, that is, whatsoever the flesh is excellent in, it is enmity to God, it
is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be.

Spirits teaching is sufficient without Humane Learning, is, because, as the
Apostle says, We are complete in him, that is, perfect and full in him; and
this he strengthens yet further from this consideration, that he is the Head of
all Principalities and Powers; so that if there were any thing else to make us
complete, he being the Head of all, we should have it; but he has given
nothing but his 1 Cor. 12.7.
Spirit to profit withal, therefore we are complete by it alone; and therefore
is it that Paul 1 Timothy 6.20.21.
exhorts Timothy to keep that which was committed to him, which was the Faith
taught by the Word and Spirit, and wishes him to avoid and beware of Science,
that is, all knowledge natural, which is comprehended under Col. 2.8.
Philosophy, learned, profane bablings, and oppositions to the Faith of
Christ; and so much is by the Apostle there declared, saying, Which while some
have lusted after, they have erred from the Faith: So that it is most plain and
clear, that these things are so far from perfecting men, or helping of them in
the knowledge of the truth, as that they hinder, and cause such as profess
them to err from the Faith: Even all the seven Liberal Sciences, for all is
but Science, and all this Science or knowledge is falsely said to be of use in
the Gospel; profane and vain bablings are far better names for them, and
oppositions, according to Paul's teaching; and he says of himself, I think I
have the Spirit of God, and so indeed he had without doubt, and so our ground
remains good, that we are complete in Christ Jesus.

1 Cor. 3.18.
advise, Let no man deceive himself; and that in the true way of attaining
wisdom, he declares what it is, in these words, That such a one is to become a
fool, that he may be wise and how is that, but by knowing that indeed there is
nothing in all man's wisdom, to be any whit helpful, but hurtful to him, in
attaining and comprehending the wisdom of God in Christ: Now what is more
foolish to a man, then to know that there is nothing that all the wits of man
can reach unto, that can benefit him? and if nothing, then not the thing in
question, but that it must needs be, that we must be fools to it; and what is
the true mark of a fool, but to be ignorant, and without knowledge? therefore
we call them fools in the world, and so is it here: The best way for a man to
deceive himself, is to know nothing of this Learning, nor any other fleshly
excellency, that so he may learn true wisdom; and the Apostle does (methinks)
sufficiently confirm this advice of his against all exceptions, The Lord knows
(says he) that the thoughts of m^^ be vain: Men think highly of their own
conceits this way, ye^ if no man will take this his counsel for wisdom in
this kind, yet the Lord concludes the truth of it, and he knows the thoughts
of men to be vain, that think Humane Learning some help: but let them think
what they will, the Lord is against them in it, for he knows that it is sure
that they are deceived, for his thoughts be not as man's thoughts.

Spirits teaching, and preferres it, usually he at the same time casts contempt
upon this learning, as is to be seen in many places; 1 Cor. 1.17.18.
Christ (says he) sent me to preach the Gospel, not with the wisdom of
words, lest I should make the cross of Christ, or the Gospel of Christ of none
effect, where we see, that for good reason he rejects the very wisdom of words
in preaching of the Gospel, and that is, lest if he should have done otherwise,
he should have made it of no effect, because he was to declare the sincere
word, without the least mingling; as if he should say, such manner of preaching
is a foolish preaching, but it is so only to them that perish, but to such as
are saved it is the power of God, without what man expects: and therefore he 2
Cor. 11.^.2, 3.
says again, he was jealous over them with a godly jealousy, for he had
prepared them a pure Virgin for Christ: but, says he, I fear, that as the
Serpent beguiled Eve, but how? through his subtlety, so your min^s should be
corrupt, that is, putrified, and infected from the sincerity that is in
Christ: This we see was Paul's fear, that while he was absent their minds
should be withdrawn from the foolishness of the Gospel, and the simplicity,
sincerity, and truth thereof, and this they should be withdrawn from by the
subtlety of Satan that old Serpent, in his instruments the false Teachers;
this he fears, because of their fleshlinesse that was in them, which was ready
to yield to their wiles by reason of their subtlety that way, for by fair
words and flatteries they deceived the To. 16.18.
hearts of the simple, and with this their craftiness they lie in wait to Ephesians.
4.14.
deceive; thus contemptuously does Paul speak of those things, in opposition
to the true learning, as is further to be seen in many places, of which I will
name one more, and that from the Apostle Peter in his second Epistle, Chap. 1.
Verse 16. For we, says he, followed not deceiveable Fables, when we opened
unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus. Now such names as these are
does the Apostle choose to cast on man's excellencies, as in diverse other 1 Timothy
1.4. and 4.7. Tit. 3.9.
places, which declare what contempt is cast on such learning in opposition to
the Spirit of God.

Cor. 2.10. The spirit searches the deep things of God, and verse 14. The
spiritual man discerns all things; if then the spirit searches the deep things
of God, and that discerns all things, what need we more? And with this agrees
the Apostle John, saying, And ye need not that any man teach you, save as that
Anointing teaches you. 1 John 2.27.
Then I conclude, That we need not that any man teach us, not the Master, nor
any of his followers, for the Disciples of Jesus Christ do learn (as the truth
is) in him, and of him, and they have received the Spirit of God, that they
might know the things of God; therefore we may well be without any man's
learning, and have no need of it; and so the point is clear and plain. That
such as are taught by Gods Spirit without that learning, do truly understand
the Word.

I judge it necessary also to be understood of the Reader, what I do understand
by Humane Wisdom, as well as Humane Learning: by Humane Wisdom, I do
understand whatsoever appears excellent in man's understanding, as he is left
without Gods Spirits teaching, this the more excellent it is to him that is
carnal, so much the worse it is; therefore it is said of such by the Apostle,
That when as they professed themselves to be wise, then they became fools. Romans
1.21. Mat. 6.23.
And says our Savior, If the light which is in this (which I mind to be meant
of men's understanding and wisdom) be darkness, how great is that darkness?
So that by man's wisdom, I understand, whatsoever seems excellent to him with
which he would honor God withal, that he is not the Author of, as eloquence,
and fair speeches, and any thing in tha^ way, such as the Greeks sought after,
as men do now adays* this I do the rather differ from Humane Learning, 1 Cor.
1.22.
because i^ seems to me that the Scripture differenceth them, Acts 22. and the
difference rightly understood, may prevent just exception^ and give light to
the right understanding of the whole matter^ for this wisdom is made by the
Apostle, Romans 6.7.
and that rightly, to be enmity to the Spirit of God, and impossible to submit
to it, it i^ so contrary.

Now follows to be answered such Objections as are made against it: As first,

Paul, in 1 Timothy 3.6. That a Bishop must be no young Scholar, lest he being
puffed up, fall into the condemnation of the Devil.

Paul means here, is the teaching of the Spirit, whereby the man is made sound
in the Faith; for that learning only will make men low in their own eyes, as is
before declared, and he that is unsound in the faith, will ever be found the
most lofty, and puffed up in his own conceit, and so be rejected of God, as the
Devil was, though he was in heaven with God, yet being puffed up, he was
rejected of God, and so 2 Pet. 2.
cast down to hell; to which example Paul here alludes, as I conceive, and that
rightly, for a Bishop in the Church, is in respect of his spiritual state and
place, in favor and fellowship with God, and that in heaven, as the whole book
of the Revelation describes the Church to be. Now such as by the Church should
be chosen to that state, being young Scholars, that is, not soundly taught in
the truth by the Spirit, he is in great danger; the more other learning that he
has, so much the more to be puffed up. This I believe was the cause of
Diotrephes 3 Ioh. 9.10.
pride, he wanted this Scholarship, and that caused him to seek the
pre-eminence; and this, whatsoever our great Scholars think of themselves, is
the cause of the high conceits that they have of themselves, and their knowledge
and understanding above others that want their learning, even this, because
they be but young Scholars (if that) in the School of Christ; and thence is it
they are so puffed up with the vainglory of their fleshly learning, that they
think that none that are not as themselves are, fit to be their fellows, and so
know not how that they be wretched, poor, miserable, blind, and naked; though
they conceive themselves to be rich, and have need of nothing, as did the Rev.
3.17.
Laodiceans, and so indeed are fallen into the condemnation of the Devil, as
being rejected of God, for he resists the proud, and such as are puffed up, and
gives grace to the 1 Pet. 5.5.
humble, and such as are low in their own eyes. Now whether these men humanly
learned, be they that are puffed up, or low in their own eyes, as mean as he that
is unlearned, I leave to all that have eyes to see and look into it, and so to
judge whether they are not yet to learn Paul's Scholarship.

Further, I say, it is here to be minded, that if it should be Humane Learning
that is here meant, then Paul should teach Timothy for to teach the Church to
choose such Scholars, as had more learning then had their Master Christ Jesus:
Now this, some say, is blasphemy, and threaten me sorely for it.

Christ Jesus as God, according to the Divine Nature, so he is God over all,
and so gives all things, Acts 17.25. and so he is the Jam. 1.17.
giver of every good gift, and so Humane Learning and Wisdom are To. 11.37.
of him; and so much (but that men are maliciously bent) they might discern,
that I in this argument had not to deal with him, as God, but as the Minister
of God, administering for the good of his body, according to that, Luke 24.18.
What learning Christ had.
where he says, The Spirit of the Lord has Anointed me that I should
Minister, etc. and so in this argument he is by the Apostle set forth as a Man,
Act. 2.22.
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God; and such a man so administering, I do
still affirm, and that with great confidence, that he was unlearned in this
consideration, and without the learning that we speak of; and so the Tongue of
the Isa. 5.1.
learned that was said to be given him, is Isa. 61.1.
interpreted by the same Prophet, to be the Spirit of God; For, says he, The
Spirit of the Lord has Anointed me that I should preach; from whence is plain,
That Christ Jesus was learned of the Father to preach by the Spirit, See
further of this in the Epistle noted with ()
without Humane Learning, and so much is plain to them that can believe the
Scriptures, from John 7.15. where the Jews admire, saying, How comes this man
to know the Scriptures, seeing that he was never learned? From whence it is
plain, that as he was a Man, he was unlearned in the letters of the Scriptures,
though as God he knew all things, and by a Divine Power, not Humane Learning,
so much as his own natural Tongue by letter, as in the Synagogue he could take
the Book and read; Luke 4.17.
and this doubtless was one cause why the Jews are said to be astonished at
the hearing and seeing of him, as appears, Matthew. 13.54. etc. Luke 4.22. so
that from all this, my affirmation remains true, and good, that if Humane
Learning should be it that is there meant by the Apostle, then he was to teach
the Servant to be above his Master, when as Christ Jesus himself Mat. 10.5.
says, It is enough for the Disciple to be as his Lord; and he being destitute
of Humane Learning, his Disciples may well be without it also, without any
offense, and yet preach the Gospel too. Now, if notwithstanding all this,
there be them that will take Act. 6.11.
Stephens accusers place, and still accuse me of blasphemy, as they did him,
etc. though it may be they may say true words, as that I said that Jesus Christ
was without Humane Learning, and so apply it to him as God, when as I spoke of
him as Man, they may there see themselves ranked among the number of them that
are called by the Spirit of God, False Witnesses, as walking in the steps of
those envious persons, Chief Priest chief in spilling innocent blood.
even such as were always the Murderers and Betrayers of Christ Jesus and his
Servants; and they that are such, may be likened to them that being full of
envy, Act. 13.45.
spoke against those things that were spoken of Paul, contrarying them, and
railing on them: Mark it, they denied what he taught, but disproved it not, but
spoke against it, and railed on the person, and so left not, till they had been
a means to expel them out of their Coasts; so was he, and such like measure is
still to be expected to befall such as tread in his steps; but it is to be
minded, that envious ones are the movers of it; and so leaving of it, I come to
another exception, which is,

unlearned, will be able to stop the mouths of Gainsayers, seeing the Apostle
requires of a Tit. 1.11.
Bishop, that he should be able so to do?

mouths of Gainsayers should be stopped by the knowledge of Tongues and Arts,
but that way that himself directs, The way to stop Gainsayers mouths.
1 Titus 9. which is by sound Doctrine, or by wholesome Doctrine; so then, to
go to any other way then thus to stop their mouths, is both unsound, and an
unwholesome course; and it were far better in my judgment, and that according
to Paul, and that their mouths should be left open, then that they should be
stopped after that manner, and that it has not profited them in the spiritual
meaning of the word that have been exercised therein: So now it is high time,
that we honoring the teaching of the Spirit, should refuse to meddle with such
as go another way to work, then by it, to declare Gods mind to us, because it
alone is sufficient to stop the mouths of all Gainsayers. Act. 6.10.
They were not able to resist the Spirit (not the Tongues and Arts) by which he
spoke, for he used none of them, for the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, and so are Tongues and Arts, and such like, but yet mighty, not by
man, but through God, to 2 Cor. 10.4.
cast down holds; therefore this Weapon only is sufficient to stop the mouth of
all gainsayers, and for such as think it not sufficient, much good let their
Humane Learning do them, and the good Lord give me of his holy Spirit only to
do this work: And so I come to the next exception, which is,

Tongues in the Apostles times in the Churches, Acts 2. Acts 8. Acts 10. Acts
19. 1 Cor. 12. and 1 Cor. 14.

Act. 2.2.8.27.10.44.19.6.
Scriptures: Now wheresoever such gifts are to be found, them will I freely
acknowledge, as being indeed suitable to the Gospel, which brings to us freely
all good gifts, without any labor or pains of ours, and therefore all is said
to be of gift, least any man should boast: But if the Tongues that are pleaded
for, are such as are attained to by industry and pains taking of our own, then
they better suit with works then grace, and so are more meet for Arts for
Egypt and Babylon.
Egypt and Babylon, then for the Church of Jesus Christ, Gracious gifts for
the Church.
which comes by all her precious gifts gratis, and therefore such as plead for
these things, as suitable to the Ministers, become in effect suitable with Act.
8.18.
Simon Magus, who would have obtained the gift of the Spirit by money, which
there was the gift of Tongues, and if these Tangus pleaded for, be the same,
they are all attained by money; and if this be so good a way now, why does
Peter so evilly intrea^ him, for desiring that for money, which all afterward
by these pleas were thereby to obtain? But Peter, we see, perceives him to be
in the gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity, that should offer to seek
to obtain the gift of Gods Spirit that way; and i^ they be humane excellencies,
then of necessity the course is to b^ repented of also, that any should offer
to bring any human^ thing to Gods Word, when as it is so expressly forbidden u^^
That we put nothing thereto, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Pro. 30.6.
nor take any thing therefrom P^^ nothing to his Word, lest he reprove thee,
and thou be found a ly^^^ Now there is nothing but the Word and Spirit go
together therefore they are liable to Gods reproof, which is Ps. 50.21.22.
tearing i^ pieces: Therefore let all such as stand for such learning t^ bring
men to the knowledge of Gods Word, mind whethe^ Peter's exhortation to Simon
Magus, ought not to take place with them, namely to Act. 8.22.
repent of this their wickedness, etc. and acknowledge the Spirit of God
freely bestowed, to be the alone furnisher of us to that which is right in his
sight, without which none have part or fellowship of this business, in
understanding and unfolding of the things of God; and so I come to another
exception.



The unlearned man: For these Reasons.

Gal. 2.6.
God no respecter of persons, when be chused the unlearned for Ministers.
God respects no man's person: Now if God should take the learned man; then he
must be respected above the other for it; if he be of right and due to be
preferred, which is wickedness once to think of him, for all are alike in that
respect: But the Scripture tells us, and that for good reason, That without any
respect at all, he of his good pleasure, and that no flesh should glory, has
chosen the foolish things, and the vile things in man's account, he has chosen
the 1 Cor. 1.27.
foolish things of this world to confound the wise: Then if God have so chosen,
let him have his own choice, it is meet he should, for his choice is the best;
and the end why he has so chosen, is, that he might confound the wise, and so
Isa. 29.13.
fulfill his Word, as Paul 1 Cor. 1.19.
expresses; and thus he chooses, not only for Salvation, but for Ministration,
the 1 Cor. 4.10.
foolish in man's account: Paul it seems was so foolish in theirs and others
account in his administration of the Word, as that they could scarce suffer it,
and this sense must needs be good, though the place be understood of Gods voice
to salvation only, which cannot be the meaning, because, as we may see Paul's
argument about 2 Cor. 11.17.
preaching the Gospel, going onwards in opposing the Scribe and Disputer of
this World, to them that were not such, and so comes to declare among whom it
was that the Lord made his choice, and that was among the foolish in the worlds
eyes: But as I said before, take the other for the sense, and the point remains
true, because, that of such as God chooses to salvation of them, he chooses
Ministers, and for salvation, it is granted, he chooses the foolish; then it
must needs follow, that out of the foolish also he chus^th Ministers.

Secondly, And this indeed is most suitable to the Gospel, 1 Cor. 11.3.
which is it self simplicity, and appears to the wisdom of man so to be, and
it is not meet, our Savior says, to put contraries together, as a new piece
into an old garment, nor new wine into old vessels, but to have all things
suitable: Therefore seeing the Gospel is 1 Cor. 1.25.
foolishness, therefore it is meet he should have Foolish in the worlds
account was the Lords choice.
foolish Ministers in the wise worlds account, yea, and in his servants too,
when as they see as man sees, and not as does the Lord. For thus was it of old
subject to Samuel, the Lords Prophet, when as the Lord sent him to the House of
Is^ay, to anoint him a King, he seeing as a man does, he said, 1 Samuel 16.6, 7.
Surely the Lords Anointed is before me; but we find that the Lord corrects
that, and tells him, It was not so, the more unlikely man, and the unthought of
one, was he that God had chosen to himself, and so is it here, we are not to
see as man sees, but as the Lord directs us.

Thirdly, God chooses these things in opposition to others, to astonish the
wisdom of man: When the Acts 4.13.
Council perceived Peter and John were unlearned men, and without knowledge,
they marvelled, and were amazed: And so says the Apostle, He 1 Cor. 3.19.
catches the wise in their own craft: they think that all knowledge lies in
their breasts; now the Lord he comes and mak^s fools wise, and so catches
them, manifesting, that their thoughts be but vain, in thinking that the wise
are them that God h^^^ ^hosen, for it is not so, for he has chosen the foolish
to confound the wise, and therefore such as are godly wise, should chu^e Gods
wise, but the worlds foolish things for his serve, before the worlds wise ones;
and so I come to another exception, which is,

sanctified, it must needs be a good help to the right understanding of the
truth.

sanctified, so it is; But how, or where does that appear, that ever it was
sanctified? Has not the Lord long agone told us by his Isa. 29.14.
Prophet, and wished his to behold it, That he would do a mavelous work; and
then he doubles it again, even a mavelous work, and a wonder, and then all
comes to this, that he would cause to perish, and destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and cast away the understanding of the prudent; A curse threatened,
because the people were led by the prec^pis of men, verse 13.
and here, if we could see, we might all of us stay our wondering at this
strange thing, and consider, the Lord tells us, it is a mavelous work, and a
wonder, and so our wondering and marvelling how these things come so to be, is
but a fulfilling of Gods Word; and men might rest in it, and see in the next
words, that it is a woe to them for the former abuse of the same: and so now as
Mal. 2.2.
Malachy says, that he would curse their blessings, and that he had done it
already: to both which 1 Cor. 1.19. Romans 8.7.
agrees the Apostle from Isay, and concludes also, that God has distroyed it:
and in another place tells us, that it is enmity with God. How shall any dare
say then, The worlds learning not sanctified in a spiritual way.
it is sanctified, when as so plain a curse is on it, as that we are wished to
beware of being Co. 2.8.
spoiled by it: Now are we wished any where to beware of being spoiled by that
which is sanctified to us, in a spiritual way? Now these things can be
sanctified no further then they are of use, and that is but in a worldly way:
for a spiritual use, they be accursed from it.



Humane
and good in its proper place, Learning is good in its proper place.
which is for the repairing of that Genesis 11. from 6. to 10.
decay which cam^ upon man for sin: so, I say, it is of good use, for the
repairing of that loss, and so fit for Statesmen, Physicians, Lawyers, and
Gentlemen, yea, all men so far as they can attain to it, are as men beyond and
above others that are without it, yea, and beyond all other excellencies that
this world can afford, but bring it once to be a help to understand the mind
of God in the holy Scriptures, and there it is detestable filth, dross and
dung in that respect, and so good for nothing, but 1 Timothy 6.21.
destroy, and cause men to err, as we have seen before: It fares with it, as I
perceive But out of its place, is like fire out of the Chimney, and in the roof
of the house.
it does with fire, keep it in the chimney, and it serves as a good blessing of
God, for good and necessary uses, but let it once come into the roof of the
house, and it destroys all, because it is not in its proper place: so it is
here, for this thing among men, for humane and worldly employments it is good;
but bring it once to the perfecting of the Gospel, and it will be found to be
the spoiling of the right understanding thereof.

And yet further, so far do I acknowleg Tongues a help in Translation.
Tongues to be ^^^se, as to yield us the translation of the Scriptures, our of
one language into another, without which, we that are unlearned, could not come
to have the letter of the Word, and so far there is a necessity of it for that
use; but that man which can so do, is ever the more able to understand the
spiritual meaning of the word thereby, that I deny, and withal do affirm,
that an understanding man, may through the teaching of the Spirit, know the
mind of God, which the other may never reach unto, according to that Mat. 13.11.
saying of our Savior, To you it is given to know the mysteries, the secrets
of the Kingdom of heaven, to you his simple Disciples it is given, but to
others, the learned Scribes and Pharisees, it was not given: But in this case
it may fare, as it did with those that built Noah's Ark, they made a place of
safeguard for others, but were drowned themselves: So these men may prepare a
good help for others, but themselves be altogether without the benefit of it; A
Lanthorn, you know, is of good use to contain the candle, but let one carry it
in a dark night, and it will do him no pleasure without a candle lighted in it;
of the same use is the lette^ of the Word, it is but as a Lanthorn or candle
without light Learning
Now the Spirit is the light of the letter, and so is the Apostle^ 2 Cor. 3.
opposition; without the Spirit, is like a candle without light, or a Lanthorn
without a candle.
such men then in that respect may be a help to others, and yet when all is
done, be but castawayes themselves seeing, as we have before, seen the
Egyptians and Babylonian in this kind of learning to excel; and it is none
other blessin^ then what the Pope, Cardinals, and other professed enemies (...)
the truth (as all for the general confess them to be) have (...) as great a
measure, and beyond many others that profess t^ know the truth, and stand
stiffly for this, as a special help to u^derstand the true meaning of the Lord
in the Word, which if (...) be so, then by their own grants they have the
advantage (...) them, and so are to be reverenced of themselves, to have mo^^
knowledge in it then they; so then they are to acknowled^^ their error, in
counting themselves wise above what is mee^ or else must be forced to confess,
that that learning is inavail^ble for finding out of the mind of God. Neither
for all the would I have any to conclude of me, as some affirm, that I ho^ all
learned men to be excluded from the spiritual meaning the Word, God forbid:
for,

Though the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.26.
say, not many of several ranks, (...) he says not, there is none, but yet
not many: There was (...) Joseph of Mar. 15.34.
Arimathea, one John 3.1. Act. 13.7.
Nicodemus, one Deputy Act. 6.7.
Sergius Paulus a prudent man, and diverse of 1 Cor. 1.27, ^8.
the Priests. But this was not usual, for it is hard for such men to entertain
the truth: Gods ordinary way is among the foolish, Jam. 2.5.
weak and vile, so that when as the wise, rich, noble and learned, come to
receive the Gospel, they then come to make themselves equal with them of the
^^h Mat. 11.5. Romans 12.26.
lower sort, the foolish, vils, and unlearned, for those be the true Isa. 61.1.
heirs of it, and therefore it was not in vain that James said, Jam. 2.5.
Harken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor, he well saw that the
rich and carnal were dull of hearing of this matter, but yet he tells them,
God has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and upon this
consideration it is that he wishes the r Brother of high degree to rejoice in
that he was made low, that is, Jam. 1.9, 10.
brought in his mind, and account equal with the poor, accounting himself never
the higher for any such excellencies; and so the Brother of low degree, to
rejoice in that he is exalted, that is, that he was made a Revel. 1.6.
King and Priest unto God, and was set in heavenly places with Jesus Christ; so
as the one is made low in respect of any fleshly confidence he has in such
things, the other is exalted, being outwardly poor, by being in Christ Jesus,
and so they both meet in one; but now by reason of the smoke that is risen out
of the bottomless Pit, and that the Devil is Ephesians. 2.6.
cast out of heaven, and all his Angels with him to the earth, which Angels
were the fallen Rev. 2.61.
Stars that he drew after his tail, that now he has by reason of them Pride
and haughtiness is a Religion of the devils hatching.
hatched since a Religion in the world, as that he would have the wise, the
rich, the noble, the learned, the only ones, and the poor must be beholden to
them, when as this is like himself, directly to oppose Jesus Christ, so, as
that we may truly say with the Prophet, Lord, who has believed our report? or
to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

excellency that is in another, to disparage that in them, that so they might
advance themselves.

carnal course, that such as are themselves fleshly are subject to take, and it
may as well be my fault as another; but yet I profess in the presence of the
Lord, that I do not allow my self in any such course, neither does such an
exception as this beseem a man that is led by the Spirit of Truth for to make
against any servant of God, that professes opposition to such things, as
professing to be led thereto by the Word and Spirit of Truth, Carnal
advancement is got by disparaging others.
for it savours strongly of the flesh, and is too suitable to the practice of
reprobates, whose practice is to take things in the evil p^rt, whereas love,
by which all the Saints should judge, judg^s the best of things, till such time
it can epsy any cause so to do. And for the lifting up of my self, to be sure
if I so do, Gods word it is, that he will pluck the mighty from his seat, and
then you may be sure, that according to his word my fall will be far greater
then my exaltation can possibly be, and therefore it were best for all such as
so conceive, to commit the judgment to the Lord, and themselves judge nothing
before the time, nor speak no more presumptuously; let not arrogancy come out
of your mouth, for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him enterpris^s are
established. But yet after this manner of reasoning, carnal men may overthrow
the whole Gospel: For whereas the Scripture shows that Jesus Christ was without
form, or beauty, or any such thing, wherefore he should be desired, the carnal
man will soon say, no other but such a one would be so foolish, as to part from
honors, riches, credit, and such like, to endure so much sorrow, and need not:
and whereas the Apostle Phil. 2.
says, That he took on him the form of a servant, they would soon answer, and
good reason why, because he could not be a Master: and whereas it is said, He
chose the poor, that will they say, he must needs do, and the foolish, for none
of the rich and wise would be so simple as to follow him: and whereas he says,
Love not the world, nor the things in it, good cause why, will they say, for
such fools as you know not how to get it, or else, to be sure, you would love
it as well as others. And thus have I given you a glimpse, how that by this
manner of carnal arguing, we might overthrow our own Salvation, and sit down
in the very vale and shadow of death, as full of darkness, as this argument is
destitute of truth.

And thus having answered to such exceptions as I know of, made against this
truth, I come now to such Uses as it shall afford us. The first is,

To discover to us the depth of the great Woe that the world lies under, Rev.
9. from 1.10 11.
revealed to us, in which the word of the Lord is fulfilled, and men see it
not; and this you know the Scripture in sundry places makes the depth of a
judgment, as in Hosea, Ephraim is said to have here and there gray hairs, and
yet he saw them not; and in this we know was the strength of that 2 These. 2.11.
great Judgment, that men should confidently take lies for truth, this is
there made the depth of their woe. And the like is manifested 1 Timothy 4.2.
elsewhere by the same Apostle, declaring, That though they speak lies, yet they
were so scared in their consciences, as that they felt, nor feared no danger
that they were in, no more then the man that lying drunk did, though he lay
sleeping on the top of the Mast, and so ready to be drowned, yet he feared it
not; Pro. 23.34, 35. Woe to those men that take darkness for light, and live
in the smoke of the worldly Temples.
and yet such is the case, the Sun and the Air being darkened, their condition
must needs be woeful; and yet this is the case of the Inhabitants of the earth,
that they cannot be brought to believe, but that they are in a very good case,
though that the light of the glorious Gospel which is the Image of God, do not
shine unto them, as 2 Cor. 4 4.6.
says the Apostle. Now that by which this Sun is said to be darkened, is the
smoke of the bottomless Pit, and that we shall find to be the glory and power
of the false Church, called by the name of the Bottomless Pit. And that this
may the better appear, we find many Isa. 6.4. 2 King. 8.11, 12. with 15. Rev. 8.
places in the Scriptures, manifesting the glory of God, and his power to be
his smoke. Now because God has smoke in his Temple, so has Gods Adversary in
his Temple also, or rather, his bottomless Pit: After his smoke, in Rev. 9, 2,
3. there follows power; and if you look in the 7.8. and 9. verses, there is
their glory; and it does further appear by the thirteenth Chapter, and the
third verse, that it was so great power and glory, as that all the world
wondered, and admired it; and yet this Jesus Christ ^ccounts a great woe and
plague to them; now part of this woe; Rev. 16 10, 11.
I believe is this learning which we have here in question, for as we have
before manifested, the Sun light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ allows not, for
the glory of Christ's Doctrine is, that it is of the Spirits teaching; 2 Cor. 3
12.
for when we behold the glory of the Lord in the most perfect measure, so as we
are changed thereinto from glory to glory; yet all is from the Spirit of the
Lord, seeing that he is the promised Comforter, that is to teach us all good
things belonging to our perfection.

Then it must needs follow, that is a smoaky power and glory, flowing from the
Kingdom of Satan, and so a part of the Tail that Rev. 12.4.
the Dragon drew the Stars withal after him: And hence comes it to pass, that
now instead of the Spirits teaching, 2 Pet. 2.1.
according to Peter's Prophecy, here are a generation that do arise, 1 Timothy 4.2.
which privily bring in damnable errors; and so, for that end, forsaking the
Spirit of Truth, they speak lies through hypocrisy: As Paul also witnesses
they should do, pretending now, that the true and right way for understanding
the Scriptures and mind of God was, that men for that end must learn a part
from others, only for that work, and so to be taught in Tongues, and diverse
Languages, and have their wits exercised in Arts and Sciences humane, and so
such a flourish bears this in man's conceit, as that it seems the only way that
can be for a man to be made fit for this work, so that before, while the Angels
kept their station in heaven, the Spirits simple teaching was judged
sufficient, without these things, for this work, they now being fallen from
thence to the earth, and having the key of the bottomless Pit, Rev. 9.4.
thence it being opened, now arises up See John Bale on Re. 9.1.
Plato and Aristotle, and a multitude more of Heathen Philosophers.
Philosophers are the Angels that hinder the Spirits four winds to blow on the
four corners of the earth.
These are the four Angels that stand on the four corners of the earth, holding
the four Winds that they should not blow on the earth, neither on the Sea,
neither on any Tree, as being those that have the whole power of preaching in
their hand, not suffering any to blow, but who they please, and so do withhold
the truth in unrighteousness, declaring thereby they be under the wrath of
God; and they seem to yield these starry Principles very fitting in their own
understanding, better to furnish them with fitness to open the mind of God,
Rev. 7.1.
then his Spirit can do; Romans 1.18.
whereas before, when as the perfect teachings of the holy S^^^ was in force,
these men, of all others, were by reason of them learning and wisdom, the most
unutterablest men that were in the world for the receiving of the truth, as
appears by the testimony of Luke, Acts 1.18.
and is not yet, for all the great Sun-light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
which these men profess, they have these black smoaky principles still so
stiffly stood for, as that there is no removing of men from the high conceit
that they have of them: And does not this sufficiently declare, as the Apostle
says, That God has blinded the minds of men, 2 Cor. 4.4. John 9.41.
so as they cannot see, but are so much the blinder, because they say they see:
And hence came it to pass, that I for mentioning Plato and Aristotle, Humane
Learning? with contempt cast upon it, as if that which I had from them, being
Humane learned men, was of it self sufficient to overthrow the matter which I
had there delivered.

Paul mentioned to the Athenians, their own Poets, Acts 17.
and yet for all that, he was as great an enemy to Humane Learning as I, and
greater too. And it is to be minded, as I have before declared, that I do not
oppose the knowledge of humane things, nor yet deny, but that we may be
acquainted with their sayings, as the Apostle himself, and our Savior was,
yea, and that sometimes we make use of them too, as occasion requires, as I
have done here, though sparingly, and but seldom, and when it is, that it be
of great use, as it was at those three times that Paul did use them, and no
more, that I remember, in all the Scripture. Now this you see the Spirit
teaches, Acts 17.28. 1 Cor. 15.33. Tit. 1.12.
and therefore it cannot properly be called Humane Learning, especially in my
sense that I have to do withal, which is to oppose that which is maintained to
make men fitting to open the mind of God in his Word, which is by the learning
of Tongues and Arts, as of necessity, whereas this is used but by the by, and
not to find out the Truth with, but it being sufficiently before proved by
themselves also: It is the Spirits order to gain their acknowledgement of it,
and this is no other learning, but what every man without any Scholarship (as
ye call it) may attain unto, whereas that that is so much gloried in is, that a
man is able aptly to speak according to art and knowledge in the Sciences, and
this is it by which men yet still are hatched and bred up, and this I believe
was the means of bringing in all those abominable errors that the earth has
drunk in, Rev. 12.16. 1 Timothy 6. to 12. Revel. 12.4.
both in Doctrines and Practice, and so have occasioned those noisome lusts
that drown men in perdition, that the man of God is to fly, as best beseeming
the tail of the Dragon, and suiting with this great woe which is further
manifested, by comparing the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and those together.

Now what marks they be known by, you may read in 2 Cor. 6. from the third, to
the 11. Verse, where, as in a Looking-glass, you may behold the true Picture,
both of the one, and of the other; by them we approve our selves as the
Ministers of Christ, and give none occasion why our Ministry should be
reproved; says Paul, In much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labor, in watchings,
in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by-kindnesse, by
the Holy Ghost, by love unfaigned, by the Word of Truth, by the power of God,
by the Armor of Righteousness on the right hand, and on the left, by honor
and dishonor, by evil report, and good report, as deceivers, and yet true, as
unknown, and yet known, as dying, and yet behold we live, as chastened, and not
killed, as sorrowful, and yet always rejoicing, as poor, and yet making many
rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. Distinguishing marks of
the true Ministers.
These ye see are the marks by which Paul approves himself with his fellow
laborers, to be the Ministers of Christ; now selves so to be; they disprove
themselves to be the Ministers of Christ in all these things: Where is their
patient bearing with the contrary minded, as Paul says, the 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
servants of God should do? And where are their afflictions which they suffer,
with their necessities and distresses? Are they not for the most part full of
all outward necessaries? What are they in distress for? How many stripes do
they suffer, or shall have need so to do, be they but observant of their
Canonical obedience? How many, ^ay, where are any imprisonments that they
suffer, or at least need to do, if they live according to their own Laws? And
for ^umults, they are so far from abiding any, as that they be far more ready
to make them against others, then to endure them themselves, and for their
labors, which what he means you may perceive by 1 Cor. 4.12. and that to be
sure they are guiltless of; and so for their watchings, and fastings, and all
the rest being duly considered of, we may read the quite contrary fulfilled in
them, so that of necessity there will appear as void (...) difference, as is
betwixt light and darkness, and those persons more fitly suiting that
description belonging to the Rev. 9. from 7. to 11.
Locusts, then with this description here of the 2 Cor. 6. from 3. to 11.
Apostle; so far are they from what they pretend themselves to be, as that the
words of the Prophet came truly to be fulfilled in them, That their Isa. 47.10.
wisdom and their knowledge perverts them, or causes them to err, and is the
wickedness they trust unto; and this is it that lifts them up in their own
conceits, so far, as that they think in their hearts, and stick not to say also
with their tongues, that they are for the ministration of the Word, and none
else; and the Lord says, That their wisdom and knowledge is the cause o^ this
their error, and they say, it is the means of right understanding: now whether
is to be believed God or they, let all judge, especially when as we see, that
the Lord himself is against them for it, in denying others, he denies them,
saying, therefore shall evil come upon thee, and thou shall not know where it
arises, etc. all which declares the depth of the woe they lie under, for is
not this a woeful thing, that of that which God has made a curse, men should
make a blessing, and that against his will, and say, that his mind cannot be
known; what can be more against him.?

Not unto us, not unto us, but to his name be all the glory, Romans 11.19.
seeing it is he only that does great things.

Also it may teach all men to cease pinning of their faith upon the sleeves of
Learned men, for there is no good cause why we should so do; but to see with
our own eyes, seeing that the just is to live by his own faith, and to believe
what the Lord has said, which is, that he has Luke 10.21.
hid those things, that is, the mysteries of the Gospel (among which, this
which now is declared is one) from the wise and learned, and this I verily
believe is the wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel, and which has against it the
wise and learned, opposing and denying of it to be so, and so confirming the
words of our Savior: therefore need we not to wait for their witness to it;
but to be glad, and rejoice to see his saying made true, That he will reveal
them to babes, that is, simple things in the Worlds eye and account, and with
this consideration to overlook all contempt that can be cast upon us for the
same: For so is it now with men, that they judge that nothing is hid from such
and such, when as we are to expect the fulfilling of the Prophecy of Zach.
13.2, 3.
Zachary, that the Lord will cut off the names of the Idols, and the unclean
Spirits of the Land, and that while they Prophecy, their Father and Mother that
begat them, shall run them through with the Sword of the Spirit, and say, Thou
shall not live, because they told lies in the name of the Lord; and then shall
they be ashamed of their Vision; and it then shall be known, that their
garments, by which they be known and taken knowledge of to be Ministers, are
garments of deceit; and at that day such Prophets shall be ashamed of
themselves, as that they shall disclaim themselves for very shame, to stand in
any relation to such Prophets, as Zach. 13.4, 5
there the Prophet shows, when are their nearest friends with contempt shall
refuse them, and run them through, saying, Thou toldst us lies in the name of
the Lord; such light it seems shall then appear, as that they themselves shall
count him no Prophet, that is made so by man's teaching. Now this teaching in
question, is but man's teaching, and therefore when as the clear light appears,
they shall be ashamed of it, though now they prefer it.

Christ Jesus, for that he is pleased to reveal these great Mysteries to such
mean and simple things as we are, when as he conceals them from the wise and
prudent: This Mat. 11.29.
use Christ Jesus himself makes, and gives us to understand the true cause why,
and that he makes not any excellency in them, more then was in others, but only
according to the nature of the Gospel, the good pleasure of God, which is
indeed the only ground of all our happiness, and blessed must needs all those
be, that can with our Savior truly conclude with the same. And so I come to
the next point; for having found out who be the learned men that Peter here
intends, which is, they are taught by the Spirit of God, then it must needs
follow, that they that are not such, are the perverters of these and all other
Scriptures to their own destruction; and so this is another Observation.

That such as are destitute of the Spirits teaching, Here he set out the
perverters of Scripture.
though furnished with Humane Learning, are the perverters and wresters of
these, and all other Scriptures, to their own destruction.

The truth of this Conclusion appears plainly confirmed to us in the Mat. 5.21.
Pharisees, as our Savior declares in many particulars, plainly discovering
the Mat. 23. from 16. to 19.
blindness of these learned Teachers, in esteeming and preferring of things
less in themselves, above such as were far greater, as the proportion is made
betwixt the Gold of the Temple, and the Temple, and the Altar, and that which
was offered thereon; and so blind were they, that they counted that most holy,
which the Temple and the Altar made to be holy; and the same Mat. 15. from 3.
to 7.
elsewhere appears, that for all their learning, they taught directly against
the mind of God in his Word. We may see the same further commended to us,
Barjesus, one full of all Acts 13.6.
subtilty in this kind, but a turner from the Faith, and not to it, and a
perverter of the straight ways of God. The like is to be observed in 1 Timothy
1.7.
those of whom Paul speaks, that would be Doctors of the Law, and yet knew not
what they said, nor whereof they affirmed, so wise their Humane Learning did
help to make them.

World of God, good Reasons may be observed further to confirm this: As first,

Because nothing but the Spirit of God can bring any to the true knowledge of
the Word of God, and so says the Cor. 2.12.
Apostle, We have received the Spirit of God, that we may know the things that
are given us of God; The Spirit of God, though in Cobblers, Pedlers, Tinkers, or
Chimney-sweepers, is better thou all the worlds learning, though in Popes,
Councils, Cardinals, Bishops, or Presbyters.
and Peter 2 Pet 1.20, 21.
tells us, that no Scripture is of any private interpretation; but in
opposition to that, the Apostle sets the Spirit, and opposes it to the will of
man, and so declares that the Spirits interpretation, where it is, is a public
interpretation, and not private; and that men, though endued with great
learning, having not the Spirit of God, can give but a private interpretation,
according to the Apostles intent, let men judge what they will, though it be
the Pope, and all his Councils of Cardinals and Bishops, and the rest of that
learned Robble; yet they being destitute of the Spirit, can give but a private
interpretation, according to the Apostles mind, whereas, if a man have the
Spirit of God, though he be a Peddler, Tinker, Chimney-sweeper, or Cobbler, he
may, by the help of Gods Spirit, give a more public interpretation, then they
all: for as Cor. 15.1, 2
Paul says of love, the same is to be said of the Spirit, Though men did speak
with the tongues of men and Angels, and knew all secrets, and had all
knowledge, yet this is but as a sounding brass, or tinkling Cymball without
the Spirit.

Jesus Christ his coming into the world, that they that John 9.39.
see might be made blind; and this clearly appears in the Pharisees, The
learned aceounted the common people accursed.
those learned wise men that counted the common people as accursed, because not
knowing the Law, and they themselves seeing, blessed ones; and therefore, Joh.
7.48.
say they, Do any of the Rulers or Pharisees believe in him? as touching, that
the Rulers and Pharisees must needs know the truth, when as these were blind
guides, as our Savior says, and so much Joh. 9.40.
these took notice of that he so accounted them; and so also those that were
blind in man's sight, as was the blind man there spoken of, He sees the gift of
God, and believes in Jesus Christ for his salvation, and yet they refuse the
knowledge and light of this seeing Ver. 29.
man, and upbraid him for being born in sins, and for going about to teach
them, scorning that such learned men as they should be taught of such as he
was, though Jesus Christ has made him learned, and given himself for him.



Because such are unlearned and unstable ones: for as before we have seen such
persons are destitute of the The unlearned of the Spirit are the unstable ones.
true learning, so also are they in an unsettled and unstable condition, seeing,
as the Prophet Psalm. 51.
witnesses, That the Spirit is the establisher; neither can they be rooted,
and established in the Faith, according to the Apostles Col. 2.7.
saying, seeing they be not founded on the Rock Christ Jesus, but on the Sands
of Humane Learning, arising from a sleshly mind, destitute of the Spirit of
Truth, for they have not learned, as the truth is in Jesus.

They that heaped Teachers to themselves, were led to fables.
and led, even the whole heap of them, as big as it is, and these shall
satisfy men's lusts, and turn them from the Faith, unto Fables, as the 2 Timothy 4
4.5
Apostle long ago has foretold; for such as are themselves of the flesh, turn
all things to fleshlinesse, for that is it which they savor, for to the
unclean all things are unclean, their consciences being defiled, as Tit. 1.15.
witnesses the Apostle: Hence was it, that when as our Savior Joh. 2.29
bad the Jews to destroy this Temple, meaning his Ver. 29.
body, they themselves being carnal, understood him to speak of the Temple of
Jerusalem. And so the Capernaits when as Jesus Christ tells them, He will give
them Joh. 6.
of his flesh to eat, they being carnal, cannot bear it, Verse 53.60.63.
and all because they be destitute of the Spirit, for it was in a spiritual
sense that he intended it. And the like is to be seen in Nicodemus a Pharisee,
Joh. 5.1, 3, 4.
and so a learned man, being a Teacher, and a Ruler of the Jews; this man, for
all this, when as Jesus Christ tells him, That he must be born again, otherwise
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; he seeing no further then into the
natural birth, demands how that could be, That a man, when he is old, should
enter into his mothers womb, and be born again; so destitute was he of the
spiritual meaning of the mind of Jesus Christ in his Word.



Because such persons are usually vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction;
Those to whom the Gospel is a savor of death, would have it go in their way.
therefore they drive all to the same end, to which themselves belong: The
Gospel is the savor of life to life in them that are saved, but is the savor
of death to them that perish: Yet would I not from hence have any to conclude,
that I deny salvation to learned men, as some in effect have affirmed (as I
hear) of me, for the Scripture is against it, as is already before declared
from the 1 Cor. 1.26.
Apostle, though there be not many. But yet this for certain is the worst work
that a carnal man can undertake, to meddle with the Scriptures, seeing that he
abuses them, and that to his own destruction, for the Word is a Sword with two
edges, which whosoever that is carnal meddles with, it will run into his
heart, to Romans 2.5.
harden it against the day of wrath. And so I conceive the point is clear and
plain, That men without Gods Spirit, though furnished with Humane Learning, do
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.

Spirit of God, or the Spirit of Error?

Spirit of God is a sufficient witness to it self, seeing, that the Spirit is
Truth. Now this agreeing, as it does with the Word, needs not any other
testimony of it self, because it is the witness of God, and that is the
greatest, as says John, the 1 John 5.6.
Spirit bears witness, for the Spirit is Truth: And again, 1 John 3.
Hereby we know that he abides in us, even by the Spirit that he has given us.

Next, it is to be known by its operations and works: as first it savours
spiritual things, They that are after the flesh, says the Apostle, Romans 8.5.
Gods Spirit is known by his mighty works.
savor the things of the flesh; and they that are after the Spirit, the things
of the Spirit. And again, the Verse 10.
spirit is life for righteousness sake, and is said to be of a Verse 11.
quickening and an enlivening nature for righteousness. The fruits of it arc
further manifested in Gal. 5, 22, 23
other places. Now these things being found in us, do witness for God against
Error, though it set it self up with never so high a hand: 1 Kin. 22.24.
Zedekiah, When went the Spirit of God from them, to such as I speak of? To
this I answer, that with Zedekiah, such persons do but beg the question, great,
and his companions many, as is Verse 6.
showed, and that Micajah was but one poor Prophet alone, and hated of the
King, yet he had the Spirit of God, when as all the other were led and ruled by
the lying Spirit; and though Jesus Christ, and his learned ones cannot be
believed of the great and honorable Prophets of the world, but by Zedekiahs
shall be smitten on the Cheek, when by them this question is demanded of the
Lords Prophets, yet this answer may be given them, that when as they come to
hide themselves in secret, and to be ashamed of their Vision, and that the Rev.
15.1.
seven last plagues come to be fulfilled, spoken of in the Revelations, then
they shall find the truth of the testimony that is born against them, though in
the mean time the servants of the Lord be committed to prison, there to eat the
bread of affliction, and the water of affliction for their testimony.



Paul, that the The whole Scripture is given of God.
whole Scripture is given of God, and is profitable to make the man of God
absolute and thoroughly 2 Timothy 3.16.
furnished to every good work: Whence I conclude, that if the Scripture be
perfect and abs^lute for every good work, then it is so for that, so that then
there is no need of man's wisdom to help the Ministers of God. And so yet
further, says the Apostle, that he 1 Cor. 1.17.
preached the Gospel, not with wisdom of words; if not with wisdom of words,
then I conclude, they were needless, and so much the next words declare, Lest,
says he, I should make the Cross of none effect. And again, I, Brethren,
says he, when I come unto you, came not with the 1 Cor 2.1^
excellency of words, or of wisdom, showing unto the Council of God, but frees
himself from it, denying that his preaching stood in the Verse 4.
enticing speech of man's wisdom, but on the contrary, in the plain evidence
and demonstration of the Spirit. And afterward he gives the Verse 5.
reason for it, that their Faith should not be in the wisdom of men, by which,
it seems, it is subject so to be, if that were used: And so we find that
indeed it is, and not in the power of God, by the plain demonstration of the
Spirit: And though in all this one would think the Apostle had said enough in
this matter for the manner of the delivering of the truth, yet for all this he
has not done with it, but minds it yet 1 Cor. 2.13.
again, saying, Which things as we know them, so we also speak not with words,
which man's wisdom teaches. And so again, 1 Cor. 4.19.
sl^ghtly passes over the words of the false Teachers, as not worth the
knowing or regarding; therefore he says, When he comes he will know, not their
words, but their power. And so again, he condiscends to the false Teachers, so
far, as to confess that he was 1 Cor. 11.6.
rude in speaking, but not so in knowledge: By all which places it plainly
appears, that man's wisdom is to be rejected, even in speaking the Word of God,
and that none are to affect any excellency that way, but to content themselves
even with the use of the natural abilities they have, without any art or skill
in learning further.

Apollo is said to be an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24.

Paul, and Moses, and those mentioned in Acts 19. and yet, as I have before
manifested, that when as all these came to receive the Faith, they left,
forsook, and contemned all that; so do I believe was it here with this ^an,
that when as he came to be taught further in the know^edge of Christ, that he
then became more and more suitable ^o the rudeness and simplicity of preaching
the Gospel, as well ^s Paul, for never afterward do we read that he was
com^ended by that term, for such manner of excellency was ^roper to the Law,
and not to the Gospel in any degree. But ^^condly, take it for granted, that he
persisted in his elo^uence, yet it appears that it was such as he had obtained
^^^y being mighty in the Scriptures: And this also further justifies a former
Answer, that the Scripture alone is sufficient to furnish us with expression.
So now the point remaining true for all this, That men destitute of the Spirit,
having Humane Learning, do pervert the Scriptures to their own destruction.
This in the first place may teach

Gods Spirit, how wise and learned otherwise they seem to be, to beware of
meddling with the Scriptures, it is the worst work that possibly they can
undertake, for in so doing they meddle with that, in which they have no skill,
and so wound themselves: for it is a sharp two edged sword, and they having no
skill to handle it, to be sure, it will dangerously wound them to their own
destruction: but seeing the truth is so, as that they have neither ears to
hear, nor hearts to understand it, therefore I will thus pass it over: and

Gods Siprit, what ever they be else, yet they be both unlearned and unstable
men, according to the mind of God: so the 1 Cor. 14.24
unbeliever is called of Paul, an unlearned man: and so much in effect, Jam, 1,
6, 7, 8
James tells us of a Faithless man's inconstancy, that he is tossed about like a
wave, and is unstable in all his ways of Religion, for indeed wanting the
Spirit to establish him, he is driven hither and thither of every blast and
breath of man's wisdom, and so much experience, without any more Scriptures
daily proves upon every change of Orders, and Ordinances of Religon: how
confident have many wise worldly lea^ned men been of their stability for being
brought to yield to this or that, when as the raging wave of the Sea has
roared but a little? how have these men fallen from their supposed stabilitie
and sledfastnsse? so that instances I need not name, every ones small
experience can bring forth enough: but from all this there is given us to see
the Scriptures fulfilled before our eyes, for our confirmation, and their just
convicton.

Peter's intent, unlearned men, do pervert the Scriptures, making their
interpretations as carnal as themselves, for when as the Scriptures speak of
learning, and so by it do for the mos^ part commend unto us the learning of
the Spirit of Truth, a^ before we have seen from this Text, and many more
places, these persons presently apply them to Humane Learning, and the Texts
are all by them wrested and perverted: and in this kind many instances might
further be alleged. First concerning the Church, whereas the Scriptures do
Authorize Christians to gather themselves together in Christ's name, and-so have
the Mat. 18.20.
promise of Gods presence in so doing. This they presently deny to be the
intent of the place, and say, it is to be meant of two or three come together
in performance of prayer, or such like, contrary to the scope of the place,
which treats only of such as are in Church Order, and have committed to them
the power of binding and loosing, which the promise of Christ Jesus his
approving of the same by them; and besides, where in the Scriptures is Christ
Jesus said to be in the midst of any but his Levit. 16.11, 12. 2 Cor. 7.16. Ps.
132.13.14. Rev. 13.1. Rev. 2.1.
Churches. And further, whereas the Scriptures speak of the Church, Temple,
and House of God, applying these sayings to believers, and such as are 2 Cor.
6.16. with Heb. 3.6. with 1 Pet. 2.5.
bu^lded upon Christ by faith, these they rest and pervert, in applying these
titles to their houses of lime and stone; calling them the houses of God, and
Temples for him to dwell in; though the Scriptures be plain to the contrary, as
Stephen declared to the Act 7.47.28.50.
Council long ago, and that from the Testimony of the Isay 66.1.
Prophet long before: and so our John 4.21
Savior himself to the woman of Samaria, denying for the time to come any
such places, as the Jews and Samaritans doted on, but tells her, and us, that
spiritual service in Mat. 18.20.
any place, as he says himself should please him, though it will not give
carnal men content. Likewise are not the Scriptures alleged frequently by
these learned men for the Nation and people for being the Church of God, and
for the same end, National observances as the High Priests consecrated and set
apart for the services of the Church, and so under him the rest of the holy
Priests, with their holy garments, and tithes, and such like for their
maintenance, and for this purpose the Scriptures alledg^d in a most plentiful
manner, both from the Law and ^he Prophets, for the justifying of their names,
orders, and ^dministrations, when as if it be spiritual discerned, and ^he
Scripturs not wrest^d nor perverted, it will be found ^rue as Peter Act. 10 14,
15
says, that not every Nation, nor any more any Nation, but in every Nation
them that fear the Lord, and none other, are accepted of him: Whereas Christ
Jesus himself Rev. 13.7. with Rev. 16, 19.
has told us, that the Psa. 125. Psalm. 1.
beasts should have power over every Kindred, Nation, and Tongue, and that the
National Cities should fall, whereas Mount Sion, the City of God shall never be
moved, as says the Heb. 12.
Prophet, and also the Apostle; by this then it appears, that all such
Scriptures as are alleged for the maintenance of a National Church are
perverted, being that long since the Lord has rejected it, now accounting a
company of Saints in fellowship with himself to be Mount Rev. 14.1. Psa 14 9
from 6. to 9.
Sion, that shall never be moved, and these he has made Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. 1
Pet. 2.9.
Kings and Priests to God. The like we may see in the Ministers of the Church,
seeing that they were of old times in that Church, to be honorable persons in
outward honor and esteem, for their names Priests, for their callings above the
rest of the people, a distinct body of themselves, for their apparel, different
in their administrations from other of the people, and so for their
maintenance, by tithes, and offerings, all which had a respect to Christ, and
were in him to have their end, as the Apostle Gal. 4.12.
declares, as being but worldly rudiments.

Yet these men though they profess themselves Ministers of Jesus Christ, and
under the Gospel, yet Child-like, as under Tutors and Governors, do yet observe
these things after the rudiments of the world, and so suitably to the Gospel,
cannot abide to approve themselves to be Ministers of Christ, by such marks as
his Word affords, as we have 2 Cor. 6. from 4. to 10.
before considered, but they must be men of Honor, and such as be distinct
from others, in their apparel, maintenance, and such like; dishonor, and
reproach, and nakedness, and living on meet Alms, they cannot brook; but they
be so far from working with their own hands for their own necessities, as the
Apostle requires that the Act. 2.33, 34, 35.
Ministers of the Gospel should do, as that they wrest the Scriptures of the
Law and the Prophets, haling in, as it were, by the hair of the head, the
Scriptures, to speak for them and their delicious living, faring, like Dives,
deliciously every day, whereas the Elders of Jesus Christ should 1 Pet. 5.1, 2
feed the Flock of God, not caring for it for filthy lucre, but of (...) ready
mind.

But leaving these things, and such as these are, which declare them to be more
suitable for Moses and the Law, which tends unto wrath and bondage, then such
as are Ministers of Christ, and made partakers of the liberty of the servants
of God.

Object with the Answer.
I will speak of some few things that are in difference among them and us. You
know it is usually objected against us, because of our departure, out of the
Joh. 6.68.
words of Peter to our Savior, being these, Whether shall we go, thou have the
words of eternal life? From whence is concluded against us, if the Text be not
perverted, that we in leaving them do forsake Jesus Christ, wherein they take
it for granted, that he is with them, and not with those that forsake them;
whereas the Text is clear to prove, that the words of eternal life are in him,
as John 6.
himself says also, The words that I speak are Spirit and Life, and this who
denies, but that he that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son, has
no life: But let not the Text be wrested, yet what proof is here that
Antichrist has the words of eternal life, and that there is no forsaking of
him, and yet all that know wherein the difference lies, know that this is the
controversy, and how that these persons, thus forsakeing, go to Christ, and to
the word of Eternal Life, seeing that the Lord Isa. 8.16.
binds the testimony, and seals up the Law among his Disciples; so that till it
can be proved that these leave Christ, and forsake the words of Eternal Life,
the Text must be taken for none other but to be perverted, and a Vail drawn
over it to beguile the simple.



Now for answer hereunto, it is to be minded, that conversion does properly
belong to the Psalm 19.7. Romans 1.16. 1 Pet. 1.3 23.
Word of the Lord: Now this word by which we are all begotten, is the proper
portion of the Church of God, as Ps. 147.19, 20. Mat. 13.11. 1 Cor. 3.22.
diverse Scriptures declare: Hence then must it needs follow, that whosoever are
converted to the Lord, those by virtue of their conversion belong to the true
Church, Converts belong to the true Church.
because, as is before said, the word is hers, and therefore they are to cleave
to her, and forsake those places where they were converted, and that for this
reason, because the Lord himself is Psa. 78.6.
said to count, when as he writes the people, that this man was born there,
that is, in Sion, the Church of God, though that the man were converted in man's
account in Babel and Palestina, yet the Lord when he counts, shall write the
converted man to be born in Sion his Church: Now all Gods people should count
and write as God does, and give Babel no honor at all of their conversion,
because the Lord does not give her any; and the same thing is abundantly seen
in the Converts, that they are Act. 2.40.
exhorted to leave those places where they were converted, and so they did, as
the Act. 2.44. and 17.4.34.
Scripture manifests in many places, which might be noted.

Again it is to be minded, that God himself counts all the faithful to belong
to the Rev. 12.4, 5
Woman, the Church of God, as appears in the Revelations, where the Man-child,
as is evident by Exodus 4.23, 23.
other places, contains all the faithful, even the whole Church of God: This
Son of God, and his Man-child, is called his Exodus 5.1.
people. The like appears in Isay 66.7, 8. where the Man-child is interpreted
to be a whole Nation of Children, including all the faithful. Now this Woman is
said to be in Travail, crying, and if yours be that Church that is in this
Travail, crying, and in pain, according to the Scriptures, I am content the
Child shall be acknowledged yours, but if it be in jollity and without sorrow,
putting the others to pain, and ready to cut the living Child in pieces, how
then can I acknowledge it for the true Mother? when as also the Apostle says,
That Jerusalem that is from above is the Gal. 4.24.
Mother of us all, and she is not one that gendreth to bondage, but to
freedom, as says the Apostle, and therefore methinks it appears that every
ones conversion strongly binds him to make speed to that Church which consists
of such as are faithful in Jesus Christ, as being the proper inheritance to
which they all belong, and to know that all such places as are alleged to
conclude otherwise, be but wrested and perverted, though never so fair a gloss
be set upon them, for God, ever since the beginning, has put enmity betwixt
the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, and accu^sed shall all they
be that join those together, that God has so far separated; and therefore let
none of Gods servants stand with one foot on Mount Sion, and another on
Babylon, lest that which is halting be turned out of the way, Heb. 12.

Ministry, after this manner:

That Ministry that does the work of the Ministry of Jesus Christ spoken of
in Ephesians. 4. for the perfecting of the Saints, is a true Ministry, but your
Ministry (you say) does the same work, etc.

etc. to read Divine Service, Church women, Marry, and bury the Dead, and such
like services as these are? Did the Apostles perfect the Saints after this
manner? For who knows not but that this is the substance of what your office of
Ministry binds you unto? as for Preaching, that may be dispensed withal, and
a little now and then may serve the turn.

Besides, as is granted, your offices are not the same there mentioned, that
Jesus Christ from on high gave gifts unto, for you have others, that the
Scripture speaks not any otherwise then by the Rev. 17.3.
names of blasphemy: But for the power and work of the Ministry, which you say
is answerable to that of the Apostles, by your gathering of the Saints
together, taking it for granted that you say, from what do you convert them? If
from the power of darkness, as you would seem to imply, into the Kingdom of
Christ, as Col. 1.13.
did the Apostle, then by your own grant in the power of darkness you found
them; and the truth is, that where you found them, there you leave them; when
you found them before their conversion, you professed of them that they were
regenerate and bo^^^ anew, to what then do you convert them? or have you
conversion after regeneration? you also bade these persons before, to take and
eat in remembrance that Christ died for them, and so give them the Seals of
Life and Salvation; and yet after all this, you being Ministers to them, come
to justify the truth of your Ministry by your conversion of the people, that
by these things no need of amendment, and yet when all is done that you plead
for, they still abide in the same Church under the same Ministry, in the same
worship that they were conversant in before, whereas I have declared before,
that when as the Apostle converted any, those converts left their former
places, turning from dumb Idols to serve the living God. Now it has been long
acknowledged and professed, that the worship of your Church, Ministers that now
are, says be, come of Rome.
and the Ministry of it, came out of the Popes Shop, and must needs be
reformed, or else the judgment of God cannot but light upon you, as has been
manifested in the first and second admonition to the Parliament, in the days
of Queen Elizabeth; and all know that yet it continues the same that then it
was, and if it were so bad then, as it is reported that a thousand Ministers
said it was, small cause have any to plead Conversion, when as they shall
continue in such abominations, as that the plagues of God cannot by their own
confession be withheld: Seeing that the Scriptures and Spirit of God teaches
us, that the Psa. 119.101.
fear of the Lord teaches men to refrain their feet from every evil way, and
to cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and to
grow up unto full holiness in the fear of God, or the worship of God, as our
Savior Mat. 4. 2 Cor. 2.1.
interprets it, and to hate the very Jude 23.
garment spotted by the flesh. Now these things well considered, it will appear
that the several Scriptures that are continually brought for the maintenance of
your Ministry, are but so many flourishes by which the Word of Truth is
wrested and wringed like to a Nose of Wax, contrary to their proper intents and
scopes to serve their own turns, which who they be, of you, or others, that are
the perverters of them, God knows, and one day will judge betwixt the righteous
and the wicked, and give to every one according as his works shall be: In the
mean while, to me it appears plain, that men destitute of the Spirit of God, be
they as learned as may be in man's learning, yet they do pervert all Scriptures
to their own destruction, when as the unlearned one, simple men and women
having the Spirit of Truth in them, shall rightly know them, and Gods mind in
them for their great comfort.

Again, seeing this is so, that such men do thus pervert the Scriptures, this
should provoke all that are made able Ministers of the Spirit, as says the 2
Cor. 3.2.
Apostle, that they take the same Apostles 1 Timothy 4.6.
advise, saying, If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou
shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ: If thou put the brethren in
remembrance of these things. What thing? those things mentioned From the 1
Verse.
before, how that the Spirit has foretold of doctrines of devils, how that men
should speak lies through hypocrisy, etc. as Zachary also foretold, that the
Zach. 13.3.
Father and Mother of the Prophet should say, that he told them lies in the
name of the Lord: If thou put the Brethren in remembrance of these things,
because they are subject to forget them, and thou should be their
Remembrancer, which if thou do, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ,
which have been nourished up in the words of Faith and good Doctrine; then
mark, these things are not error, nor lies, nor he a false Teacher that
speaks of them, out a good Minister that has been nourisht up in faith and
good doctrine, which was continually taught of Paul, and heard of Timothy: And
to this is to be added what the Apostle 1 Timothy 6.3.4
says further in this matter, declaring, that he that consents not to
wholesome doctrine, that is according to godliness, is puffed up, and knows
nothing, but dotes about words, and as such a one, as is so far corrupted by
the flesh, as that he is to be separated from; therefore Gods good Ministers,
as we see should be careful of these things, as knowing of whom they shall
receive their reward, and what shall also be their portion from men of the
world, in that which is Rev. 11.7.
death in the world, but Rev. 14.13.
life with the Lord, Be faithful therefore to the death, and you shall have a
Rev. 2.10.
Crown of Life; declaring the power of the Spirit of the Lord in you.

2 Pet. 3.16.18.
Apostle in the words following; Yea, therefore beloved, seeing ye knew these
things before; What things? among others those, that worldly learned men, are
Gods unlearned men, being destitute of his Spirit, beware and take heed lest ye
also, as well as others (you being subject to it) be plucked away before you be
aware into the error of the wicked, to think that Gods Mysteries can be
attained to by man's learning, and so you fall from your own steadfastness,
which is Romans 11.
through Faith, for by Faith ye stand, and by the Spirit, for by it ye are also
Psalm. 51.
established; and for a preservative against this error, as opposite to it, grow
and increase in the grace of God, and the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ,
which is that that will preserve you from error. Now to him be glory, not to
us, nor to man, but to him our Lord Jesus Christ, both now and for evermore.
Amen.

ESAIAS 64.25. The Lord frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, and makes Diviners
mad, turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge foolishness.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
HAving before the death of this Author been well acquainted with him, and
tasted that Spirit of Light and Truth which God in his day did more then
ordinary power out upon him, by which he was enabled to minister seasonable
words, to the refreshing of many weary souls, and also to contend against those
corruptions and inventions which men brought into the Worship of God, raging
like the mighty waters against all the Servants of God which opposed them in
the same, I mean the power of Prelacy which ruled them in that day, the weight
of whose persecuting hand, this Author while he lived had his share, and when
he died, not suffered by them to have that which they called Christian Burial,
but his friends were forced to lay his body in the high way, as one which was
numbered amongst the Transgressors, of whom, I may say, the world was not
worthy: But my intent in writing this (...) word, is not to commend the Author,
but to tender to thy review the matter of this foregoing Book, the bent thereof
is to advance the Teachings of the Spirit of Christ in the unfolding of the
mystery of the Gospel to the hearts of men, as the choice Revealer of that
glory of truth to the soul, which will change from glory to glory into its own
likeness, a truth much opposed by men of corrupt minds in this day, and
therefore it becomes all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity to stand upon
their watch, and be earnestly beging of the Father of Lights that Spirit which
may help them to judge of things that differ, and may lead into strait paths,
trying all things, and holding fast that which is good. Thou will find in this
Tract the Spirit of the Author strongly and zealously contending for the
advancement of the Spirit of Christ, which if therein thou meet'st with any
words that may seem harsh against that which men advance, let it not be an
offense to thee, but try whether it be agreeable to the form of found words or
no. I shall detain thee no longer, but my desires to the Lord is, that all his
Isra^ may more and more know the truth, as it is in Jesus, shining as the Sun
more to their perfect clearness, knowing the night is far past, and the day
near approaching, that so we may walk as the Children of the Light, waiting for
the glorious appearing of him that will come, and not tarry.

Yours in the love of Christ, William Kyffen.


