THE VANITY OF THIS Mortal Life: OR, OF MAN, Considered only in his Present
Mortal state.

By J. HOW, M. A.

LONDON: Printed by A. Maxwell, for Sa: Gellibrand, at the Ball in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1672.

To the deservedly honored, John VPTON of Lupton, Esquire with the many surviving
Branches formerly sprung out of that Religious Family; and the Worthy Consorts
of any of them.
SInce it is the lot of the following Pages to be exposed to public view;
There is somewhat of justice in it, to your selves, or me, that the world do
also know wherein diverse of you have contributed thereto, that, if any thing
redound hence to public advantage, it may be understood to be owing in part to
you: or, if it shall be reckoned an useless trouble, in this way to represent
things, so obvious to common notice, and whereof so much is already said; all
the blame of the publication be not imputed (as it does not belong) to me only.

But I must here crave your excuse, that, on this account, I give you a
narrative of what (for the most part) you already know, and may possibly not
delight to remember; both because it is now become convenient that others
should know it too, and not necessary to be put into a distinct Preface: And
because to your selves the review of those less pleasing passages may be
attended with a fruit which may be same recompense for their want of pleasure.

Ther^ (...) give the Reader leave to take notice, and let it not be grievous
to you that I re mind you, That after this your near Relation Mr. Anthony
Vpton, the Son of John Vpton, of Lupton, Esquire
(whose death gave the occasion of the ensuing Meditations) had, from his
youth, lived between Twenty and Thirty years of his age in Spain, your
joint-importunity had at length obtained from him a promise of returning:
Whereof. when you were in somewhat a near expectation, a sudden disease in so
few days landed him in another world, that the first notice you had of his
death, or sickness, was by the arrival of that Vessel (clad in mourning-attire)
which, according to his own desire in his sickness, brought over the deserted
body to its native place of Lupton; that thence it might find a Grave where it
first received a Soul; and obtain a Mansion in the Earth, where first it became
one to a reasonable spirit.

A little before this time, the desire of an interview among your selves (which
the distance of your habitations permitted not to be frequent) had induced
diverse of you to appoint a meeting at some middle place, whereby the trouble of
a long journey might be conveniently shared among you.

But, before that agreed resolution could have its accomplishment, this sad and
most unexpected Event intervening, altered the place, the occasion, and disign
of your meeting; but effected the thing it self, and brought together no less
than Twenty, the Brothers and Sisters of the deceased, or their Consorts;
besides his many Nephews and Neices, and other Relations, to the mournful
solemnity of the Interment. Within the time of our being together upon this sad
account, this passage of the Psalmist here insisted on, came into discourse
among us; being introduced by an occasion which (though then, it may be,
unknown to the most of you) was somewhat rare, and not unworthy observation;
viz. That one of your selves, having been sometime before surprised with an
unusual sadness, joined with an expectation of ill tidings, upon no known
cause, had so urgent an inculcation of these words, as not to be able to
forbear the revolving them, much of the former part of that day, in the latter
part whereof the first notice was brought to that place of this so near a
Relations decease.

Certain Months after, some of you with whom I was then conversant in London,
importuned me to have somewhat from me in writing upon that Subject. Whereto I
at length agreed, with a cautionary request, That it might not come into many
bands, but might remain (as the occasion was) among your selves. Nor will I
deny it to have been some inducement to me to apply my thoughts to that Theme,
that it had been so suggested as was said. For such presages and abodings, as
that abovementioned, may reasonably be thought to owe themselves to some more
steady and universal principle, than Casualty, or the party's own Imagination:
By whose more noble recommendation (that such a gloomy Premonition might carry
with it not what should only afflict, but also instruct and teach) this Subject
did seem offered to our meditation.

Accordingly therefore, after my return to the place of my abode, I hastily
drew up the substance of the following Discourse; which, a year ago, I
transmitted into their hands who desired it from me, without reserving to my
self any Copy. Hereby it became difficult to me, presently to comply (besides
diverse considerations I might have against the thing it self) with that joint
request of some of you (in a Letter, which my removal into another Kingdom
occasioned to come long after to my hands) that I would consent these Papers
might be made public. For as I have reason to be conscious to my self of
disadvantages enough to discourage any undertaking of that kind: so I am more
especially sensible, that so curs^ry and superficial a management of a Subject
so very important, (though its private occasion and design at first, might
render it excusable to those few friends for whom it was meant) cannot but be
liable to the hard censure (not to say the contempt) of many whom Discourses of
this kind should more desgnedly serve. And therefore, though my willingness to
be serviceaable in keeping alive the apprehension and expectation of another
state, my value of your judgments who conceive what is here done may be useful
thereto; and my peculiar respects to your selves, the members and appendants of
a Family to which (besides some relation) I have many obligations and
endearments; do prevail with me not wholly to deny: Yet pardon me that I have
suspended my consent to this publication, till I should have a Copy transmitted
to me from some of you, for my necessary review of so hasty a production, that
I might not offer to the view of the world, what, after I had penned it had
scarce passed my own. And now, after so long an expectation, those Papers are
but this last week come to my hands: I here return them, with little or no
alteration; s^ve, that what did more directly concern the occasion, toward the
close, is transferred hither; but with the addition of almost all the directive
part of the Use: which I submit together to your pleasure and dispose.

And I shall now take the liberty to add, my design in c^nsenting to this
request of yours (and I hope the same of you in making it) is not to erect a
M^nument to the memory of the Deceased, (which how little does it signify!)
nor to spread the same of your Family (though the visible blessing of God upon
it in the fruitfulness, piety, and mutual l^ve, wherein it has st^urish^l for
same generations, do challenge observation, both as to th^se braaches of it
which grow in their ^wn more natural s^il; and th^se, as I have n^w occasion to
take further notice, that I find to have been transplanted into another
Country). But that such into whose hands this little Treatise shall fall, may
be induced to consider the true end of their beings; to examine and discuss the
matter more thoroughly with themselves, what it may or can be supposed such a
sort of Creatures was made and placed on this Earth for: That when they shall
have reasoned themselves into a settled apprehension of the worthy and important
Ends they are capable of attaining, and are visibly designed to, They may be
seized with a noble disdain of living beneath themselves, and the bounty of
their Creator.

It is obvious to common observation, how flagrant and intense a zeal, men are
often wont to express for their personal reputation, the honor of their
Families, yea or for the glory of their Nation; but how few are acted by that
more laudable and enlarged zeal for the dignity of Mankind?

How few are they that resent the common and vile depression of their own
species! Or that, while in things of lightest consideration they strive with
emulous endeavor, that they and their relatives may excel other men, do reckon
it a reproach if in matters of the greatest consequence they and all men should
not excel Beasts! How few that are not contented to confine their utmost
designs and expectations within the same narrow limits! Through a mean and
inglorious self-despiciency, confessing in themselves (to the Truth's and their
own wrong) an incapacity of greater things! and, with most injurious falsehood,
proclaiming the same of all Mankind besides!

If he that, amidst the hazards of a dubious War, betrays the Interest and
Honor of his Country, be justly infamous, and thought worthy severest
punishments; I see not why a debaucht Sensualist, that lives as if he were
created only to indulge his appetite, that so vilifies the notion of man, as if
he were made but to eat, and drink, and sport; to please only his sense and
sancy; that in this time and state of conflict between the powers of this
present world, and those of the world to come, quits his Party, bids open
defiance to Humanity, abjures the Noble Principles and Ends, forsakes the Laws
and Society of all that are worthy to be esteemed men; abandons the common and
rational hope of mankind concerning a future immortality, and herds himself
among brute Creatures; I say, I see not why such a one should not be scorned
and abhorred as a Traitor to the wh^le Race and Nation of reasonable Creatures;
as a fugitive from the T^nts, and desertor of the common Interest of men; and
that, both for the vileness of his practice, and the danger of his example.

And who, that has open eyes, beholds not the dreadful instances and increase
of this difection? When it has prevailed to that degree already, that in
Civilized, yea in Christian Countries (as they yet affect to be cal^'d) the
practice is become fashionable and in credit; which can square with no other
Principle, than the disbelief of a future state, as if it were but a mere
Poetic, or (at best) a Political Fiction. And as if so impudent in^idelity
would pretend not to a connivence only, but a sanction, it is rock^^'d an odd
and unc^^th (...) for a man to live as if he thou^ (...); and a great
presumption to seem to dissent from the profane infidel Crew. As if the matter
were already formally determined in the behalf of Irreligion, and the Doctrine
of the life to come had been clearly condemned in open Council, as a detestable
Heresy. For what Tenet was ever more exploded and hooted at, than that
practice is which alone agrees with this? Or what series or course of repeated
Villainies can ever be more ignominious than (in vulgar estimate) a course of
life so transacted as does become the expectation of a blessed immortality? And
what? After so much written and spoken by persons of all times and Religious
for the immortality of the humane Soul, and so common an acknowledgment thereof
by Pagans, Mahometans, Jews, and Christians; Is man now at last condemned and
doomed to a perpetual death, as it were, by the consent and suffrage even of
men? and that too without trial or hearing? and not by the reason of men, but
their lusts only? As if (with a loud and violent cry) they would assassinate
and stifle this belief and hope, but not judge it? And shall the matter be thus
given up as hopeless? and the victory be yielded to prosperous wickedness, and
a too succesful conspiracy of vile Miscreants against both their Maker, and
their own Stock and Race?

One would think whosoever have remaining in them any conscience of obligation
and duty to the common Parent and Author of our Beings, any remembrance of our
Divine Original, any breathings of our ancient hope, any sense of humane
honor, any resentments of so vile an indignity to the nature of man, any spark
of a just and generous indignation for so opprobrious a contumely to their own
Kind and Order in the Creation, should oppose themselves with an Heroic vigor
to this treacherous and unnatural combination.

And let us (my worthy Friends) he provoked, in our several capacities to do
our parts herein; and, at least, so to live, and converse in this world, that
the course and tenor of our lives may import an open asserting of our hopes in
another; and may let men see we are not ashamed to own the belief of a life to
come: Let us by a patient continuance in well-doing (how low designs soever
others content themselves to pursue) seek honor, glory, and immortality to our
selves; and, by our avowed, warrantable ambition in this pursuit, justify our
great and bountiful Creator, who has made us not in vain, but for so high and
great things: And glorify our blessed Redeemer, who amidst the gloomy and
disconsolate darkness of this wretched world, when it was overspred with the
shadow of death, has brought life and immortality to light in the Gospel. Let
us labor both to seel and express the power of that Religion, which has the
inchoation of the (participated) divine life, for its principle; and the
perfection and eternal perpetuation thereof, for its scope and end.

Nor let the time that has since elapsed, be found to have worn out with you
the (useful) impressions which this monitory surprising instance of our
Mortality did at first make: But give me leave to inculcate from it what was
said to you when the occasion was fresh and new: That we labor more deeply to
apprehend Gods dominion over his Creatures; And that he made us principally for
himself, and for ends that are to be compast in the future state; not for the
temporary satisfaction and pleasure of one another in this world.

Otherwise, Providence had never been guilty of such a Solecism, to take out
one from a Family long famous for so exemplary mutual love, and dispose him
into so remote a part; not permitting to most of his nearest Relations the
enjoyment of him for almost thirty years (and therein all the flower) of his
age; and at last, when you were expecting the man, send you home the breathless
frame wherein he lived.

Yet it was not contemptible that you had that. And that dying (as Joseph) in a
strange Land, he gave, also, commandment concerning his bones; that though, in
his life, he was (mostly) separated from his brethren, he might in death be
gathered to his fathers.

It was some evidence (though you wanted not better) that amidst the Traffic
of Spain, he more esteemed the Religion of England; and therefore, would rather
his dust should ass^ciate with theirs, with whom also he would rather his
spirit should.

But whatever it did evidence, it occasioned so much, that you had that so
general meeting with one another, which otherwise, probably, you would not have
had, nor are likely again to have (so has Providence scattered you) in this
world. And that it proved a more serious meeting than otherwise it might: for,
however it might blamelesly have been designed to have met together at a
cheerful Table, God saw it sitter to order the meeting at a mournful grave; and
to make the House that received you, (the native place to many of you) the
House of mourning rather than of feasting. The one would have had more quick
relishes of a present pleasure; but the other was likely to yield the more
lasting sense of an after-profit. Nor was it an ill errand to come together
(though from afar, for diverse of you) to learn to dye. As you might, by being
so sensibly put in mind of it, though you did not see that very part acted it
self.

And accept this endeavor to further you in your preparations for that change,
as some testimony of the remembrance I retain of your most obliging respects
and love, and of my still continuing

Your affectionate and respectful Kinsman and Servant in our common Lord, J.
HOW.
ANTRIM, April 12. 1671.
THE Vanity of MAN AS MORTAL.
PSALM. 89. 47, 48. Remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all
men in vain?

What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul
from the hand of the grave? Selah.


WE are not concerned to be particular and curious in the enquiry touching the
special reference or occasion of the foregoing complaints from the 37 verse. It
is enough to take notice, for our pres^^^ (...), that besides the evil which
had ^^^ady befaln the Plaintiff, a further danger nearly threatened him, that
carried death in the face of it, and suggested somewhat frightful apprehensions
of his mortal state; which drew from him this quick and sensible petition in
reference to his own private concern, [Remember how short my time is] and did
presently direct his eye with a sudd^n glance from the view of his own, to
reflect on the common condition of man, whereof he expresses his resentment,
first, in an hasty exp^^tulation with God [Wherefore have thou made all men in
vain?] Then, secondly, in a pathetick discourse with himself, representing the
reason of that ^ough charge; [What man is he that lives* and shall not see
death? Shall he deliver, etc] q. d. When I add to the consideration of my short
time that of dying-mankind, and behold a dark and deadly shade universally
overspreading the World, the whole species of humane Creatures vanishing,
quitting the stage round about me, and disappearing almost as soon as they show
themselves: Have I not a fair and plausible ground for that (seemingly rude)
challenge? Why is there so unaccountable a Phoenomenon? Such a Creature made to
no purpose? The noblest part of this inferior Creation brought forth into being
without any imaginable design? I know not how to unty the knot, upon this only
view of the case, or avoid the absurdity. It Is hard sure to decline the
supposal (of what it may yet seem hard to suppose) that all men were made in
vain.

It appears the expostulation was somewhat passionate; and did proceed upon the
sudden view of this disconsolate case, very abstractly considered, and by it
self only; and that he did not in that instant look beyond it to a better and
more comfortable scene of things. An eye bleered with present sorrow, sees not
so far, nor comprehends so much at one view, as it would at another time; or as
it does, presently, when the tear is wiped out, and its own beams have cleard
it up.

We see he did quickly look further, and had got a more lightsome prospect,
when in the next words we find him contemplating Gods sworn loving kindness
unto David. V. 49.
The truth and stability whereof he at the same time expressly acknowledges,
while only the form of his speech does but seem to import a doubt [where are
they?] But yet [they were sworn in truth] Upon which argument he had more
copiously dilated in the former part of the Psalm; and it still lay deep in his
soul, though he were now a little diverted from the present consideration of it.

Which, since it turns the scales with him; It will be needful to enquire into
the weight and import of it. Nor have we any reason to think that David was
either so little a Prophet or a Saint, as in his own thoughts to refer those
magnificent things (the instances of that loving kindness confirmed by Oath,
which he recites from the 19 verse of the Psalm to the 38, as spoken from the
mouth of God, and declared to him by vision, to the dignity of his own person,
and the grandieur and perpetuity of his Kingdom. As if it were ultimately meant
of himself, V, 27.
that God would make him his firstborn, higher than the Kings of the earth,
(when there were diverse greater Kings, and (in comparison of the little spot
over which he reigned) a vastly spreading Monarchy, that still overtopt him all
his time, as the same and successive Monarchies did his Successors) or that it
was intended of the secular glory and stability of his Throne and Family; that
God would make them to endure for ever, V. 29.
and be as the days of Heaven; that they should be as the Sun before him, V.
36, 37.
and be established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven.

That God himself meant it not so, experience and the event of things has
shown; and that these predictions cannot otherwise have had their
accomplishment, than in the succession of the spiritual and everlasting Kingdom
of the Messiah (whom God raised up out of his loins to sit on his throne) unto
his temporal Kingdom. Act. 2. 30
Wherein it is therefore ended by perfection, rather than corruption. These
Prophesies being then made good, not formally, in the kind which they literally
imported; but with an (highly redundant) equivalency in another (far more
noble) kind. In which sense God's Covenant with him must be understood, V. 28.
34.
which he insists on so much in this Psalm, even unto that degree, as to
challenge God upon it, as if in the gloomy dispensation of this juncture (so
far did it darken his present apprehension of things) he did actually vacate
and make it void: ^ ^9.
Though he sufficiently express his confidence, both before and after, that
this could never be. But it is plain it has been vacated long enough ago, in
the subversion of David's Kingdom; and in that we see his Throne and Family
have not been established for ever; have not endured as the days of Heaven; if
those words had no other than their obvious and literal meaning. And if any
would imagine a salvo to the truth of God, from the wickedness of his
posterity, first making a breach, and disobliging him; it is expressly precluded
by what we find inserted in reference to this very case: If his children
forsake my law, V. 30.
and walk not in my judgments, 31.
etc. Then will I visit their iniquity with the rod, etc. 32.
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, 33.
nor suffer my faithful^ess to fail. 34.
My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
All which is solemnly sealed up with this, 35*
Once have I sworn in my holiness, that I will not lie unto David So that they
that will make a scruple to accuse the Holy God of falsehood in that which with
so much solemnity he has promised and sworn, must not make any to admit his
further intendment in these words. And that he had a further (even a mystical
and spiritual) intendment in this Covenant with David, is yet more fully
evident from that of the Prophet Isaiah; Isa. 55.
He every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, V. 1.
etc. Incline your ear and come to me. 2.
And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, 3.
even the sure mercies of David. 4.
Behold, 5.
I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander, etc.
What means this universal invitation to all thirsty persons, with the subjoined
encouragement of making with them an everlasting Covenant (the same which we
have here, no doubt, as to the principal parts, and which we find him
mentioning also, 2 Samuel 23. 5. with characters exactly corresponding to these
of the Prophet) even the sure mercies of David? The meaning sure could not be,
that they should be all Secular Kings and Princes, and their posterity after
them for ever; which we see is the verbal sound and tenor of this Covenant.

And now since it is evident God intended a mystery in this Covenant, we may be
as well assured he intended no deceit, and that he designed not a delusion to
David by the vision in which he gave it. Can we think he went about to gratify
him with a solemn fiction, and draw him into a false and fanciful faith; or so
to hide his meaning from him, as to tempt him into the belief of what he never
meant? And to what purpose was this so special Revelation by vision, if it were
not to be understood truly, at least, if not yet perfectly and fully? It is
left us therefore to collect, that David was not wholly uninstructed how to
refer all this to the Kingdom of the Messiah. And he has given sufficient
testimony in that part of Sacred Writ wher^of God used him as Penman, that he
was of another temper than to place the sum and chief of his expectations, and
consolations, in his own and his posterities worldly greatness. And to put us
out of doubt, Mat. 22.
our Savior (who well knew his Spirit) expressly enough tells us, that he in
spirit called him Lord; Psalm. 110.
when he said, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, till I
make thy enemies thy footstool. A plain discovery how he understood God's
revelation touching the future-concernments of his Kingdom (and the Covenant
relating thereto) viz. as a figure and type of Christ's, who must reign till all
his enemies be subdued.

Nor was he in that ignorance about the nature and design of Christ's Kingdom,
but that he understood its reference to another world, and state of things,
even beyond all the successions of time, and the mortal race of men; so as to
have his eye fixed upon the happy eternity which a joyful resurrection must
introduce, and whereof Christ's resurrection should be the great and most
assuring Pledge. And of this we need no fuller evidence than the express words
of the Apostle St. Peter, Act. 2. V. 25, etc.
who after he had cited those lofty triumphant strains of David, Psalm. 16. 8,
9, 10, 11, I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth:
my flesh also shall rest in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in hell (or
in the state of darkness) neither will thou suffer thy holy One to see
corruption. Thou (...) show me the path of life. In thy presence is fullness of
joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. All which he tells us
was spoken [concerning Christ]; V. 25.
he more expressly subjoins, that David being a Prophet, 26.
and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him* that of the fruit of his
loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne.
He seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ, V. 31.
(it appears he spoke not at random, but as knowing and seeing before, what he
spoke) That his soul was not left in hell, etc. nor can we think he thus
rejoices in another's resurrection, forgetting his own.

And yet we have a further evidence from the Apostle St. Paul, Acts 13. V. 32,
33, 34.
who affirms that the promise made to the fathers* God had fulfilled to their
children, in that he had raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the
second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; and as concerning
that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he
said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David. Which it is now
apparent must be understood of eternal mercies, such as Christ's resurrection,
and triumph over the grave, does ensure to us. He therefore looked upon what
was spoken concerning his Kingdom here, as spoken ultimately of Christ's, the
Kingdom whereby he governs and conducts his faith^ul Subjects, through all the
troubles of Life, and terrors of Death (through both whereof he himself as
their King and Leader has shown the way) unto eternal blessedness, and upon
the Covenant, made with him as the Covenant of God in Christ, concerning that
blessedness, and the requisites thereto. And (to say no more in this argument)
how otherwise can we conceive he should have that fullness of consolation in
this Covenant, when he lay a dying, as we find him expressing* 2 Samuel 23 5.
(for these were some of the last words of David, as we see v. 1.) He has made
with me an everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure; for this is all
my salvation, and all my desire. What so great joy and solace could a dying man
take in a Covenant made with him, when he had done with this world, and was to
expect no more in it, if he took it not to concern a future blessedness in
another world? Was it only for the hoped prosperity of his House and Family
when he was gone? This (which is the only thing we can fasten on) he plainly
secludes in the next words, -- although he make it not to grow.

Therefore it was his reflection upon those loving-kindnesses mentioned in the
former part of the Psalm, contained in God's Covenant, and confirmed by his
Oath, but understood according to the sense and import already declared, that
caused this sudden turn in David's spirit; And made him that lately spoke as
out of a Golgotha, as if he had nothing but death in his eye and thoughts; to
speak now in so different a strain, and (after some additional pleadings, in
which his faith further recovers it self) to conclude this Psalm with solemn
praise: Blessed be the Lord for evermore, Amen and Amen.

We see then the contemplation of his own and all men's mortality, abstractly
and alone considered, clothed his soul with black, wrapped it up in gloomy
darkness, makes the whole Kind of Humane Creatures seem to him an obscure
shadow, an empty vanity: But his recalling into his thoughts a succeeding state
of immortal life, clears up the day, makes him and all things appear in another
hue, gives a fair account why such a Creature as Man was made; and therein
makes the whole frame of things in this inferior World, look with a comely and
well-composed aspect, as the product of a wise and rational design. Whence
therefore we have this ground of discourse fairly before us in the words
themselves: That the short time of man on Earth, limited by a certain
unavoidable Death; If we consider it abstractly by it self, without respect to
a future state, carries that appearance and aspect with it, as if God had made
all men in vain.

That is said to be vain, according to the importance of the word here used,
(...)
which is ^ither False, a fiction, an appearance only, a shadow, or evanid
thing; or, which is Useless, unprofitable, and to no valuable purpose.


The life of man, in the case now supposed, may be truly styled vain, ^ither
way. And we shall say somewhat to each; but to the former more briefly.

1. It were vain, i. e. little other than a show, a mere shadow, a semblance of
Being. We must indeed, in the present case, even abstract him from himself,
and consider him only as a mortal dying thing; and as to that of him which is
so, what a contemptible nothing is he! There is an appearance of somewhat; but
search a little, and enquire into it, and it vanishes into a mere nothing* is
found a lie, a piece of falsehood, as if he did but feign a being, and were
not. And so we may suppose the Psalmist speaking, upon the view of his own, and
the common case of man, how fast all were hastening out of life; and laying down
the being which they rather seemed to have assumed and borrowed, than to
possess and own: Lord, why have thou made Man such a fictitious thing? given
him such a mock-beeing? Why have thou brought forth into the light of this
world such a sort of Creatures, that rather seem to be, than are? That have so
little of solid and substantial being? and so little deserve to be taken for
realities? that only serve to cheat one another into an opinion of their true
existence, and presently vanish and confess their falsehood? What hovering
shadows, what uncertain Entities are they? In a moment they are and are not. I
know not when to say I have seen a man. It seems as if there were some such
things before my eyes; I persuade my self that I see them move and walk to and
fro, that I talk and converse with them; But instantly my own sense is ready to
give my sense the lie: They are on the sudden dwindled away, and force me,
almost, to acknowledge a Delusion. I am but mocked with a show; and what seemed a
reality, proves an Imposture. Their pretense to being, is but fiction, and
falsehood; a cozenage of over-credulous unwary sense, They only personate what,
they are thought to be; and quickly put off their very selves, as a disguise.
This is agreeable to the language of Scripture elsewhere. Surely men of low
degree are vanity, 2. 9.
and men of high degree are a lie, etc.

In two respects may the present state of man seem to approach near to
nothingness; and so admit this Rhetorication of the Psalmist, as if he were in
this sense a vain thing, a figment, or a lie, viz. in respect of the
Minuteness, and Instability of this

his (material and perishable) be^ing.

1. The Minuteness, the small portion or degree of being which this mortal
part of man has in it. It is truly said of all created things, Their non esse,
is more than their esse. They have more no-beeing than being. It is only some
limited portion that they have, but there is an infinitude of being which they
have not. And so, coming infinitely nearer to nothingness, than fullness of
being, they may well enough wear the name of Nothing. Wherefore the first and
Fountain-beeing, justly appropriates to himself the name, I am; yea, tells us,
He is, and there is none besides Him, therein leaving no other name than that
of Nothing, unto Creatures. And how much more may this be said of the material
and mortal part, this outside of man, whatever of him is obnoxious to death and
the grave; which alone (abstractly looked on) is the subject of the Psalmist's
present consideration and discourse?

By how much any thing has more of Matter, it has the less of actual Essence.
Matter being rather a capacity of being, than being it self, or a dark
umbrage or shadow of it, actually nothing; but [(...) (...) (as are the
expressions of a noble Philosopher) a mere Semblance, Plotin. En. 2. 1, 6
or a Lie.

And it is the language not o^ Philosophers only, but of the Holy Ghost
concerning all the Nations of men, that they are as nothing, less than nothing,
Isa. 40.
and vanity. What a scarcity then, and penury of being, must we suppose in
each individual especially if we look alone upon the outer part, or rather the
umbrage or shadow of the man?

instability and fluidness of it. The visible and corporal being of man has
nothing steady or consistent in it. Consider his exterior frame and
composition, he is, no time, all himself at once. There is a continual
defluence and access of parts; so that some account, Each Climacterick of his
age changes his whole Fabric. Whence it would follow, that besides his
statique individuating Principle (from which we are now to abstract) nothing of
him remains; He is another thing; The former man is vanished and gone; while he
is, he hastens away; and within a little is not. In respect of the duration, as
well as the degree of his being, he is next to nothing. Job 27. 19
He opens his eye, and is not. Gone in the twinkling of an eye. There is
nothing in him stable enough, to admit a fixed look. So it is with the whole
scene of things in this material world. As was the true Maxim of an Ancient:
All things slow, Heracl.
nothing stays; after the manner of a River. The same thing which the Apostle's
words more elegantly express: The fashion of this world passes away. 1 Cor. 7.
The scheme, the show, the pageantry of it. He speaks of it but as an
appearance, as if he knew not whether to call it something or nothing, it was
so near to vanishing into nothing. And therefore he there requires, that the
affections which mutual nearness in relation challenges, be as if they were
not: That we rejoice in reference to one another, (even most nearly related, as
the occasion and scope of his discourse teach us to understand him) but as if
we rejoiced not, and to weep as if we wept not. Which implies, the objects
merit no more; and are themselves as if they were not. Whence therefore a
continued course of intense passion were very incongruous toward so
discontinuing things.

And the whole state of man being but a show, the pomp and glittering of the
greatest men, make the most splendid and conspicuous part of it: yet all this
we find is not otherwise reckoned of, than an image, a dream, a vision of the
night; every man at his best state is altogether vanity, walks in a vain
show, Job 20. 7, 8, 9.
disquieteth himself in vain, Psalm. 73. 20.
etc. Of all without exception it is pronounced man is like to vanity, Psalm. 39.
5, 6.
his days are as a shadow that passes away: As Ecclesiastes often, of all
sublunary things, vanity of vanities, etc.

2. But yet there is another notiof [vain], as it signifies useless,
unprofitable, or to no purpose. And in this sense also, if we consider the
universal mortality of mankind without respect to a future state; There were a
specious ground for the expostulation, Why have thou made all men in vain?

Vanity in the former notion speaks the emptiness of a thing, absolutely and in
it self considered; In this latter relatively, as it is referred to and
measured by an end. That is, in this sense, vain, which serves to no end, or to
no worthy and valuable end; which amounts to the same. For in as much as all
ends, except the last, are means also to a further end; if the end immediately
aimed at be vain and worthless, that which is referred to it, as it is so
referred, cannot but be also vain.

Whereupon now let us make trial what end we could in this case think man made
for.

Which will best be done by taking some view 1. Of his nature. 2. Of the ends
for which, upon that supposition, we must suppose him made.


I. Of the former (neglecting the strictness of Philosophical disquisition) no
more is intended to be said than may comport with the design of a popular
discourse. And it shall suffice therefore, only to take notice of what is more
obvious in the nature of man, and subservient to the present purpose. And yet
we are here to look further than the mere surface and outside of man, which we
only considered before; and to view his nature, as it is in it self: and not as
the supposition of its having nothing but what is mortal belonging to it, would
make it: for as the exility (and almost nothingness) of man's being considered
according to that supposition, did best serve to express the vanity of it, in
the former notion that has been given of a vain thing: So the excellency, and
solid substantiality of it, considered as it is in it self, will conduce most
to the discovery of its vanity in this latter notion thereof. That is, if we
first consider that, and then the supposition of such a Creature's being only
made to perish. And if what shall be said herein, do, in the sequel, tend to
destroy that abovementioned supposition, (as it, being established, would
destroy the prime glory of Humane Nature) it can only be said magna est
veritas, etc. In the mean time we may take a view, in the nature of man,

1. Of his Intellective Powers; Hereby he frames notions of things, even of
such things as are above the sphere of sense; of moral good and evil, right and
wrong, what is virtuous and what is vicious; of abstract and universal natures.
Yea, and of a first being, and cause, and of the wisdom, power, goodness, and
other perfections which must primarily agree to him. Hereby he affirms and
denies one thing of another, as he observes them to agree and disagree, and
discerns the truth and falsehood of what is spoken or denied. He does hereby
infer one thing from another, and argue himself into firm and unwavering assent
to many things, not only above the discovery of sense, but directly contrary to
their sensible appearances.

2. His power of determining himself, of choosing and refusing, according as
things are estimated, and do appear to him. Where also it is evident how far
the objects which this faculty is sometimes exercised about, do transcend the
reach of all sensible nature; as well as the peculiar nobleness and excellency
is remarkable of the faculty it self.

It has, often for its object, things of the highest nature, purely spiritual
and divine; Virtue, Religion, God himself. So as that these (the faculty being
repaired only by sanctifying grace; not now first put into the nature of man)
are chosen by some, and, where it is not so, refused ('it is true) by the most,
but not by a mere not-willing of them (as mere brutal appetite also does
not-will them, which no way reaches the notion of a refusal) but by rejecting
them, with a positive aversion, and dislike, wherein there is great iniquity
and sin: which could not be but in a nature capable of the opposite temper.

And it is apparent this faculty has the privilege of determining it self; so
as to be exempt from the necessitating influence of any thing foreign to it.
Upon the supposal whereof, the managery of all humane affairs, all Treaties
between man and man, to induce a consent to this or that; The whole frame of
government, all Legislation and distribution of public Justice do depend. For
take away this supposition, and these will presently appear most absurd, and
unjust. With what solemnity are applications and addresses made to the Will of
man upon all occasions? How is it courted and solicited and sued unto? But how
absurd were it so to treat the other Creatures, that act by a necessity of
Nature in all they do? to make supplications to the Wind, or propound articles
to a Brute? And how unjust, to determine and inflict severe penalties for
unavoidable and necessitated actions and omissions?

These things occurr to our first notice, upon any (a more sudden and cursory)
view of the nature of man. And what should hinder, but we may infer from these
that there is further in his nature,

3. A capacity of an immortal state, i. e. that his nature is such, that he
may, if God so please, by the concurrent influence of his ordinary power, and
providence, without the help of a miracle, subsist in another state of life,
after this, even a state that shall not be liable to that empairment and decay
that we find this subject to. More, is not (as yet) contended for; and so much
methinks, none should make a difficulty to admit, from what is evidently found
in him. For it may well be supposed that the admitting of this (at least) will
seem much more easy, to any free and unprejudiced reason, than to ascribe the
operations before instanced in, to alterable or perishable matter, or indeed to
any matter at all. It being justly presumed, that none will ascribe to matter,
as such, the powers of ratiocination or volition. For then every particle of
matter must needs be rational, and intelligent (an high advance to what one
would never have thought at all active). And how unconceivable is it, that the
minute particles of matter, in themselves, each of them destitute of any such
powers, should by their mutual intercourse with one another, become furnished
with them! That they should be able to understand, deliberate, resolve, and
choose, being assembled and duly disposed in counsel together; but, apart, rest
all in a deep and sluggish silence! Besides, if the particles of matter
howsoever modifi'd, and moved, to the utmost subtilty or tenuity, and to the
highest vigor, shall then become intelligent and rational, How is it that we
observe not, as any matter is more subtle, and more swiftly and variously
moved, it makes not a discernably nearer approach, (proportionably) to the
faculty and power of reasoning? And that nothing more of an aptitude or
tendency toward intelligence and wisdom, is to be perceived in an aspiring
Flame, or a brisk Wind, than in a clod or a stone? If to understand, to define,
to distinguish, to syllogize, be nothing else but the agitation and collision
of the minute parts of rarefied matter among one another; methinks some happy
Chemist or other, when he has mist his designed mark, should have hit upon
some such more noble product; and, by one or other prosperous sublimation, have
caused some temporary resemblance (at least) of these operations. Or, if the
paths of Nature, in these affairs of the mind, be more abstruse, and quite out
of the reach and road of artificial achievement; Whence is it that Nature her
self (that is vainly enough supposed by some to have been so happy, as by some
casual strokes to have fabricated the first of humane Creatures, that have
since propagated themselves) is grown so effete and dull, as never since to hit
upon any like effect in the like way. And that no Records of any time or age
give us the notice of some such Creature sprung out of some Epicurean Womb of
the Earth, and elaborated by the only immediate hand of Nature, so disposing
the parts of matter in its constitution, that it should be able to perform the
operations belonging to the mind of man.

But if we cannot with any tolerable pretense or show of reason attribute these
operations to any mere matter, that there must be somewhat else in man to which
they may agree, that is distinct from his corruptible part; and that is
therefore capable, by the advantage of its own nature of subsisting hereafter
(while God shall continue to it an influence agreeable to its nature, as he
does to other Creatures).

And hence seems a modest and sober deduction, That there is in the nature of
man, at least, a capacity of an immortal state.

Now if we yet suppose there is actually no such state for man hereafter: It is
our next business to view the ends for which, upon that supposition, he may be
thought to have been made. Whence we shall soon see, there is not any of them
whereof it may be said, This is that he was created for, as his adaequate End.

And here we have a double Agent to be accommodated with a suitable End: Man
now made. And God who made him.


1. Man himself. For it must be considered, that in as much as man is a
Creature capable of propounding to himself an end, and of acting knowingly and
with design toward it (and indeed incapable of acting otherwise as a man): It
would therefore not be reasonable to speak of him, in this discourse, as if he
were merely passive, and to be acted only by another. But we must reckon him
obliged, in subordination to his Maker, to intend and pursue (himself) the
proper end for which he appointed and made him. And in reason we are to expect,
that what God has appointed to be his proper end, should be such as is in it
self most highly desirable, suitable to the utmost capacity of his nature, and
attainable by his action, so carrying with it sufficient inducements, both of
desire and hope, to a vigorous and rational prosecution of it. Thus we must, at
least, conceive it to have been in the primitive institution of man's end (unto
which the expostulation has reference, Wherefore have thou made all men in
vain?)

And we can think of no ends which men either do or ought to propound to
themselves, but by the direction of one of these principles, Sense, Reason, or
Religion.

1. Sense is actually the great Dictator defacto, determines them to the mark
and scope which they pursue, and animates the whole pursuit. Not that sense is
by it self capable of designing an end, but it too generally inclines and
byasses Reason herein. So that Reason has no other hand in the business, than
only as a slave to Sense, to form the design and contrive the methods which may
most conduce to it, for the gratification of sensual appetite and inclination
at last.

And the appetitions of sense (wherein it has so much mastery and dominion)
are but such as we find enumerated 1 John 2. 16. the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, the pride of life. Or (if we understand the Apostle to use the
name of lust objectively) the objects sufficiently connote the appetitions
themselves. All which may fitly be referred to Sense, either the outward senses,
or the fancy and imagination, which, as deservedly, comes under the same common
denomination.

Now who can think the satisfying of these lusts the commensurate end of man?
Who would not, upon the supposition of no higher, say with the Psalmist,
Wherefore have thou made all men in vain? To what purpose was it for him to
live in the world a few years, upon this account only, and so go down to the
place of silence? What is there in the momentary titillations of man's wanton
flesh; in his pleasing-view of a Mass of Treasure (which he never brought with
him into the world, but only heaped together, and so leaves not the world
richer or poorer than he found it)? What is there in the applause and
admiration of fools (as the greater part always are); that we should think it
worth the while for man to have lived for these things? If the question were
put, Wherefore did God make man? Who would not be ashamed so to answer it, He
made him to eat and drink and take his pleasure; to gather up wealth for he
knows not who; to use his inventions that each one may become a talk and wonder
to the rest; and then when he has fetched a few turns upon the Theater, and
entertained the eyes of beholders with a short scene of impertinencies,
descend, and never be heard of more? What? that he should come into the world
furnished with such powers and endowments for this? It were a like case as if
one should be clad in scarlet to go to plough, or curiously instructed in arts
and sciences to tend Hogs.

Or, 2dly, if we rise higher to the view of such ends as more refined Reason
may propose, within the compass only of this present state; we will suppose
that it be either,

The acquisition of much knowledge, the furnishing his understanding with store
of choice and welldigested notions; that he may please himself in being (or in
having men think him) a learned Wight; Death robs away all his gain. And what
is the world the better? How little shall he enrich the clods, among which he
must shortly lie down, and have his abode! Or how little is the gain when the
labor and travel of so many years is all vanished and blown away with the last
puff of his dying-breath? and the fruit that remains, is to have it said by
those that survive, There lies learned dust? That any part of his acquisitions
in that kind descend to others, little betters the case, when they that suceeed
are all hastening down also into the same ignoble dust. Besides that the
increase of sorrow, both because the objects of his knowledge, the more he
knows, do multiply the more upon him, so as to beget a despair of ever knowing
so much as he shall know himself to be ignorant of; And a thousand doubts,
about things he has more deeply considered, which his more confident
(undiscovered) ignorance never dreamt of or suspected. And thence an
unquietness and irresolution of mind, which they that never drove at any such
mark are (more contentedly) unacquainted with. And also because, that by how
much knowledge has refined a man's soul, so much it is more sensible and
perceptive of troublesome impressions from the disorderly state of things in
the world; which they that converse only with earth and dirt, have not spirits
clarified and fine enough to receive. So that except a man's knowing more than
others, were to be referred to another state, the labor of attaining thereto,
and other accessory disadvantages, would hardly ever be compensated by the
fruit or pleasure of it. And unless a man would suppose himself made for
torment, he would be shrewdly tempted to think a quiet and drowsy ignorance an
happier state.

Or if that a man's Reason, with a peculiarity of temper, guide him to an
active, negotiating life, rather than that of contemplation; and determine him
to the endeavor of serving mankind, or the community to which he belongs. By
how much the worthier actions he performs, and by how much more he has
perfected and accomplished himself with parts and promptitude for such actions;
The loss and vanity is but the greater thereby, since he, and those he affected
to serve, are all going down to the silent grave. Of how little use are the
Politician, the Statesman, the Senator, the Judge, or the Eloquent man? If we
lay aside the consideration of their subserviency to the keeping the world in a
more composed and orderly state, for the prosecution of the great designs of
Eternity, when, ere long, all their thoughts shall perish! What matter were it
what became of the world, whether it be wise or foolish, rich or poor, quiet or
unquiet, governed or ungoverned? Whoever should make their order and
tranquillity their study, or that should intend their thoughts and endeavors
to the finding out the exactest methods and rules of government and policy,
should but do as they that should use a great deal of pains and art in the
curious adorning, and trimming up of a dying person. Or as if some one, among
many condemned persons, should be very solicitous to have them march with him
in very exact order to the place of Execution. If the World be not looked upon
as a 'tiring-room to dress one's self in, for an appearance on the Eternal
Stage; but only as a great Charnel-house, where they undress, and put off
themselves, to sleep in everlasting darkness; How can we think it worth a
thought? or to be the subject of any rational design or care? Who would not
rather bless himself in a (more rational) neglect, and regardlesness of all
humane affairs? and account an unconcerned indifferency the highest wisdom?

Yea, 3dly, If we suppose Religion (which we need not (because it is mentioned
in this order) conceive exclusive of Reason, but rather perfective of it:
Reason having first found out God, Religion adores Him) to become with any, the
Ruling-principle, and to have the direction and government of the Man, as to
his way and end; How would even that, languish with the best, were the
consideration of a future state laid aside, which, with so few, notwithstanding
it, has any efficacy at all to command and govern their lives?

Religion terminates upon God: And upon him under a double notion; either as we
design service and honor to him; or as from him, we design satisfaction and
blessedness to our selves.

Now if a man's thoughts, and the intention of his mind be carried toward God
under the former notion; How great an allay and abatement must it needs be to
the vigor and zeal of his affection, who shall with the most sincere
devotedness apply himself to serve His interest and glory, to reflect upon the
universal mortality of himself and mankind, without any hope of compensation to
it by a future immortality?

It is agreed on all hands, that the utmost contributions of Creatures can add
nothing to Him. And that our glorifying Him does only consist, either in our
acknowledging Him glorious, our selves; or representing him so to others.

But how little does it signify? and how flat and low a thing would it seem,
that I should only turn mine eye upwards, and think a few admiring-thoughts of
God this hour, while I apprehend my self liable to lose my very thinking-power,
and whole being the next! Or if we could spread His just renown, and gain all
the sons of men to a concurrence with us, in the adoring of His Sovereign
Excellencies; how would it damp and stifle such loyal and dutiful affection, to
consider, that the universal testimony, so deservedly given Him, shall shortly
cease for ever! And that infinitely blessed Being, be ere long (again, as he
was from Eternity before) the only Witness of his own glory!

And if the propension of a man's soul be toward God under the latter notion
also, in order to a satisfaction that shall thence accrue to himself (which
design, both in the pursuit and execution of it, is so conjunct with the
former, that it cannot be severed) It cannot but be an unspeakable diminution
and check to the highest delights in this kind, to think how soon they shall
have an end. That the darkness and dust of the grave shall shortly obscure and
extinguish the glory of this lightsome scene.

To think every time one enters that blessed Presence, for ought I know, I
shall approach it no more! This is possibly my last sight of that pleasant
Face! my last taste of those enravishing pleasures! What bitterness must this
infuse into the most delicious sweetness our state could then admit! And by how
much more free and large Grace should be in its present communications; and by
how much any soul should be more experienced in the life of God, and inured to
divine delights, so much the more grievous and afflictive resentments it could
not but have of the approaching end of all; And be the more powerfully tempted
to say, Lord, why was I made in vain? How faint and languid would endeavors be
after the knowledge of that God, whom I may but only know, and dye? How impotent
and ineffectual would the attractions of this end be to man in his terrene
state, to raise him above the world, and rescue him from the power of sensible
things, to engage him in the pursuit of that sanctity and purity which alone
can qualify him for converse with God, to bear him out in a conflict against
the (more natural) inclinations of sense; When if with much labor and painful
striving, much self-denial, and severity to the flesh, any disposition should
be attained to relish divine pleasures; it be considered all the while, that
the end of all may be as soon lost as it is gained. And that possibly there may
be no more than a moments pleasure to recompense the pains and conflicts of
many years; although, in this case, the continual hope and expectation of some
farther manifestation and fruition, might much influence a person already holy,
and a great lover of God, unto a steadfast adherence to him; yet how little
would it do to make men such, that are yet unsuitable and disaffected to him?
or even to recover such out of their lapses, and drowsy fits, that are not
altogether so?

And it is further to be considered, that since God has given man a being
capable of subsisting in another state (as does appear by what has been
already said): And since he is therefore capable of enjoying a greater
happiness than his present state can admit of; that capacity will draw upon him
a most indispensable obligation to intend that happiness as his end, For admit
that there be no future state for him, it is however impossible any man should
know there is none; and upon an impartial view of the whole case, he has
enough to render it (at least) far more likely to him that there is. And
certainly he cannot but be obliged to pursue the highest good (even by the Law
of Nature it self) which his nature is capable of; which probably he may
attain, and which he is no where forbidden by his Creator to aspire unto.
Whence therefore, if we now circumscribe him within the limits of this present
mortal state; or if, for argument's sake, we suppose eventually there is no
other; we must not only confess that capacity to be given him in vain, but that
he is obliged also to employ the principal endeavors of his life, and all his
powers in vain (for certainly his principal endeavor ought to be laid out in
order to his principal end): That is, to pursue that good which he may attain,
but never shall; and which is possible to him, but not upon any terms future.

And if it be admitted that the subject state of man must silence all
objections against any such inconsistencies, and make him content to act in
pure obedience to his Maker (whether he signify his will by the Law of Nature
only, or by any positive Precept) though he shall not hereafter enjoy any
permanent state of blessedness, as the consequent reward; That virtue and
goodness, an holy rectitude of inclinations and actions, are reward enough to
themselves. That there is that justice and sweetness in Religion, to oblige him
to love, and reverence, and adore the Divine Majesty this moment, though he
were sure to perish for ever, and be reduced to nothing the next. I say,
admitting all this, yet

2. Since the blessed God himself [Why have thou made all men in vain?] It is
with modest and humble reverence to be considered, what end worthy of that
infinitely perfect Being, he may be supposed to have propounded to Himself, in
forming such a Creature of so improvable a nature, and furnished with so noble
faculties and powers, for so transient and temporary a state. And how well it
will consist with the most obvious and unquestionable notions we can have of an
absolutely perfect Being, and the Attributes which he most peculiarly
challenges and appropriates to himself (so as not only to own, but to glory in
them) that he should give being not to some few only, but to the whole species
of humane Creatures, and therein communicate to them a nature capable of
knowing, of loving, and enjoying himself in a blessed eternity, with a design
to continue them only for some short space on earth, in a low imperfect state,
wherein they shall be liable to sink still lower to the vilest debasement of
their natures, And yet, not for their transgression herein (for it is the
mortality of man not by sin, but by Creation, or the design of the Creator
only, that is now supposed) but for his mere pleasure to bereave them of being,
and reduce them all again to nothing?

It is to be considered, whether thus to resolve and do, can any way agree to
God, according to our clearest and most assured conceptions of him; not from
our reasoning only, but his discovery of himself. For, otherwise, we see, the
imputation falls where we should dread to let it rest, of having made man in
vain.

He is, in common account, said to act vainly, who acts beneath himself, so as
to pursue an end altogether unworthy of him, or none at all.

It Is true, that some single acts may be done by great Persons, as a
divertisement, without dishonorable reflection, that may seem much beneath
them. And if any do stoop to very mean offices and employments to do good, to
help the distressed, and relieve the miserable, it is a glorious acquest; and
the greater they are, the higher is the glory of their condescending goodness.
Benignity of nature, and a propension to the most unexpected acts of a merciful
self-d^p^^ision, when the case may require it, are the most comely ornaments of
Princely Greatness, and outshine the glory of the richest Diadem. But a wonted
habitual course of mean actions, in great persons, that speak a low design, or
no design at all; but either an humor to trifle, or a mischievous nature and
disposition, would never fail to be thought inglorious and infamous; as may be
seen in the instances of Sardanapalus's spinning, and Domitian's killing of
Files.

When Wisdom and Goodness are in conjunction with Power and Greatness, they
never persuade a descent but upon such terms, and for such purposes, that a
more glorious advancement shall ensue. Wisdom foreseeing that end, and Goodness
readily taking the way, which (though it were most undesigned, or not aimed at
as an end) could not fail to effect it.

Nor are any Attributes of the Divine Being more conspicuous than th^se; more
testified by Himself, or more generally acknowledged by all men that have not
denied his existence. Or if any have done that violence to their own minds, as
to erase and blot out thence the belief of an existing Deity; yet, at least,
while they deny it, they cannot but have this notion of what they deny; and
grant that these are great perfections, and must agree to God, upon supposition
that He do exist. If therefore He should do any thing repugnant to these, or we
should suppose Him to do so, we should therein suppose Him to act below a God,
and so, as were very unworthy of Him.

And though it becomes us to be very diffident of our own reasonings,
concerning the Counsels and Designs of that Eternal Being: so as if we should
find him to assert any thing expressly of himself, which we know not how to
reconcile with our own preconceived thoughts, therein to yield him the cause,
and confess the debility of our understandings. Yet certainly it were great
rashness, and void of all pretense, to suppose any thing, which neither he
says of himself, nor we know how, consistently, to think.

Nor are we, in judging of his designs, to bring him down to our model, or
measure him by man, whose designs do for the most part bespeak only his own
indigency, and are levelled at his own advantage, and the bettering some way or
other of his present condition. Whatsoever the great God does toward his
Creatures, we must understand him to do, though with design, yet from an
exuberant fullness of life and being, by which he is incapable of an accession
to himself. And hence that he can, in reference to himself, have no other
inducement to such action, besides the complacency which he takes in diffusing
his free communications, (for he exercises loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth, Jer. 9. 24,
because he delights in these things); and the maintaining the just honor and
reputation of his government over his Creatures, who as they are of him, Romans
11. 36.
and through him, must be all to him, that he may have glory for ever.

Now though it be most undoubtedly true, that the Sovereignty of his power, and
dominion over his Creatures (of which he has no need, and to whom he so freely
gave being) is so absolute and unlimited, that, if we consider that only, we
must acknowledge he might create a Man or an Angel, and annihilate him
presently: yea, that he might, if he so pleased, raise up many Thousand Worlds
of intelligent and innocent Creatures into being in one moment, and throw them
into nothing again the very next moment.

Yet how unwarrantably should we maim the notion of God, if we should conceive
of him only, according to one Attribute, secluding the consideration of the
rest! How misshapen an Idea should we bear of him in our minds! And how would it
deform the face of Providence, and spoil the Decorum of his Administrations, if
they should be the effects of one single Attribute only, the other having no
influence on the affairs of the world! If nothing but Mercy should appear in
his dispensations toward sinful man, so that every man might do what were good
in his own eyes, without cause of fear to be called to account; If the most
dissolute and profane were equally assured of his favor, with those who are
most holy, and strictly regular in all their conversation; what would be
thought of God and Religion? Or how should we savor the notion of an impure
Deity taking pleasure to indulge the wickedness of men? And if Justice alone
have the whole management of Affairs, and every act of sin be followed with an
act of sudden vengeance, and the whole world become a flaming. Theater, and all
men held in an hopeless expectation of fiery indignation, and of judgment
without mercy; What would become of that amiable Representation, and the
consolatory thoughts we have of God, and of that love and duty which some souls
do bear toward him? Or if Power should affect daily to show it self in
universal appearances and effects, in changing every hour the shapes of the
Terrestrial Creatures, in perpetual quick innovations of the courses of the
Celestial, with a thousand more kinds of prodigious events that might be the
hourly effects of unlimited power; How were the order of the World disturb^d,
and how unlovely an Idea would it beget in every intelligent Creature, of him
that made and rules it? Yet is it from no defect of Mercy, that all men are not
equally favored and blessed of God; nor of Justice, that a speedy vengeance is
not taken on all; nor of Power, that the World is not filled with astonishing
wonders every day; but rather from their unexcessiveness; and that they make
that blessed temperature where they reside, and are exercised in so exact
proportion, that nothing is ever done unworthy of Him who is, at once, both
perfectly Merciful, and Just, and Powerful, and Wise, and has all Perfections
eminently comprehended and united in His own most simple Being.

It were therefore besides the purpose to insist only what Sovereign Power,
considered apart, might do; but we are to consider what may be congruous to Him
to do, who is infinitely Wise and Good, as well as Powerful.

1. And first, let it be weighed, how it may square with this Divine Wisdom to
give being to a World of reasonable Creatures, and giving them only a short
time of abod^ in being, to abandon them to a perpetual annihilation.

Wisdom in any Agent must needs suppose the intention of some valuable End of
his action. And the Divine Wisdom wherein it has any End diverse from that
which his pure Goodness and Benignity toward his Creatures would incline him
to (which also we must conceive it most intent to promote and further) cannot
but have it chiefly in design; it being determined that his goodness should
open it self, and break forth into a Creation, and that of reasonable
Creatures, so to manage his government over these (which indeed are the only
subjects of government in the strict and proper notion of it) as may most
preserve his authority, and keep up his just interest in them, both by
recommending him to their fear, and love; to possess them with that due and
necessary reverence of him, that may restrain them from contemptuous sinning;
and so endear his government to them, as to engage them to a placid and free
obedience.

But how little would it agree with this design of the Divine Wisdom, to have
made man only for this temporary state?

For,

1. How little would it tend to the begetting and settling that fear of God in
the hearts of men, that were necessary to preserve his authority and government
from a profane contempt; whereas daily experience shows, that there is now no
difference made between them that fear God, and them that fear him not, unless
wherein the former are worse dealt with, and more exposed to sufferings and
wrongs; That at least it is often (yea for the most part) so, that to depart
from iniquity is to make one's self a prey; that those who profess and evidence
the most entire devotedness to God, and pay the greatest observance and duty to
him, become a common scorn upon this very account; and are in continual danger
to be eaten up as bread, by those that call not upon God, while, in the mean
time, the Tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure,
are not plagued as other men, nor in trouble as other men. And judgment is not
here executed for wicked works in this world: If also nothing is to be expected
(either of good or evil) in another, who is likely to be induced (in this case)
to fear God, or be subject to him? And how unlike is this to the wisdom of the
Supreme Ruler, to expose his most Rightful and Sovereign Authority, to the
fearless and insolent affronts of his own revolted Creatures, without any
design of future reparation to it! as if he had created them on purpose only to
curse him, and dye! But he has prevented the occasion of so reproachful a
Censure, and thought fit to fill his Word and the Consciences of guilty sinners
with threats and dreadful presages of a future judgment, and state of
punishment. To which he is no less concerned, both in point of wisdom and
veracity (and I may add, of Legal Justice) to make the event correspond, that
he may neither be found to have omitted any due course, for prevention or
redress of so great an evil; and that, if the threatening do not effectually
overawe sinners, the execution may, at least, right himself: And that, in the
mean time, he do not (that which would least of all become him, and which were
most repugnant to his nature) make use of a solemn fiction to keep the world in
order, and maintain his government by falsehood and deceit, that is, by
threatening what he knows shall never be.

2. Nor were there (in the case all along supposed) a more probable provision
made, to conciliate and procure to the Divine Majesty the love which it is
requisite he should have from the children of men.

And this cannot but be thought another apt method for his wisdom to pitch
upon, to render his government acceptable, and to engage men to that free and
complacential subjection which is suitable to a God. For how can that filial
and dutiful affection ^ver be the genuine product or impress of such a
representation of the case between God and them; that is, that they shall be
most indispensably obliged to devote their whole being, and all their powers,
entirely to his Service and Interest; exactly to observe his strictest Laws, to
keep under the severest restraint their most innate reluctant inclinations; and
in the mean time expect the administrations of Providence to be such, toward
them, that they shall find harder usage all their days, than his most insolent
and irreconcilable Enemies, and at last lose their very Beings they know not
how soon; and therewith (necessarily) all possibilities of any future
recompense. Is this a likely way to procure love, and to captivate hearts into
an affectionate and free obedience? Or what is it probable to produce, but a
sour and sullen despondency, the extinction of all generous affection, and a
temper more agreeable to a forced enthralment to some malignant insulting
Genius, than a willing subjection to the God of all Grace and Love?

And every one will be ready to say, There is little of wisdom in that
Government, the administration whereof is neither apt to beget fear or love in
those that are subject to it: but either through the want of the one to be
despised, or to be regretted through the want of the other.

And this being the very case, upon supposition of no future state; It seems
altogether unworthy of the Divine Wisdom, that such a Creature should ever have
been made, as Man, upon which no end is attainable (as the course of Providence
commonly runs in this world) in comparison whereof, it were not better, and
more honorable to his Maker, (whose interest it is the part of his wisdom to
consult) that he had never been. And therefore as to God, and the just and
worthy designs of his glory, he would seem upon this supposition wholly made in
vain.

2. And Secondly, How congruous and agreeable would this supposition prove to
the Goodness of God? As that other Attribute of Wisdom does more especially
respect His own interest; so does this, the interest of his Creatures: That is,
if it be understood, not in a Metaphysical, but in a Moral sense, as it imports
a propensity and steady bent of will unto benefaction, according to that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 68.
Thou art good, and do good.

And this free and generous Principle it is, which gives the first rise and
beginning to all the designs any way respecting the wellbeing and happiness of
Creatures, which, then, infinite wisdom forms and manages to their full issues
and accomplishment, guiding (as it were) the hand of Almighty Power in the
execution of them.

That there should be a Creation, we may conceive to be the first Dictate of
this Immense Goodness, which afterward diffuses it self through the whole, in
communications agreeable to the nature of every Creature. So that even this
inferior, and less noble part, Psalm. 33. 5
the Earth, is full of the goodness of the Lord.

It creates first its own object, and then pours forth it self upon it with
infinite delight, rewarding the expense with the pleasure of doing good.

Now if we should suppose such a Creature as Man made only for that short time
and low state, which we see to be allotted him in this world; It were neither
difficult, nor enough, to reconcile the Hypothesis with strict Justice, which
upon the ground of absolute dominion, may do what it will with its own: But the
ill accord it seems to have with so large and abounding Goodness, renders it
very unlike the Dispensation of the blessed God. No enjoyment being in that
case afforded to this sort of Creatures, agreeable to their common nature and
capacity, either in degree or continuance.

Not in degree: for who sees not that the nature of man is capable of greater
things than he here enjoys? and where that capacity is rescued from the
corruption that narrows and debases it, how sensibly do holy souls resent and
bewail their present state, as a state of imperfection! With how fervent and
vehement desires and groans do they aspire and pant after an higher and more
perfect! We that are in this tabernacle do groan, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
being burdened; not for that we would be unclothed (that is not enough, to be
delivered out of the miseries of life, by laying down this passive part, is not
that which will terminate their desires) but clothed upon, that mortality might
be swallowed up of life.

Theirs are not brutal groans, the complaint of oppressed sensitive nature under
a present evil; but rational and spiritual, the expressions of desire strongly
carried to pursue an apprehended suitable good.

The truest notion we can yet have of the primitive nature and capacity of man,
is by beholding it in its gradual restitution. And is it agreeable to the
goodness of God to put such a nature into any, and withold the suitable
object? As if it were a pleasure to him to behold the work of his own hands
spending it self in weary struglings toward him, and vexed all the while it
continues in being, with the desire of what it shall never enjoy? and which he
has made it desire, and therein encouraged it to expect?

Nor in continuance: For I suppose it already evident, that the nature of man
is capable (in respect of his principal part) of perpetuity, and so of enjoying
a felicity hereafter, that shall be permanent and know no end. And it seems no
way congruous to so large Goodness, to stifle a capacity whereof it was it self
the Author, and destroy its own work.

For if the Being of man is intended for so short a continuance, either he may
have the knowledge of this determination concerning him, or not: If he cannot
have the knowledge of it, why should any one say what they cannot know; or put
such a thing upon God, that is so vilely reflecting, and dishonorable to him?
If he may have the knowledge of it, then does he seem a Creature made for
torment, while, by an easy reflection upon himself, he may discern he is not
incapable of a perpetual state; and is yet brought forth into the light, to be,
ere long, extinguish't, and shut up in everlasting darkness. And who can think
this a thing worthy of infinite and eternal Goodness? Besides (as has been
insisted before) that this torture, proceeding from so sad an expectation,
cannot but be most grievous and afflictive to the best. Whence the Apostle
tells us, that Christians, if in this life only they had hope, 1 Cor. 15. 19.
were of all men most miserable. So that it were more desirable never to have
been. If any yet, fall hereafter into a state to which they would prefer
perpetual annihilation, in as much as it is wholly by their own default, it no
way reflects upon Divine Goodness. But it would be a dishonorable reflection
rather upon that Author and Fountain of all Goodness, if he should not express
himself wise and just as well as good; as it would upon a man, especially a
Ruler over others, if that which we call good nature were conjunct with
stolidity, or an insensibleness of whatsoever affronts to his Person and
Government.

Upon the whole, therefore, it seems most repugnant to these great Attributes
of the Divine Being, to have made man only for this present state. That to
think so, were to conceive unworthily of him, as if he had acted much beneath
himself, and done a vain thing in making such a Creature, no end being
attainable by it, which we can suppose either his Wisdom or Goodness to aim at.

If any would imagine to themselves an expedient, by supposing an eternal
succession of humane generations, upon whom the Wisdom and Goodness of God
might have a perpetual exercise in the government and sustentation of them for
their appointed times: This would be far from satisfying, as to either; but
would rather increase the difficulty. For there would be the same temptation
upon all the Individuals, to contemn or regret the Government of their Maker.

So that he should hereby even eternize his own reproach; and should always, in
every succession, have still the same craving appetites returning, and
expectations never to be satisfied; which were as repugnant to all he has
discovered to us of his nature, as any thing we can suppose.

Though some persons of a light and desultory humor, might imagine to
themselves a pleasure in it, if they had the power to make such a rotation of
things, rising and falling, coming and passing away, at their beck and command;
and such as were of a Sanguinary Temper, might sport themselves in raising up
and lopping off lives at pleasure with an arbitrary hand. Yet sure they would
never gain by it the esteem of being either wise or good; and would it is like,
in time, grow weary of the sport. But to form to our selves such Idea's of the
blessed God, were an injury not inferior to the vety denial of his being.

His providence toward the inferior Creatures, has no resemblance of any such
thing; whom his bounty sustains agreeably to their natures, who have no
foresight of their own cessation from being, to keep them in a continual death
by the expectation of it. And who serve to valuable and reasonable purposes,
while they are continued; for they are useful, partly to the sustentation of
man, and partly to his instruction, in order to his higher Ends.

And though each individual of them do not actually so, it is sufficient that
the several kinds of them are naturally apt thereto, which are propagated
according to a settled course and Law of Nature in their individuals. And if all
immediately serve not man, yet they do it mediately in serving those that more
immediately do. Besides that when such a work was to be done, as the furnishing
out, and accomplishing this lower world; It was meet all things should be in
number, weight and measure, and correspond in every part. As if one build a
House for entertainment, though the more noble Rooms only do come in view, yet
all the rest are made answerably decent, on supposition that they may. It was
becoming the august and great Lord of this world, that it have in it, not only
what may sustain the indigent, but gratify the contemplative, by fresh
variety; who would be apt to grow remiss by conversing only with what were of
every days observation. Nor was that a low end, when such contemplation has so
direct a tendency to raise a considering mind to the sight, and love, and
praise of the Supreme Being, that has stamped so lively signatures and prints
of his own perfection upon all his works.

If it be said, Man might be in the same kind serviceable to the contemplation
of Angels, though he were himself never to know any other than this mortal
state. It Is true, that he might so; but yet the incongruities were no way
salved, of God's putting a capacity and expectation into his nature of a better
state. Of his dealing so hardly with them, that he has procured to love him.
Of his never vindicating their high contempt, that spent their days in
rebellion against him.

Besides, that these were ill precedents, and no pleasant Theams for the view
of an Angelical mind. And if they see a nature extinct, capable of their state,
what might they suspect of their own?

So that which way soever we turn our thoughts, we still see that man's
mortality, and liableness to an unavoidable death, abstracted from the thoughts
of another state, carry that constant aspect, as if all men were made in vain.

What remains then, but that we conclude hence, we ought not too much, o^ too
long, thus to abstract, no^ too closely confine our eye to this dark and gloomy
Theme, Death, and the Grave, or withold it from looking further. For far be
it from us to think the wise and holy God has given being to man (and
consequently exercised a long continued series of Providence thorough so many
successive Ages toward him) in vain.

Nothing but a prospect of another state can solve the knot, and work through
the present difficulty, can give us a true account of man, and what he was made
for.

Therefore since it would be profane and impious, sad and uncomfortable, a
blasphemy to our Maker, and a torture to our selves, to speak it as our settled
apprehension and judgment, That God had made man to no purpurpose: We are
obliged and concerned, bo^^ (...) to Him, and compossion to our selves, so to
repre^ent the ^a^e as that we may be able to remove so unworthy and black a
thought to the greatest distance from us, both in it self, and whatsoever
practice would be consequent thereto. That is, to conclude, That certainly
there must be another state after this; and accordingly steer our course.

The Improvement then of the foregoing Discourse, will have a double aspect; On
our Judgments. Practice.



1. On our Judgments, To settle this great Principle of Truth in them, The
certain futurity of another state, after this life is over. Unto which this
present state is only preparatory and introductive.

For whereas we can never give a rational account why such a Creature as man
was made, if we confine all ou^ apprehensions concerning him to his present
state on earth: Let them once transcend those narrow limits, fly over into
eternity, and behold him made for an everlasting state hereafter; and the
difficulty now vanishes, the whole affair looks with a com^ly and befitting
aspect.

For we may now represent the case thus to our selves. That man was put into
this terrestrial state and dwelling, by the wise and righteous designation of
his great Creator and Lord, that his Loyalty to him amidst the temptations and
enticements of sensible things, might be tried a while: That revolting from
Him, he is only left to feel here the just smart of his causeless defection.
That yet such farther methods are used for his recovery, as are most suitable
to his so empaired state. An allayed light shines to him in the midst of
darkness, that his feebler eye may receive a gradual illumination, and behold
God in those more obscure discoveries which he now vouchsafes of himself, till
by degrees he be won to take up good thoughts of him, and return into an
acquaintance and friendship with him; which once begun here, shall be hereafter
perfected in eternal fruitions. The offense and wrong done to his Maker, he in
a strange unthought of way makes compensation of to himself. And testifies his
reconcileableness, and persuades a reconciliation upon such terms, and by so
endearing Mediu^^s as might melt and molli^ie hearts of Adamant; and shall
effectually prevail with many to yield themselves the Subjects and Instances of
his admired goodness for ever; while others lie only under the natur^l
consequents and just resentments of their unremedied enmity and ^olly. So are
the glorious issues of God's dispensation toward man, and the wise and
merciful conduct of his equal Government, worthily celebrated through the days
of Eternity with just acclamations and praises. We can fasten upon nothing
ex^^ptionable or unaccountable, yea, or that is not highly laudable and
praiseworthy in this course of procedure.

Therefore, though now we behold a dark Cloud of Mortality hanging over the
whole Humane Race; Though we see the grave still devouring, and still
unsatisfied, and that all are successively drawn down into it; and we puzzle
our selves to assign a reason why such a Creature was made a reasonable Being,
capable of an everlasting duration, to visit the world only, and vanish; to
converse a short space with objects and affairs so far beneath it, and retire
we know not whither. If yet our eye follow him through the darker paths of the
Region of Death, till at the next appearance we behold him clothed with
immortality, and fitted to an endless state, the wonder is over, and our
amusement quickly ceases.

Wherefore let us thus bethink our selves, and consider: Surely he that m^^^e
this great Universe, and disposed all the sorts, stations, and motions o^
Creatures in it, in so exquisite order and method, cannot but be a most
perfectly wise and intellectual Ag^nt, and therefore cannot be supposed to have
done any thing to no purpose; much less when all the inferior Creatures have
Ends visibly answering the exigency of their natures, to have made so excellent
a Creature as Man (the nobler part of his lower Creation) in vain; that He only
should be without his proportionable end, and after a short continuance in
being, return to nothing, without leaving it conjecturable what he was made
for. This were so intolerable an incongruity, and so unlike the footsteps that
every where else appear of the Divine wisdom and goodness, that we cannot but
enquire further into this matter, and conclude at last, That he was made for
some higher purposes than are within the reach of our sight; and has his
principal ^^^t yet to act upon another st^ge, within the vail, that shall never
be taken down.

The future immortality of man seen^s, therefore, so certainly grounded upon
what is discovered and generally acknowledged touching the nature of God, and
his most peculiar and essential Per^ections, that unless we were further put to
prove the existence of a God (which to them that are rational need not, and to
them that are not, were in vain) there can no reasonable doubt remain
concerning it.

Practice: Which it may fi^ly serve both to correct and reprove, and also to
direct and guide.

1. It administers the ground of just rebuke, that since if we terminate our
thoughts and designs upon things, only on this side the grave, it would seem we
were wholly made in vain, we do yet so generally employ our cares and
endeavors about such things, and even the vilest and most de^p^^^ble of these:
And so live, not to our own dishonor only, but to the reproach of our Maker,
as if he made us for no more worthy Ends. And let us but impartially debate the
matter with our selves: Can we, in sober reason, think we were made only for
such Ends as the most only pursue? Have we any pretense to think so? Or can it
enter into our souls to believe it? Would not men be ashamed to profess such a
belief? Or to have it written in their foreheads, These are the only ends they
are capable of? Then might one read, Such a man born to put others in mind of
his Predecessor's Name; and only lest such a Family should want an Heir; Such a
one to consume such an Estate, and devour the Provenue of so many Farms and
Manors. Such a one to ^ill so many Bags and Coffers, to sustain the riot of him
that succeeds. Some created to see, and make sport; to run after Hawks and
Dogs, or spend the time which their weariness redeems from converse with
Brutes, in making themselves such, by drinking away the little residue of Wit
and Reason they have left; mixing with this gentile exercise, their impure and
scurrilous Drolleries, that they may befriend one another with the kind
occasion of proving themselves to be yet of Humane Race, by this only
demonstration remaining to them, that they can laugh. Which medium, if the
wisdom of the jest were known, would be found so pregnant, as to afford them a
double conclusion; and be as effectual oftentimes, to prove them Fools as Men.
Others one might read born to trouble the world, to di^quiet the neighborhood,
and be the common plague of all about them, at least, if they have any within
their reach and power, that are v^is^r and more sober than themselves; or that
value not their souls at so cheap a rate as they. Others made to blaspheme
their Maker, to rent the Sacred Name of God, and make proof of their high
valor, and the gallantry of their brave spirits, by bidd^ng a defiance to
Heaven, and proclaiming their Heroic contempt of the Deity, and of all
Religion. As if they had persuaded themselves into an opinion, That because
they have had so prosperous success in the high achievements of conquering
their humanity, and bassling their own Fear, and Reason, and Conscience, Death
also will yield them as easy a victory, or be afraid to encounter men of so
redoubled courage; that the God of Heaven, rather than offend them, will not
stick to repeal his Laws for their sakes, or never exact the observance of them
from persons of their quality; that they shall never be called to judgment; or
be complemented only there, with great respect, as persons that bore much sway
in their Country, and could number so many Hundreds or Thousands a year; that,
at least, the infernal flames will never presume to touch so worthy Personages;
that Devils will be awed by their Greatness, and fear to seize them, lest they
should take it for an affront. No conceit can be imputed to these men absurd
enough to over-match the absurdity of their practice. They can themselves think
nothing more gross and shameful, than what they daily are not ashamed to act.
For what absurdity can be compassed in a thought, greater than what appears in
a course of life managed in perpetual hostility to all Principles of Reason and
Humanity? And either they must own all the impious solly of such thoughts; or
confess, upon other accounts, an equal inf^tuation in their thinking-faculty it
self. For either they think their course justifiable, or they do not. If they
do, how fatally are all things inverted in their depraved minds? Wisdom and
Folly, Virtue and Vice, Good and Evil, seem to them transformed into one
another, and are no longer to be known by their Names. The common notions of
all mankind are but blind fancies in comparison of their later and clearer
illumination. And the ancient religious sentiments of all former ages, dreams
and follies to their admired n^w light. Their wise and rare d^scov^ries, That
they and all things came by chance; That this wor^^ has no Owner or Lord
(because they never had wit or patience to consider the nonsense of them; and
though they never any of them, had the luck to see (...) clod of earth or grain
of sand start up into being out of nothing; much less ground to think, that
such a World should of it self do so) are reason enough with them to mock at
the Eternal Being, and attempt to jeer Religion out of the world, and all other
men out of their reason and wits, as they have themselves. And sure this must
be their only pretense; and their Atheism the best reason, upon which to
justify their constant practice. For who can think, (while he sees them not
yet in chains) they should be so perfectly mad, as to acknowledge only such a
Deity (the Author and Ruler of all things) whose favor were worth nothing? or
to be procured by affronts? to whom contempt were a sacrifice? and the
violation of whatsoever is Sacred, the most effectual propitiation? or
acknowledge him for a God whom they hope to overpower, and to prosper in a War
against him?

And if they acknowledge none at all, and this be the fundamental Article of
their Creed, That there is indeed none; Then can no man charge them with any
thought more grossly foolish than their own, nor can they devise to say any
thing, by which more certainly to argue themselves berest of the common
understanding of men. For who that is not so, if he only take notice of his own
being, may not as certainly conclude the existence of a God, as that two and
two make four? Or what imagination can be too absurd to have place in that mind
that can imagine this Creation to be a casualty? He would be thought besides
himself that should say the same of the composition of a Clock, or a Watch,
though it were a thousand times more supposable. But if they do not justify
themselves, to what purpose is it further to press them with absurdities, that
persist in constant self-contradiction? or that have not so much left them of
rational sensation, as to feel in their own minds the pressure of the very
greatest absurdity?

If they only presume they do well, because they have never asked themselves the
question, or spent any thoughts about it; this speaks as much a besotted mind,
as any of the rest; and is as unworthy of a reasonable Creature. Why have they
the power of thinking? Or who do in any case more generally incurr the censure
of imprudence and folly, than they who have only this plea for their actions,
That they did not consider? Especially when the case is so plain, and the most
sudden reflection would discover the iniquity and danger of their course.

And one would think nothing should be more obvious, or more readily occurr to
the mind of a man, than to contemplate himself, and taking notice there is such
a Creature in the world, furnished with such abilities and powers, to consider,
What was I made for? What am I to pitch upon as my proper End? Nor any thing
appear more horrid to him, than to cross the very Ends of his Creation.

2. It may also be improved to the directing of our Practice. For which purpose
we may hence take this general Rule, That it be such as becomes the expectation
of a future state. For what else is left us, since in our present state we
behold nothing but vanity?

We see thus stands our case, that we must measure our selves by one of these
apprehensions; Either [we are made in vain]; or [we are made for a future
state]. And can we endure to live according to the former? As if we were
impertinencies in the Creation, and had no proper business in it? What
ingenuous persons would not blush to be always in the posture of an useless
hang-by? to be still hanging on, where he has nothing to do? that if he be
asked, Sir, what is your business here? he has nothing to say?

Or how can we bear it, to live as if we came into the world by chance? or
rather by mistake? As though our Creation had been a misadventure, a thing that
would not have been done, had it been better thought on? And that our Maker had
overshot himself, and been guilty of an oversight, in giving us such a being?
Who that has either just value for himself, or any reverence for his Maker,
could endure either to undergo the reproach, or be guilty of the blasphemy
which this would import? And who can acquit himself of the one or the other,
that lives not in some measure agreeably to the expectation of somewhat beyond
this present life? Let us therefore gird up the loins of our minds, and set our
faces as persons designing for another world; so shaping our course, that all
things may concur to signify to men the greatness of our expectations. We
otherwise proclaim to the world (to our own and our Creator's wrong) that we
have reasonable souls given us to no purpose. We are therefore concerned and
obliged both to aim at that worthy End, and to discover and make it visible
that we do so.

Nor is a design for an immortal state so mean and inglorious, or so irrational
and void of a solid ground, that we have any cause either to decline or conceal
it; either not to retain, or to be ashamed of our hope.

Nor is there any thing to be done in prosecution of it, so unworthy as to need
a corner, or merit to be done as a work of darkness.

Neither yet is it a vainglorious ostentation, or the affectation of making
show of an excellency above the vulgar pitch that I persuade to: But a modest
sober avowing of our high design and hope; neither making any near approach to
a proud arrogance on the one hand; nor a mean pusillanimity on the other. Truly
great and generous spirits know how to carry under Secular Honor with that
prudent and graceful decorum as shall signify a just owning of themselves
without insolence toward others. Real worth though it do not vaunt, will show
it self; and while it does not glare, yet cannot forbear to shine.

We should endeavor the excellency of a spirit refined from earth and dross,
and aspiring toward a state of immortality, may express it self; and shine in
its native luster; with its own, not with borrowed beams; with a constant,
even, natural; not with an unequal artificial light. That all that will, may
see, by the steady tendency of our course, that we are aiming at the great
things of another world. Though we, all the while, are not so much solicitous
to have our end and purpose known, as to obtain it.

And verily, since the vile sons of the earth, the men of sense, that aim at no
other end than to gratify their brutal appetite with such pleasure as is only
to be compassed within a short li^^s-time in this world; and who live to the
reproach of their Maker, and of mankind, do not go about to hide the infamy of
their low design, or conceal the degenerous baseness of their mean spirits; but
while they make their belly their God, and only mind earthly things, do also
glory in their shame: How much were it beneath the state and spirit of the sons
of God, that are worthily designing for a glorious immortality, to be ashamed
of their glory? or think of stealing a passage to Heaven in the dark?

No; let them know, it is not only too mean a thing for them to involve
themselves in the common spirit of the sensual world, but even to seem to do
so. And that this is so soul and ignominious a thing, as whereof they are
concerned, not to be free from the guilt only, but the suspicion. Heb. 11.
Those worthy souls that in former (and darker) days were engaged in seeking
the Heavenly Country, thought it became them to confess themselves pilgrims
and strangers on the earth: And therein, to declare plainly, that they were
seeking that better Country. Which confession and plain declaration, we need
not understand to be merely verbal, but practical and real also, such as might
be understood to be the language of their lives, and of a constant uniform
course of actions, agreeable to such a design.

Let us therefore bethink our selves, what temper of mind, and manner of life
may be most conformable to this design, and best become persons pretending to
it: Whereupon we should soon find our own thoughts instructing us, that such
things as these would be most becoming, and fit, in reference thereto; and
which, we may therefore take as so many particular directions how to govern our
spirits, and behave our selves answerably to so great an expectation.

1. That we endeavor for a calm indifferency and dispassionate temper of mind
toward the various objects and affairs that belong to this present life. There
are very narrow limits already set, by the nature of the things themselves, to
all the real objective value that such things have in them: And it is the part
of wisdom and justice to set the proportionable bounds to all the thoughts,
cares, and passions, we will suffer to stir in our minds in reference to them.
Nothing is a more evident acknowledged Character of a Fool, than upon every
slight occasion to be in a transport. To be much taken with empty things,
betokens an empty spirit. It is a part of manly fortitude to have a soul so
fenc't against foreign impressions, as little to be moved with things that
have little in them. To keep our passions under a strict rein, and steady
command, that they be easily retractable, and taught to obey. Not to move till
severe Reason have audited the matter, and pronounced the occasion just and
valuable. In which case the same manly temper will not refuse to admit a
proportionable stamp and impress from the occurring object: For it is equally a
prevarication from true Manhood, to be moved with every thing, and with
nothing. The former would speak a man's spirit a feather, the latter a stone. A
total apathie and insensibleness of external occurrents, has been the aim of
some, but never the attainment of the highest pretenders. And if it had, yet
ought it not to have been their boast; as upon sober thoughts it cannot be
reckoned a perfection. But it should be endeavored, that the passions which
are not to be rooted up (because they are of Nature's planting) be yet so
discreetly checked and deprest, that they grow not to that enormous tallness,
as to over^op a man's intellectual power, and cast a dark shadow over his soul.

A rational authority must be maintained, a continency and dominion of one's
self, that there be not an impotent profusion, and we be never so affected with
any thing, but that the object may still be able to warrant and justify the
affection, both for the nature and degree of it.

Which rule if we strictly observe, and apply it to the present case, we shall
rarely meet with any temporal concern that ought to move us much: both for the
littleness of such things themselves, and that we have so unspeakably greater
things in our view and design.

In con^ormity therefore to our so great Expectation, we ought more
particularly to watch and repress our inclinations, appetites, and affections
toward each several sort and kind of objects which time and this present state
has within the confines of it. As,

How contemptuously should we look upon that empty vanity of being rich? How
coldly and carelessly should we pursue; how unconcern'dly should we lose any
thing that might entitle us to that Name?

The pursuit of so d^spicable a trifle, with violent and peremptory desire, so
as hereby to suffer a diversion from our design for another world, is to make
our eternal hope less than nothing (For to any man's calm and sober thoughts
this will be found as little). And so will amount to a total quitting of all
our pretensions to a (better) future state; that is, when we so indulge this
odd, irrational, this wildly sanciful, and purely humoursome appetite (of which
no man can give any tolerable account), that it becomes ravenous, when it
devours a man's time, his thoughts, the strength and vigor of his spirit,
swallows up his nobler designs, and makes an idle doting about he knows not
what, or why, his main business.

Especially when Conscience it self becomes a sacrifice to this impure,
unhallowed Idol; and the question is wholly waved, Is this thing just and
honest? and nothing is considered, but that its commodious and gainful.

Yet (if herein we will take upon us to pass a judgment upon other men) it will
be no way ingenuous or just, that in smaller and disputable matters, we make
our own apprehensions a measure and standard to them. They are commonly aptest
to do so, who have least studied the matter, and have nothing but their
ignorant confidence to entitle them to the Dictator's Chair; where, however,
having placed themselves* they liberally bestow their censures and reproaches
on all that think ir not fit to throw away their own eyes, and see with their
bad ones. And conclude them to have no Conscience, who go not according to
theirs. And that they cannot but have some base design, who in any thing
presume to swerve from their judgment, especially if the advantage, in any
temporal respect, happen to lie on that side from which they dissent.

Nothing can indeed so comport with the spirit and design of one who believes
himself made for another world, as a brave and generous disdain of stooping to
the lure of present emolument, so as thereby to be drawn into any the least
thing which he judges not disensible by the severest Rules of Reason and
Religion; which were to quit a serene Heaven for mire and dirt.

There is nothing in this world of that value, or worthy to be bought so deer,
as with the less and forfeiture of the rest and repose of a mind quiet, benign,
peaceful, and well pleased with it self. It is enough if one find himself, by
difficulties which he cannot master, constrained to dissent from persons above
exception wise and pious, placidly, and without unbecoming confidence, to go on
in the way which his present judgment allows, carrying with him a modest sense
of humane infirmity, and how possible it is the error may lie on his own part:
Having, yet, to relieve him against that supposition, the clearness of his own
spirit, the conscience of his innocence of any ill disposition or design; of
his instructibleness and preparedness to admit a conviction if he err. And be
he never so fully persuaded about the thing in difference, yet to consider the
smallness of it, and how little cause he has of glorying, if he know in this
matter more than others, who, possibly, know ten times more than he, in far
greater and more important matters.

But, in matters clearly determined by common agreed Principles, to prevaricate
out of an indulgence to mere appetite; To give up one self to practices
apparently immoral and flagitious, only to comply with, and lest he should not
satisfy sensual desires, is the Character of one who has abandoned the common
hope of all good men; and who, that he may have his lot with beasts in this
world, dreads not to have it with Devils in the other.

And it is upon the same ground, equally unbecoming them that pretend to this
hope, to be visibly concerned and discomposed for losses and disappointments
they may meet with in this kind, when unexpected events withstand their having
much of this world, or deprives them of what they have. It becomes them that
reckon their good things are to come hereafter, to show by their equal
deportment and cheerful aspect in any such case, that they apprehend not
themselves touched in their most considerable Interests. Yea, though they suffer
not losses only, but injuries; and besides that they are damnifi'd (as much as
such things can signify) they find themselves wronged; and though further
trouble and danger threaten them in the same kind, They should evidence how
much it is above the power either of chance or malice, not only to make them
miserable, but even to disturb or make them sad. That they are not happy by a
casualty; And that their happiness is not in the command of them who cannot
command their own. That it only depends on the inward constitution and frame of
their own spirits, attempered to the blessed objects of the invisible world,
whereby they have the assurance of enjoying them fully hereafter, and the
present grateful relishes thereof in the mean time: and hence, That they can be
happy without the world's kindness, and in despite of its unkindness. That they
have somewhat within them, by which they are enabled to rejoice in tribulation;
being troubled on every side, yet not to be distressed: To take joyfully the
spoiling of goods, knowing within themselves they have in Heaven a better and
enduring substance. Not to suffer or discover any perturbation or disquiet. Not
to have their Souls ruffled or put into disorder; Nor let any Cloud sit on
their brow, though dark and dismal ones seem to hang over their heads.

And the same absurdity it would be to indulge to themselves an unbounded
liberty of sensual pleasures. For that looks like a despair of futurity; as if
a day were a mighty gain for eating and drinking, because to morrow we must
dye. An abstemious shyness here is comely. A tasting only the delights, whereof
others suffer themselves to be ingulft. A prudent reservednes and restraint, so
as that what shall cause with others an unbeseeming transport, and diffusion of
themselves, be entertained, not with a Cynical morosity, but a pleasant
composure, and well ordered complacence; keeping a due and even distance
between levity and sourness.

Yet there is a natural retiredness in some men's tempers; and in others an
aversion to pleasures, proceeding only of a rational estimate of their
emptiness and vanity in themselves; which may, however, much fall short of wha^
the present case requires: The exigency whereof is no way satisfied, but where
such a moderation to the product of a comparative judgment between the delights
of the present, and those of the future state: When one so enjoys any thing in
this world, as to be under the power of nothing, because of the more prevailing
influence he is under from the power of the world to come: When his Faith is
the Parent of his Sobriety; and his denial of worldly lusts flows from the
expectation of the blessed hope: When, because he more highly prizes, and lest
he forfeit eternal pleasures, he so behaves himself toward all temporary ones,
as neither to abuse those that are lawful, nor to be abused by the unlawful;
not to exceed in the one, nor to touch with the other.

Thus also ought we to look upon Secular Honors and Dignity; neither to make
them the matter of our admiration, affectation, or envy. We are not to behold
them with a libidinous eye, or let our hearts thirst after them. Not to value
our selves the more for them if they be our Lot: nor let our eye be dazzled with
admiration, or distorted with envy, when we behold them the ornaments of others.

We are not to express that contempt of them, which may make a breach on
civility, or disturb the order and policy of the Communities whereto we belong.
Though this be none of our own Country, and we are still to reckon our selves
but as pilgrims and strangers while we are here; yet it becomes not strangers
to be insolent or rude in their behavior, where they sojourn; how much soever
greater value they may justly have of their own Country. We should pay to
Secular Greatness a due respect, without Idolatry, and neither despise nor
adore it; considering at once the requisiteness of such a thing in the present
state, and the excelling glory of the other. As, though in prudence and good
manners, we would abstain from provoking affronts toward an American Sachim,
or Sagamore, if we did travel or converse in their Country; yet we could have
no great veneration for them, having beheld the royal pomp and grandeur of our
own Prince; especially he who were himself a Courtier and Favorite to his much
more glorious Sovereign, whom he is shortly to attend at home, could have no
great temptation to sue for Offices and Honors, or bear a very profound
intrinsic homage to so mean and unexpressive an Image of Regality.

It can surely no way become one who seeks and expects the honor and glory
which is conjunct with immortality, Romans 2. 7.
to be fond of the airy titles that poor Mortals are wont to please themselves
with; or to make one among the obsequious servile company of them whose
business it is to court a vanishing shadow, and tempt a dignified trifle into
the belief it is a Deity; to sneak and cringe for a smile from a supercilious
brow; and place his Heaven in the disdainful favors of him, who, it may be,
places his own as much in thy homage (so that it befalls into the Supplicant's
power to be his Creator whose Creature he affects to be). What eye would not
soon spy out the grosness of this absurdity? And what ingenuity would not blush
to be guilty of it? Let, then, the joyful expectants of a blessed immortality,
pass by the busy throng of this fanciful Exchange; and behold it with as
little concern, as a grave Statesman would the sports and ludicrous actions of
little Children, and with as little inclination of mind, as he would have to
leave his business, and go play with them; bestowing, there, only the transient
glance of a careless or a compassionate eye, and still reserving their intent
steady views for the glorious hope set before them.

And with a proportionable unconcernedness should they look on and behold the
various alternations of Political Affairs; no further minding (either the
constitution or administration of Government) than as the Interest of the
universal Ruler, the weal and safety of their Prince or Country are concerned
in them* But how many under the specious pretense of a public spirit, make it
their whole business to inspect and pry into these affairs, even with a most
meanly private and interested one! watching over the Public beyond the bounds
of their own Calling; and with no other design, than to catch at an opportunity
of serving their own turns! How many that stand perpetually at a gaze, in a
suspenceful expectation how things will go! either joying or hoping to behold
any favorable prognostics to the Party whereto they have thought fit to
addict themselves. Glad, or desirous to see it ingross power, and grasp the sum
of things, not from any sense of duties toward God's Vicegerents; not from
love of Justice, or study of public advantage; but that the happier lo^ may
befall or remain to themselves: These men are absorpt, and swallowed up of the
spirit of this World, contemper'd only to this sublunary Region, concorporate
with the earth, so as to partake in all its pangs and paroxisms, and tremul^us
motions. By the beating of their pulse you may know the state of things in this
lower World, as if they were of the same piece, and had but one soul with it.
Let them see times and a state of things on earth suitable to their Genius, and
you put a new life and soul into them. Reduce them to a despair here, and (so
little communion have they with the affairs of that other Country) the most
specious inviting representation that can be made to them of the world to come,
hinders not, but their hearts languish and dye, and become as stones within
them.

But that lofty foul that bears about with it the living apprehension of its
being made for an everlasting state, so earnestly intends it, that it shall
ever be a descent and vouchsafement with it, if it allow it self to take notice
what busy mortals are doing in their (as they rec^^^n them) grand negotiations
here below. And if there be a suspicion of an aptness or inclination to
intermeddle in them to their prejudice to whom that part belongs, can heartily
say to it (as the Philosopher to the jealous Tyrant) We of this Academy are not
at leisure to mind so mean things. We have somewhat else to do than to talk of
you. He has still the image before his eye, of this world vanishing and
passing away; of the other, with the everlasting affairs and concernments of
it, even now ready to take place, and fill up all the stage: and can represent
to himself the vision (not from a melancholic fancy or crazed brain, but a
rational faith, and a sober well instructed mind) of the World dissolving,
Monarchies and Kingdoms breaking up, Thrones tumbling, Crowns and Scepters
lying as neglected things. He has a Telescope through which he can behold the
glorious appearance of the Supreme Judge, the solemn state of his Majestic
Person, the splendid pomp of his magnificent and vastly numerous retinue; the
obsequious Throng of glorious Celestial Creatures, doing homage to their
Eternal King; the quick celerity of the emissitious Partisans covering the face
of the Heavens with their spreading wings, and dispersing themselves into all
the four Winds to gather the Elect: The universal silent attention of all to
that loud-sounding Trumpet that shakes the pillars of the world, pierces the
inmost caverns of the earth, and refounds from every part of the incircling
Heavens: The many Myriads of joyful Expectants arising, changing, putting on
glory, taking wing, and contending upwards, to join themselves to the
triumphant Heavenly Host: The Judgment set: The Books opened: The frightful
amazed looks of surprised Wretches: The equal administration of the final
Judgment: The adjudication of all to their eternal states: The Heavens rolled
up as a scrowl; the Earth, and all things therein, consumed and burnt up.

And now what spirit is there any more left in him toward the trivial affairs
of a vanishing world! How indifferent a thing is it with him, who bears himself
highest in a state of things whereof he foresees the certain hastening end!
Though he will not neglect the duty of his own place, is heartily concerned to
have the knowledge and fear of God more generally obtained in this apostate
world; and is ready to contribute his utmost regular endeavors for the
preservation of common peace and order in subserviency hereto. Yet
abstractedly, from these confiderations, and such as have been before
mentioned, he is no more concerned who is uppermost, than one would, passing by
a swarm of Flies, which has the longest wings, or which excels the rest in
sprightliness or briskness of motion* And for himself, he can insert this among
his most serious thanksgivings, That while the care is incumbent on others, of
watching over the public peace and safety, he may sit still, and converse with
God, and his own more sedate thoughts. How secure is he in this, That infinite
Wisdom governs the world! That all things shall be disposed the best way, to
the best and most valuable ends! That an afflicted state shall never befall
unto good men, but when it is fittest, and most conducible it should do so!
That the prosperity carnal appetite covets, is never denied them, but when it
would be pernicious! How calm is he in the midst of external troubles! How
placid and serene a spirit inhabits his peaceful breast! When all things are
shaken round about him, he is not shaken. He bears all sort of troubles, but
creates none to others, nor is disturbed by any himself.

But they that delight to see this world rolling or fixed, as may most serve
their private purposes; and have a perpetual quarrel with it, while it looks
not kindly upon them. Their life is bound up in it, and their pretenses to
another, are but the languid faint notions of what they never heartily believe
nor desire.

Upon the whole matter, Nothing is more agreeable to this great expectation,
than a steady restraint, and moderation of our passions toward things without
us* That is, all the several sorts of external objects and affairs, that so
variously invite, and tempt our observation and regard in this our present
state.

That we be not overmuch taken up in minding the body. For this looks like a
design (or that inconsistent wish) to have our present state perpetuated; And
that the thoughts are remote from us of a change for a better. As if
notwithstanding all that the Divine Goodness has promised concerning the
future inheritance of the free and heavenborn Seed, This did still lie nearest
our hearts, O that Ishmael might live in thy sight! And that the belief did
miserably languish with us of any better portion than what our eyes do already
behold: Together with the apprehension of a spiritual being in us, to be
ripened into a complete and actual capacity of enjoying what is better. It is
true, that all the exorbitant workings of those meaner and ignoble passions
that are moved by objects and occasions without, and foreign to us, have the
body for their first and last, their spring and source, their center and end.
But thence it becomes the more proper, and requisite, that we draw nearer this
their seat and center, and strike at the root; and, in killing that inordinate
love and solicitude for the body, mortify them all at once.

We are indeed so far to comply with the pleasure of our Maker, as not to
despise the mean abode which he has assigned us for a while in the body. But
withal, to take heed lest we so cross and resist it, as to make caring for the
body our whole business: which he has only enjoined us, in subserviency to an
unspeakably greater and more important business. Its health and welfare ought
upon very valuable accounts to be carefully preserved by all prudent means. But
to indulge its slothful desires, and comply with its licentious wild cravings,
is far beneath us, a base unmanning of our selves, and would signify as if so
absurd a conceit had past with us into a settled judgment, That a reasonable
immortal spirit was created only to tend and serve a Brute. It is monstrous to
behold, with how common consent multitudes that professedly agree in the belief
of the immortal nature of their souls, do yet agree to debase and enslave them
to the meanest servility to their mortal bodies; so as these are permitted to
give Laws to them, to prescribe them rules of living, and what their daily
employment shall be. For observe the designs they drive, and what is the
tendency of their actions and affairs (whence the judgment is to be made
concerning their inward thoughts, deliberations, and resolves) and is not the
body the measure and mark of them all? What import or signification is there in
this course, of a design for futurity? And (which increases the folly of it to
a wonder) they can make a shift to go on thus from year to year, and take no
notice of the absurdity! They agree to justify each one himself, and one
another. The commonness of the course takes away all sense of the horrid
madness of it. And because each does as the rest do, they seem to imagine they
all do well; and that there is nothing exceptionable in in the case; Non qua
eundum est sed qua itur. Sen.
and go on * (as the sequacious sheep) not the way they ought, but which they
see others go before them.

But, if any place could be found for calm and sober thoughts, What would be
reckoned a greater impertinency, than to be at so great pains for maintaining a
bodily life, without considering what that life shall serve for? To employ our
utmost care to live, but to live for we know not what? It becomes us to be
patient of the body, not fond. To treat and use our bodies as things shortly to
be put off, and laid aside. To care for them, not for their own, but the works
sake we have to do in them; and leave it to them to indulge and pamper the
body, who expect never to live out of it. Not to concern our selves, that the
circumstances of our bodily state be such as will gratify our appetites, but
answer the Ends for which our Maker thought fit we should live a while in the
body. Reckoning with our selves, We are lodged in these mean receptacles
(though somewhat commodiously, yet) but for a little while, and for great
purposes; and more minding our journey, and home, than our entertainment in our
Inn. Contentedly bearing the want of bodily accommodations, that are not easily
to be compassed, and the pressure of unavoidable bodily infirmities; not much
pitying our selves because of them; nor deeply regretting it, if wants and
pains pinch our flesh; nay, though we see the outward man perishing, so we can
but find the inward renewing day by day.

3. That we set our selves with mind the state and things we were made for? We
should therefore make these familiar to our selves, and use our spirits to
those more noble and pleasant Theams: Recounting often, how unworthy it is of
them to grovel in the dust, or choose the objects of their converse by such
measures only as are taken from sense.

It is an iniquity which, though God may be so gracious to us as to forgive, we
should not easily forgive to our selves; That we have so often chosen to
converse with empty trifles, while so great things have invited our thoughts in
vain.

Their remoteness from sense has little of excuse in it, and unworthy a
reasonable Creature. Methinks they should be ashamed to alledg it, who consider
themselves furnished with an intellectual power that does, in many other
instances, control the judgment of sense, and impeach it of falsehood. Would we
not blush to profess it for a Principle, That there is nothing real that
exceeds the sphere of our sense?

We would reckon it a part of modesty, not to ascribe too much to our own
Understandings, or presume too far upon our intellectual Ability, against the
Judgment of sage and knowing persons. How is it then, that we think it not
immodest to oppose the apprehensions of our dull and incapacious sense, to the
common faith and reason of all good and wise men, that are or have been in the
world, as well as our own? If we have not seen what the state of things is in
the other world, are we not told? And have we not enough to assure us, that
it is He has told us, whose nature cannot suffer him to impose upon us, or
represent things otherwise than they are? Who else can be the Author of so
common a persuasion? I^ any man had been the first Inventor of the opinion,
That there is another state of things to succeed to this; would he not have
assumed it to himself, that he was so? Would he not have owned it, and gloried
in it? Or would not some or other of his proselyted disciples have preserved
his name and memory, and transmitted them to posterity? Could so vast a sect be
without an Head or Master, known and celebrated among men?

Less plausible Opinions find some Owner; Why is it not said, Who was the first
Broacher of this? And if we can find no other Parent for it, but He who was the
Parent of our beings, how grateful should such a discovery be to us, both for
His sake, and its own? Upon His account, we should surely think it worthy to be
believed; and upon its own, to be considered and seriously thought on, with
greatest delight and sense of pleasure.

Many things that we reckon considerable upon much lower accounts, we so
believe, as to let them engage our hearts, and influence our practice, upon
much lower evidence: How entirely are men's spirits taken up many times about
meaner matters, whereof they have only a (much more uncertain and ^allible)
report from one another? What pretense can we have, less to regard* the
testimony of Him that made us, discovering to us things so great, so important,
so rational in themselves, even though they had not been so expressly revealed?
Let us therefore d^ive the matter to a clear and short issue, and come to a
resolution wi^^ our selves: Have we reason to believe such things, or no? If we
can so far impose upon our selves, as to think we have not; or be tempted into
so abject, so unrequired, and so unwarrantable a self denial, so base an esteem
of our own beings, as to account the things of this earth and present world
have enough in them to answer any Ends we can suppose our selves made for; Let
us no longer mock the world, by pretending to believe what we believe not: but
if this be our settled judgment, and we will avow and own it, That we believe
these things; Let us no longer expose and make our selves ridiculous, by
counter-acting our own pr^fessed belief in matters of such moment, pretending
to believe, and disregarding them at the same time. It Is absurd and foolish to
believe such things, and not mind them much, or not let our souls and our
practice be commanded and governed by them: Not to have our desires, and cares,
and hopes, and joys, influenced thereby to the uttermost; How rational (...),
here, to be deeply (...) by the unsuitableness (...) own spirits we defeat not
our (...) expectations! How pleasant and delectable (that danger being provided
against) to sit down and compare our present with our expected state! what we
are, with what we hope to be ere long! To think of exchanging shortly,
infirmity, pollution, darkness, deformity, trouble, complaint; for power,
purity, light, beauty, rest, and praise! How pleasant, if our spirits be fitted
to that state! The endeavor whereof is a further congruity in the present
case, viz.

4 That we make it our principal

We should therefore make this the matter of our earnest study, What would be
the proper improvements and ornaments of our spirits, and will most fitly
qualify them for the state we are going into; and of our daily observation how
such things thrive and grow in us. Especially we should not be satisfied, till
we find in our selves a refinedness from this earth, a thorough purgation from
all undue degrees of sensual inclination and affection; the consumption of our
dross by a Sacred Fire from Heaven, a Spirit of Judgment and of Burning, an
aptitude to spiritual exercises and enjoyments; high complacency in God,
fervent love, a worshipping posture of soul, formed to the veneration of the
eternal Wisdom, Goodness, Power, Holiness, profound humility, and abnegation of
our selves; a praiseful frame of spirit, much used to gratulations and
thanksgivings; a large and universal love, imitating, as much as is possible,
the Divine: A proneness to do good to all; a steady composure, and serene
temper of spirit; the repose and rest of a contented mind, not boisterous, not
apt unto disquiet, or to create storms to our selves, or the world; Every way
suitable to the blissful Regions, where nothing but perfect purity, entire
devotedness to God, love, goodness, benignity, well-pleasedness, order, and
peace, shall have place for ever.

This we ought to be constantly intent upon, as the business of our lives, our
daily work, to get our spirits so attempered and fi^ted to Heaven, that if we
be asked, What design we drive? What are we doing? We may be able to make this
true answer, We are dressing our selves for Eternity: And since nothing is
required hereto, that is simply impossible, nothing but what is agreeable to
our natures, and would be a perfection to them; How worthy and commendable an
ambition were it to be always aspiring? not to rest or take up beneath the
highest pitch of attainable excellency in these kinds, reckoning every degree
thereof a due to our natures; and that they have not what belongs to them,
while any thing of real intrinsic moral goodness is yet wanting; and not only
due, but necessary, and what we shall have need of in reference to the state we
are shortly to enter upon; that except such things be in us, and abound, we
cannot have an abundant entrance into the everlasting Kingdom.

And should we, pretending to such an expectation, omit such endeavors of
preparing our selves, it were alike thing as if an unbred Peasant should go
about to thrust himself, with an expectation of high Honors and Preferments,
into the Prince's Court; or as if a distracted man should expect to be employed
in the greatest and most intricate affairs of State; or an uninstructed Idiot
take upon him to profess and teach Philosophy.

Therefore let us consider; Are we conscious of no unfitn^ss for that blessed
state? To dwell in the presence of the holy God? To be associated with the
H^av^nly Assembly of pure intellectual spirits? To consort and join with them
in their celebrations and triumphant Songs? Can we espy no such thing in our
selves, as an earthy mind, aversation to God, as pride, disdain, wrath, or
envy, admiration of our selves, aptness to seek our own things, with the
neglect of others, or the like? And do not our hearts then misgive? and tell us
we are unready? not yet prepared to approach the Divine Presence, or to enter
into the habitation of his Holiness and Glory? And what then have we to do, but
set our selves to our preparatory work? To set our watches, make our
observations, take strict notice of all the deflections and obliquities of our
spirits, settle our methods, and hasten a redress? Do not we know this is the
time and state of preparation? And since we know it, how would the folly
torture us, by reflection, of having betrayed our selves to a surprisal! None
are ever wont to enter upon any new state without some foregoing preparation.
Every more remarkable turn or change in our lives, is, commonly (if at all
^or^known) introduced by many serious fore-thoughts. If a man be to change his
dwelling, employment, condition, common discretion will put him upon thinking
how to comport with the place, business, converse, and way of living he is next
to betake himself to: And his thoughts will be the more intense, by how much
more momentous the change. If he be to leave his Country, with no probability
of returning; If he be designed to a station, the circumstances whereof carry
any thing of awfulness in them; if to public business, if to
Court-attendances, With what solemnity and address are such things undertaken!
How loath and ashamed would one be, to go into such a condition, being totally
unapt, not at all knowing how to behave himself in it! But what so great change
as this can the nature of man admit? That a soul, long shut up in flesh, is now
to go forth from its earthly Mansion, and return no more; expecting to be
received into the glorious Presence of the Eternal King, and go act its part
among the perfected Spirits that attend His Throne! How solicitous endeavor of
a very thorough preparation, does this case call for!

But how ill does the common course of men agree to this! who never have such
matters in their thoughts! who so much neglect not their very Hogs, as they do
their Spirits!

5. That we have much conversation very inward with him, does best agree with
the expectation of a state perfectly good and happy.

To expect this, and converse only with shadows and vanishing things, is to
expect to be happy without a happiness; or that our happiness should betide us
as a casual thing, or be forced upon us at last whether we will or no. But
since our happiness in God is on his part not necessary, but vouchsafed and
gratuitous, depending on mere good pleasure; Is it our best way of ingratiating
our selves with him, to neglect him, and live as without him in the world? To
keep our selves strangers to him all our days, with a purpose only of flying to
him at last, when all things else that were wont to please us, are vanished and
gone? And if we could suppose his Wisdom and Justice to admit his forgiving so
provoking contempt of him, and receiving an exiled Soul forced out from its
earthly abode, that to the last moment of it would never look after him, or
have to do with him; yet can it be supposed, that its own habitual aversation
to him, could allow it to be happy in him? Especially being increased and
confirmed by its consciousness and sense of guilt? How can these but make it
banish it self, and in a sullen enmity and despair perp^tually fl^e the Divine
Presence? What can in this case be more natural to it, than to give up it self
to eternal solitary wanderings, as a Fugitive from God? to affect to be ever
enwrapt in its own darkness, and hidden from his sight, and be an everlasting
tormentor to it self? Can we be happy in him whom we do not love? or love whom
we will not know or be acquainted with?

What sure ground of hope can we imagine to our selves, that our reconciliation
and acquaintance with God shall ever be brought about, if it be not done while
we are here in the body? Will we be so vain, as to cherish an hope that not
only affronts the visible import of God's revelation, but the very reason of
things, and the natural tendency of our own spirits? Nor indeed (if we would
consider better) can we possibly hope for what we desire not, or whereto our
hearts are in an habitual disaffection, other ways than (in the present case)
negatively; and that our infidelity permits us not to fear the contrary: yea,
and the lively hope of a blessedness in God, as it includes desire, would
certainly infer that Purity (the image of his own) that could never fail to
incline our hearts to him, and which would habituate us to a course of walking
with him in inward communion.

And this were comely and agreeable to our pretenses; If while we profess our
selves made for another state, we retire our selves from the fading things that
put a vanity into this; and single out, by our own choice, the stable good
which we expect ever to enjoy. How befitting is it to pass by all things with
neglect, and betake our selves hither with this sense?

Lord, I have viewed the World over in which thou have set me; I have tried how
this and that thing will fit my spirit, and the design of my Creation; and can
find nothing in which to rest, for nothing here does it self rest, but such
things as please me for a while, in some degree, vanish and flee, as shadows,
from before me. Lo, I come to Thee, the Eternal Being! the Spring of Life! the
Center of rest! the Stay of the Creation! the Fullness of all things! I join my
self to thee; with thee I will lead my life, and sp^nd my days, with whom I aim
to dwell for ever; expecting when my little time is over, to be taken up, ere
long, into thy Eternity.

And since we who live under the Gospel, have heard of the Redeemer, of the
dignity of his Person, of his high Office and Power, of his merciful design,
and great Achievements for the restoring of lapsed and lost souls:

It is most agreeable to our apprehensions of the vanity of this present state,
and our expectations for the future, that we commit our selves to him. That
with entire trust and love, devotedness and subjection, we give our selves up
to his happy conduct, to be led by him to God, and instated into that eternal
blessedness which we look for.

His Kingdom is not of this world (as we profess not to be). We cannot be
innocently ignorant, that its constitution and frame, its laws and ordinances,
its aspect and tendency in its self, and the whole course of its
administration, are directed to that other state. He has overcome death, and
him that had the power of it; has brought life and immortality to light, is
the first begotten from the dead, and the first fruits of them that slept; has
opened Heaven to us, and is himself ascended, and entered as our victorious
triumphant Captain and Forerunner. He is adorned with highest Power, and has
set up an Universal Kingdom, extended to the utmost bounds of this apostate
World, and the vaster Regions of innocent and constantly loyal Spirits. His
Proclamations are issued out, his Ensigns displayed, to invite and call in
whosoever are weary of the sin and vanity of this wretched world, of their
alienation from the life of God, of living in the midst of death; to join
themselves to Him, the Prince and Lord of Life; and be led by Him to the
immortal state. If the present state of things appear dismal to us; if we
reckon it a woeful spectacle to behold sin and death reigning, wickedness and
mortality acting their combined parts, to waste the world, and lay it desolate;
If we would deliver our selves, and escape from the common ruin; are seriously
designing for Heaven, and that World in which Death has no place, nor any
shadow of Death; Let us betake our selves to Him, enroll our Names, put our
selves under his Banners and Discipline, strictly observing the Laws, and
following the guidance of that our invisible Lord, who will be Author of
eternal salvation to them that obey him; and save to the uttermost all that
come to God through him. How dear should he be to us! How cheerfully should we
trust him, how dutifully serve him, how faithfully adhere to him, both for his
own sake, and that of the design he has in hand for us, and the pleasant
savor of Heaven and Immortality which breathes in both!

But if we neglect Him, and disown our relation to him; or if we let days and
years go over our heads, wherein we drowsily slumber; roll our selves in the
dust of the earth; and, while we call our selves Christians, forget the reason
and importance of our own Name, and think not of our being under his call and
conduct to the eternal Kingdom and Glory. This is perversely to reject what we
say (only) we seek; to disclaim and renounce our pretenses to Immortality; to
blast and damn our own great hopes.

Lastly, It is congruous to our best terms, reconcile us to the grave, That our
greatest hopes lie beyond it; and are not hazarded by it, but accomplished.

Although, indeed, nothing were to be expected hereafter; yet so little
suitable entertainment does this world afford to a reasonable spirit, that the
mere weariness of beholding a Scene of vanity and folly, might well make a
recess acceptable. For is it so grateful a thing to observe the confused
scramble and hurry of the world? How almost every one makes it his business to
catch from another what is worth nothing! With what toil, and art, and violence
men pursue, what when they embrace they find a shadow! To see deluded Mortals,
each one intent upon his own particular design, most commonly interfering with
another; some imposed upon by others overreaching Wit, and all by their own
folly: Some lamenting their losses, others their short and unsatisfying
acquisitions: Many pleasing themselves with being mocked, and contentedly
hugging the empty Cloud; till Death comes and ends the story, and ceases the
busy agitation; that is, with so many particular persons, not with the World.
A new succretion still springing up, that continue the Interlud^, and still act
over the same parts, ad taedium usque!

What serious person? who that is not in love with impertinency and foolery,
would much regret it, to close his eyes, to have the Curtains drawn, and bid
goodnight to the world, without ever wishing to see the morning of such another
day! And even they that have the world most in their power, and can command
what they please for the gratifying of their appetites, without the
contradiction and control of others, What can they enjoy more to morrow than
they did yesterday? or the next year than this? Is it so much worth the while
to live, to see a few more persons bow the knee? To extend power a little
further? To make another essay what pleasure sense can taste in some or other
hitherto unexperimented Rarity? What more peculiar gusto this or that thing
will afford? and try the other Dish? or to renew the same relishes over again?

He whose creative fancy could make him golden Mountains in a dream, create him
a Prince of Nations, give him to enjoy the most delicious pleasures of the
world in Idea; might, with some plausible show of reason, be deemed the happier
man, than he that has, and is all this indeed: for his toil is less, and his
victories unbloody, his pleasures not so impure. However, one would think that
to such whose utmost seize end only in the pleasure of their sense, and
have but this Epiphonema, Now, let us sit down, eat, drink, and be merry; A
little time might suffice for business of no more weight; and that no man,
after he has once seen the course of the world, and tasted of its best
delicacies, should greatly wish for a renewal, or long-continued repetition of
so fulsome vanities.

But the most find not the world so kind; and are not so much exercised in the
innovating of pleasures, as miseries (changes being their only remedies, as the
Moralist speaks); or in bearing (more sadly) the same every day's burden; and
drawing out the series of their calamities in the same kind through the whole
course of their time.

And surely these things considered, there wants not what might persuade a
Sceptick, or even a perfect Infidel, as to another world, not much to be in
love with this.

For upon the whole, let but the case be thus put: Is it not as good to do
nothing, as to be busy to no purpose? And again, Is it not as good to be
nothing, as to be, and do nothing? Sober reason would judge, at least, there
were but little odds.

But now; If such considerations as have been mentioned, would suffice to state
the matter in aequilibrio, to make the (...) even; Ought the ra^i^n^l sober
belief of a blessed immortality do nothing to turn the balance? Ought the love
of God to do nothing? The desire and hope of a state perfectly good and happy,
quiet and peaceful; of living in the Region of undefiled innocent love and
pleasure; in the communion of holy and blessed spirits (all highly pleased, not
in their own only, but one another's happiness; and all concen^^ing in the
admiration and praise of their common Parent and Lord) Ought all this nothing
to alter the case with us? or signify nothing to the inclining our mind^ to
the so unspeakably better part?

Methinks since we acknowledge such an order of intelligent (and already happy)
Creatures, we should even b^ush to think they should be spectators of our daily
course and (too plainly discovered) inclinations, so disform and unagreeable to
all the Laws and dictates of reasonable nature? What censures, may we think, do
they pass upon our follies? Are those things great in their eyes, that are so
in ours? In lesser matters (as some interpret that passage) indecencies are to
be avoided, because of those blessed spirits. 1 Cor. 8.
May we not then be ashamed that they should discern our terrene dispositions?
and see us come, so unwillingly, into their con^ort, and happy state? Although
our present depressing circumstances will not suffer us to be in all things, as
yet, conformable to their high condition, we should however carry it as
Candidates thereto, studying to approve our selves; waiting and longing to be
transum'd and taken up into it.

And since we have so high and great an expectation, and it is understood and
known, That the very perfection and end of our Beings is no otherwise
attainable, than by putting off our sordid sl^sh, and laying aside this earthly
Appurtenanc^; that yet there should be so fixed and prevailing an aversion to
it, is a most unaccountable thing, and one of the greatest Problems in Nature.

I say, prevailing: For admit what is like to be alleged, that an addictedness
to the body is by natural inclination; ought not the Laws of a Sup^rior to
prevail over those of the inferior nature? And is not the love of God a higher
natural Law than that of the body? to whom here our service is little, yea our
disservice much; and from whose most desirable commerce we s^ffer so
uncomfortable a disclusion by the sad circumstances of our bodily s^ate? Are we
more nearly (...) to a piece of C^^y* (...) to the Father of our spirits? And
(...), Is not every thing (...)? and obliged to (...) there, rather than (...)
in^^rior thing (at least) ^ow n^^rly soever united? since there can be no
pretense of any such (...) union, than o^ a thing with it self? And ^re not our
souls and our bodies (though united, yet) distinct things? Why then should not
our souls, that are capable of understanding their own interest, mind that
first; intend most their own perfection and improvement, and begin their
charity at home? It is nor strange, that what is weaker and more ignoble,
should affect union with what is above it, and a spring of life to it: But when
it is found burdensome, nothing forbids, but that the superior Being may be
well content, upon fair and allowable terms, to be rid of the burden. Therefore
though flesh and blood may reluctate and shrink at it, when we think of laying
it down; yet it becomes immortal spirits to consider their own affairs, and be
(more principally) intent upon what will be their own advantage. If so mean a
Creature as a sorry Flea, finding it can draw a suitable aliment from our
bodies, affect to dwell there, and is loath to leave us; It were a ludicrous
pity to be theretherefore content to endure its troublesome v^llications,
because we fear the poor Animal should be put to its shifts, and not to be
otherwise able to find a subsistence. It Is true, that the great Creator and
Lord of the Universe, has not permitted us the liberty of so throwing off our
bodies when we will (which otherwise are in dignity far more beneath our
spirits, than so despicable a Creature is beneath them). And to his dispose
that has ordered this conjunction for a time (whether we look upon it as an
effect of his simple pleasure, or of his displeasure) we must yield an awful
and a patient submission, till this part of his Providence toward us have run
its course, and attained its ends. And then, how welcome should the hour of our
discharge and freedom be, from so troublesome an Associate! which upon no other
account than that of duty toward the Author of our beings, one would more
endure, than to have the most noisome offensive Vermin always preying upon his
flesh. At least, (though the consideration of our own advantage had no place
with us in this matter) the same sense of duty toward our great Creator, which
should make us patient of an abode in the body, while he will have it so;
should also form our spirits to a willing departure, when it shall be his
pleasure to release us thence. But that neither a regard to his ple^sure, nor
our own blessedn^ss, should prevail against our love to the body, is the
unaccountable thing I speak of. And to plead only, in the case, the corruption
of our natures that sets us at odds with God and our selves, is to justify the
thing by what is it self most unjustifiable; or rather (as some that have
affected to be styled Philosophers have been wont to expedite difficulties, by
resolving the matter into the usual course of Nature, which is) to resolve the
thing into it self, and say, It is so, because it is so, or is wont to be; and
indeed, plainly to confess there is no account to be given of it. This being
the very thing about which we expostulate, that reasonable nature should so
prevaricate: The commonness whereof does not take away the wonder, but rather
render it more dreadful and astonishing.

The truth is, the incongruity in the present case is only to be solved by
redress; by earnest strivings with God, and our own souls, till we find our
selves recovered into a right mind; into the constitution and composure whereof
a generous fortitude has a necessary ingrediency; that usually upon lower
motives refuses no change of Climate, and will carry a man into unknown
Countries, and through greatest hazards in the pursuit of honorable
enterprises, of a much inferior kind.

It is reckoned a brave and manly thing to be in the temper of one's mind a
Citizen of the World meaning it of this lower one). But why not rather of the
Universe? And it is accounted mean and base that one should be so confined by
his fear or sloth to that spot of ground where he was born, as not upon just
inducement to look abroad, and go for warrantable and worthy purposes (yea, if
it were only honest self-advantage) as far as the utmost ends of the earth. But
dare we not venture a little farther? These are too narrow bounds for a truly
great spirit. Any thing that is tinctured with earth, or favors of mortality,
we should reckon too mean for us; and not regret it, that Heaven and
Immortality are not to be attained but by dying; so should the love of our own
souls, and the desire of a perpetual state of life, triumph over the fear of
death.

But it may be alleged by some, That it is only a solicitous love to their
souls, that makes them dread this change. They know it will not sare with all
alike hereafter, and know not what their own lot shall be.

And is this indeed our case? then, what have we been doing all this while? and
how are we concerned to lose no more time?

But too often a terrene spirit lurks under this pretense; and men alledg their
want of assurance of Heaven, when the love of this earth (which they cannot
endure to think of leaving) holds their hearts.

And (a little to discuss this matter) what would we have to assure us? Do we
expect a vision or a voice? or are we not to try our selves; and search for
such characters in our own souls, as may distinguish and note us out for
Heaven? Among these, what can be more clear and certain than this, that we have
our hearts much set upon it? Phil. 3. 20, 21.
They that have their conversations in Heaven, may from thence expect the
Savior, who shall change their vile bodies (the bodies of their ^^mil^^tion,
Gr.
or low abject state) and make them like his own glorious body.

God, Romans 2. 6, 7.
who will render to every man according to his works; will give them that by
patient continuance in well doing, seek honor, and glory, Col. 3. 2, 3, 4.
and immortality, eternal life. They that set their affections (or mind) on the
things above, not those on the earth; when Christ shall appear, who is their
life, shall appear with him in glory. Mistake not the notion of Heaven, or the
blessedness of the other world; render it not to your selves a composition of
sensual enjoyments; Understand it (principally) to consist in perfect holiness
and communion with God (as his own word represents it, and as reason has
taught even some Pagans to reckon of it) and you cannot judge of your own Right
by a surer and plainer Rule, than that eternal blessedness shall be theirs
whose hearts are truly bent and directed toward it. Admit we, then, this
Principle; and now let us reason with our selves from it: We have a discovery
made to us of a future state, of blessedness in God, not as desirable only in
it self, but as attainable, and possible to be enjoyed (the Redeemer having
opened the way to it by his blood, and given us at once both the prospect and
the offer of it) so that it is before us as the object of a reasonable desire.
Now either our hearts are so taken with this discovery, that we above all
things desire this state, or not. If they be, we desire it more than our
earthly stations and enjoyments, and are willing to leave the world and the
body to enjoy it; and so did falsely accuse our selves of a prevailing aversion
to this change. If they be not, the thing is true, that we are upon no terms
willing to dye, but the cause is falsely (or partially) assigned: It is not so
much because we are unassured of Heaven, but (as was above suspected) because
we love this world better, and our hearts center in it as our most desirable
good.

Therefore we see how unreasonably this is, often, said, We are unwilling to
change states, because we are unassured; the truth is, they are unassured,
because they are unwilling; and what then ensues? They are unwilling because
they are unwilling. And so they may endlesly dispute themselves round, from
unwillingness to unwillingness. But is there no way to get out of this unhappy
Circle? In order to it, let the case be more fully understood; Either this
double unwillingness must be referred to the same thing, or to diverse: If to the
same thing, it is not sense; they say what signifies nothing: For, being to
assign a cause of their unwillingness to quit the body, to say, because they
are unwilling, (viz. of that) is to assign no cause, for nothing can be the
cause of it self. But if they refer to diverse things, and say, They are
unwilling to go out of the body, because they are unwilling to forsake Earth
for Heaven; The case is then plain, but sad, and not alterable, but with the
alteration of the temper of their spirits. Wherefore let us all apply our
selves (since with none this is so fully done, that no more is needful) to the
serious endeavor of getting our souls purged from the dross of this world, and
enamoured of the purity and blessedness of Heaven, so the cause and effect will
vanish together; we shall find that suitableness and inclination in our spirits
to that blessedness, as may yield us the ground of a comfortable persuasion
that it belongs to us us; and then, not be unwilling, though many deaths stood
in our way, to break through to attain it.

FINIS.

