A PANEGYRIC TO HIS HIGHNESS THE DUKE of YORK, ON HIS SEA FIGHT WITH THE DUTCH
June 3d 1665.

By the Honorable EDWARD HOWARD.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Anchor on the Lower Walk of the
New-Exchange. 1666.

A PANEGYRIC To his Highness The Duke of York, ON His Sea Fight with the
Dutch, June 3. 1665.
ILLustrious Prince, while your great Deeds outdoe,
All that the Muse can fain, or World knows true,
Your Panygerick, must be such a Theme,
As makes Fame, Poet, and Truth seem a Dream.
What age had such a Chief? that Sea and Land
Rivals in Glories, from your brave Command,
While Earth, that wondered at your Worth before,
Fears, that your Prowess, gives the Sea now more;
Had any Blood but yours, or Princes Name,
Spread through the Universe, so bright a Fame,
Our happy boast, must then have turned to be
A glorious dread of such a Gallantry.
And beaten Dutch, whose yielding Valors find
Your Royal Conduct, Victory inclined,
Might then their drowsy hopes revive again,
And slight our fury on the angry Main.
But while they see, that you there challenge Fate,
To fight, must make 'em more unfortunate.
Lepanto, now no more shall Sea Fights boast,
Though so much Othoman glory, there was lost;
Or tell what Done of Austria then achieved,
Or brave Villerio, for famed Venice did,
Since in your Deeds we Empires so outdo,
As Princes never can hope to Rival you,
Or State so bold, to send a Fleet to Sea,
To dare your Conduct such another day;
Who from your steady Virtue dread to meet,
Power more resistless than your Conquering Fleet.
How then shall vanquished Dutch e're hope to show
Valor enough for a more Signal blow?
While your High Prowess, proves it is their Doom,
Not to attempt enough, to be overcome;
Will not Heroicks Spain repine to see,
You on their Rebels get this victory?
When all its Power, and Indian Treasure too,
Could scarce a Ship, much less their Fleet subdue:
As this great Monarchs Scepter on the Main,
Sunk, to reduce his Rebels Power again,
And late with pity, we beheld our Coast,
A Witness of his Navies glory lost:
How was our former Charles provoked to see
That rough Contest in his Sovereignty!
Whose Name and Rule, like great Augustus days,
Taught the World Meekness, and gave Calms to Seas;
Yet on the Main permitted these to fight,
To leave our King the glory of his Might;
Which from your Conquest, unconfined extends,
And Seas makes Empires, where the World has ends.
That hence aspiring Spain in ours must see
More than an Universal Monarchy,
And beg a Conduct from Great CHARLES and You,
To use that world, his Arms did first subdue;
Though now obliged by Heaven to confess,
His mighty Rebels tamed from Your Success,
Leaving their Crimes, too powerful for his Throne,
To meet a Fate from Heaven and You alone:
Thus while Your Glories rumor at this rate,
Your Conquest proves, Divinity has Fate,
Since we from it have more than cause to bless
Heaven for our Loss as well as Your Success;
A Loss so small, as Victory never knew
Such great Achievements, and Death win so few,
Though sent from Cannons mouths to force its way,
Trembled to act the Furies of this day,
While it opposed our Cause, and Your Defense,
Both so obliging, of Omnipotence:
But as some stately Oak, that Heaven designs
To check the rudeness of impetuous winds,
Ventures his growth and glory to bestow
Safety and grace on humbler Trees below,
So did Your Virtues in this furious day,
The wonder of our Loves, themselves display,
While all the force of these our Belgic Foes
Does less Your Fleet than Your own Ship oppose;
Like Pirates, that for one rich Vessels Prize
Venture their own to sink its Sacrifice;
Thus having swelled their Sails, their Guns did ply,
Whose noise like Thunder seemed to wound the Sky,
While Yours with louder Fury these repress,
And dumb their Cannons, threatening their Success:
And so the Lion, which disdains Contests
When menaced with Assaults of vulgar Beasts,
First awes 'em with his Voice, but if such dare
Contemn his Rule, and proudly bid him fear,
Then by the Wounds he gives they prove his Might,
And find it was their Crime to dare his Fight:
And thus did you contend while these assail;
But Fortune something will for them prevail;
She that with Virtue still maintains debate,
And with its brave Atchievments scatters Fate,
Acts now a part above her sin and pride,
Else how could Cannons kill so near Your Side,
Or snatch such Worthies by a fatal blow,
Protected by Your Love and Conduct too?
Ah, wretched Dutch, to be obliged by Fate,
Which on their ruin it must expiate,
And Elements opposed, at once conspire,
That Opdam sinks, and yet consumes with Fire.
No Bullet from Your Guns but finds a way
To Naval Glory, and each gets his day;
This sinks a Ship, and this bids the other fly,
While waves assault their wounds that stay to die.
Thus for Your sake the angry Main devours,
And Neptune with Your Prowess joins his Powers:
Some swim to Rocks, and there lament their State,
Whose greedy Pride they now deplore to late;
Others on limbs of Vessels steer alone,
And to the merciless Sea as hapless moan,
Repining, since that perish now they must,
They cannot, like other Mortals turn to dust,
But in this liquid Element consume,
Where Nature never intended Grave or Tomb.
While You these Shipwrack'd Enemies survey,
As brave in pity, as you won the day;
Wishing their Valors had their Lives reprieved,
Or by Your Mercy, more o're-come, had lived.
And now the watery Host that glide the Main,
Begin to fight, which shall devour the slain,
Fish against Fish in fierce Battalions meet,
And pour out waves, like Thunder from Your Fleet;
Vast Whales draw up their monstrous Bodies here,
There slimy Monsters, yet unknown, appear,
Inflamed, in this cold Element, to strive
Which on the dead shall now most mighty live:
Some Sholes of Men in their vast Bodies pour,
And waves enough to store new Seas devour,
Mingled with blood, food to their thirstful rage,
Which others with revengeful draughts assuage,
And these through vaster jaws thus swelled convey,
That Fish die drowned, as well as Men, that day?
What were your Crimes, O Dntch, provoked a Foe
So Great and Good as is our King, and You,
Whose Influence can Winds and Seas assuage,
And but incensed, commands the Oceans rage?
Thus having fatally now proved their Might,
Heaven they implore for winds to speed their flight;
But they so gently breathed, as Dutch must say,
The Air was pleased to see You win this day:
And next their utmost toils and arts they try,
To steer a flight, but fear to fight, and fly,
Wishing that Courage and famed Parthian skill,
As Romans proved, could them pursuing kill;
While they to obscure Shores direct their course,
Like routed Armies that must hide their force;
Some sink on Sands, or Rocky dangers meet,
To escape the greater Terror of your Fleet,
Which now in glorious triumph, you survey,
Acting both Prince, and Pilot, this rough day;
So great Enaeas, as Fame, and Maro tell,
Could guide his course, though Pallinurus fell.
Each Militant, with beams of Grace you know,
And had your Crastinus, like Caesar too;
But far more famed, since your success began,
As Princely Rupert, fought, and led the Van.
A Name so glorious, as Fate must confess,
He still grew greater, while she meant him less:
And in our Crowns defense, still acted so,
As boldest Rebels feared, unconquered too;
Thinking their guilt, could never supported be,
Unless his Death had been, their Victory,
Whose virtues even transcend their former Claim,
Since now in his, he shares, your valors Fame.
And thus our matchless Monarch did complete,
All brave attempts, his Cause and Crown speaks Great,
While Fate unconquered, he or'ecame despair,
And taught bold Fortune, from himself to fear;
How will his Crown, in glory, hence increase,
That through the Main gives Subjects Trade and Peace,
Which as his Empire over the world does raise,
So Crowns your Prowess with eternal Praise.
FINIS.
LICENSED,

April 23. 1666. Roger L' estrange.


