IMPRIMATUR, hic Liber, cui Titulus (The Reconcileableness of God's Prescience
of the Sins of Men, with the Wisdom and Sincerity, etc.)

Apr. 19. 1677. Guil. Sill. R. P. D. Henr. Epis. Land. a Sacris Domest.

THE RECONCILEABLENESS OF God's Prescience OF THE SINS of MEN, WITH THE WISDOM
and SINCERITY OF HIS COUNSELS, EXHORTATIONS, And Whatsoever other Means He uses
to prevent them.

In a Letter to the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire.

LONDON: Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons, over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1677.



THE RECONCILEABLENESS OF God's Prescience, etc.
Sir,
THe veneration I have long had for your Name, could not permit me to apprehend
less obligation than that of a Law, in your recommending to me this subject.
For within the whole compass of intellectual employment and affairs, non but
who are so unhappy as not at all to know you, would dispute your right to
prescribe, and give Law.

And taking a nearer view of the Province you have assigned me, I must esteem
it alike both disingenuous and undutiful, wholly to have refused it. For the
less you could think it possible to me to perform in it, the more I might
perceiv of kindness allaying the Authority of the imposition; And have the
apprehension the more obvious to me that you rather designed in it mine own
advantage, than that you reckoned the cause could receiv any, by my undertaking
it.

The doubt, I well know, was mentioned by you as other Men's, and not your own;
whose clear mind, and diligent enqiry leave you little liable to be encumb'red
with greater difficulties.

Wherefore that I so soon divert from you, and no more allow these papers to
express any regard unto you, till the shutting of the discourse, is only a
seeming disrespect or indecorum, put in the stead of a real one. For after you
have given them the countenance, as to let it be understood, you gave the first
rise and occasion to the business and design of them; I had little reason to
slur that stamp put upon them, by adding to their (enough other) faults, that
of making them guilty of so great a misdemeanour, and impertinency, as to
continue a discourse of this length, to one that has so little leisure or
occasion to attend to any thing can be said by them.

WHat there is of difficulty in this matter I cannot pretend to set down in
those most apt expressions wherein it was represented to me, and must therefore
endeavor to supply a bad memory out of a worse invention.

So much appears very obvious, That, ascribing to the ever blessed God, among
the other Attributes which we take to belong to an every way Perfect Being, a
knowledge so perfect as shall admit of no possible accession or increase; and
conseqently the Prescience of all future events (as whereof we doubt him not to
have the distinct knowledge when they shall have actually come to pass.) Since
many of those events are the sinful actions or omissions of men, which he
earnestly counsels and warns them against; This matter of doubt cannot but
arise hereupon, viz.

How it can stand with the wisdom and rity which our own thoughts do by the
earliest anticipation challenge to that ever happy Being, to use these (or any
other means) with a visible design to prevent that, which, in the mean time
appears to that all-seeing eye, sure to come to pass.

So that, by this representation of the Case, there seem to be committed
together. Either 1st. Gods wisdom with this part of his knowledge. For we judge
it not to consist with the wisdom of a man, to design and pursue an end, which
he foreknows he shall never attain: Or 2ly. the same foreknowledg with his
sincerity and uprightness, that he seems intent upon an end, which indeed he
intends not.

The matter then comes shortly to this sum. Either the holy God seriously
intends the prevention of such foreseen sinful actions and omissions or he does
not intend it. If he do, His wisdom seems liable to be impleaded, as above. If
he do not, his uprightness and Truth.

My purpose is not, in treating of this affair, to move a dispute concerning
the fitnes of the words [prescience] or [foreknowledg] Or to trouble this
discourse with notions I understand not, of the indivisibility, and
unsuccessivenes of eternal duration, Whence it would be collected there can be
no such thing as first or second fore-or afterknowledg in that duration. But be
contented to speak as I can understand, and be understood. That is, to call
that foreknowledg which is the knowledge of somewhat that as yet is not, but
that shall sometime come to pass. For it were a mere piece of legerdem^in only
to amuse enqirers whom one would pretend to satisfy. Or to fly to a cloud for
refuge from the force of an argument, and avoid an occurring difficulty by the
present reliefless shift of involving one-self in greater.

Nor shall I design to my self so large a field as a Tractate concerning the
divine Prescience. So as to be obliged to discourse particularly whatsoever may
be thought to belong to that Theological Topic. But confine the discourse to
my enjoined subject. And offer only such considerations as may some way tend to
expedite or alleviate the present difficulty.

. II.
II. It were one of the greatest injuries to Religion, a subversion indeed of
its very foundations. And then by doing which, we could not more highly
gratify atheistical minds, instead, and under pretense of ascribing
perfections to the nature of God, to ascribe to it inconsistencies, or to give
a self-repugnant notion of that adorable Being, The parts whereof should justle
and not accord with one another. And yet eqal care is to be taken, lest while
we endeavor to frame a consistent notion of God, we reject from it any thing
that is truly a perfection, and so give a maimed one. Whereby we should undo
our own design, and by our over much caution to make our conception of him
agree with it self, make it disagree to him. For to an absolutely perfect
Being, no other can agree than that, which not only is not made up of
contradictions, but which also comprehends in it all real perfections either
explicitly, or which leaves room for all, by not positively excluding any of
them. Which to do, and afterward, to assign that as the proper notion of God,
were, it self, the greatest contradiction. We need therefore to be very wary,
lest we pronounce too hastily concerning any thing, which to our most sedate
thoughts, appears simply a perfection in it self, that it carries with it a
repugnancie to somewhat else, necessary to be ascribed to him.

We are first to suspect (as there is greatest cause) and enqire whether the
aile be not wholly in our own minds. Which in this and such like cases, we
certainly shall upon due reflection, find laboring under the natural defect of
that incomprehensive narrownes, that is, in some degree, unavoidably followed
with confusion and indistinctnes of thoughts. And may perhaps find cause to
accuse them of the more culpable evils, both of slothfulnes, that withholds
them from doing what they can, and self-conceit by which they imagine to
themselves an ability of doing what they cannot.

It cannot be unobserved by them that have made themselves any part of their
own study, that it is very incident to our minds, to grasp at more than they
can compass; and then, thorough their own scantines (like the little hand of a
child) to throw away one thing that has pleased us, to make room for another,
because we cannot comprehend both together.

It is not strange, that our so straightly limited understandings, should not be
able to lodge commodiously the immense perfections of a Deity. So as to allow
them liberty to spread themselves in our thoughts in their entire proportions.
And because we cannoot, we complain, when we feel our selves a little pincht,
that the things will not consist; when the matter is, that we have unduly
crowded and huddled them up together, in our incomprehensive minds, that have
not distinctly conceived them.

And tho this consideration should not be used for the protection of an usurped
liberty of fastening upon God, arbitrarily and at random, what we please (As
indeed what so gross absurdity might not any one give shelter to by such a
misapplication of it?) We ought yet to think it seasonably applied, when we
find our selves urged with difficulties on one hand and the other; and
apprehend it hard, with clearnes and satisfaction, to ascribe to God, what we
also find it not easy not to ascribe.

Nor would it be less unfit to apply it for the patronage of that slothfulnes
wherein our discouraged minds are sometimes too prone to indulge themselves.

To which purpose I remember somewhat very apposite in Minucius Felix, That
many thorough the mere tediousness of finding out the truth, do rather, by a
mean succumbency, yield to the first specious show of any opinion whatsoever
than be at the trouble, by a pertinacious diligence, of applying, themselves to
a thorough search.

Tho the comprehension of our Minds be not infinite, it might be extended much
further than usually it is, if we would allow our selves with patient diligence
to consider things at leisure, and so as gradually to stretch and enlarge our
own understandings. Many things have carried the appearance of contradiction
and inconsistencie, to the first view of our straitened minds, which
afterward, we have, upon repeated consideration and endeavor, found room for,
and been able to make fairly accord, and lodge together.

Especially we should take heed lest it be excluded by overmuch conceitednes,
and a self-arrogating pride, that disdains to be thought not able to see
thorough every thing, by the first and slightest glance of an haughty eye; and
peremptorily determines that to be unintelligible, that an arrogant
uninstructed mind has only not humility enough to acknowledge difficult to be
understood. Whence it is too possible some may be overprone to detract from God
what really belongs to him, lest any thing should seem detracted from
themselves, and impute imperfection to him rather than confess their own. And
may be so overascribing to themselves, as to reckon it a disparagement not to
be endured, to seem a little puzzled for the present; to be put to pause, and
draw breath a while, and look into the matter again and again; which if their
humility and patience would enable them to do; It is not likely that the Author
of our faculties would be unassisting to them, in those our enqiries which
concern our duty toward himself.

For tho in mattes of mere speculation, we may be encountered with difficulties,
whereof perhaps no mortal can ever be able to find out the solution (which is
no great prejudice, and may be gainful and instructive to us) Yet as to what
concerns the object of our Religion, it is to be hoped we are not left in
unextricable entanglements; Nor should think we are till we have made utmost
trial. The design being not to gratify our curiosity, but to relieve our
selves of uncomfortable doubtfulnes in the matter of our worship, and (in a
dutiful zeal toward the blessed object thereof) to vindicate it against the
eavils of ill-minded men.

. III.
But if the unsuccessfulnes of often repeated endeavors make us despair of
being able, with so full satisfaction, to reconcile some things which we have
thought were to be attributed to God; It will be some relief to us, if we find
the things about which the doubt lies, are not of the same order, nor such as
with eqal evidence and necessity are to be affirmed of him.

And when we make a comparison, we may find our selves at a certainty
concerning those his Attributes which most commonly, and at the first view,
approve themselves to every man's understanding.

Among which we little hesitate, (as we are most concerned not to do,) about
those which carry with them the import of moral goodness; and which render the
object of our Religion, at once, both most venerable and lovely. For none do
more naturally obtain for common notions concerning him; so as even to prevent
rationcination or argument, with whomsoever the apprehension of his existence
has place.

Every man's mind, it being once acknowledged that there is a God, refuses to
conceive otherwise of him, than that he is holy, just, merciful, true, etc. And
rejects with abhorrency the notion of an impure, unrighteous, cruel, deceitful
Deity.

As for those that, by a long train of our own more uncertain and lubricous
reasonings, we endeavor to deduce; If we find our selves constrained any where
to admit a diffidence, It were rather to be placed here. For it is at first
sight evident, since God is most certainly willing to be known of them that are
sincerely willing to know him; that what is a natural impression, stamped by
his own hand on every man's mind, has more of absolute certainty, than what
depends on metaphysical subtlety; whereof so very few are capable, and whereby
diverse pretenders thereto, do so freqently, (and perhaps very dangerously)
ensnare themselves. And it is of far greater importance, such a notion of God
be entertained, as whereby he may be rendered amiable, and an inviting object
of love (the very life and soul of all Religion) than such as shall be the
result, and entertainment, only of Scholastic wit.

Yet also since it is very manifest that Man is now become a degenerate
Creature, and in an Apostasy from God: He is very little to be trusted with the
framing his own Idaea of him; being certainly most unapt to allow any thing a
place in it, that would have an unfavourable aspect upon his vicious
inclinations and his guilty state. And the contagion of man's sinfulnes having
spread it self as far as he has propagated his own Nature; so as no notion in
his Mind can be more common than the perversion and distemper of his mind it
self; The possibility and danger is very obvious, of mistaking a dictate of
depraved nature for an authentic common notion. And tho these are not
impossible to be distinguished, and in some cases very easy, as when men find
it imposed unavoidably upon them, to apprehend and acknowledge some things which
they are very unwilling should be true (In which case their sentiments have the
same right to be believed as the testimony of an enemy on the opposite partie's
behalf.) We have yet no reason to neglect any other means, whereby we may be
more certainly directed how to conceive of God, or what we are to attribute to
him, and what not.

. IV.
Nor can we be at a greater certainty, than in admitting such things to belong
to the Blessed God as he plainly affirms of himself; or any way, by his Word,
evidently discovers to belong to him. 1 Cor. 2.
For as none knows the things of a man, but the spirit of a man that is in
him, so the things of God are known to none but the Spirit of God.

Taking therefore his own Word for our measure in the present case (which I
will suppose the Reader not to think it unreasonable to appeal to; And what is
here said, is intended only for those that have that estimate of the Writings
wont to go under that name) what it says of him (much more what it proves)
will no doubt be admitted for certain truth. Though, if it say such things, as,
to us, seem not so manifestly to agree with one another, Our endeavor must be
the more earnest and solicitous (as also it ought to be the more modest) to
discuss, and remove the (...), or whatsoever semblance of disagreement.

And whosoever concern themselves to peruse that venerable Book, will find
every where, on the one hand, proclaimed and magnified in it (what our own
minds cannot but have been prepossessed of) the most exqisite Wisdom of God,
whereby he forms and contrives the methods of all his dispensations, and
disposes them in the aptest subserviency to his own great and most important
ends. Deuteronomy. 32.
That all his ways are judgment; and that he works all things according to
the counsel of his Will. Ephesians. 1.
In sum, that all wisdom is appropriated to him, that he is celebrated in the
style of God, Romans 16. ult.
only Wise. Nor are we therefore to think it strange, if, many times, we are
not able to trace him out, or understand the reason of every thing he thinks
fit to do. For the paths of the more perfect wisdom, must therefore be expected
to be the more abstruse, and remoter from common apprehension.

How often do we find our selves so far outgone by wise and designing men, as
that we are sometimes constrained to confess and admire their great prudence
and conduct (when they have effected their purposes) in those managements,
which we have before beheld, either with silent ignorance, or perhaps, not
without censure. How much less should the wisest of men regret it, to find all
their conjectures exceeded by the infinite Wisdom. In the contemplation
whereof, we find the great Apostle (notwithstanding the vast capacity of his
divinely enlightened understanding) exclaiming in a transport. Romans 11. 33.
O the depths!

And when our eyes tell us, from so manifest stupendous effects, how far we are
exceeded by him in power, it were reasonable to expect he should surpass us
proportionably in the contrivances of his Wisdom also.

And whereas the conjunction is rare, among men, of deep political wisdom, with
integrity and strict righteousness; This proceeds from the imperfection and
insufficiency of the former in great part, that they know not how to compass
their designs, unless often, by supplying their want of wisdom, out of the
spoil and violation of their justice and honesty. Otherwise, these are things
not so altogether out of credit in the world, but that men would rather
accomplish their purposes by fair and unexceptionable means, if they could tell
how. Only the respect and deference they have for them is less, than what they
bear to their own interests and ends.

But besides the natural inflexible rectitude of the divine Will, we are
secured, from his all-sufficiencie, that we shall never be fraudulently imposed
upon by any of his declarations unto the children of men. For there is nothing
to be gained by it: And we cannot conceive what inducement he should have, to
make use of any so mean and pitiful shifts for the governing of his Creatures,
whom he spontaneously raised out of nothing, and has so perfectly within his
power.

Unless we should be so most intolerably injurious to him, as to imagine a
worse thing of him than we would of the worst of men, that he loved falsehood
for its own sake. And that, aginst his so constantly professed detestation of
it, the declared repugnancie of it to his Nature, and the even tenor of his
Word (every where agreeing with it self herein) so often describing him by that
property, God that cannot lie. And, with the same positivenes, avowing his own
uprightnes, and reqiring it, expressing his great love to it, and the high
delight he takes to find it in his (intelligent) creatures. Ps. 11. 7.
The righteous God loves righteousness, and with his countenance does he behold
the upright.

Nor is his testimony the less to be regarded for that it is laudatory, and of
himself. For we are to consider the Prerogative of him that testifies, and that
if he were not (...) he were not God. Besides that his giving us this, or any,
representation of himself (to whom it were enough to enjoy his own Perfections)
is a vouchsafement, and done of mere grace and favor to us, that we may by it
be induced to place with satisfaction, our unsuspicious trust and confidence in
him. As also, that he says, in all this, no other thing of himself, than what
our own minds, considering him as God, must acknowledge most worthy of him, and
agreeing to him with the most apparent necessity.

This part, therefore, of the Idaea of God has so firm a foundation, both in
the natural complexion of our own minds, and the report which his Word makes of
him, that on this hand we are hemmed in as by a wall of Adamant: And cannot
have the thought of defending his Prescience, by intrenching upon his Wisdom
and Truth, without offering the highest violence both to him and our selves.

. V.
On the other hand also, as it cannot but seem to us an higher perfection to
know all things at once, than gradually to arrive to the knowledge of one thing
after another; and so proceed from the ignorance of some things to the knowledge
of them; and that nothing is more certain, than that all possible perfection
must agree to God; So we find his own Word asserting to him that most perfect
knowledge which seems to exclude the possibility of increase; or that any thing
should succeed into his knowledge. For how plainly is it affirmed of him that he
knows all things. And even concerning such future things as about which our
present enqirie is conversant, The affirmation is express and positive. Isai.
46. 9, 10. with Chapter 41. 22, 23.
I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the beginning, and
from ancient times the things that are not yet done.

Nor is the affirmation naked, and unfortify'd. For, in the same sacred
records, we have the same thing both affirmed and proved: Inasmuch as we find,
in a great part thereof, are contained things foretold by most express
Prophecy, unto which the Events recorded in other parts (and many of them in
other unqestioned Writings besides) have so punctually corresponded, as to
leave no place for doubt or cavil. Instances are so plain and well known that
they need not be mentioned. And surely what was so expressly foretold could not
but have been foreknown.

It seems then an attempt also eqally hopeles and unrelieving, as it were
adventurous and bold, to offer at the protection of his Wisdom and Sincerity,
by assaulting his Prescience or certain foreknowledg of whatsoever shall come
to pass.

And that their defense is not to be attempted this way, will further most
evidently appear from hence, That it is not impossible to assign particular
instances of some or other most confessedly wicked actions; against which God
had directed those ordinary means of counselling and dehorting men, and which
yet it is most certain he did foreknow they would do. As, tho it was so
punctually determined even Exodus 12. 41.
to a day, and was (tho not so punctually) Genesis 15. 3.
foretold unto Abraham, how long, from that time, What there is of difficulty
or doubt about this Prophecy, see fully cleared in the late Letter to the Deist.
his seed should be strangers in a Land that was not theirs; Yet how freqent
are the counsels and warnings sent to Pharaoh to dismiss them sooner; Yea how
often are Moses and Aaron directed to claim their liberty, and exhort Pharaoh
to let them go, and at the same time told, Exodus 4. etc.
he should not hearken to them. Nor indeed is it most seldom said that the
Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart, lest he should. Tho it may be a doubt whether
those passages be truly translated. For the gentler meaning of the Hebrew idiom
being well known, it would seem more agreeable to the Text, to have expressed
only the intended sense, than to have strained a word to the very utmost of its
literal import, and manifestly beyond what was intended.

After the like manner is the Prophet Ezekiel sent to the revolted Israelites.
Chapter 3. v. 4.
And directed to speak to them with Gods own words, The sum and purport
whereof was to warn and dehort them from their wicked ways lest they should
die; when as yet it is plainly told him, But the house of Israel will not
hearken to thee, for they will not hearken to me.

Unto which same purpose it is more pertinent, than necessary to be added, That
our Saviors own plain assertions that he was the Son of God, the many Miracles
by which he confirmed it, and his freqent exhortations to the Jews to believe
in him thereupon, had a manifest tendency to make him be known and believed to
be so, and conseqently to prevent that most horrid act of his crucifixion (for
it is said, and the matter speaks it self, 1 Cor. 2.
that, if they had known they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory.)
Notwithstanding that it was a thing which Gods hand and counsel had determined
before to be done. Act. 4. 28.
That is, foreseeing wicked hands would be prompt and ready for this tragic
enterprise, his Sovereign Power and Wise Counsel concurred with his
foreknowledg, so only, and not with less latitude, to define or determine the
bounds and limits of that malignity, than to let it proceed unto this
Execution. And to deliver him up (not by any formal resignation, or surrender,
as we well know, but permitting him) thereunto. Tho the same phrase of
delivering him, has elsewhere, another notion of assigning or appointing him
to be a propitiation for the sins of men, by dying; which was done by mutual
agreement between both the parties, him that was to propitiate, and him who was
to be propitiated. In which respect our Savior is also said to have given
himself for the same purpose; Tit. 2. 14.
Which purpose it was determined not to hinder prepared hands to execute in
this way.

Now if it did appear but in one single instance only, that the Blessed God did
foreknow, and dehort from the same act, It will be plainly consequent, that his
warnings and dehortations from wicked actions in the general, can with no
pretense be alleged as a proof against his universal Prescience. For if the
argument [he dehorted from the doing such an action, therefore he did not
foreknow it] would be able to conclude any thing, it must be of sufficient
force to conclude universally; which it cannot do, if but a single instance can
be given, wherein it is apparent, he did both dehort and foreknow. It can only
pretend to raise the doubt which we have in hand to discuss, how fitly, and
with what wisdom and sincerity, he can be understood to interpose his counsels
and monitions in such a case.

. VI.
Wherefore nothing remains but to consider how these may be reconciled, and
made appear to be no way inconsistent with one another.

Nor are we to apprehend herein so great a difficulty, as it were to reconcile
his irresistible predeterminative concurrence to all actions of the creature,
even those that are in themselves most malignantly wicked, with the wisdom and
righteousness of his Laws against them, and severest Punishments of them
according to those Laws.

Which sentiments must, I conceive, to any impartial understanding, leave it no
way sufficiently explicable, how the influence and concurrence, the holy God
has to the worst of actions, is to be distinguished from that which he affords
to the best; Wherein such inherently evil actions are less to be imputed to him
who forbids them, than to the malicious tempter who prompts to them, or the
actor that does them, or wherein not a great deal more. And leave it
undeniable, that the matter of all his Laws, in reference to all such actions
that ever have been done in the world, was a simple and most strictly natural
impossibility. Nothing being more apparently so, than either not to do an
action whereto the agent is determined by an infinite Power; or to separate the
malignity thereof, from an intrinsecally evil action; And that this natural
impossibility of not sinning was the ineluctable fate of his (at first)
innocent Creatures. Who also (as the case is to be conceived of with the Angels
that kept not their first station) must be understood irreversibly condemned to
the suffering of eternal punishment, for the not doing of what it was (upon
these terms) so absolutely impossible to them to avoid.

. VII.
This too hard Province the present design pretends not to intermeddle in, As
being neither apprehended manageable, for those briefly mentioned
considerations, and many more that are wont to be insisted on in this argument.

Nor indeed at all necessary; For tho many considerations have been with great
subtilty, alleged and urged to this purpose, by former and some Modern
Writers, (Which it is besides the design of these Papers severally to discuss)
These two, which seem the most importunate and enforcing, will, I conceive, be
found of little force; and then the less strength which is in others, will be
nothing formidable; viz:

That it necessarily belongs to the Original and Fountain-Being, to be the
first Cause of whatsoever Being; And consequently, that what there is of
positive Being in any the most wicked action, must principally owe it self to
the determinative productive influence of this first and sovereign Cause.
Otherwise it would seem there were some Being that were neither Primum, nor a
primo.

And again (which we are more concerned to consider, because it more concerns
our present subject) that it were otherwise impossible God should foreknow the
sinful actions of men (many whereof, as has been observed, he has foretold)
if their futurition were a mere contingency, and depended on the uncertain will
of the subordinate agent, not determined by the Supreme.

But neither of these seem able to infer the dismal conclusion of God's
concurring by a determinative influence unto wicked actions.

Not the former; for it may well be thought sufficiently to salve the rights
and privilege of the first Cause, to assert that no action can be done but by a
power derived from it; which, in reference to forbidden actions, intelligent
Creatures may use or not use as they please, without overasserting, that they
must be irresistibly determined also, even to the worst of actions done by
them. Besides, that it seems infinitely to detract from the Perfection of the
ever Blessed God, to affirm he was not able to make a Creature, of such a
nature, as, being continually sustained by him, and supplied with power every
moment suitable to its nature, should be capable of acting; unless whatsoever he
thus enables, he determine (that is, for it can mean no less thing, impel) it
to do also.

And except it were affirmed impossible to God to have made such a Creature,
(that is, that it implied a contradiction, which certainly can never be proved)
there is no imaginable pretense why it should not be admitted he has done it:
Rather than so fatally expose the Wisdom, Goodness, and Righteousness of God, by
supposing him to have made Laws for his reasonable Creatures, impossible,
thorough his own irresistible counter-action, to be observed: and afterward to
express himself displeased, and adjudg his Creatures to eternal punishments,
for not observing them.

I am not altogether ignorant what attempts have been made to prove it
impossible, Nor again, what has been done to manifest the vanity of those
attempts. But I must confess a greater disposition to wonder, that ever such a
thing should be disputed, that dispute so plain a case. And that a matter
whereupon all moral Government depends, both humane and divine, should not have
been determined at the first sight.

It Is not hard for a good Wit to have somewhat to say for any thing. But to
dispute against the common sense of Mankind, we know before hand, is but to
trifle; as the essay to prove the impossibility of local motion.

The notion of the goodness and righteousness of God, methinks, should stick so
close to our minds, and create such a sense in our Souls, as should be
infinitely dearer to us than all our senses and powers. And that we should
rather choose to have our sight, hearing, and motive power, or what not
besides, disputed, or even torn away from us, than ever suffer our selves to be
disputed into a belief, that the holy and good God should irresistibly
determine the wills of men to, and punish, the same thing. Nor is it difficult
to urge more puzzling sophisms against the former, than for this latter.

But the efforts of a sophistical Wit against sense, and more against the sense
of our Souls, and most of all against the entire sum and substance of all
Morality, and Religion, at once, are but like the attempt to batter a Wall of
Brass with straws and feathers.

Nor is the assault, on this part, more feeble and impotent, than the defense
is wont to be of the other. For I would appeal to the qick refined sense of any
sober and pious mind, after serious, inward consultation with it self; being
closely urged, with the horror of so black a conception of God [that he should
be supposed irresistibly to determine the will of a man to the hatred of his
own most Blessed Self, and then to exact severest Punishments for the offense
done] what relief it would now be to it, to be only taught to reply, [That Man
is under the Law, and God above it.]

A defense that doubles the force of the assault. What! that God should make a
Law, and necessitate the violation of it! and yet also punish that violation!
And this be thought a sufficient Salvo, that himself is not subject to any Law!
Will a qick-sented, tender spirit, wounded by so unsufferable indignity,
offered to the holy God, be any whit eased or relieved, by the thin sophistry
of only a collusive ambiguity in the word [Law?] Which sometimes signifies the
declared pleasure of a Ruler to a Subject, in which sense any eye can see God
can be under no law, having no superior. But not-seldome also, an habitual
fixed principle and rule of acting after one steady tenor. In which sense how
manifest is it, that the perfect rectitude of God's own holy gracious Nature is
an eternal Law to him, infinitely more stable, and immutable, than the
Ordinances of day and night!

Or what relief is there in that dream [of the supposed possibility of God's
making a reasonable Creature with an innocent aversion to himself?] For what
can be supposed more repugnant? Or what more impertinent? If innocent, how were
it punishable? A Law already made in the case, how can it be innocent?

But whatsoever strength there may be in arguments, and replies, to and fro, in
this matter. That which has too apparently had greatest actual efficacy, with
many, has been the authority and name of this or that man of reputation; and
the force of that art of imputing a doctrine, already under a prejudicial doom,
to some or other ill-reputed former Writer.

I profes not to be skilled in the use of that sort of weapons. And what
reputation ought to be of so great value with us, as that of God and Religion!

Tho if one would take that invidious course, it were easy to evince, that
such a predeterminative influx to the production of all whatsoever actions, is
the dearly espoused notion of one, of as deservedly an ill character, as ever
had the name of a Christian Writer. And whether he would not take that name for
a dishonor to him, I pretend not to know.

But let us take this sober account of the present case, [That in this
temporary state of trial, the efficacious grace of God is necessary to actions
sincerely good and holy; which therefore all ought undespairingly to seek and
pray for. But that in reference to other actions, he does only supply men with
such a power, as whereby, they are enabled, either to act, or, in many
instances (and especially when they attempt any thing that is evil) to suspend
their own action.

And surely it carries so unexceptionable a face and aspect with it, that no
man, that is himself sober, will think the worst name, of whosoever shall have
said the same thing, were a prejudice to it; Or should more oblige him to
reject it, then we would think our selves obliged throw away Gold, or Diamonds,
because an impure hand has touched them; Or to deny Christ, because the Devils
confessed him.

Tho also, if any should impute the so stating of this matter, to any Author,
that has been wont to go under an ill name and character, in the Christian
Church; There were a great oversight committed (to say no harder thing of it.)

For the Writers whose names would be supposed a prejudice, have neither said
the same thing, nor with the same design.

They would have this indetermination of the power afforded to the creature, to
be so universal, as to extend eqally to evil actions and to good. And have
asserted it with a manifest design to exclude efficacious grace, in reference
to the best actions.

Whereas this account would make it not of so large extent. (As it were very
unreasonable any should) For tho it may well be supposed extendible to many
actions, besides those that are intrinsecally evil, or to any that are not
spiritually good, yet nothing enforces (nor can it be admitted) that it should
actually, and always extend so far. For who can doubt but God can overruled
the inclinations and actions of his creature, when he pleases; and, as shall
best consist with his Wisdom, and the Purity of his Nature, either lay on, or
take off his determining hand.

Nor is it here asserted with any other design, than to exempt the Blessed God,
as far as is possible; from a participation in the evil actions of his
Creatures: In the mean time entitling him, most entirely, to those that are
sincerely good. Tho it must be left imputable to men themselves (it being
thorough their own great default) if they have not the grace, which might
effectually enable them, to do such also.

And as for the latter. This supposed indetermination of the human will, in
reference, especially, to wicked actions, is far from being capable of
inferring, that God cannot therefore foreknow them; Or any thing more, than
that we are left ignorant of the way, how he foreknowes them. And how small is
the inconvenience of acknowledging that? Yea and how manifest the absurdity of
not acknowledging the like, in many cases? Since nothing is more certain, than
that God does many things besides, whereof the manner, how he does them, we can
neither explicate nor understand! For neither is it difficult to assign
instances, more than enough, of actions done by our selves, of the manner
whereof, we can give no distinct account, as those of vision, intellection,
with sundry other.

Some have been at great pains we well know to explain the manner of God's
foreknowledg of these futurities, otherwise than by laying the foundation
thereof in his (supposed) efficacious will or decree of them. They that can
satisfy themselves with what Thomas and Scotus have attempted, and the
followers of them both; That can understand what it is, with the one, for all
things to be eternally present to the Divine intellect in esse reali, and not
understand by it, the World to have been eternal. Or what, with the other, that
they be all present only in esse representativo, and not understand by it
barely that they are all known, and no more, (which seems like the explication
of the word invasion, by invasion) let them enjoy their own satisfaction.

For my own part I can more easily be satisfied to be ignorant of the modus or
medium of his knowledge, while I am sure of the thing; And I know not why any
sober-minded man might not be so too. While we must all be content to be
ignorant of the manner, yea and nature too, of a thousand things besides, when
that such things there are, we have no doubt. And when there are few things,
about which we can, with less disadvantage, suffer our being ignorant; or, with
less disreputation, profess to be so.

It cannot therefore be so affrightful a thing, to suppose God's foreknowledg
of the most contingent future actions, well to consist with our ignorance, how
he foreknows them, as that we should think it necessary, to overturn and mingle
Heaven and Earth, rather than admit it.

. VIII.
Wherefore waving that unfeasible, unnecessary, and unenjoyned task, of
defending God's predeterminative concourse unto sinful actions; Our encounter
must only be of the more superable difficulty, to reconcile his Prescience of
them, with his provisions against them, i. e. how fitly the Wise and Holy God
can have interposed his precautions and dissuasions, in their own nature, aptly
tending to withhold and divert men, from those evil actions, which he yet
foresees they will do.

And it is, in the first place, evident, there can be no pretense to alledg,
that there is any such repugnancy in the matter, as shall amount to a
contradiction, so much as vertual, or which the things signified, on the one
part and the other, can be understood any way to import, That indeed there
should be a direct and explicit contradiction between foreknowing and
dehorting, we may, at first sight, perceive the terms cannot admit; For there
is nothing enuntiated (affirmed or denied) in either. But let the sense of both
be resolved into Propositions, capable of being confronted to one another, And
all that can be made of the former, will only come to this] you will do such a
thing] and of the latter, no more but this [you ought not to do it] These are
at as great distance, as can be imagined, from grating upon, or jarring with
one another.

And wherein is the indecorum of it, that both these effata should proceed from
the same mouth, viz. of a Governor, or one that has authority over others.

We will, for discourse sake, suppose a Prince, endowed with the Gift or Spirit
of Prophecy. This, most will acknowledge a great perfection, added to whatsoever
other his accomplishments. And suppose we this his Prophetic ability so large,
as to extend to most events that shall fall out within his dominions. Is it
hereby become unfit for him to govern his Subjects by Laws? or any way
admonish them of their duty? Has this Perfection so much diminisht him as to
depose him from his Government?

It is not indeed to be dissembled, that it were a difficulty to determine,
whether such foresight were, for himself, better or worse. Boundless knowledge
seems only in a fit conjunction with as unbounded power. But it is altogether
unimaginable that it should destroy his relation to his Subjects. As what of it
were left, if it should despoil him of his Legislative Power, and capacity of
governing according to Laws made by it?

And to bring back the matter to the Supreme Ruler. Let it for the present be
supposed only, that the Blessed God has, belonging to his Nature, the
universal Prescience whereof we are discoursing; We will, surely, upon that
supposition, acknowledge it to belong to him as a Perfection.

And were it reasonable to affirm that by a perfection he is disabled for
Government? Or were it a good conseqence [He foreknowes all things, he is
therefore unfit to govern the World!]

. IX.
And, that we may consider the matter more narrowly; Would the supposition of
such foreknowledg, in God, make that cease to be Man's duty, which had
otherwise been so? and take away the differences of good and evil? Would it
nullify the obligation of God's Law, and make Man's own inclination his only
rule? Or, if it be said, because it is foreknown, Man will do such a thing,
therefore he may, where is the connection? For what influence can foreknowledg
have, to alter, or affect, any way, either the nature of the thing foreknown,
or the temper of the person that shall do it; any more than the present
knowledge of the same thing, now in doing? Which knowledge none would deny to
God: And which, when it occurs to a man, is no more understood to make an evil
action innocent, than the action makes the eye guilty, of him that beholds it
only, and detests it at once. Surely what is, in its own nature, whether, good,
or evil, can never not be so, be it foreknown or not foreknown.

But if what was otherwise man's duty, be still his duty, what can make it
unfit that it be declared, and made known to him to be so? And how is that
otherwise to be done, than by these disputed means? Yea (for this is the case)
what can make it less fit, than it would be that God should cease to rule over
the World? and qit the right of his Government to his revolted creatures, upon
no other reason, than only that he foresees they have a mind to invade it?

It may now, perhaps, be said, All this reasoning tends indeed to establish the
contrary assertion, [that notwithstanding God do foreknow man's sin, it is
however necessary he forewarn him of it] but it answers not the objected
difficulty. viz. How reasonably any such means are used for an unattainable
end. As it is manifest, the end, Man's Obedience, cannot be attained when it is
foreknown he will not obey.

. X.
It may here, before we proceed further, not be unseasonable to consider (A
matter, as is known, wont to be much vexed in the Schools) how God may be said
to act for any end at all. And it appears very certain, that he, who is so
every way absolutely perfect, and happy, cannot be thought to intend, and
pursue an end, after the same manner as we are wont to do.

We being conscious to our selves of indigency, or, at the best, of obligation
to the Author of our Beings, are wont to design this or that end for the
relieving of our selves, or the approving our selves to him. And, our
satisfaction depending upon the attainment of it, we solicitously deliberate
about the fittest means to attain it; and are tos't with various Passions, of
desire, and hope, and fear, and joy, and grief, according as the end is
apprehended more or less excellent, or likely to be attained; varying often our
course upon new emergencies, as this or that may probably promote, or hinder
the success of our pursuit. In short, we pursue ends, as being both impatient
of disappointment, and uncertain of their attainment.

The Blessed God, being indigent of nothing, nor under obligation to any one,
cannot be supposed to propound an end to himself as that whereupon his
satisfaction depends, which were inconsistent with his already-compleat
felicity, and would argue him but potentially happy. But acting always from an
immense Self-sufficient fulness of life, and of all perfections, does ever
satisfy himself in himself, and take highest complacency in the perfect
goodness, congruity and rectitude of his own most Holy Will and Way.

And again, as he does not seek a yet-unattained satisfaction, in any end he
can be supposed to propound to himself; So nor can he be thought to deliberate,
as we are wont to do, concerning the means of effecting any. For deliberation
would imply doubtfulnes and uncertainty, which his absolute Perfection cannot
admit; Nor does need, the whole frame and compass of things intended by him, in
their distinct references and tendencies, being, at once, present to his
all-comprehending view; so that there can be no place for any intermediate
knowledge with him, or for any new resolves thereupon. Known to the Lord are all
his Works from the beginning of the World. Acts 15.


This being premised; It is now further to be considered, that howsoever one
end oftentimes is not attained, unto which the publicly extant declarations of
the Divine Will have a visible aptitude, viz. the obedient compliance of men
with them; another, more noble end was, however, attainable, not unbecoming the
designment of the Divine Wisdom, and which it was every way most worthy of God
to be more principally intent upon.

It is fit the mention of this be prefac't with an obvious remark; That the
misapprehension of the state of things between God and Man does, in great part,
owe it self, to our aptnes to compare unduly, the Divine Government with that
of Secular Rulers; and our expectation to find them in all things agreeing with
each other. Whereas there cannot but be a vast difference, between the
constitution, and end of God's Government over (his Creatures, and more
especially) Mankind, and that of Man over his fellow Creatures of the same kind.

The Government of secular, humane Rulers, can never be, in the constitution of
it, altogether absolute, nor ought, in the design of it, primarily to intend
the personal advantage of the Ruler himself, who as much depends upon his
Subjects, and has (at least) as great, need of them, as they can be understood
to have of him. But as to the Blessed God the matter is apparent, and has its
own triumphant evidence, that since he is the Original and Root of all Being,
that all things are mere dependencies upon his absolute pleasure, and entirely
of him, and by him, all ought to be to him that he alone might have the glory.
To. 11.


Wherefore, it must be asserted, and cannot fail of obtaining to be
acknowledged, by every impartial, and sober considerer of things, that there is
a much more noble and important end, that all God's public Edicts, and
Declarations to men (the instruments of his Government over them) do more
principally aim at, than their advantage, viz. the dignity and decorum of his
Government it self. And that he may be found in every thing to have done as
became him, and was most worthy of himself. And what could be more so, than
that he should testify the aversion of his own Pure, and Holy Nature, to
whatsoever was unholy and impure, his love of righteousness and complacency to
be imitated herein, together with his steady, gracious Propension to receive
all them into the communion of his own Felicity or Blessedness (for the
Redeemer's sake) who should herein comply with him?

Nor are we to understand that he herein so designs the reputation of his
Government, as men are often wont to do things out of design for their
interest, in that kind, that are otherwise, against their (overruled)
inclination. But we are to account these his declarations (although they are acts
of an intelligent Agent, and the products of wisdom and counsel, yet also) the
spontaneous emanations of his own holy, and gracious Nature, such as wherein he
most fully agrees, and consents with himself. And is it now to be expected,
that, because he foresees men will be wicked, and do what shall be unworthy of
them, he must therefore lay aside his Nature, and omit to do what shall be
worthy of himself?

. XII.
And hereupon it may be expected, the more ingenuous, and candid, will allow
themselves to think the matter tolerably clear, in reference to the former part
of the proposed difficulty; i. e. will apprehend this way of dealing with men
not imprudent, or inconsistent with the Divine Wisdom, since, tho one end, in a
great part, fail, yet another, more valuable, is attained.

But yet, as to the latter part, the difficulty may still urge, viz. how it can
stand with sincerity, whereas that end also which fails, seems to have been
most directly intended, that the Blessed God should seem so earnestly intent
upon it. Since it is hardly conceiveable, that the same thing should be, at
once, seriously intended as an end, and yet, at the same time, give the eye,
which seems to design it; no other prospect, than of a thing never to be
brought to pass.

Wherefore we are next to consider, that we may proceed gradually, And not omit
to say what is in it self considerable; tho it is not all (which cannot be said
at once) that is to be said; That the public declarations of the Divine Will,
touching man's duty, do attain that very end [his obedient compliance
therewith] in great part, and as to may (although it be foreknown they will prove
ineffectual with the most) and are the no less successful, than the apt means
of attaining it.

Nor, certainly, if it were foreknown the World would be so divided, as that
some would obey, and others not obey, was it therefore the fittest course, that
these two sorts should, by some extraordinary act of Providence, be carefully
severed from each other; and those be dealt withal apart from the rest: But
rather, that the Divine Edicts should be of an universal tenor, and be
directed to all as they are; the matter of them being of universal concernment,
and eqally suitable to the common case of all men.

. XIII.
Neither yet was it necessary, that effectual care should be taken, they should
actually reach all, and be applied to every individual person. Since it is
apparently to be resolved into the wickedness of the World, that they do not so;
and that there is not an universal diffusion of the Gospel into every part.

For it being evident to any ones reflection, that men are in a state of
apostasy and defection from their Maker and common Lord, and therefore subject
to his displeasure; Whereas the Merciful God has done his own part, and so
much beyond what was to be expected from him; issued out his Proclamations of
Peace, and Pardon, upon so easy and indulgent terms, as are expressed in his
Gospel; if, hereupon, men also did their part, behaved themselves sutably to
the exigencie of their case, and as did become reasonable Creatures, fallen under
the displeasure of their Maker, (whereof their common condition affords so
innumerable, so pregnant proofs) The Gospel, wheresoever it should arrive,
would have been entertained with so great a transport of joy, and so ready and
universal acceptance, as very soon to have made a great noise in the World: And
being found to be of an universal tenor and concernment, and that what is
says to one Nation, it eqally says the same to every one; It could not but
be, that Messengers would interchangeably have run from Nation, to Nation; some
to communicate, others to enqire after those strange tidings of great joy unto
all people, lately sent from Heaven; concerning the Emmanuel, God with us; God,
again upon his return to Man, and now in Christ reconciling the World to
himself. And thus how easily, and even naturally, would the Gospel soon have
spread it self thorough the World? Especially the merciful God having so
provided, that there should be an office constituted, and set up; a sort of
men, whose whole business it should be, to propagate, and publish those happy
tidings.

But that men should so indulge their sensual, terrene inclination, as not at
all to use their understandings, and considering power, about other matters
than only what are within the sight of their eye, when by so easy and qick a
turn of thoughts they might feel and find out who made them, and was the
Original of their life and being, and that things are not right, and as they
should be, between him and them; and so by what is within the compass of
natural revelation, be prepared for what is supernatural. And not that only,
but to that stupidity, by which they are unapt to enqire after, and receive, to
add that obstinate malignity, by which they are apt to reject, and oppose the
merciful discoveries, and overtures of their offended, reconcilable Creator,
and Lord: How manifestly does this devolve the whole business, of the little,
slow progress of the Gospel in the World, upon themselves only!

As suppose we a Prince of the greatest Clemency, Benignity, and Goodness, from
whom a whole Country of his Subjects have made a most causeless defection;
hereupon to send, to the whole Body of the Rebels, a gracious Proclamation of
free Pardon, upon their return to their allegiance, and duty; and it only from
hence comes to pass, that every individual person of them, distinctly
understands not what the Message from their Prince did import; because, they
that heard it would not, many of them, allow themselves to consider and regard
it; and others of them, with despiteful violence, fell upon the Heralds,
barbarously but chering some of them, and ignominiously repulsing the rest. Who
would not say, that Prince had fully done his part, and acqitted himself
answerably to the best Character, tho he should send to the Rebels no further
overtures. Much more, if, thorough a long tract of time, he continue the same
amicable endeavors for their reducement; notwithstanding the constant
experience of the same ill success? Who would not cast the whole business of the
continued ill understanding, between him, and the revolters, upon themselves.
And reckon it impossible, any should be ignorant, of his kind and benign
inclinations and intentions, if an implacable enmity, and disaffection to him,
and his Government, were not their common temper?

Tho, so infinitely do the Mercies of God, exceed those of the most Merciful
Prince on Earth, as well as his knowledge and power; that wheresoever there are
any exempt cases, we must conceive him, eqally able, and inclined, to consider
them distinctly. And so vastly different, may we well suppose, the degrees of
happiness and misery to be, in the other World; as that there may be latitude
enough, of punishing and rewarding men, proportionably to the degrees of light
they have had, and the more or less malignity, or propension to reconciliation,
was found with them thereupon.

. XIV.
Nor again was it at all incongruous, or unbecoming, that the Blessed God, this
being the common temper, and disposition of all men, to reject his gracious
tenders, should provide, by some extraordinary means, that they might not be
finally rejected by all. For what can be more appropriate to Sovereignty (even
where it is infinitely less absolute) than, arbitrarily, to design the objects
of special favor? Who blames a Prince, for placing special marks of his Royal
bounty, or clemency here and there, as he thinks fit? or that he has some
peculiar favorites, with whom he familiarly converses, whom he has won, by
some or other not-common inducements, and assured their loyal affection: tho
there be thousands of Persons in his dominions besides, of as good parts,
dispositions, and deserts as they? It belongs to Sovereignty, only so, to be
favorable to some, as, in the mean time, to be just toward all.

Yea and it must be acknowledged, such are the dispensations of the holy God
toward the whole community of mankind, as import, not only strict
righteousness, but great clemency and mercy also.

Tho they might easily understand themselves to be offenders, and liable to the
severities of his Justice, they are spared by his patience, sustained by his
bounty, protected by his power, Their lives and properties are fenced by his
own laws. And whereas they are become very dangerous enemies to one another:
and each one his own greatest enemy; It is provided by those laws, even for
the worst of men, that none shall injure them, that all love them, and seek
their good. He interposes his authority on their behalf; and, if any wrong
them, he takes it for an affront done to himself. By the same laws, they are
directed to industry, frugality, Sobriety, temperance, to exercise a Government
over themselves, to bridle and subdue their own exorbitant lusts and passions,
their more immediate tormentours, and the sources of all the calamities and
miseries, which befall them in this World. By all which evidences of his great
care, and concern for their welfare, They might understand him to have
favorable propensions toward them, and that, tho they have offended him, he
is not their implacable enemy; And might, by his goodness, be led to repentance.

Yea and moreover; he has sent them a Redeemer, his own Son, an incarnate
Deity, who came down into this World, full of grace and truth, upon the most
merciful errand. (And they have some of them been in transports, when they have
but fancied such a descent, for the doing them, only, some lighter good turn;
as upon the cure of the Creeple. Act. 14.
The Gods (say they) are come down in the likeness of Men!)

He being filled with the glorious fulness of the Godhead, has been a voluntary
sacrifice for the sins of men; And if they would believe and obey him, they
would find that sacrifice is accepted, and available for them.

And tho they are disabled to do so, only by their own wicked inclination, even
against that also they have no cause to despair of being relieved, if they
would (which they might) admit the thoughts of their impotency, and the
exigencie of their case, and did seriously implore Divine help.

XV.
Now with whom these methods succeed well, there is no suspicion of
insinceritie; Let us see what pretense there can be for it, with the rest.

It is to be considered, that, as to them, he does not apply himself to every
(or to any) person immediately, and severally, after some such tenor of speech
as this, I know thee to be a profligate, hopeles wretch, and that thou will
finally disregard whatsoever I say to thee, and conseqently perish and become
miserable. But however (tho I foresee most certainly thou will not, yet) I
entreat thee to hear, and obey, and live. Indeed sending a Prophet to a
promiscuous people, he foretells him of such ill success Ezekiel. Chapter 3. 7.
. But it is not told him he should succeed so ill universally, and it is
implied, he should not. V. 21.


But the Course the great God takes, is only to apply himself to these (as has
been said) in common with the rest. For if it be said he also applies himself
to them by the private dictates of his Spirit; He does not, by it, make formed
speeches to men. But as to those its common motions, whereby it applies it self
unto them, does only solicit, in a stated manner of operation, in and by their
own reason and consciences (as he concurres with our inferior faculties, and
with the inferior Creatures, sutably to their natures and capacities) speaking
no other, than their own language, as they are instructed out of his Word, or
by other means. Which he usually continues to do, till, by their resistencies,
they have sealed up their own Consciences, and conseqently (according to its
more ordinary fixed course, and laws of access and recess) shut out the Holy
Spirit both at once. Nor is it more to be expected, he should universally alter
that course; than that he should alter the courses of the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and innovate upon universal nature.

So that what is endeavored for the reducement of such, as finally refuse to
return, by particular applications to this or that person, and beyond what is
contained in the public declarations of his written Word, is by substituted
Ministers, and inferior Agents, that know no more of the event, than they do
themselves.

And that this was the fittest way of dealing with reasonable Creatures, who,
that will use his own reason, sees not?

. XVI.
That our disqisition may be here a little more strict, we shall enqire both,

What may be supposed possible to be alleged out of God's Word, in reference
to them that persist in wickedness till they finally perish, which it can be
thought not consistent with sincerity to have inserted, upon the supposed
foresight of so dismal an issue.

And what more convenient course we can think of, which sincerity (as we
apprehend) would have reqired.

As to the former. It may, perhaps, be alleged, that he professes to will the
salvation of all men. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Not to desire the death of him that dies. Ezekiel. 18. 32.
Yea and professes himself grieved that any perish. Ps. 81. 12, 13.
Now these things, compared with his public declarations, and tenders,
directed, in an universal tenor, to all men, carry that appearance and show
with them, as if he would have it believed, his end were to save all. Wherewith
his foresight of the perdition of so many, seems ill to agree. For, how can
that end be seriously intended, which it is foreseen will not be brought about?
And how can it be thought to consist with sincerity, that there should be an
appearance of his having such an end, unto which, a serious real intention of
it does not correspond?

Wherefore we shall here examine, what appearance such expressions as those
above recited, can, by just interpretation, be understood to amount unto.

And then show that there is really with the Blessed God, what does truly and
fully correspond to that appearance. And very agreeably too, with the
hypothesis of his foreseeing how things will finally issue, with very many.

And first, that we may understand the true import of the expressions which we
have mentioned, and others of like sound and meaning. We are to consider, that
(tho being taken severally and apart, they are not capable of a sense,
prejudicial to the cause, the defense whereof we have undertaken, which we
shall afterward more distinctly evince, yet) it were very injurious, to go
about to affix a sense, unto a single expression, without weighing the general
design of the writings, whereof it is a part.

It were qite to frustrate the use of words, when a matter is to be
represented, that is copious, and consists of many parts and branches; which
cannot be comprehended in one, or a few sentences, if we will pretend to
estimate, and make a judgment of the Speakers full meaning, by this or that
single passage, only, because we have not patience, or leisure, to hear the
rest; or perhaps have a greater disposition to cavil his words, than understand
his meaning.

If a Course resembling this should be taken, in interpreting the Edicts, or
Laws of Princes, and States (suppose it were a Proclamation of Pardon to
delinqent Subjects) and only this or that favorable clause be fastened upon,
without regard to the inserted Proviso's and Conditions; The (concerned)
interpreters might do a slight, temporary, and easily remedible wrong to the
Prince; but are in danger, more fatally, to wrong themselves.

The Edicts of the great God, that are publicly extant to Mankind (the
universal publication whereof, they partly withstand, and which they too
commonly deprave, and perversely mis-interpret, where they do obtain) carry no
such appearance with them, as if he had ever proposed it to himself, for his
end, to save all men, or any man, let them do what they please, or how
destructive a Course soever they take, and shall finally persist in.

If that were supposed his design, his so seemingly serious counsels, and
exhortations, were as ludicrous, as they could be thought, if it were as
peremptorily determined all should perish. For what God will, by Almighty
Power, immediately work, without the subordinate concurrence of any second
cause, must be necessarily. And it is eqally vain, solicitously to endeavor
the engaging of subordinate Agents, to do that which without them is absolutely
necessary, as it were to endeavor that, by them, which is absolutely
impossible.

. XVII.
That which his declarations to men do amount unto, is, in sum, thus much,
That, whereas they have, by their defection, and revolt from him, made
themselves liable to his Justice, and very great conseqent miseries; he is
willing to pardon, save and restore them to a blessed state, upon such terms as
shall be agreeable (the recompense due to his injured Law, being otherwise
provided for, at no expense of theirs) to the nature of that Blessedness they
are to enjoy, the Purity of his own Nature, and the Order, and Dignity of his
Government. That is, that they seriously repent, and turn to him, Love him as
the Lord their God, with all their Heart and Soul, and Might, and Mind; and one
another as themselves. (being to make together one happy Community, in the
participation of the same Blessedness) Commit themselves by entire Trust,
subjection and devotednes to their great and merciful Redeemer, according to
the measure of light, wherewith he shall have been revealed and made known to
them; Submit to the motions and dictates of his Blessed Spirit, whereby the
impression of his own holy Image is to be renewed in them, and a Divine Nature
imparted to them; And carefully attend to his Word as the means, the impressive
instrument or seal, by which, understood and considered, that impression shall
be made, and the very seed out of which that Holy Nature, and the entire frame
of the New Creature shall result and spring up in them; so as to make them apt
unto the obedience that is expected from them, and capable of the Blessedness
they are to expect. That if they neglect to attend to these external
discoveries, and refuse the ordinary aids and assistances of his good Spirit,
and offer violence to their own Consciences, they are not to expect he should
overpower them, by a strong hand, and save them against the continuing
dis-inclination of their own wills.

Nor (whatsoever extraordinary acts he may do upon some, to make them willing)
is there any universal Promise in his Word; or other encouragement, upon which
any may reasonably promise themselves that; in the neglect and disuse of all
ordinary means, such power shall be used with them, as shall finally overcome
their averse disaffected hearts.

. XVIII.
It Is true that he frequently uses much importunity with men, and enforces his
Laws with that earnestnes, as if it were his own great interest to have them
obeyed; Wherein, having to do with men, he does like a man, solicitously intent
upon an end which he cannot be satisfied till he attain. Yet withal, he has
interspersed, every where in his Word, so frequent, God-like Expressions of his
own Greatness, All Sufficiency and Independency upon his Creatures, as that if
we attend to these his Public declarations, and manifests of himself entirely;
So as to compare one thing with another, we shall find the matter not at all
dissembled; but might collect this to be the state of things, between him, and
us; that he makes no overtures to us, as thinking us considerable, or as if any
thing were to accrue to him from us. But that, as he takes pleasure in the
diffusion of his own goodness, so it is our interest to behave our selves
sutably thereunto, and, according as we comply with it, and continue in it, or
do not, so we may expect the delectable communications of it, or taste,
otherwise, his just severity. That, therefore, when he exhorts, obtests,
entreats, beseeches that we would obey and live; speaks as if he were grieved
at our disobedience, and what is like to ensue to us therefrom; These are
merciful condescentions, and the efforts of that goodness, which chooses the
fittest ways of moving us, rather than that he is moved himself, by any such
Passions, as we are wont to feel in our selves, when are pursuing our own
designs. And that he vouchsafes to speak in such a way as is less suitable to
himself, that it may be more suitable to us, and might teach us, while he so far
complies with us, how becoming it is that we answerably bend our selves to a
compliance with him. He speaks, sometimes, as if he did suffer somewhat humane,
as an apt means (and which to many proves effectual) to bring us to enjoy, at
length, what is truly divine. We may, if we consider, and lay things together,
understand these to be gracious insinuations; Whereby, as he has not left the
matter liable to be so mis-understood, as if he were really affected with
solicitude, or any perturbation concerning us (which he he has sufficiently
given us to understand his Blessed Nature cannot admit of.) So nor can they be
thought to be disguises of himself, or misrepresentations, that have nothing in
him corresponding to them. For they really signify the obedience, and
blessedness of those his Creatures that are capable thereof, to be more pleasing
and agreeable to his Nature, and Will; than that they should disobey and
perish. (which is the utmost that can be understood meant, by those words, God
will have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth) But
withal, that he so apprehends the indignity done to his Government, by their
disobedience, that if they obey not (as the indulgent constitution and temper
of his Law, and Government now are, in and by the Redeemer) they must perish.
And that he has also such respect to the congruity and order of things, as
that it shall not be the ordinary method of his Government over reasonable
Creatures, to overpower them into that obedience, by which it may come to pass
that they perish not. All which may be collected from those his own plain
words, in that other recited Text (and many besides of like import.) When, with
so awful solemnity, he professes, Ezekiel. 33.
that as he lives he takes no pleasure in the death of sinners, but that they
may turn and live; and adds, Turn ye, turn ye, why will you die? That is, that
their repentance, and consequent welfare, would be more grateful to him, than
their perdition, upon their persevering in destructive ways. But yet, that if
they were not moved to repent, by these his pleadings and expostulations used
with them, they should die, and were therefore concerned, to attend and
hearken, to such his reasonings and warnings, as the apt means to work their
good; not expecting he should take extraordinary courses with them, in order to
it. And that the real respect he had thereunto, should never induce him, to use
any indecorous course, to bring it about; but that he had a more principal
respect to the rules of Justice, and the order of his Government, than to their
concernments. And that he, notwithstanding, expresses himself aggrieved that
any finally perish; If we consider and recollect, what notices he has
furnished our Minds with, of the Perfections of a Deity, and what he has
remonstrated to us of his own Nature, so plainly, in his Word; we cannot
understand more by it, than the calm dispassionate resentment and dislike,
which most perfect Purity, and Goodness have, of the sinfulnes and miserable
ruin, of his own Creatures.

In all which we have a most unexceptionable Idaea of God, and may behold the
comely conjuncture of his large Goodness, strict Righteousness, and most accurate
Wisdom all together. As we are also concerned, in making our estimate of his
ways, to consider them. And not to take our measure of what is suitable to God,
by considering him according to one single Attribute only; but as they all are
united, in his most Perfect Being. And in that blessed harmony, as not to infer
with him a difficulty what to do, or what not. Which sometimes falls out with
men, where there is an imperfect resemblance of those Divine Excellencies, not
so exactly contempered together. As it was with that Spartan Prince and General
in Plutarch, when, finding a necessity to march his Army, and taking notice of
one, for whom he had a peculiar kindness, that, thorough extreme weakness, was
not possibly to be removed, he looked back upon him, expressing his sense of
that exigencie, in those emphatical words, How had a matter is it at once
(...), to exercise pity and be wise!

God's own Word misrepresents him not, but gives a true account of him, if we
allow our selves to confer it with it self, one part of it with another. Nor
does any part of it, taken alone, import him so to have willed the happiness of
men, for any end of his, that he resolved he would, by whatsoever means
certainly effect it; As we are wont, many times, with such engernes to pursue
ends upon which we are intent, as not to consider of right or wrong, fit or
unfit in our pursuit of them, and so let the cost of our means, not seldom, eat
up our end. Nor did that belong to him, or was his part as our most benign,
wise, and righteous Governor, to provide that we should certainly not
transgress, or not suffer prejudice thereby; but that we should not do so,
thorough his omission of any thing, which it became him to do to prevent it.

. XIX.
It may therefore be of some Use further to take notice, that a very diverse
consideration must be had, of the ends which shall be effected by Gods own
action only, and of those which are to be brought about (in concurrence, and
subordination to his own) by the intervenient action of his Creatures.
Especially (which is more to our purpose) such of them as are intelligent, and
capable of being governed by Laws.

As to the former sort of these ends, we may be confident they were all most
absolutely intended, and can never fail of being accomplished.

For the latter, It cannot be universally said so. For these, being not
entirely his ends, But partly his, and partly prescribed by him, to his
reasonable Creatures, to be theirs. We are to conceive he always, most
absolutely, intends to do, what he righteously esteems congruous* should be his
own part; which he extends and limits, as seems good unto him. And sometimes,
of his own good Pleasure, assumes to himself the doing of so much, as shall
ascertain the end; Effectually procuring, that his Creature shall do his part
also. That is, not only enacts his Law, and adds exhortations, warnings,
promises, to enforce it, but also emits that effectual influence, whereby the
inferior wheels shall be put into motion, the powers and faculties of his
governed Creature excited and assisted, and (by a spirit in the wheels) made as
the Chariots of a willing people. At other times and in other instances, he
does less, and meeting with resistance, sooner retires; follows not his
external Edicts and Declarations, with so potent and determinative an
influence; but that the Creature, through his own great default, may omit to do
his part, and so that end be not effected.

That the course of his Economy toward men on earth is, de facto, ordered
with this diversity, seems out of qestion. Manifest experience shows it. Some
do sensibly perceive that motive influence, which others do not. The same
persons, at sometimes, find not that, which at other times they do. His own
Word plainly asserts it. He works in us to will and to do, of his own good
pleasure. Where he will, he, in this respect, shows mercy; where he will, he
hardens, or does not prevent but that men be hardened. And indeed, we should
be constrained to raze out a great part of the Sacred Volume, if we should not
admit it to be so.

And as the eqity and fitnes of his making such difference (when it appears he
does make it) cannot without profanenes be doubted, so it is evident, from what
was before said, they are far removed from the reach and confines of any
reasonable doubt; since he forsakes none, but being first forsaken.

Nor have men any pretense to complain of subdolous dealing, or that they are
surprisingly disappointed, and lurcht of such help, as they might have
expected; inasmuch as this is so plainly extant in God's open manifests to the
World, that he uses a certain arbitrarines, especially in the more exuberant
dispensation of his grace; and is inserted to that purpose, that they may be
cautioned not to neglect lower assistences; and warned, because he works to
will and to do of his own pleasure, Phil. 2. 12, 13.
therefore to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling. Whereupon,
elsewhere, after the most persuasive alluring invitations. Prove. 1.
Turn ye at my reproof, I will pour out my Spirit to you, I will make known my
words to you, It is presently subjoyned, Because I called and ye refused, I
stretched out my hand and no man regarded. But ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes.

From all which it is plainly to be understood, that the general strain and
drift of God's external revelation of his Mind to Man, in his Word, and the
aspect of even those passages, that can, with most color, be thought to
signify any thing further, do amount to nothing more than this, that he does so
far really will the salvation of all, as not to omit the doing that which may
effect it, if they be not neglectful of themselves, but not so as to effect it
by that extraordinary exertion of Power, which he thinks fit to employ upon
some others.

Nor is it reasonably to be doubted, (such a will being all that can be
pretended to be the visible meaning of the passages before noted) whether there
be such a Will in God or no. And so somewhat really corresponding (the next
thing promised to be discoursed) to the aspect and appearance hereof, which is
offered to our view. For what should be the reason of the doubt? He, who best
understands his own Nature, having said of himself what imports no less; why
should we make a difficulty to believe him? Nor indeed can any notices we have
of the Perfections of the Divine Nature be less liable to doubt, than what we
have of his unchangeable veracity; whence, as it is impossible to him to lie,
it must be necessary, that he be really willing of what he has represented
himself so to be.

I must here profess my dislike of the terms of that common distinction the
voluntas beneplaciti, et signi in this present case. Under which, such as
coined, and those that have much used it, have only rather, I doubt not,
concealed a good meaning, than expressed by it an ill one. It seems, I confess,
by its more obvious aspect, too much to countenance the ignominious slander,
which profane and atheistical dispositions would fasten upon God, and the
course of his procedure toward men; and which it is the design of these Papers
to evince of as much absurdity and folly, as it is guilty of impiety and
wickedness: As tho he only intended to seem willing of what he really was not;
That there was an appearance to which nothing did subesse. And then why is the
latter called voluntas? unless the meaning be he did only will the sign, which
is false and impious; and if it were true, did he not will it with the will of
good pleasure? And then the members of the distinction are confounded. Or, as
if the evil actions of men were, more truly, the objects of his good Pleasure,
than their forbearance of them.

And of these faults the application of the distinction of God's secret Will,
and revealed, unto this case, tho it be useful in many, is as guilty.

. XXI.
The truth is (unto which we must esteem our selves obliged to adhere, both by
our assent, and defense) that God does really and complacentially will (and
therefore does with most unexceptionable sincerity declare himself to will)
that to be done and enjoyed by many men, which he does not, universally, will
to make them do, or irresistibly procure that they shall enjoy. Which is no
harder assertion, than that the impure will of degenerate sinful Man is
opposite to the Holy Will of God; and the malignity of Man's will to the
benignity of his. No harder than that there is sin and misery in the World,
which how can we conceive otherwise, than as a repugnancie to the good and
acceptable Will of God?

Methinks it should not be difficult to us to acknowledge, that God does truly,
and with complacencie, will, whatsoever is the holy righteous matter of his own
Laws. And if it should be with any a difficulty, I would only make this
supposition. What if all the World were yet in innocence, yielding entire,
universal obedience to all the now extant Laws of God, which have not reference
to Man as now fallen (as those of repentance, Faith in a Mediator, etc.) would
it now be a doubt with any, Whether God did truly and really will, and were
pleased with the holiness and righteousness which were every where to be found in
the World? Surely we would not, in this case, imagine the creatures will more
pure and holy than the Divine; or that he were displeased with men for their
being righteous and holy. Now again suppose the World revolted, what then is
that holy Will of God changed? will we not say it remains the same holy Will
still? And stands the same Rule of righteousness and duty that it was? Does the
change of his Rebel-Creatures infer any with him? Or do only the declarations
of his former Will remain to be their rule, and keep them still obliged, his
Will it self being become another from what it was? Surely he might as easily
have changed his Laws.

And if we say his Will is changed, how should we know it to be so? If we know
it not, surely such a thing should not be said or thought. If we know it, how
should those yet-extant Laws and Declarations continue to oblige, against the
Lawgivers known will? And then the easy expedient to nullify the obligation
of a Law, that were thought too restrictive, were to disobey it. And men might,
by sinning once, license themselves to do the same thing (tho then we could not
call it sinning) always. And so the Creatures should be the supreme, and
ruling will. Nor had it been a false suggestion, but a real truth, that Man, by
becoming a sinner, might make himself a God.

Or, if it shall be thought fit to say, that the Divine Will would not, in that
supposed case, be said to be changed; but only, that now, the event makes it
appear not to have been, what we thought it was; That were to impute both
impuritie and dissimulation to the Holy Blessed God, as his fixed Attributes.
And what we thought unfit, and should abhor, to imagine might have place with
him one moment, to affix to him for perpetuity.

. XXII.
And whereas it may be thought to follow hence, that hereby we ascribe to God a
liablenes to frustration, and disappointment. That is without pretense. The
resolve of the Divine Will, in this matter, being not concerning the event what
Man shall do, But concerning his duty what he should, and concerning the
connection between his duty, and his happiness. Which, we say, he does not only
seem to will, but wills it really and truly. Nor would his Prescience of the
event, which we all this while assert, let frustration be so much as possible
to him. Especially, it being at once foreseen, that his Will, being crossed in
this, would be fulfilled in so important a thing, as the preserving the decorum
of his own Government. Which had been most apparently blemished, beyond what
could consist with the Perfections of the Deity, if either his Will concerning
Man's duty, or the declarations of that Will, had not been substantially, the
same that they are.

We are, therefore, in assigning the object of this or that act of the Divine
Will, to do it entirely, and to take the whole object together, without
dividing it, as if the Will of God did wholly terminate upon what indeed is but
a part (and especially if that be but a less considerable part) of the thing
willed. In the present case, we are not to conceive that God, only, wills
either Man's duty or felicity, or that herein his Will does solely and
ultimately terminate. But, in the whole, the determination of God's Will is,
That Man shall be duly governed, that is, congruously both to himself, and him.
That such and such things, most congruous to both, shall be Man's duty, by his
doing whereof, the Dignity and Honor of God's own Government might be
preserved, which was the thing principally to be designed; and in the first
place. And, as what was secundary thereto, that hereby Man's felicity should be
provided for. Therefore, it being foreseen a violation would be done to the
sacred rights of the Divine Government, by Man's disobedience, it is resolved,
they shall be repaired and maintained by other means. So that the Divine Will
has its effect; as to what was its more noble and principal design, the other
part failing, only, by his default, whose is the loss.

And if yet it should be insisted, that in asserting God to will what by his
Laws he has made become Man's duty, even where it is not done, we shall
herein ascribe to him, at least, an ineffectual and an imperfect Will, as which
does not bring to pass the thing willed.

It is answered, that imperfection were with no pretense imputable to the
Divine Will, merely for its not effecting every thing, whereto it may have a
real propension. But it would be more liable to that imputation, if it should
effect any thing, which it were less fit for him to effect, than not to effect
it. The absolute Perfection of his Will stands in the proportion, which every
act of it bears, to the importance of the things, about which it is conversant.
Even as, with men, the perfection of any act of will is to be estimated, not by
the mere peremptory sturdines of it, but by its proportion to the goodness of
the thing willed. Upon which account, a mere velleity (as many love to speak)
when the degree of goodness in the object claims no more, has unconceivably
greater perfection in it, than the most obstinate Volition.

And since the Event forbids us to admit that God did ever will the obedience
and felicity of all, with such a Will as should be effective thereof; if yet
his plain Word shall be acknowledged the measure of our belief, in this matter,
which so plainly asserts him someway to will the salvation of all men, it is
strange if, hereupon, we shall not admit rather of a will not-effective of the
thing willed, than none at all.

The Will of God is sufficiently to be vindicated from all imperfection, if he
have sufficient reason for all the propensions, and determinations of it,
whether from the value of the things willed, or from his own Sovereignty who
wills them.

In the present case, we need not doubt to affirm, that the obedience and
felicity of all men, is of that value, as whereunto a propension of will, by
only simple complacency is proportionable. Yet, that his not procuring, as to
all (by such courses as he more extraordinarily takes with some) that they
shall, in event, obey and be happy, is upon so much more valuable reasons (as
there will be further occasion to show ere long) as that, not to do it was more
eligible, with the higher complacency, of a determinative will.

And since the public declarations of his good will, toward all men, import no
more than the former, and do plainly import so much; Their correspondency to
the matter declared is sufficiently apparent.

And so is the congruity of both with his prescience of the event.

For tho, when God urges and incites men, by exhortations, promises, and
threats, to the doing of their own part (which it is most agreeable to his holy
gracious Nature to do) he foresee, many will not be moved thereby; but persist
in wilful neglect, and rebellions till they perish: He, at the same time, sees
that they might do otherwise, and that, if they would comply with his methods,
things would otherwise issue with them. His prescience, no way, imposing upon
them a necessity to transgress. For they do it not because he foreknew it, but
he only foreknew it because they would do so. And hence he had, as it was
necessary he should have, not only this for the object of his foreknowledg,
that they would do amiss and perish. But the whole case in its circumstances,
that they would do so, not thorough his omission, but their own. And there had
been no place left for this state of the case; if his public Edicts and
Manifests, had not gone forth, in this tenor as they have.

So that the consideration of his prescience, being taken in, gives us only, in
the whole, this state of the Case, That he foresaw men would not take that
course, which he truly declared himself willing they should (and was graciously
ready to assist them in it) in order to their own well-being. Whence all
complaint of insincere dealing is left without pretense.

. XXIII.
Nor (as we also undertook to show) could any course (within our prospect) have
been taken, that was fit, in it self, and more agreeable to sincerity.

There are only these two ways to be thought on, besides. Either that God
should wholly have forborne to make overtures to men in common.

Or, that he should efficaciously have overpow'red all into a compliance with
them. And there is little doubt, but, upon sober consideration, both of these
will be judged altogether unfit.

The former; Inasmuch as it had been most disagreeable to the exact measures of
his Government, to let a race of sinful Creatures persist, thorough many
successive Ages, in apostasy and rebellion, when the characters of that Law,
first written in Man's heart, were in so great measure outworn, and become
illegible; without renewing the impression, in another way; and reasserting his
right and authority, as their Ruler and Lord; To the Holiness of his Nature, not
to send into the World such a declaration of his Will, as might be a standing
testimony against the impurity, whereinto it was lapsed; To the goodness of it,
not to make known upon what terms, and for whose sake, he was reconcilable;
And to the truth of the thing, since he really had such kind propensions
toward men in common not to make them known. That it had, it self, been more
liable to the charge of insinceritie, to have concealed from men what was real
truth, and of so much concernment to them. And he did, in revealing them, but
act his own Nature; the goodness whereof is no more lessened, by men's refusal of
its offers, than his Truth can be made of none effect by their disbelief of its
assertions. Besides the great use such an extant revelation of the way of
recovery, was to be of, to those that should obediently comply with it, even
after they should be so to do.

. XXIV.
And the latter we may also apprehend very unfit too; tho, because that is less
obvious, it requires to be more largely insisted on.

For it would seem that if we do not effect any thing which we have a real will
unto, it must proceed from impotencie, and that we cannot do it, which who
would say of the great God?

Herein, therefore, we shall proceed by steps. And gradually offer the things
that follow to consideration.

As, that it were, indeed, most repugnant to the notion of a Deity, to suppose
any thing, which includes in it no contradiction, impossible to God, considered
according to that Single Attribute of Power, only.

But yet we must add, That this were a very uneqal way of estimating what God
can do, that is to consider him as a mere Being of Power. For the notion of God
so conceived, were very inadeqate to him, which taken entirely, imports the
comprehension of all Perfections. So that they are two very distant qestions,
What the Power of God alone could do; And, What God can do. And whereas to the
former the answer would be, Whatsoever is not in it self repugnant to be done.
To the latter, it must only be, Whatsoever it becomes, or is agreeable to a
Being every way perfect to do. And so it is to be attributed to the excellency
of his Nature, if amongst all things not simply impossible, there be any, which
it may be truly said be cannot do. Or, it proceeds not from the imperfection of
his Power, but from the concurrence of all other Perfections in him. Hence his
own Word plainly affirms of him, that he cannot lie. And by common consent it
will be acknowledged, that he cannot do any unjust act whatsoever.

To this I doubt not we may with as common suffrage (when the matter is
considered) subjoyn, that his Wisdom does as much limit the exercise of his
Power, as his Righteousness or his Truth does. And that it may with as much
confidence, and clearnes, be said and understood, that he cannot do an unwise,
or imprudent act as an unjust.

Further, That as his Righteousness corresponds to the Justice of things, to be
done or not done, so does his Wisdom to the congruity or fitnes. So that he
cannot do what it is unfit for him to do, because he is Wise; and because he is
most Perfectly and Infinitely Wise, therefore nothing that is less-fit. But
whasoever is fittest, when a comparison is made between doing this or that, or
between doing and not doing, that the Perfection of his Nature renders
necessary to him, and the opposite part impossible.

Again, that this measure must be understood to have a very large and most
general extent unto all the affairs of his Government, the object it concerns
being so very large. We, in our observation, may take notice, that fewer
qestions can occur concerning what is right or wrong, than what is fit, or
unfit. And whereas any man may in a moment be honest, if he have a mind to it;
very few (and that by long experience) can ever attain to be wise. The things
about which Justice is conversant being reducible to certain rules, but Wisdom
supposes very general knowledge of things scarce capable of such reduction. And
is, besides, the primary reqisite, in any one that bears rule over others. And
must therefore most eminently influence all the managements of the Supreme
Ruler.

. XXV.
It is moreover to be considered, that innumerable congruities lie open to the
Infinite Wisdom, which are never obvious to our view or thought. As to a
wellstudied Scholar, thousands of coherent notions, which an illiterate person
never thought of. To a practic't Courtier, or welleducated Gentleman, many
decencies and indecencies in the matter of civil behavior, and conversation,
which an unbred rustic knows nothing of. And to an experienced Statesman,
those importancies, which never occur to the thoughts of him who daily follows
the plough. What Government is there that has not its arcana, profound
mysteries and reasons of State that a vulgar wit cannot dive into? And from
whence, the account to be given, why this or that is done or not done, is not,
always, that it would have been unjust it should be otherwise, but it had been
imprudent. And many things are, hereupon, judged necessary not from the
exigencie of Justice, but reason of State. Whereupon, men of modest and sober
minds, that have had experience of the wisdom of their Governors, and their
happy conduct, thorough a considerable tract of time; when they see things done
by them, the leading reasons whereof they do not understand, and the effect and
success comes not yet in view, suspend their censure; while as yet all seems to
them obscure, and wrapped up in clouds and darkness. Yea tho the course that is
taken have, to their apprehension, an ill aspect. Accounting it becomes them
not, to make a Judgment of things so far above their reach, and confiding in
the tried wisdom of their Rulers, who, they believe, see reasons for what they
do, into which they find themselves unable to penetrate.

With how much more submiss, and humble veneration, ought the methods of the
Divine Government to be beheld and adored, upon the certain assurance we have,
that all things therein, are managed by that Wisdom, which could never in any
thing mistake its way. Whereas, there was never any continued administration
of human Government, so accurate and exact, but that, after some tract of time,
some or other errors might be reflected on therein.

Again, it may further be said, without presuming beyond due bounds, That tho
infinite congruities must be supposed to lie open to the Divine Understanding,
which are concealed from ours, yet that these two things in the general are
very manifestly congruous to any sober attentive Mind, that directly concern,
or may be applied to the case, under our present consideration, viz.

That the course of God's Government over the World, be, for the most part,
steady, and uniform; not interrupted by very freqent, extraordinary and
anomalous actions. And again,

That he use a royal liberty, of stepping out of his usual course, sometimes,
as he sees meet.

It cannot but appear to such as attend, highly incongruous, should we affirm
the antithesis to either of these; or lay down counter-positions to them, and
suppose the course of the Divine Government to be managed agreeably thereunto.

. XXVI.
For, as to the former; what confusion would it make in the World, if there
should be perpetual innovations upon Nature; continual, or exceeding freqent
impeditions, and restraints of second Causes. In the sphere of Nature, the
Virtues and proper qalities of things, being never certain, could never be
understood, or known. In that of Policy, no measures, so much as probable,
could ever be taken. How much better is it, in both, that second Causes,
ordinarily follow their inclinations? And why is it not to be thought
congruous, that, in some degree, things should be proportionably so, in the
sphere of Grace? (whereto by and by we shall speak more directly.)

We pray, when our Friends are sick, for their recovery. What can be the sober
meaning and design of such prayers? Not that God would work a Miracle for their
restitution, (for then we might as well pray for their revival after death)
But, that God would be pleased so to cooperate, in the still and silent way of
Nature, with second Causes, and so bless means, that they may be recovered, if
he see good. Otherwise that they, and we may be prepared to undergo his
Pleasure. And agreeable hereto ought to be the intent of our Prayers, in
reference to the public affairs, and better posture of the World.

And we may take notice the Divine Wisdom lays a very great stress upon this
matter, the preserving of the common order of things; and cannot but observe a
certain inflexiblenes of Providence, herein. And, that it is very little apt to
divert from its wonted course. At which weak minds are apt to take offense. To
wonder, that, against so many prayers and tears, God will let a good man die;
or one whom they love; Or that a Miracle is not wrought to prevent their own
being wronged at any time; Or, that the Earth does not open and swallow up the
person that has done them wrong. Are apt to call for fire from Heaven, upon
them that are otherwise minded, and do otherwise, than they would have them.
But a Judicious person would consider, if it be so highly reasonable that my
desires should be complied with, so extraordinarily, than why not all men's? And
then were the World filled with Prodigies and confusion. The inconveniences
would soon be to all, eqally discernable, and intolerable (as the Heathen Poet
takes notice, Should Jupiter's Ear be over-easy) Yea and the impossibility were
obvious of gratifying all, because of their many counter-desires.

And for the other, it were no less incongruous, if the Supreme Power should so
tie its own hands, and be so astricted to rules and methods, as never to do any
thing extraordinary, upon never so important occasion. How ill could the World
have wanted such an effort of Omnipotency, as the restriction upon the flames
from destroying Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego? Or the Miracles wrought in our
Savior's and the next following Days? Such things are never done; but when
the all-comprehending Wisdom sees it most congruous. And that the cause will
over-recompense the deflection from the common course. If no such thing did
ever fall out, what a Temptation were it to mankind, to introduce into their
belief an unintelligent fate instead of a Deity? Besides that the convincing
testimony were wanting, which we see is so necessary for the confirmation of
any particular revelation from God, which comes not within the compass of
natures discovery (upon which account, also, it is as apparently necessary such
extraordinary works should not be over-frequent, for then they become ordinary,
and useless to that special end) so that here the exertions both of the
ordinate and absolute power God (as some distinguish) have their so
appropriate, and so visibly apt, and congruous uses, that they are discernable
to a very ordinary understanding, how much more to the infinite Wisdom of God!

. XXVII.
Now hereupon we say further, There is the like congruity, upon as valuable
(though not altogether the same) reasons that, in the affairs of Grace, There
be somewhat correspondent. That, ordinarily, it be sought and expected, in the
use of ordinary means. And that, sometimes, its sovereignty show it self in
preventing exertions. And in working so heroically, as none have, before hand,
in the neglect of its ordinary methods, any reason to expect.

And we may fitly add, That where Sovereignty is pleased thus to have its
exercise and demonstrate it self, It is sufficient that there be a general
congruity, that it do so sometimes, as an cedent reason to the doing of some
such extraordinary things, but that there should be a particular leading
congruity or antecedent reason, to invite these extraordinary operations of
grace, to one person more than another, is not necessary. But it is most
congruous, that, herein, it be most arbitrary. Most agreeable to the Supremacy
of God; to the State of Sinful Man, who has infinitely disobliged him, and can
deserve nothing from him; Yea, and even to the nature of the thing. For, where
there is a parity, in any objects of our own choice, there can be no leading
reason to this, rather than that. The most prudent man, that is wont to guide
himself by never so exquisite wisdom, in his daily actions, where there is a
perfect indifferency, between doing this thing or that, is not liable to
censure, that he is not able to give a reason why he did that, not the other.
Wisdom has no exercise in that case.

But that the Blessed God does ordinarily proceed in these affairs, by a steady
rule, and, sometimes, show his liberty of departing from it, is to be resolved
into his infinite wisdom, it being, in it self, most fit, he should do both the
one, and the other; and therefore to him most necessary. Whereupon, the great
Apostle Saint Paul, discoursing upon this subject, does not resolve the matter
into strict justice, nor absolute sovereignty (both which have their place too,
in his proceedings with men, as the sacred writings do abundantly testify) but
we find him in a transport, in the contemplation of the divine wisdom, that,
herein, so eminently shines forth. Romans 11. 33. see to the same purpose, c. 16.
25, 26, 27. And Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 7, with the 8.
O the depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!

. XXVIII.
To sum up all, we conclude it obvious to the apprehension of such as
consider, that it was more congruous the general course of Gods Government,
over man, should be by moral instruments.

And, howsoever it were very unreasonable, to imagine, that God cannot in any
case, extraordinarily oversway the inclinations, and determine the will of such
a creature, in a way agreeable enough to its nature, (tho we particlarly know
not, as we are not concerned to know, or curiously to enqire in what way) And
highly reasonable to admit that in many cases he does.

It is notwithstanding manifest, to any sober reason, that it were very
incongruous, this should be the ordinary course of his conduct toward Mankind,
or the same persons at all times.

That is, that a whole order of intelligent creatures should be moved, only by
inward impulses; That Gods precepts, promises and comminations, whereof their
nature is capable, should be all made impertinencies, through his constant
overpow'ring those that should neglect them; That the faculties, whereby men
are capable of moral Government, should be rendered, to this purpose, useless
and vain; And that they should be tempted to expect, to be constantly managed
as mere machines, that know not their own use.

Nor is it less apprehensible, how incongruous it were also, on the other hand,
to suppose that the exterior frame of Gods Government, should be totally
unaccompanied with an internal vital energie; or exclude the inward motions,
operations, and influences, whereof such a creature is also fitly capable. Or
that God should have barred out himself, from all inward access to the spirits
of men, or commerce with them. That the supreme universal, paternal mind (as an
heathen called it) should have no way for efficacious communications, to his
own offspring, when he pleases; that (so unsutably to sovereignty) he should
have no objects of special favor, or no peculiar ways of expressing it.

It is manifestly congruous that the divine Government, over man, should be (as
it is) mixed or composed of an external frame of laws, with their proper
sanctions, and inforcements, and an internal effusion of power, and vital
influence, correspondent to the several parts of that frame; and which might
animate the whole, and use it, as instrumental, to the begetting of
correspondent impressions on men's spirits.

That this Power be put forth, not (like that of a natural Agent) ad ultimum
(which if we would suppose the Divine Power to be, new Worlds must be springing
up every moment) but gradually, and with an apt contemperation to the subject,
upon which it is designed, to have its operations, and withal, arbitrarily, as
is becoming the Great Agent from whom it proceeds, and to whom it, therefore,
belongs, to measure its exertions, as seems meet unto him. That it be
constantly put forth (tho most gratuitously, especially the disobligation of
the Apostasy being considered) upon all, to that degree, as that they be
enabled to do much good, to which they are not impelled by it. That it be ever
ready (since it is the Power of Grace) to go forth in a further degree than it
had yet done, wheresoever any former issues of it have been duly complied with.
Tho it be so little supposable that Man should hereby have obliged God thereto,
that he has not any way obliged himself; Otherwise, than that he has implied
a readiness, to impart unto Man what shall be necessary to enable him to obey,
so far as, upon the Apostacy, is reqisite to his relief: If he seriously
endeavor to do his own part, by the Power he already has received. Agreeably
to the common saying, homini facienti qod in se est, etc. That, according to
the Royal Liberty, wherewith it works, it go forth, as to some, with that
efficacy, as notwithstanding whatever resistance, yet to overcome, and make
them captives to the authority and love of Christ.

. XXIX.
The universal continued rectitude of all intelligent creatures had, we may be
sure, been willed, with a peremptory, efficacious will if it had been best.

That is, if it had not been less congruous than to keep them, some time (under
the expectation of future confirmation and reward) upon trial of their
fidelity, and in a state wherein it might not be impossible to them to make a
defection. And so it had easily been prevented, that ever there should have
been an apostacy from God, or any sin in the world.

Nor was it either less easy, by a mighty irresistible hand, universally to
expel sin, than prevent it; or more necessary or more to be expected from him.

But if Gods taking no such course, tended to render his Government over the
world more august, and awful, for the present, and the result, and final issue,
of all things more glorious at length, and were consequently, more congruous;
that could not be so willed, as to be effectually procured by him.

For whatsoever obligation strict justice has upon us, that congruity cannot
but have upon him. And whereas it would be concluded, that whatsoever any one
truly wills, they would effect if they could, we admit it for true, and to be
applied in the present case. But add,

That as we rightly esteem that impossible to us, which we cannot justly do, so
is that to him, not only, which he cannot do justly, but which, upon the whole
matter he cannot do, most wisely also. That is, which his infinite wisdom does
not dictate, is most congruous and fit to be done.

Things cohere, and are held together, in the course of his dispensation, by
congruities as by adamantine bands, and cannot be otherwise. That is, comparing
and taking things together, especially the most important. For otherwise, to
have been nicely curious about every minute thing, singly considered, that it
might not possibly have been better (as in the frame of this or that individual
animal or the like) had been needlessly to interrupt the course of Nature, and
therefore, it self, to him an incongruity. And does, in them that expect it,
import more of a trifling disposition, than of true Wisdom.

But To him whose Being is most absolutely Perfect to do that, which, all
things considered, would be simply best, i.e. most becoming him, most
honorable, and God-like, is absolutely necessary. And conseqently, it is to be
attributed to his Infinite Perfection, that, unto him, to do otherwise, is
absolutely impossible.

And if we yet see not all these congruities which, to him, are more than a
Law; it is enough that they are obvious to his own eye, who is the only
competent Judge.

Yet, moreover, it is finally to be considered, that the methods of the Divine
Government, are, besides his, to be exposed to the view, and judgment of other
Intellects than our own, and we expect they should to our own, in another
state. What conception thereof is, already, received and formed in our Minds,
is but an Embryo, no less imperfect than our present state is.

It were very unreasonable to expect, since this World shall continue but a
little while, that all God's managements, and ways of procedure, in ordering
the great affairs of it, should be attempered, and fitted to the judgment, that
shall be made of them in this temporary state, that will so soon be over: And
to the present apprehension and capacity of our (now so muddied and
distempered) Minds. A vast and stable eternity remains, wherein, the whole
Celestial Chorus shall entertain themselves, with the grateful contemplation,
and applause, of his deep Counsels. Such things as now seem perplex, and
intricate to us, will appear most irreprehensibly fair, and comely to angelical
minds, and our own, when we shall be vouchsaf't a place amongst that happy
Community. What discovery God affords of his own glorious Excellencies, and
Perfections is principally intended to recommend him, in that state; wherein
he, and all his ways and works, are to be beheld with everlasting, and most
complacential approbation.

Therefore tho now we should covet the clearest and most satisfying account of
things, that can be had; we are yet to exercise patience, and not precipitate
our judgment of them before the time: As knowing our present conceptions will
differ more, from what they will be hereafter, than those of a Child, from the
maturer thoughts of the wisest man. And that many of our conceits, which we
thought wise, we shall, then, see cause to put away, as childish things*

The disorder (Sir,) of this heap (rather than frame) of thoughts and
discourse, as it cannot be thought more unsuitable to the subject, than suitable
to the Author; and the less displease, by how much it could less be expected to
be otherwise, from him, even in the best circumstances; So it may lay some
claim to your easier pardon, as having been, mostly, huddled up in the
intervals of a troublesome, long Journey. Wherein he was rather willing to take
what opportunity the inconveniences and hurry of it could allow him; Than
neglect any, of using the earliest endeavor to approve himself (as he is your
great admirer)

Most honored Sir, Your most obedient humble Servant, H. W.

Contents.
Sect. I. THe Proposal of the difficulty to be discus't. Disqisition concerning
the words Prescience, or Foreknowledg waved. page 1. Sect. II. Great care to be
taken lest we ascribe to God inconsistencies, under the pretense of ascribing
all Perfections. Eqal care, lest we deny to him any Perfection, upon the first
appearance of its not-agreeing with somewhat else, which we have found it
necessary to ascribe. Our own Minds to be suspected. And endeavored with to
the utmost, before we conclude what is, or is not to be ascribed to God; if we
meet with a difficulty. p. 5. Sect. III. Such Divine Attributes as agree to the
Deity by the Common Suffrage of all considering men, to be distinguished from
those that are only concluded to belong to him upon the subtle reasonings of
but a few. Yet the danger to be carefully avoided, of mistaking any dictate of
Corrupt affection, for a Common notion. p. 11. Sect. IV. His own Word,
therefore, our surest measure, by which we are to judge what belongs to him, and
what not. Which plainly asserts both his Wisdom, and Sincerity. As our own
Minds do also naturally suggest to us. p. 16. Sect. V. It also seems plainly
both to assert and prove his Universal Prescience. Particularly of such things
from which he dehorts. Whence his dehorting is no proof of his not-
foreknowing. p. 24. Sect. VI. These therefore to be reconciled. Which not so
difficult as to reconcile his dehortations from sinful actions, with his
predeterminative concurrence thereto. This undertaking waved as not manageable.
p. 31. Sect. VII. Nor necessary. The principal Arguments that are brought for
it, not concluding. That every thing of positive Being must be from God. That
otherwise he could not foreknow such actions. The former considered. How we are
to satisfy our selves about the latter. p. 34. Sect. VIII. The undertaken
difficulty weighed. Nothing in it of contradiction. Nothing of indecorum. p.
50. Sect. IX. Gods supposed foreknowledg of contingent actions, alters not the
natural goodness or evil of them. p. 54. Sect. X. and XI. How God may be said to
act for any end? His public declarations to men have a more principal end, than
their obedience, and felicity. Which is attained, tho this fail. The
difficulty, therefore, concerning the Divine Wisdom vanishes. p. 57. and 60.
Sect. XII. That, concerning the Sincerity of God considered. That other End,
Man's obedient compliance, attained in great part. p. 64. Sect. XIII. God not
obliged to procure his published Edicts should reach every Individual person.
It Is owing to the wickedness of the World that they generally do not so. p. 67.
Sect. XIV. He shows special favor to some Nations herein without being
injurious to others. Yea expresses much Clemency, and Mercy to all. p. 74.
Sect. XV. Where his gracious Methods succeed not, To be considered he Only
applies himself to them in Common with the rest. p. 78. Sect. XVI. Proposed to
be Enqired; What can be alleged out of his Word, that seems less-consistent
with sincerity, toward them with whom things do not finally issue well? What
fit course could be thought of more consistent therewith? As to the former,
What appearance such alleged Passages can be justly said to have? Propounded
to be (afterward) shown; that the Truth of the thing corresponds to that
appearance. p. 81. Sect. XVII. What his declarations to men amount unto? What
they are, by them, encouraged to expect? p. 87. Sect. XVIII. Expressions of
passionate earnestnes, how to be understood? p. 90 Sect. XIX. The Ends to be
brought about by God's own action only; And those which should be brought to
pass by the intervenient action of Man, to be distinguished. God's Word
represents him not as so willing the salvation of all men, as that it shall be
effected whatsoever course they take. p. 99. Sect. XX. Such a Will as it
represents him to have of man's welfare we ought to believe is in him. The
distinction of his Will of Good Pleasure, and of the Sign. Of his secret Will,
and revealed (as applied to this matter) animadverted on. p. 105. Sect. XXI.
God truly wills the matter of his own Laws, and their welfare for whom he made
them. p. 108. Sect. XXII. Is not made liable to disappointment hereby. Nor can
hence an imperfect will be ascribed to him. page 112. Sect. XXIII. The 2d Head
(proposed Sect. XVI.) discussed; That no other fit course could be taken, that
can be pretended more agreeable to sincerity. Two only to be thought on. To
have pnblisht no written Word. To have overpow'red all by strong hand into
compliance therewith. The former not fit. p. 121. Sect. XXIV. The latter unfit
also. The Congruity of things makes them necessary, with God. The incongruity,
impossible. p. 123. Sect. XXV. Innumerable Congruities obvious to the Divine
Understanding not perceivable by ours. Two things manifestly congruous, to our
apprehension. That the Course of God's Government be, for the most part,
steady, and uniform, That he sometimes vary. p. 128. Sect. XXVI. Both these
many ways represented congruous, in reference to matters within the sphere of
Nature, and Policy. p. 132. Sect. XXVII. Eqally congruous, that matters be in
some degree correspondently managed, within the sphere of Grace. p. 138. Sect.
XXVIII. The Congruity of both these in the matters of Grace more distinctly
expressed. p. 141 Sect. XXIX. The Conclusion. p. 147
FINIS.

