THE MAN OF NEWMARKET. As it was Acted at the Theater Royal.

AUTHOR, The Honorable EDWARD HOWARD Esquire.

Licensed, April 13. 1678. TO. L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar,
1678.

The Induction.
Enter Prologue at one Door; and just as he addresses to speak, enter Shatteril
and Haines at the other. Haines. BY your favor, Mr. Prologue, you must forbear.


Prologue. How forbear, mean you?


Haines. Or, which is much the same, withdraw speechless; there may be
considerations to induce your silence.


Shat. Or our Company may be otherwise emploi'd than to act this Play.


Haines. Observe this, Sir.


[Shews a Paper. Prol. A Prohibition indeed! the King's Bench does issue none of
such Authority here: You may proceed as you please.


[Exit Prologue. Haines. No less than a List of two and twenty Wits, great and
small, caball'd against us?


Shat. O Heavens! and to spite so gentile a Mirth too, as might represent the
acceptable diversion of Newmarket! By the best Muse now extant, I am apt to
believe they would not allow their King neither so much true Comedy as to
provoke his smile, (without their License) durst they own so presumptuous a
Censure.


Haines. That were bold indeed: but no more of that, Robbin.


Shat. It needs not, since some spurious Monopolizers of Wit are too well known.


Haines. How, Monopolizers of Wit? by my best Mimickry, I could not have
thought it before this day.


Shat. Yes, and by their wills would only allow so many Writers by Retail, or
Trade-Poets, though we Actors have paid dearly enough for some of the best of
their Compositions.


Haines. Let me never utter proper sense on the Stage more, if I know what
definition can square with these men of Pudder called Wits; or I suppose it at
least as hard as to describe all the variety of Butter-flies the world abounds
with.


Shat. I care not if I help thee; and next be it known to all (whose Pates are
not over-discompos'd by the extravagant itch of their imaginary Brain-worms)
that there are at this day in being, in spite of ingenuity and some good
manners, a sort of people called Wits and Sub-wits or Critics, and
Sub-criticks; and these again divided into Poets and Sub-poets, etc.


Haines. A series indeed! but to pass the rest, prithee tell me what thou
meanest by a Sub-wit, or Sub-poet.


Shat. Why, both or either of them make but in effect one common Zany to some
Grand Wit-monger.


Haines. And so complete their office by some allowed Jest or Raillery, when
their conceits are so happy as to come by it.


Shat. What else, man? allowing this difference, that the Subpoet whenever he
writes, he must refer his Papers (with some torment) to their inquisition.
After which perhaps, to spite a better Muse, they may give his the applause of
a favored bad one.


Haines. And had but this Poet a little collogu'd with this formidable Cabal,
and next suffered his Wit to be cut, lined, and interlin'd at pleasure, we
might have performed his Play with some security. I could scratch my Pate to
think it was omitted.


Shat. Alas for the Gentleman, he has otherwise satisfied himself, and is
content we wave his Play, and act another.


Haines. Well remembered, and that shall be the Comedy, alias Farce, that has
lately past the test of some notorious Town-wits: Thou know we are perfect
in it already.


Shat. Nothing better.


Haines. Where thou shall see me, Jo. Haines, so mimick French and English
mixtures; thou know my Talent that way. Besides, this fantastical dress will
suit it to a wish.

And when that is over, we'll soon be provided of another. There is a Poet,
shall be nameless, that can scribble such kind of Mungril Intrigues almost as
fast as he can by plain speech tell his five Fingers; whilst others are more
than six months knitting together their French and English Collections.


Shat. French and English mixtures, say thou? the very expression does
irritate my Genius.


Haines. They are pretty slight taking things, thou know, and consequently
our interest.


Shat. That Is confessed; but to lay aside English Wit for a Frenchifi'd
Composition, well, since there is no remedy.


Haines. It Is time we began it.


Shat. I go with thee -- or now I think better, I cannot -- and next behold
with me how many judicious honest Faces are in our eye.


Haines, What of them? give us rather those are called the Savepoets of the
Town.


Shat. Save-poets, Save-pedlers; I say once more in spite of all Gangs, give me
such National complexions as I now behold, Men, that in my Conscience will no
more consent to betray true English Comedy, than they would give up Calice to
the Monsieur, were it in their power. For their sakes, I say peremptorily, our
intended Play shall be acted. And mark me, Jo. Haines, be sure thou play the
Fool most egregiously; I suppose thou have a part to that purpose.


Haines. How, resolute Numps? oblige me to be a Fool, and out of Farce too?


Shat. Yes, finical Mr. Haines, or else I Will stop your share.


Haines. Say thou so? give me thy hand; and know Gent. that to my best power
I am to be this day a Comical Fool.

Enter Prologue. Mr. Prologue, you may return, good Mr. Prologue.

Thus I Will presume to introduce you.

[Takes him by the hand. And next, shift for the Poet and your self as you can.


THE PROLOGUE, Spoke by Mr. CLARKE.
A Bold Induction, and, to tell you true,
'Twas fitted purposely for some of you.
And pity it is no medium men can find,
In being here perpetually unkind.
And thus with Wits and Poets runs the strife,
It Is thought may last at least this Ages life.
Or like the long disputes 'twixt France and Spain,
Besides their Allies, and the wronged Lorain:
Not all know which with better sense contest,
Though most the weaker side allow the best.
And thus they sometimes rail, and sometimes fight,
Until a juster Power compose their might.
Such a Confederate we wish for here;
And though from Nimmegen there none appear,
Yet something to comply you is designed,
A Jest you will say indeed to make you kind.
But it is no matter -- or yet stay a while,
We may have those, to spite your Wit, can smile.
Perhaps, entreated from Newmarket too,
To Sham you here, as there they others do.
Nor is it just to blame our Poet's Art,
If here, without your leave, he gets the Start.
The NAMES.
Passal. A generous person, and ingenious. Mr. Wiltshire. Maldrin. A deserving
Gentleman, and friend to Passal. Mr. Birt. Sr. Ral. Nonsuch. A public
ridiculous pretender, and a Luxuriast. Mr. Powel. Whiffler. A finical Fop. Mr.
Haines. Swiftspur. A Gentleman-Racer. Mr. Clark. Trainsted. Another Gentleman
of Newmarket. M. Goodman. Bowser. Their Friend, and lover of Sport. Mr.
Griffin. Plodwell. A Lawyer, and of a handsome Character. Mr. Perin. Breakbond.
A wild Gentleman, obliging the Sex of Women, and of a generous character,
except in payment of Bonds. Major Moon. Pricknote. An hypocritical Sectary and
Knave interested in Sir Ral. Nonsuch. Mr. Cash.
The Women.
Clevly. A Worthy Lady. Mrs. Corbit. Jocalin. A lover of Pleasure and
Ingenuity. Mrs. Baker. Quickthrift. A Lady of Wit, but proud and covetous,
courted by Plodwell. Mrs. Corey. Luce: A pretended Miss to Sir Ralph Nonsuch.
Mrs. Farlo.
Flora: Sister to Jocalin.

Jockeys in several Habits.

Attendants and Dancers.

The Scene, LONDON.

THE Man of Newmarket.
ACT the First. SCENE the First.
Enter four Jockeys. 1 Jockie. FEllow Horsemen, let us embrace heartily. Thanks
be to Heaven, we have not many hours to spend in this Metropolitan Wilderness
of Houses, called London; an open Air fits our flesh and blood, and sports
together, much better.


2 Jock. Or to be plain, Brother, any ground of England that affords but good
galloping after Water. The Stones of Cities are more ill-natured to the
Constitution and Feet of Horses, than the Souls of the Inhabitants are to one
another. Let me never cross good Runner more, if I do any thing but dream of
four-mile Plains, shapes of Horses, and their pleasant Courses on them, this
tedious night that we have been in London.


3 Jock. There I am with thee heartily. The very ruminating on the last sport
we happily beheld at Salisbury, Winchester, and some other places, did so fill
and quicken my drowsy thoughts with this Match, and the other Match; nay, in my
Conscience, I took my Whip in my Hand, and sometimes in my dream lashed the
Bed-post heartily, as if I had been in hard running; after which, I was so
indisposed, I know not how, this very Morning, that when the Tapster's plump
Wife came up with my mornings draught, I had scarce the heart to kiss her. But
O sweet, sweet, Newmarket! had I met with but half the temptation there, I had
rode a Heat indeed.


1 Jock. And so thou have many a one. There are Girls that will stick at Mark
to purpose.


4 Jock. And not give such marks too, which may be discerned in a sort of
Strayers here by the Notch in the Nose -- but let that pass*


1 Jock. With all my heart: But cannot yet be in so much charity with this
Town, as to wish its good fortune in any thing, except its preservation from
Plague and Fire, it affords such a variety of stops to the pleasure of our
Gentry.

Well, God a mercy our Good King, who guides himself and them to the happy
place of Pleasure called Newmarket.

I would say else (in despite of any Browantled Cockney of 'em all) that this
City might otherwise prejudice the health of the best Prince that ever Subjects
enjoyed.


2 Jock. Right; and in detestation of which, together with all its
Inconveniences, let us cheerfully vow not to be so much of its mode as to wear
Shoes whilst we breath here.


Enter the fifth Jockey. Omnes Jock. Agreed, agreed.


3 Jock. Fellow-Horsemen, what news?


5 Jock. In excellency, I hope Mr. Trainsted is already come to Town.


1 Jock. Not to stay, I hope?


5 Jock. Stay him what can, he has taken up his Lodging purposely at the Sign
of the red Lion in Holbounn, for a Nights rest or so.

The very Candlelight that he employes in this place, shall be but to light
him to make Matches and Betts. His Soul and Being is too much with his Coursers
to be deluded otherwise, I warrant him.


1 Jock. A Patron of our Sport indeed; our King has scarce a Gentleman within
his Dominions, that, next his Royal self, understands Racing so delightfully
well.


5 Jock. Nay, more, in my Conscience, he has a Horse, that shall be nameless,
the sight of whose Gaskins does more please his Eye, than if he beheld the
Thighs of a second Rosemund.


1 Jock. And nothing of our most generous Patron Mr. Swiftspur, notwithstanding
he was expected here last night?


5 Jock. By this time alighted certainly. I met with his Led Horse that came
before him into Drury Lane.


4 Jock. Let me not live, if I did not expect he would rather have galloped
through this Town, than to have afforded three minutes rest here for himself or
Horse.


5 Jock. I Will warrant no stay in him, Boys.

As soon the Sun can shine in all places in England, and except
Newmarket-heath, as he not show his cheerful Spirit there.


1 Jock. But prithee, one thing betwixt our selves; which of those two
Gentlemen, next Racing, does love a Woman best?


5 Jock. Hum! let me see, next Racing, say thou? Why, I believe, to do 'em
right, both equally.


1 Jock. Then, let it go so, they are Gentlemen; two such Sports I confess may
be allowed one after the other with convenience.


2 Jock. What else, Lads? There are times of Heat and Frost, when Horses cannot
exercise, wherein their Masters, as well as we Keepers, may be humored
otherwise: Good Drink and Girls are never out of season with true Coursers;
Is It not so, Boys?


Enter Passal. 1 Jock. Let Us away, and with this mirth find our Patroons.


Passal. Hold a tittle; are Mr. Swiftspur and his friend Trainsted come to Town?


1 Jock. We are just going to 'em, Gentlemen; and if you be a friend to their
manner of Communication, doubt not your welcome.


Pass. I know 'em well, and have seen the sports of Salisbury, Lincoln,
Brackley; heard the discourse of Peggie Bregs, as the most famous she-creature
of her kind then extant.


1 Jock. Very well, Sir; and to direct you better, take your way to
Newmarket-heath, where the Scene of pleasure is more gloriously laid.

By the best Pegasus, it has been too much a fault in Country-gentlemen to
contrive Racing in any other place than where the King takes pleasure most: A
sign that such Squires have not civility enough to serve his recreation.


Pass. Or it may be, have not suitable Confidence to attend his person so
obligingly as they wish it: but it is their way.


Omn. Jock. You Will excuse us, Sir.


[Exeunt Jock. Enter Trainsted. Pass. Here comes Trainsted -- What, in so much
haste?


Trainsted. You must pardon me, Sir, if you were a better friend than you are;
until I have made my dispatches, met with my Associates Swiftspur and the rest,
I have not leisure for a thought.


Pass. Go thy ways then, one of our gentile Horsemen, said to be pretty honest
too, and that is much in his way of dealing.

Enter Maldrin as in a study. What, thinking Maldrin?


Maldrin. Nay prithee give me leave a little.


Pass. Let me not die an honest Gentleman, if I loath any thing, next to
downright Knavery, more than a thinking friend, let the cause be almost what
it will be.


Mald. And must a man have no time for thought then, or suppose business?


Pass. That Is worse; Business, why it is a kind of Heteroclite, by which
(especially as the world is now) men are to be read backward, if not such
sullen Contemplators for their own advantage, that they scarce have soul to
bestow a good deed or thought on any besides themselves.


Mald. Grant it true, Passal, is every man's case therefore alike? Or are there
no particular Ethics from the top to the bottom of Mankind, whereby worth
might hope for some encouragement?


Pass. Does not this smell somewhat rank of reward that thou would be fain
nibling at, in order to some past merit, as is too familiar with many?

By my friendship, Maldrin, I could almost leave thee with such fumes of thy
Brain, until the Vapor dissolves it self.


Mald. But not to be taken notice of, after what I may call, (without
ostentation) worthy service to my Country.


Pass. What, because thou wear'st a black Patch as one mark of thy honorable
Scars? Prithee go into the Market, and cry it up, and thy merit together, with
thy friends, instead of stewed Pruines, or else find some greatness to make
legs to in behalf of us both: What Is thy service, or mine, Is it not duty? Or
can thou pretend to have looked Death further in the face than I? yet when we
have done, are there not men that have served as daringly for eight pence a
day, and perhaps never had it too, yet might as highly pretend as the best of
our actions?


Mald. But virtuous honesty is a handsome something.


Pass. So are knavery and foolery, well managed: either of which is many times
sufficient to outface the best Countenance in an honest man's complexion.


Mald. Well, thou shall in part persuade me.


Pass. Or choose, and in thy unquoth mood join with some separate Congregation,
and pray against Plum-broth at Christmas, in expection of a Gift on their
New-years-day -- A Gentleman and not be cheerful? or that seems so burdened
with virtue, that it must necessarily bow his Soul, or spoil his Mirth? out
upon it!


Mald. Prithee no more, though, to be plain, I was even going to confess that I
was even weary of being just or good much longer.


Pass. To divert thee further yet, when saw thou Sir Ralph Nonsuch?


Mald. But the other night; and as formal as ever.


Pass. And rails, according to his usual manner, against Church and State;
perhaps expects so fond a providence as to be rewarded for it.

Would not this make as honest a man as thou call'st thy self almost hate to
own such a handsome deed, and such an age of Pretensions as we live in?


Mald. Nay, I must grant him, with thee, to be as odd a composition of Fool
and Knave, as any is now extant. A Luxuriast too in all things, I hear.


Pass. And of the worst and oddest sort: to which purpose he associates
sometimes with the most illegal Sanctity, has his Nonconformist to visit him
one hour, a Dicer another, a Doctor or Musician a third: undertakes to
arbitrate Love and Faction: such a medley of man --


Mald. And keeps his Lass, or Girl too, I hear.


Pass. O yes, that in graver seasons plays at Bopeep behind the Arras, in
expectation of her Interlude with due leisure --

We'll find some opportunity to smile at his folly.

In the mean time, I Will tell thee whom I accosted just now; 'twas even that
formidable Squire Whiffler.


Mald. And did he part with thee before he had new combed and set his Face?


Pass. Nor then neither, by his will. O there is not so fine a Fool extant: he
thinks the world and all things in it are not gay enough for his sake.


Mald. And speaks with his Chin affectedly forward, to promote the delivery of
his words, when he would seem most pathetical to a Lady.


Pass. Thou have him right; and after that manner sets one Leg odly before
the other: it is thought the Town and Court will not have done laughing at him
this seven years.


Mald. Is he not proud?


Pass. to a miracle; and as ill-natured where he dares, as the love of Money
and good Clothes can make any body.

He comes.


Enter Whiffler. Whiffler. O my Messieurs, pardon my diversion a while.


[He spruces up himself. Mald. Speaks he French?


Pass. So delicately, as he thinks, that he undertook lately to teach a
Frenchman -- Had we but such a face betwixt us, as thou have, Whiffler!


Whiff. By the best tincture about me, it is complete, I hope, Gallants.


Mald. It Is odds but he paints too.


Pass. As plain as if he did it with a Trowel.


Whiff. Excuse me, Sirs, I have much a better Perriwig than this, such a one
that is composed throughout of Virgin-locks, not an hour elder than fifteen: I
did but kiss the pretty Rogues, and they robbed their Heads to pleasure mine.
And he that has a better to cover with such a trifle, let him produce it if he
can.


Pass. You are hopeful always.


Whiff. Let my Skin be polluted with the great Pox, if a grave Gentlewoman did
not protest with a good conscience, that she thought there were many Ladies
would bestow their Portions on me for one nights embrace; so that it is some
question to me whether I shall ever marry or no.


Mald. A Tale of a Bawd, I dare promise for him.


Whiff. But that is not all, Sirs, I have many hopes besides of being made sole
Heir to one in Fee-simple, to another in Fee-tail, with no small assurance I
may succeed a Baron of my acquaintance; as also some fine Court-words and
Promises, too many for me to remember at once.


Pass. And all this for your taking Physiognomie.


Whiff. Or so well built before, and behind, that no Mankind comes into my
Bed at night; you may conceive my apprehension.


Pass. That Chime of thine, and the wonders thou pretend'st to, do put me in
mind so odly of the Jaw Bone of an Ass!


Whiff. Hang Bones, give me Beams: Is there a Woman in our way that is
delicious enough for my temptation? I protest I am scandalized with so many
unrefin'd Females as the Town abounds with.


Mald. A mixture of Luxury and Folly, beyond president: see, here comes
Breakbond.


Enter Breakbond. Break. Maldrin and Passal, well met, boys --

And how goes Money and fine Women in Town?


Pass. As they usually do, Tom. Some have both, and some neither; and must be
contented as well as they can.


Mald. And can thou not yet take counsel of thy Friends, Breakbond?


Break. As dully as to pay debts, thou mean.

I Will tell you, Gentlemen, I intend never to be able; and that is somewhat less
dishonesty than in many of our acquaintance -- You Will excuse my resolution,
Smock-face --


Whiff. I am obliged by your expression, Sir.


Break. Or I will owe thee, in spite of thy Teeth, Ignorance; could thou
commit such a sin against common sense, as to hope for Money of me? a thing I
never sleep with, where Wine or Women inhabit.


Mald. But to be just, Breakbond, is considerable. --


Breakb. I Will leave it to Divines, and Lawyers, that are paid to that purpose;
however, I find my self to be the most particular Dispensation London enjoys;
the very Women of Pleasure live on me by dozens; I maintain 'em, feast 'em, and
drink up their riot, until it tickle my spirits and theirs together. What I
spend, I borrow chiefly for that purpose: I have the happiness to be indebted
to Fools and Knaves, or such Caterpillars of the Nation as men call Usurers;
perhaps break besides with Haberdashers, Drapers, and Tailers; all venial
Crimes, I Will warrant 'em.


Pass. Though thou art an odd piece of Manhood, there is so much worth in thee
besides, that I cannot tell how to chide thee heartily.


Breakb. Let me suffer more than I deserve, if I do not love naturally a
handsome Woman, whether she be honest or dishonest.


Pass. I believe thee.


Breakb. I mean generously; that is to say, I love to see Creatures of their
excellence gay and fine -- Do hear, Whiffler? -- five Guineys at thy peril
immediately, there is a Beauty of my acquaintance wants it -- Remember how
lately I commended thy handsome Face and Perriwig.


Whiff. Cry you mercy, Sir, you ought to command me.


Breakb. Thou shall have the honor to be my Purse-bearer on such charitable
accounts.

[Gives Whiffler money. Farewell friend -- Whiffler, be sure thou do treat
thy Women of pleasure kindly, lest I have an account of thy Conversation.


Whiff. I warrant you, Sir.


[Exit Breakbond. Mald. A brave fellow, I pity him.


Pass. And no less a Gentleman, bating his extravagance. Behold Madam
Quickthrift, with her demure Lawyer.


Enter Quickthrift, led by Plodwell. Quickth. And was your last Purchase just a
thousand pounds a year?


Plod. I should be sorry, Madam, if it rise not to eleven hundred, as I may
raise my Tenants.


Quickth. I commend thee, thrive well first, and love as I find occasion
afterward -- Cry you mercy, Gentlemen.


Pass. No hurt, Madam, since you vouchsafe us the beholding of your beautiful
form, and this Gentleman, your Servant.


Quickth. He is of the Generoso's of the Inns of Court, and near the Degree of
Barrister, (though perhaps called a Novice in some kind) by such wild ones
there, who burst out like Bucks of the first head, that men scarce hear of
their Families after 'em. He is none of that Complexion, I suppose.


Plod. To serve you, Madam, is entirely my desire: And if I do not find that
treated well in what I have read, I Will burn some Volumes for your sake.


Quickth. A full expression: and next learn, though a Lawyer, to confer your
Estate on my discretion. Your proposal of Jointure may in some measure answer
my expectation: I care not if the world know, that my ingenuity is so
beneficially devoted, as I permit Money to be in great part my loves Idol.


Plod. What you please, Lady --


Quickth. But I had forgot something -- Hark you, Sir, have you not lost your
Maidenhead? Or I Will take it for granted; I know you Inns-of-Court-men lie
sometimes out of your Lodgings.


Plod. An account of my Life before I am here is? --


Quickth. However, I expect five hundred pounds a year more for my supposition;
you will see the Writings drawn?


Plod. Indeed, Madam, -- She Is a quaint one; but no matter.

[aside
Mald. This bit of Love may puzzle a Learned Palate indeed. But the World and
Women are most unintelligible things, Passal.


Pass. And ever were, and will be so.


Whiff. Let me not breath if you have not a smart movement, Lady.


Quickth. How know you that, Sir?


Whiff. Know it, Madam? do I know my own Face?


Quickth. Not so well as you ought, I believe.


Whiff. She commends me already too: how I could consume my self on such a Toy!
-- Let me beg your diversion, Lady; I Will serve you with what kind of Amor you
please, besides choice Fricacies, Gellies, Potato's, Washes, Baths Nocturnal
and Diurnal, or any thing --


Quickth. How now, Cock-sparrow!


Pass. I expected you would soon be weary, Madam.


Quickth. You are in the right, Sir --

Mr. Maldrin, I am glad to see you -- Excuse me if I return as I was led
hither: Your Cosen Nonsuch perhaps shall judge further betwixt us.


[Exit Quickth. and Plod. Enter Clevly and Jocalin. Pass. Ladies, you are well
met.


Clev. Thanks, kind Passal.


Pass. Well, Madam, I could say something more, were it to much purpose.


Clev. I Am sorry to understand your Wit is so deficient.


Pass. But you know my meaning sufficiently, I suppose.


Clev. Did I ever taste your sense otherwise than by your words? What an age do
we live in, Jocalin? a Woman cannot be any thing taking, or but acquainted with
as passable a Gentleman as some one of these, but he thinks himself affronted
if he does not immediately secure her by his address.


Whiff. Not an eye toward me all this while, notwithstanding I have put my
Face and person in so delicate a garb.


Jocal. Let my virginity be not credited, if I do not love the Age exceedingly
in spite of its sin, the mirth is so great.


Clev. And by my wish thou shall have it to thy desire, Jocalin. I confess thy
Genius does deserve the best alacrity of Manhood now living.


Whiff. Not an eye to this Cheek neither?


Clev. Maldrin, me thinks thou seem reserved, or perhaps soberly warmed by
some Amor; I will not undertake to judge. However, I dare thank you for your
last Treat, 'twas handsome.


Pass. She Will not skip me for my friend, I hope.


Mald. Madam, the mirth I have to spare at some seasons, your Sex has it
usually, I confess.


Pass. But is somewhat out of humor with himself and the world at present; I
was chiding him for it.


Jocal. We'll join with you by any means. Give me cheerfulness in flesh and
blood; a man that has always his smiles about him; one that loves pleasure
dressed or naked: such a Rider might man a Woman happily.


Clev. Well, thou art mirth in abundance -- But what figure of Man is that?


[Points at Whiffler. Pass. One, Lady, that you may perceive by his posture, is
most laborious to be taken notice of.


Jocal. Me thinks 'twere sport to bestow his Image on a Signepost.


Whiff. Madam, in this posture of my real self, I covet the diversion of your
Glove.


Mald. An amorous term indeed!


Clev. The attendance on a Ladies Galoches might fit him well; he seems to
affect cleanness:


Pass. As far as Milk and Water, with some other purifications, can extend; and
if he meets not with a Glap, it is odds but he will live as neat as Vice will
allow.


Jocal. Out on the Creature! he is enough to spoil Loves mirth to think on him.


Pass. Here Is Maldrin knows he may be called fool safely: Besides, he thinks it
no disparagement, having been told, that men of weak brain have been sometimes
fortunate on considerable accounts.


Mald. And conceives, Ladies, that if you would bestow a kiss on him, you would
strangely admire the mode of his Lip.


Pass. Thou see thou art commended, Whiffler.


Whiff. By my best outside, I thank you, Sir; you will remember to do it more, I
hope.


Pass. Not to be thy Pimp, would thou?


Whiff. No matter if she be honest, provided she be a fine one. I have such a
wheedling smack, will make her forget what Virtue means.


Pass. Well, for mirth-sake I Will put thee on something.


Clev. When saw you Madam Quickthrift?


Pass. But even now, and hand in hand with her Law-student.


Clev. No wonder in her, since his Purse and Profession is so thriving: not to
take otherwise from the desert of the Gentleman -- You saw not Mr. Swiftspur?


Pass. I expect him, and here he is with his friend Bowser.


Enter Swiftspur, Bowser, and Servant. Swiftsp. Has my Mare Bonny recovered her
lameness?


Servant. Perfectly, Sir, and with your own oil too.


Swiftsp. See that my Horses go before; I Will overtake you somewhere.


[Exit Servant. Enter Trainsted, with a Purse of Gold in his hand. Trainst. I
have been with my Goldsmith, and am well furnished to start hence. I thank
Heaven that I found no Rub in his Conscience at present, or politic necessity
to break, like others, who cashier their Clients expectations and Cash together.

Here sum'd happily --


Swiftspur, Thou art he I would find; if thy Purse be as plump with Goldings
as mine, give me thy hand, and set forward with me.


Swiftsp. What else, thou sportive Intrigue of delight? Alas, I was wanting
thee; our friend Bowser knows I made my delay here chiefly for thy coming. And
mark me, as very friends as we are, I am resolved to beat thy Stable through:
Thou shall not own Mare or Horse, that have not been o'rerun by mine.


Trainst. But in the mean time, with all this crack and our kindness together,
I have made bold to defeat some of your best runners hitherto: Not a few of thy
Goldfinches sing here: And give me but five Guineys, and I Will make it ten if I
do not better thee on our next engagement.


Swiftsp. It Is done, a Bet: you will excuse me, Ladies, if I beg the honor of
your witness?


Trainst. What this contains besides, shall be wager'd on Bonnyface and
Thruster; I care not much, if it be so much every mile they course.


Swiftsp. God-a-mercy for that, Trainsted -- Our application to these Ladies,
and so depart; a smile of theirs will smooth the brow of Fortune wheresoever it
lights.


Pass. What, going out of Town already?


Swiftsp. As Soon as possible; the King's Hawks and Hounds are gone, the Matches
made, and ready to start in my conceit already -- You cannot do better,
Gentlemen, than to bear us company.


Bows. Let Us away then, I shall do nothing else but pine with unpleasant
idleness whilst I stay here.


Pass. You mentioned the Ladies even now.


Swiftsp. 'Slid, I had almost forgot 'em.


Trainst. And so had I.


Bows. I am glad to hear it.


Swiftsp. Now I better remember, I cannot but admire 'em handsomely.


Trainst. Such a sight in the Stand at Newmarket as we lead over, were taking
indeed.


Jocal. Say you so, Sir?


Swiftsp. Beyond measure: And to oblige you the more, you shall go what you
will on the best hand. How were a Woman to be valued that should endear our
pleasures, Trainsted?


Trainst. Thou have a little the start on me there, Swiftspur: but 'twas fair,
I confess.


Jocal. Go on the best hand, call you it? I had as lieve venture on the best
Foot and Leg.


Swiftsp. She means of one of us -- but no matter.


Clev. Let Jocalin alone, she will fit 'em, I warrant her.


Jocal. And for your kindness, I conceive it as odd as the discourse of Racers
when they meet. You may take your way.


Swiftsp. O there is a movement would tempt an hot-Spur indeed! What think you
of New market-heath, Ladies? There Is a Flat would invite your Beams to play on
like Sunshine, where you may see our King exceed (if possible) his most
gracious and constant Serenity.

Nothing to be found there but much mirth, pleasant things, and their business,
which some call happiness.


Clev. A fine place; have you not seen it, Madam?


Jocal. Not as yet.


Clev. Jocalin, thou love riding well; and next, what think thou of these
Gentlemen?


Jocal. Sportive, I perceive.


Clev. And of a handsome humor with it.


Jocal. I could make a Quere too.


Clev. And do it home.


Jocal. Is not one of these friendly Gentlemen something in your thought?

[Pointing at Passal and Maldrin.
Clev. You shall soon perceive -- I hear Sir Ralph Nonsuch is indisposed.


Pass. Or sick with the warm conceit of his prudence; it is not impossible.


Clev. An Arbitrator of Love too.


Jocal. I was thinking to visit him.


Clev. With all my heart.


Pass. Command my hand, Madam.


Clev. By no means, Sir.


Mald. Or mine, Lady.


Clev. Both or neither.


Pass. A paradox of love, and betwixt us two.


Mald. Remember we are friends.


Swiftsp. Let Us accompany a while; I know thou have Betts to make; besides, I
have friends to meet will wager with us both.


Trainst. Then be it so, a small delay will hurt nothing -- She has fire in her
Eye who can but feel its warmth?

[Looking on Jocal.
Swiftsp. What sai'st thou, Trainsted?


Trainst. Nothing but a certain thought of a delicate Courser.


Whiff. Your Usher, Ladies, I waited purposely to be so finically happy: You
may observe my divertising movement always.


Swiftsp. Along, and next to Newmarket.


The end of the First ACT.
ACT the Second.
Enter Sir Ralph Nonsuch, Pricknote, and two Sectaries. Nonsuch. There Is no
being accounted wise, (with some) unless factious, I dare affirm it.


Prickn. You are zealously in the right, Sir.


Nonsuch. Whence I conceive, that to dissent on purpose to be dissatisfied, or
the spinning of trifles dexterously into as many nothings, may shame the
subtlety of Ariadne's thread.


Prickn. Your Worship is most Orthodoxical.


1 Sect. Or, as we hold, factiously pious.


Nonsuch. Or, which is much one, tending to the vexation of Heaven and Earth,
out of private respects.


1 Sect. The very nick of piety with us.


Prickn. And had not Providence kept a close Purse, our party had often
beggered this Nation since Forty one, merely in praying for their own best
advantage.


Nonsuch. You likewise pass by some frailties, as supposing the Smock be in
more repute than the Surplice; thou understand'st me, Pricknote?


Prickn. To a hair, Sir.


2 Sect. Or a certain kind of Comprehension, in spite of Superiors.


Nonsuch. Enter me immediately a Patron, Pricknote.


Prickn. Most devoutly, I assure you --

[Writes in his Book.
Nonsuch. There be great ones in the world that may take notice of somebody, or
men may seem displeased, or factious until they do, I take it.


1 Sect. Or we'll otherwise lend, borrow, trade, give peevishly on purpose.


Nonsuch. Thou may enter it with thy Notes of Providence, Pricknote.


Prickn. Nay more, Sir, I Will tediously pray for it the next cold night by my
farthing Candle.


Nonsuch. It Is judged I had no small intrigue in burning the Pope's Image on
last November.


2 Sect. An extraordinary Dispensation, doubtless.


Nonsuch. I must rejoice it, considering it is rumor'd, I know not how, as if
that Bishop intended to give nine months Assesment to oblige the Commons of
England, who have so long railed at him they know not why.


1 Sect. A Sophistry that might ruin Geneva it self.


2 Sect. It Is meet we conceal it.


Prick. Or else preserve it, with other Annotations, on purpose to belie the
Catholics when we please.


Enter Luce. Nonsuch. Should that Prelate affect it, it is thought there is no
man in Christendom that wears a wiser Nightcap.

Nay, Luce, you are a little too open at this time.


Luce. Did not you say, Sir Knight, I should learn from your politic Converse?


Nonsuch. But there are seasons more wise and vain together, Luce. I would not
have a scandal in the way of my concerns, Luce.


Luce. With what form am I designed to be a Wench?

[Aside.
Prickn. Even pretty Mrs. Luce; I pray permit her, there is not a soft-lipt
Phanatick amongst us but would most devoutly admire her.


Luce. How pious a thing is kissing, even with these! --

[Enter Servant. I obey, Sir; but if I do not make your. Cods-head ache for
this, there is no wit in Woman.


[Exit Luce. Serve. Mr. Plodwel the Lawyer, Sir --


[Exit Servant. Nonsuch. To advise with me in point of Law, I take it: there is
no living in this world if not thought wise always.


Prickn. You Will remember my Exhibition, Sir?


Nonsuch. Thy quarters Wages beforehand, for entering my Name; bid my Steward
pay it.


Prickn. I thank you, Sir; the smiles of Consent that you have bestowed amongst
us --


[Exit Pricknote, and Sectaries. Enter Plodwell, and Quickthrift. Quickth. I
have such a complaint against your Cosen-Student here --


Nonsuch. What is it, Lady?


Quickth. Why, I am very inclinable to believe that he presumes to make his
Address, after he has been such a sinner as to lose first his Virginity.


Nonsuch. A Querie not usually insisted on, Madam; besides, it is something, I
know not how, incident to the Genius of the English, to be variable,
extravagant, and wise interchangeably; a notion of no inconsiderable policy in
some.


Quickth. With pardon, Sir, of your grave conception, I judge it is with men as
it is with Plants: take one that blossoms too soon, 'twill starve a Sloe, or
Hedg-peake.


Plod. No ebb in her humor?

[Aside.
Quickth. To marry a Student, and not be sure of my Chambermaids when I go from
home --


Nonsuch. There are domestic cases, I confess: Nay, I have heard that
Littleton himself held Love by no certain tenure.


Quickth. Besides, I have not heard him say his Prayers.


Plod. Shall I try, Lady?


Nonsuch. 'Twere too much to require of my Kinsman, Madam; And Pater Nosters so
much out of fashion too.


Quickth. Or I Will hear him read a long Chapter to me to morrow morning: which
done, he shall speak French to me some hours afterward.

I have heard that you Lawyers poison that Tongue most abominably.


Plod. A Satyrist too --

But I Will preserve my Temper.

[Aside.
Quickth. Should a Woman espouse Love, and not well understand such a Fee-tail
as this?


Nonsuch. I once knew a man, that undertook to discern precedent copulation by
feeling of the tip of the left Ear; perhaps I might arbitrate the Question that
way.

Hark you, Mr. Plodwel.

[Aside.
Plod. So you will not feel me by the Ear --


Enter Clevly, Jocalin, and Passal. Nonsuch. Is there no pecuniary mulct by
Law, on any of your profession, that shall be couchant with Womenkinde before
they are called to the Bar?


Plod. Not as I ever heard of.

[Aside.
Nonsuch. Then whisper her in the Ear, and tell her, it is my sense that all is
well -- Madam Clevly, with others.

Perhaps some amorous emergencie to be determined by me --

I Will attend their leisure.

[Plod. whispers Quickth.
Clev. Where left you Maldrin, Sir?


Pass. I suppose withdrawn upon some concerns. --


Clev. Or melancholy perhaps, I guess the cause.


Pass. Indeed, Lady.


Clev. His presence was ill omitted.


Pass. I understand you not, Madam.


Clev. You may perhaps, or there are Almanack-makers to enquire of. --

How is it, Jocalin? thou art cheerful still.


Jocal. So far, that no Dido of our Sex shall teach me to whine for any
Catastrophe that Cupid can bestow.


Clev. But we forget Madam Quickthrift, with her Servant.


Quickth. A studious Beetle-brow'd-hing, Ladies, that cannot conster my Amor
in order to Money, Manners, and Wit.


Clev. I am sorry for his sake.


Plod. You shall not, Lady.


Jocal. Fie on these Riddles of Loves making: Give me a passion as gay as
Gossamors, that when I am indisposed, my Love may raise my Comedy, and take me
that way too.


Nonsuch. Ladies, you are welcome -- If you have any thing of Love to decide,
command Sir Ralph Nonsuch.


Quickth. A mere question betwixt this Gentleman and my self; but ended
already, I know not how.


Pass. I must not think so.


Nonsuch. Ladies, you may command my house:

Of all vanities, I most dispense with the softest.


Clev. And have your Amor, I guess too, preserving the respects of your
State-faction.


Jocal. Or a politic capacity bestowed on Venus: is it not so, Sir Ralph?


Nonsuch. I confess, Lady, that there may be (formally taken) a juggling of
Interest and Pleasure together in some, whereby they may seem a deceptio visus
to the Public; a very ordinary Stateintrigue, I take it.


Pass. No more of your kissing policy, Knight, or annex it to your discussions
somewhere.


Jocal. Me thinks we are not brisk enough, or some body's wanting. -- What say
you, Quickthrift?


Quickth. So merry, Madam, that for your recreation you shall see my Lawyer
manage his great Horse.


Jocal. That were pleasant.


Clev. By no means, Lady; 'twill shame some of the Judges, who can scarce walk
their Steeds handsomely to Westminster.


Enter Breakbond and Whiffler. Jocal. Not he come yet? it allays my mirth a
little.


Breakb. These Ladies are too fine, notwithstanding thy Complexion, Whiffler.


Whiff. 'Twere a disparagement to my Physiognomy to think so.


Breakb. For five pound more, I Will commend thy face to a handsome Wench, and
that is enough for thee.


Whiff. It Is impossible, Sir.


Breakb. I Will make her so, to any man that loves kindly: and now stand at some
distance, Whiffler, and covertly too, till I have done.


Whiff. If I must not show my face, I must not, and that is some unkindness.


Breakb. Ladies, I am yours; Knight and Lawyer, I salute you: But Knight, take
a care of too particular and clandestine frailty, it is enough to ruin a
Republic of Females.


Nonsuch. Are you my Instructor, Sir?


Breakb. Yes, or any man's that understands not how to admire woman handsomely,
or in that abundance that nature delights. Shall a Pagan worship a whole
Firmament of Stars at once, and a man generously principled not far more devote
himself to every luster in Womankinde?


Nonsuch. A Libertine indeed -- You want no money, Sir?


Breakb. Yes, to spend, or give it.


Jocal. To some of our Sex, I suppose.


Breakb. I confess, Madam, they have the first of my commiserations in all
kinds: If I find a man uses his Wife scurvily, or beats her, I beat him as
well as I can for it: If a Wench be used too coursly by her Friend, I give him a
cut with my Sword for her sake. There Is more conscience in enjoying Woman
always, than in payment of Debts, or let me not be called Breakbond.


Clev. I did not expect so handsome a Raillerie.


Jocal. An obligation to all our Sex at once.


Pass. There Is none that writes She, but may in part command him.


Quickth. But has little to say for old Women, I conceive?


Breakb. But I have, Lady; if they do but Mump upon me kindly, I could find in
my heart to Kiss 'em heartily:

At least, I wish most devoutly that Nature could afford some restorative to
render such young and gay ten times over.


Clev. Why this is generous indeed!


Pass. I knew he would make it out.


Breakb. Passal, I am thy friend -- And once more, Knight, take a care of too
formal or single vanity; every Gentleman that can drink handsomely may instruct
thee better.


Nonsuch. An irruption I expected not.


Whiff. You Will remember your promise, Sir?


[Luce peeps out. Pass. I do, and mark these Doors.


Whiff. Shall I not show my rosy Cheeks to the Ladies first?


Pass. By no means, thou see 'em busy.


Whiff. Have I discerned her?

[Luce peeps again. Thou pretty rogue of Venery.

[Goes to the Door.
Nonsuch. So open again, Luce?

[At the Door.
Luce. I am gone, Sir.


Whiff. Have found my Cheek again, thou pretty Bo-peep thou?


[Luce appears at another Door. Luce. Dispatch, I beseech you.


Whiff. Hark thee: about half an hour hence --

[In her ear.
Luce. Enough, I Will not fail you.


Nonsuch. I find I am now secured.

[Aside.
Whiff. I have succeeded most propitiously, Sir.

[To Passal.
Pass. Away then.


Quickth. No matter, Sir Ralph, though his mirth be bold, it is passable.


Breakb. There shall nothing live that has so much of Woman as can make out
Hermophrodite, that I could not oblige cheerfully: And hark you, Lawyer, thy
looks speak thee civil.


Plod. I should hate my face else.


Breakb. Let me oblige thee to take no Fee of Woman-client that is handsome, or
amorous, for my sake: If thou do, may Rats consume thy Writings.


Plod. You are a kind Sir.


Breakb. If at any time thou suest me, do what thou can I Will never pay thee.


Plod. Threaten the Law?


Breakb. When my Grandmother dies, I Will make thee my Trustee to pay my
Obligations to Women: For Men, I have used 'em to good words, and they expect
no more; wherefore, love Females in the first place, follow thy Vocation in the
next; and whenthou come to be a Judge, remember thou were frankly advised by
Tom Breakbond.


Plod. You have, Sir.


Breakb. And one thing more -- Thou shall join in a Petition with me, That all
Women not superannuated, and such as have not more Money than Kindness, may be
discharged of their debts; that they may be troubled with no other Obligation
than their love to men.


Pass. And may I not add in thy behalf, That such of that Sex as are
indispensably old, yet, in their precedent time, have been celebrated by humane
affection, should likewise have their release, according to this invention of
thine.


Breakb. I embrace it heartily: the youthful part of my memory might otherwise
have ingratefully forgot it.


Plod. And what shall such do that are able to pay, and will not?


Breakb. Provided they love much, let 'em disburse little; or only now and
then to a Tire-woman, or Chambermaid, things assistant to their Business,
Complexion, and Feature.


Plod. Suppose one woman be indebted to another, what would you then determine?


Pass. Well urged In Faith, Student, thou't go near to pose him there.


Breakb. Let me see -- I have it, and handsomely too: Why, in that case, let
her that is fairest and most beloved of men, in commiseration forgive the other.


Clev. An arbitrament of Love, you will end it Knight?


Pass. It Is what he desires.


Nonsuch. Why, look you, Ladies and Gentlemen, there may be a vanity in all
Comprehensions; as he that eats one poach'd egg, may possibly long for more;
there are several incitements, I take it; you will excuse me a space --


[Exit Nonsuch. Pass. A Nonsuch indeed!

What are these?


[Enter two or three Jockies. 1 Jock. Men that are so unhappy, as to have
almost lost our selves.


2 Jock. Or what is worse, our best Companions and Patroons: if ever you had
compassion of men expert in the use of Whip and Spur, assist our condition.


Pass. You want no charity, do you?


1 Jock. Not so much as the abundance of Love which we apprehend here: There
were more of us in number, besides two of the best gentile Jockies that ever
England bred. They must be ensnared with the pleasures of the Tavern,
Gaming-houses, or worse places: There Is nothing but Ginns and Gilts here, or a
sort of Town-sluts that will out-lie Horsecoursers.


Pass. And Jockies together, it may be: That Providence should dispense so
useful a creature as a Horse, and yet permit man to tell so many abominable
falsehoods in respect of its use! What say thou, Breakbond?


Breakb. They wrong not Women, I hope?


Pass. No, by my troth, they have done a many too much right.


Breakb. O! I remember 'em, Servants to our friends and good fellows:

I dare pass my word for 'em, they will cozen any other way, rather than ride
booty.


Pass. That Is no usual commendation in their profession.


1 Jock. For which, I Will not presume to displease your Worship so far, as to
put you in mind of ten shillings yet unpaid me ever since the last Race at
Bansted.


Breakb. Thou may freely: I suppose I gave thee good words for thy own, did I
not?


1 Jock. As any Gentleman living, that pays money no other way.


2 Jock. Nay, thou't forget our design.


1 Jock. I warrant thee -- Might I beg a short favor at your hands, Mr.
Breakbond?


Breakb. Speak it.


1 Jock. We conceive you have some interest with Ladies in this Town.


Breakb. And ever shall, I hope: but what is thy desire?


1 Jock. To request you, Sir, that by any means you would hinder our Chiefs,
Mr. Swiftspur and Mr. Trainsted from Coping with any such delights; if they do,
they will set down their Runners, and turn us off immediately.


2 Jock. Here Is a Lady or two in our eye, I think may deserve our apprehension.


Breakb. Now I perceive you are Knaves indeed in blue Caps: I dissuade Love? --


1 Jock. Good Sir, have patience: Or were it not all one if any of 'em had a
fair Match for their Maidenheads at Newmarket?

There would be no sport hindered that way.


Breakb. The very conceit has reconciled me, Lads; I only want some Crowns to
express it: perhaps the Stars above may decree something.


1 Jock. In the mean time could we see these Commanders of ours?


Breakb. I expect 'em each minute, let that comfort you -- Your excuse, Ladies,
and the rest.


Jocal. More of the men of Newmarket, or you would attend your Masters here.


1 Jock. With leave, Lady.


Breakb. As sure as Heaven smiles on your faces, this day must end with mirth
that will please every where.


Jocal. I hope we shall find room for it.


Enter Maldrin. Clev. Maldrin, we wanted thee here: Sir Ralph Nonsuch has made
such amorous decisions, that Jocalin, Quickthrift, and my self, have smiled
most abominably at it:

I am sorry thou did not share mirth with us.


Mald. You have obliged mine already, Madam -- How far'st, Breakbond?


Breakb. As well as Woman can make me.


Mald. Thou art happy then.


Breakb. And will be, that way, in spite of Destiny.


[Exit Breakb. Clev. But your friend Passal and I wanted you here.


Pass. Excuse me, Lady.


Clev. I cannot, Maldrin and you join hands.


Mald. It Is strange, but it is her will, Passal.


Pass. I obey it.


Clev. How like you one another Faces now?


Pass. Have never a Baby in thy eye extraordinary, Maldrin? or do see one in
mine?


Mald. I know not.


Clev. No matter, I Will not trouble Sir Ralph Nonsuch to determine this affair,
another time may do it.


Enter Swiftspur, Trainsted, and Bowser. Mald. She has amazed us both.


Jocal. Now they are come; a little of your patience, Lady.


Swiftsp. Thou art such another man of expedition, that there is no kind
reason that accompanies thy diligence, notwithstanding our engagements to the
Ladies here: Bowser could almost chide thee with me.


Bows. Rather let me commend thee, Trainsted; thou love Sports with thy whole
soul, may Heaven delight thee for it: what are such She-objects, to a man that
can with more gayness behold his brown Mares Buttocks, than the finest of their
Concealments?


Trainst. Thou say right, Bowser; besides, having been almost dazzl'd with
such a taking temptation, there is no reason to hazard it again.

See who waits our remove.


1 Jock. With such a desire to be jogging, that if we stay here this night, it
shall be with so much spite to our ease, that we'll sleep in our Boots.


2 Jock. And what is worse, the best spirit of Liquor in Town has no power on
our mirth; I know not whether or no we may be too melancholy to wench, if you
continue thus.


Trainst. God-a-mercy Will and Tom; come, we'll soon to horse; I Will not desert
any of our society.


Swiftsp. What if thou go before, Trainsted?


Trainst. Did thou not tell me of my engagement, and being civil, just now?

In what haste art thou altered! -- See who moves toward us, I cannot withdraw
rudely from such an Object; Madam, the obligement of your hand before our
departure.


Jocal. To save you that trouble, I Will take leave first:

Here are other Ladies that may deserve your civilities.


[Offers to go. Swiftsp. By no means, Madam; thy rash demeanor reflects too
much on us both.


Trainst. Rather than so, Lady, I Will spend my Spring and October here, though
it take from my usual converse in other places.


Jocal. A kind compliance, I confess.


Swiftsp. Nothing at all, Madam, to what I dare assure you: besides, this
friend of mine may have a more particular occasion.

The truth is, he feeds and sets his Runners much by his own care, it is well
known to Bowser and my self: for which reason you may dispense if you please.


Bows. How! I abhor this Placket-wheedling: Let me not live, Lady, if it be
truth well intended; rather dispatch somebody else if you think fit. Trainsted,
if thou let'st this Go-by pass, may thou never more win Match.


Jocal. I have considered; by your favor, Mr. Trainsted, a word with you, Sir.


Trainst. Your pleasure, Madam?


Jocal. I suppose you have your Purse of Gold about you?


Trainst. At your service, if it contained Millions.


Jocal. You dare trust me with it?


Trainst. Trust you, Madam! a mere favor that you will receive it; I have credit
enough, I hope, to discharge my Wagers otherwise, if it must be so.


[Delivers his Purse. Jocal. You Will find me faithful.


Trainst. You have given me assurance.


Jocal. You Will not remove now, and tell your friends, in case your ready money
fail, I keep your stakes.


Trainst. A Sweep-stakes indeed!


Swiftsp. A mere neglect of thee, I knew 'twould come to this; that so ready a
Brain as thine could not perceive it!


Trainst. I may perhaps conster it otherwise: Women have many wiles, or I find
her too handsome to chide with: 'twas five hundred Guineys, and should I
forfeit for want of depositing, with some ill natured Betters? but no matter --
Your Servant, Lady.


Jocal. You Will not be gone to night?


Trainst. If possible; what shall I do? the very cast of her Eye will detain me
in spite of my beloved Racing: At present I Will remove however -- Come along,
Horsemen, you will find my spleen move cheerfully in spite of fate.


[Exit Trainsted and Jockies. Bows. I Will follow him.


Swiftsp. Not yet, Bowser, we'll rather overtake him on the Road.


Bows. I have enough of this sort of Game, I thank you.


Swiftsp. Let me persuade thee; I know there are some here may take it amiss.


Jocal. I am all Air, and could leap upwards to think how I have laid my
design.


Clev. What, surpised, Jocalin?


Jocal. A movement I remembered of my last dance.


Swiftsp. Ladies, I beg your pardon, I withdrew a little with this Gentleman,
and have showed him such a Jennet of mine the best of your Sex might borrow
Thighs on, it is such a Let-down creature.


Jocal. Your Horse is much beholden to you.


Swiftsp. Not so, Lady; he that loves his Horse generously, will love Woman in
abundance -- Is It not so, Bowser?


Jocal. A free humor.


Bows. Let Us proceed to our Field-sports first, stretch our Limbs well as the
Morning breaks, and the Hounds run heartily: for Woman, let flesh and blood
find her as occasion serves: There Is such delays in this Town, they sicken
Recreation.


Clev. A Huntsman to purpose.


Swiftsp. But to do what thou know on with one of these, Bowser, were more
than a chase with Diana and her Hounds together.


Clev. What lusty things these men of pleasure are!


Enter Quickthrift, Plodwell and Nonsuch. Breakbond at another Door. Quickth.
They have sure amused my Lawyer.


Plod. I intend to make no such Bencher, Lady.


Swiftsp. I am once more thine, Passal, with thy friends -- I had almost forgot
thee, Breakbond; if thou come to our next Race, borrow money there if thou
can.


Breakb. Or I Will out-bet you all there; it is in my power to stake a fair one at
every Miles end, win her who can.


Swiftsp. A wager above all; thou shall ride my best Galloper to bid thee
welcome.


Clev. This is mirth indeed, Jocalin.


Jocal. I hope so -- What say you, Sir Ralph?


Nonsuch. Why, it is to be understood, Ladies, that if pleasure be duly
appropriated, it may conduce something.


Pass. Or a politic capacity for a Girl in private; is it not so, Knight?


Mald. You have touched too near the Quick there.


Clev. Is there no Music here?


Nonsuch. My house affords it, Lady; I permit a sober affectation of pleasures
in all kinds.


Pass. And now and then a Pricknote besides, if I mistake not.


Swiftsp. I Will join my steps here.

[To Jocalin.
Bows. Such a measure as had turns and doubles like a hunted Hare I should like
heartily.


Nonsuch. You Will excuse me, Ladies; though I be full of pleasure in conceits,
my great Toe is somewhat indisposed.


[Sits down. Clev. Or in your Milk-diet perhaps, as it is usual with some heavy
Politicians to refresh that way.


Swiftsp. Start apace, Music --


[The Dance is ended. Clev. Me thought Mr. Plodwel moved towardly.


Quickth. I confess, with somewhat more grace than the Grave of the Inns of
Court move round their Fire at Christmas.


Swiftsp. Who leads, Gentlemen?


Pass. My hand to serve you.


Mald. Or mine.


Clev. Both, if you please.


Pass. More Riddles yet!


Breakb. Away with this Ceremony, a thing in women I least forgive.


Plod. Then I Will conduct you.


[Takes Quickthrift by the hand. Quickth. So confident of the sudden!


Plod. Do not I tread tolerably? -- Your judgment, Ladies?


Breakb. God-a-mercy Lawyer, I begin to love thee.


Plod. Me thinks I quicken strangely; shall we have the other dance?


Quickth. Is It possible?


Swiftsp. In my Conscience he is a good Horseman too; and that is much for a
Student.


Clev. Enough at this time -- Our thanks, Knight.


Plod. By your leave, Ladies.


Plodwel leads: And so ends the Second ACT.
ACT the Third.
Enter Maldrin, leading of Glevly. Clev. WHere left you Passal?


Mald. I know not well, Lady.


Clev. Your Address is not so welcome then.


Mald. Call it my fault, Madam.


Clev. That Is something handsome, I confess, a single and solitary Courtship;
why every Chambermaid has it on most Holydays: I must not think on it.


Mald. That I should mingle Love with my other concerns.


Clev. Not that I Would have you fall below your merit; I know you have been a
Soldier, and deserve a handsome recompense, though men of your Complexion are
not always fortunate to find it, as some may read your Stars.


Mald. Your smiles may make them more propitious, with pardon, Madam.


Enter Passal. Pass. How is it, Lady? -- Me thinks thou art not cheerful, friend.


Mald. Never better, I know not well for what cause.


Pass. Why then, it is as it should be, is it not, Frank?


Mald. I hope so.


Clev. Or I have an Intrigue shall oblige you both.


Pass. Again reverting?


Clev. The very same -- There Is no such odness in you both, or either, but I
may admit your Rivaldry.


Mald. She has thrown me back again.


Clev. A thing very familiar with Ladies that have but two Servants -- Or
suppose I think a way to increase the merit of one in the worth of both, would
this pose you?


Pass. Next to the Gat with nine Lives, a double soul'd Woman! you have two
Hands, two Feet, no other Member of Love that must be doubly supplied.


Clev. So you will join Honor to it, our Senses cannot differ much.


Mald. Speak it, Lady.


Clev. Take it in a word then: It Is which of you two shall impose the most
worthy action on me.


Pass. To be commanded by us!


Clev. Most obediently: There Is nothing more common than for Women to command
Men; every small Address has it: wherefore I Will invert it to oblige more fully.


Mald. A Paradox I have not met with.


Clev. You have time to study it.


[Exit Clevly. Mald. To impose on her, it is an odd Devoir, and yet me thinks
looks generous.


Pass. Abating that expression, I should have sworn that thou and I should have
come the Caster with her by turns.


Mald. She Is fair, and no less worthy.


Pass. But how to pleasure such fair and worthy Flesh and Blood, and not the
direct way of Nature, is such a Mizmaze to Manhood --


Mald. It Is certain she loves one of us.


Pass. And could we not rather wish she was enamored of us both, unless either
of us understood her better?

To deliver such Problems of Love as make Sense itch to resolve em, and yet
cannot, 'twas not so kind in her Ladyship, I conceive.


Mald. I cannot help it.


Pass. Suppose one of us bid her adieu; were it not as well? prithee tell me;
thou know I love thee.


Mald. I grant it; but In Faith I cannot do so much for your sake.


Pass. Would thou could then.

[Aside. Or no matter, we are friends, and we'll love together, and heartily.


Mald. Let Us walk and think.


Pass. As cheerfully as possible.


Mald. Thy Hand to assure me.


[Exeunt. Enter Luce and Whiffler. Luce. No eye near us?


[Looks about. Whiff. None but mine, and that does make such a pretty Infant in
thine. Prithee try whether thou can see it and our selves together in my
Looking-glass.

[Offers his Glass, and sings. The Song.
BY the Lilies of thy Cheeks, and the Roses of mine,
By every soft dimple,
And every pretty twinkle
That conveys my Beauty to thine;
Let me decoy thee as my Duck,
And next teach thee to give suck,
Or my face I behold wants luck.
2.
See how my wanton-eye-babes invite thee:
Or what tickles above measure,
Take me sprucely together,
My fineness I Will yield to delight thee.
And should thou clip more refine
Than French or English when they twine,
My Delicass thou't prove sublime.

Luce. But I have to do with such a cautious sinner, and one that studies to
make me wise.


Whiff. Hang him, course Looby, he has no countenance in his face that
intimates the agility of a neat Wencher.

Thou shall know me in part by this extraordinary kiss.


Luce. You take me to be a Wench, I perceive -- But were you not a handsome
Man, and one that has money --


Whiff. Here Is this Ring, I have half the Exchange in my head besides for thee.


Luce. God Lord! and what a fine man are you?


Whiff. Anon I Will make thy Limbs so supple in my Bath, thou can not imagine:
It shall be of white Bread and Milk, or Curds and Cream, take which thou like.


Enter Pricknote. Luce. But see, you must needs withdraw, Sir -- Here Is one of
Sir Ralph Nonsuch his Rabbet-catchers: There Is scarce a Ferret sees further
into a Coney-hole.


Whiff. Thou know where to meet; I am gone, Luce.


Luce. Hold a little, your Purse of Guineys first.

[Gives his Purse. Away now.

[Exit Whiffler. Who would not trust Heaven somewhat to cozen Fools and Knaves?


Prickn. Mrs. Luce here, I should not have thought it. Most happily met, sweet
Mrs. Luce.


Luce. Thanks, kind Pricknote.


Prickn. I could say something more, gentle Mrs. Luce, --


Luce. Sir Ralph Nonsuch his Intelligencer, but no matter.


Prickn. Thou art fair indeed, Mrs. Luce; I could almost compose a Canticle,
and dedicate it to thee; so much the breath of my mouth does warm my words.


Luce. Ha, ha, ha! an amor of his toward too!


Prickn. Or, thou art more than my Rebecca unto me Isaac.


Luce. A married Publican, it seems!


Prickn. Thy Knight is most candid, I confess; no craneys of suspicion to be
found on his Brow; thou may conceive me.


Luce. And conceive by thee, in a Temporal sense: Is It not so, Sneak-face?


Prickn. Surely I might do much for your sake.


Luce. Or get a scurvy Christian suitable to the method of your own baptizing:
well, you are a Pricknote indeed; and should Sir Ralph know it --


Prickn. Good honey Mrs.


Luce. And what a complete Sister of your Brotherhood you might enter me in
your Note-book.


Prickn. For my Exhibition-sake spare me, together with my Wife and six
Children, that most devoutly pray for it.


Luce. Well, I Will excuse you for once, so you tell my tale to the Knight, and
your own effectually: I know you Phanaticks can lie of course.


Prickn. More than kind Mrs. I thank you.


Luce. What a world of Love and Zeal is this? --


[Exeunt. Enter Sir Ralph Nonsuch, and Plodwel. Nonsuch. I confess, Cosen
Plodwel, that your deportment is acceptable enough; but you may yet want
instruction: for, look you, Sir, it is a certain dexterity of the Age we live
in, to be serious and vain together, I can testify it.


Plod. Indeed, Sir Kinsman!


Nonsuch. Take it in pleasure and interest, what is it but a complicating
together of so many nothings with as many somethings?


Plod. And you have proved it, Knight?


Nonsuch. I may perhaps, and hopefully too: But to come nearer your purpose, I
find the Lady of your Address has some scruples slip from her I know not how:
She Is beautiful, and that implies a handsome something; or at worst, joined to
a more tolerable insignificacy, the very pleasure that some may take, even of
our Sex, so they be held improper and useful together, either to Church or
State.


Plod. The Politics of a Nothing indeed!


Nonsuch. It Is true, she hinted something of Money and Prayers, but I would not
have you start at her devotion therefore. Perhaps she may be of all, or of no
Religion, as is common with some beautiful and parsimonious Ladies: There Is an
excess, or intricate delight, in some sense allowable to most Complexions.


Plod. But I honor Government and Law, remember that, Sir.


Nonsuch. So do most, provided they get by either; whence I conceive proceeds
the very sober vanity of the Factious: There Is no courting Mankind to be
honest, now a days, without their particular emoluments; your Law cannot do it
otherwise.


Plod. The greater shame to the perverse Genius of our Nation. Can there be a
more high inducement than to be legally good, or to submit to the divine
perfection of Reason formed into Law? Believe me, Sir, it shall guide my civil
being. Nay, from it too I Will own my Love, I Will bed no such irregularity in
Nature that does not grant it is due humanity with mine, and thence deduce my
future happiness.


Nonsuch. But thou art so inclined to mistake, Plodwel! I told thee there would
be ever delicious Intrigues both legal and illegal, or not improperly mixed, if
formally apprehended.


Plod. A F^^ of some gravity.


Prickn. Mrs. Luce, Sir --


[Enter Pricknote in haste. Nonsuch. How, Pricknote!


Prickn. Was going, or might have gone.


Nonsuch. Gone, say thou?


Pricknote. Even perhaps astray, had she not returned with me.


Nonsuch. I Will double thy Exhibition for that, immediately, Pricknote --

Nay, Luce, the same misdemeanour again, Luce?


[Luce peeps. Plod. Have I found you, Knight?

[Aside.
Luce. Is not this Company serious enough, Sir? But I can submit.


[Enter Luce. Nonsuch. I know thou can.


Luce. You Will not forget my Velvet-gown.


Nonsuch. It Is bespoke already -- A way, and see dinner be provided.

I come immediately.

[Exit Luce. Pricknote, thou shall eat with us, I know thou art often hungry.


Prickn. I thank you, Sir.


Nonsuch. A friend of mine that had some serious business with me.


Plod. Some of your serious vanity, I suppose.


Nonsuch. You Will excuse my dispatch.


[Exit Nons. and Prickn. Plod. A sudden affair doubtless -- But enough of your
counsel, Knight. --

She Is here.


Enter Quickthrift. Quickth. Me thinks he alters something -- You have heard I
am proud, Sir.


Plod. And covetous too; but as you please.


Quickth. Grant me both, or such a Lady that values her profit by her pleasure.
One that knows how to bestow four of your best Terms on a Gown or Coach; or
when the Town affords a choice Gem, or Necklace, send you and your Clerk
immediately to buy it for my use: It Is enough if your Estate and Vocation, with
my own best frugality, be subservient to an ingenious expense; a thing not so
frequent with very deep Penmen.


Plod. You may be observed in all -- As I conceive, Madam.


Quickth. Or should it sour the Complexion of a new-fledg'd Advocate, that
perhaps scarce knows how to wear the Wings of his Gown neatly on his shoulders
-- Am I not right, Sir?


Plod. Most exceedingly -- That an honorable Profession should be thought to
derogate from the esteem of a Gentleman -- But I am prepared.


Quickth. And be so, I suppose your Scribe has drawn the Writings.


Plod. He Is something slow, I confess, Lady.


Quickth. No matter, there are men in the world that have as good Feet and Legs
as most of your sedentary Complexion.


Plod. Take who you please, or can.


Quickth. Indeed Sir, and thus Cockt, and Capt too!


Plod. I own no movement but what suits a Gentleman: Nay more, I Will throw off
all besides to make me yours, or any other you shall judge most worthy of your
choice: and this perhaps your own way too.


Quickth. Why, now you rise indeed! proceed.


Plod. It Is warmly in my Brain -- You Will give me leave to take my Study for a
while?


[Exit Plod. Enter Clevly. Quickth. There Is more than I expected in him.


Clev. Mr. Plodwel gone already?


Quickth. In some haste, I know not well the cause.


Clev. You are not too severe, I hope?


Quickth. When I know his deserts better, your Ladyship may have an account. In
mean time me thinks there is more than one Genius meet in him.


Clev. That is to say, the Lawyer and the Gentleman, if I take him right; a
brisker motive to your Love, Madam, since these Complexions are not always
united.


Quickth. I must think better -- Your excuse, Lady.


Clev. I Will withdraw with you.


[Exeunt Quickth. and Clev. Enter Jockeys at several Doors. 3 Jock. And are we
met once more here? Let Us clap our Whips for joy:

[They lash Whips. Or what if we lashed our selves a little, for losing one
another I know not how?


2 Jock. Well thought on, Jack; I care not much if we begin with thy Back,
Rowland: we missed thee about Whetstone's-park. It Is odds but thou did slip
into a faulty corner there. But no matter, anon the Jug shall go round on
Horseback, and so excuse our neglects.


1 Jock. If I back my Galloper again, I Will give him an extraordinary lash for
the Oats he has so lazily devoured in this Cockneydominion.


4 Jock. I commend thee, Tom; and for my Steed, he begins to look sowrely on me
in the Stable; I apprehend he has a growing Head, I find it already in that
lubberly slave the Hostler, who takes no more care of him than a Jailer does of
his Prisoner -- There will be money wanted amongst us, I suppose.


3 Jock. But we have a Swiftspur and Trainsted that will discharge all: One or
other of them never yet failed us to go on the best runner; or what is better,
so much to nothing unless they were winners.


5 Jock. Well remembered, Fellow-horsemen; and so in case of the worst, we'll
pay 'em again out of their own winnings.


4 Jock. Nothing better: well, this Racing is a most noble sort of Recreation,
since it undoes Gentlemen to raise Grooms, blessing on their Hearts for it.


1 Jock. Here comes Bowser, one of sportive expedition indeed.

Enter Bowser. And how go matters, Sir?


Bows. Not so cheerfully as I could wish, Tom. I blush to think what a Truant I
have been to Time; besides, my Purse begins to be thin, and indisposed too.


1 Jock. If I did not bode it, hang me.


5 Jock. And at such a time too, when our Horses and we are like to pinch for
want of due Provender.


Bows. There Is no subsisting for a kind Complexion here; what between expense,
lending, with such other gratuities to wanting Gentlemen, that, like the best
sort of Beggars, provide for their idle poverties, chiefly here, a man is
worried with such a restless charity.


1 Jock. I hope you say not this by way of prevention, Mr. Bowser?


Bows. Not I, believe me. And for our other friends, if their Guineys do not
make a loose on the Bones of four Dice, or sink into some Wenches Pocket,
according to the adventures of Towngallants, there may be hopes of moving yet.


2 Jock. Otherwise, may a She-devil accompany all the Animals. I care not if I
do not love my Chessnut-mare so well as I have done, for the same reason.


Enter Jocalin and Trainsted. Bows. Here comes one of those we wanted; she with
him too! it is something ominous, but no matter.


Jocal. I did not think the Town could have contained you to this minute; but
you found cause, it seems!


Trainst. I were more than far unworthy, should I neglect the least of your
smiles.


Enter Swiftspur. Swiftsp. Trainsted already with her?

There Is no trust to the blood of Jockeys.


Jocal. And take this more: the confidence you did so willingly repose in me,
does oblige my thoughts in some near degree to serve you.


Swiftsp. I like not this.


Trainst. Swift spur, come.


Swiftsp. By my life, I could chide thee, a man of thy speed, and not going
yet; I meant to call thee.


Bows. A word, Mr. Trainsted, do not leave the Town until thou have first
wearied him out on it; thou may have reason; besides, there is no way to spite
him like it, on all our accounts.


Trainst. I thank thee -- And do thou not perceive who may take horse first
now, Swiftspur? where is the Brains you talked on?


Swiftsp. I am a Calves-head if I could not find in my heart with some disdain
to be gone instantly, and be it so -- farewell, Madam.


[Offers to go. Jocal. Hold a little, Sir. What if I bet with a Lady in your
behalf?


Swiftsp. Nay then I am with thee again: she comes about, Trainsted, just
taking of my Nag's part against thine.


Jocal. But most convenient to make Stakes out of your Purse, I suppose it is
about you.


Swiftsp. Nothing more ready at your service, Madam; she has thine already too;
a mere device of hers to hold thee in Town to bear me company; I knew it all
along.


Jocal. Behold me, Men of Metal; do not these ring handsomely, Yours, and
yours, and yours, and yours, Sirs? there is no broad Gold in either, is there?


Swiftsp. About sixscore Two-and-twenties in mine, Madam.


Jocal. Very good, I know of a Diamond-ring may fit me about that price -- Or,
now I consider better, take your Purses again: and if you think fit, remove
together; I perceive you love one another's society.


Swiftsp. I cannot, will not leave thee.


Trainst. If I might, I would not.


Jocal. Then welcome both: and who shall direct the setting of the Runners now,
Gentlemen?


Trainst. It gives me some melancholy to think on it.


Swiftsp Well enough, I Will warrant thee; here are these we'll send before us to
take care.


Trainst. Or let us venture a while longer, it is but giving 'em some Crowns to
drink, and stay for us.


Swiftsp. Best of all, here is money amongst you, Horsemen; at your Lodgings
you will find Meat and Wine, besides -- Nay, no repining.


1 Jock. I should not, were it not for that kind lovely Bess of mine I left at
the Star at Newmarket; I cannot choose but let fall a warm tear to think how I
want her.


Swiftsp. And he that refuses this Lady's health, shall bestride no Courser of
mine.


Omnes Jock. Agreed, agreed.


2 Jock. Away, and whilst his money lasts, at worst we'll be merry.


1 Jock. Or I Will drink and weep together.


[Exeunt Jockeys. Swiftsp. Madam, you have not yet vouchsafed the favor of
your hand.


Trainst. Or what think, if thou and I draw Guts for it, Swiftspur? I dare
wager with thee that way too.


Jocal. You shall excuse me, Sir; unless I judge which of you may best deserve
the longest trifle. See who comes here.


Enter Clevly. Clev. These Mounters are the men, it seems, Jocalin: But take a
care you love not Riding the better for em.


Jocal. Look to your own Intrigue, Lady; if I cannot so far weary Flesh and
Blood, the good nature of Love is the more obliged by me.


Enter Breakbond. Swiftsp. Our friend Breakbond!


Breakb. And resolved to be entered a Horseman for your sakes, and yours,
Ladies.


Clev. But not to jade us, I suppose?


Breakb. Let me have Sports, Women, and Money, and let the World turn round,
'twill serve my System well enough.


Swiftsp. How I could hugg thy friendship! What say thou, Bowser?


Bows. This Town, this wearisom Town, there is no Game starts here, but what is
under a Petticoat.


Jocal. God-a-mercy, Huntsman!


Swiftsp. Lady, my respects are yours,


Jocal. I suppose it, Sir; but here is Mr. Breakbond has such an universal
affection to our Sex!


Breakb. And will, Ladies, so long as I can either give or borrow.


Clev. And buy Love that way, after the manner of some Gallanteries.


Breakb. Seldom or never, Madam; where I affect, I find Women in abundance
that will bestow that toy on me: a Gentleman may go less on trust for Love than
Apples, if he please.


Clev. But you have friends, I judge, that share with you in such Intrigues
sometimes.


Breakb. And welcome too, so they borrow what I am willing to lend, not
otherwise.


Clev. An odd humor!


Jocal. And yet, me thinks, pleasant.


Breakb. Or, where I cannot oblige handsomely to my humor, I give my friend
leave to do it for my sake and his own together.


Clev. A borrowing and giving of Love indeed!


Breakb. A more eternal thing, Ladies, than Generation and Corruption, if I
mistake not.


Jocal. Enough to make us smile and blush together.


Clev. You want no Money, Sir?


Breakb. No, 'faith, Lady, I have just enough to give at this time, I thank
Providence.


Swiftsp. Let me not live, if thy company be not worth half Newmarket.


Bows. That so sacred a place of Recreation should be so profaned! Had I but so
much as my Horn here, to quicken this dull time a little, 'twere somewhat
toward sport.


Swiftsp. And if thou had, thou should blow up a Jubilee to Love and Mirth
at once, Rogue.


Bows. Still love in your way.


Enter Waiting Woman. Swiftsp. So much in haste, that a man cannot duly laugh,
and sport with his friends, were too much a fault. Besides, we have made an
appointment to match and frolic, where thou shall hear Trainsted talk so
cunningly odd, that he will catch Betters before they gather his meaning or
their own.


Bows. A man would think that Jockeys were begotten in haste, yet act with so
many dilatory circumstances: well, give me the merry Huntsman that sports apace
daily.


Jocal. Have found the place?


Wait. I have; and can direct you, Madam.


Jocal. Enough, be gone --

[Exit Waiter. Touch and take, start and away, God-a-mercy Tick-tack.


Trainst. And the Tick-tack-Mare too, next Woman-kinde there was not such a
She-creature -- swiftspur, I find my spleen does palliate something.


Swiftsp. I knew thou would have patience for my sake. More of our Friends!


Enter Passal, and Maldrin. Mald. Who shall give off thinking first now,
Passal? art not weary yet?


Pass. No 'faith: and yet I love it as little as possible.


Mald. Or do not perceive she is above what Sense can reach?


Pass. She Is no Woman, if she be, do what her wit can do --


Swiftsp. O Friends, we mist your mirth; here is Breakbond, and Break-jest too
in abundance.


Breakb. Passal, and Maldrin, your Hands; and next, be frolic; it is Woman that
expects it.


Mald. Excuse us a little.


Jocal. I knew you would pose your Servants.


Breakb. Is this an age to be provoked with Love's Riddles?


Clev. Not I, believe me; and for Maldrin, you know his public merit may a
little stick on his spirit; he has been a Soldier, is it not so, Sir?


Mald. But had never such an onset to make in the field of Cupid before, I
thank my Stars. My Friend and I, Lady, have considered.


Clev. Very good.


Pass. But to impose on a Lady, or to oblige her to bed with one of us two Men,
were such a crime --


Clev. Is this what I expected, Passal? What say you, Maldrin?


Mald. I know not, except you please to think for me.


Clev. Dull things, that cannot command a Woman to merit takingly! you will think
again, I suppose.


Pass. Think, Lady? perhaps one or both of us may dream at night; what say
thou, friend?


Mald. A dozen to one on it.


Clev. Then dream instead of thinking; there may be worth in that.


Pass. But how to convey it warm enough to your Ladyship, that is another Querie.


Clev. When your thoughts are more mature, you may acquaint me.


Pass. That Love should impose so unhappily on my humor, as thinking amounts
to.


Mald. And could reproach me for it? but it is no matter.


[Pass. and Mald. whisper. Clev. Jocalin, your hand; it is time we walk.


[Exeunt Clev. and Jocal. Swiftsp. By that cast of her eye, she could have
taken mine as willingly. Bowser, there is sport behind, I Will warrant thee.


Bows. If my Limbs tarnish not in the mean time with keeping London-company.


Breakb. At night we'll drink, perhaps have a Covey at the Dog and Partridge.


Bows. Or tame Coneys in couples, according to the Townmode.


Swiftsp. Come, Horsemen, you know our haste.


[Exeunt Swiftsp. Trainst, and Bows. Mald. Since it is thus, give me thy hand,
Passal; we must needs think again, it seems.


Pass. That word Thinking -- Well, I Will bear thee company.


[Exeunt. The end of the Third ACT.
ACT the Fourth. SCENE the First.
The Scene opens with the 3d and 4th Jockey mounted on the shapes of two
Horses. 3 Jock. ARe not we mounted in conceit, Kester?


4 Jock. What else, Rowland? and these the beloved Figures of the most noble
Coursers of the last age.


3 Jock. For which reason, I conceive it no small happiness, though but in
imagination, to bestride 'em thus.


4 Jock. Nothing better; I itch all over to be at any thing like Whip and Spur.


3 Jock. Now, suppose our selves running on the four-mile Heath.


4 Jock. Then I suppose my Roan is holden on thee the first mile.


3 Jock. Have at thee on the second going up Choak-jade, or at the Ditch:
Whiterose was a whole Runner there.


4 Jock. No more of the Devil's-ditch, prithee; I had a Cup in my Pate last
night, and dreamed I was near it in earnest. But have at thee for the Flat; I
am sure I must have overstroken thee there, and so throughout --

Enter the other Jockeys. They come; let us sit thus, and surprise 'em.


1 Jock. A pox on this indigested London-liquor, its best essence is fit for
nothing but to beget a crude sort of Females, that are so impudent to turn up
their Crescents by Moonlight.


2 Jock. And for its unsodden fulsome Ale, it is only useful to thicken the
Wastes of Tailers to the use of their Wives: though the Villains sit frequently
cross-legg'd, they commonly espouse greater Pagans than themselves.


1 Jock. I fear by my Compass I am plump'd above weight; and what a misfortune
were that to a well-reputed Jockey? Were it amiss, friends, to think of a
She-waster?


2 Jock. And so put the Pox in the Scales with thee, it is better to ride
over-balanc'd somewhere -- Well, Kester and Rowland are precious Knaves to be
wanting, and our Chiefs just coming hither.


5 Jock. See, here they are, and, if my eyes dazzle not, mounted too!


4 Jock. To your wonder, fellow-horsemen: behold the figure of most inestimable
White-rose!


3 Jock. And this of matchless Roan-dutton!

[They leap off the shapes of the Horses. We have rode a four-mile Course with
'em in conceit too.

The next thing we do, shall be to present 'em to our Patroons.


4 Jock. But I Will have Swiftspur to have both, by your leave.


3 Jock. How, both?


4 Jock. Yes, both, or I Will scourge thee into better manners.


3 Jock. Indeed, Sir --


[Offer to lash one another. 1 Jock. Hold, fools, I Will give you reason: Mr.
Swiftspur is a man of Estate, at present has a Country-hall, he will judge
adorned with their remembrance, and think 'em his best Monuments.

For Trainsted, he is a Sojourner with his Horses, and putting aside his good
fortune, Master of little as yet.


Omn. Jock. Content, content; we can be but well requited, let us join hands
on it.


Enter Swiftspur, Trainsted, and Bowser. 1 Jock. See, you are presented, Sir.


Swiftsp. I know their fame, and have not seen better figures of these
excellent Runners; you shall receive my full thanks: Such shapely Lineaments,
as might shame the Trophy of Bucephalus!


Trainst. And that Macedonian Greatness it is Erector.


Swiftsp. To say truth, he had been a pleasant Gentleman, had he understood a
running Horse as well as Wine and Women.


[Table and Bottles. Trainst. It may be some such lubberly Steed as the French
Monsieur usually manages. I conceive him to have been at most but a good
Trotter.


Swiftsp. Come, sit, give me the List, Trainsted.

[They sit down. Let me see twenty two Matches immediately ensuing.


1 Jock. May they prove lucky: I have been half undone with laying the odds
last meeting.


Swift. For my part, I intend to bet freely; you know my way, friends.


Bows. Would we were on the place first.


Swiftsp. Thou art so earnest still to follow Yopers, that make so much haste
to devour a simple Hare. Remember to be more sparing of the King's Game, lest
his pleasure want it: Speak your opinions, Horsemen.


2 Jock. My opinion is, that Bay-lusty may have a good match on it.


Swiftsp. But, I must not forget how Tick-tack handled him. I never saw a
better Loose run up Choak-jade.


Trainst. There I am with thee, Swiftspur; and for Have-at-all, he is a hearty
runner, doubtless.


Swiftsp. But the misfortune of the Scotch Horse!


3 Jock. Curse light on him, he has lost me Money, when I thought I was more
than sure on it.

[Aside.
Swiftsp. To stumble on a black Coat, was such a fate for that Horse! --


Trainst. A Book-man that rode with Spurs, yet knew not how to apply 'em to his
Horse by riding out of the way.


Bows. Or as it is frequent with such men, to be in their own way and other men's
together.


Swiftsp. But what say you to Red-rose, Gentlemen? he seems Peerless hitherto?


1 Jock. If to be judged by the last Course he made, he was not concerned there.


Swiftsp. And runs a Wind long and smartly; a Woman would not wish to make a
brisker Course under her Rider.


Bows. There will be a Wench in our way, I prognosticate.

[Aside.
Trainst. It Is granted him.


Swiftsp. And next, let me advise thee, Trainsted, to take care how thou do
trust too many Guineys on Iron-grays; they are a sort of ill-natured beast, I
can tell you.


Trainst. I thank you, Sir.


Swiftsp. But what for the Geldings Match?


3 Jock. Both Jades, it may be: Give me a creature that is not pruned in those
parts.


Bows. Spoke like a Horseman.


Swiftsp. And a Woman's man too, Bowser: He could be no sportive Humanity, that
first made Eunuch of Man or Animal. Give me some Wine; here is a health to his
Majesty, he is our pleasure and being in all kinds.

[They drink. And next let us have a Song.

The Song.
1.
THough sports of the Field
Their pleasures may yield,
As the Hound or the Horse does run:
Yet there is no such delight
As the Bed at night,
Where Woman is surest won.
2.
Let men sport, drink, or play,
Or take business in their way,
The Females Intrigue will be
The pastime at last,
Which Nature does most haste,
To start with her he and she.
3.
Then Love is man's pleasure,
And will be his leisure,
What respites soever it make:
As Women dress at home,
Or from abroad Men come,
It Is odds they would it partake.
Toward the end of the Song, Jocalin passes with her Waiter over the Stage,
and drops her Glove.
Swiftsp. What have I here? her Glove -- Nay, her Name written within it too!
-- And next a Dance, Horsemen.


[A dance of Jockeys, with their Whips in their Hands. Bows. There Is not such a
Town as this in Europe, to detain men in it when they least think on it!


Swiftsp. Thou art so mistaken now, I was just thinking to match Wagtail this
night; I forgot to tell thee on it.


Bows. I guess what Wagtail you mean: If I stay long here, I shall fall foul on
my Washer-woman, do what I can.


Enter Waiter, and delivers a closed Paper to Trainsted. Trainst. To me,
Gentlewoman?


Wait. And from Madam Jocalin too.


Trainst. It Is welcome.


Wait. I am glad on it for your sake: But she bids me let you know, that it is
her desire you should not open it till she gives leave.


Trainst. Not open it! What should it mean -- Let her know I salute it thus,
and will observe strictly her Commands. One word more; do think she affects
me?


Wait. What else, Sir? I have heard her commend just such a brown or
Nutmeg-complexion as yours.


Trainst. Enough, here is for the -- I cannot but once more kiss it.


[Gives her money. Swiftsp. Come, let us prepare.


Omn. Jock. Upon condition we ride post by our own Horns, with a Tivy, Tivy,
Tan-tivy, boys.


Swiftsp. Or it matters not much if I overtake you about the Green-man, or
Eppin; Trainsted may go with you perhaps; what say thou?


Trainst. Just thinking of a delicate-limb'd creature.


Bows. Was ever Huntsman thus drilled by delay?


Swiftsp. I guessed as much; but prithee what was the enclosed delivered thee
even now? 'Twas not from Madam Jocalin, was it?


Trainst. Grant it so.


Swiftsp. How, and not impart such a trifle to thy friend!


Trainst. I must not, cannot.


Swiftsp. No, Sir? --


Trainst. Not, though it should render my heart most happy, and by thy self
acknowledged too.


Swiftsp. This shows unfriendly.


Trainst. Rather unkind in you to press it.


Swiftsp. That thou had never been my friend; or that it were no sin to kill
thee, and force it that way from thee.


Trainst. Recall your passion; I am by her commanded otherwise; see if thou
dare to disoblige her first.


Swiftsp. Commanded, say thou? hang him that dares offend her: Thou't let her
know I did obey most readily?


Trainst. With all my heart. Come, friends, you will stay a while for my sake now?


Omn. Jock. Trainsted perverted too?


Enter Whiffler, and Luce, at several Doors. Whiff. What a just Rascal it is? By
the languishment of thine eye and mine together, thou art well meit.


Luce. Pull in your Chap, Sir.


Whiff. And could not clap it and this Cheek together? That as wholesome
Ladies admire as any Paint in Town.


Luce. And were you not near making a Wench of me, think you?


Whiff. A thing of nothing, Prettyness, with my Complexion. To encourage thee,
such as are called Honest women hold it no sin to lie with me.


Luce. Well, it is a wanton age, and every fool finds it -- You are a Gentleman
of conceit, doubtless.


Whiff. As ever lickt honey from Lip, Sweetface. To tell the truth, I was
engaged lately to some six Ladies, so precipitately too -- Thou understand'st
me?


Luce. To assure you, take this as a favor to your lower Lip.


[Strikes him. Whiff. 'Slid, She has hurt the very main grace of my Countenance.

Enter Breakbond. I could find in my heart to bustle with thee for it, as I did
with the Girl the other day for her Virginity, though she box'd me all the while.


[Whiff. and Luce strive. Breakb. How, Sirrah, abuse a Woman?


Whiff. It Is Breakbond; I could dissolve into a Jelly me thinks --


Breakb. Thou Ague-jaw'd Raskal --

Were It not just to sever thy Chaps, and send the Bones to a Dicemaker?


Whiff. Good Sir, for my dexterity in kissing, excuse me this once.


Breakb. Kicking is too good for thee, Slave.

[Kicks him. And mark me, if thou do but look upon a Woman with thy scurvy
temptation henceforward --


Whiff. Spare me, and my eye shall not so much as languish after a woman,
though she cry for me.


Luce. Enough for my sake, Sir.


Breakb. Excuse me a little -- And more, Sirrah; if a woman pass the Street,
and you think or know her to be a Wench, disturb her if thou dare.


Whiff. By no means, Sir; I Will wait on her to her own, or her friends Lodging,
most respectively.


Breakb. There Is a Conscience to be used to women, whether honest or dishonest,
whilst I wear a Sword I Will justify it -- You have your freedom, Gentlewoman.


Luce. I thank you, Sir.


Whiff. To be more sincerely friends, do you want money, Mr. Breakbond?


Breakb. Not of thine, thou art to mean a fellow to lend it me; Abuse a
creature of her Sex! be gone immediately.


Whiff. May I not so much as take my leave of her?


Breakb. Not a kiss, without free consent, at your peril.

I may be wanted at the other end of the Town, perhaps on such an account too.


[Exit Breakb. and Whiff. severally. Luce. A Gentleman of his worth might well
tempt a lukewarm chastity without further motive.


Enter Pricknote as observing. Prickn. Is it even so?


Luce. He comes next, and has observed, I hope.


Prickn. By the treasures of thy eye, Mrs. Luce, I could not have supposed this
digression of thine.


Luce. Indeed, thou Pupil of sin!


Prickn. Thy Knight, I confess, is most serious and vain together, consider
that.


Luce. For your sake, shall I?


Prickn. It may not, or it may be a secret, so it be sealed with thy Lip.


Luce. Or to come closer, and Ty the kisses after the manner of some
Presbyters; Is It not so, thou motley thing of Faith and Faction?


Prickn. There may be examples, I allow; insomuch that not long since one of
our zealous Expounders was out three times, as his eye roved to catch a smile
from such another Prettiness as thy self.


Luce. What a fertile Glebe of love have some illegal beliefs! I ever thought
it --

Do you see who is coming?


Prickn. The Knight; once more commiserate my kind Mistress.


Enter Sir Ralph Nonsuch. Luce. Or I Will advise him to send your Genitals to
Geneva.

There Is scarce a Sectary comes so near Heaven as a Moral Eunuch amounts to.


Prickn. Dispense with me yet.


Luce. He Is serious at present.


Prickn. Let me take liberty to lie once more, though I endanger my Exhibition.


Luce. You may, or steal, I suppose you are nimble fingered? Now to observe --


[Luce obscures. Nonsuch, How do approve my Luce, Isaac?


Prickn. Shall I enter her in my Note-book, Sir?


Nonsuch. She Is young, and may have some Gayeties as are incident to most
Beauties; but let me tell thee, she is of such a delicious sobriety withal, as
may teach the gravity of a separate Assembly.


Prickn. Not to be doubted, Sir.


Nonsuch. Or do think there is any solid danger in such of thy Sect as are
called Prickear'd? the word methinks has much of erection in it.


Prickn. Or an extraordinary business of now and then a Member: according to
your worshipful allowance of serious and vain together.


Nonsuch. There I am with thee, Pricknote.

And did she not, as I may say, warm thee something, ha! thou know I am
content she should be admired.


Luce. This is coming to my business.


[Luce within Prickn. She has Multiplication in her looks, doubtless, or such a
dazzling of sense, that I was fain to drink her health in a quart of cold Water
with a hotheaded Anabaptist of my acquaintance.


Luce. This fellow is no zealous Liar --


[Luce within. Nonsuch. I commend thy respect and care; and let me tell thee
with secrecy, Pricknote, that I have some Intentions to have her appear naked;
and so read a Lecture of my composing, from her Eyebrows to the extremity of
her Waste; were not this a grave and delicious verbosity, think thou?


Prickn. Above measure, Sir.


[Luce appears. Luce. Would you so, Sir? -- Or shall I expend your
compositions, Knight, with your Prick-knave here?


Nonsuch. Nay, thou art to blame, Luce -- Nothing but an Invention of mine, to
admire thy Capacities.


Luce. You are a Sir Ralph, I confess; or a Gentleman of as deep a reach
somewhere as most now extant.


Nonsuch. But to be severe, Luce, and against my vanity too!


Prickn. By my sincerity, you should dispense, Mistress.


Luce. Take that, Sirrah; you have an Itch, I perceive.


[Kicks him. Prickn. It Is seasonable to withdraw, though I cannot repent.


[Exit Pricknote. Luce. And next dilate with what gravity you would have
attacked my Virginity.


Nonsuch. Yet again, Luce!


Luce. Or, declare how you purposely lie in of the Gout to plot for Preferment;
Is not this to be serious and vain at once, Sir?


Nonsuch. She Will ruin my pretensions -- Do hear, Luce, I know you are
kind, exceeding kind.


Luce. It Is very possible.


Nonsuch. But I have not obliged thee enough; love me, and take what Gold thou will: I had almost forgot thy Velvetgown; or it may be thou would take the
Air, command my Coach at thy pleasure.


Luce. You have given me commission, and I Will improve it.


[Exit Luce. Nonsuch. Thus it must be, when wise men cannot live without Love.

But there are a thousand Intrigues in Women, as well as in State, and somewhat
more diversely capacitated; there is no avoiding --


Enter Quickthrift. Quickth. So serious, Knight!


Nonsuch. I have told your Ladyship, that there is a certain mixture in all
things.


Quickth. True, and I have found it in my Lawyer.


Nonsuch. It Is not impossible: I have just now a Considering cap to put on,
upon a deep account; you will excuse me, Madam?


[Exit Nonsuch. Enter Plodwel new dressed. Quickth. Do you know Mr. Plodwel,
Sir?


Plod. I hope I do.


Quickth. And so fine on the sudden, a Sword by your side too!


Plod. And dare use it justly.


Quickth. A valiant piece of Justice; you may do wonders on the Bench
hereafter; It may be hang to a Prisoner, as some have been talked on.


Plod. There Is nothing on me that I conceive is unbecoming the person which I
own; your judgment, Lady.


Quickth. Then I perceive you can spend money on your self.


Plod. Yes, and more, as does become a Gentleman. I know no Bar from Birth or
Custom that forbids a comely use of Clothes and Manners, what e're you may
command.


Quickth. But have a care how you clap too many Fees on your Back; (as some raw
ones of your Profession are prone to) the Times are wise and saving, at least
not so frequently litigious as heretofore, when long ease and contention
devoured men's Estates.


Plod. I have considered fully, Lady.


Quickth. To cozen me in your self: Alas, I expected an ordinary Suit of
Clothes, a few Shirts, Night-caps, with two or three Folio's, things that
suffice very celebrated of the Long Robe, might have obliged you; or do you
intend to set up for a Wit like some of our sprucer sort of Gallants?


Plod. I Will study to find some at your service.


Quickth. But there are few professions that afford it: Perhaps, there is here
and there a Gentleman, that can pass a Repartee, or pretend to write a Play,
though they -- not seldom lament the fate on it six months after.


Plod. A Head-ake to purpose.


Quickth. Or I Will take it for granted, that you are so modish as to drink. It
may be, troublesome in it too -- Let me consider, three hundred a year I expect
shall be added to my former demand.


Plod. I am obliged to deal worthily with you, and cannot do handsomer than to
make it your acquaintance.


Quickth. Speak it, Sir.


Plod. I may have inclinations, Lady.


Quickth. To some other, I suppose.


Plod. You are right, Madam; a Gentleman I lately heard on, one that in part
assures my Address to her, of beauty too; and what is more, has an esteem for
useful Science, such as I presume to call my Studies; nor is addicted to that
Thrift or Pride, which some may construe yours: A Genius I might wish to
embrace with mine.


Quickth. Is It come to this?


Plod. And something more, Lady; I find you have a flaw in your Fortune.


Quickth. But not to be filled off at your Bar, I conceive. Yet I remember
something --

[Aside.
Plod. I have done, Lady.


[Offers to go. Quickth. And can you leave me thus?


Plod. If It be your fate, there is no remedy.


Quickth. But to quit a Gentlewoman in so intricate a fashion --


Plod. You thought I wanted Brains too, though my name be Plodwel.


Quickth. It may be one that loves you too.


Plod. Or a proud covetous kindeness -- But no matter -- What think you of
coming now toward me, Lady? you have some thousands that may be better
inspected.


Quickth. I find I am touched --

[Aside.
Plod. You may suppose I am in haste.


[Exit Plodwel. Quickth. There Is a punishment due to my temper; and it is odds I
may feel it, the worst way too. Your servant, Madam.

Enter Clevly, Passal, and Maldrin. I conceive you're busy.


[Exit Quickthrift. Clev. She seemed concerned.


Mald. As Lovers will be.


Pass. There Is a pleasant depth in Love that is hard to fathom.


Clev. Not reach my sense yet!


Pass. Would I might try, Lady.


Clev. Soldiers, and Gentlemen, I conceive you both; yet not able to oblige a
woman to perform one handsome action?


Mald. It Is in your power to command us, Madam.


Clev. Your Manhood, it is like: If not, consequently expect that I should
engage you to hector or fight one another after the new mode, or suitable to
the diverse concern of Honor and Kindness with some Ladies; though it has
added so little to their esteem, that the world has conster'd such Hero's of
theirs as some detriment to their reputation afterward -- I conceive you are
friends, and no less gladly allow it, as I observe you both.


Pass. Or your eye, as it is quick enough, may be so propense to your
inclination, as to make pathetically your own election: me thinks you might
beam more directly toward some body, Lady -- but as you please.


Clev. My Choice, mean you? I know it is enough in my power to determine that
without your Counsel, Sir; a taking of one six pence instead of the other is not
more facile: Or is not my Garb and Mien attractive enough to deserve what I
require? or I suppose you find some fault.


Pass. and Mald. You are all perfection --


Clev. It may be too you would prove it after such a way that humanity does less
admire than blush at: by my life, Gentlemen, I should be loath to give a
Man-child being after your rate of Courtship.


Pass. Would I might endeavor the close experiment but with half your will,
Dame Haughty.

[Aside.
Mald. Or grant it to be, which of us shall devise a way that you may appear to
us and the world more excellent?


Clev. You have hit me, Sir.


Mald. I hope I shall do, Lady.


Pass. May not we take liberty to laugh at one another a while before we attain
this warm scruple?


Clev. With all my heart, or I Will smile with you, till when I judge that
neither of you know how to command me worthily; and so Adieu.


Ex. Clev. Mald. Is it not just that I should now blame my severe fate in all
kinds?


Pass. And so be angry with thy Mistress, and the times together; should she
pose me thus a twelvemonth, I could almost forgive thinking for her sake, it is
so generous.


Enter Jocalin in a Riding habit, and her Waiter. Mald. Here Is Madam Jocalin,
but we are otherwise disposed then for her Mirth at this time.


Pass. Thought, work thy will.


Jocal. Let Madam Clevely know I Will wait on her on horseback, to take the air
this afternoon.


Enter Swiftspur and Bowser. Bows. I shall, Madam.


[Exit Waiter. Jocal. He Is here.


Bows. Yet more delays?


Swift. Thou may allow some Remora's to love, Bowser.


Bows. Since it is thus, I Will observe your sport a little.


[Bowser obscures. Swift. You perceive this glove, Lady.


Jocal. You Would best kiss my hand, and call it mine.


Swift. I do, and heartily.


Jocal. And what next?


Swift. Methinks you might begin a little, Lady.


Jocal. And tell you of your Gray Mare, shall I?


Swift. By my love, she affects riding, I see it by her dress too; had I
Pegasus, I would present him to you, or make him an ambler purposely for your
sake.


Jocal. You Would carry me apace, I perceive.


Swiftsp. There Is no creature of divine pleasure but Woman: give me the looses
of Love, the very Tho-sport of Mankind? Is It not so, fair one?


Jocal. But stay, Sir Hotspur, you and I are not ready to start yet. Pray tell
me, were they not Scotch Jockeys, or Divines in blew Caps, that formed the
Scotch-Covenant?


Enter Trainsted. Swiftsp. Hang 'em, Knaves, a sort of hungry things that
preached on Galloways twelve inches high!


Jocal. No matter what they were -- Cry you mercy, Mr. Trainsted; have you
observed my desires, Sir?


Trainst. Yes, punctually, Madam.


Jocal. May I take your word? or let me see it:

[Gives her the Letter.] I understand that you Gentlemen-jockies can lie
intolerably, lay two to one on this side, and three to one of the other; perhaps
swear they never saw the Horse which they have bought, matched, and tried.


Trainst. Men of pleasure may be dispensed with something.


Jocal. By your leave, Sir, I forgot I was in haste.


Trainst. She Will not take her kindness back in what she gave me. My spleen
labors to think on it.


Swiftsp. I hope so; nay, but retard a space, Lady: thou can not be so
unkind to take Horse without me.


Jocal. As for your friend here, I see he has been observant: perhaps has
kissed what this may possibly contain.


Trainst. I did, with all my heart.


Jocal. I take it kindly; and return it thus --

[Kisses the enclosed, and gives it Trainst. My Injunction's yet in force.


Swiftsp. I am gone again.


Jocal. You claim a favor, Sir; and though a slight one, I guess you judge it
was too real to be dropped by chance -- I Will say no more.


Swiftsp. Prove me, and rather than I Will fail thy service, I Will pay my
forfeits, and renounce the jolly sport of Racing for ever.


Jocal. Now I conclude you dissemble.


Swiftsp. Confide, and thou shall find me a Rider to purpose: If this take not
with Female Flesh and Blood, what can?


Jocal. Your breeding's course, I had almost forgot it.


[Exit Jocal. Bowser appears. Bows. Which on you will lay six to four on the
best choice now? Let me die without hearing the cheerful Music of Hounds, if I
would not sooner trust a Country Milk-maid than the most delicate complexion
of any She this City most celebrates.


Swiftsp. So severe in thy reflections, Bowser!


Bows. Did not I tell you of this Twittle-twattle amorous hindrance? As sure as
there are old Women, the Hare I hunted last was a metamorphis'd Witch, I am so
crossed in my humor.


Swiftsp. Well, Love, thou art an odd trifle as ever had to do with the lower
Region of Providence: How fares thy Spleen now?


Trainst. A little indisposed, but it is vanishing.


Bows. Hold up thy Spirit, Trainsted, if but to afflict him; I begin to be
unmerciful to his Pauses.


Swiftsp. She has perplexed us both: what think if thou and I outdo Leander,
and drown our selves purposely in the Thames before her dressing-window? I care
not if on Horseback too. It Is odds, when both are dead, but she may pity one of
us.


Trainst. My flame is not so immoderate, I thank you.


Swiftsp. Or should I do it alone, thou would bear me company.


Bows. When I do, may I turn Otter, and hunt fish under water too.


Swiftsp. Or, what is worse, let us vow never more to see Newmarket.


Trainst. Worse than all mischiefs.


Bows. Or more than ten thousand mischiefs: let me clap thee on the Back for
this resolve however --

You may proceed, Sir.


Swiftsp. I must, but know not how.


Trainsted and Bowser go off together. The end of the Fourth ACT.
ACT the Last.
Enter Sir Ralph Nonsuch, Pricknote, and Servant. Nonsuch. LEt me hear thee
first -- Not found yet --


Serve. Nor like to be, Sir; besides five hundred Guineys she has taken with her
to bear her charges.


Nonsuch. That a man of knowledge should be so unfortunate as to lose his love
and his money at once!


Serve. Nothing more familiar, Sir, with some Females, than to be paid by one,
and sport with more.


Nonsuch. Yet she is a Dove, I confess, in some sense.


Serve. But no clipping of her Wings from flying, I ever thought it.


Nonsuch. Leave me? what say thou, Pricknote.


[Exit Serve. Prickn. Mrs. Luce may return, or she may not.

There Is no other construction to be made of woman's desire.


Nonsuch. Thou did advise her.


Prickn. Yes, Sir, and would have pricked such an impression of mine besides in
her Table Book, Heaven bless the Gentlewoman, she is a fair one.


Nonsuch. I do not conceive thee well.


Prickn. The more's my grief, she did not: I assure your Worship I whispered to
her as sincere a Concupiscence as was ever conveyed at repetition.


Nonsuch. My tender Conscienc'd Isaac!


Prickn. Tenderly inclined indeed, Sir; but she is youthful, and may be
instructed.


Nonsuch. Thou bid'st me hope; and now I think on it, I remember a sprightly
Zealot that had just such another cast with her eye, 'twas such a manner of
being serious and pleasant together!


Enter Luce. Prickn. Most allowable, Sir.


Luce. Thanks, kind Isaac.


Prickn. As much as you please in secret, Mistress.


Luce. And you, Knight, with your formal Amor, do you think to detain me here,
till I come to be the discourse of the street and Constable?


Nonsuch. This heat with me, Luce?


Luce. Or else fee the next Bawdy Court to continue your Capacity: Is this your
politic dealing with such flesh and blood as mine is? As I write Gentlewoman,
I could find in my heart to hire some Hector to chastise your lustiness.


Nonsuch. But did thou not make me hope you would soberly Cajole my delight,
Luce?


Luce. And hope it if you please still, Sir.


Nonsuch. As big as I am, were I all Gold, I think I could yield to be coined
into Guineys for thy sake.


Luce. Yet could be content to make your enquiry after me, and by this your
Prick-knave too.


Prickn. Let me save you the endeavor of making me dishonest, I beseech you.


Luce. Do so then -- And next Sir Amorous, I add not fool, and Knave -- here is
your Money, you may take it, Sir, I Will only whisper a few of your Luxuries and
Politiques into some ears --


Nonsuch. Not for a world, Luce -- Hark thee, upon the word of a cautious
Sinner, I Will rather give thee a Thousand pound more to hold thy peace, though
thou leave me for ever.


Luce. The very Bargain I hoped to make: Farewell Sir. -- These sums put
together may possibly produce a convenient honesty.


[Exit Luce. Nonsuch. There Is nothing more hard than to be wise and wanton
together -- there may be discredit too.


Prickn. Were it not for the Emulsion to flesh and blood in being of a public
factious Spirit, I might pity your infirmity.


Nonsuch. However, I will pretend gravely, or fret against the times, out of
vexation and loss I have vainly given my self.


Prickn. Or I Will protest you are more deeply diligent in the service of
Dissenters; you may yet be held worthy to purchase some capacity.


Nonsuch. Let me have thy Counsel, Pricknote.


Prickn. You shall, Sir -- In the mean time I had almost forgot where the
Silver Plate stands.


[Exeunt. Enter Whiffler, with three Bailiffs pulling of him. Whiff. Patience,
patience, Gentlemen, you will so disorder my dress else! --


1 Bayl. We must make bold to take your person for pawn a while. We Bailiffs
are like some Birds of prey, when we light on any of your Feather, though we do
not eat 'em, we plume 'em to purpose.


Whiff. No pity on my fine Face!


2 Bayl. It Is somewhat extraordinarily engaged for your Milkwashes to your
Butter-woman.


3 Bayl. I Will be bold with your Perriwig in behalf of your Barber.


1 Bayl. You had as good bestow your Coat in part of satisfaction of your
Tailor too.


Whiff. Take this Money too, and let me be gone half naked.


2 Bayl. 'Twere somewhat too much.


1 Bayl. Not if he give these things freely for our extraordinary attendance.


Enter Breakbond. Whiff. Should any of my Ladies see me thus --


1 Bayl. We'll keep your counsel, so you will be worth us something more for that*


Breakb. Who have you here, Lads?


1 Bayl. A Gentleman that lives under the Law, but does not care to pay Money.


Breakb. Is that all? I do as much my self; though I give, I as seldom pay as
most men living.


1 Bayl. You have taught us to know it, Sir.


Breakb. Whiffler, I had almost forgot thy Countenance; do your office;
friends; he is not deserving enough of Mankind to violate the Law.


1 Bayl. We thank you, Sir; and when ever a Writ comes to us against you, we'll
cast it into the fire without presuming to show it you.


Breakb. Except at the suit of a Woman, and under forty too, conceive me -- in
that case I Will see it paid.


[Offers to go out. Omn. Bayl. You may command us, Sir.


Whiff. Favor me something, though you borrow more money of me in spite of my
teeth.


Breakb. Or, now I think on it, you may let him have his Clothes again; and for
the rest, take his word till to morrow, he will make it good.


2 Bayl. On yours, Sir?


Breakb. Yes, on mine, Sirrah; if I break my Bond, I am a Gentleman if I
promise.


2 Bayl. Cry you mercy, Sir -- There Is no daring of his Anger.


[Exit Breakbond. 1 Bayl. You see what it is when such fine Gentlemen as you can
pay money, and will not without this trouble.


Whiff. Well, I Will hide my self for a time, or go into the Country, and try
whether I can make love to Dairy-maids. This is some comfort to a Skin that is
too fine to be seasoned with cold.


[Has his Clothes delivered. Exit. Whiff. Enter Pricknote, with two silver
Tankards under his Arms. 1 Bayl. What sly fellow's that? we'll venture to stay
him in behalf of the Constable. -- Who, Isaac Pricknote, the very'st Knave in
all the Borough of Southwark!


Prickn. Excuse me, I have strict occasion --


2 Bayl. There Is something under his Arm.


Prickn. Nothing but a Cawdle I am to convey to a friend.


[They search under one Arm. 1 Bayl. You may keep your Cawdle when you have it,
but we'll seize on this piece of Plate.


2 Bayl. Sir Ralph Nonsuch's name on it too.


3 Bayl. What if 'twere said we found it by chance?


Prickn. With all sincerity you may.


1 Bayl. Some Roguery, but no theft, brother Catchpole.


3 Bayl. We'll search him again -- There will be a reward from the Knight to us
however.


[They search him again. 1 Bayl. The Other piece of Plate too! You must before
the next Justice. He deserves to be hanged twice, if possible.


Prickn. No pity for the transgression of a Zealot!


1 Bayl. Away with him.


[Exeunt. Enter Breakbond at one Door, and Plodwel at another. Breakb. Worthy
disposer of Writs and Parchment, well met.


Plod. I thank you, Sir.


Breakb. Thou honour'st thy profession in thy esteem of Women; there is no such
mine and thine, that Mortality has to do with; go on and prosper.


Plod. I conceive you, Sir.


Breakb. And more, I will pardon the Law, though somewhat a crabbed method of
generous Education, for thy sake -- farewell. One word more; I find thou art a
Gentleman, and when thou have a mind to Dice or Drink, I Will forward thy
ingenuity that way too: And now to find the gang of Pleasure with Swiftspur.


[Exit Breakbond. Enter Quickthrift. Plod. An odd extravagance, but time may
recall him: She Is come -- You may command my observance, Madam.


Quickth. You told me of a truth concerned me.


Plod. I did, and am prepared to make it good.


Quickth. As little frivolous, or tedious, as you please; I have heard of
Chancery-bills.


Plod. Your words are too much pointed, or Woman's way of reasoning, as if they
owned their being to no other right than what they call their Beauty. What does
your Sex confer to civil happiness, more than their persons, and their Milk to
nourish Children? whilst its best reason, and its safety's none of yours; you
must excuse my freedom, Lady.


Quickth. Or think me still both proud and miserable, I know your grievance.


Plod. Add, if you please, a person in my sense most lovely, joined to a quick
and taking spirit, yet even such a soul, may like a Diamond that is set too
narrow in the finest Gold, straiten its luster. Am I right, Madam?


Quickth. Is this my business, Sir?


Plod. I have brought it, Madam.

[Gives her the Writing. Here Is a Writing will express the right I have to make
you mine.


Quickth. It was my dead Father's act when I was young --


Plod. And that if ever you married other man, you was to pay me out of your
Estate five thousand pound.


Quickth. It Is not to be denied.


Plod. I have done, Lady.


[Offers to go. Quickth. In so much haste too!


Plod. Or now I think on it, I Will wave it yet, and give you freedom to oblige
some other choice -- I hope I have performed my devoir now?


Quickth. This touches home, In money too -- Well, Sir, you may be pleased to
think you have prevailed; I suppose on your terms and mine together I may
deserve you,


Plod. Above my wishes.


Enter Clevly with Passal and Maldrin, at some distance. Clev. May I not
congratulate, Lady?


Quickth. I here have owned my happiness.


Clev. I rejoice it with you, worthy Plodwel -- My addressors come, we'll give
'em leave a little.


[Clev. Quick. and Plod. whisper. Pass. Well, I am so far happy as to have done
with thinking.


Mald. Could not lend a thought to help thy friend, thou conceiv'st me?


Pass. Not a Chimera, though no bigger than an Atom: It may be I may give a
past thought for thee and my self together.


Mald. Well, I begin now to vex with thee at this word Thinking.


Clev. Which of you begins? you may be free.


Mald. He that knows best how, Lady.


Clev. Is that all? I begin to perceive your delays unkind.


Mald. To discipline a Lady of your sense, and in point of love too! By my
Sword, I had rather command for the French, though I love not their Party.


Clev. Or you may move for your self and friend together, Passal.


Pass. I feel some temptation that way in spite of my spirit, but I must away
with it -- Well, Madam, since it is your will I must enjoin, I hope to fit your
worth and mine together -- Give me thy hand, Maldrin, you have my command Lady
to take my friend. There Is no injunction I conceive more honorable, or
happiness I shall impose on your respects: he will merit most your worth.


Clev. A generosity I looked for.


Pass. Brain, I thank thee.


Mald. I fear too great for me to own; I have seen some handsome actions in the
world, but few can equal this in Friendship -- I must return her to your hand:
I had your leave to impose, Madam, as well as he.


Pass. A thread bare Method used in Plays; Thou never could less deserve my
friendship. The offer is enough to make me angry, is it not, Lady?


Clev. A Passal indeed; and must be, next your Obligation, my first of friends;
you will give me leave to assure it, Sir?


Mald. Above my own and your expression.


Pass. No such Thinking neither; remember I find not that your fault again,
Maldrin.


Mald. I warrant you.


Clev. He Will grant it for my sake.


Mald. You have abundantly obliged me.


Clev. And next to quit that saucy thing called public Merit, there will be
much that falls below desert, though in the best and wisest Governments: My
love and fortune shall oblige it.


Quickth. Now I may bid you happy.


Plod. This day stands fair to all our wishes.


Clev. Let Us find Jocalin.


[Exeunt. Enter Jockies at several Doors. 1 Jock. O Horsemen, Horsemen!


2 Jock. What Is the matter?


1 Jock. The heaviest tidings; I saw our own Swiftspur lean with his Hat on his
Eyes at a Tables end: if I forget not, booted too.


3 Jock. Who could have thought it in him?


1 Jock. He Is Lovesick, it is certain. And for Mr. Trainsted, what his spleen
may produce, Heaven knows: at present it seems with him worse than in a hot
season that admits not to give his Courses their due exercise.


2 Jock. Might Cupid be so kind as to dispatch one of his Bolts to this jolly
Mistress of theirs, I care not much which of them were his Deputy.


1 Jock. But as for my Bess, my lovely brown Bess, that kissed me so often
betwixt the sips of Ale and Apples, and looked more red than the best ruby
streaks of a Gillyflower, how could I hug her in conceit!


2 Jock. May not I do as much, think thou, for a bucksome Kate of my
acquaintance?


3 Jock. Notwithstanding she lives, as I guess, at the sign of the
No-maidenhead somewhere. It Is odds but our Fellow-riders may take wrong
Forfeitures for some of our absence.


4 Jock. If not swear that most of us are so drily in love, as to engage our
Field-spirits with City-chamber-maids; I could burn my Whip to think on it.


Enter Trainsted and Jocalin. 5 Jock. Here comes Trainsted, and has her by the
hand already; it is fit we attend.


[The Jockies observe, and whisper. Jocal. Your Obligements I need not further
press; they may answer my expectation fully.


Trainst. And shall, Madam.


Jocal. May I take your word?


Trainst. And deed too; you cannot command any thing on your account, but I Will
most readily embrace.


Jocal. This heightens to my end.


1 Jock. She speaks of ending: I wish her a kiss extraordinary for it.


Enter Swiftspur. Jocal. Observe my Face once more; and next, are you sure my
best resemblance fits your kindest welcome?


Trainst. I vow it does.


Jocal. It Is granted then.


Swiftsp. Granted, says she?


Jocal. Yes, Swiftspur; nor ought you to repine, if I should give to him more
than due modesty can claim to be my own desert; do you understand me yet?


Swiftsp. I understand too much, thou smooth-faced intricacy.


Jocal. Then I Will unfold my self -- Give me the enclosed, Sir, I see it is yet
unopen'd.


[Trainst. delivers it. Trainst. 'Twas your command it should.


Jocal. Behold this Figure; is it not well limbed?


Trainst. But in my eye 'tshould be short of the Original.


Jocal. Thy expression well deserves it -- I dare bestow it thus before you,
Sir.


Enter Bowser. Swiftsp. Ha, her Picture given him too!

My heart, I feel it sink too low to aid my feet.


[Falls and faints. 1 Jock. O, Mr. Bowser, what will become of our Darling
Swiftspur?


Bows. Does he lie there?


1 Jock. Yes, and struck down merely by the breath of this Lady too!

Good Gentleman, he should have tried to have blown her down first.


Jocal. I dare venture him; I scarce read of any of his Sex that ever di'd for
love but in a Romance.


Bows. Best of all, Lady: And if dead, it is no matter; he may be afterward
flung into the Thames; he talked of cooling his Flames, I remember.


[Swiftspur leaps up. Swiftsp. I die for Love! a mere accidental qualm; did
thou and I ever speak of Love, Lady? What say thou, Trainsted?


Enter Flora. Jocal. I Will speak for him: Observe this Gentlewoman, she is the
true Original I did entrust you with.


Trainst. So like your self, she is more than taking; I Will not impose further on
your wishes.


Jocal. My Twin and only Sister -- I dare make good her gift. What say thou,
Flora; his person thou have seen before?


Flora. Your choice is mine, you have already taught my inclinations duly to
value his respects; I need add nothing more.


Trainst. You have won me in her fair affection.


Jocal. I told you it should be a strict and near obligement to my self.


Trainst. I am bound to accept her.


Jocal. For you, Sir, and your Gallopers, you may be in greater haste than I Will
suppose; perhaps I can as readily grant that you and I but dreamt of Love.


Swiftsp. I Will die in earnest first; I know thou dare not suffer it. A kiss,
and so join hands.


Jocal. You are one of the eag'rest men, and possible to ride post with me.


Swiftsp. Thou have me home In Faith.


Jocal. But you will hardly reach me so. Let me see your face -- You may study
the point better, or guess it presently.


Swiftsp. By that eye of thine, thou Creature of mirth and wonder, there is no
avoiding me.


Jocal. Then I must be yours it seems: I ever designed a brief and cheerful
Courtship.


Swiftsp. What think thou of the looses of Love I shall make now, Bowser?


Jocal. That I Will make better if I can.


Bows. I ever thought you would match your Wagtail before you departed.


Trainst. We are more than Brothers now; I Will not have other Wager with thee,
than which of us shall make the best Woman's Rider.


Swiftsp. But it is odds my Boy will cry first for a Hobbyhorse; he will soon
have an inclination to ride astride, I can tell thee.


Trainst. You are pleasant.


Swiftsp. Jocalin, bestow your hand on these, they are faithful Jockies, and
love to win heartily --


[They kiss her hand. 2 Jock. Or if she please, I Will begin below, and so kiss
upwards, as I rejoice your happiness.


Enter Clevly led by Maldrin, Quickthrift by Plodwel, Passal after. Clev.
Trainsted joined to your Sister Flora?


Jocal. He is, Madam.


Trainst. And by this kind Lady's Artifice, I thank her.


Swiftsp. Ladies and Gentlemen, I am yours: You Will all be for Newmarket now. I
am the man to bid you welcome.


Clev. With all our hearts.


Plod. What say you, Lady? becoming pleasure I dare own with such good Company.


Quickth. What you think fit, Sir.


Swiftsp. Thy judgment may compose some Articles amongst us there.


Plod. If not too intricate.


Bows. Or such of the nicer sort that are full of Dispute and little Reason.


Plod. Your pastimes shall command my assistance; I love 'em well, your
Joyntures too I Will make.


Mald. By any means.


Pass. Plodwel, I rejoice your happiness; my choice is made already in my
friends.


Plod. I perceive it, and judge it no less worthy in you both. Your part of
commendation does most speak it, Madam.


Clev. My love and estimation of both these obliged it.


Swiftsp. Bowser, do not long to be before at Bishops-stafford, and kiss thou
know who, at the Rain-deer, in thine and my behalf?


Bows. I Will have none of your cold scents, I thank you.


Swiftsp. Perhaps we'll dine there; but no Maidenhead to be won but at
Newmarket.


Omn. Jock. Agreed, agreed, agreed.


[Fling up their caps. Enter Breakbond. Pass. Thou were wanted, Breakbond.


Mald. To thy Men and Women-friends.


Swiftsp. and Trainst. And to thy Newmarket-friends.


Breakb. As I honor Women and Mirth, I could not help it. No less than a dozen
pretty rogues looked out of Windows two stories high to stay my coming to you:
it is such a necessitous loving world!


Pass. And will be always so with thee.


Breakb. Besides a business of some importance with the next Constable.


Mald. Not for assaulting him and his Watch, I hope.


Breakb. I have had cause, but I leave that disorder to such as dare only
fight when they are drunk.


Plod. And pay for the offense when they are sober.


Mald. And fit they should.


Breakb. To be short, with a few good words and more Silver, I have reduced
that legal sort of Knave to so much Conscience, as not to molest the King's
loving Subjects of Men and Women: Or to think that at one, two, or three a
Clock in the Morning they may not have their Congressions without his leave, or
a shilling for him and his Watch to drink. I have some thought to make my
Applications to Justices of the Peace to the same purpose. It Is such a crime to
nature to think that Mankind should live and love orderly --

I had almost forgot you, Ladies.


Swiftsp. Well, thou have a pleasant way of Raillerie.


Trainst. He shall wager on our side -- What think thou, Bowser?


Bows. I would I were rid of this trifling, lest I be so far debauched as to
conceive that there is other ingenious discourse than of Hounds and Horses.


Cleav. Thou art a wild one, but time has altered some.


Breakb. Or let it ruin me beyond the imbecility of ten Ages of gray Hairs,
provided I might but live to behold no fading in your Sex, 'twere such an
Autumn to my Genius.


Omn. Ladies. Now you oblige us all.


Jocal. Or we'll commend you to a fair one.


Breakb. Marry, Ladies, it may be if I live to be old in spite of my humor,
or when I am good for little more than to retire, perhaps I Will ask a License of
Womankinde, and espouse one.


Quickth. We'll hope it sooner for your sake.


Enter Servant. Serve. Ladies and Gentlemen, Sir Ralph Nonsuch desires your
excuse, being a little indisposed at present.


Clev. Perhaps with the fond conceit of his Politics.


Plod. It Is not unusual with him.


Serve. Besides some disaster within the compass of his most private Circle.


[Exit Servant. Jocal. In spite of his prudence too, what a smile does he
deserve!


Mald. But even now I understood it: No less than his fine Miss departed with
some hundreds of his Guineys, together with some Plate of his embez'led by a
thieving Separatist of his acquaintance.


Pass. It Is odds but he will come to thee for counsel, Plodwel. There Is no
maintaining Suit, did not Fools and Knaves make up the greatest number of
Contenders.


Plod. The very dishonor of so noble a Science as Law and its Professors.


Pass. God-a-mercy worthy Pleader -- You are happy now indeed, Lady.


Quickth. I grant it fully.


Swiftsp. Some mirth at London first -- Here Is Music waits us.


Swiftsp. Let Us kiss, and next to Horse.


[They dance. [The Dance is ended. Trainst. I Will see thee well mounted,
Breakbond; thy mirth deserves respect.


Breakb. I have been often, I thank some kindness, though I scarce had ever yet
Horse of my own: There Is a certain kind of Providence in living well, men know
not how.


Swiftsp. Bowser, thou shall lead the Road; we'll ride, laugh, talk, alight,
and what you please, Ladies --

It Is time our Pleasures hasten on their way;
Who loves Newmaket, will clap hands to day.

THE EPILOGUE.
Spoke by Mrs. BAKER. Mr Part was Mirth, and Jocund, as you see,
I bring the Epilogue along with me.
And I have been, as I presume you will say,
As merry as most Ladies in a Play;
And'tis loves Mirth best suits the Comic way.
Nor doubt I, Ladies, but it is known to you,
That some Newmarket-lads are Lovers too.
Men that quick pleasures swiftly can employ,
Most Women graut their speed, their love enjoy.
Wit they pretend to, as you Gallants do,
Who, though called Wits, like them lose money too.
Yet know in Matches no such booty way's,
As they who here cry up or damn our Play's.
Then Critics have a care what you commit,
Lest here our Jockeys with you wager Wit.
They know your stingy slights, and how inclined,
And what to Crony Poets is designed;
Whilst this our Author does by me afford
Not so much for his Play as one kind word.
Or tells you that his Scenes or Wit are new,
Which some, that boast much wit, want wit to show.
We for a Play such Wits did all approve,
Got little Money, we played all for Love.
FINIS.

