A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Ananias and Saphira, Wherein is laid open Their SIN and
PUNISHMENT.

BY William Houghton, Minister of Ordsoll in Nottinghamshire.

1 Cor. 10.6, 11. These things happened unto them for examples, and are written
for our admonition.

Romans 2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, committest thou Sacrilege?

Many who have fled from Idolatry, and reformed the Worship of God from that
pollution (...), that is, by bending the crooked stick too much the other way,
have run too far into the contrary extreme, and taken away (some of us) all
difference in a manner between Sacred and Profane, and in so doing made our
selves liable to that upbraid of the Apostle: Tu qui idola abominaris,
Sacrilegium admittis? Mede Diatr. 74.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Nathanael Webb, at the Kings Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1661.

To the Reader.
WHen Adam and Eve had sinned in eating the forbidden fruit, Eve was first
called forth and sentenced, then Adam: Here on the contrary, first Ananias,
then Saphira. The reason hereof, I conceive, was this, because there the woman
was first in the transgression, but here the man: There the Husband was
consenting to the Wife, (...).
here the Wife was consenting to the Husband. It is not a question this much
material to be stood upon which of them sinned first, it is likely there was no
long space of time between them: In such a nearness as is between head and body
the infection ran suddenly from one to the other. This therefore should rather
take up our thoughts and meditations, (...), Romans 1.32.
that as they were consenting together in sin, so were they partakers in the
punishment, this was the just judgment of God upon them; and this joining
together in sin is the cause of most general judgments. As sheep, having
infected one another, die together of the rot: so when people have generally
corrupted one another, they fall and perish together by Sword, Famine, or
Pestilence. Therefore the first counsel both David and Solomon give in the
Psalms and Proverbs, is, not to walk in the way of the ungodly, and, If sinners
entice thee consent thou not. Especially, as thou love thy soul, have a care
to keep thy self from this sin of Sacrilege, and walk not in the way of
Ananias. Many there are who count all gain godliness, therefore Sacrilege is
not thought to be a sin by such men, but being weighed by the balance of the
Sanctuary, and the heavy judgments of God upon it, it will be found to be a
great and grievous sin, highly provoking the eyes of Gods glory. The sin of
Adam and Eve was the sin of Sacrilege, and the first sin that was punished in
the Old Testament: This sin of Ananias and Saphira the sin also of Sacrilege,
and the first that we read of that was punished in the New Testament, after the
descending of the Holy Ghost: Surely therefore (as Solomon says) it is a snare
to the man that devoureth that which is holy: ^ov 20 15.
If thou be wise keep thy self out of this snare, ^^v. 18 4.
and be not partaker with others in this sin, that thou receive not hereafter
of their plagues.

W. H.

A Discourse concerning ANANIAS and SAPHIRA.
ACT. 5.3. Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to
keep back part of the price of the Land?


IN this History of Ananias and Saphira three things are to be considered.

First, Their fact in three particulars:

1. Selling of a possession. 2. Keeping back part of the price. 3. Laying down
a certain part at the Apostles feet, V. 1.
Secondly, The Examination and Trial, which was several; 1. Of Ananias, to v.
7. then of Saphira, to v. 12. Peter is the Justice before whom they are brought
by Gods Providence: His Examination or Trial of Ananias, has in it, 1. Three
Questions. And 2. The Sentence given.

I. The First Question shows the nature of his sin, v. 3.

II. The Second, That it proceeded from his own will; and that as he was not
constrained to sell or give away his Land, so there was no outward compulsion
used to constrain him to keep back part of the price: Both before and after the
Sale, it was in his own power, v. 4.

III The third Question shows, that his sin was very absurd, though firmly
settled in his mind, and that there was no cause why he should so resolutely
yield to the temptation of the devil; Why have thou conceived this thing in thy
heart? v. 6.

2. His definitive sentence, being the forerunner of Gods Judgment: Thou have
not lied unto men, but unto God, v. 4.

3. The events three: 1. In Ananias sudden death, the strange judgment of God
upon him for his sin, v. 5. 2. In all that heard it, fear, v. 5. 3. In certain
young men the performance of a duty, viz. his burial, v. 6.


In the arraignment of Saphira after her appearance, described by the
circumstance of time, and her ignorance of the precedent judgment, v. 7. we may
observe the same parts as before, viz.

First, Two Questions: 1. To the former, whereof she answers affirmatively
against her conscience, that they sold it for so much, v. 8. 2. In the second
Peter aggravates their sin by their mutual consent, and calls it by another
name, viz. A tempting of the Holy Ghost, v. 9.


Secondly, The sentence uttered, with relation to the judgment of her husband,
v. 9. end.

Thirdly, The three former events are rehearsed, though not in the same order,
v. 10, 11.

This is the logical Analysis, or resolution of the whole History; but because
my purpose is to show the nature of their sin, I will forbear to handle any
other part save only Peter's first Question, in these words: Why has Satan
filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the Price
of the Land? Wherein this sin of Ananias is set forth by five Arguments: 1. The
author, or first mover, Satan, 2. The measure of corruption, Filled. 3 The
subject, or shop of Satan, the Heart. 4. The matter of their sin, it was a
counterfeiting of, or Lying to the Holy Ghost. 5. The manner of it, By turning
aside part of the Price of the Land.


But Peter said, Ananias, etc. First then of the author that set them a work,
Satan; the word signifies an Adversary: Why has Satan.
that enemy of Piety, and murderer of Mankind, that root of malice, and Prince
of all wickedness, the Father of lies, that great Dragon, Rev. 12.9.
that old Serpent called the devil and Satan; he is veteranus, an old
experienced Soldier, that rejoices not so much to have his hand in small
attempts, as to be seen in great exploits; Facinus magnum, and memorabile, some
notorious mischief is to be expected when he comes upon the stage: When he
tempted Eve to eat the forbidden fruit, he brought a lamentable calamity upon
all mankind; when he by one of his evil angels came upon Saul, Saul throws his
spear at David, thinking to nail him to the wall; 1 Samuel 18.11.
When Satan stood up against Israel, 2 Samuel 19.10.
and provoked David to number the people, it put him into a great straight, 1 Chronicles. 21.
and there fell of Israel 70000 men: And when Satan, after the Sop, 1. -- 14.
entered into Judas, he most unnaturally betrayed his Master, Joh. 13.2.27.
and most ungratiously sold him for thirty pieces, that was presently to redeem
us with the ransom of his most precious blood: So here, when Satan, that old
Serpent, crept into the hearts of Ananias and Saphirae, he filled them full of
all mischief, and brought them to destruction. Why has Satan? That sin cannot
be small that proceeds from such an author: All men indeed are sinners, the
best that are do sin through the proneness of natural corruption, but when men
sin through the motion and instigation of Satan, then their sin becomes more
devilish and heinous; now some men in sinning do more immediately join hand in
hand with the devil, entertaining his motions, and consenting to his
suggestions, they join with him, and he with them: They as his Vassals, he as
their Lord; thus combining together, and uniting their strengths, they become
the more strong, according to that, Vis unita fortior. Satan indeed, both by
long experience, and by nature, is far more wicked than man, therefore when he
infuseth wickedness into man, and imparteth to him that hellish quality of his,
then man commits sin like the devil himself: When he moves, counsels,
persuades, fills, or possesses any man's heart (as here he did the hearts of
Ananias and Saphira) he then brings some notorious iniquity to pass, and
their sin becomes no small sin.

Therefore above all things take we heed of devilish motions and suggestions;
the devil is often exceeding sudden in his assaults, Inference.
a spirit, and very quick; oh that we could be as quick, when he sets upon us,
in flying unto God by prayer, saying as the Psalmist, Send help (O Lord) from
thy Sanctuary, Psalm. 20.2.70.1.
Lord make haste to help me. When the devil seeks to throw his wildfire into
our hearts, let us presently take to us the shield of faith, whereby we may
quench those fiery darts of his, and being strong in the Lord, and in the power
of his might, let us fight the good fight: When the enemy suggests any wicked
thought, let us rise up against it with a holy indignation, and presently smite
it down, send it as low as hell, Ruth 1.16.
from whence it came; and as Ruth to Naomi, Entreat me not, for I am steadfastly
minded to go with thee; so let us say to the adversary, Away cursed fiend, thou
losest thy labor, never go about to persuade me, entreat me not, for I am
steadfastly resolved with purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord. Thus
resisting we shall not be overcome, but shall even force Satan himself to
flight, for resist the devil (says the Apostle) and he will flee from you.
Jam. 4.7.


Filled. Filled.
It is said in the former Chapter they were all filled with the Holy Ghost;
Acts 4.31.
here is now another manner of filling, they are filled with the wicked ghost,
or spirit full of Satan; but how did Satan fill them is a point worthy our
enquiry. First, You see they consent together to practice that wickedness which
the devil put into their hearts, and herein they show their great folly in
this, that they had rather at last have part of the price wrongfully, and
unlawfully, than at the first the whole lawfully and justly, and what greater
folly could there be than this? But how does Satan draw them to this folly? I
answer, by his two Counselors, Covetousness and Vainglory; Covetousness
says, yet at least keep somewhat to your selves: Vainglory says, nay, but
give all at least in show. So then if to their folly we add Covetousness and
Vainglory we shall see the measure already beginning to fill very fast.



What will ye indeed give all away, and leave nothing to your selves? How will
ye do then when old age comes upon you, and you shall not be able to take
pains? What if you fall sick, and keep your beds, will these new Deacons and
Overseers then provide for you? Or will they not rather slight you, and not
regard you? Therefore keep something in store for fear of the worst, you know
not what may happen.

Vainglory likewise from Presumption draws her Arguments thus: If you give not
all, I assure you you shall want a great part of your praise, you shall be less
esteemed and regarded than such and such; Joses the Levite shall be better
thought of, and have more repute amongst the Brethren, for he has given all,
Acts 4.34-37.
wherefore if you will needs keep back part, be it so, yet seem to give all;
who knows that ye do keep any thing back, make show therefore of giving all, so
shall you provide for your selves; seem as liberal as the best, yet lose no
part of your commendation. These then are the two Counselors Covetousness and
Vainglory, the one looking at their profit, the other at their credit;
Vainglory draws on Presumption, Covetousness Despair: Vainglory bears them
in hand, that they shall be commended though they deal corruptly: And
Covetousness would have them think, that if they sincerely yield to the motion
of the Holy Ghost, and strictly follow the example of the Godly, then they
shall be like to starve for want of things necessary.

See and observe from this, Inference.
that as there is a concatenation of Virtues, so also of Vices, one seldom goes
alone, but draws and hales on another into the heart, till it be filled
therewith; therefore says the Prophet, They draw iniquity with cords of
vanity, Isa. 5.18.
and sin as it were with a Cart-rope; hence it is, that wicked men are said to
add sin to sin, as Ananias and Saphira here did, 30.1.
they added one sin to another, till at last they were filled with sin; a whole
band of the devils soldiers, Folly, Despair, Presumption, Covetousness,
Vainglory, these five are broke into their hearts, to which if you shall add
two more, that is, their lying and tempting of God, you will easily perceive,
that the unclean spirit which was gone out of them, at their first conversion
to the faith of Christ, is now returned, and finding the room swept and
trimmed, Luke 11.26.
has taken seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they are entered
in and dwell there, and their last state is worse than the first; you have now
seen how Satan filled them, these particulars that I have named make up the
full measure of their iniquity, and do show, that it is now come to the height,
and that it is ripe, so that the Lord must needs come and thrust in his sickle.

Thy heart.
these sins were entertained with the best welcome, with their mutual consent,
and into the best room, their hearts. The heart is the principal place and seat
of life in the natural man, and of grace in the spiritual. Now these places
that should have been Sancta Sanctorum, the most sacred Temples of the Holy
Ghost, are entered upon, and profaned by the devils guests; And this is a
further aggravation of their sin, for God has set every man to guard and keep
his heart as one would keep and defend a Castle, if a man deliver up this
Castle into the enemies hands it is treason; evil thoughts are the keys of
this Castle, for they open the heart and let in the enemy; to think as the
devil would have us think, is to deliver up the keys of our hearts to him; the
rolling up and down of evil cogitations is the turning of the key, and opening
of the gates to Satan; And this is that for which Peter so sharply rebuked
Ananias: Why has Satan filled thy heart? That is, why have thou betrayed thy
trust? Why have thou delivered up the keys into his hands? Why have thou done
this?

Let us learn from hence what is the cause of all our sin and misery, Inference
1.
even our own hearts. The Apostle here lays the fault upon Ananias,
expostulates with him, not with Satan: He does not say, Satan, why have thou
filled the heart of Ananias, but Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart? Why
did thou suffer him to do this? And yet more plainly, v. 4. Why have thou
conceived this wickedness in thy heart? (...), verse. 4.
Or as it is in the Original, Why have thou put this wickedness in thy heart?
The devil could never have got this wickedness into his heart if himself had
not put it in there: If Ananias had not opened the sack the devil could never
have filled it; He could never enter, and come into our hearts, did not we open
the door to him; therefore says the Apostle, Every man is tempted when he is
drawn away of his own lust, Jam. 1.14, 15.
and enticed, then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin. The devil
indeed filled the heart or Ananias, but it was not till Ananias had conceived
this wickedness in his heart, or had put it in his heart, that is, he gave it
conception, and then the devil nourisht and augmented it till it came to the
birth.

should most strive against: For the Apostle here strikes at the root of this
mischief, the heart. Why has Satan filled thy heart? And why have thou
conceived this wickedness in thy heart? Making it, as it were, the engineer and
framer of all this mischief: Such was his dealing with Simon Magus, Pray God,
Act, 8 22.
if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee. Thus the Prophet,
Jer. 4.14.
Wash thy heart from wickedness that thou may be saved. It was ordered by a
Law called the Law of the twelve Tables, Fontinus.
that all springs and fountains should be kept from filthiness and pollution,
lest these being corrupted should fill the Land with infection: So here the
heart is the fountain; therefore (says Solomon) above all keepings keep thy
heart, Prove. 4.2^.
for out of it are the issues of life; If thou would have any sin mortified,
kill it in thy heart; if any grace entertained, plant it in thy heart. A good
man (says our Savior) out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth
that which is good; Mat. 12.35.
where the word (Good) is thrice repeated; but mark the order, first, a good
treasure, then a good man, then good fruits: The treasure of the heart being
good makes all good, gives the owner of this treasure his denomination, makes
him a good man, yea, his speeches, actions, these fruits that come from him
they are good also, the heart being good. It is the goodness of the man
sanctifies all outward things, but it is the goodness of the heart that
sanctifies the man.

To return to my Text.

This sin of Ananias as you have seen it set forth by the Author, Quantity,
Subject; so in the fourth place, it is lively deciphered by the matter of it,
and this will put us upon a narrower search (...).
and the natures of things are commonly known by their names: Now this sin of
theirs has three names in this Chapter, for first it is called a
counterfeiting of the Holy Ghost; Secondly, Lying to the Holy Ghost in my
Counterfeiting of the Holy Ghost.
v. 9. I will endeavor to open them all in order.

First, There was a Counterfeiting of the Holy Ghost: It is said of Achan, that
he took and stole the accursed thing, Josh. 7.11.
and dissembled also. Vid. Cajetan in loc. p. 13.
Joshua sent Officers into the Army to charge every man to keep the decree of
Almighty God, in not taking the accursed thing, and when all the people
answered that they had kept the decree, Achan said so too; thus he stole the
accursed thing, and dissembled also, faining himself as innocent as any in the
company. Just so dealt this sacrilegious couple, they stole part of the Price,
and dissembled also; they would seem to do as others did, and be thought as
devout as any of them, here was a counterfeiting of the Holy Ghost, that is, of
the grace of the Holy Ghost; a faining, and making show of that sincere grace
which was not in them, in that they would seem to give the whole, when they
gave but part only, here was their hypocrisy, for this is the guise of
hypocrites, if they can cast a mist before your eyes, and walk invisible, if
they can carry it away cleanly, and be reputed just and holy, they care for no
more: They are like some Taverns, having before them the sign of the Angel, but
within nothing but beastly drunkenness: or as Christ says, like whited
sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, Mat. 23.27.
but within are full of dead men's bones, and all uncleanness: Fair without, but
foul within; outwardly, they appear righteous unto men, but within they are
full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Many examples of such are recorded in
Scripture, as of Saul, who said that he had done the Commandment of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.
when he had done quite contrary; 9 -- 13.
and Gehazi, when he had been running after Naaman the Syrian for a bribe, 2
King. 5.25.
came and stood in a demure posture before his Master Elisha, saying, Thy
servant went no whither. So Herod spoke thus to the Magi, Bring me word when ye
have found him, Mat. 2.8.
that I may come, and worship him also, when he meant to murder him. As to
cover and conceal a fault (in the presence of God especially, who knows all
things) is dissimulation: So to set forth a color and show of virtue and
goodness there where it is not, is Simulation and Counterfeiting, and both this
and that is hypocrisy, and both to be seen in Ananias and Saphira, for they
kept secret their thievery, and make a show of their liberality; they give
their heart to Satan, and their face to God; they counterfeit the Holy Ghost,
being limbs of the devil; they feigned that they had that special and excellent
grace of God in their hearts which was then in the Church, even the Communion
of Saints in a rare and extraordinary manner, when indeed they had Communion
and Fellowship with Satan, and he it was that had filled their hearts with
devilish qualities.

Let it therefore teach us to take heed of this; Inference.
Hypocrisy is such a sin, that it makes him that in show is an Angel of light,
Joh. 6.70.
to be indeed a Fiend of darkness. Judas one of the twelve Disciples of Christ,
and Doctors of the World, is called a devil, and therefore a devil because when
he betrayed his Master he did it with a Kiss; that execrable venom of Treason
was blandisht over with a soft and gentle, but hypocritical Kiss, He came to
Jesus, and said, hail Master, and kissed him. Mat. 26.49.
I end this with that excellent saying of Chrysostom: O hypocrite, if it be
good to be good, why will thou not be that which thou will seem to be? And if
it be evil to be evil, why will thou be that which thou will not seem to be? If
it be good to seem to be good, it is better to be so; And if it be evil to seem
to be evil, it is worse to be so; therefore either seem as thou art, or be as
thou seem to be.

Secondly, It is called Lying to the Holy Ghost in this verse, v. 4. that is,
he lied to the Holy Ghost being God. Lying is so linckt to Hypocrisy, Lying to
the Holy Ghost.
that it serves the same as an officious handmaid. Now this lie of theirs was
very cunningly contrived. The proud (says David) have imagined a lie against
me; Psalm. 119 69.
Or it might be read thus: They have trimmed their lies, Concinnaverunt
mendacia.
dressed and trimed them under the shadow and color of truth: So this lie of
Ananias was very artificially trimmed up. Jun. vatabl.
Many things come here to be considered about it.

1. We find that it was a real lie, not uttered in words, but exhibited Ananias
in words did not utter an untruth, but his deeds did; he did not say, that he
did not keep back part; but his deeds made show of giving all, therefore that
deed of his was a lie for another secret deed, namely, keeping back part did
contradict the same. There are real lies then as well as verbal, such was this
of Ananias. That is the first.

2. This Lie of theirs it was a concealing of the truth, and truth be so, we
may go shut up our shops, for should we tell the fault of our goods, we should
hinder our selves in the sale. But is it not better to hinder thy self in thy
goods, than to offend thy God; nakedly and plainly to declare the goodness or
badness of thy Commodities, than by taking advantage of the buyers ignorance to
have singultum cordis, 1 Samuel 25.31.
that is, a throbbing heart, an accusing conscience. This sin the of Ananias it
was a lie, it was a real lie, and it was a lie in the point of concealment,
because they concealed the truth.

He that made the eye, shall not he see? He that made the heart, shall not he
understand? Psalm. 94.9.
Surely he sees, and knows all the Mazes and Meanders; all the windings and
turnings of our vain hearts.

Let this therefore teach us to hate and detest this sin of Lying. These are
the things which ye shall do, Inference.
speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor, Zac 8.16, 17.
execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates; Let none of you
imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love no false oath; for
all these are things that I hate says the Lord. In like manner the Apostle,
Laying aside Lying, speak ye the truth every man to his neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25.
for ye are members one of another: So deal therefore one with another as one
member of the body would deal with the rest. Consider what has been said
against this sin, That every lie is against the God of truth, and he will find
it out; that it was the sin of these two notable hypocrites, and a sin that
must help them out in their hypocrisy; they could never have made the World
think so well of them if the lie had not come in to help them. Further, Lying
is the devils badge, a mark of his disciples, Joh. 8.44.
who himself is the father of lies. It is joined and coupled together by the
Prophet Hosea with four other capital sins, Hos. 4.2.
Swearing, Murder, Theft, Adultery. Surely they that hide themselves under
falsehood and deceit, Isa. 28.15.
and make lies their refuge, will in the end be found to be but under a bad
shelter; For (says David) the Lord who loves truth and righteousness, Psalm.
45.7.
and hates iniquity, Psalm. 5 6.
he will destroy them that speak lies; and how will he destroy them? St. John
faith it shall be with an everlasting destruction, Rev. 21.8.22.15.
he will shut them out of the heavenly Jerusalem. Let every one of us
therefore labor for truth in our speeches, and for truth in our actions, ever
saying with David, Lord, Psalm. 119.29.
remove from me the way of Lying.

Thirdly, You have seen what was the second ingredient, the Tempting of the
Holy Ghost.
and they lied to the Holy Ghost; In the ninth verse it is called a Tempting of
God. How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord?
This then is to be taken in as a third branch of their sin, and a devilish sin
it is, Mat. 4 6.
because when the devil tempted Christ in the Wilderness he tempted him to
tempt God, saying, Cast thy self down headlong. This sin left the remembrance
of it in giving a name to a place, where the people of Israel tempted God at
Rephidim, for it is not only called Me^ibah of their contending and striving
against Moses, but also Massah of their tempting of God; therefore Moses does
admonish them, that they should not tempt God as they tempted him at Massah,
saying, Deuteronomy. 6.16.
Is the Lord amongst us, or not. Exodus 17 7.
The Psalmist also testifies that they tempted him in the Wilderness, and
required meat for their lust, saying, Behold, he smote the Rock that the waters
gushed out, Psalm. 78.20.
and the streams overflowed, can he give bread also? Can he provide flesh for
his people? As if it were not as easy for God to give bread as well as water,
but they would needs tempt him, and try what he could do: So here Ananias and
Saphira are said to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, because they meant to try
conclusions, and prove whether or no the Holy Ghost could espy and find out
their juggling, and whether he could punish it being found out.

This then being so great a sin to tempt God, let us take the more heed of it;
let us take heed of presuming upon the mercy of God; let us not venture to
commit any sin, entertaining such a thought as this into our hearts, Why? What
if we do? God is not able, or he is not willing to punish us. Do we provoke the
Lord to anger, are we stronger than he? 2 Cor. 20.22.
Oh let us do nothing with an evil conscience, nor against the knowledge of a
good conscience, praying still with David, Lord keep thy servants from
presumptuous sins, Psalm. 19.13.
and let them not have dominion over us.

Their sin then, for the nature of it, was like Cerberus, a beast, as the Poets
feign, having three heads; or like a poison mixed, and made up of three
ingredients, Hypocrisy, Lying, and Tempting of God.

(...). Keeping back part of the price of the Land.
which is the Quomodo or manner of it; they made a lie to God, they tempted
God, but how? Saint Luke says, it was by turning aside part of the price of
the Land; here was to use the School term Formale, the very formality of it.
The devil that old Serpent had compounded and infused a new poison into their
hearts, consisting of three ingredients, they were the matter of their sin; now
the manner of acting, and working, and what operation this poison had, appears
by their actions too open and known, the first, and the third, selling of their
Land, and bringing part of the price to the Apostles feet; but the second was
secret and unknown, viz. keeping back part of the price.

They began no doubt by the motion of the Holy Ghost to sell their possession,
and in selling of it aimed at a good and holy end, that it might be distributed
to the several necessities of the Church, therefore they bring it, and lay it
at the Apostles feet: A good beginning, and a good end intended; but Satan
creeps in between them, sets his foot in the midst, and mars all; like the
envious thief in the Gospel, he sows tares amongst the good seed; yea, so far
he bewitcheth them, that they presume through their hypocrisy to beguile and
deceive the Holy Ghost, in concealing part of the price. Their sin then was a
secret and voluntary withholding and keeping back some part of that which they
began to give openly; and in conclusion a show of performing the whole, when
indeed they did but perform only some part. They gave all to God, they stole
some of it again, and would have the rest to stand for the whole. Their own
being given to God was no longer their own, but Gods, therefore their secret
keeping back part was Sacrilege, that is, stealing of a holy and consecrated
thing. Now this was a sly kind of Sacrilege, and hard to be exemplified out of
Gods Word, and it seems but a small matter for them to take some of that which
so lately was their own; yet seeing they were led to it by the instigation of
Satan, he was the Parent, and that in traveling to bring it forth, they grew
very big, being full of Distrust, Presumption, Covetousness, Vainglory, and
having brought it forth, it appears in the light to be a monstrous birth, a
hell-hound with three heads, Hypocrisy, Lying, and Tempting of God, (as you
have already heard.) And lastly, seeing (as the Story shows) it was punished
with a sudden and fearful death as it were, the ireful breath of the Holy
Ghost, blasting and smiting them both to death by the mouth of the Apostle;
therefore it is apparent from hence, that this their Sacrilege, suppose the
lowest degree of Sacrilege, this their stealing of part of their own gifts
from God, was a most fearful, and grievous sin. And from hence I propound these
Queries following: I. If to take it away Secretly were such a sin, what is it
to do it Openly? II. If to take away Part, what is it to take away All? III. If
to take away a man's Own gift were so great a sin, what is it then to take away
Another man's gift?


But these things require a fuller debate, therefore let us consider of them
severally.

I say therefore, First, If to steal Secretly that which has been 1 These. 5.7.
it is now committed in the light, and is become, as it were, Psalm. 91.6.
a noonday devil: So it is not likewise an aggravation of the Sacrilege of our
days, that whereas Ananias and Saphira hid their sin, Job 31.33.
as Adam, and kept it close, many do now on the contrary, Isa. 3.9.
show and declare their sin, as Sodom, they hide it not. We say, he is a bold
Thief that will steal when men look on: Are they not then bold Thieves that
will rob God of the means of his Worship, though all the World look on. That is
the first.

The second Quere is this, If it be so great a sin to keep back Part Ananias)
so a revocation is made of their gifts: This questionless cannot be without
sin; for in matters of God we are not to deliberate, In ^e sancta deliberatio
non habet locum.
that is, not to reason with flesh and blood, but to do as we have promised:
When thou vowest a Vow unto the Lord thy God, Cypr.
thou shall not be slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it
of thee, Deuteronomy. 23.21.
and so it should be sin unto thee, says Moses; Job. 2.27.
So holy Job, Thou shall make thy prayer to him, and he shall hear thee, and
thou shall render him thy Vows; To this purpose likewise is that of Solomon,
Eccles. 5.4.
When thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure
in fools, pay that which thou have vowed. Indeed unlawful Vows ought not to
bind men's consciences, neither are they to be kept, but rather to be broken by
those that made them, because sin is not to be added to sin; but on the other
side, take away and exclude superstition, wickedness, impossibility, then Vows
are lawful, they bind the conscience, and ought to be performed. When therefore
a thing is once not only determined between God and a man's conscience, but also
publicly consecrated, and so notified before men, then it is no longer his
that gave it, but it is Gods; It is not common, but holy, that is, set aside to
a holy end. It is the gift of the Holy Ghost, because God is both the Author
and end thereof; for although the thing given be temporal and transitory, yet
the manner of giving being spiritual and holy, the gift is the gift of the Holy
Ghost, for God the Holy Ghost does effectually move a man's mind to give it, and
God the Lord Jesus Christ does cheerfully receive it in his Members for the
mutual cherishing and exercising of Gods gifts and graces amongst them, to the
honor and glory of God the Father; wherefore what man soever, though the The
style of all ancient Deeds and Grants shows this, ^unning in this form: We have
given unto God both for our selves, and for our heirs for ever. Magna Charta
cap 1.

When Ethelbert endowed the Church of Pancrace with Land, he did it with an
irrevocable Act: Adjuro, and praecipio in nomine Domini Dei omnipotentis, qui
est omnium justus judex, ut praefata terra subscripta donatione sempeternaliter
sit confirmata, ita ut nec mihi, nec alicui successorum meorum de ea aliquid
fraudare liceat. Spelm, Council. Britan. p. 119.

Siquis rem domino jam devotam carnali victus illecebra crediderit denuo
reposcendam, non est legitimus ejus rei possessor, sed divini juris
pronunciatur invasor. Fulgent. Epist. 1. de debit. Conjug.


Giver of the gift, shall either openly take away, or secretly purloyn the
same, he commits Sacrilege, and steals from God, and not from men.



Was it not in thine own power, says Peter here to Ananias? True (as if he had
said) it was, but being since consecrated, and given unto God, thou art now
found to be a liar and a thief in keeping it from him: Let all men therefore
take heed of dealing thus with their God; I am persuaded that this dallying
with Almighty God, this playing fast and loose with His Majesty, is that which
eats Religion out of the hearts of many rich men, and quenches the Spirit of
God in them: Why should any man be so simple as to begin in the Spirit, and end
in the Flesh? Begin with God, (as Ananias here did) and end with the devil?
Gal. 6.7.
Be not deceived (says the Apostle) God is not mocked. This is a second thing
offered to our consideration, If to take and keep back part were such a sin,
what is it then to keep back the whole?

To proceed yet one step further in this climax or gradation: Hooker than in
mine own: The devil (says he) by certain strong enchantments has so deeply
bewitched Religion it self, as to make it in the end an earnest solicitor, and
an eloquent perswader of Sacrilege, urging confidently, that the very best
service which men of power can do to Christ, is without any more ceremony to
sweep all, and to leave the Church as bare as in the day it was first born;
that fullness of bread having made the children of the household wanton, Hooker
Ecces. pol. l. b. 5. p. 432.
it is without any scruple to be taken away from them and thrown to dogs; that
they which laid the prices of their Lands as offerings at the Apostles feet,
did but sow the seeds of superstition; that they which endowed Churches with,
Lands poisoned Religion; that Tithes and Oblations are now in the sight of God
as the sacrificed blood of Goats; that if we give him our hearts and
affections, our goods are better bestowed otherwise, etc. Covetous men have
ever something to say for themselves, so these you see they want no words,
desire of gain makes them very witty. But turn we our ears from them to God,
and hear what he says: They that wrong Levi in his substance God shall smite
through the Loins of such, Deuteronomy. 33.11.
says Moses. Mal. 3 8.
Will a man rob God? Ye have robbed me in tithes and offerings, therefore are
ye cursed with a curse, cries the Prophet Malachi; Those that say, Come let us
take to our selves the houses of God in possession; O my God, make them like a
wheel, still running about as if they were mad. As the fire burns the wood:
and as the flame sets the mountains on fire; Psa. 83.13, 14.
So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm; So
David. Thus the Penmen of Holy Writ sharpen their Style, denouncing heavier
judgments against sacrilegious persons; This is therefore the third and last
Question: If Ananias might not keep back part of that which was his own, but it
cost him his life, How then dare men take away from the Church, that which
never was their own, and not think themselves subject to the wrath of Almighty
God?

Having thus laid open the several parts of this Text, and showed the nature of
this sin of Ananias and Saphira, let me desire thee (Christian Reader) to fix
thy serious thoughts and meditations upon this general Conclusion, very clearly
arising from the premises: That there are many who call Christ Master, yet are
the Worlds servants. Or, That it is possible for a man to go far in the way to
heaven, yet be at length overtaken with a whorish love of this World, for thus
was it with Ananias and Saphira. Who would ever have thought, that Saint Luke,
writing so many things in their praise in the former Chapter, should here come
in with such a tragical relation: There they received the Word, here give ear
to Satan; There they prayed, here hold parley with the devil; There with joyful
hearts they praise God, here they tempt him; There you read of their charity,
now you have seen their hypocrisy; There they joined themselves with the
Apostles, 1 Timothy 6.10.
here for detaining the price of their Land were cast out of the blessed
society and fellowship of the Apostles: Summos saepe viros transverses egit
av^ritia. Salust. Hominum mentibus est inspersa cupiditas, and little qui in
pie^ate cons^^uti vid^^^u^, Chrysto^ 5. p. 204.
Well does Saint Paul say, that the love of money is the root of all evil; It
is the root of Apostasy, and falling from God. This sin creeps into the heart
when other sins go out; and this is the sin of many Professors, men of eminent
parts, who for Piety and Religion seem to be set in a higher rank and form than
other men. Curtius writing the Life of Alexander, praises him for many things,
as Wisdom, Valor, Industry, reports him very hardy, a man that when frost and
snow lay upon the ground, would climb up the Alps on his bare hands and feet;
then he gives a sudden dish with his Pen: Caeteruming entia animi bona, etc.
hand tolerabili vini cupidita of aedavi^. Q Curt. p. 158.
But he was intolerably given to the love of Wine, and would be drunk, and that
was a blemish to all his other Virtues: The like may be said of many
Professors, that make a glorious show, hear much, read much, do many excellent
things; But their hearts are overcharged with the love of earthly things, and
that deprives them of salvation, for that Plaagere cos praecipit, non propter
homicidia, non propter fornicationes, aut alia postremo vitia lethali gladio
animos and parenns occisione jugulantia: sed propter solas tantummodo opes;
propter insanam cupiditatem, propter auri, atque argenti famem. ut ostenderet
scilicet sufficere hae^ homini ad aeternam d^mnatio^^^, ^ri^ms^ ^^atus olii
(...) s^^ssent Sal p 357.
alone may do it as well as murder or adultery. The hearers, resembled to
thorny ground, went they not further than the rest? Did they not hear the Word?
Did they not believe it? Did they not receive it with joy? Yet after all this
were choked with cares and riches. The young man in the Gospel, did he not
leave Christ because he would not leave his possessions. and Ananias here
because he would not let go the price of his Land? Judas also, and Demas they
both suffered shipwreck upon the same rock. When Naomi went out of Moab with
her two daughters, Ruth and Orpah, toward the Land of Judah, Ruth stuck to
her, and would by no means forsake her: Orpah, she also went a good way with
her, wept, and took on, but at length she kissed her mother and departed; She
returned to idolatrous Moab to her People, and to her Gods (says the Text:) So
a hypocrite may make a fair progress in the way to heaven, read, pray, converse
with the Saints, weep it may be at a Sermon, yet for all this be deeply in love
with the World, and have his heart there amongst his Gods of Silver and Gold:
And these, O ye men of might, have been the Gods many of you have been fighting
for so long; Luke 8 14. Mat. 19.22. 2 Timothy 4.10. Ruth. ^.15. Psalm 7^.5. Mat. 21
38.
that which you have chiefly sought has been to seize upon the inheritance,
and to get into your hands the price of the Land; Who see^h not at this day a
great measure of Ananias's hypocritical covetousness, and covetous hypocrisy
to have been reigning in your hearts: Seeming Saints you have been, and
servants of God, but the World has been your Master: You have used Religion
but as a ladder to climb up to wealth and worldly preferment, which being had,
the ladder has been thrown aside, no matter what became of it: Saint John
says, 1 John 5.4.
This is the victory that overcomes the World, even our faith; to you it may
be said, This is the victory that has overcome your faith, even the World, and
your worldly hearts, look into them, and you will find this to have been the
root of your late so foul miscarriages, but manum de tabula, oculos ad coelum.

The Lord shower down his blessings upon the head of our Sovereign Lord King
Charles, and so replenish him with the grace of thy Holy Spirit, that he may
always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way. Bless the Great Council of
the Realm assembled together in the High Court of Parliament, grant that with a
single eye they may look at thy glory, ever preferring the public good before
their private interests; Job 29.17.
strengthen their hands that they may pluck out of the throats of those
Cormorants the spoil which they have so greedily devoured. Rebuke the madness
of those false Prophets, 2 Pet. 2.3.
who through Covetousness with fained words make merchandise of thy people.
Lord, bless Levi's substance, and accept the work of his hands; and suffer not
the means of thy Worship to come into the hands of those who count all gain
godliness.

This heavy judgment on Ananias struck fear into all that heard it: The Lord
grant it may have the same effect in all that shall read these lines, Act.
5.5.11.
that all Israel may hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously. Deuteronomy. 17.13.
Seeing few have conceived this sin of Sacrilege in their hearts who have not
felt the judgment of God upon their backs; Deuteronomy. 21.21.
may therefore the example of his heavy judgments deter and keep back all men
from this sin.

(...).


