THE USURPER, A Tragedy. As it was Acted at the Theater Royal by his Majesty's
Servants.

Written by the Honorable EDWARD HOWARD, Esquire

Licensed August 2. 1667. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the
New Exchange, 1668.

THE EPISTLE.
SInce the Impression of Plays, is so much the Practice of the Age, that few or
none have been Acted, which fail to be displayed in Print; where they seem to
put on the greater formality of Authors, while perhaps thus appearing, divested
of the life of Action, which gave no small varnish to their figures, they
suffer a more severe Correction from the Reader: Notwithstanding which
disadvantage, I have Adventured to be Companion in the Impression of this Poem.
And indeed I think it some impudence to hazard the Reader's being less Gentle
than Spectators; the Press being in some manner the Stages Tyring-House, where
all Ornaments are thrown off, save native design and Language. And if this
Poem, either for Gravety or weight of Argument, or deepness of Intreque (the
true Soul and Genius of the Stage) has received (when Represented there) any
grateful Acceptance from the Judicious, who pass few Enormities undiscerned,
and therefore best able to take Plays in their highest Magnitudes, to them I am
obliged to present it thus published. Not insensible what disadvantage it may
receive, passing in the World on naked feet of verse, with other Works that
have their measures adored with Trappings of Rhyme, which how'ere they have
succeeded in wit or design, is still thought music, as the Heroic Tone now
goes: But whether so natural to a Play, (that should most nearly imitate, in
some Cases our familiar Converse) the Judicious may easily determine. But here
I would not be thought to detract from any that have been Considerably welcomed
on the Stage in this Garb; since many Excellent Pens, and Honorable Persons,
have thought fit to spend some Treasure of their Muses in Compositions of this
kind. The other extreme which deserves some Reflection; and which far more
debases the Dignity of the Stage, is that of Farce or Scommatick Plays, which
has so tickled some la^e Audiences, with I know not what kind of Jollity* that
true Comedy is fooled out of Countenance, and instead of Humor and wit, (the
Stages most Legitimate issue) leaves it to the inheritance of Changlings. No
less Articke seems to many, the wresting in of Dances, when unnatural and
improper to the business of the Scene and Plot, as if by an unintelligable
Charm of their Muses, the Actors were like Faires Conjured up, that the Play
might vanish in a Dance. Yet least I seem too much to carp at the delights of
others, (since Plays are but Diversions in what kind soever understood) I
willingly wave this unnecessary Excursion; desiring the Reader to think it
meant rather an Apology for my own: In respect it had not this kind
entertainment, and not a violent Stemming against the Tide of Applause, that so
favorably has brought Plays of this sort of Trimming, and Lading to an Anchor
on the Stage, where I leave them to their Spectators, as I do this here to the
Readers impartial Reception,

Farewell.
THE PROLOGUE TO THE USURPER.
AS new made Pilots when they first Take Sea,
Fear makes 'em think each Wave a Storm they see.
And when Arrived, at the Appointed Land;
Mistrust the Shore, is some devouring Sand:
So here our Poet; having brought his Play
Unto the Stage, the Muses fatal Bay.
Fears even the Coast, he labored most to Steer;
Doubting his Danger will he Landing here.
But this same Itch of Wit, so fain would thrive;
Just as some Merchants, still with Losses strive;
That no successless Voyage made before,
Writers forewarns from Coming to this Shore.
Who though here Beggared, still Design and Try*
How to deserve, or get a Charity.
But in Good faith, it is held as hard a Task
To pardon Wit, as Give to All that Ask.
For here is the Difference, and the Danger too;
Wants will Presume, but Wit's often poor from you.
In these Extremes, it is Difficult to say;
Which is most safe, a Good, or Bad, new Play.
Since it is his Danger, now who ere does writ,
To want a Pity, or to meet a Spite.
Such strange Antipathies we well may fear,
Both from your failings, and our Authors here;
Yet I dare swear, He Will Count it his Good Hap,
Though Envy strike, if All of you will Clap.
Drammatis Personae.
DAmocles. An Usurper. Dionysius. His Son. Cleander The true King disguised
like a Moor, under the name of Hiarbas. Cleomenes. A faithful noble Person.
Demaratus. A Sicilian noble and worthy Senator 's. Parmenio. His Son. Hugo. A
Parasite and Creature of the Usurpers. Proclus. Strato. Commanders nnder the
Usurper. Alexius. Sicanus. Dorion. Commanders under the Usurpers Son.
Scrophilus. Arisba. A Moor, and Servant to King Cleander. Senators. Attendants.
Soldiers.
The names of the Women.
Timandra An Affrican Queen that preserved and loved the King Cleander.
Calanthe. The Kings Sister. Ladies.
The Scene Sicily.

ACTUS PRIMUS:
Scena prima.
Enter Demaratus, and the two other Senators. Dema. I Cannot expound the Riddle.


1. Sen. It is a Trick, some new Device to ensnare us.


2. Sen. I cannot tell: It wants a President.
Resign his Power and Greatness, at a time,
When every Stratagem has had Success,
And all things Stoop to his Ambition.
It puzles me,

Dema. I wish he were in earnest.

1. Sen. If his Inclinations be for a private Life,
He shall have my Vote; and let him make
What have he will to the other World.

2. Sen. If it were in my power, I would lend him
A Lift to Heaven, and that is more Charity
Than he deserves, when the Accounts* are cast between us.

Enter Colonel, Strato, and a Soludier. Soul. What shall we do, Colonel? they
say
We are like to be Disbanded too.

Str. Is there no Hemp? Go Hang your selves.

1. Sen, This is not the usual Dialect.

S^r. Your Servant Gentlemen.

2. Sen. Noble Colonel, you are melancholy.

Them. A Simptom of our Cure.

[aside. Sir. Your Wisdoms apprehend the Cause;
If the Generals Humor holds, You three
Will not take my single Security for a thousand Crowns.

1. Sen. You are merry now.

Sir. If you were no Senators I could tell you,
You lie now: But bewo'ye Gentlemen,
You are like to have a fine time on it.

[Exit. Them. I like this well.

1. Sen. Another discomposed to.

Enter Alexius. Them. I am acquainted with him Colonel.

Alex. My grave Senator: Hark! you promised
Me a Kindness; We may be undone, if the
General hold his purpose* We shall
Be marching off shortly.

Them. Whither*

Alex. To our old Trades again.

Them. Why, do you believe his Excellency
Has any serious thoughts to lay down his Commands.

Alex. You will easily Consent: Are you not all desir^d
To meet him at Timoleons Tomb?

Them. We are.

Alex. Where he will resign his Commission to the Senate.

1. Sen. It Is very strange.

Alex. And which is worse in my Opinion.
It will be true, And which is worse than this,
There Is little hope the Army will be continued.
The Enemies (Pox on 'em) are all quiet,
And we that fought for this peace, must Starve and Stink,
For ought I know, suddenly.

Them. Nay, prithee be clear with us, and tell us
Thy own thoughts of the General.

Alex. By the Word of an Officer.

Them. Who Will take it?

Alex. If you cannot take my Word, to what purpose
Should I answer your question? Why I Will tell you,
And you shall judge your selves, what will
Become of ^im* These two days he has
Drunk nothing but Water, Eat nothing but Sallads,
Talked nothing but Religion, and now and then falls*
Into a long Fit of Prayer, that signifies nothing:
If these be not Prognostics of a falling General,
Then would I had all my Arrears.

Dam. Why? for your comforts, the Senate may hold fit to keep
The Army up still, and though the General lay down. --
It Is not impossible to find another will take up.
Will it hurt you to Receive your Money?

Alex. Nay, nay for my part, I shall be contented, so
I be paid amongst a great many more,
That shall be happy to be retained in your Thoughts,
As men that dare empty their best Ve^ns to serve you.

1. Sen. We have experience of your Valor Colonel.

2. Sen. And shall deserve it.

Alex. Your most humble Servant.

Exit Alexius. Them. What think you now?

1. Sen. My Faith settles apace.

Enter Cleomenes. Them. It Is he: my Lord Cleomenes, my Heart
Leaps to congratulate your safe return,
(Gentlemen of the Senate of my Principles)
Your Victories were here before your Person;
Our Enemies in Afric are all tamed.

Cleo. And Dionysius marching Home in Triumph.
I shall take an Opportunity after I have seen the
General, to give you a more particular account.

Them. One Word, Sir, We have Wonders here, that
You expect not, strange Revolutions.

Cleo. How?

Them. I dare not tell you aloud, and it will ask
Your strong Faith, the General.

[Whispers aside. 1. Sen. He is a most Noble Gentleman, and has
Preserved the Honor of his Family,
And still maintained his Current clear, uot mixed
With foul rebellious Streams.

2. Sen. 'Twas his Fortune to be abroad when
Damocles began his Faction here; and, but since his Return,
And the Kings loss engaged with Dyonisius, --

[Aside. Cleo. But that I know the Wisdom and Friendship
Of good Demaratus, I should Suspect
He would abuse my Faith; It frights my Reason:
Resign his interest in the Army?
But who are those approach us with grave Ceremony?

Enter Hugo and others. Is not this Hugo de Petra?
Them. The same: One that may write himself
Knave General.

Hugo. My most Noble Lord: I know not whither I should
First deliver my Message from the General, or
Bid you Wellcom home from my self?
But it is good manners to Obey his Excellence.

Cleo. You preserve your ingenious Humor still.

Hug. Sir, I was Commanded to wait your Entrance into
The City; and in the Generals name, to
Congratulate your return.

Cleo. He was ever gracious.

Hug. But that is not all, By his Command I am to Salute
Yo^ by the Title of Grand Master of the great
Castle of Syracuse, which is a Signal Mark of
His Confidence I will assure you: Leave off your Wonder,
And Read there.

[Delivers him a Commission. Cleo. It were no manners to distrust his Act,
Or your Relations, who have always been
A friend to truth.

Hug. Let me Kiss thy honorable Hand upon my own
Account; If I have a soul? your Honor shall
Command it to your Service.

1. Sen. If he have a Soul? he makes a doubt on it.

Cleo. But it is too great an honor to Cleomenes:
His goodness thus would prompt me to a worth;
Who finding only some desires in me
To serve his just Commands, would quicken them
To some becoming Action; but my Duty
Is not performed, till I wait upon him.

Hug. And we shall attend you; my good Lord,
Demaratus, and Gentlemen.
[Exit Hugo and Cleom.
Them. This, beyond all confirms me.

1. Sen. A good Preface.

Them. Excuse me Gentlemen, if some great affair
Call me hence: I Will not fail to meet you at
T^moleons Tomb: where, if things succeed
To expectation, I shall tell you something to startle you,
And you shall thank me for it.
[Exit Demaratus.
1. Sen. But it is not without my Wonder,
That Cleomenes, --

2. Sen. There Is the policy: 'Its frequent,
When Princes fear a popular man, they labor
To gain him to their party by preferments:
Nor is it safe yet to Irritate the Soldier,
To whom Cleomenes stands Precious.

1. Sen. I know not what to think.

2. Sen. Think no more, let the gods play their Game out*
They are wise, and Mankind is their mockery:
But we loose time; I am for Timoleous Tomb.

1. Sen. The Scean of our whole Fate lies there.

2. Sen. I wait upon you.

Exit. Enter Damocles, Cleomenes, Hugo, Colonel Strato, Alexius, and Proclus.
Dam. The Place I have confirmed, is but an earnest
Of that great debt is owing to your Services:
You have made my Son a Soldier Cleomenes;
He cannot fail of Victory, that lives
Near the example of so much Honor.

Cleo. I have performed my Duty, All above it,
Sir, is your Bounty.

Dam. But is Timandra within his Train of Captives?
Heir to the great Numidian, King Ophella, whose unquiet
Arms kept us so much in Action.

Cleo. But his fall procured you many Victories.

Dam. A Princess of much Beauty by my Sons
Description, so much excellency of Person
And bravery, I guess there is something in it,
Beside the naked Story: He does write as
He were prompted by Affection.

Cleo. His Deportments have been fair to her,
And like himself.

Dam. We shall see this Wonder*
But what is the Moore he talks off?

Cleo. A person of no mean Extraction,
That came to show his Valor in her Cause,
Whom the impatient Courage of your Soldier
Compelled to wait upon Timandra's Fortune,
And fills a place now in her Train.

Dam. It Is well Cleomenes: The present state
Of things requires you, take possession
Of the Castle, where I shall soon give you a visit:
I have trusted you with Siracuse, and my self.

Cleo. To both I shall be faithful, Sir. --

[Exit Cleo. Dam. What think thou of him Hugo?

Hug. You have done wisely to Secure him thus;
This will C^jole the Citizens.

Dam. How now Gentlemen?
I thought you would have waited on Cleomenes
To his new Charge: Your looks are Sullen: Ha!
This shows like an Affront to me; as you
Meant to dispute the Justice of my Fa^vour^.

Col. Str. We know Cleomenes is a Noble Gentleman,
And think your Excellence has not been sparing
In your Reward: We hope you do remember,
We have fought for you too; In all your Fortunes
Showed both our Love and Courage.

Dam. Now I see, and pity your Envies; you are not wise:
Can you remember this, and think I can
Forget my Veteranes, to whose constant Valor
I owe my Growth, my Glories, and my Self?
You cannot loose mein a Wilderness:
Though you should make no pursuitafter me,
It would become my Care to find you out,
To honor and reward you; and in confidence
That you are still the same Men that dare Execute
When I command: This day I have determined
The Harvest of your Fortunes.

Col. Alex. We dare Execute whatever you Command.

Dam. Hugo, the List; acquaint 'em with my purpose;
Tuou art fit to be a Minister of State.
I will peruse their Faces.

Hug. Can you read Colonels?

Col. Alex. Do make a question?

Hug. I cannot tell, it is not in your Commissions.
You must be acquainted with these Names: They Are Men
That must (Where sits the wind?) be knocked of the Head,
And your work's done; all but examining,
What Baggs, Plate, Jewels, and such Tristes, they
Have at Home. I cut out this work for you.

Proc. Excellent witty Hugo, thy designs oblige us all.

Hug. When you have done, I look for my Reward.
Sir, the Officers are very Reasonable, and will do my thing
You shall command -- For their own good.

[ to Damocles. Dam. Their Smiles assure my Happiness, and their own;
Which shall grow uplike Twin^s.

Hug. If any will go off civilly and Compound --

Col. Str. What shall's do with 'em?

Dam. Give 'em Wings, to fly to any Region
Of the Air, or Earth, so we be rid of 'em.
This day I lay all down, and like the Sun
Set in my Evening Cloud: But yet may Rise.

Hug. Or my Astrology fails. --

Poroc. More bright and glorious. --

Dam. That to the gods and you. --
[Exit Damoe.
Hug. You must not be drunk till the work be done.
But hark you Gentlemen: You are to Act great things,
Where Is your Commission to Secure you?

Str. That Is true.

Hug. When you have done this dangerous Service; Where Is
Your Order to defend you from the Gallows!

Str. My thoughts were so taken up with the Hope
Of Plunder, I minded no Security.

Hug. I must provide for you all: It Is here then
Under the General's hand* This is your Commission
Peremptory, do you mark? This you must do,
And more you may do: For many things
Are left to your own discretions.

Colonel. As how?

Hug. If in that Company, or as you March, you see
Any man, whose Look, Fashion, or Beard, you
Like not; It Is enough to make him a Delinquent,
And qualify him for a Composition.

Colonel. Most ingenions Hugo: We are all bound to thee.

Hug. I shall see that by my Share in your Plunder.

[Exeunt omnes. Enter Demaratus and Calanthe. Call. You tell me wonders, Sir.

Them. Let me Repeat 'em Madam.
This day will Damocles deliver up
His guilty Greatness, and lay by his Sword,
Has been so fatal to your Family,
I am transported with my Hopes, and Prophecy*
The hour approaches Madam, when you may,
Like a bright Star (too long Eclipsed) Advance
Your glorious Head, and wear upon your Brow,
Those Beams, that best become your Name and Birth;
Daughter and Sister to a King.

Call. Alas! both those Relations cease; my Father's dead,
And my dear Brother drowned.

Them. Yet still you are Calanthe,
Next of Blood, for whom the Stars
Have finished the^r Consult to make you happy.

Call. By Damocle's Reign? call home your Reason
My Lord, you gave me a preservation,
When my misfortune knew not how to find,
Or parallel in Story, a more sad Image,
Than mine did Represent. Do not undo
That goodness you have wrought by wishing me:
Believe, there can be truth or hope in Damocles
At this time, when Success Courts him abroad,
And not a breath at home so bold, to murmur
At his Ambition, now lay down his Power?
He will sooner part with his right Arm.

Them. When I remember, Madam, who you are,
And what your Royal Brother suffered; it is
A fair excuse, if you admit not this
To your belief. We all knew him a Villain:
But what is all this, if heaven have now decreed
He shall be a Convert?

Call. Till the Earth witness it,
For whom it is partly meant, let us not throw
Nature and Reason off, the greatest Argument
You can assign, is, that he has advanced
Cleomenes to so great a Place of Trust.
A person of much Honor, and by fate
Employed at Carthage, when the Flames broke out
At home, in whose black Clouds my Brother Vanished.
A man of the best Race of the Nobility,
Whose Valor has endeared him to the Soldiers,
And rather of the Generals Fear than Choice,
Called to the Power, which he can soon take off.

Them. You are too full of Jealousy.

Call. My Lord, you must not to Timoleons Tomb;
My soul presages, it will prove the Scean
Of some black Tragedy.

Them. Hear me, Madam.

Call. I know it is your Affection joined with Duty
(That flatters you with Hope to see me prosper)
Invites you from me: But i will not consent
To loose you so; my Father, Brother, all
My cruel Stars have left me.

Them. I could chide your busy fears: To wave my
Resolves now, were to be false to you and to my Country:
The Gods and Justice call me; and you, Madam,
To expect the Glories that your Blood does challenge.
Which I shall timely urge, when Damocles
Lays down his Interest in the State and Army,
And when your Name is mentioned. --

Call. Still I fear.

Them. Prepare for news Madam, to cure the tremblings
Of your affrighted Heart. They stay for me;
permit me to Kiss your Hand.

Call. Since there is no Remedy. --

Them. You are gracious to dispense.
[Exit. Them.
Call. Farewell my honest Lord; my soul divines
We have had our last meeting in this world:
It Is time to call a Counsel of my thoughts,
I am lost else. --
(Exit. Call.
Enter Officers solemnly, one after another, carrying a Sword, and other Arms
of the General 's Commission upon a rich Cushion, a Page before Damocles,
attended by Hugo and others. Dam. Hugo, How do like this Ceremony?
Do not I look now like a walking Hearse?

Hug. Most rarely; but 'twere fit you made a halt,
You will arrive too soon, before the Knaves
Be all met at the Tomb: A thin Convention
Will spoil the sport, I always loved to see
Full Audience in the Theater; it is the credit
And glory of an Action, and I must
Applaud your Brain for this Design, who might
Have done your business without half this trouble.

Dam. There Is the Delight, the mischief is my Luxury:
To Raise 'em high, then Crush 'em in their Swelling.
I do not wish my self Born to the Inheritance
Of this great Island: Hang long Pedegrees,
Titles of Blood, and empty Fables of
Our Ancestors: A Ladder by which Fools
And Changlings may ascend to greatest Empires,
I will create a Claim to every Kingdom
Within my Reach: It speaks the greater Power;
And frights a Nation, which should be used
To terror, lest their saucy pride and ease
Make cheap the Person of their Sovereign.

Hug. How every thing becomes you? We arrive
Timely: Do you not hear a Noise and Outcry
IN the Temple; Sir, the Gates are spread: So, so,
The Soldiers have been at it.

The Scean Timoleons Tomb, where things appear in some confusion, the
Soldiers knocking down Senators, and some are carried off wounded. Dam.
Whether most Reverend Fathers?

Hug. Sir, the press of People is so great expecting
Your Excellency, that these venerable Gentlemen
Did faint sor want of Air; and are
Now led forth to Breath. -- their Last.

[Aside. Dam. Alas! Convey 'em gently to a Refreshing.

2. Sen. Impudence! It Is thy Treachery: Expect
A black Reward.

1. Sen. Do thou not fear a Thunderbolt?
Officers. March, March on.
Exeunt Senate.
Hug. Those that remain are your own Creatures Sir,
And most of 'em my Cuckolds, their Wives,
Shall bear me witness.

[Aside. Dam. They Represent a Counsel of the Gods.

Hug. Had they all Provinces in Heaven, they would
Resign 'em to you, and be damned to serve you.

Dam. Grave, honored Gentlemen,
True Patriots and Preservers of your Country,
Whose Bosom was late panting, and her Check
Pale wi^h the loss of Blood, the Punick Sword
Had Ravished from her: I come not to shake you
With Terrors of new War, nor to ask Pay
For your bold Soldiers, by whose Valor you
Enjoy your Shade* Sleep quietly, and Foes
Abroad calm as the Dust that covers 'em:
At home no Relick of the public Enemy
That filled your Streets with blood. Young Cleander
Is out of Capacity to give You
Alarm in this World, unless he can,
After so long a sleep in the Waves, break from
His gloomy habitation, and his Sister
(In her self inconsiderable were she alive)
Has to my knowledge been long since a Tenant
To her cold Grave in this Conjuncture of
Affairs; your weary General
Does at your feet lay down his Sword, and all
That power to Act you gave him.

1. Sen. How Is this?

2. Sen. It must not be Sir.

[The Senators rise. Hug. So, so; they are perfect I see, and he dissembles
To my own Heart: The Devil cannot match him.

[Aside. Dam. It remains only that I humbly beg
(Grave Fathers) your consent, that I may now
(There being no further use of me, already
Tired with the careful conduct of your Arms,
Retreat into a private life, and spend
My rest of days in Prayer, that you may live
A flourishing State.

3. Sen. Will you desert us then;

Dam. Good Heaven avert so foul a Thought: I shall
Be near you still, and after refreshment,
If danger dare approach, at your first call
Take up my Sword again, and in your Cause
Give up my Life, your Safety, or your Sacrifice.

1. Sen. However your great soul will not allow
A sense of danger, Sir we are not safe,
If you will not resume your Sword and Power,
I speak the General Vote.

2. Sen. You do not Sir
(With pardon of your Gravity) Reach
What we most desire* In justice Sir
To your great prudence of so eminent Valor
To which we owe our Lives, our Liberties,
And what else we enjoy. We humbly pray
You would exchange the Title of our General,
And take from us the offer of a Kingdom.
The Crown cannot be placed upon a Head
So much deserves it.

Hug. Thou Boy!

3. Sen. As it were,
Ingratitude in us to Court your Virtue
With any less Oblation* So it will be
The great Unhappiness within our Fate
If you refuse it. Sir, in mine, you hear
The Breach of all.

Omn. All, All.

Hug. Now must he Cant a little.

[Aside, ^ Dam. I do not understand you Gentlemem,
Pray speak-agen.

Hug. He cannot hear't too often.

3. Sen. Here we divest our selves of Power and Name
Of useless Senators, and all Bow to you.
As humble Subjects.

2 Sen. All ready with our persons to attend,
And declare it to the People.

Dam. You amaze me Gentlemen; Collect your Wisdoms,
I am consumed already with less Cares,
Too feeble to sustain a Crown (I think,
With pardon you did Name the Word.) My sleeps
Under that little Province I enjoyed
Before were thin; and those poor slumbers full.
Of Trouble and Destraction: 'Twill be justice,
That under such a Weight I never sleep;
So much will the Concernment of my Cares,
For you oblige me to perpetual waking?
I dare not Gentlemen give Entertainment
To such ambicious Thoughts, Among your selves
How many worthier men to sit at Helm,
Not one in all this Circle but is qualified,
To Guide a Nation: I have no Name,
No Birth, no Images: Nothing in Annalls
To speak the Glory of one Predecessor:

Sen. This is your modesty, which cannot be
Greater then the Necessity upon us
To live under a Royal shade: You have
An influence upon him: pray Sir speak:

Hug. You hear what Necessity there is:
You Will break their hearts if you deny'm.

Dam. Gentlemen, Vouchsafe me
But some few Hours to Consider.

Hug. Hours? They will be dead within this half hour
If you refuse it. Pity the Venerable Gentlemen:
Observe they Weep, and I do melt to see'em.

Dam. I cannot stand the storm of this Affection,
Do with me what you please: Although you make
Me King, I hope I may take leave to Call
My self your Servant in my Heart, and study
By all the duties of a Prince --

1. Sen. We are all satisfied.

2. Sen. Sir we all wait on you,
And think our Happiness Incomplete, till
We hear the Voice of all the Citizens,
O^t noise the Trumpets at your Coronation
With long live Damoeles King of Scicily.

Dam. The works done.

[A shout within Hug. Hark the noise is Catching.

Dam, He that Aspires, must know no Conscience.
I see it is easier to be great then good:
Some Trees thrives best whose: Roots are warmed in Blood.

Exeunt omnes. Actus Secundus.
Enter Hugo, Strato, Proclus. Hug. COme let me see your Bills of Mortality: How
many
Have dyed this week of the Bloody Sweat?
[Reads* Three Senators knocked o'th'Head at Timoleo^s
Tomb, and four in the Street for not holding
Their peace; Six Senators drowned, thrown
From a Precipice into the Sea. Two and twenty buried alive.
How buried alive?

Pro. Why, these were Totally plundered, or Compounded
At so high a Rate for their Liberty; they must
Starve presently; Which we call burying alive.

Hug. That Is right: Well Gentlemen, I have been
Studying for you, and have found out more Employment,
Unless your Conscience have enough, and in that want
Of wit have an inclination to live Honest.

Stra. You have better thoughts of us.

Pro. What is it dear Sir?

Hug. Observe me: I will procure you Commissions
When you please to talk witty Treason.

Stra. Thank you; and so when the State please we may*
Be ingeniously hanged for it.

Hug. You Are dull Officers, and do not Reach the Knack;
Yet I Will tell you: You shall insinuate into
The Company of discontented Persons.

Pro. So, Sir.

Hug. You will have the Wit to choose men of a sound
Kidney; that have Estates I mean, and can
Endure to bleed in the Metal Vein.

Stra. What then: We understand this.

Hug. Comply with the'r discourses, and Humor every
Complaint upon this turn of State: Ag^ravate
The Insolence of the Court, the want of Trade
In the City, and the heavy oppression of the People.
Cannot Weep, Drink with them, Wind up
Their pity into Anger, and with the the other Cup
Pinch up their Anger into Curses of the present
Government: After you see'em Ripen with some
Impertinent Cautional Parenthesies, which you
Must use (As I hope their's none but Friends)
Whisper a Health to the Confusion of the Usurper.

Stra. To his Confusion? Good, and what Follows?

Hug. When this is done, or so much as Opportunity
Will give way too: Embracing some One affectionately,
Dropping into a melancholy posture, Call the Drawer
And pay all the Reckoning.

Stra. We pay it all?

Hug. By any means you must seem honorable: their's
The Trapan, it will create their Confidence to other
Meetings, to which they may invite more
Of the forlorn Tribe, and perhaps beget a design,
Or some Engagement for the Cause: To be short,
When you have wrought the business to a Height,
Or Schrew'd'em into an Action; send for Soldiers
At the next Guard: Charge'em confidently with
High Treason, and bring'em before me.

Pro. But they may Recriminate upon us.

Hug. Where are your memories? You shall have a Commission
To be Knaves, talk Treason cum privilegio, like good
Subjects to find our the States Enemies: and if they
Escape climing the Tree for it, their Estates shall Suffer.
Out of which shall be defalk'd large sums for your
Honest Services: And what harm's in all this Now?

Stra. None in the world most ingenious Hugo.

[Exeunt. [They embrace him. Pro. Admirable Hugo.

Enter Calanthe disguised. Call. Farewell Demaratus; and Farewell Calanthe,
For I am lost too although I walk thus
In this thin shadow that does shroud my Being,
Compelled by Tyrany of my Fate like some
Vessel distressed to shift all Sail, and stand
What Winde^ are pleased to Blow: Nothing is left now,
But in this Cloud to attempt Cleomenes:
Whose Faith must either guide my Will to live,
Or his neglect lead me a nearer way.
Enter a Servant to Cleomenes. To death; Sir, do you serve my Lord Cleomenes

Serve. Or I am paid to no purpose.

Call. I Will not examine that: pray give him knowledge,
A Gentleman desires to speak with him.

Serve. To avoid impertinent Errands, I Will consider
Whether your business may be worth his Trouble or no.

Call. That Is out of your Commission (I suppose) to Judge.

Serve. Young Gentleman, you are mistaken, in such Cases
As yours, I have heard and determined my self: Hum!
The Governor is at this Time is engaged to Serious Business.

Call. I know yours then: Here -- prithee acquaint him
That I wait.

[gives money. Serve. Cry you mercy, Sir: I find your Business Weighty.

[Exit. Call. I tremble at my self before I see him.
What if this Lord should now prove false?
Since Friendship but too often follows Fortune,
Perhaps he is involved to Act which those
That Rule; and neither Will, nor Dares beyond it.
Where am I then? And which is worse then all
Accounts of Danger, should he when I am known
Give up my Honor, or my Life, to gratify
The Tyrants Lust!
Enter Cleomenes. It Is He: His looks are troubled, but I see no
Line within his Face to doubt his honor.

Cleo. With me Sir?

Call. Sir, I have a business to you of great Concern.
A Secret too not fit for every Ear.

Cleo. Withdraw.

[Exit Servant. Call. I am a stranger to you, and perhaps
You may want Faith to Credit my Relation
At first; but when you have heard me out --

Cleo. Proceed.

Call. It is believed in Siracuse that a Sister
To the late King (by name Calanthe)'s dead.

Cleo. Calanthe! It Is so, or at least this Island
Contains her not: But grant her dead.

Call. I must not.

Cleo. How?

Call. Sir, She is living: to my knowledge, living:
I know upon what Bosom I Repose
This Trust: You have been held a noble Lord,
And Friend to Innocence.

Cleo. I Smell a Snare.
[Aside. The Devil is at work already, But
He shall find me Armed: To your knowledge living?
Young man, if thou can make this clear, and that
The Person thou have named by any Art
Of thine may be invited hither, Ask
Thy own reward: The King shall thank the for it,
To whom thou can not do a service more
Acceptable: and I shall think it Happiness
By thy Consent to be an instrument.
To settle his unquiet Thoughts. Calanthe,
After so strict an inquisition
Brought to our Hands? No Reward can be enough.

Call. Reward, for What?

Cleo. Betraying to our Justice the Person of Calanthe.

Call. Oh my Heart! My Fears are come about.

Cleo. Where is she? Speak: I will command a Guard
To wait upon her.

Call. Command all the Furies.
I am mistaken, you are not Cleomenes,
Upon whose Heart I durst have laid my Soul,
Whose Fame was never Staind with a dishonor:
You are some Monster of the Time: Good Heavens,
Why do you allow him such an honest Face?

Cleo. How Is this? You will discover
Where this fair Lady is?

Call. Not to Redeem thee
From that dark place thy Soul is meant for, Hell;
Though I am young I have Fortitude
Above thy malice, and give my self
A Sacrifice to Virtue with more ease
Than thou can name it: I already see
My confidence has betrayed me to a Man
That has sold all the Honor of his Family
To buy the Favor of a bloody Tyrant.

Cleo. Be not so loud.

Call. Be you less impious, good Heaven!
Open thy Azure Curtain and permit
My Brothers Soul to look down to see me now
Bleeding and panting, at the Feet of once
His Friend Cleomenes. Do not think bad man
One tear of these speaks any grief to die,
But to have found thee false: Here, Take Calanthe,
And carry her a Triumph to the Rage
Of your new Master.

Cleo. There Is tremblings in my blood: Calanthe! ha!
Though sorrows have endeavored to destroy
Her Beauty; She retains enough to make me
Believe she lives: It Is the distressed Princess,
Howere that Habit would Obscure her.
Madam, (for I dare call you so) admit
Cleomenes to your Charity and forgive me.
We either seemed our selves: You for your safety,
And I suspecting a design upon me
From Damocles Agents.

Call. Are you honest then?

Cleo. And shall be ever: Madam, my Eyes cannot
Be weary of this Happiness to see you.

Call. And dare you Sir protect me? I am too blame
To tempt you with a Care of my Distress
That have been fatal to those Hands preserved me:
Honest Damaratus, If I drop a Tear when
[Weep. I do mention him, you will be so kind
To excuse me, and to pardon my Rash Language*

Cleo. Dare protect you Madam?
For your sake I will dare the worst of Fortune,
And Act what Honor can expect or dictate:
I think it a high Favor from the Gods,
And could even bless the miseries that brought you,
But prudence will be necessary, till
Things Ripen to your Freedom and just Merit.

Call. You may own me as Page.

Cleo. It will be safe.

Call. I shall observe my distances.

Cleo. Ha!

Enter Hugo. Hug. The King is come to Visit you.

Cleo. It is a grace to his unworthy Servant.

Enter Damocles attended. Dam. Let one ascend the Platform of the Castle, and
Give me notice when they approach the City.
Cleomenes, I am come to bid a joy
To your new Government.

Cleo. You are ever bountiful.

[ Hespi^s Calanthe. Dam. Hugo, What pretty Boy is that?

Hug. I know not Sir, a very handsome Face, but if
you have a mind to have a Boy, know a Face
Will tempt you.

Dam. Cleomenes, What Youth is that?

Cleo. A Page of mine.

Dam. A very pretty Boy, he shall wait on me.

Call. Defend me Goodness.

[Aside. Dam. Come hither pretty Youth,
What Is thy Name.

Col. I am called Polydore.

Cleo. It Is well he asked not me.

[Aside. Enter Alexins. Alex. Sir, The Prince Dyonisius and the Army are now
Marching within clear view of the City.

Dam. Alexius and the rest Rid forth to meet 'em,
Salute my Son from me, and test him it is my Will
So soon as he Reach the Outworks of the City, that He
And the Prisoners of greatest Quality attend me here
I'th'Castle, the rest Rendevouz without the VValls
Till further Order: I'th'mean time, I Will take
Some prospect of their March.

Exeunt Damoc. And Alexius Call. What can secure me now?

Cleo. Madam, I Will send one to convey you hence.

Call. And what will you do then?

Cleo. So you be safe, Let all the lives of Danger
Meet here, and center in my Heart.

Cleom. officers to go off. Call. My Lord come back, and hear me; I have thought
a way.

Cleo. Things must not be delayed; Oh speak it.

Call. It may preserve us both, till some kind Star
Smile on us: Come, you shall present me to him.

Cleo. I will present this sooner to my Heart.
[Points to his Sword. Did you propose Cleomenes your Defense
From the fierce Tygar, and do I hear you
Bid me now give you up his prey: Did you
So late accuse me in your Jealousy
Of my lost Faith, and after so few minutes
Advise me to betray you?

Call. Alas, my Lord,
There is necessity, I must be undone;
And let me choose my Way.

Cleo. Consider better.

Call. I have to keep the safe, who by denial
Of this small gift may draw his Rage against thee,
And ruin both.

Cleo. And i will be rash as Passion to Oppose it.

Call. Will that help me in such a straight: who must
Upon his least Command be compelled from you.
Your Courage is not now my Friend: there is
No time for more dispute: By all thy love,
By thy own Duty, as thou love my Life
And Honor I command thee.

Cleo. I am charmed to Obedience, Madam.

Call. I have not Suffered to that Height of misery
To throw off all Hopes in Providence: This
Will confirm thee in the Tyrants thoughts, who may
Suspect me else a Woman, and perhaps
The same thou would preserve: He is
Returned, be Confident.

Enter Damocles and Hugo. Dam. Now my good Lord -- Ha^! still methinks that Boy.
Is full of Beauty: VVilt thou change thy Master?

Cleo. He cannot Sir, but be ambitious of it,
And I am proud if you accept him from me.

Dam. He shall be my Page:
Thou have too good a Face to be a Boy.

Call. You make me over happy -- T^^ls talk frights me.
[As^^^. If any blessed Spirits be designed
To guard poor Mortals, let them Hover here
Calanthe's And.

Hugo. I Will search him if you please.

Dam. No it is a Boy.

Hugo. Would I were sure of a Female with no worse,
Face for this nights Bedfellow*

Enter Dyonisius, Alexius, Strato, Dion. Scrophilus. Sir, The Prince.
Dam. VVelcome to Siracuse my Son, and to
Thy Fathers best embrace, who thinks no Blessing
Can drop from Heaven so welcome, as to Hear
Thou have a Name in War.

Dio. Sir, I must Owe*
To Heaven, and your great Precepts what has made me
Seem worth your* Favor; and next them a Debt
We must acknowledge to Cleomenes,
Whose Counsel, and Example made us Fortunate.

Dam. Again my thanks to you Sir: But where is
The Queen Timandra? and the more you charactered*
So brave an Enemy? I desire to see'em,
Attend'em hither.

Enter Timandra and the Moor with Attendants. The Treasures of the East cannot
afford
So rich a Present. Madam, you are welcome.
She weeps, and yet looks fair as does the Face of Day,
[She weeps. When it is washed with morning Dews.
Madam, I hope my Son has made no forfeit
Of his Honor, Since you left your Couutry
Under his Conduct.
Tim. Your Son has used me honorably, abating what
The Laws of War oblige him too: You cannot
Bar the Resentment of my own condition,
That thus contributes to your Triumph;
A Queen, your Prisoner.

Dam. Nothing can have here:
The face of a Confinement to your Person,
Your are Queen Timandra still; and let me tell you
So far from being a Prisoner, that you have made
Your self a Conquest.

Tim. How?

Dam. A Victory of me, by those fair Eyes;
So that what Spoil my Soldiers made within
Your Kingdom, you have Revenged this very minute
By making me the Conquero^r, your Captive.

Tim. I know not what this means.

Dam. It shall appear (if you will give a little
Truce to your Passion, Madam) that you were
Sent hither by the Gods to make you happy
And greater.

Tim. Still beyond my Understanding,
I cannot be more miserable: Death
Has not a sting beyond what now afflicts me.

Dam. Be wise and tame those Fears: Nothing is meant
Here, but your Honor and a Liberty
Beyond what you enjoyed: The Crown you wear,
If you but smile shall have a double Luster,
And call to it another bright Companion;
This Island to Obey you.
Dionisi. Oh my Fate!
He Courts her: Have I for this
Stifled my thoughts of Love so long, in Hope
[Aside. To gain him for my Advocate? and do I hear
His passionate Addresses?

[Aside. Tim. Now I conclude you mock me Sir, this shadow
You have in your pocession, but my Soul
Can never be your Captive

Clea. Brave Timandra.

[Aside. Dam. In this Angelique form I see you have
The passion of a Women: You are Angry,
When you have better thought upon it you may
Call in this cold neglect, and think me worthy
Your highest Favors: -- Son, you may attend the Queen,
Call back that Moor: your Name?
Exit Dionisius. and Timandra.
Clea. Hiarbas.

Dam. Your Condition?

Clea. A Lybian born: my Extraction Honorable,
I was bred up in King Ophella's Court,
After whose death (before unripe for Action)
It pleased the Queen to think me worthy of
Her chief Command of Horse against your Army:
How I behaved me in that Trust your own
Soldiers inform you; I am now your Prisoner,
Ready for Death or Ransom.

Dam. It may be in your own power to deserve
[Whispers [Exit Moor. Your Freedom: Think on it: Withdraw.

Enter Dionysius. Dionis. Sir, I have an humble Suit.

Dam. I must deny thee nothing: But deferr it,
I have something that is near me to Consider.

Dionis. Near you Sir, I am your Son.

Dam. Do you affect the Queen?

Dionis. It Is in my Heart confessed: and Sir, I hope,
You will consent to make me further happy.

Dam. Call in those thoughts, and be your self Remove. --
[Exit Dion.
I bid him be himself, and ca^ot Curb
My own effeminate Passion. -- Now she is gone,
I am at ease: Why, how now Damocles?
Have thou beheld the Horror of a Battle?
Stood all the danger of the Sea and Fire?
Heard groans that shook the Dead unmoved and constant?
And shall the magic of a Voice or Face,
That perhaps owes its Beauty to a Pencil,
Betray thee into paleness, and a fear
Of every frown, and think it Happiness,
If she but Counterfeit a Smile upon thee?
Wake, wake, my Soul, and do thy noble Office
Upon my Heart, that now is Shrunk and Creeping
To be a Females Scorn. Who will Obey me,
When I Un-king my self? Ha! I am armed
Against her Charms: It is too like a Virtue
To be Love: Who waits? Where is the Queen?
Enter D^onysius and Cleomenes leading the Queen by the Hand, with Cleander.
The Devil has a Claw within me still.
[Starts at their Approach. There is some Witchcraft in her Eyes and person
That softens me again -- Dionysius.
Now I commend thy prudence that do offer
With thy own Hand what is so precious to me.
Dionis. If you please, this may have other Application:
I can Challenge no Affection from the Queen,
But for your Kingdom I wonot leave my
Hopes, she may at last look kindly
On my Intentions.

Dam. What if I love her?
You will not be my Rival?

Dionis. With your pardon;
If you be not Cruel to your Son,
Deny me not what every Soldier looks on,
The purchase of his Sword: She is my Prisoner*
The Law of Arms gives her to me,

Dam. Fools will be Clerks before they Read: I blush at thee;
The Law of Arms gives no propriety
Of persons: when we make 'em Prisoners,
The Ransom they may Challenge: If thou have
An Avarice so low it shall be paid thee.
Cherish no other Hopes, lest I be angry.

Dionis. This my Reward?

Tim. Sir, I entreat, your Son may not, for his
Civilities to me, meet with your Anger.

Dam. His best Regards to you became his Honor,
I hope, you will not Frown on mine. I have
This Madam only more to say; You shall
But change your Palace for ^y Court, Which will
Receive new Honor by your presence, Whilst
I change the name of King to be your ^ervant.

Tim. This I expected not, and blush a little,
[Aside. To find my self deceived: I only pray,
This noble Moor, whose Fate has suffered much
In mine, may have a part in your high Favor
And Freedom.

Dam. Sir, you have it: Now, Madam, I Will wait on you.

Exeunt Dam. leading Tima. and Cleandra. Dionis. Cleomenes, have thou Art to
give a name to this Affront?

Cleo. I am sorry Sir to witness it, his passion wonot last, pray let me follow
you.

Dionis. My Lord, I have found your Love; Loose not the King.
O my enraged Soul beats to get forth:
[ Cleom. goes off. It is too full of Flame to come abroad yet,
But^ I must not grow old with this Dishonor,
His Act has disobliged my Blood, which will
Admit no Calm, until by Force or Art,
I tear the fair Timandra from his Heart.

[Exeunt. Actus Tertius.
Enter Cleander and Timandra. Clean. How shall I give my Grief a name that Live,
And yet am worse than lost? misfortune never
Declared me miserable, till this Hour.
For while I Read bright Comforts in thy Eyes,
See my self loved and promised to be once
The happy Owner of thy self, and Virtue;
I do Behold a Hand wonld Snatch thee from me.

Tim. It must be the cold Hand of Death. I promised
My Love to you with such devotion,
As with our last Breath gives up our Souls
To Heaven: And those that dare lay Violence
Upon our mutual Vows shall Reap the fruit
Or nothing but their Sins.

Clean. Thou art excellently good: Perfection has
No name in Nature large enough for thine,
And what am I, to merit so much Goodness?
Thou can not choose but see how much I am
A darkning to thy Luster: every Smile
Bestowed on me, is but a Sunbeam cast
Upon a Rock, which cannot pay the Gift
With any thing but Barrenness: The gods
For foam offense are Angry all with me,
So much, that 'twere a Sin almost to ask
A kindness from above, for thee, least they
Punish thy Virtue for my sake.

Tim. Or yours rather for me.

Clean. My Stars have made a Faction in Heaven,
And poisoned all the Influence of thine,
Which else would be less cruel, and take thee
Into their kinder Conduct. Is It not then
A Justice to Remove me from thy Love?
Then all thy Grief would Vanish soon with me,
Or else command me to Act something for
Thy sake, which in the doing may destroy me.

Tim. You do not think I can be so unkind
To impose a danger upon you, whom I
Have Begged of Heaven; and whose misfortunes I have
Wept for as my Sins, and wished 'em wholly mine,
So I might ease your Breast: You have forgot,
I only Live in you, and when you dye,
Timandra is destroyed, I shall despise
The Tyrants Policy and Rage. --

Clean. Thou have named the Reason,
Why it is fit I should not Live.

Tim. To see my Constancy?

Clean. And what must follow;
A constant persecution of thy Innocence.

Tim. It Is Conquest that way to be Overcome:
I am sure you won^ me so.

Clean. I know thy Blood will throw severe Disdains
Upon this bold Usurper, who neglected,
May by his Rage be prompted to more Wickedness,
While I must be an idle Looker on.
And See thy Goodness war against thy Safety,
Like a tame Cipher, keep a place within
Thy Breast, to increase the number, when thou have
A mind to sum thy Griefs.
This is not all; thou art to Combat with
Another Serpent of a softer mould,
Perhaps more dangerous, when deceived his Son,
When to other cannot by his fiercer Nature.
This may Attempt to catch thee with an Art,
Betray thee with a Charm of seeming Innocence,
And with Civilities attempt to Cheat,
If possible, thy Virtue.

Tim. How I could chide you now: It is not well
At this Time, when our Loves, our Lives, and Honors
Are most concerned, and ask our wisest Counsel
And strength to guard 'em, to take off our Courage,
By numbering up our dangers; as if Death,
Which sums them all, were more Considerable
Than our own Honor to be armed against it.

Clean. Thou have awaked
My Soul and Reason: I have said too much,
Which not Considered, Springing from my Love
And Fear of thee, were above all Forgiveness.
Thy pardon will Restore me to my self:
Here I throw off my melancholy dream.

Tim. Heaven will have care of both.

Clean. Thy words are Prophecies.

Enter a Lady. Lady. Madam, the Prince Dionysius.

[Exit. Clean. It may advance something, if you speak kindly
To the young Highness, who may be Honorably
Preserved, and be of use to our Necessities:
The gods allow us prudence.

[Exit. Tim. I Will withdraw.

Enter Dionysius. Clea. Your Highness humble Servant; I rejoice
To see you cheerful Sir; the Queen was thinking,
The late unkindness of your Father, might
Have made too deep Imprission in your thoughts.

Dionis. 'Twas an Affront shook my Obedience. -- But you see
I wear a quiet Face.

Clean. I see you can Retain, You filial Piety.

Dionis. I preserve
My thoughts in their own purity to the Queen,
And came to kiss her Hand.

Enter Timandra. Clea. She Is coming forth.
I Will leave you.

Dionis. Your near Relation may do me a Favor
When I am absent, by some friendly mention. --
I may deserve it.

Clean. You have already Sir.
[Exit Cleander.
Dionis. Madam, it was not
A want within me of that most Religious
Esteem I owe to your person, that I did not
show more of passion in my late Affront,
And you concerned.

Tim. You showed a noble temper
And piety to your Father.

Dionis. I hope Madam,
You wonot think my soul so much a Coward
To quit the least thought of my Honoring you,
The Pride and Glory of your Sex: I hold it
A greater Blessing to call you Mistress, than him Father.

Tim. But with your Highness pardon;
Here Is nothing of ill Consequence considered,
Or to your self or me: And dangers have
But ill Invitements to Affection.
Though you have made me Captive, I am not
So weary of my self to wear new Chains.
What is your Father's Court to me? A Prison,
But with more Paint and Ornament: I take
The Garden Air, sometimes the Fields, or Grove.
But not without your Father, in whose absence
I want not spies upon me: In each Chamber
And Gallery: And this he calls by Liberty,
And glorious Freedom: But you cannot help it. --

Dionisi. Madam, I came to tell you that I can
And will, if you consent. --

Tim. To what,

Dion. To accept it as my Service and my Duty,
I know you look upon me now with wonder,
Forgive me, and forget I brought you hither
To exercise the greatness of your Virtue,
And when I kiss this sacred Hand, let it
Bind like an Oath (that is sworn by all the Gods)
I will not rest 'till you are free again
Out of the reach and force of Siracuse
In your own Kingdom; where your Subjects eyes,
To see you again Surpised with your blessed presence,
Shall weep their sudden joys, and dye contented*
Nay, in your own Court, Madam, where I found you,
When you were praying unto stubborn Heaven
That heard you not. If all this be not done
By me, and ere the Sun three times Rejoice
The world with Day, Conclude that I am dead.
And one thing, Madam, more; I scorn to make
A Price, or name my own Reward: when this
Is perfect, you may please to think I loved you.

Tim. You have named such things Sir, (give me your pardon)
I have not hope eneough to think'em possible;
But such an Act would merit much. --

Dion. I must
Seem calm and easy to my Father 'till
It come to Action: the method is already
Formed in my Brain: All that is good attend you.

[Exit. Enter Cleander. Clean. I am glad to see these Smiles aboard.

Tim. I have a story will concern our happiness
This Dionisius may be noble.

Clean. I mainly doubt it, Madam: if the Devil
Should spawn a Saint it would be wonderful.

Enter a Lady. Lady Madam, a young Gentleman from the King,
Humbly desires Access.

Tim. We are interrupted;
I guess upon what Embassy he comes: Please you,
Withdraw.

Enter Calanthe. Clean. He Is young and handsome; What great pity it is
He should be a Knave so soon? But the Usurper
Is cunning to engage such Innocent Faces,
To abuse our fond Belief: How the Urchin throws
His eyes upon me? As he would stare me
Out o'th 'Presence.
[Exit Cleander.
Clean. Madam, I hope you will vouchsafe your pardon
If no express a Service for your just
Concerns, I beg a Freedom.

Tim. You attend the King?

Call. Madam, I do, but am not now his Messenger.

Tim. I like it better.

Call. Though I bring with me what is fit for Princes
To hear, the Language of an humble Heart,
That in the general interest to Virtue
Comes to unlade it self, and do you service.

Tim. Thou give thy business a spacious preface,
And by thy looks it should be fair: But yet
Sweet youth take heed the Court (thou come from) do not
Instruct thee wrong: Thou serv'st a Master wise
Enough to Teach. --

Call. My attendance on the King, Madam, does carry
No early date, and if you dare believe me
My time has been to mourn, not to admire
Transactions of the Court: Some tears I have wept,
(Though a stranger to your Person) for your sake.

Tim. Prithee take off my wonder, and be clear:
This Language would invite me to believe
There were some Danger near.

Call. I would give it a Name
That should not fright you: for it is
Within your choice, timely to scatter a'l
Those hovering Clouds that may involve you in
Too late Repentance.

Tim. Still thou art obscure.

Call. It is no secret in the Court; The King
(For that he has made his Title now) does love you.

Enter Damocles. Dam. Ha! what makes that Boy here -- I Will observe.

[He obscures Call. And cherishes a hope by marriage
To fix his never satisfied Ambition.

Tim. This is not thy Concernment.

Call. But it will
Be yours too soon, and justly may be mine
Who have a Heart that inward bleeds to see
So great a Queen, and more than great in Virtue
Made a Tyrants hopes.

Tim. Thy duty to the King obliges thee
To wish him well although my Ru^n Follow,
Alas, I have no favors to Reward thee.

Call. To serve your Virtue is above Reward,
Save what Heaven gives.

Tim. This boldness wants example.

Call. I confess it,
And in that answers his impiety;
You cannot choose but know it. Fame has not
Yet lost his Tongue abroad, and it might reach
Your ear: Or if you have not been so happy,
It Is not too late to tell you he is false
To Heaven and all mankind: Within his Breast
Dwells no ingredient of Love or Honor,
And though he carry Bolsome in his Lip,
It Is to betray you at last a Sacrifice
To his unruly Greatness.

Tim. I am a Queen.

Call. But in a Tyrants power, which knows no Law,
When he has secured your Crown to his Ambition.

Tim. I have heard too much of him, he dares not Act
A Violence, although I be his Prisoner.

Call. He that durst act a Sacrilege upon
His King, will think it but a petty Trespass,
To bruise, or break a soft Heart, such as yours.

Tim. All this I know is Truth: But why from him!
[Aside. But that he speak so passionately the Vices
Of this great man, I should believe I had
A Rival, that obscured within that Habit:
There Is something more than my weak Eye can Reach,
His words do speak a greater Soul, than what
He seems to enclose.

Call. I hope 'twill prosper: She seems to Resent it.
[Aside. Madam, I dare not trespass more upon you:
I have discharged my duty to your merit,
To Justice and to Heaven; And now I cast
My self on Providence for what must follow,
If I have given a light to see the Danger,
You might incurr with this bad King, I am happy.
But if my want of years or Eloquence,
To cloth my Honest meaning better, make it
Less acceptable, You may soon Revenge it,
I have put a poor unworthy Life within
Your Breath, which you may throw into the Air,
Or call the Usurpers Cruelty to punish it.
You shall see Madam, then, I fear not Death;
And in my last devotions will pray,
Heaven may forgive you.

Tim. Stay noble Youth, and
Take my thanks: I know not when thou meanst
To visit me again.

The King comes forth. Enter Strato and Proclus. Dam. Our Guard lay hold upon
that Traitor; that Impudent
Young Villain, Yes --
He shall visit you, when he can crawle from the other world.

Call. My Stars have done their worst: be you perfect Madam.

Dam. Let his Tongue be cut out immediately.

Tim. Sir, I beseech you, let not your Anger fall
With so much Cruelty.

Dam. Madam, though you have not merited so much
If the Story be considered, to incline me
To any mercy for him; Yet that part
Of his punishment! Remit. Drag him to
The Common prison till further Order --
Stay, I have thought better on it.
Carry him prisoner to the Castle, and tell Cleomenes,
I have sent back his precious Page, but bid him,
As he will stand clear in our Thoughts, look to him,
And place him in some Dungeon, dark and deep enough,
Where he may Howl unpitied: He may afford him
The music of his Chains to make him merry.

Call. And when you have done all your Cruel^y,
Death will, at last (spite of your Rage) Release me,
[Exit Calanthe and Officers.
Enter Hugo: Stops, and goes off. Dam. Madam, you may be wise yet, to consider
I honorably Court you: What is past,
Is in your wisdom to Redeem by Smiles
Upon your Servant; pray think timely Madam. --

[Exit. Enter Cleander, and observes Timandra going of weeping. Clean. Weeping?
Shall I kill him now, and Oblige
The world by taking off this hated Monster?
Yet he spoke kindly when he parted from her.
[Exit Tim. [Enter Damocles. But he Returns.

Dam. Hiarbas: Nearer yet. You may Remember,
I said 'twas in your power to deserve
Your Liberty, and me your Friend: The way
Is this: Use all your Interest or Art
To make the Queen more soft to my desires.

Clea. How Sir?

Dam. I would have a marriage of our Crowns and Hearts.
You understand?

Clean. I must acknowledge You much honor me,
But Sir, you have chosen a weak Orator
In the affairs of Love: I wish I had
An Interest in the Queen so great to serve you
To your own merit; but in what my Power
Or Language can effect, in Reference to
Your wishes, shall appear.

Dam. Thou art prudent: she has newly took the Gallery.
[Exit Clea.
Enter Hugo again. Hugo, I thought our favors would have made you
Be near us still: I wanted thee.

Hug. I was here within these Six minutes to attend you, Sir.

Dam. I saw thee not.

Hug. But I did you Sir, with the beauteous Queen,
And knew my duty better, than to interrupt you
When you are private with a Lady.

Dam. You can be a Courtier.

Hug. I have news for you.

Dam. What Is that?

Hug. Your Son presents his duty to you.

Dam. My Son?

Hug. Yes, your obedient Son, as I have Ordered him,
He begs your pardon, for his bold intrusion
Upon the Queen Timandra's Love, he has
Done with her.

Dam. Done with her? How?

Hug. He has disengaged her from his thought, and now
Wisely foresees your Care and deep Contrivements
Are for his good and Greatness, when it shall
Please Heaven to call you hence, which I hope
Will never be whilst I live Sir.

Dam. I thought he had been stubborn, and resolved
An expedition far enough to tame him.

Hug. The People will not thank you, Sir, for that,
They have no mind to part with him.

Dam. The People! Hang the shabbed multitude.

Hug. Oh! they love him Sir, and he is more endeared
To their kind thoughts since his Return.

Dam. And I grow less, ha?

Hug. The more's the pity Sir.

Dam. But tell me Hugo. --

Hug. The many headed Beast will talk Sir, --

Dam. Of me?

Hug. I Sir, of you.

Dam. What dare they say?

Hug. Even bad enough: They were ill before, but
The bloody Nose you gave the Senate, Sir,
Has turned the^r Tongues wild.

Dam. I must know what they say.

Hug. I beseech you do not: Do not desire to hear it.
A pox upon 'em, what can you expect from Rogues
And Rebels?

Dam. I have a prospect of their Hearts already;
I know they love me not: But I do long
To hear how the Slaves talk, and belch their poison:
Come, Gi't me therefore in their own pure Vomit.

Hug. I am very unwilling: I know 'twill make you angry.

Dam. With thee? Do It I command thee, as thou love me.
But let me have no mincing of the Treason,
Nor washing a fowl word; the Sports lost then,
I Am in the Humor for it.

Hug. You know I am the Creature of your Smiles,
And must obey when you Command; But --

Dam. There Is no Retreat, Begin, now I am ready.

Hug. Why, Sir, the people call you a Bold Knave: Yes
By my troth, which in their opinion is a worse
Name than Traitor, and more suitable to
Their understandings. They that would be
Thought less Soluble in their own Tongues,
Say, you are but an Usurper, and though you
Have the luck to dye in your Bed; nay, and may
Have the liberty to stink in your Grave,
Yet they hope before they dye to make it a
Holiday, and see you hanged after all this, to
The great Comfort of the Nation. What Rogues are these?

Dam. The Rascals would be witty: On good Hugo.

Hug. Another says, the Flames you have kindled
Can never be quenched, till some of your principal members
Be committed to the Fire, The name
Of your Quarters has been terrible; and therefore
They wish, that every Post, that now carries
A Libel, had also a Limb of you.

Dam. Good, Good.

Hug. For your Soul, they think the Devil will
Scarce have any thing to do with it, though
It be his due; lest your impudence should
Outface him in his own Dominions, and by
Some Faction and Conspiracy there, Cheat
Him of his Kingdom, as you have done your
Sovereign here.

Dam. Ha, Ha.

Hug. They say, beside other gifts, you have two Virtues
Most remarkable: Pity, and Devotion.

Dam. It Is well they will allow me any thing.

Hug. They say you can Out-weep the Crocodile, when
You have the Humors to dissemble, and can eat
Up any man's Heart with tears in your eyes
For your devotion: the people never tremble more
Than when you look upwards to Pray: Your days
Of Humiliation are a certain preface to some
Notable mischief: for if they escape a Tax, the
Murder of some honest Men must follow: after
Which you commonly Order a Thanksgiving.

Dam. They observe me right Hugo: If they have any
Malice left, a little more, it is excellent Mirth.

Hug. They that speak favorably of you, say you are
A brave Villain: In conduct fortunate and full
Of Courage, but all misapp^r'd to serve your design
Of enslaving a Kingdom, to Master a Crown,
Which they say will show upon your Head, but as
A brighter mark of your Rebellion, till your
Noddle ache with the weight of it, and both fall
From your shoulders in a great storm; In which
They prophecy the Devil means to come, ere it be
Long and fetch your Soul away.

Dam. A storm? I shall go off with loud music then,
Ha, ha: So, so, let' em talk on; and when their Breath
Is spent, their Heirs may take up their quarrel
And kill me in a Chronicle; where they shall read
That all their Fathers were my slaves: Ha, ha,
Farewell honest Hugo.

[Exit severally. Enter Parmenio and an old Servant. Par. And did thou wait
that day upon my Father
At Timoleons Tomb.

Serve. 'Twas my last service Sir:

Par. Did see him murdered too?

Serve. I saw your Father, the good Lord Demara^^s
On the Pile with other Senators,
Bleeding his Life away, and with the first,
Thought it my duty, though it were sad news,
To acquaint you Sir by letter.

Par. And I find
The story now confirmed: I am lost to all the World:
No man dares own me but this poor old Servant.
To my Fathers death this Cruelty is added,
That me they devoured alive: All that my Father
And his old Predecessors had been gathering
So many years to keep alive our Family;
They have torn and Ravished from me*
Why do I breath this Air?

Enter Hugo at one door, at the other two Colonels, Calanthe, and a Soldier,
leading her as a Prisoner. Hug. How now Colonels? Why in this posture?

Str. We are commanded to carry this young Traitor to the Castle.

Hug. I ever thought he was a Rascal: You were Cleomenes
Page Sir, were you not? Well, I suspect
Hugo whispers with the Colo. That Lord too: But what has he done Colonels?

Serve. If I mistake not, those two Feather Caps
Are of the military Tribe, that brought Commission to
Plunder your Fathers House Sir,
And one of 'em quoited me out of the dinning Room.

Hug. I Will bear you Company,
I cannot serve the State too much, I love to have
My hand in every Treason.

Proc. You were ever active.

Parm. Leave me I charge thee.

[Exit Servant. Hug. What Is he that comes confidently toward us?

Parm. I have an humble suit to you Gentlemen.

Hug. It may be so, but I use not to carry single money,
And these Colonels have nothing but Gold about 'em.

Parm. I scorn your Charities, unless it be to kill me.

Stra. How kill thee? upon what acquaintance?

Parm. And to that I must have not consent, I Will show
You Reasons, and then I know you will do it.

Hug. Friend, your Reasons.

Parm. I was late Son to an unfortunate Senator.

Hug. Son of a Senator, That Is somewhat: He deserves
To be run through the shoulder for that: Look to
The Prisoner; I do not like this despirate fellow.

Parm. My Father was murdered at Timol^o^s Tomb
And by some marks given me, you may be two
Of the Barbarous Villains.

Proc. The young man's Angry.

Hug. Look to the Prisoner I say.

Parm. I could not reach the City at an hour
to die with him, but time enough to bear,
That since his death, that Fortune, which his Care
Meant mine, is seized upon* All my hopes lost,
I have a Total Ruin.

Hug. What do thou tell us of Ruins, and killing of thy
Father? Come to the point: Tell us something of
Consequence; We have other bnsiness to attend.

Parm. In short I must prevail with one of you to kill
Me presently:

Hug. Art thou in earnest? Look to the Prisoner, I say.

Parm. By all my better hopes of to'ther World,
I hate to live in this, Stripped of all Comforts.
Who draws? I Will stand a fair mark for his Sword.

Hug. Sir, we have something else to do, then
To kill a man that has lost both his Friends
And his Fortune: you must 'en live 'till you dye,
If you had had the luck to have been with your Father,
These Gentlemen would have done you Reason.
But now the State is satisfied, and for ought
I see, you must live a little longer, unless you will
Be impatient, and hang your self.

Pro. We do not use to exceed our Commissions Sir.

Parm. Why then my Sword shall try what I can force.

Hugo. Look to the Prisoner. Ah!
They fight: Calanthe runs away,
The Soldiers follows her.

Enter Cleomenes. Cleo. Ha! I have known that Face,
It Is Demaratus's Son.

Hug. Hold! I am a naked man: One of you kill him at my
Peril, I Will save you harmless; Here Is a mad fellow
Indeed, O my Lord Cleomenes save me, defend me, there is
An impudent Rogue, he calls himself
The Son of a Senator, set upon us,
[Two Colonels. My self and another Soldier

Cleo. Not to have Robbed you?

Hug. No, no, the Rascal had a plot to have his own
Throat cut; and because we would not do him the Courtesy,
Like a Brazen-faced Fellow, he set upon four on's.

Cleome. What Is become o'th Colonels?

Hug. Nay, nay, he has killed 'em for ought I know.

Cleo. These are the men*
Of mighty noise and Husk, when there is no danger,
Most nimble at a Throat, when they are numerous.
[Hugo looks about him. But leaves tremble not more in a Rough Wind,
Than they to Guard themselves, when they are called
Upon the Account of Honor.

Hug. He Is here again.

Enter Parmenio with his Sword drawn, and puts it up. Parm. It is the Lord
Cleomenes.

Cleom. Come hither desperate Gentleman. --

[Whispers. Hug. Ask him what he has done with the two Field
Officers? Thank Heaven Sir, I had no Sword,
As I do heartily: I think it saved my Life, I had
Been paid else: I am in a sweat to think whether I
should have gone if he had killed me.

Cleo. So, no more, the Colonels made their retreat fairly;
He did not know your Person and Employment
And does ask pardon for the Fright he put you to.

Parm. I humbly beg your pardon to my passion:
The memory of my undoing was too fresh within me.
Alas I was transported with rage, more for
My Fortune then my Father, and I am. --

Cleo. Of our own Principles, and for the Cause, which made
His Father send him to Travail. --

Hug. Says your Lordship so? But Sir he has Rescued a
Young Villain that was sent hither by the
Kings command to be your Prisoner.

Parm. I rescue a Prisoner? Whom? or When?

Hug. That did you Sir, you were weary of your life before:
Now the Law shall hang you to your own Hearts desire.

Parm. Upon my life I know not what he means.

Hug. The thing that was your Page my Lord: O he is
Proved an impudent young Traitor.

Cleo. Ha! What has he done?

Hug. Nay, I know not. --
Enter the Soldier leading Calanthe. It Is he: by good Fortune he is recovered:
honest Soldier
Look for a reward: my Lord, it is
The King command you, put this Rogue into a Dungeon*

Cleo. It Is she, my Heart dares not look forth. --

[Aside. Hug. He shall want no Charge I warrant him. I am
Sorry he had no more Grace for his Relation once
To your Lordship: the Crimes are high. -- You shall
Hear more, my Lord I know you are honorable:
He has an honest Face, but your Lordships wisdom
Will be concerned to use him like a Rascal, and so
I take my leave. My most Honorable Lord.

Enter a Guard of Soldiers. Cleo. It shall Speak my Innocence
And Duty to the King: Take him away,
I hate to look upon him.
[The Guard take off Calan. My Soul's upon the Torture.

Hug. Farewell, Son of the Senator, thou may live now
To be an honest man, and see what will come on it.

[Exit. Cleo. Parmenio, thou shall not Repent to Live,
I see thy Courage, and in thy Name
And Blood have an Assurance of thy Faith.

Parm. In all I am your servant.

Cleo. Bid an Officer of the Guard bring the Boy back,
And wait me at my Chamber to be examined,
And be you near to Observe my further Order.

Parm. I shall my Lord.

Cleo. I have a narrow path
To walk on: Guide me Honor and thou great
Soul of the World: Things now for Action call:
This Tempest looks as it would drown us all.

[Exeunt. Actus Quartus.
Enter Sicanus, Dorion, Scrophilus. Scro. I Do not like the present Face of
things.

Dor. Nor I.

Scro. I did expect a finer Time on it.

Sic. The Triumph quickly Vanished.

Enter Alexius. Alex. Your Servant Colonels: Where Is his Highness?

Sic. In's Bedchamber writing Letters.

Alex. What to his Mistress? the Queen Timandra?
She Is a Rare Beauty.

Sic. Would Afric had kept this admiration
To it self: I fear she will be fatal,
And undo us all.

Dor. For my part, I think, no woman in the
World is worth a man's melancholy.

Scr. I am sure it has thrown us into a melancholy
Posture: The Prince does not enjoy himself.

Alex. And the King is strangely altered.

Sic. I have heard one man possessed with many
Devils, but I never heard of two men possessed
With one and the same evil Spirit before.
Well, I fear a Storm's not far off: the Clouds
Are gathering: This outward Reconcilement
Between Father and Son, is but a dream of
Fair weather.

Dor. I wish his Highness well:

Sic. So we do All.
Enter Dionysius. He Is here.

Dion. Fellow Soldiers, welcome.

Sic. Your Highness humble Servants, who should be all
Happy to kiss your Hand, and see you cheerful.

Dion. Why, so I am: Am I not cheerful Gentlemen?
Look well upon me.

Scr. Your pardon, Sir.
Your Servants cannot choose but be concerned,
When any Cloud's upon you: Sir, we are
Men that truly Honor you, and see through all
The Sunshine you put on, that something
Has got too near your Heart and darkens you.

Dion. I did not Sleep well. --

Alex. We Believe it Sir,
And something is the cause* Change but your Fancy,
And it will Vanish like a dream.

Dion. Your Remedies are pleasant.

Alex. You Would say so, if you knew my Frolicks,
And yet I must Confess, I have had my Fits
As high as a Mistress, but never Ventured Love
Above a Moon: Took notice of my Tides
Of Love, yet made my Voyage off and on
Without a Storm, or straining the least String
About my Heart. You Will pardon Sir the freedom. --

Dion. But you mistake Cause.

Alex. I wish I did Sir;
But this disease, called Love, has a most certain
Symtome, and wears his Nightcap so visible,
That the distempers still appear, although
The Cure may sometimes fail.

Dion. Gentlemen, it is no woman has discomposed
My thoughts.

Scr. Why, is it a Man? Who in the name
Of nature can be so weary of his Life,
As to disturb our Freedom.

Dor. If my counsel may be offered Sir, no matter what is the Cause:
Drink Wine, and bear up above all the thoughts
Or Friends or Enemies. Would we were
In The Camp again; this Drowsiness and Ease
Will Tarnish all our Souls.

Dion. You love me Gentlemen, and
I hope I have deserved it.

Dor. Is there one here that stands suspected?
A man that will not Sacrifice his Life,
And in your Service fight in any Cause,
Against any Person?

Dion. None: I believe.
You would contribute all your Courages
TO assist my Honor, if it shall Require
A worthy Vindication. Therefore, Gentlemen,
In the Evening I shall communicate a Secret,
In which I shall desire your Faith and Counsels,
Till when I ask your pardon noble Colonels.

Scr. We Will wait you Sir.

Alex. And shall be proud to serve you.

[Exeunt Colonels. Enter Hugo. Hug. What make all these Officers here? I like
it not.

Dion. Hugo, to my wishes; thou have kept thy promise.

Hug. Pardon the boldness of this interruption;
My duty may want method, but not zeal,
To serve your Highness.

Dion. Thou have given me proof.

Hug. I came to give you account Sir of your Father.

Dion. How is it with the King, dear Hugo?

Hug. Much the better, since
I sweetn'd him with your Resolve to quite
Your Hopes in fair Timandra: I found him
Raving at first, and a Commission drawing up
For your present expedition to Corinth.
But I soon qualified that cold Unkindness
And he expects your Visit.

Dion. Thou have Obliged me Hugo; and to justify
The truth of thy Relation, and Confirm him
That all is my Obedience and clear Duty,
Here is a Letter to the Queen from me,
With full Resign of my Pretensions to her:
And that there may be nothing wanting Hugo,
To uncreate his Jealousy of either,
Thou shall deliver it thy self, and give him
Thy own account of all things.

Hug. I applaud
Your Care to satisfy him, it is excellent; and I
Shall take it as a great Honor, to carry this express to her.

Dion. Honest man: What can Reward thy Faith,
And care of me?

Hug. My duty pays it self.

Dion. Farewell dear Hugo, I expect no Answer. --

Hug. I think you need not: This will do your work Sir.

Dion. I cannot choose but Smile: that I shall make
[Aside. This cunning Knave my Engine. I Will not trust him
Too much: Parasites are a Race of dangerous men,
Especially to Princes, who abuse
Their Beams, as Serpents do the Sunshine; Thrive,
And yet Infect the very Light they live by.

[Aside. [Exit Dion. Hug. So, I have an Office; his Highness Letter-carrier.
But I consider the Circumstance carried a Gloss
Of Cunning. That nothing may be wanting Hugo,
Thou shall deliver it thy self. Hum! And why my self?
I am not Concerned I take it: I Will be sure on it.
With your Highness leave, I must make bold
To peep^ into the Belly of your Paper-kite. --
If any body should see me, He would think me
Little better that a Knave now: But it is not
The first Time I have been bold with a Trust.
[He opens the Letter, a Scroll drops. What Is here! a loose parcel of paper
inscribed
Palermo! What should this signify?
[Reads the Letter. Madam,
I have not not time to enlarge: Prepare
Your self and your Friends this night for your
Escape: I have sent you the Word enclosed
By which you may pass the Guards, from whence
I will wait you to my Quarters; where
With a considerable Train
I will be your Conduct: and in all other
Commands Show the Obedience of,
Your most faithful Servant Dionysius.


I this the Letter of Defiance? Are you good at
This young Prince?
If I had not made a Knave of my self before
Hand, what a Fool would he have made me now, and
His own Father. The Word for their Escape!
Conscience be quiet; I am Resolved to carry this
Letter to her, but his Highness shall excuse me, if I keep
To the Father's side; He Is my elder Acquaintance.
We were bred up Children in Villainy; and when we
Came to Age, the Devil swore us into a Brotherhood;
Saving that mischief advanced him to be a
King, and let me rise no higher than a Parafire.
A little Art will make this Letter sound again.
As for the enclosed, a word to the Wife; I can
But laugh to think what a Rogue I am.

[Exit. Enter Cleomenes and Calanthe. Call. My Lord, I have told you all the
Story, and
Cannot acquit my self of some Impudence,
Although I felt a Tempest in my Soul,
To see this black Usurper-hold so fair
A Hope in the Queens Love, which by one Act,
Might make him Master of her Crown and Beauty.

Clen. It did concern your Interest to break
The Rise of such a Fortune, and there is
No despair Madam, but it may work
A noble Sense within her Breast.

Call. She heard me.
And in my apprehension (though Silent)
Yet seemed to pity both her self and me,
But kept her passious even, and in order;
At last she gave me thanks, and turned aside,
As being, perhaps, not willing I should see
A Tear was breaking from her Eye: And at
This instant Damocles Surpised us.

Cleo. It Is high time, Madam, to consult your Safety,
Which has a sad Complexion; the perils
That I have been acquainted with near shook
My Frame so much; I labor with the Weight of your Concerns.

Call. My Life's indeed a Burden,
And 'twere a mercy, if the Heavens took back!
Their unregarded gift, since I have lived
To be destructive to my self, and all
That undertook my Safety.

Cleo. There Is something offered to my Thoughts: Ha! it is gone again.

Call. Cast not thy self into a Storm for me.

Cleo. It Is come again. Madam, I have a Servant,
Honest and Valiant; you may trust your Person
To his Attendance, who may this Evening
Convey you to place Secure; for here
You are exposed to death inevitable.
There, nor his Anger, nor his Eyes shall Reach you:
Leave me to answer your Escape.

Call. That were
Without enquiring, whether you design,
To make my safety my Ingratitude*
Does not my Reason tell me, he will make
Your Life the forfeit of my absence.

Cleo. Could I
Deserve so well of Heaven as to be made
A Sacrifice for you; How would my Blood
Conspire and Crowd into a Flood, to show
A Cheerful Ebb: 'Twere but duty Madam.

Call. My Lord, I allow a duty, but like not the
The way; Since I Will accept defense, but on
Such Terms as Honor: would embrace a Victory.
The Dangers are my own, and I Will be near 'em.

Cleo. Then be it so; and be as safe as I,
This Fort, my Life, and all my strength can make you:
If I and they fail, You shall see and witness.
Of The sudden, I could prophecy, but dare not
With profane Lips, but yours are sacred, Madam,
And you may say, there is a hand, that guide^
Your Safety: that great Fate that brought you hither.
And it does raise my thoughts that you must prosper:
I find the People willing to shake off
The Usurpers Chains, and then your bright appearance
Will complete their Joys, and make
A Mourning Throne Rejoice, to see it self
Restored in you, to all just Glory.

Enter Parmenio. [Cleom. Spies him. He has observed my Order.
Be pleased, I may commend to your attendance
This Gentleman: A person, on whose faith
You may build a Confidence: It is the Son
Of good Demaratus; Parmenio.
Call. I have heard his Father mention him; He was
Sent to Palermo for his Studies.

Cleo. It Is the same, by his good Fate sent hither now
To do you Service; I must take my Leave,
Affairs throng in my Brain.

[Exit. Call. You need not wonder
That these few tears break thus unruly forth,
They are a just debt to your Fathers memory,
Who loved me well.

Parm. Mine have been paid already,
And it remains to show my self his Son:
I know not who you are, more than a Gentleman,
Whom the Usurper persecutes, and a person
My Lord Cleomenes would preserve: And I
Presume you have Virtue to deserve all this,
And shall think Death an Honor, when I meet it,
With his Commands upon me.

Call. I attend Sir.

[Exeunt. Enter Cleander leading Timandra. Clea. Madam, This Story of the Boy
amazes me:
Why, he so unconcernc'd should take the Boldness
To venture so much Counsel to his Ruin?

Tim. It is no less my wonder: But I never
Observed a greater sense of Honor, nor
Read so much Virtue in so small a Volume.

Clea. I had other Thoughts
When I considered his Relations
To the Usurper, and had no Charity
To think him more than one of his black Agents,
And the worse too for his good face, It put me
In the mind of the fallen Angels.

Tim. I grieve for his sad Fate, but cannot help him:
Indeed I never felt within my heart
So great Commpassion to a stranger, and
It is but justice, since his care of me
Made him so miserable.

Cle. Dear Madam,
Quit this sad Argument, and give me leave
To tell you another story that concerns you.
I have a message to you.

Tim. To me! from whom?
He must be a bold man, made you his messenger.

Clea. From Damocles.

Tim. Forgit it I beseech you;
He Is full of Love no doubt.

Clea. Full of the Devil;
And would engage me his, dark instrument,
To bring you to his wishes. O the Favors
And Treasures shall be mine: Have not I
An excellent Office!

Tim. What answer did you make? I fear his words
Awaked your angry blood, in which you made
A Return, did not please him.

Clea. Yes, yes, Madam,
He hopes I Will do it.

Tim. What witchcraft could encourage him?

Clea. Being thus put to it,
As the Oracles are wont to Answer, when
They are consulted what shall come to pass,
I wanted not ambiguous words that pleased him,
As wishing I had so much interest,
And strength to do him service to his merit,
That would do all our work, and his too; Madam,
He should be hanged but once, and high enough:
But let me humbly beg your pardon, Madam,
That I have mentioned him, his very Name
Carries a secret poison in the Breath,
That must create a Melancholy, and Dull
Those Crystal images within your Soul; Let us
Look back upon our hopes in Dionysius;
Whose promise kept, will pour a welcome Balm
Into our wounded Loves, and Banish all
Our sullen Contemplations.

Tim. I Fear
Those great things are beyond his power to Accomplish.

Clea. O punish not your self with one such Thought,
I confess, Madam, it is a mountainous promise,
But he is a Prince now, beloved in the Army,
And at home popular: The Rising Sun:
Adored, and flattered: And who knows what Miracles
His Love, and Power may Act.

Enter a Lady. Lady. Madam, a Gentleman desires access,
He has some business of Concern (he says)
From the Prince Dionysius.

Tim. He must be admitted.

Clea. I Will withdraw.

[He obscures. Enter Hugo. Hug. Madam, I approach your Royal hand
With as much Reverence as to an Altar.

Tim. Have you affairs with me Sir?

Hug. With you most Royal Madam, I think I have;
But pardon me if I be slow to tell you what
Commands I have from the sweet Prince; Ah
My eyes are not yet satisfied: There are so
Many beauties in that Face, I could stand
A whole day to gaze upon it.

Tim. Pray come to the business.

Hug. Come to the business? Ha, most gracious Madam,
The Prince. --

Tim. Be not so tedious: What from him?

[He gives a Letter. Hug. What from him? That from him:
And in that I have said all, and done my
Duty, and now most gracious Madam, can
Tell him what you say.

Tim. I have said nothing: It does require no Answer.

Hug. In that Smile I carry a thousand.
Cleander observes, Hugo going off, and comes toward Timandra, but Hugo
looking back obsucres himself. Hum! Is It even so black Gentleman, you are very
familiar,
I shall do your errand, How she Titters at the Letter, and he laughs
And looks through the Paper: If I say I shall betray my self.

[Exit. Clea. The thing has kept his word, and we must take
This Opportunity; I like his Project.
But, Mandam, though we make use of the Word,
It will concern our wisdoms not to Trust
His Conduct after: That were but to shift,
A person, not the Danger, since his power
Abroad may equal what is threatened here:

Tim. Wisely thought on.

Clea. We must Remember this Mock Prince is still
The Son of Damocles; but our time is narrow,
Leave me to the care of Outward things: If we
Without a Check but reach the Sea, we have
A Friend from every Prospect; not a Wind
Can blow from Heaven, and hence, but for our safety.
The world's before us: Who can fear to drown,
When every Coast, and every Wind's our own.

[Exeunt. Enter Damocles, and Attendants. 1. The King's troubled.
2. And he will be so,
While this unmanly Ague shakes his Temper.
[He waves his Hand for them to leave him. Dam. Have I by my great Arts from a
despised
Prodigious Lowness of my Birth and Fortune
Advanced my self to Honor, and to Empire?
And now fixed like a Piramy'd, upon
Whose Top my Name stands the admired Obj^ct,
And envied mark of Princes round about me,
Who fear what Crown of their's I Will next attach,
As I have done this Kingdom, where I have
With bloody cost raised to my self a power
Upon my Princes, and the Nations fall;
Both which I Ruined, with a factious Flame,
And made this Clime too hot for temperate Laws:
The Dull Defenders of a drowzey State,
That slept too long, while my Ambition waked,
And undiscovered brought this fatal Change;
And as those subtle Favors that design
The Bodies Ruin, by the Vitals first,
So I began against the Life of Power,
My lawful Sovereign, whom I fought and forced
In Battle to Retreat and save himself,
'Till in his flight he met an Angry stream
That swallowed him, and his great Horsmanship.

[Waiters putting on one another at the Door. 1. I dare not speak to him,
He carries Ponyards both in his Eyes and Pocket.
2 We must stay till he call.
Dam. The Senate then a lazy lump of Power,
With forcked Heads threatened to sit heavy
Upon my Heart: But I found ways by purge
And bleeding to Remove 'em, and constrained
The dull Remains to humble their proud necks
For we to walk on: All things that Opposed,
Until this period, I made tame and stoop,
And shall at last a Woman baffle me:
Defy my Love, my Anger and my Conquest?
I will disolve that Magic that she trusts to,
And make her know it is in my power to take
(If she be obstinate) more than I have asked:
And that bold talking treacherous Boy shall live
To see her pride and stubbornness tormented.
And should my Son Rebel again, and offer at
An interest with me: I have an engine
[Handles his Dagger. That wakes at my first call, shall strick him to
Eternal Silence.

Enter again one of the Waiters. 1 Sir, I beseech your pardon.

Dam, What Tumults this?

2 Hugo, Sir, says, he must speak with you.

[Enter Hugo. Dam. O, is it Hugo?
Why was he not admitted presently!
You can be officious when you please.
Leave us again, and let none interrupt us,
Honest Hugo.

Hug. The business, Sir, is done.

Dam. What business?

Hug. I have explored each Fiber of your Son.

Dam. And How? and How?

Hug. All things are well and in an excellent posture.

Dam. Thou art in the dark.

Hug. But I have brought to light a Plot, you will
Thank me for.

Dam. A Plot? What is it?

Hug. Your Son most violently proceeds to Cross
Your interest in the Queen, and has most
Impiously contrived away for her escape.

Dam. He dares not? Her Escape?

Hug. I skrew'd my self into his Soul, and he,
In his Confidence of my honesty, would have
Me carry a Letter to her.

Dam. And did thou?

Hug. Yes, but had the Grace to break it open.

Dam. Excellent.

Hug. Which gave her to understand that this night
By Virtue of the Word, a scrowl enclosed, without
And difficulty she might pass the Guards.

Dam. O Rebel, Traitor, It will be then necessary to
Change the Word immediately.

Hug. Do not trouble your self Sir, I have saved that l^bour,
For most artificially I trimmed up the
Letter, and changing the Scrowl, baited their
Ambition to be gone with a word of my
Own divising; Did I not very well Sir?

Dam. Admirably: I could kiss thee for it, Thou have done
A Service never to be sufficiently Rewarded.
It tickles my spleen; T^ou have done rarely Hugo.

Hug. In this one Act I have outwitted your
Son, and it was high time to give his disobedience
A Check, Clipped the wings of his precious
Pigeon, who is wild with the immagination of
Taking the fresh Air; but when she finds her self
In our snare, I hope she will be tame
Enough, and stoop to any Conditions your
Heat of blood will propound to her.

Dam. The pleasure comes to fast: Ha, ha, ha.
Now are they (having already swallowed their
Liberty) laughing at us. --

Hug. To think how we are gulled? I should have told
You Sir, I have discovered the Moor to be a Raschal,
A near friend of hers; A saucy Sunburned Devil,
And your Rival.

Dam. The Sooty slave shall dye for it: Not all his black
Relations in Hell shall rescue him: The evening
Creeps upon us: I dare not trust the Air with ou^
Discourse, my Stars, I do forgive you all, you are
Kind; and next to them, I owe my thanks to
The Wise, Honest Hugo: We Will be in at the Sport.

Hug. By any means Sir, I must wait upon you,
My presence will add much to their Vexation.

Dam. The strength shall be recruited at each Guard.

Hug. I cannot but laugh to think how they will look upon me Sir, when they see
themselves in the snare,
And how the Moor will Blush Sir.

Dam. Let Us away: no change of Countenance:
Carry all Smooth until the storm surprise 'em.

[Exeunt. Enter Captain of the Guard, and a Sergeant. Cap. Where Is the Corporal?

Ser. He Is ordering the Centries.

Cap. So, it is well.

Enter Corporal with two Soldiers. 1. Soul. Well: If I miscarry this bout
Corporal, I Will say
My death at your door, that made me leave my
Drink behind me.

Corp. There Is your spot: Two hours hence expect Releif,
You may lie down and listen, but take heed, when
The Round comes that you be not taken Napping,

[Exit Corporal and two Soldiers. 1. Soul. I warrant you, in my first duty, I
thank my Stars,
(When I left my own Trade to follow Man-killing)
I had a Benefit from my Fears, and could wake
At the Motion of a Field-mouse, now I am an old
Soldier, and used to it, I can do my duty in my
Sleep: Rise, Bid stand: Ask who goes there? Have
All my Questions and postures as ready as the
Most waking Centry of 'em all.

Capt. I had a Scurvy dream last night Sergeant.

Ser. It Is well for you Captain.

Capt. A Scurvy dream well for me? Why prithee?

Ser. It Is well for you that you can dream: Time
Was within our memory we have not slept
In ten nights: hard duty, little drink, and no
Pay, do not much Corroborate nature: But
What was your dream Captain?

Capt. Why, I dreamed we had an Alarm given us,
And that the Enemy (having taken our Redont
Upon the River) were entering the Town,
Against them I marched; and at last, when I was
Beset by a Party of theirs, and in
The Condition of engaging with 'em: Two Rats
That had a quarrel behind the Hangings in
My Chamber, wakened me.

Ser. And so you came off?

Enter Strato. Str. Where Is the Captain of the Watch?

Capt. Here Colonel.

Str. I had Orders to Recruit the Guards to night.

Capt. What Enemy?

Str. I know not, but there is something expected.

Capt. A pox on it, my dream's out: Come Sergeant,
I attend you Colonel.

[Exeunt omnes praeter I. Sold. Enter Cleander, Timandra, and Arisba. Clean.
Look how the night's already dressed, and for
Thy fair attendance has put on her best
And brightest Luster, while every Star
(Though not with so much Sparkling as thy Eyes)
Pays his willing shine to light thee
To some more happy Coast.

Tim. I cannot fear Success, while you are Conduct.

Clean. Arisba, this last Act
Will perfect thy fidelity, and make it
Fit for Reward.

Aris. Be confident of my duty*
But Sir, contemn your self, I heard something
Move* the Centry is near.

Clean. Be careful of the Queen, I will approach
And give the Word.

1. Sold. I hear a Voice: Stand: Ha! What Is this?

Clean. Call your Officer.

1. Sold. Corporal: by this moonshine it is the Devil.
Coporal: Come quickly and be damned, here is one
Stays for you: I charge thee, come no nearer.
Corporal, ha! So.

Enter Corporal. I Will even leave you together, and Alarm the Guard.
Corp. The Word.

Clean. Siracuse.

Corp. You are mistaken, and must along with me.

Clean. Must Rascal?
[They fight. The Guard's Alarmed: I doubt we are betrayed

[He kills the Corporal. Enter Soldiers: one Seizes upon Timandra. Tim.
Villain unhand me.

Clean. It had been safer to have touched a falling
Thunderbolt.

Enter Captain of the Guard. Capt. The Corporal killed? -- Then it is time
To try my Sword.

[He also is beaten off by Cleander. [They fight; he makes 'em Retreat. Clean.
We must face about.

Enter Strato and Proclus with more Soldiers at one door. At the other
Dionysius, Sicanus, Dorion. Str. The Court's Alarmed: where are these Traitors?

Pro. Here.

Str. Let Us help to take 'em.

Pro. Agreed; Soldiers, we assist your duties.

Dioni. Whence this Alarm? Hiarbas and Timandra.
There is no time for cold enquiries; Accept our
Swords Hiarbas to your Service.

Clean. Dionysius, can this be Real? There is some Hopes yet.

Enter Parmenio and others. Dion. I think this Coast is safe.

Clean. Ha! the Soldiers grow out of the Earth
Like Cadmus Teeth, Defend the Queen on that hand,
I on this.

Dion. I cannot fall in a more glorious quarrel.
Soldiers do you not know me?

Pro. Dispatch: the King commands you Seize 'em.

They fight* Strato and Proclus fall in the Skirmist. Sicanus and Dorion beaten
off. D^onysius taken, and Cleander surpised behind by Parmenio. Parm. Thou Art a
brave M^or

Enter Damocles, Cleomenes, and Hugo. Dam. Where Is the Queen?

Tim. Here Tyrant.

Dam. Ungrateful woman; was your Heat so mighty,
None but this Son of night was fit to mix
And walk Companion of your Love and Fortune?
A Dog? a Moor?

Clean. Thus Mungrils snarl at Lions: Damocles,
It Is not our Crimes, nor any good the Gods
Foresaw in thee, nor Valor of thy Guards,
Nor our own Sleeping Stars, but thy great Sins,
Not yet mature for Vengeance, has made
Our design fruitless.

Dam. Ha! Dionysius! my Son turned Rebel?
It Is time to check his Speed: And whose fine plot
Was this?

Tim. Sir, it was mine: I could not hope a Life here
Without Stain to my Honor.

Dam. And Madam you may dearly count for this.

Clean. It was I contrived it.
She does abuse her Innocence, let me
That have a Soul prepared sustain the punishment.

Dio. They have both accused themselves unjustly,
The plot was mine, I must again Repeat,
But not Repent it, mine; I sent a Letter,
And the Word enclosed for their escape.

Dam. You did? -- Cleomenes. --

[Dam. and Cleom. whisper. Hug. Sir, I desire no body may be Believed, but my
self:
The Plot was mine, the Cream, the Knack of
It my own.

Clean. Thine?

Hug. Yes, and shall please thy Sooty Phis^omy.

Dion. Cursed Villain.

Hug. As sure as your Highness gave me your Letter to
That Lady, which I delivered with my own Hand;
But it was after I had broke it open, and made
Bold to put the Change upon your own Trick. -- Altering
Only a word or so. --

Clean. Remember he is your Son.

Dam. Thus I blow off that name: I expect your duty:
You need not Strive for your Rewards.

Parm. I am commanded to attend you Sir to the Castle.

Tim. I am sorry my unhappiness should thus
Involve your danger; But I hope your Father
Has a Reserve of kinder thoughts.

Dio. Timandra, your fair Hand. -- This Kiss
Is bought too cheap though I dye for you.
Farewell noble Hiarbas.

[Exit. Dam. Come nearer Moor: Do thou not Read Death
Within this Frown?

Clean. I am above it Damocles: Keep those Bugs
Upon thy Brow to fright tame Fools, and such
As born from Worms do Crawl about thy Court,
And lick thy dusty Pavements: Snakes that live
And lap the blood of Innocents: I despise
Thy mercy to my self; But if thou have
A sense of Honor, or of any thing
That Is man within thee, Look with softer Eyes
On this distressed Queen.

Dam. Yes, your Mistress?

Clean. Ambition cannot aim at greater Honor.

Dam. This saucy Competition
(Had thou no other Crime) shall make thee Curse
Thou have a Being.

Clean. Saucy Competition with thee? Thy Pride
Provokes my Smile: I tell thee Damocles,
Thou may by number, and thy Crowds of men,
Steal an Inglorious Victory: But were
Our Persons singly armed, and we two placed
Upon a Cliff, or some Star-kissing mountain:
All thy abused Legions round about us
Staring to see us fight for Love and Honor:
The Gods should not be weary to look down.
And thy own Armies undeceived should Judge
Who best deserved Timandra.

Omnes, This Moor has a brave Soul.

Clean. But I loose breath in talking to a man
Whose very Soul's a Coward, and his Heart
False as his Title to the Crown.

Dam. No more:
We Will try how he can talk without a Head:
The morning Sees him dye: For her. --
One Convoy serve 'em both, and look you trifle not
With my Commands as you will keep your Head on.
Thns all my Troubles vanish; I was never
A King till now.

Hug. I hope you will take my word another Time.

[Exeunt Damacles and Hugo. Cleo. Madam, I grieve for your misfortune.

Clean. For thy self Cleomenes: And yet thou had
An honest Fame.

Cleo. You do not know me Sir.

Clean. But I forgive thee: Come, mourn not Timandra.

Tim. I should not weep were we to dye together.

Clean. It Is not Resolved above so; do not envy me
As man to lead the way: It Is my Honor
To bleed a cheerful Martyr to thy Love.
Forgive me if I hope thou may not stay
Too long behind: For when I shall arrive
Among those blessed Shades; and have my Seat
Where only good inhabits: Yet I fear
I shall not think it Heaven till thou art there.
Conduct now where you please.

[Exeunt omnes. Actus Quintus.
Enter Parmenio and Calanthe. Call. THou have told me a sad Story: the Queen's
made
A Prisoner? and Hiarbas doomed to loose
His Head this mourning? They are then both
As miserable as I: But she is firm
I see to her Honor. How does he bear himself?

Parm. With a most manly Temper, not in the least
Dejected for his thought of suffering Death,
But as it separates Timandra from him;
For it is presumed they Loved.

Call. Her knowledge of
His worth may make the Cloud upon his Face
More lovely to her Eyes. But how does She
Take this affliction?

Parm. At first most sadly;
And yet his Courage and his wisdom has
Almost persuaded her to part with him.

Call. Might I not see him before he dye?

Parm. He made it his request to my Lord Cleome^^s,
That he might Visit you, petending something
That might concern you and himself.

Call. On that account I wish he were permitted.
[Exit Parm*
Parm. His stay will be but short.

Call. I limit not the Favor, and shall thank you,
I wonder I have been so long forgotten
In the Usurpers anger, but his Fury
When it does fall perhaps will recompense
The slow approach it makes.
Enter Cleander, and Parmenio. Sir, I am told you would speak with me.

Clea. Yes, sweet Youth.

Call. Your business pray with me?

Clean. I must be thrifty of my Time, my Life wonot
Allow us many minutes, and I would not
Put off this earth without a peace about me.
I come to Ask thy Pardon.

Call. How! My pardon?
You never Injured me*

Clea. Yes Polydore,
I did abuse thy Innocence.

Call. Not mine.

Clea. And gave thee ^p
To my own thoughts an impious Boy, when I
Conceived thee late a wicked Agent from
The Us^rper to the Queen: But she has told me
Since, a large volume of thy Virtue,
That I am obliged to carry thy Forgiveness,
Or doubt my Passage to a better World.

Call. Sir, I have Charity to pardon all
The ill you thought of me.

Clea. I thank thee, and trust me, if I were to live
I would study thee a better Recompense
Then naked Pravers: But as it is, I wish
T^ou may o^t-live the Tyrants malice, Farewell.

Call. Is this all?

Clea. I should say something, from the Queen, of sorrow,
That for her sake thou suffer'^t, But when I Am dead
She Will tell the all at large.

Call. Pray tell me Sir,
Do you expect to die so soon?

Clea. I know not,
The precise minute, but cannot think I have
Many more to tell that number time, but
By a Tyrants glass.

Call. And can you part with Life so evenly?
How did you work this noble mastery
Upon your Soul? I wish I may do so,
When the approaching minute Comes.

Clea. It is an ease to die: a Blessing Boy.

Call. My bless: The choice part of my Life is gone
Before, yet I am confined to a tedious Life
And make no have to follow it, But it is
The Tyrants fault not mine.

Clea. Thou were then in Love too.

Call. Heaven will forgive me, if I say, I loved
A Brother, in whose life was all my Comfort
But Death snatched him away maliciously,
I know not where, nor how.

Clea. His Name I prithee.

Call. You shall excuse that, you are a stranger
And will not be at all concerned to know him,
But here is all that is left him, his shadow,
[Shews the Picture. Which when his cruel Fortune called him from me,
He gave me a Companion in his absence,
But that my tears are pious to his memory;
The frequent Drops, and kisses, I have paid it,
Might have long since defaced and drowned the Image.

Clea. My laboring Soul: The very same I gave

[Aside. Calanthe, it is my Sister, but I must not
Discover.

Call. You are troubled.

Clea. Polydore.
[He restores the Picture. There is some secret magic in thy Sorrow
Makes me forget my own: If I could think
The Tyrant would not punish thee with Life
Too long, I Would wish to stay and tarry for
Thy company that we might die together.
Enter Timandra, and seeing them, stands at some distance. Thou art young, and
by the example of my dying
I would instruct thee to a Flight abve
The wo^lds Ambition, and though I be
A stranger here, there we should be acquainted,
Where we might live and love to all Eternity.

Tim. What do I hear?

Call. The Queen Sir:

[Cal. spies the Queen. Clea. Ha! Timandra, I am but
The shadow of my self: those two divide
All that I was between 'em. Art thou come!
I Will tell the Secret, Polydore's a woman;
A Princess my Timandra, One that loved me
Before my Happiness of knowing thee,
And yet I dare not tell her who I am
Though a dear part of my self; nor dare I kiss her
For fear my Soul dissolve upon her Lip.

Call. He has some strange Contention in his Breast.

Tim. What killing Language do I hear?
Have I for this made forfeit of a Kingdom,
And what is dearer, Liberty? Pulled on me
A Tyrants Rage, and given my heart to one
That in my presence owns another Mistress?

Clea. I see the Clouds are gathering to make
A storm within thee: Let one word disperse 'em:
It is Calanthe, my dear long lost Sister.

Tim. And will you not uncloud your self to her?

Clea. Take heed.

Call. I cannot blame their passions high at parting.

[Aside. Clea. It were a wickedness the Gods
Would never pardon, I Will give the a Reason:
She knows I am to die; O let me vanish
In The dark: for but to tell her I am Cleander
That must within few minutes bow my Neck
T'th' Hang-mans Ax, to please a bloody Tyrant,
'Twould strik her dead immediately before us,
And I should be her Murderer: No Timandra,
Let the Usurpers Soul own all that guilt,
When I am past the miseries of Life,
I Will tell the Angels, who are coming after,
And that is enough.

Tim. I would say something,
Speaking to Calanthe. But so many Seas of sorrow meet within me,
They drown my Tongue and Heart.

Enter Cleomenes Reading a Paper. Attendant. Cleom. Your duties.

1. Atten. I am commanded to attend you, Madam,
To your Chamber.

Tim. Where you please.

[Exit. 2. Atten. Sir, I have Orders to wait upon you.

Clean. Thou call'st me to my death, it is welcome.

[Exit. Cleom. Madam, your Retirement is concerned.

Call. How soon, we are all divided?

[Exit. Cleom. She must not know this Warrant for her death:
He has remembered her at last; Let (...) dye to morrow
Timandra will be next, and then his Son,
[Reads. And then my Head brings up the Rear, I see
The method of his Tyranny.

Enter Parmenio. Parm. Sir, I am very much Importuned by the Moor,
Hiarbas Servant, now your Prisoner.

Cleom. To what?

Parm. To let him speak with you: He says he will discover
Something to your private Ear you will thank him for:
A secret will be welcome to the King,
And worth his pardon, if you will promote it.

Cleom. Prithee admit him.
[Exit Parmenio, and enter with Arisba. Have you any thing to say
To me?

Aris. My Lord, I have something to reveal to your Lordship,
And in Hope you will mediate for my pardon. --

Cleom. Be brief.

Aris. There is a person in the World.

Cleom. One person in the World? take him away*
The Fellow trifles, and is tedious.

Aris. Not so quick; I Will come to the Business.
My Lord, I Will tell you: The Gentleman you
Call Hiarbas.

Cleom. What of him?

Aris. Is no such man: No Moor.

Cleom. How!

Aris. No more then your Lordship; these hands tempered
The Ingredients, that gave him the Complexion
He wears; I dare not speak too loud:
It is the King* Sir.

Cleom. Ha! the King!

Aris. King Cleander.

Cleom. Make it good, and be for ever Happy.

Aris. I knew it would be welcome news; upon my
Most certain knowledge he has walked in that
Obscurity, since the Defeat he had (...) Battle*
The Queen only knows of it, beside my self*
There are few could have kept a Secret so long,
And so sweet, as I have done; but the fear
Of Hanging has had the better of my Conscience.

Cleom. Thy (...)
For such a Service; The King shall (...)

Aris. Nay, let him give me what he will beside, I hope.
You do not conceive that I have done this out*
Of any ill Principle, only the Gallows
Was too strong for my Imagination*

Cleom. Art sure this is not Revealed to any else?

Aris. Upon my (...) your Lordship (...)

Cleom. Then I Will take course to be the last*
It shall go no further.

[Cleomenes kills Arisba. Aris. Oh*

Cleom. Take thy Reward base Villain: Betray thy*
King and Master? Parmenio, throw him
Into that Lobby; and do (...) off his Head,
I shall have use on it: So, good Heavens I thank you,

(...)* we have much to (...)

[Exit without Parmenio. Enter Timandra and her Attend ant. Tim. I thank you
Sir, only I shall Request*
This favor, when Hiarbas with his Blood
Has satisfied the Thrist of Damocles*
That you would bring me word.

Serve. I shall.

[Exit. Tim. That news may give a period to my Life,
And break my Heart: What benefit have Princes:
To be born great? To have a name and power
Above the common Tribe for a few minutes?
When they are exposed to the same Strokes of Fortune,
Which renders them but still the more unhappy;
And their fall so much the greater, as they are
Thrown from the taller Precipice.

Enter Attendants. Atten. Madam, the Prince Dionysius, by some favor
Of my Lord Cleomenes, is come to visit you.

Tim. Alas! this is no season for a Visit;
And yet he has deserved all my Civilities.
I pray admit him.

Enter Dionysius. Dion. Pardon, dear Madam, that I have presumed
To make intrusion upon your Sorrow:
I have only to present you my sad Heart,
That sees and mourns your ^ate.

Enter Cleomenes hastily. Cleom. Madam, the King is come into the Castle;
Sir, as you weigh my Safety or your own*
You must not be seen here: That way you will meet him;
You may Obscure (I know not where) within
That Bedchamber, his Jealousy at your Sight,
Will turn him into a Flame to all our Ruins.

Dion. You shall persuade: Though it be worse than death
To show this Fear.

Cleom. For the Queens Honor there Sir; I hear him
[Dionysius obscures. Coming up the Stairs; One word more Madam,
I dare not trust your tender Heart
[To Tim. Without a Caution, let no Object fright you,
Hiarbas shall be safe upon my Honor,
By your fair self he shall, until you speak with him.
Enter Damocles and Hugo. Is It done?

Cleom. He is dispatched Sir;
You never shall see his Face again.

Dam. Not see it, I must Cleomenes, therefore when I send for it
Let it be ready. Hugo attend.

Cleom. It Is at your Service Sir.

[Exit Cleom. and Hugo. Dam. What says the fair Desire now?
Have you considered?

And throw off all your unbecoming Wildness,
The very thought and memory of Hiarbas,
Or any other that durst take the Boldness
To offer at Affection as my Rival?
Are all your sullen humors tamed and vanished?
And in that stubborn Heart have I a name?
Lord of that Empire by thy Choice and Gift
To my desert? This I expect to hear,
Or nothing, and that too without much preface.
This is a new and shorter cut of woing
Than I have used: But since t'hast Slighted all
My kinder ways, Anger is only left
To instruct thee how to Love? Say, and be brief.

Tim. Then briefly thus; Know I do hate thy Love,
As much as I despise thy Anger, Tyrant.
And had I guilt but of one loving Thought
Within my Heart to thee, I Would say,
That Honor there had bid farewell, and left
Me fit to be a Prey to Falsehood.
I have not been much tedious in my Answer.

Dam. You have been nimble I confess, but I will
Use the same Brevity: Bid Cleomenes
send in Hiarbas Head?

Tim. Hiarbas Head?

Dam. A Present for you Madam.

Enter Hugo with the Moors Head covered. Tim. False Cleomenes.

Dam. His lips are cold,
And want much of that noble Heat, wherewith
They were wont to entertain you Madam.

Tim. Inhumane Tyrant!

Dam. I will not leave any thing alive that loves thee,
My Son is next: But now I thing on it Madam,
I have not done yet: I wo'not leave,
Till I have made thee leprous and unfit
For any man's Embrace: Come, you know the way
To your Bedchamber: Move, or I Will drag thee to it.
Hugo, to the Doors.

Hug. Yes, I know my duty: Or shall I help you Sir?
I am good at both.

Tim. Help, Help! Dionysius, A Rape, Treason.

Enter Dionysius. Hug. Ambuscado! It Is time for me to Shift.

[Exit. Dam. Her Champion hid in her Bedchamber! They have
Had meetings. Villain, Bastard.

[Dam. draws, Dion. takes up a Chair. Dion. Lost both to Gods and Men; no more
my Father.
Murder: Help; O drop a Sword from Heaven
To punish this predigious man. Murder:

[He takes a Chair for his Defense: Timandra runs out. Dam. There, I ha'e met
with you.

Enter Cleomenes and Parmenio. Dio. You have don't: farewell Timandra and all
the world.

[Dyes. Cleom. What have you done Sir?

Dam. I have killed a Traitor.

Cleom. You have slain your Son.

Dam. He was my Son, my Anger had forgot him.

Cleom. Take off the Body: the Spectacle will Raise.
[Dionysius is carried off. A Tempest in the Soldiery: You have undone
Your self, the Army loved him.

Dam. Let 'em take him then: where is the Queen?

Cleom. She gave the first Alarm with crying a Rape,
And now the murder of your Son: -- You must
Consult your Safety.

The Soldiers within crying the Prince's Revenge. Hark! the Soldiers,
Their Clamors mount as if they would Allarum Heaven.
Parmenio, set a Guard upon the Stairs.
Again they cry Revenge. Dam. Curse on these loud-mouth Hounds.

Cleom. You must be Ruled; the Torrent will Orewhelm
Us all, if you neglect your Safety: Here, obscure,
Trust to me Sir, I will secure your person;
Upon my Life.

Enter Parmenio. Dam. Honest Cleomenes.

Cleo. Leave me to use my Art: you shall hear from me.
But first I Will thus prevent your Sally.
[Locks up Damocles. And place a Guard to watch you here.
So far my work is done.
The Beast I have got within a Den. --
Captain, proclaim a free Session of the
Senate in my name; and give 'em all my Honor,
None shall invade their privilege or persons.
I will Join with 'em to Assert their Liberty,
And impart something after these Rough Seas
To make their Calm secure:
And withal, you may give out the Usurper's
Dead, It will allay their Fears the better.

Parm. You need not doubt this will be welcome news:
I go my Lord.

[Exeunt severally. Enter Hugo. Hug. What will become of me now? There Is
nothing but
Confusion in the Castle, and now I am out on it, do not
I know where to hid my self: Some say my Mother
Was a Witch, if she had taught me her Trade, now
Could I have transformed me self into a Cat: they
Say she has nine Lives; I would give eight on 'em
With all my Heart to save the odd one.

Enter a Soldier. A Soldier, ha!
I do not like his marching up to me: How now Soldier?
Sold. Save you noble Sir.

Hug. But I fear I shall not be saved. Do know me?

Sold. Know you? Yes Sir, very well: I ha'e Reason for it;
You saved my Life, when I was condemned by a
Counsel of War to be hanged.

Hug. O, I remember thee; 'twas for Robbing a Church,
A very honest Fellow; I see thou art grateful, and
I Believe thou have a kindness for me, for
Old Acquaintance.

Sold. Would I could Serve you Sir.

Hug. Pox, I know 't; and that thou may be in Action
Now, I have a Suit to thee.

Sold. To me?

Hug. Here Is money, as we say at Court, to help the good
Inclinations: Here Is gold too.

Sold. Bless your Honor: But what is the Suit an't please you?

Hug. No worse than I wear my self, I would only
Change an upper garment, I have a great fancy
To see how that Red-coat would become me, mine is
Velvet: Shall's Chaffer?

Sold. It Is at your Service Sir.

Hug. Here, quickly then help to Strip me: What news Soldier?

Sold. News? Why, do you not hear a free Senate proclaimed?

Hug. A free Senate? make have honest Soldier.

Sold. There Is nothing but Joy in the City, and the
Secluded Members of the Senate do every minute
Creep out of their obscurities to admiration: They talk of
Bonefires too: What turn there may be in the State
I know not.

Hug. A Pox of all ill luck: It will come to my turn
I fear.

Enter Cleomenes and salutes the Senators. Sold. They have my Lord Cleomenes
Honor to Secure 'em;
And the Senate House being in the Castle, they have
Pretty good assurance of their Safety.

Hug. Peace; not to loud: Stand behind me Soldier, thou
Shall not be seen, not for a World.

Sold. Why Sir! I dare show my Face.

Hug. Dear honest Mirmidon: for a Reason that I know.

Sold. Not show my Face!

Hug. There Is more money: as thou love me. --

Cleom. Most Noble Lords, and Reverend Senators,
The Business that requires your presence
Will need no Preface, more than to assure you,
It Is of dear Concernment to your Countries peace,
Such as will wipe away the black Remembrance
Of Timoleous Tomb.

Hug. Ha! Timoleons Tomb, discoursed on already.
Stand close good Soldier! I Will be thy Skreen
For this time.

Cleom. And prove a welcome Balm, to heal those
Wounds, the people but too long have with you wept,
While both your Votes and theirs meets Heavens
At once: But I delay this Happiness too long,
And now Conduct you to the place designed
For this great Work.

Omn. Sen. Honored Cleomenes.

[Exeunt Cleom. and Senators. Hug. They are out of Sight. -- So, now I thank
thee;
Farewell honest Soldier. -- and be hanged.

Sold. Stay Sir, a word,

Hug. I am in have.

Sold. So am I: I have a Suit to you now.

Hug. To me? what prithee! Thou have had my Coat already, but be short.


Sold. That you would please to walk along with me
To the Castle.

Hug. Friend thou shall excuse me now; another time. --

Sold. I must not be denied: I was civil to you.

Hug. What do mean?

Sold. You must walk presently, as I direct, or I have
A Goad will make you mend your pace.

Hug. Soldier, oh!

Sold. I must do my duty, I have an Order for it; I
Expect a Reward too; Therefore dear Hugo. --

Hug. For thy Honor; thou know I saved thy Life.

Sonld. Do not you remember the Proverb: Save a man
From the Gallows, and he will be the first
Shall cut your Throat. March, honest Hugo, march.

[Exeunt. The Senators appear in the Senate, to them Cleomenes, Alexius,
Dorion, Sicanus, Calanthe veiled. Cleom. That you are safe, and met here, is
the Joy
Of your Cleomenes, who has no Ambition, but
To Repair his sad and bleeding Country,
And that the Laws, after so many Stromes,
May run in their own free and ancient Channel.
Lay down your Fears of an Usurping Tyrant,
Whose Lust of Empire has committed such
Horrid and high Impieties, I tremble
But to Remember: And at the last has added
Unto his many Paricides, the murder
Of his own Son: A Person that was only
Unhappy, that he had so vile a Father.
Who though not at present dead;
Yet. --

Omn. Sen. How, not dead?

Cleom. Not dead Fathers, but by the Providence of
Heaven, that heard our prayers, he is now
Within your power, and timely shall appear
To be the Object of your Justice first.

1. Sen. Thou art thy Conntries, and our great Preservor

Cleom. But there is something, Honored Fathers, of
Greater Concern to take up your chief thoughts.
I meant it in my promise; and shall not
Detain your Hopes too long: Here, I present
The lovely person of a long lost Princess:
A Branch surviving of the Royal Family,
Whose Story will draw up your Love and Wonder;
The fair Calanthe.
[They offer to Rise. Fathers keep your places,
And think what your own duties are obliged too.

Sen. It will Require no Study: We declare
Her Right to the Succession: the Crown
Is justly hers, and we Salute her Queen.
Long live. --

Cleom. Stay Honored Fathers; though her name and Virtues
Deserve as much as all her Sex together,
Whose preservation has been long my Study,
Though I have nothing to accuse your duties,
Yet she must not be Queen.

Call. What means Cleomenes?

Omn. Sen. My Lord, your Reason.

Cleom. I Will show you a Reason presently.

[Exeunt Cleomenes and Col onel. Call. After a great and constant zeal to place
me
In my own Right; Is he become my Enemy?
The faith of man is but a Mockery.

Enter Cleomenes, Cleander, with Timandra. Alexius, Dorion, Sicanus. Cleom.
Here is my Reason Fathers: Do none here
Know this too long obscured Face?

Omn. Sen. The King: It Is Cleander.

[The Senators Rise. Cleom. Your pardon, Madam.

[To Calanthe. Call. Ha! my Brother? let me throw
My Soul into his Bosom: Blessed Cleomenes:
My Royal Brother: dearer to my Heart
Than many thousand Kingdoms.

^lean. O my dear Sister.

[Cleander led to his Seat by Cleomenes and Senators. ^mn. Sen. Long live
Cleander King of Scicily.

Clean. I shall employ the best Care of my Life
^world^ serve you, and my Country.

^world^ Sen. You are dropped a present Sir from Heaven: aand after
^s blessing, there is nothing left to pray for,
^t that the same great Arm that brought you
^ther with so much Miracle and Peace;
^y still be a Guard about your Crown.

Clean. Most Honored Subjects,
^ead firm Loyalty in every Face,
^ould else think the Crown a Burden to me.
^t I must tell you that my Fortune meets it,
^hen I have more Capacity of bearing
^o great a weight: For here is one that must
^vide all Cares with me: The fair Timandra.
[Rises from his Seat, and goes to Timandra* ^ur Voices and consent will weave
our Crowns
^d persons into One: Heaven has done his Office.

Cleo. Then long Live Cleander and Timandra.
^ng and Queen of Scicily and Namidia.

Tim. I am rewarded now for all my Sufferings.

Call. Madam.

[To the Queen. Tim. My Sister now.

Clea. Cleomenes pardon my unjust suspicion
upon thy Honor.

Call. He is perfect in all goodness: I must own him
^ly best preserver: You can never Sir,
enough reward his Piety.

Clea. I will hope,
^world^ you consent Calanthe: Dare give thy self to me?

Call. Most freely Sir.

Clea. So, what think you of my Sister?

Cleo. What I should think, if she were not your Sister,
^ere soon resolved;
^e is the wonder of her Sex: A Princess
^o be with Reverence looked on a far off.

Clea. My Lord, if I should bring her nearer to you.

Cleo. She is in my Soul already.

Clean. Come Calanthe,
^world^ see thou only can Reward Cleomenes*
and nothing else left worthy of his Faith*
And Honor: I must give thy self to him.
Take her Cleomenes from me: your Hearts will meet
And make no difference.

Call. I Confirm my Brothers gift Cleomenes:
Thy Blood is from the Race of noblest Ancestors.
Thy Virtue makes the greater: and let Envy
Talk it self dumb, thou do deserve a Princess,
And shall't be Read in story to thy Honor,
When some that boast great Empires shall have dark
And common Mention.

Cleom. It Is too much Grace.

Clean. The Command
Of all our Forces both by Sea and Land
Are thine, with what can be hereafter found
Worthy of thy Desert, and fit to add unto
Calanthes Dowry.

Cleom. Your bounties overwhelm me, I must fear
My Bark's too small for this great Happiness,
But will remember still you are Calanthe.

Enter Damocles Guarded, Dirion, S^canus. Dam. Are you my Guard?

Sic. We do attend your Person.

Dam. But I had men that would Obey.

Dor. You had a Son too, but you murdered him.

Dam. Fine fellows: Ha! What are these? Senators?
Their Faces are much paler then their Robes:
And some of these dropped at Timoleons Tomb: Ha!
I know 'em again: See how my dream continues;
When shall I wake? Me thinks I feel the weight
Of mountains on me -- Cleomenes:
What gay thing is that?

Cleom. It Is Cleander the King.

Dam. Ha, ha: A very dream still: If I were not*
A sleep, who durst confine me thus, and give me
Such saucy Language? What Is that Lady?

Cleom. It Is the Kings Sister, the fair Calanthe.

Dam. So, so, I am confirmed, and that is Timand^a
Whom the fine King plays withal: Chimeraes,
What strange things do we fancy in our dreams,
Some Thunder wake me.

Enter Hugo Guarded. Cleom. Hugo, Sir, the Usurpers Parasite,
A most Perfideous Villain.

Hug. Ha! The King? I am blasted Sir, I most
Humbly beg that you would hang me.

Clea. The Laws may fit you Sir.

Hug. I have deserved it.

Clea. I make no question:
Remove this horrid Traitor from my sight,
This day be sacred to our Kingdoms Peace,
And let him dream on, till the Laws and Death
Awake him.

Alex. Ask the King mercy: Speak for your self Hugo.

Hug. To what purpose? Let me say what I will, I
Knew they will hang me.

[They lead him off. Dam. Then I will wake my self:
The next wound's his, that dares approach me.
Cleander, I will do the Justice,

[Wounds himself with a Poniard. Clean. Restrain him.

Dam. It Is too late, I scorn your Canting Forms of Law:
It Is in my Power to deceive all your policy: Ha!
I do begin to be awake: This wound has don't:
But I shall sleep again I fear, and quickly Vanish,
I know not whither.
My eyes grow dim of the sudden: It Is a trouble
Now to look upwards: Heaven's a great way off,
I shall not find the way in the dark: Farewell.

[Dies. Alex. He Is Dead.

Clea. But left his name behind; A Glorious Villain.
His Head shall be advanced upon the Castle,
But let his Body crow'd for Burial,
In The Common Execution place.
You Gentlemen (no more a Senate) shall
Be honored with the name of our great Counsel,
And leave it to my care to Recompense
Your Loss, and Sufferings.

Omne. Sen. You are Gracious.

Clean. There shall be an Indemnity for those
Whose frailty, and not malice, made 'em Act
Under the Tyrant.

Cleo. Mercy becomes a King, which as it flows
Upon your Enemies, should have a free
Stream to your Friends, whose Faith, Sir, has been tried*
You ^lse would break their Honest hearts.

Clean. I thank your good advice my Lord.

Cleom. And in their number let me, Sir, present
(To kiss your Hand) this noble Gentleman,
Son of the Lord Demaratus; who Bleed
A Martyr for you.

Call. He was my second Father.

Clean. And my Friend: you shall be
[Parmenio kisses the Kings Hand. Restored both to his Honor and his Fortunes,
Beside the Addition of some employment
(That may be worthy) near our Person.

Cleo. What shall be done with Dionysius Body?

Clean. It shall have honorable interment.
Come Timandra, --
Set on to the Temple first, Where we may Pay
Our thanks and Vows to Heaven; whose Justice, though
It march but slow, and silent;
Yet at the last bold Traitors all shall Feel,
It stricks their proud Heads, with an Arm of Steel.

[Exeun^ ^mnes. FINIS.
THE EPILOGUE TO THE USURPER.
THe Moral use of Plays, does make us know
Actions, which virtues Raise, and vice lay Low:
Teaching the Bad, though even dead, to fear
They may be Revived, to be punished here.
As now this Play, by some such Magic Call
Has raised a bold Usurper up, to Fall.
And if I may advise you Gentlemen,
Faith let him live, if but to dye again.
His Crime was horrid, and it is not fit,
One death of the Usurper Expiate it:
Let him dye often, He Is content that way,
Still to be punished, so you will spare the Play
Which by our Authors aim was meant to be
Here, a Record of all such Loyalty;
That after long Contests, did safely bring,
Subjects to Rights, and to his Throne our King.

