A LETTER OF Friendly Admonition TO A DIVINE of the SYNOD, Upon occasion of a
Sermon preached by him, October. 18. 1647. TOGETHER, With certain Quaeres
presented to the SYNOD: Wherein the maine Objections against the Common Prayer
set forth in the Preface to the late Directory are examined; Together, with
other Acts that have been done against the suffering party of this KINGDOM.
And the Answer of the Synod desired thereunto. By a hearty wel-wisher to Truth
and Peace, T.W.

(...) Si ego, quis ego, si non ego, quis? Printed in the Year, MDCXLVII.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
Honest Reader,
PRincipium been agendi est b^ne sape, and proaemium been sapiendi est been
dubitare; The beginning of well doing is to know well, and the preface of well
knowing is to doubt well. Had this been the preface, or that the principle of
those with whom I have to do in this Treatise, for the leading on and
rectifying of those Acts which they have done, in order, or rather in disorder
to the Church. I should not have needed to have troubled them or thee with so
many doubts or Quaeries as are here presented to thy view, but their overhasty
resolutions have brought forth these questions. Had they sincerely and
impartially examined their designs before hand, we had been saved the labor
of this after examination of their performance; some may perhaps count me with
the Proverb, That a fool may ask more questions than many a wise man can
answer* and others may charge me with overmuch arrogance and boldness, To
take upon me the examination of the acts of a whole Synod, consisting of so
many learned Divines; others may blot me and this book with the imputation of
impertinency in seeming to require answers of them for those things which are
the Issues of another womb, the sharp effects of the influence of another
Constellation. And perhaps there will not be some wanting that will challenge
me of less clearness, and of as little ingenuity in my proceeding in that I
have not set up the particular marks that I have shot at, before every shaft
that I have let go, that is to say, That I have not set down the particular
passages of the Directory against every Quaere which is passed upon them. And
indeed it is but reason, that I who am so forward to require satisfaction of
others, should not be backward in giving satisfaction to others that may
require it of me: mine answer therefore to them that shall examine me, or that
shall make any of the aforesaid objections against me, is this:

To the first, That it is too true, That it is very easy for wisdom to be
pozed and puzzled by folly. The many unnecessary, fruitless, unsober and
pernicious questions of this age, that is sick of an inquisition, do too
plainly and evidently convince it. But yet though curiosity has the stamp both
of malevolency and folly upon it, yet it may be remembered, that as wise men are
bound in reason to clear and justify those acts which they do of public
concernment: so it may be the part of honest and sober men to desire it of
them, especially where many consciences are engaged upon the inquest, and that
under the penalty of an eternal mulct, and where the Authority whereby things
are done is within a little as doubtful, as the reason of their doing being
done.

It may well be I confess, that that Painter spoiled his picture that mended
it, or rather altered it according to the exceptions of every fancy that would
find fault with it; an error that some are too guilty of in these days, in
the too easy change of frames and draughts of a far greater moment than the
painters workmanship, and an eye endued but with natural and ordinary skill
may easily perceive what a comely deformity is left us. If the people must
always be heard in such matters, I mean in matters of Church and State
government; they will never likely have done their quarrels, until they have
quarrelled or agitated all into confusion; since as Judicious Mr. Hooker has
well observed, and we find by lamentable experience at this day: There is
scarce any thing more easy than to persuade a people that they are not well
governed; no yoke can be so fit or easy to their necks, but those untamed
Calves or Bullocks will be ready enough to shake it off, and plead for
licentiousnes under the name of liberty; hence it is that affectation of
novelty is such an epidemical disease amongst them, and not more universal
than turbulent and pernicious; which made the Thurian's lawgiver provide that
severe Antidot against it, by making a law that whoever would go about either
to abolish any one of the old laws, or attempt to establish a new, should
present himself before the people with a rope about his neck: to the end, that
if his invention were not approved of all men he should presently be strangled,
and so he should taste first of the poison that himself had mingled: That it
might not be safe for any man to propose that which should be dangerous to the
whole body. A law that never was more needful than to our people, and in these
days; and I think we may well wish it had been the first Act of this present
Parliament; it might no doubt have saved a great many lives, and prevented a
multitude of mischiefs. A great Moralist makes it a great doubt, whether any
so evident profit may be found in the change of a received Law of what nature
whatsoever, as there is hurt in the removing of the same, for so much, as a
well settled policy may be compared to a frame or building of diverse parts
joined together with such a ligament as it is impossible to stir or displace
one, but the whole body must needs be shaken or show a feeling in it. The doubt
I conceive to be a little too general, but yet the reason that he gives has
proved too true in our present condition. And the old rusty sword of justice at
Marseille, that the same Author tells us of, was a good emblmee to signify,
the great caution that should be used in admitting of novelty in public
administrations.

But yet though the danger of novelty does forbid the People to be admitted for
tamperers with the settled constitutions of a Kingdom, since the selfish nature
of men is such, that for the most part every one (as we see) would have his
private affections and designs be the only gages of public rules, and the
profit of one man is observed to be the damage of another; yet when the
perilous business of changing old or making new Laws is set on foot, it is
not inexpedient that all men's objections may be heard against them before they
be thoroughly established; and therefore it were not a misle that as some
Colleges use to deal in the admission of their members, making them
probationers for a certain time before they be finally admitted into the
number; so those new Laws that are brought in might be probationers too
amongst us for a convenient time, in which time it might be free for all men to
make their exceptions against them in a fair and peaceable manner. The banes
of them should be first as it were publicly asked as we use to do in
marria^es, and liberty allowed to every man to show cause if he knows any why
they ought not to be contracted with the Commonwealth; and when they are once
so settled, for ever after the people should be bound to hold their peace,
unless it be in such case where some clear and manifest opposition is
discovered between the Law of God and the received constitutions: In which
case also there is great moderation to be used, and nothing to be extorted by
force or tumult, nor is it often found that the people are fit Judges in such
things.

But this may serve I hope to excuse me from the over-severe censure either of
folly or malignity, in that now I have endeavored so far to serve the good of
the Church and State; as now in this time of attempted change, and whilst
those new Laws that are brought in are yet upon their probation* being not yet
established by a full authority (which cannot be done with pretermission of, or
contradiction of the supreme magistrate) yea, whilst the Laws are yet in
force whereby the old customs are ordained (unless we will admit that the
acts of a less and more imperfect power may abolish the acts of that which is
more full and perfect, or that a Body without a Head has more faculty and
perfection than a Body and Head together) I hope I say I may be excused from
the aforesaid censures, if now I have discharged so much faithfulness to the
Church and State, and particularly to my Prince and the suffering party, as to
offer my objections against those things that are attempted in a fair way to
the public view, and especially unto their consideration who have taken upon
them the manage of the business.

And this may serve in part too, for an answer unto the second objection that
may be made against me in point of Arrogance, in undertaking the examination of
the Acts of a whole Synod. I shall acknowledge the parts and gifts that are
amongst them to be far more eminent than any I can pretend unto I contend not
with them in these things, but I hope to be found as faithful as they, and
think I have altogether as much Authority to desire a resolution from them of
those doubts that conscience may make against, that they have done, as they
have (being not designed by the supreme power, or the Church thereunto) to make
constitutions wherein men's Conscience are not satisfied. God has chosen the
foolish things of the World to confound the wise, the weaker things of the
World to confound the things that are mighty, the base things of the World and
things that are despised has God chosen, yea, and things which are not to
bring to naught things that are; that flesh should glory in his presence. I
desire not to make odious comparisons for them, nor ambitious or arrogant ones
for my self, not to quench but revive the flames of Christian love betwixt us.
But yet it is possible they may be in an error; and then Micaiah was no
presumptuous Prophet to oppose 400 Prophets that had mistaken their message;
and I could tell my censurers that the Arrian Counsels, and the Council of
Trent too might have had a more free and uninterrupted passage through the
World perhaps, if they had been secured from the examination and opposition
from particular men. And we know the Apostle has laid a command upon us to try
the spirits; however we may reverence their gifts, and wish the Church the
benefit of them in the right employment; yet we dare not ascribe so much
Divinity unto them, as to take all things upon trust that they shall impose
upon us, or receive every Metal of their Coinage for pure Gold, without
bringing it unto the ^est, lest in so exalting them we should debase the most
high; and whilst we afford such reverence unto them, we should forget to pay
that reverence which is due from us, unto the Church of England, and those
Constitutions which have been established by other former Synods at least as
Authentical as they.

If all this will not justify me form a blot of insolency, I must bear it for
ought I know, only to make them the more inclinable to lenity in their censure
of it: give me leave to say, that if I cannot be freed from the guilt of
insolency, in taking upon me to examine the Acts of a whole Synod (as they are
styled) I cannot see how it will gain them the Glory of modesty to take upon
them not only to examine but to abolish the Acts of the Church of England,
confirmed by the Laws of the supreme civil power, and by the Constitutions of
the Ecclesiastical State of this Nation, unless they had a better calling to
do it than we know of.

To the third quarrel of impertinency that may be entered aagainst me in
desiring an answer from them for the actions of others. I answer briefly, That
the highest capacity that I can look upon them in, in that Body where they are
assembled, is as they are chosen by those others for the direction of their
Consciences, in those things which they were to do. And therefore if things
have been done amiss, it concerned them to have advised them better, and yet
we have some reason to believe, where we consider the advantages that diverse
of the Synod have made unto themselves of some of those Acts that have been
done by others, in the receiving the benefit of pluralities of Sequestered
Livings, etc. That some of those things were done not for want of their advice
to the contrary, but were promoted by their advice and council. And
Councillors as well as Actours of Inconveniences are answerable to God, and
may be desired by men concerned, to afford them satisfaction in Conscience:
However it be I do but propose Quaeres and Doubts of them in the maine, and
if there be any modest harmless way I think that is it.

To the fourth and last objection that I am liable to. I do not undertake the
justification of my self against it, but first excuse it, and desire pardon;
my mind is full of many thoughts in these times, many issues I have struggling
in the womb of my soul at once, and one has the hand as it were upon the
heel of another, like Jacob upon the heel of his Brother, ready to supplant
it, or precipitate the birth of it. Besides the particular business of the
Directory reasons was not in my mind when I went first about this work, and
that may I hope be admitted for one tolerable Apology for the omission of
setting down the Passages of the Directory in the same order with the Quaeres,
unto which diverse of them are directed.

But Secondly, to make some amends for this error, I have here afforded thee
the draught of the preface to the Directory, where thou have the several
objections thereof against the Common Prayer, which are pointed at, and called
to a reckoning in some of the Quaeres, especially in the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
etc. unto the 26. Together with some other particular passages of the Directory
it self concerning Burial of the Dead, and Holy Days which are touched upon
therein.

If any shall desire farther to know why I have not gone through with other
passages of the Directory; I answer with the proverb, that have makes wast, and
withal some regard was to be had of the volume in such a time, when people
are so easily frighted from a Book by the Bulk of it. But if I find that the
further prosecution thereof shall be desired from so weak and rude a hand as
mine is. I shall be willing to make up what has been wanting ere it be long:
In the mean time honest Reader, His mere mecum, read deliberately and judge
impartially, and the Lord who is the God of wisdom and Peace fill thee full
of the riches of his spiritual wisdom, and restore Peace unto us in these
poor distracted Kingdoms. Farewell.

The Preface TO THE DIRECTORY.
IN the beginning of the blessed Reformation, our wise and pious Ancestors
took care to set forth an Order for Redress of many things, which they, then,
by the Word discovered to be Vain, Erroneous, Superstitious and Idolatrous,
in the Public Worship of God. This occasioned many Godly and Learned men to
rejoice much in the Book of Common Prayer at that time set forth; Because the
Mass, and the rest of the Latine-Service being removed, the Public Worship
was celebrated in our own Tongue; many of the common People also received
benefit by hearing the Scriptures read in their own Language, which formerly
were unto them as a Book that is sealed.

Howbeit, long and sad Experience has made it manifest, That the Leiturgie
used in the Church of England, (notwithstanding all the pains and Religious
intentions of the Compilers of it) has proved an offense, not only to many of
the Godly at home; but also to the Reformed Churches abroad. For, not to speak
of urging the Reading of all the Prayers, which very greatly increased the
burden of it; the many unprofitable and burdensome Ceremonies, contained in it,
have occasioned much mischief, as well by disquieting the Consciences of many
godly Ministers and people who could not yield unto them, as by depriving them
of the Ordinances of God, which they might not enjoy without conforming or
Subscribing to those Ceremonies. Sundry good Christians have been by means
thereof, kept from the Lords Table, and diverse able and faithful Ministers
debarred from the exercise of their Ministry (to the endangering of many
thousand Souls, in a time of such scarcity of faithful Pastors) and spoiled
of their livelihood, to the undoing of them and their Families. Prelates and
their Faction have labored to raise the Estimation of it to such an height, as
if there were no other Worship, or way of Worship of God amongst us, but only
the Service-Booke; to the great hinderance of the Preaching of the Word, and
(in some places, especially of late) to the justling of it out, as unnecessary;
or (at best) as far inferior to the Reading of Common Prayer, which was made
no better than an Idol by many Ignorant and Superstitious People, who pleasing
themselves in their presence at that Service, and their Lip-labor in bearing a
part in it, have thereby hardened themselves in their ignorance and
carelessenesse of saving Knowledge and true Piety.

In the mean time Papists boasted, that the Book was a compliance with them
in a great part of their Service, and so were not a little confirmed in their
Superstition and Idolatry, expecting rather our return to them, than
endeavoring the Reformation of themselves: In which expectation they were of
late very much encouraged, when, upon the pretended warrantablenesse of
imposing of the former Ceremonies, new ones were daily obtruded upon the Church.

Add hereunto (which was not foreseen, but since has come to pass) that the
Leiturgie has been a great means, as on the one hand to make increase an idle
and unedifying Ministry, which contented it self with set Forms made to
their hands by others, without putting forth themselves to exercise the gift of
Prayer, with which our Lord Jesus Christ pleases to furnish all his Servants
whom he calls to that office: so on the other side it has been (and ever
would be, if continued) a matter of endless strife and contention in the
Church, and a snare both to many godly and faithful Ministers, who have been
persecuted and silenced upon that occasion, and to others of hopeful parts,
many of which have been, and more still would be, diverted from al thoughts of
the Ministry to other studies; especially in these latter times, wherein God
vouchsafes to his people more and better means for the discovery of Error
and Superstition, and for attaining of knowledge in the mysteries of
godliness, and gifts in Preaching and Prayer.

Upon these, and many the like weighty considerations, in reference to the
whole Book in general, and because of diverse particulars contained in it; not
from any love to Novelty, or intention to disparage our first Reformers (of
whom we are persuaded that were they now alive, they would join with us in
this work, and whom we acknowledge as Excellent Instruments raised by God to
begin the purging and building of his House, and desire they may be had of us
and Posterity in everlasting Remembrance, with thankfulness and honor;) but
that we may in some measure answer the gracious Providence of God, which at
this time calls upon us for further Reformation, and may satisfy our own
Consciences, and answer the expectation of other Reformed Churches, and the
desires of many of the godly among our selves, and with all give some public
Testimony of our endeavors for Uniformity in Divine Worship, which we have
promised in our Solemn League and Covenant: We have after earnest and frequent
calling upon the Name of God, and after much Consultation, not with flesh and
blood, but with his holy Word, resolved to lay aside the former Leiturgie, with
the many Rites and Ceremonies formerly used in the Worship of God: And have
agreed upon this following Directory for all the parts of Public Worship, at
ordinary and extraordinary Times.

Wherein our care has been to hold forth such things as are of Divine
Institution in every Ordinance; and other things we have endeavored to set
forth according to the Rules of Christian Prudence, agreeable to the general
Rules of the Word of God. Our meaning therein being only that the general
heads, the sense and scope of the Prayers and other parts of Public Worship
being known to all, there may be a consent of all the Churches, in those
things that contain the substance of the Service and Worship of God; And the
Ministers may be hereby directed in their Administrations to keep like
soundness in Doctrine and Prayer; and may, if need be, have some help and
furniture; And yet so, as they become not hereby slothful and negligent in
stirring up the gifts of Christ in them: But, that each one, by meditation, by
taking heed to himself and the flock of God committed to him, and by wise
observing the ways of Divine Providence, may be careful to furnish his heart
and tongue with further, or other materials of Prayer and Exhortation, as shall
be needful upon all occasions.

Concerning Burial of the Dead.
WHen any person departs this life, let the dead body upon the day of
Burial, be decently attended from the house to the place appointed for
public Burial, and there immediately interred, without any Ceremony.

And because the customs of kneeling down, and praying by, or toward the dead
Corpse, and other such usages, in the place where it lies, before it be carried
to Burial, are Superstitious: and for that, praying, reading, and singing,
both in going to, and at the Grave, have been grossly abused, are no way
beneficial to the Dead, and have proved many ways hurtful to the living,
therefore let all such things be laid aside.

Howbeit, we judge it very convenient, that the Christian friends which
accompany the dead body to the place appointed for public Burial, do apply
themselves to meditations, and conferences suitable to the occasion: and, that
the Minister, as upon other occasions, so at this time, if he be present, may
put them in remembrance of their duty.

That this shall not extend to deny any civil respects or differences at the
Burial, suitable to the rank and condition of the party deceased whiles he
was living.

Concerning Days and Places for Public Worship.
THere is no Day commanded in Scripture to be kept holy under the Gospel, but
the Lords day, which is the Christian Sabbath.

Festival days, vulgarly called Holy days, having no warrant in the Word of
God, are not to be continued.

Nevertheless it is lawful and necessary upon special emergent occasions, to
separate a day or days for Public Fasting or Thanksgiving, as the several
eminent and extraordinary dispensations of Gods providence shall administer
cause and opportunity to his people.

SIR,
I Have been several times your Auditor, and cannot but confess that I have
heard many Truths from you. Truths employed in their right Offices, Truth
vindicating Peace from the bane of Division; and Truths vindicating truth from
the liberty of Corruption. I shall not now question with you whether you have
guided the Truth unto its right end, as well as you have employed it in its
proper Function. I have heard you mourning for the miserable condition of this
Church and Nation; and I think every good Christian should join with you in
the lamentation of these great evils: For who can think or speak it without a
heavy and groaning heart; That we have lived to see the Paradise of the world
become a rude and desolate wilderness; The glory of the whole Earth to become
the shame and reproach of all Nations: The Temple of God (for so I may well say
this Kingdom of ours was, if any of late days in the World) turned into a
great Den of Thieves and Robbers: The erst enclosed Garden of the Almighty,
once full of the fragrant Flowers, and wholesome Herbs and Plants of Divine
Truths, not less amiable in their beauty and ornament, then profitable in
their Sovereign virtues and operations, and hedged about with an orderly
discipline or government (though some thought it grew too high) transformed
indeed (not reformed) into a horrid brake of Weeds and Briars, and become a
free harbor for Toads and Serpents, and every noisome and poisonous creature,
whilst falsehoods, and those none of the meanest additions do not as heretofore
steel in as Thieves by night, or dwell obscurely as stranger (amongst us* but
are even naturallized, and made free Denizens in this wretched Nation: and as
if our Age were the refuse and dregs, the very last off all of all the former
winnowings of the floor ers of time, and our Nation the sink to receive the
Congeries of all that Corruption that ever any Nation has brought forth,
whether in depraved Doctrines, or debauched. Conversation; All the Articles of
the Creed almost, the great (...), heretofore to distinguish between
Christians, and Jews, and Infidels; and all the holy Commandments of God; The
great and holy Mounds and Ramparts between the pastures of the Sheep, and the
wilderness of the Wolves or Goats; between the road of life, and the broad way
of death and damnation, are not only shut out of your Directory for Worship,
when as yet they themselves are the great Directory of God, for the main parts
of his Worship, (which should have been better considered of) but are as
commonly trampled upon as the dirt in the streets.

-- Quis talia fando?
Mirmidonum dolopumve aut duri miles Ulysses.
Temperet a lachrimis --
I cannot blame you to lament these things, I think we should all take up the
wish of the Prophet Jeremiah, O that my Head were waters, and mine Eyes a
fountain of tears, that we might weep day and night for these things, and for
the slain of the daughter of my people. For those many thousands that have
been slain by the violence of the sword: and that far greater number which
we may justly fear have been, and are daily slain by the famine and
corruption of the Word; when we do but think how the glorious Maxims of
truth, the very foundations of Christianity are shaken and demolished.

How the Beauty and Order of Gods Worship, together with the peace and unity of
the Church is defaced and confounded.

What continual encroachments and inroads Satan makes upon the Lords
Inheritance, to the ravishing and worrying of so many thousands of souls; the
blood whereof must be one day accounted for by some body.

How the Lamps of the Temple, together with the fire of the Altar (sincere
knowledge and holy zeal) seems by the twinkling to be even almost ready to go
out amongst us. The former being turned for a great part into frantic fancies;
and the latter into unsanctifi'd furies.

How the new nightly Lights, or ignis fatui, that appear to the seducing of
the people, whilst they promise to guide them, do seem to be sad Messengers
of the declination of the Sun of the true and saving knowledge of the Gospel;
and to threaten us with the sad lot of Antioch, and Ephesus; and Smyrna, and
those other famous ancient Churches, which for less unthankfulness (it may be
feared) then we have showed, have been stripped of their ornaments of the
Jewels and precious graces of the Gospel, and have had the Candlestick removed
from them. How can we but fear the fearful sentence that our Savior in the
close of the Parrable denounced against the Jews, to be the sad judgment that
hangs over this Nation; Even that the Vineyard of the Lord shall be taken from
us, because we have not yielded the fruit thereof; but have beaten and cast out
the Messengers of the Lord with such a sharp and cruel persecution, and that
against those that the Authors cannot deny to be Preachers of the truth of the
Gospel, and to embrace the same faith which themselves profess and allow, (as
for ought I know) I may challenge any to parallel in all respects in any
Christian Story: Which together with the many other crying sins of this Nation,
may seem to threaten us with that woe of the Prophet, and make us to cry out
with him; Woe unto us, for the day goes away, for the shadows of the evening
are stretched out. Jer. 6.4.

We have great reason to bear a part with you in the lamentation of those sad
consequences that have followed already upon these things, and are likely yet
further to come in. Who can mourn sufficiently for them?

But could we shed forth ten thousand Rivers of tears, yet they would not
satisfy the Duty that God expects from us; that we should not content our
selves with a fruitless lamentation, but should all use our best endeavors
for a remedy. And sure he is not worthy the name of a Christian that would not
readily join with you in this too. And I pray God it be not too late. And I
could heartily wish, we could all so far forget our selves, our interests, our
former courses, and illegal, and unwarrantable engagements, as to join
together in those means, which are most conducible to a sound and speedy remedy.

But I shall desire you not to grow angry (if I shall, as I do) earnestly
entreat you to cast your thoughts back upon your own ways, and to consider
well, whether you and others with whom you have traveled together in turbulent
Machinations, have not led on these mischiefs in the road wherein they have
hasted to surprise us, whether you have not been too too active in cutting up
and pulling down those Mounds of Government both in Church and state, at the
ruins whereof, they have broken in; to the great devastation of the
inheritance of the Almighty; and whether a Writ of Quare claus^m fregit? will
not issue forth against you from an higher Court then the Parliament, unless
you prevent it by a timely Repentance, and a serious endeavor to repair those
breaches which you have made.

Consider, I beseech you, whether it had not been wisdom and piety, (however
vile and extravagant the old Mounds were grown) to let them have stood, at
least not to have pulled them up root and branch, till your new Quick had been
grown up, (as wise Husbandmen use to do) and had been able to have kept in
the Enclosure from those Forrages that have been since made upon it;
especially since (as it appears) you could not foresee what Frosts might nip
it, or what Beasts would devour it before it could attain unto its full
growth, for all those Thorns wherewith you senced and covered it.

Let this Meditation take up some of your solitary and serious minutes, and if
your Conscience will take no Bribes from Interest, I hope you may discover it
to be a friendly Admonition.

I am glad you have learnt; but how did you learn it? by acting upon others,
or suffering your self? but I am glad you have learnt it; but sorry that you
have learnt it so late, and by such sad experience, That Persecution it such an
innocent and profitable thing unto the sufferers. But I must beseech you to
remember, That it is not altogether either so innocent or profitable to the
inflicters* I would you had not been so busy in reading hard Lectures upon
this subject unto others, before you would acknowledge it your self. I am very
well pleased to hear you now tell us, That the greatest Persecution is better
then those far greater evils which are now come upon us. Had you but learnt
this seven years sooner, you would not sure have been so impatient of a
fancied Persecution, or at the most so light a one as the worst of it was; as
in the shaking off that yoke from off your neck, and by springing so violent a
Mine under the late Ancient Government, to have opened the door to all that
Rabble that is come in. Me thinks your present Doctrine is a secret
retractation of your practice heretofore: let your future practice be now
answerable to your Doctrine, or take heed your Sermons be not turned into
Bills of Indictments against your self, when you shall stand at the Bar of
the great Tribunal. You see now I hope how dangerous a thing it is to be
tampering with the frame of a Church or State, when it is once reasonably
settled in any tolerable condition: and that it was a wise saying of holy
Augustine, Aug. Ep. ad Januarium.
Iosa quippe mutatio consuetudines etiam quae adjuvat utilitate novitate
purturbat, That the change of things received by custom, although it be such
as may help by the commodity of it does cause trouble and disturbance by the
novelty.

You find now I hope, that every Novelty is not a Medicine.

I think you cannot, I am sure you dare not deny, but many men did, and more
might have gone to Heaven, had that Frame, and Government, and Discipline been
continued, which was founded in the blood of so many Martyrs; at least if it
had been peaceably and orderly reformed, by a wise and moderate reclaiming of
some wild Branches that had crept into it; and by a reduction of it to a
(somewhat more near compliance) with the frames of the Primitive times.

Tell me truly, or if you will not confess to us, yet confess to your own
Conscience; Do you not find cause heartily to wish, that you had left some
things undone.

We had need take heed what sparkles we kindle, unless we be well assured
that we know how and when to quench them again, lest we burn down the
House we dwell in.

Who would have thought that the setting fire of a pair of Lawne sleeves, and
a Common Prayer-booke, should have made so much Tinder to light such a
multitude of Matches amongst us, to set such a blaze into three several
Kingdoms.

Oh this Ambition! it is a pestilent Tumor. And Diogenes his Pride it is
thought was as bad as Plato's. Calco fastu^ Pla^onis, said Diogenes. Sed majori
fastu, replied Plato.
I am sorry his Tub too is in such request amongst us.

Oh this Covetousness! it is no good Chyrurgeon to cure the wounds of a Church
or State: it has proved unto us like those Medici parisienses, it is too much
given to Phlebotomy. A bloody sin it is without doubt, but will the Bishops
Lands, or the sequestered livings, or Deaneries think you pay for that great
Acceldama of this land? Oh a peaceable mind; it is a rich commodity.

Sir, I could find more to say in this matter: But I shall conclude,
commending unto your consideration these few sayings of the wise man.

The beginning of strife is as when one lets out water: Prove. 17.14.
therefore leave off contention before it be meddled with.

It needs no other descant but what as I remember your self gave upon it not
long since, I refer you to your own Notes.

He that diggeth a Pit shall fall into it, Eccl. 10.8.
and who so breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him.

Remove not the ancient Land-marke, Prove. 22.28.
which thy Fathers have set.

One more. My Son, Prove. 24.21.
fear thou the Lord and the King: and meddle not with them that are given to
change.

Sir, Think me not your Enemy for this advice. I assure you, I heartily wish
your greatest good; and I pray you consider that I am but a poor runinous
Wall, that have received so strong a Beam of your own light from you, and
thus reflected it upon you again for your good.

Of which I rest an hearty well-wisher in the recovery and preservation of
Truth and Peace, and Righteousness in the Church, and in the prosperity of my
gracious Sovereign and his Kingdom: (...).
October. 18. Die Dominico noctiscente. Anno infaustae seditionis Anglianae jam
curente septimo foelicissimae vero incarnativus Dominicae supra millessimo
sexcentissimo quadragessimo septimo. POSTSCRIPT.
SIR, where men wish no good, they do not use to expectany; that you may
guess therefore by my confidence in you, how far I am from wishing any evil
unto you, I am bold here to entreat your favor to present these few Quaeres to
your Synod, desiring their sincere and speedy resolution.




