E^ie and u^ro Ril^ di Masianiello, (...).



THE SECOND PART OF MASSANIELLO, His Body taken out of the Town-Ditch, and
solemnly buried, with Epitaphs upon him. A Continuation of the Tumult; The D.
of Guise made Generalissimo; Taken Prisoner by young Don JOHN of Austria. The
end of the Commotions. By J. H. Esquire.

Truth never looked so like a Lie
As in this modern History.
LONDON, Printed by J. M. for A. Roper, and T. Dring, and are to be sold by
Richard Lownds at the White Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1663.

To the Right Worshipful The Governor, The Deputy, and the rest of the Worthy
COMPANY OF LEVANT-MERCHANTS.
GENTLEMEN,
THere are none so capable to judge of the truth of this Napolitan Story as
your selves, who have so frequent Intelligence from that Country where it was
acted; Therefore, I presume, no man will question my judgment for making this
Dedication.

Moreover, I had some particular engagements that induced me thereunto, in
regard of those helps which I received from some Worthy Members of that
Society, who favored me with the sight of diverse of their Letters from time to
time, and furnished me with other advantages toward the compiling of this
Piece.

The Part you formerly had attended the Fisherman to his Greatness, and this
accompanies him to his Grave. That blind instable Thing which we call Fortune
never showed Her self more like Her self then She did in the handling of this
man, whom in a very few days She raised to such a prodigious altitude that the
Great Turk was not more terrible in Constantinople, then he was in Naples. But
afterward, like a Statue of some course Stone, set up upon a high Marble
pedestal or frame, she suffered him to fall down and dash himself to pieces.

This second Part is nothing inferior to the first in strangeness; and he who
with a serious well-weigh'd judgment will meditate on the passages thereof,
will confess that Realities never appeared more like Romances then in this
Story: For it will tell you of above a hundred several Fights and Skirmishes
that happened in Naples within the compass of about two Months time; how every
Street was made Frontier one to another, and disputed by inches; how above
fourscore thousand Cannon-bullets were shot from the three Castles, and twenty
thousand from the Town; A great number of stately Palaces, with invaluable rich
Furniture, all turned to ashes by the fury of the Fire, and of the People, who
may be said to be the more furious of the two. And indeed it cannot be denied
but the people had some reason to be incensed, in regard of those multitude of
Gabels that were imposed upon every thing; which Gabels had flown so high, that
they had got up to the tops of the very Trees, among all sorts of Fruit;
Insomuch that one may well say, the Napolitan Coursier was almost rid quite off
of his legs, and his back so galled that upon the least rubbing he could not
choose but winch, kick and flounce, which he did to some purpose, so that he
had almost quite orethrown his Rider. Now, if the Spaniard had lost Naples, you
know better then I, what an infinite detriment it had been unto him, it being
one of the fairest Flowers in his Garden, one of the best patches upon his
Pilgrims coat, as the Frenchman compares the squandred Dominions of Spain. For
it is to be seen upon good account, how that this King and his Father have had
above a hundred millions of crowns in mere Donatives from that Kingdom, besides
the stable Rents and Perquisites of the Crown, which comes to near upon three
millions per annum. Insomuch that it had been more advantageous for Spain that
Massaniello had not been killed so soon; for had he lived a few days longer he
had taken a course to raise five millions for the King in compensation of the
Gabels.

So, desiring again your gentle acceptance of this now -completed Story, as a
further evidence of my respects unto you, I rest,

Sirs, Your humble and ready Servitor, JAM. HOWEL.

The Proeme.
IT is well known to the world what a high pitch of Power, and vast latitude of
Dominion, the Kingdom of Spain has arrived unto in the compass of a few years:
The first step into this greatness was the Conjunction of Castile and Arragon
by Marriage. The second was the Discovery of the West Indies, which happened a
little after. The third was an Alliance 'twixt the Houses of Austria and
Burgundy, whereby all Belgium, viz. The seventeen Provinces of the
Low Countries, or the Netherlands, came to be united in a joint Subjection to
the Empeperour Charles the Fifth, who attempted to heighten those Provinces to
the Title of a Kingdom: but He, and his Son Philip the Second, after him,
failed in the Design. The fourth step was the Conquest of Portugal (though an
Hereditary Title was pretended) whereby Spain came to be Mistress of the
East Indies, and part of the Antipodes, with sundry Islands in the Atlantic
Sea, and diverse strong Maritim holds in Barbary.

Now, since the time that Spain came to this height by such a mavelous
Celerity (for all these Accessions happened in less then fifty years, partly by
Alliances, partly by Succession and Inheritance, partly by Donation, and partly
by right of Discovery and Conquest) I say, since these huge Accumulations of
Titles and Territories, both in the old and new world.

1. The first Country that rose up and revolted from the King of Spain was
Holland with her five considerate Provinces, which happened a little after the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

2. The second was Catalonia, some twelve years since.

3. The third was the Kingdom of Portugal, which entirely fell off from him a
little after, and settled it self under another King in a very few days, in
such a quietness as if it had been twenty years a doing.

4. The last that banded against him were the Kingdoms of Sicily and Naples,
which happened about four years since; but the fire of the first was quickly
extinguished; yet the flames thereof flew ore the Phare of Messina into
Calabria, and so to Naples, where they grew to such a violence, that an utter
revolt was intended.

Touching the falling away of Holland, which kept such a stir in the world,
the causes thereof may be comprehended in two words, viz. Inquisition and
Imposition, the latter whereof conduced to wring the Purse, the other the
Conscience.

Catalonia flew off in regard of the free Quarter which the Castilian Soldiers
took, with other Insolences they committed in their march to imbark for Italy.

The Portuguais unyok'd himself, not so much for the extraordinary Taxes, but
that the King of Spain, having so many irons in the fire, could not, or at
least neglected to protect him against the Hollander in Brasile, and elsewhere
in the Indies.

Now the causes of the Risings of Naples have much Analogy with all the former,
for they proceeded from the multiplicity of Gabels that were laid upon every
thing both for Back and Belly: Add hereunto the forced Services that were so
frequently imposed upon the Subjects to go to hazard their lives in other
Countries; And lastly, the Rapine of the Viceroyes (with the Gabelliers or
Customers) It being a kind of Proverb in Italy touching the Governor of
Milain, the Viceroy of Sicily, and he of Naples, that the one eats, the other
gnaws, and the third devours.

These Commotions came at last to such a violence that the whole Kingdom was
upon the point of an utter defection, having introduced the French for
Protector, and traced the form of a Commonwealth: but the soft Napolitan was
not, it seems, so constant to his ends as the Hollander or Catalon, and other
tougher Nations. The ensuing History will satisfy the Reader with much
exactness and fidelity the whole Circumstance of the business, extracted out
of Authentic Manuscripts, which Collection and Collation of Letters from
diverse Persons of Honor.

J. H.

A HISTORY Of the late REVOLUTIONS IN THE KINGDOM of NAPLES, And how suppressed
and ended.
BEfore we fall upon the second and third Revolutions that happened in the City
and Kingdom of Naples, it is not amiss, for the more regular proceeding in the
series of the Story, to make a succinct recapitulation of what succeeded in the
first tumult, wherein some signal passages shall be imparted, which were
omitted in the former Narration, for want of better Intelligence.

The Gabel of Fruit, and the Act confirmed, newly imposed upon the most
faithful people of Naples, was insupportable; to which purpose the Viceroy made
the Lords of the Customs to Convene diverse times hereabouts; and it was at last
determined, that it should be utterly abolished; and that the said Lords should
find some means where another Imposition might be laid for satisfaction of
those moneys which the Royal Court had raised upon the credit of the foresaid
Gabel. The people were also mightily discontented for other Taxes which were
laid upon every edible thing; for there was scarce any commodity escaped, but
the Imposition did countervail well near the value of the thing; whereunto the
most faithful people did conform a long time, as holding it necessary for the
support of the Catholic Monarchy, by stooping their heads to the pleasure of
him who Reigned over them, and preserved them in peace.

The foresaid Lords often met to take off the new Gabel; but for want of money,
and for the calamities of the times, they knew not where to turn themselves:
Besides, the people grew to be wonderful impatient; whereupon one day as they
were exacting the said Gabel in the Marketplace, a shrewd clash happened
'twixt the Farmers of the said Gabel and the Fruiterers, to whom the
Costermongers did closely stick; and the business being aggravated by
multiplication of words, all respect was lost unto the said Farmers; insomuch
that the Toll-house was burnt to the ground, with all the Writings therein, by
the fury of Boys, and others of the poorest sort of people; among whom
Massaniello, a poor barefooted retailer of Fish, was chief. The Lord Andrea
Anaclerio, the Elect of the people, intervened to appease the tumult; but
finding the business too hot for him, he withdrew himself, and with much
difficulty and danger escaped away in a Feluca.

The rabble of the common people being further animated hereby, the boys went
up and down with Canes in their hands to all places where the said Gabel was
raised, and burnt the houses and goods of the Gabelleers, as also of the
Farmers of all other kind of Tolls.

A little after two Companies well armed, but all masqued, passed by
Jesu-street, and another Brigade of 300. foot, with above four thousand Boys.
By the Market of Saint Elino two Companies more met, who broke through the
Court of Guard which was before the Castle Court, hurling two of the Soldiers
into the di ches thereabouts. Afterward they ran toward the Palace, where
they furiously entered: The Viceroy hereupon found himself in no small danger,
therefore throwing handfuls of Gold among them, and promising to take off
Gabels they were aggrieved at, he stole away with much ado to Saint Francisco.
Many of the Nobles endeavored to pacify the tumult, and, among others, the
Prince of Bisignano Carafa, and the Prince of Satriano labored very hard
herein, but it was in vain, so that they incurred some danger of their lives.

The rabble went afterward to the Prison of Saint James, and forcing it
violently they released all the Prisoners, whereof there were some in for their
lives; and they burned to Cynders all theWritings and Ledger books, as also all
the goods of the Jailer. They did the like in all other Prisons, excepting that
of the Vicaria, in regard of the reverence they bore to the holy Church.

This made the Viceroy change his lodging and re^ire to Castle novo with all
his Family. The Lord Vi^^tor General seeing these horrid tumults, opened his
^risons also, and let loose all the prisoners, making ^ereby virtue of
necessity, and so retired with all his ^amily to the Viceroy.

Hereupon the bread rose to thirty two ounces upon a sudden, which gave a
general coffeehouse.

That night there was nothing but beating of Drums, as if some Enemy were in
the Field, or the Turk upon the Coasts ready to invade.

The Viceroy thought it expedient in policy to release from prison the Duke of
Matalone, which was detained in Castelnovo; who mounting on horseback rode up
and down Naples well accompanied, asking the people with all mildness what they
would have: they cried out, That they would have all the Gabcls to be abolished
that were imposed upon them since the time of Charles the Fifth, and that all
the privileges should be renewed, and punctually observed, which were granted
to the most faithful people of Naples by that Emperor. The Viceroy with all
meekness said it should be done; therefore he suddenly caused a Pragmatica or
Proclamation to be printed and published to that purpose, with the advice of
the Collateral Council. Yet this would not satisfy, but they cried out that
the Duke of Mataluni had cozened them; therefore they took him for one
Hostage, and shut him up in the Carmine of Naples, whence he afterward fled.

After dinner the Prior of Rovella procured another Proclamation to be stamped
in Parchment, all in Letters of Gold, and carrying it about the Streets of
Naple on horseback said, That his Excellency the Viceroy had done them the
grace, in his Catholic Majesty's Name, to take off all the Gabels: Hereupon an
infinite number of Boys danced and leaped up and down about the Priors horse,
crying out, Let the King of Spain live, who has abolished all Gabels; and so
went to the Market place: But this neither would give full satisfaction; but
they went more violently to work, running to the house of Hieronym^ Letitia,
where they hurled out all his goods at the windows, and burnt them in the midst
of the Street, taking special care that nothing should be pilfer'd away, but
that an entire sacrifice should be made thereof to Vulcan. Then they ran to
Felix Basil's house, and used him with the same punctuality: Thence they
steered their course to Antonio d' Angelis, and did the like; Thence they went
to Andrea Anaclerio's Palace, who was the Peoples Elect; and though 'twas late,
yet they used his house as they did the rest.

The next day the Viceroy commanded to be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, that
all Gabels should be abolished that were imposed ever since the time of Charles
the fifth, which Trumpeters went up and down the places, as well within the
City as toward the Sea side where the Gabel houses stood: Yet for all this
they ran to the house whete the Magazine of Powder was, and took away what
proportions they pleased: nor would this serve the turn, but they set fire to
what remained, with the death of forty men; which made such a hideous noise, as
if not only one City, but the whole world did tremble: Hereupon every one did
put himself in Arms, and the women were as busy as any.

In the Sellaria they planted five pieces of Ordnance, six hundred Foot passed
by Magdanela bridge, to be embarked in some Galleys for the Kings service; but
the rabble fell upon them, and took away their Arms for another use. The
Nobility failed not ever and anon to court the Viceroy in behalf of the people,
who now began to prohibit things to pass to his Palace. One would think now
that he had been in Cocagna or Lubberland, for every thing entered into Naples
without paying the least toll; nor could a Sergeant be scarce seen in the
streets, nor any Officer that had any thing to do with the Farmers of the Gabel.

The next morning the rabble went to the Lord Antonio Mirabello's house, whom
they took in bed, and he hardly escaped away in his shirt; they presently burnt
all his movables, which made a rich bonefire; thence they went to Duke
Caviano's house, and used him alike, with many other sair Palaces,: Then they
came to Caesar Librano's house, where scarce a pin escaped the fury of the fire:
In the same manner they came to the Duke of Ostuin's house, and to Dr.
Tavaglo's, where they did the like. They sent to Andrea Mazzola for fifteen
hundred Muskets, but denying he had any, they put fire to his house, and took
out the said Muskets: Every Housekeeper in Naples was commanded to put himself
in Arms immediately, under pain of having his house burnt. There were some
sixty Spaniards in garrison about the Tower of St. Laurence, but the rabble ran
thither with two Cannons, where they disarmed and thrust out the Spaniards, and
possessed themselves of all the ancient Records that were in those Archives, so
they placed presidial Forces of their own there. Then they put fire to Biasio
de Balsamo's house, whence they passed to Bartholomeo d' Auqino of Chaia, and
treated him as they did all the rest; but they spared the house he had in
Pizzifalione, which they turned to a fortress: Jeronymo Nacarella had his share
in this Tragedy, who had a sumptuous new Palace made level with the ground:
Then they flew to Baron Valentiano's house, who was Farmer of the Corn; from
him they passed to Pietro Florio, who was Cash-keeper to the Royal Dogana or
Custom-house; and because it was fitting that at such a holy day a Minister of
the Chamber should have some share, they went to President Cenano, to whom they
did the like courtesy as they had done to others. It was admirable what a
regular method they observed in their fiery executions; for they used first to
take all the goods out into the Market place to be burnt, crying out it was the
blood of the people of Naples, and 'twas death to embeazle the least thing;
insomuch that one who had stolen but a peep of Sausage was like to be hanged by
Massanicllo; nor did they spare either gold, silver or jewels, but all was
thrown into the flames, as also coaches and horses were burnt alive, most rich
Tapistries and Pictures; but they saved all books and pieces of Piety, which
they sent to several Churches; and in Fclix Basils house they burnt a huge
proportion of biscuit, which was ready to be sent to the Galleys for the Kings
service.

The Viceroy ordered that some Companies of High Dutch who were in Garrison at
Pozzuolo should come to Naples, the rabble having notice hereof ran out of
Gratta, and meeting them they disarmed them all, and brought them prisoners to
the Marketplace.

When they entered into Saint Lorenzo, they found there the picture of Charles
the Fifth, which they carried round about Naples with twenty thousand souls,
who accompanied it, crying all along, Viva il Re di Spagna, May the King of
Spain live.

After this they went to Cornelio Spinola's House, where it was expected they
would have used the same Complement as they did to others; but he told them
that he never had any thing to do with the Gabels, but he was there for the
service of Genoa only, thereupon they chose him for Grassiero, or
superintendent of the Flesh-Market, and lest in his house the picture of
Charles the Fifth. One may easily conjecture in what pickle the poor Genoway
stood all the white.

They placed up and down the City five and twenty great Cannons in the most
necessary Advenues; and the busiest man who was employed herein was Joseph
Perrone a notorious Bandito, whom they appointed to be Captain of the Guard in
the great Marketplace, who dispensed his commands with that reservedness and
punctuality that 'twas wonderful, but some under-dealings of his being
detected, he and his brother were hackt to pieces by the fury of the people,
and their bodies for public satisfaction and example, were dragged up and down
the Streets, and hurled afterward into the Common Ditch.

The Duke of Mataluni, for the safeguard of his house assembled his outlaws,
and other desperate persons, but the people haivng notice thereof killed five
of them, and took one, alive, the rest saved themselves by flight: Thereupon
the great Bell of Lorenzo rung out to give notice that every one should be
ready in Arms, which had not been done a hundred years before. Massaniello now
grew higher in Command, yet he would not alter his habit, but went still
barefoot, and in Mariners habit; so that the common cry was, Viva Dio, Re de
Spagna, and Massaniello, Let God live, live the King of Spain, and Massaniello,
and there was such an opinion conceived of him, that they thought him to be
divinely inspired, so that every nod of his went for an absolute Command: This
opinion was confirmed by a strange Passage, which was, That certain Banditos
and Outlaws intending to murder the said Massaniello, they discharged diverse
Muskets at him, but they did no execution, which was held a notable miracle,
eight of the said Banditoes were slain, the rest saved themselves in the Church
of Carmine; The whole City was cut out into Trenches, and all Coaches were
prohibited: The forementioned Joseph Caratta, brother to the Duke of Mataluni,
who had retired into Saint Mary's Church, and thence into the Monastery, the
people beleaguered the Monastery; whereupon he thinking to flee under a
disguised habit, was betrayed, and his head chopp'd off, with three servants
more, as enemies to the people; his brother the Duke, hereupon took a fair pair
of heels, and fled toward Rome, as 'twas thought.

Massaniello began now to send out his Commands very magisterially, and the
penalty of his Commands were, Sotto pena della vita, and incendio, under pain
of life and firing: he commanded that every Window should have lights in them,
which was punctually performed, which seemed to embellish the City, and make
the streets as lightsome by night as by day.

Another peremptory Command of his came out, that all should go en cuerpo
without Clokes, which extended to Priests and Bishops, who went up and down
only in Cassocks, Ladies and Gentlewomen were forbidden likewise to go abroad
with wide-hoop'd Gowns or Kirtles, and the reason was, that they might carry no
arms underneath. A report did fly, that the Duke of Mataluni had poisoned the
waters of Formali, which served the City, this made the rest of the Nobles to
be so ill looked upon, that happy was he who could fly away first from the
City. The women up and down did wonderfully encourage their husbands, and all
traffic except Market-solks was quite down.

There came in the heat of this hurly-burly eight Napolitan Galleys, which were
missing a long time; the Viceroy commanded they should not enter into the Port,
but that they should stay 'twixt St Vincents Tower and the Key.

Thereupon by intervention of Cardinal Filomarino, who was Archbishop of
Naples, and accounted the common Father of the City, an interview or parley was
appointed t'wixt the Viceroy and Massaniello, who with much ado was persuaded
to shake off his Mariners slop, and put on a rich Suit of Cloth of Silver, to
denote by that white Color the innocence of the people. Being attended to the
royal Castle by an infinity of the people, and he himself mounted upon a choice
Courser with naked sword in hand; the Viceroy treated him with terms of
extraordinary respect, being both for the satisfaction of the people, in an
open Balcone. At that time there were many obstreperous noises among the people
below, and a great confusion; but Massaniello lifting up only his hand, all
was hushed.

The Capitulations for peace t'wixt the Viceroy and Massaniello being read
aloud, and confirmed by the Viceroy, and the Collateral Council, Massaniello
said, That by the wise deportment of his Excellency his Catholic Majesty had
gained the Kingdom of Naples more firmly then ever; for that mass of people he
saw, with millions more were bound to thank his Majesty, and his Excellency,
who will be ready to expose their lives to defend his Government here against
the French or any other Enemy.

Oulio Genovino was the chiefest Counselor of Massaniello, who in the Duke of
Ossi^a's time was created the peoples Elect in another great tumult; for which
he had been sent Prisoner to Spain, and thence banished to Oran in Barbary,
whence he returned, and turned Priest; a man most zealous for the common good
and interest of the People, Doctor of the Civil Laws, and a shrewd politic
Person; this Man and Massaniello, clung together as nail and flesh, for the
time.

Massaniello sent a Regalo of sweet meats to the Viceroy, and to his Lady; who
returned a Present of Jewels to Massaniello's Wife, who afterward did visit
her attired in Cloth of Gold. Massaniello commanded the Kings-Arms to be set up
over all the Gates of Naples, and the Cities Arms underneath, with P. in the
middle; and understanding there were many Bandito's lay sculking in the Town,
and fled to Sanctuaries, the fury of the people was such that they pulled them
all out and killed them.

Francisco Erp^io was chosen by Massaniello to be the Peoples Elect, and by
sound of Trumpet he declared, That every one should open his shop under pain of
Rebellion; he caused also among diverse others, an Abbot to be put to death, and
two men besides of an ill life, who had only time given them to confess.

There was order given to erect to Erect a fair Palace in the great Market
place for Massaniello, and much of the Materials had been brought thither to
that purpose; there was a Spaniard imprisoned by the people, but Massaniello
commanded him out, and sent him to the Viceroy, who remanded him to
Massaniello, who pardoned him.

All the Tribunals of Justice were shut up at this time, nor was any person
obeyed but Massaniello, who commanded Gibbets to be set up in diverse places of
the City, which struck a great terror into the hearts of all people.

The next day the Viceroy with the Royal Collateral Council came in great pomp
to the great Church, where Cardinal Filomarino was in his Pontificalibus at the
high Altar, and Massaniello standing with a naked Sword upon one of the steps,
and his Brother behind him in Cloth of Silver also, the Viceroy took there a
solemn Oath to perform the Capitulations in his Catholic Majesty's name, viz.
That all kind of Gabel that were imposed upon the City of Naples since the
Reign of the glorious Emperor Charles the Fifth should be utterly abolished,
and never to he levied again: That his Excellency should do his endeavor to
procure a full ratification hereof from the Court of Spain, within the compass
of two months, and that in the interim the most faithful People of Naples
should stand upon their Guard, and in Arms.

Massaniello gave out, That he would provide five Millions very speedily to
send his Catholic Majesty for this singular grace toward the support of his
Wars: He commanded all the household stuff of the Duke of Mataluni^ to be
brought out to the public street and burnt, and it is incredible what rich
Furniture, what e^quisite Pictures, what costly Jewels, with abundance of
Treasure did endure the brunt of the fire; There was upon this above a hundred
thousand men enrolled to bear Arms, and all to be at the beck of Massaniello:
Moreover, there was a Declaration published by the Viceroy, wherein he
disclaimed this Sollevation to be a Rebellion; and so passed a general Pardon.

Massaniello gave out, That what Courtesan soever desired to marry, she should
have fifty Ducats given her. He went then among the Galleys, and made a poor
Mechanic a Captain of one of them. He was feasted in the Castle by the
Viceroy, together with his Brother and his Wife; but the next day he committed
some ridiculous Extravagancies, as leaping into the water to refresh himself in
his Clothes, so that some thought he had a fig given him in the Castle to
intoxicate his brains; Others did impute it to want of repose and sleep, for he
was wonderfully watchful, intentive, and restless in his business. But he began
now to lose the wonted respect among the Soldiery and Citizens: Insomuch that
Marco Vitale his Secretary giving a Captain a cuff before the Castle, the
Captain and others fell upon him and slew him.

Andrea Roma and Ardizzone, with others, all ventrous Blades, went the next day
to the Church of Carmine, where they found Massaniello airing himself, they
surpised and dispatched him, and cut off his head; 'Twas thought the people
would have resented it, but it proved clean contrary, for they followed the
Coach wherein the head was carried to the Viceroy, with a great deal of
applause and triumph: His body was dragged up and down by the Boys of the City.
So fell the bold Fisherman of Naples, who had reigned as absolutely as any
Sovereign, the space of eight days and eight hours; And one may say more
absolutely then any Kings use to do; for they are restrained by Laws; but
Massaniello was beyond the bounds of any; For during this short time, he caused
to be killed by his own order two hundred and fifty persons, and that suddenly,
giving them only time to confess, and to some he would give none. In fine, He
was thought to be more then a man, and that what he ordered was ordained by God
himself.

After this Tragical Act, the Lord Regent of the Vicaria, with his wonted
Guards, went with Trumpets before him about the Streets, and proclaimed, That
none under pain of Rebellion should stir: He declared further, That all
Gabels were taken off: to which purpose he carried the Instrument in his hand;
therefore he commanded, That none should adhere to the accomplices of that late
Rascal, that Retailer of Fish, who disturbed the tranquillity hoth of People
and City; So there was a great cry, Viva il Re di Spagna, Let the King of Spain
live. A little after, the Viceroy passed up and down the City in stately
Equipage, which increased the cry, So that the noise then was, Viva il Re di
Spagna, e Duca d' Arcos, Let the King of Spain, and the Duke of Arcos live: And
as the Viceroy went along, he assured the people every where of the Abolition
of the Gabels, and further Concession of Graces.

The next night after, there entered into the City at the Royal Port six hundred
Horse, with admirable secrecy, who went all to the Palace to serve the Viceroy
upon occasion, and the next Morning they betook themselves to diverse Ports.

That day the bread fell to be eleven Ounces lighter; whereupon the people
mutined again, and fell a burning the Furnaees and goods of the Bakers. Then
they went in multitudes of armed men to find out the body of Massaniello, which
it seems was cast into a Ditch; they took it out, washed it, and persumed it,
and carried it upon a Bier out of the gate of the Holy spirit; where they took
down his Head, and sewed it to the rest of the Carcass, and so brought it in a
very solemn order to the great Church of Carmine: The people went along, both
men and women, crying out, Brothers and Sisters say a Pater Noster, and an Ave
Mary for this our Countryman and fellow-Citizen; his body being hoised up a
great height, to be made more visible. So he who was cursed and dragged up and
down the streets the day before, is the next day after bewailed, missed, prayed
for, and buried in mavelous pomp: the white Boys of Loreto went before him
with above a thousand Priests with burning Torches in their hands, the Trumpets
and Drums sounded the doleful march; and as he lay in his Funeral bed, they put
a Crown upon his Head, and a Scepter in his hand; so he had at his death those
Ensigns, the jurisdiction whereof he usurped in his life. Many thousands of
armed men accompanied his Hearse, and women without number, raising up their
beads and voices in high and dolorous accents, with requiems and refrigeriums
to his soul. This Funeral pomp came out again from the great Church of the
Carmine, and fetching a compass about all the five Precincts of Naples, they
carried the body under the very Balcone of the Viceroy, where it stayed a while
till they had fixed a Standard, and hung Colors thereabouts. After all this
the Bier was brought about two hours at night to the great Church again, where
he was interred with much pity and honor; the common people crying him up for
a Saint already.

-- Quantum est in rebus inane! Thus Massaniello being raised up by popular
Air, slain and scorned by the same people, honored and idclatriz'd after his
death by the same persons, may be compared to a Ball tossed up and down by
Fortune. The voice went then, that a Chapel should be built for him, and these
ensuing Epitaphs were composed by the prime wits of Naples.

Lamento di Massaniello al popolo Napolitano.
ALtra paga sperai, altra mercede,
Di Te patria crudel, populo ingrato,
Troncarti ill collo a chi to ha il capo alrato,
Fidelissima sci senra feed.
La pesca non lasciai, com' altri erede,
Nelle mie reti di qualunque stato
Pescai la liberta, ne'l vil mercato
De commando piantai la Real sede.
Di Re divenni Reo, in ra instante
Rimasti in vita tu, io nel' Inferno,
Jo strascinato fu, Tu triomphante,
Pompa non fu, ma vituperio Eterne.
L'essequie mie di general Forfante
Fu gloria infame, and honor vol' sherno,
Cosi con questo essempio Eterno,
Impari ogn uno da me par troppo audace,
Per altro non pugnar starsene in pace.
Massaniello's Lamentation concerning the people of Naples.
I Did expect from Thee a better Fate
Ungrateful City, People more ingrate,
Thou chop'st his Neck, who thy Head did unthral,
Faithful thou art, yet have no Faith at all.
I did not leave my Fishing, as some say,
But still employed my Nets to catch, and lay
The Gabels on the ground: The Royal Throne
I brought into the Market, every stone
Can witness it; The Nobles I did quell,
Thou still shall live, but I must fry in hell.
While my dragged body bleeds, so basely slain,
Thou triumph'st in that Freedom I did gain.
Learn hence ye Mortals all, Be not too rash and bold
To sight for other Men, Lest you be bought and sold.
Nobilium Tyrannide, In usi^^^is oppressionibus and angari^ In Regnum, Cives,
and Exteros, Praeter Rerum and Naturae ordinem Violenter extortis, Repressa

Virgini Dei Matri Carmeli Die 7. Julii, 1647. Gabbellis

Publicis, Facinorosis, secretis Patriae Hostibus,

Incensis, fugatis, profligatis, suhlatis.

Inconcussa fide servata,
Ferdinandi primi, and Frederici Aragonensium Regum,

Caroli quinti Imperatoris Gaesaris confirmatis, renovatis aureis privilegiis.

Philippo Quarto Rege Catholico, D. Rodcrieo Pons de Leone Duce d' Arcos Regis
vieem geren^e,

Thoma Anello de Amalfi invicti populi Duce.

Pristina liberate redemptus Fidelissimus populus Neopolitan. Mausolaeum

In reportatae victoriae memoriam posteris excitamen^um posuit.

The Tyranny of the Nobles being repressed, who beyond the order of things, and
rules of nature, did so violently extort unusual taxes and services from
Kingdom, Citizens, and strangers,

An unshaken faith being kept to the Virgin the Mother of God, in the holy
Church of Carmine the 7. of July 1647. The Gabels being abolished, and the
public, facinorous and secret enemies of our Country, being burnt, banished,
subdued, and extinguished,

The golden privileges of Ferdinand the First, and Frederick King of Aragon,
and of Charles the Emperor being confirmed and renewed,

Philip the Fourth, being the Catholic King, and Don Rodrigo Pons de Leon Duke
of Arcos being Viceroy, Thomas Anello of Amalsi being General, the most
faithful people of Naples and public liberty being redeemed,

This Monument was erect in memory of the Victory obtained, and for an
encouragement to all Posterity.

THese Commotions in Naples, being the Metropolitan great Town, did cause that
almost the whole Kingdom did rise. In Bitonto many houses were likewise burnt;
as also in diverse others places, as shall be related hereafter. In the ancient
City of Nocera the Palace of the Duke himself did not escape the fury of the
flames, but was made even to the ground, with all the costly movables, as also
the dwellings of all such that adhered unto him; and if the Duke himself had
not taken a fair pair of heels and fled to Messina, he might have expired his
last in the Tumult.

In Naples the Count Cosino labored to have a public Inscription set up in
the Marketplace, which should mention the abolition of all Taxes that were
granted by the Viceroy, and the people were mighty eager to have it erected.

The Counselor Moschetola persisting by his Agents to exact the Gabel in
Meleto Casale of Aversa, upon Corn which he had rented, the people of that Town
being transported with fury, came to Naples, and colleagueing with that people,
they ran about dinner time to the Marketplace, where the said Moschetola had a
house, and gave him such a hot Alarm, that like a Cat he was forced to flee
over the tops of the houses to save himself. The women were permitted to go out
of the said house, and afterward they took out all the household stuff, and
carrying it to the open street in a kind of solemnity, all was burnt to ashes,
besides rich Tapistry, and exquisite Pictures, there were two cupboards of
silver Vessels, and a great Library of Books exposed to the fury of the fire;
all which was computed to the value of thirty thousand Crowns, all which was
reduced to Cinders. They directed their course after to Alonso d' Angelis
house, a great Officer of the Kings Dogana or Custom-house, and would have
served him with the same sauce; but the Viceroy interposed his authority, or
request rather, so earnestly that he prevailed.

In the Marketplace the day following there happened a huge tumult concerning
the public Inscription to be set up concerning those Capitulations which the
Viceroy had signed and sealed in behalf of the most faithful people, which
being delayed, the rabble flew to Cavallero Cosino's Palace, a most famous
Limner, who had the charge of doing the thing; but he finding himself in
imminent danger of his life, fled away, and his House with many rare Pieces had
felt Vulcans fury, had not the Viceroy caused the King of Spains Picture to be
hung up before the Gate in a high Balcone, which preserved the House.

They of the Marketplace ran and burnt all the Playhouses up and down the
City, as also that which was near the Castle ditch, and they chopped off the
head of a lame Sicilian who kept it. But the Viceroy having commanded two of
the said Incendiaries to be imprisoned, they were by his order both strangled
that night, and the next morning their Bodies were hanged up before the Castle,
which put a period to all burnings for the time. A Jesuit was also beheaded,
but he was unsacred and degraded first of his function in the Church of Sancta
Barbara; he was suspected to have come from Sicily to trace some machinations
against the Crown of Spain, his name was Regnicolo, and he has a Brother who
is a Baron in Abruzzo.

There was a notable thing discovered about this time in the City of Naples,
which was this; One Francisco Severino a public Notary, had a Sister who had
been a Widow seventeen years before; he was to pay her six hundred Ducats
toward her Dowry; but he had immured her and a little daughter of hers betwixt
four walls in a dark cave, where he fed them with Bread and Water, with some
few Fruits and Roots, as Radishes, Cucumbers, and other such stuff: This Widow
had a Son in the custody of an Uncle all the while, who being grown up to man's
estate came to the said Notary, and loudly demanded his Mothers goods, thinking
she had been dead: The rumor of this business flew up and down among the
people, who therefore rushing into the Notaries house, and searching up and
down, the woman began to shriek out in the cave with her Daughter; so they
broke down the wall, and entering into the cave they found there two Women like
savages or furies, with long disheveled hair, in a strange posture; hereupon
the Notary was clapped up in Prison, and the Women carried to the Monastery of
St. Onuphrio, where a great concourse of people came to see them; so the Notary
had exemplary punishment.

The City of Naples went on to inroll more men for the Militia, which came to
above the number of eighty thousand Foot, besides Horse; they changed the Guard
every night, nor did they esteem any commands that came from the Castle; the
Tribunals of Justice did cease sitting, and the commotion was held up as high
as it was in Massanicllo's time, only there were not so many heads chopped off,
and houses burnt, yet there was no sace of any government but only among the
Soldiery. One day which was a Festival, a great number of boys, half naked and
painted with red, some on horseback and others afoot, with Turbands on their
heads, and habited like Turks, went up and down; in the midst of them there was
a triumphant Chariot, where there sat one apparelled like a King, and sitting
in a Throne, with a half Moon upon his head; others were masked; others went
with strange Spectacles on their noses, in such a hideous manner, as if they
had been so many Devils broke loose out of Hell; before the Chariot there went
a Troop of Horse, whereof the hindermost carried a Scepter in his hand, habited
like a Turk; and in this garb they passed before the Castle, and under the
windows and mustachos of the Viceroy.

In these commotions the Franciscan Friars of St. Lorenzo thought to make their
advantage in a long suit they had with the Capuchins of St. Antonio de Padoua;
The Capuchins pretended that it belonged to them to carry the silver statue
that was in the Treasury upon solemn days; but the Franciscans alleged it was
their right, in regard their Order was more ancient, and theirs but a branch of
it, and that in the time of St: Anthony there was no such thing as a Capuchin:
besides, he is buried in Padoua, and painted to the life in a Chapel that
belongs to the conventual Franciscans, who are of the same Order as they of St.
Lorenzoin Naples: Upon a sudden they went in Procession, and carried the said
silver Statue of St. Antonio up and down the Streets of Naples, and the great
Street of Toledo, accompanied by a mass of people, with diverse bands of
Soldiers, and Drums beating before, as if some assault were to be given: The
common people were for the Franciscans, but the Noblemen and Gentry were for
the Capuchins; but the Franciscans got the better, being the more ancient: This
Contracto had been brought formerly before the Viceroy, but he reserred it to
Rome where it depended. The said Statue being replaced that night in the
Treasury, the next morning the people entered and took away the keys by force,
and put out the Chaplains who were appointed there by the Nobility, and
appointed others of their election.

The next day the Viceroy sent a Galley to Calabria, which carried John
Baptista Montforte Duke of Laureto, who was expressly employed by the said
Viceroy to appease the tumults in Cosenza, which were little inferior to those
of Naples. The Lord Don Carlo di Capon was clapped up in Prison by the
Soldiers of Pusilipo, together with his servants, and many heinous things were
to be laid to his charge. A Brigade of the people passing along the Castle
ditch, the Spanish Soldiers put themselves upon their Guaed, one of them
discharging his Musket, hit Doctor Benedetto Guadagno that stood in a window,
who fell down dead in an instant; whereupon the Viceroy caused the said
Soldier to be presently hanged after confession, under the same Window,
although he alleged that he knew not the Musket had been charged with a bullet.

The Students of Naples would have a share also in these Revolutions, therefore
they went all in a body and presented a Petition to the Viceroy, the effect
whereof was, That they should pay no more Fees for their Degrees then was used
to be paid in the time of Charles the Emperor: The Viceroy gave them no
positive answer for the time, which they imputed to some i^l offices that the
Prince of Av^llino had done; thereupon they attempted at their return to burn
his house, but it was prevented by some means the Viceroy wrought; and the next
day he caused diverse of the Students to be imprisoned, who were the chief
ringleaders.

The City still resolved to stand upon her Guard till the confirmation of the
Articles concerning their Privileges came from the Catholic Court, and they
armed day and night accordingly; one of which Articles was, That such arming
should not be termed a Rebellion in the interim. The Viceroy was not idle, but
he caused Bulle^s to be cast, and other warlike things to be provided within
the Castles. He sent Counselor Oraca to Leve to appease the Commotions which
happened in the Country of Otranto, with Commissioners to diverse other places
in Calabria, as he had done the Duke of Lauretto to Cosenza, were the sparkles
of their Commotions flew from Naples in greater quantity, and did as much
mischief as any where else, therefore it is worth the labor to insert here a
particular relation thereof.

A Compendium of the Sublevations and Turmoils which happened in the City, and
among the People of Cosenza.
UPon Sunday-morning about the break of day, a Dispatch was expressly sent to
the President of this Province from the Viceroy, wherein he ordered that a
Pragmatica should be published and proclaimed through all the Territories and
places thereof; the substance whereof was, That his Excellency was ready to
grant and pass unto that people all those Graces which they expected, as was
done to the City and People of Naples, for prevention of that horrid effusion
of blood, firings, and other confusions which might ensue.

Yet for all this a multitude of common People gathered together in Bands that
very Sunday-morning, all armed with a full and furious purpose to repose the
Insolence and Pride of the Nobility, who had reduced the common people to such
a pass that they could hardly live by them. The Cape or chief Leader of which
Popular Brigades was Captain Joseph Gervatio, who with his Ginet in hand caused
himself to be called Captain General, and was so accepted: it was concluded
amongst them, That they should procure to live separately from the Nobles, and
to be subordinate to no other but to the King himself, to his Viceroy, or some
principal Officers of Justice; This Assembly of the common people was so
numerous and active all that Sunday that a Gentleman dared scarce stir out of
his house, or hardly peep out at the Windows: The Bells rung out to give
general Alarms; at last they formed a Petition to the Lord President for a
present Concession of those Indulgences and Graces which were granted the
people of Naples, and with much ado for that night the President did appease
them. But upon Munday-morning the Nobles roused up their spirits, desiring to
know the cause of this hurly-burly, and what the people did desire, and there
should be a course taken to satisfy them. Hereupon a choice number of the said
people being met at the Monastery of Saint Francisco di Paola, the Lord
President, accompanied with the foresaid Antonio Gervasio the Cape of the
people told them, That their pretention and intention was to live separate from
their Nobles, as also from the Sindiques and Regiments, as likewise from the
payment of certain Gabels; And that every one of them should pay for his own
particular fire, it being not consentaneous to reason, that the people who were
alwais disposed to make ready payment, not only to the royal Court, but of all
other inferior Gabels, and that the Nobles by their authority should be exempt,
in such sort that the burden fell still upon the people which received more
weight daily; at least they paid doubly as much as the Nobles, as the Jurat
can testify, who was one year for the Nobles, and another year for the people.

To these Pretentions and Demands Doctor Baracca offered to give a satisfaction
to the Nobles, and to make it appear that they were very just: So it was agreed
on both sides, that he should have time to do it; In the interim it was
ordered, that all should lay down their arms, which was done as it were in an
instant, by the command of Captain Antonio Gervatio, until a minute or scedule
should be made, declaring the manner how they desired to live among the Nobles;
so every one returned to his own fire. While this was a doing, and all this was
hushed for the preseut, certain Albaneses being armed passed through the
Marketplace of Cosenza, who were clad like Country-Souldiers: Hereupon Captain
Gervatio with a huge Confluence of people ran to the Lord Presidents Palace,
complaining and crying out, That it was no reason that the Nobles during the
time of treaty, which tended to an amiable accord, should make provision of
Arms, calling in those Albaneses, specially since the people had laid down
their Arms in that interim, therefore they suspected some false-play
underhand, whereupon they desired that the Lord President would do them the
favor as go to Pompeo Sambiate who maintained those Albaneses, and inorder him
to dismiss them; that all surmises and Clouds of Diffidence might vanish:
Hereupon the Lord President went accordingly; and treating with the said Pompeo
to discharge his Soldiers, He answered, That he could not do it by any means,
nor ought he to do it, in regard that that armed Band was for his own Defense,
and not to offend any other: The Lord President replied, and rejoined, but he
could not prevail.

Hereupon Captain Gervatio having notice what had passd 'twixt the President
and Seignior Pompeo, he with a huge rabble of people well armed, having made
provision of barrels of Pitch, Oil, Matches and Wood, went in a kind of fury to
the Lord President; telling him, That since his Lordship could not thrust out
those Albaneses, they would do it themselves; So departing thence like so many
enraged Lions they went up and down with Drums, and Trumpets, discharging
diverse shots at Sembiate's windows and applying Pitch, Oil, Match and Wood to
his Gate, where the fire began to crackle: Another Brigade of people set fire
in another part of the Town to the houses of Scipio and Bartolo Sembiate;
Others to the house of Angelo Matera; Others to the house of Ignatio Sembiate,
with other of the chiefest houses; Insomuch, that really the Town of Cosenza
seemed to be a Mongibelo, or Mountain of fire at that time, the like whereof
was never seen before: All Obedience to Authority, all Pity and Piety was lost:
While they put fire to Scipio Sembiate's house, the poor Genrleman half naked
stood upon the top of his house, and bullets flew about his Ears; at last he
was reduced to that extremity, that he said aloud, I yield, kill me not in this
manner without Confession. The people answered, If he yielded, they desired not
his life; so he came down from the Tiles of the House, and put himself in a
Chamber; in the interim some or other of his servants had discharged a Pistol,
at the report whereof the people furiously rushed into the Chamber where he was
upon a Couch, and one of them, and he of the meanest sort of Mechanics, fell
upon the person of the said Lord Scipio Sembiate, and chopped off his head, and
threw his body out at the window; so his head was fixed upon the top of a
Lance, and carried up and down with this cry, M^uia il mal Governo, Let the ill
Government die. Hereupon the women ran up and down with piteous shrieks and
cries, having no sense of Danger, Honor or Life, the Boys ran up and down
through the flames, that the face of things looked as if the day of Judgment had
been come. Others surrounding the head of Scipio Sembiate, they placed it at
last upon the Bridge of the Revocati, so the people multiplied in numbers, and
encreass'd in fury more and more, till they came to the number of Ten thousand
armed persons. The Nobles, some of them, hid themselves in Grotzes and Caves;
others, in Churches, others in Monasteries and Hospitals; others, would not
forsake their Wives and Children, but would stand to the brunt of what should
happen: And it being now near noon, Captain Gervatio came to the Townhal with a
great number of his men, whence he sent a kind of command to the Lord
President, that he should send a Trumpet for the Fiscal Proctor, and send him
unto him upon business that much concerned the service of his Majesty. The
world stood astonished at this peremptory Order, but it was presently obeyed:
so the Trumpet, together with the Fiscal Proctor was sent, who being come to
the Townhouse, Captain Gervatio ordered that the Trumpet should go back; which
being done, the Captain proposed to the Fiscal, That for the special service of
his Catholic Majesty, it was needful that a Tax should be imposed upon all the
Nobles, and sent to the Viceroy for the necessities of war: This took effect
presently, and a Tribunal was appointed to tax every one accordingly: They
began with An. Cavalcante, who was assess'd 500. Crowns, which was proclaimed
by sound of Trumpet, and the party sent for, who with fear and reverence
appeared and obeyed presently, assigning but so much time to provide then money:
so all the Nobles were summoned in like manner by sound of trumpet, and
assess'd accordingly, and in case any refused, his house should pass the fire,
which was done to some: So there was upon a sudden a kind of Exchequer or bank
of money raised up in the City of Cosenza: some Gentlewomen came with their
children to move compassion, and to have some abatement made in behalf of their
Husbands; but neither the tears of the Mothers, nor the cries of the Infants,
could prevail or soften the stony hearts of the people.

A little after Bartolo Sembiate was imprisoned, who being penned up in a dark
Grotza, with a son of the late murdered Scipio Sembiate his brother, who being
ready to starve got out to get some bread, but he was repriz'd, and they were
both thrown into the prison of the Audientia, but in the way thither he swooned
thrice for weakness, and former want of nourishment: A little after he was sent
for by a Trumpet before Captain Gervasio, where he was inorder'd to pay 15m
Crowns before 24. hours, otherwise, he must be contented to have his head taken
off by his Soldiers. Any one may conjecture what a pitiful plight this
Gentleman was reduced to; the throbs, tears and sighs that came from his wife
and children would have mollified an Adamant; but rather then to exchange life
for death; he made a shift to take this money up by Exchange. Many days after
the said Captain Antonio Gervatio sitting in the Tribunal, sent out his Summons
by sound of Trumpet, and laid what Assessments he pleased upon all the Nobles
and Gentry that dwelt in Cosenza, and all the places adjacent: and now we will
proceed to the Territories of Otranto.

A NARRATION OF The Tumults happened in the Territories of Otranto.
THe rumors of what passed in Naples, Cosenza, with other places, together
with the flames of those fires flew as far as the Country of Otranto; and
though the people be thin in those parts, yet the Commotions were very high and
hot in the Town of Leve, and the circumjacent places, as also through all
Calabria.

The Viceroy had writ to the Lord President and Council of Leve, to take off
all kind of Gabels: The President then was Giacomo Arnolfini who was absent at
that time, and the Audienza was very weak. Giovanni Angelo the Elect of the
people, with diverse others, went to the Camp-Master Boccapianolo to consult
with him: Who advised, that it were expedient to send back to his Excellency to
know what kind of Gabels he understood should be abolished, which was done
accordingly: But the President being returned in the interim, together with the
Tribunal, without conference with the Camp-master they sent out order to take
off all kind of Gahels; but this was done with such a little Decorum, that it
caused rather a kind of alteration then quietness in the baser sort of people;
and gave occasion to ill meaning men to put their malice in execution, which
was done in an instant; for a crew of the common sort went to three or four
houses of particular men, and did them much damage; they sacked and burnt the
house of the Duke of Santo Donato which stood in the said Town of Leve; but
matters were handled so, that they proceeded no further, only the houses of two
Doctors suffered, who they pretended did some ill Office toward an immunity
from Gabels.

The Camp-master was informed, that there were some people coming from abroad
to assist the Citizens of Leve, with intent to burn three houses more;
therefore, for prevention hereof, he armed some Troops of horse: The houses
they aimed at were known afterward to be the house of Tauritano, of Francisco
Cimino the Fiscal, and of Auditor Stephano Pagliva; By the operations of the
said Camp-master these houses were saved, yet some entered into the Dogana, and
burnt whatsoever they found therein; They also elected a Capo popalo, who might
govern all the Commonality.

The City of Nardo, with the Inhabitants, did rise up, and bandy against their
Patron, raising up Fortresses within the Walls, and renouncing all obedience
unto him: He having timely notice hereof, came flying with a great number of
Horse and Foot, with all his kindred and allies, who were numerous in those
parts; and having begirt the City round, she did most stoutly maintain her self
with Cannon and Musket; whereupon some were killed on the other side, and
diverse wounded, the number whereof could not be known; But at the same time
Duke Francifco Burtato was wounded, with one of the Family of Sersale whose
name could not be known.

But the Lord Titta Cicinello, more fearless then the rest, went on to batter
the said City in the best manner he could: The Siege lasted three days; at
last arrived the Bishop of Leve, with him of Gallipoli; and the Camp-master,
who interposed so effectually, that they commanded and reconciled all matters
betwixt the City of Narda and her Lord, in so much that they returned all to
their former Obedience.

The first who entered the City was the Lord Titta: But if I should recount
what succeeded in other places, I should never end; as those murders, and
firings which happened in Misagine, in Ostuni, in the Territories of Tolva and
in Taranto, more then any where else; In Guttagia they murdered twelve persons
in one morning.

In Otranto there happened new garboils, no less New then Lamentable: For the
Tumults of Nardo being quieted, the Count parted thence with his train every
one to his own home. You must consider that those poor people are in a worse
Condition then others; for their syndique, and the chiefest of the Common
people were beheaded, which struck such an astonishment into most of them that
they all fled, and those few who stayed behind made account they remained but
as silly sheep for the slaughter, but the Duke returning had more compassion
then was expected.

In Leve Counselor Urracea was arrived there from Naples; the people had
shrewd Umbrages of fear that he came to no good purpose, but to Complement
with them, and impose some new Gabel: therefore he understanding that they had
a Design upon him, he absconded himself in the Camp-masters House: But they
laid violent hands upon Bocca-pianolla, and cut off his Head, Hurling his
Carcass out of the Windows, and carried it about the Town in piece-meales.

They went about to seize upon Cinino the Fiscal Advocate, who cunningly
escaped into the Castle; but he could not preserve his House which was burnt to
the Ground, with whatsoever was in it, and no House could be better furnished;
Nor did the Lord President himself escape some affronts from the Common people,
but they beleaguered him in the Castle of Leve, which was succored afterward
by the Valor of the Camp-master Boccapianola.

In the City of Ostuni also there were perpetrated horrid murders, yea within
Sanctuaries where Jeronymo de Fina Sergeant Major was knocked down, in the Land
of Grottaglia: they slew the Baron Basta; and in the Country of Martina there
were many firings and slaughters committed, with other horrid things, that
unless there were fresh ocular Witnesses thereof, the Recital of them would
sound as Fables; I must add hereunto that the people of Leve did put into the
Hands of Boccapianela, all the Powder and Ammunition of the City; which person
was much esteemed, and held to be so affectionate to the People as no man more;
But yesterday they write that he was so hacked, and ill handled, that all
wounded they brought him to the place where the said Gunpowder was with the
rest of the Ammunition, and took all things from him but his Life, clapping him
in close Prison, merely upon surmises and fears.

In fine, the worst things that humane imagination can conceive were acted in
those parts. And now it is high time for us to return to Naples, the source
whence all these mischiefs did flow.

The second Tumults happened in the City of Naples, held to be hotter and
higher then the former, which succeeded the 7. of July.
THe 20. of August, the Lord President Fabricio Cenano, intervening in a Cause
before the Collateral Chamber, which concerned the interest of the people; he
was told by some of their Ministers, That he was not a fit person to be seen in
that Cause, in regard his House had been burnt by them; and according to the
Pragmatica lately stamped, he could not intermeddle with a cause of that
Nature. Cenano answered, That it was too true, his House had been burnt, yet
not by the people, but by some malevolent and emulous spirits, as Seignior
Julio Genovino could make affidavit: It happened that Genovino was there
present, who rose up and said, 'twas true, whereof he was ready to make
attestation: Cenano likewise produced diverse Captains, who served the people
for Witnesses, that his House was not set on fire by order of the people, but
by the malice of some particular enemies; therefore he humbly desired his
Catholic Majesty, and his Excellence, that they should receive due punishment
who were found to be the burners of his house, While this writing went about
for subscription, the people began to be sensible of the wrong and prejudice
that might redound unto them thereby, and of the consequences that might grow
further from hence: Therefore upon a sudden they took up Arms again; and the
rather because in that affidavit they told a lie, because when the people burnt
any House, they did it with that punctuality that none might embeazle the value
of a pepper Corn, but that all should be sacrificed to the fire, as proceeding
from the blood and radical moisture of the poor; but most of Cenano's goods
were preserved. Hereupon there was twenty thousand Foot presently in Arms,
before whom the Captains cried out, Tradimento al popolo, un pater, un ave
Maria, pregate dio ne doni victoria, Andiamo a morire per voj altri, o vivere o
morire: which was as much to say, The people is betrayed, one Pater, and one
Ave Maria, pray to God that he would be pleased to give us the Victory; let us
go to die for you, to live or to die. And 'twas wonderful to see how many young
men went on so resolutely, who making a halt upon Sancta Lucia a Monte, made
themselves Masters of that Post, as an eminent place whence they might shoot at
the Castle with advantage, and at the Viceroys Palace: Having planted their
Standards there, and placed a Court of Guard for the defense thereof, they
dismissed some Companies. Then they directed their course toward Pirrifailione
for the Guard of the New-bridge: This place was guarded by six hundred Foot of
a new Levy, who were weli Entrenched; and not being able to repel the violence
of these men, who advanced with such a resolution and fury, the Soldiers that
were formerly, were forced to abandon the place and leave their Arms behind,
which the people seized on: As also upon the house of the Prinee of Ascoli, and
the Camp-master General was engaged therein: a Sergeant with thirty Spaniards
were there for the guard of it, whereof about ten were killed, and the rest
saved themselves into a grott. The people being entered therein did not touch
any thing but the Arms that were hid there, without doing any detriment at all.

Afterward they went on to the Palace of the Princess of Bucera; and seized
upon all the Arms she had, whereof they gave a receipt: Then they marched
toward the Palace of the Viceroy; but not being able to do any good there, in
regard of the preparations he had made for defense, they directed their course
to Sancta Lucia again, and thence to the Dogana, and took out the Arms they
found there, which were a thousand five hundred Archibuzes, and Pistols, but
touched not any thing else.

With three hundred foot they made themselves Masters of the Convent of Saint
Martin, and entered on the grove's side; nor could any resistance prevail,
where afterward they began to stir and interpose again; and all the street
Captains being assembled at Saint Augustine, they desired that the Viceroy would
deliver them Massaniello's brother, who was prisoner in Castelnovo, as also
Julio Genovino, whom the people demanded to keep in their custody, together
with all those Captains who had subscribed in favor of President Cenano: The
Archbishop by his singular address, prudence and gravity, did labor so far
that an accord was determined, whereupon the Bells rung out for joy, and a white
Flag was hung up in Castelnovo by the Viceroy.

But when the Soldiers who were in Garrison in Castelnovo faw a crew of people
drawing toward the Palace, they gave a volly of shot to the people without
bullet; but the people thinking that their Muskets were charged, they fell all
with their Face on the ground; nor did the people go then on any hostile
intent, but to congratulate. Yet as the Devil would have it, the report went
that five hundred of the people were killed by them of the Palace: so the
Accord was dissolved, and the War grew hot again. From Sancta Lucia they began
to batter the Castle where the Viceroy kept his Court, discharging all their
great Artillery, which did some hurt to the adjacent places; the Castle
answered, and also the Castle of Saint Elmo; but the people being nothing at
all dastardiz'd herewith, but incited still by the Women; the whole day was
spent in shooting off the great Cannons on both sides: The House of Don Diego
Manciohe was saluted by diverse shots, but did not much hurt: Porto was offended
by some of the Canons; whereupon they set up the Kings Picture in a high
Balcone, but a Cannon bullet shot it through and through.

In the Evening they chose for the Elect of the people, the Lord Don Francisco
Turaldo Prince of Massa, who mounting on horseback, undertook the business, and
dispensed his orders accordingly. The next morning the Castle of Saint Elmo, as
also Castelnovo discharged four Cannon bullets apiece, then a suspension of
Arms was agreed upon, and a Treaty was resumed for an accord, but in vain: For
there were ten Heads of slain Spaniards six'd upon poles, and carried in
triumph up and down the City.

The next day, the great Artillery that was planted upon Sancta Lucia, did some
hurt to Castelnovo; the same day they of Porto secured themselves with good
Trenches reared up in the uight time: but there was a strict watch laid, that
nothing either for belly or back, any other thing, should be carried to the
Castle where the ^iceroy was.

The Camp-master General sent forth an Order that all the street-Captains, and
other Captains of the Infantry, should meet at Saint Augnstin, to treat and
determine some capitulations for peace, which was done accordingly: And when
they were agreed upon, they sent them to his Excellency by six Captains of
Foot, accompanied by the Lord Bishop of Salut, Cardinal Filomarini's brother:
But that morning there were discovered some Trenches cast up in the night at
the Hospitaletto: there were others cast up in Toledo street; for both parties
dug night and day notwithstanding the Treaty; besides that which remained of
the Duke of Ostuni's movables were committed to the mercy of the Fire, and his
House was turned to a quarter; above his Palace they planted great Muskets,
with other kind of Artilleries to batter the Castelnovo; the Son of the said
Duke was killed at Pizzifalione; besides, they planted two great Cannons upon
the Trenches of Porto to annoy Castelnovo.

When this rumor began, there were in the Castle the L. Prior of Rocella, the
L. Prior of Caraceioli, Don J. Baptista, and the Duke of Saint Petro, whither
they retired themselves during the broyl, with diverse other personages of high
rank, for their safety: some of them went forth one day, and the
Camp-master-general clapped them up in prison, because they conceived some
jealousies of them, nor could they pump any thing out of them in point of
information; they surpised also Don John Lorio Sanfelice, but they chopped off
his Head as a President to the most faithful people.

The President Cenano was shut up in prison by the people of Santa Lucia, and
they put him with his Confessor in a great chair, and carried them about the
great streets, and in the Sellaria they took off his Head, burning his clothes
afterward; They chopped off the Head also of a Corporal of Sergeants called
Marchetollo: The next day there was a Truce accorded; yet notwithstanding both
parties went on in entrenching and fortifying night and day. The
Camp-Master-General being well informed of the innocence of some Royalists
which were in prison, joined with some street-Captains he freed them, which
business was deliberated in S. Augustine, who upon their enlargement took Oath
to be faithful unto the City.

They took off the head also of the Corporal of the Sergeants of Porto, who
said that in those places where they made their fortifications there should be
so many Gallowses and Gibbets set up to hang those who wrought in the said
fortifications; all which was proved by pregnant proof, and authentic
witnesses, and in three hours he was dispatched. The scale of the Minister of
Justice was found, but he did it upon a stone by reason of the fury of the
people: There was order given that the Holy Sacrament should be exposed and set
open in diverse Churches, that it would please God to enlighten the hearts of
the people to see the right; Besides the Nuns with poor maidens amongst them
made solemn processions, repeating the most holy Rosario. There was scarce a
post or place without and within the City butw as entrenched which made the
world wonder where they could get so much Cannon.

A company of Priests appeared who went with their Sotunes raised up; at the
head of them there marched a very Reverend Churchman upon a Ginet, with a gold
Cross in his hand; but this gave rather an occasion of scandal and murmuring,
nor was it well taken by the people.

They pillaged all Genovino's goods, who for many days before had withdrawn
himself to the Castle; and if they could have laid hold on him they would have
sent him after President Cenano to the other world.

The next day a Peace was published, which made every one to dance for joy; yet
the Viceroy thought it not safe to come out of Castelnovo.

After dinner the Lord Cardinal Filomarino went on horseback with the Prince
of Massa, and Camp-Master-General, and rid up and down the streets, all crying
out, Peace, Peace.

Toward the evening there came out an Edict in diverse Precincts of the City,
wherein the Viceroy did thank the most faithful people of Naples for their good
wills and inclination to peace. He ordered likewise, That none should speak of
the Castle of S. Elino, which was fortified and furnished with all things
necessary: Now, amongst other places, he understood that the people intended to
make a new motion that that Fortress should be in their hands.

The next day they took the Goods of President Cenano, which they had conserved
in a Convent of Terresian Nuns, and brought them to the Sellaria; they brought
thither also the Goods of Giovamis S. Felice, which all passed the flames. They
gave out an Order also to take the Son of Sanfelice, Don Lucio; because he had
given out in a menacing manner, That he would make the people of Naples eat the
very earth in lieu of bread. Now the said Don Lucio was a great Cornmaster in
Aversa.

They of the people went to the Convent of the Olivetuni on Mount Olivct, where
there was Abbot the brother of Tonno de Angelis, together with the
Visitor-General, they were both put in a Coach, and commanded to depart from
Naples.

One among the people cried up and down the street' Guerra, Guerra, War, War;
but he was put to prison by Order of the Prince of Massa, then he was shot to
death, and his head carried up and down the City for a disturber of the peace
of the most faithful people of Naples.

The Monks of the Trinity made themselves prisoners to the Popes Nuntio; and
upon that Church door they fastened an Edict that had passed, wherein she was
styled, La Santissima Trinita de Spagnuoli, The most Holy Trinity of the
Spaniards; they caused that Edict to be cancelled and torn in pieces: They a
little after made prisoner Caesar Sanfelice, for some words which dropped from
him which gave scandal.

The next day those Capitulations of peace which were accorded 'twixt the
Viceroy and the most faithful people came out, and were published in diverse
precincts of the City, whereupon they razed some of their Trenches. His
Excellency formed a new Company of three hundred Officers, all Italians, making
a Captain over them, Captain Biasi di Fosco, a person of high resolution and
merit.

The Viceroy sent prisoner to Spain Julio Genovino upon a Galley, who was
accused to be the first inciter of Massaniello, and the chiefest fomenter of
all the tumults; Doctor Luis^i Capaccio at the instance of the most faithful
people was appointed to be the Minister for confirming and swearing the
foresaid Articles of peace 'twixt his Excellency and the most faithful people;
but the Viceroy was advised by the Collateral Council, not to go forth in
person out of the Castle to swear unto those Articles, but that the Oath should
be administered to both parties within the Walls of Castelnovo.

The next day being Sunday, the City sent to, the Viceroy in behalf of the most
faithful people, that the Articles should be effectually ratified within the
Archbishops House; His Excellency returned an exeuse, that he was not well
disposed in his health, and alleged examples, besides that in such cases all
treaties were used to be confirmed within the Castle: Thereupon the Camp-Master
General Don Francisco Turaldo went thither, being accompanied with all the
Officers of War, beginning with the Alferez of Lieutenants, to higher Degrees,
together with the General of the Ordinance Ottavio Marchise, all on horseback,
and it was a very goodly sight; the horses were extraordinary, but the horsemen
were not so good, being oppidane: and Turaldo himself being sick of the Gout
went in a Sedan. They all entered into the Castle in a solemn manner, where the
Articles were all sworn unto; and so they returned into the City very well
satisfied, specially in outward appearance.

The next day they entered the House of Francisco de Lieto, a principal
Merchant, and of very high credit, an honest man and much honored, where there
was a pillar which the people took exceptions at, and would carry it away; He
said that he had lost upon the Gabels fifty thousand Crowns, and he would spend
fifty thousand more, provided that the Gabels were regulated and settled; But
they went to call in more people to plunder him, which he perceiving he stole
away surreptitiously; Thereupon they imprisoned his Children, and took away a
great quantity of Cloth and other Merchandises of value; Thus when some thought
the insurrection had been ended, it began afresh: they began to double their
Guard again; but they freed the rich Merchant di Lieto for a ransom.

In regard of the absence of the Nobility who were retired to their
Countrey-Houses, and abandoned the City, trade began to decay extremely, and
the Artisans went up and down the streets like vagabonds having nothing to do.
Thete came news from Sicily, that his Catholic Majesty had confirmed the
capitulations of peace with the Palermitans, which caused much joy in the City,
in regard they hoped that his Majesty would ratify their Articies also in as
ample manner.

There came fresh information, that Don John of Austria, Generalissimo of the
Seas, and natural Son to his Catholic Majesty, was with a royal Fleet at
Sardinia, he sent to the Viceroy to provide some provisions for the Galleys;
but he returned answer, That there was little convenience to accommodate them
there, but the Island which his Royal Highness was at, was more proper for to
furnish Biscuit, and other necessaries: It was wonderful to see how dexterous
the Citizens of Naples, were in handling their Arms, in their discipline of
war, in their marches and watches, as if they had been bred soldiers all their
lives.

There were solemn processions made by all the religious houses within and
without the City, for a benediction to come from Heaven upon the last
agreement, and that God almighty would please to inspire the heart of the
Catholic King, to confirm the capitulations for avoiding of more blocdshed,
but it seems their solemnities took little effect, as shall appear hereafter.
The great statue of silver was carried up and down with that of Saint Germano
Protector of Naples; but aster the end of the processions the said silver
statue of Saint James was replac'd in the Archbishops Palace: There happened
some stir the next day after, touching Joseph Palumbo Lieutenant of the people,
who had the chief charge of the Magazines of Gunpowder; Notice was taken, and
complaints made, that he suffered too great a proportion to go for the Castles,
but that it should be reserved for the service of the most faithful people;
therefore the said Palumbo was restrained to Saint Lorenzo; but being a popular
man, and one known to be a good Patriot, and of a public soul, and a prrson of
integrity; there were four thousand of the best armed men joined together, to
vindicate and free the said Falumbo, and there was like to be a hot fray, and
bloody business, had not the Prince of Massa, General to the City, with much
ado and no less discretion appeased the tumult.

The third Tumult happened in the City of Naples after the arrival of the
Armada of his Catholic Majesty under the command of the Serenissimo Don John
of Austria.
THe first day of October, 1647. The Castle of Saint Elmo hung up the great
Standard upon sight of his Catholic Majesty's Royal Army, there entered
afterward into the Port, five and forty great Vessels and as it was thought
the Galleys of his Royal Highness Don John of Austria: A Rumor ran that they
carried six thousand fresh Foot, others said they came but to three thousand.
All the Royal Castles saluted them, the Quay was thronged with many thousands
of people to fee the Fleet; It was then certainly known, that his Royal
Highness was aboard the Galeones, thereupon it was ordered that Prince Thraldo
with Arqata the Elect of the people, should go to tender a Tribute of due
Obsequies and Reverence to his Highness, and he with many evidences of
affection received them, and gave audience, saying, that he was ready to do
whatsoever they desired or could imagine to have, having authority from his
Majesty to grant a Remission of all things, provided that the Arms should be
consigned to his Excellency, and put in the Castles. They carried him a
plentiful present, two hundred Turky-Cocks, two hundred Capons, two hundred
pair of pigeons, twelve Calves of Surrento, and abundance of choice Fruit upon
twelve Felucas: he received all very joyfully, causing some pieces of Gold to
be hurled into the Felucas among those who carried the presents. The same
Evening the Viceroy sent him a hundred Weathers, a hundred gammons of Bacon,
with other commodities.

The next day his Highness signified his pleasure, That he was desirous to
disimbarque and put foot on shore, but he desired that first the City should
disarm: Hereupon all the Captains of War, and all the Street-Captains assembled
at S. Augustine to conclude upon that which his Highness demanded; but the
common people of the Market and of Lavinaro forced into the said Church,
threatening death to all the Captains who were there met, who dismissed the
Parliament for the time, and referred all to his Highness. The next day Arpaia
the Elect of the people was inorder'd to go to his Highness, and desire him
that he would come ashore but with a limited number, whereunto Don John gave no
pleasing ear: The next day a choice number of Captains went to attend his
Highness, and to advertise him, that the people were willing to lay down their
Arms, and put them up in their own houses, not otherwise; this likewise gave
little contentmentto his Highness.

The next day certain Spanish Soldiers came down from Castlenovo with a
company of Reformadoes, and made themselves masters of Caesar Lubrano's house
in the Hospitaletto, where they disarmed all those that stood for the people,
who were but few, because they depended upon the contract of Peace, all the
Trenches being destroyed to that purpose round about the City: The Captain of
that Post was a Glover, the Spanish Soldiers burnt the door of his house by an
artificial fire, plundered him, as they did many other houses: All the three
Castles began to play and discharge their great Guns, which struck a terrible
affrightment into the women, but they did but little execution in regard of
their distance, unless it was at Porto, which suffered much. The Captains of
the people who were assembled in Saint Augustine and in Toledo-street went all
into the Castles, as also some of the great Market, another Captain of Porto,
of Santa Maria, with diverse other: Then the gross squadron of Spaniards came
down, and with much cautiousness got possession of many of the importunest
Ports in and about the City, without the loss of one soul.

The people of Toledo-quarter remained much astonished being without Captain,
Alfarez, or any other Officer, as much as a Sergeant or Corporal: The Spaniards
seized also upon Porto, but the people recovered that again; for the people of
the great Market came in great numbers, and reviled them, calling them
Poltrons, with other opprobrious language, which incited them to take Arms
again.

The people thought they had all the justice of the world on their side, in
regard, that according to the Capitulations with the Viceroy, they were to
continue in Arms till the confirmation had come from Spain, which time was
limited to three months; therefore the Prince Turaldo going to the great
Market, the people cried out, We are betrayed, we are all betrayed: The Prince
answered them with gentle language, and in substance; Son con voy, per morir
con voy, sio ho fatto Errore la testa lo paghi, ma io Son stato Gabbato con
voy: I am with you, to dye with you, if I have offended let my head pay for it,
but I have been cheated as well as you. From that time forward the people would
not permit Turaldo to go out of their arms, either into the Castle, or aboard
the Galeons. The Spaniards in the mean time stirred themselves notably, and
took into their possession the Post of Porta Reale, with that of Porta Medina;
the three Castles still played upon Santa Lucia and Chaia, whereupon they gave
up their Arms into the hands of the Spaniards, and scarce any of the people
peeped out thereabouts.

That Night not only the three Castles, but the great Galeons which were in
Port played upon the City, and one would think by the horrid noise they made,
that a house could not stand, yet the damage was not very great; thereupon his
Highness published a strict and high Order, That every one should lay down his
Arms upon pain of death; which many did accordingly; considering with
themselves how they had three Castles, a Fleet of Galeons, and another of
Galleys against them; the Spaniards also having rendered themselves masters of
so many Posts, and going on still in their Fortifications, but specially there
being in the Port another Don John of Austria.

Yet they did not lay down their Arms or Spirits, but with a flying squadron of
two thousand foot they recovered the Port of Constantinople, and the White
port; they attempted to regain Reale and Porta Melina; but they failed in that
enterprise, as God would have it: Therefore Prince Turaldo was of opinion, it
was better to fall to entrenching again, for fear the Spaniards might gain more
places and posts. This council was embraced; yet while they were busy to
entrench, the flying squadron of two thousand foot did recover le fosse del
Grano, and diverse Spaniards fell there, for a great number of them coming to
Saint Sebastian, upon the upper ground, they let fly upon them shot as thick as
hail, as also at Saint Andrea, insomuch that the Spaniards knew not which way
to turn themselves to avoid those fiery Tempests. A Lieutenant General of his
Majesty's was on horseback, with about forty horse, and stood before the
house of Bernardo Turboli upon a special piece of service; but he was so
wounded that his bowels gushed out, and so was carried to Spirito Santo.

The Spaniards afterward hurled themselves in Catalana street, but the women
out of the Balcones and Windows pelted them with stones, whereupon the
Spaniards put fire to three Shops, and sacked diverse Houses besides, the Women
flying away at the backsides. The Brigade of Reformado's advanced afterward
with many Napolitan Cavaliers in the Vanguard, and in the Rear a Company of
Spaniards, with six Officers of War, Don Gaspar de Salta, Hieronymo Arnadeo,
with others, united themselves in the street of Porta, as far as Saint
Stephano, and the Spaniards as far as Jesu Maria; but they were repelled by the
people by a flying squadron remaining Masters of Porta Medina and Porta Reale.

The Day following the people rushed into the Prison of the Vicaria, and burnt
all the criminal Writings, setting at liberty fifteen hundred Felons, whom they
enrolled for Soldiers, and fetched as many Arms as would serve their turn:
Among those prisoners there was one Frenchman, who had been in the Candian wars
for the service of the Signory of Venice: This Frenchman had been a Commander a
long time, being a man of knowledge and courage, therefore they put him in the
head of a Troop; So there was hot skirmishing both night and day in the City on
both sides, and the great Cannons played without intermission, wherein there
was much slaughter. Most of the Officers did confess, and took the Communion,
carrying the Badge of the Carmine, hoping thereby the holy Virgi n would
protect them in the public Service of their Country, and for disburdening
themselves from the insupportable weight of Gabels. The Artillery which stood
upon the Tower of Carmine did notable service, and one Bullet was shot thence
into the Royal Galeon, where Don John of Austria himself was: He therefore
landed, and got into the Palace of the Viceroy in safety, he is a comely youth,
about twenty years of age, and full of Vigor and Resolution. His Sea-Commanders
incited him most of all to begin the War, telling him, that half a dozen shots
from the Galleons would so terrify the people, that they would lay down their
Arms, then the Sword-justice should restrain them afterward. Both parties had
now as it were beleaguered one another; all Toledo-street as far as the Palace,
the Hospitaletto, Chaia, together with Santa Lueia, were full of armed men,
insomuch that none could pass to and fro, nor did any bread appear in the
Shops, or flesh in the Shambles, or fruit in the Market: There went such a
number from the City to Pozzuolo, that they have half famished that place;
thereupon the Viceroy proposed a Truce, but the people refused.

The Spaniards the next day raised up a great Trench about Porta Reale,
together with a little Bulwark, which was done with that suddenness in the
night time, that it could not be prevented; Coaches as well as Carts were
employed to carry Materials up and down to fortify: The Walloons who guarded
Porta M^dina raised also in an instant, as it were, a mavelous strong Trench,
which the people offering to resist, they could not do it.

The people then occupied San Sebastian, they rushed the Zezza or Exchequer,
and seized upon all the silver violently into that was therein, with other
treasure; as also all the banks of Moneys for the service of the Public.

The Viceroy published a Declaration, That whosoever would bring Corn or Meal
into the Castle he should be allowed to sell it at such a rate for ready money.
At that time there came a Galley laden with Corn from Aversa; but the
Galley-slaves killing the Captain made her run upon the sands, and so the
people took her with five Cannons. There began to be a mighty scarcity in the
City, yet the fury of the war grew hot^er and hotter; and the Spaniards began
to set up double and treble Trenches, which the other did imitate: The great
Bell of S. Lorenzo rung out to encourage them to Arms all night; every house
almost had a kind of Trench about it, and some two, some three: There were
great Cannons planted also in the street of Cavaglioli, which played upon the
people incessantly near the Garden of San Felice.

The Viceroy put forth a Proclamation, That whosoever would come into any of
the three Castles to serve their King, his Catholic Majesty, should have an
advance of pay, and be presently entertained: And that day 3 Brothers were
detected to have a Design that way, but they were all put to death by the
people who were heated more and more. There were diverse Carts laden with dead
bodies passed up and down the streets, to the number of forty, this Morning;
In the midst of the City the Picture of Death was set up near a red Flag; yet
there went great numbers, that had neither houses nor shops to be plundered, to
the Castles. There was a Design to make a Mine under Saint Ursola, and to blow
it up with Gunpowder; but Prince Turaldo, in regard it was a Religious house,
would not permit it, which made him to be somewhat suspected by the people;
There were some houses near the Fathers of Santa Maria which were burnt to the
ground, and all the Office-houses which belonged to the said Fathers, were used
in the like manner; besides diverse other fair houses near San Suriano, that it
was a most pitiful spectacle to behold it.

There was a Design discovered, that a Priest had on foot against the most
faithful people who was of the Family of the Giordani, they presently chopp'd
off his head, and cut others to pieces in great numbers who were of the
Conjuration: The Nuns of the Divine Love were removed for fear of the Spaniards
into another Monastery, called the Sacrament near Francisco nuovo. There came
from Nocera to serve the most faithful people four hundred fresh men very well
armed, which did much encournge the City, and the next day after they came,
they performed a notable piece of service against the Spaniards, who were
thought to begin to want powder; for there was a calculation made that they had
discharg' d from the three Castles, Galleons and Galleys, above thirty three
thousand Bullets already.

There was a Captain made shorter by the head, in regard the people had some
jealousies that he held correspondence with the Viceroy, having diverse barrels
of powder in his lodging which he had not discovered.

The next morning betimes the Spaniards played from Land and Sea with their
great Cannons, so that it made the very earth to tremble; they threw balls of
wildfire also into the City, which did notable hurt, and made both women and
children to cry out, and howl miserably up and down the streets: The great Bell
of San Lorenzo rung out again; but that night the Capuchin Friar who was
brother to the Archbishop, and was accounted a very holy man, was permitted to
go to the Castle to his Highness Don John of Austria, to whom he proposed some
terms of Accommodation; Don John directed him to the Viceroy, but nothing could
be obtained.

The Captain General of the people, the Prince of Massa, was suspected to have
intelligence with the Enemy, in regard of a Lukewarmness they found in him in
the execution of his Office, therefore he was committed prisoner to the
Zapateria, in a certain dark Cave, and Chanchiero, who had chopp'd off the head
of Don Peppo Caratta, the Duke of Mataluni's brother, who was but a
Shopkeeper, was appointed to exercise the Office of Captain General; for it
wa^ incredible to what a skill the common Citizens were come to in point of
Arms. And now the most splendid and delicate City of Naples which ravished all
tha^ came into Her, she which was one of the Glories (...) Italy, was reduced
now to such an extremity, that she might be termed the miserablest and most
barbarous of all Cities; such is the effect of War, and the fury of the people.

The Spaniards on the one side put all to fire and sword, the Citizens on the
other side bur^ the Goods, and destroy the houses of those of whom they had the
least umbrage of suspicion: The children cry up and down the streets for bread,
which was extreme scant, and every thing else very dear, only the sea, thanks
be to God, afforded good store of Fish, but for Flesh there was neither salt
nor fresh in any competency. The people having made a Mine under Porta Reale it
was discovered by the Spaniards, who seized upon all the powder, and took some
of the Miners, which they carried to the Castle. There was a very bloody fight
'twixt the Citizens and the Spaniards, about the Dogana or Custom-house, whence
the people had removed above a Million of goods into the House of the Duke of
Adri. There came four hundred fresh men from Sanseverino to serve the people,
about which time a great many houses were burnt about Porta Reale. There came
also six thousand Combatants for Recruites from other places, as Lauro, Nola,
and other Towns, insomuch that the City had not wherewith to sustain them, they
were in such numbers.

About the Dogana there was the most furious fight of all, which lasted six
hours, wherein many hundred, were wounded and slain, but more on the peoples
sides and all the while the great bell of St. Lorenzo rang out, while they were
shedding one another blood.

Thete were about a hundred boys called Lazari, which had certain darts, who
went up and down and put fire to the Convent of Jesu, where they rushed in and
did much hurt; but they were all beaten out by the Spaniards.

The next day there was a tough and bloody skirmish at Porta Medina, and the
great bell of St. Lorenzo rung out three times; the Fight was pursued to Sancta
Lucia, where the people broke open a gate, but they were forced to turn back by
the exemplary valor of Don Diomede Caraffa, who had a very choice Brigade,
though few in number; the next morning there was nothing but flames and smoke
through the West side of the City, there were so many Houses, and some of them
very fair ones, which were set on fire the night before, which had not yet done
burning.

There came the next day three hundred men from Salerno for the assistance of
the people, who were quartered toward the Seaside; that evening, and all
night following the great Bell of St. Lawrence sounded again, and the Fight
continued all night most furiously, wherein many of the new Salerno-men
breathed their last.

The next day there was truce proposed, but to little purpose; so they fell to
it all night again, and many hundreds were slain: Among the people some of the
Family of Parigi were shot to death, upon suspicion to hold correspondence with
the Castle.

Don John of Austria sent some Galleys with a design to secure Posilipo, but
they failed in the effect; for the Spaniords were beaten back, being ore-powr'd
by multitudes. The people finding that they were weak in Horse, they made a new
Cavalry, and they admitted some of the Banditi to their Troops, who had come to
fish in these troubled waters, to command them. The Duke of Mataluni had sent
some choice Troops of Horse to Don John of Austria, which did extraordinary
service. He sent a Cavalier of Quality to the Captain General of the People, to
know the merit of their Cause, and why they were so active in their own
destruction, and the ruin of so many innocent souls, and such a glorious City:
But the people sent back but an uncivil Answer, viz. That when the Confirmation
was come from the Court of Spain they would send his Highness another kind of
Message; till then 'twas but just they should continue to stand upon their
Guard, and repel any force, by that power which God and Nature had given them
for the defense of themselves and their Franchises, together with their Wives
and Children; yet persisting with firm resolution to continue in an exact
obedience to his Catholic Majesty, and not to listen to the Enchantments of
any other Prince, which began to tamper with them already for a Revolt.

That night being a clear moonshine, the people culled out three hundred
Horse, and four thousand Musketeers and Pikemen, to keep in one body upon some
design, and it was to meet with the Auxiliaries that the Duke of Mataluni had
sent; but they did not bring their intent home to their aim that night. The
next morning a Ban was published, That none in any part of City or Suburb
should plunder, under pain of death; which was obeyed accordingly.

Upon Saturday the 19. of September the great Bell rung out for every one to be
in a posture ready to fight: There was fire put to the house of the Prince of
Montesarchio, hard by the Dogana of Corn, and a general skirmishing continued
all night long till the Sunday morning, at which time there came out a
Procession of Friars in a doleful grave posture, with their faces bending
toward the earth, which struck such a sense of mortality among them, that
there was a White Flag raised up for a Truce, which the Castle condescended
unto; but notable execution had been done on both sides the night before, so
that the greatest business of the next Sabbath was to bury their dead.

The night following there poured down such fearful cataracts of rain that
hindered all kind of action on both sides; but upon Monday there was a tough
Fight happened betwixt the Brigade of the Duke of Mataluni and the people at
Marano, three of his Commanders had their Heads chopped off in the great
Marketplace, besides there was one hanged who had been surprised and searched,
and a Letter found about him from the Duke of Mataluni to the Viceroy.

The next day the voice went up and down, That if there were not terms
propounded for a sudden Peace they intended to introduce Foreign force, and
fix up a Protest against his Excellency: The sound of this voice went up to the
Castle. There was brought that day the Head of Captain John Rosso di Nola into
the Marketplace, who was one of the chief Commanders in the Brigade of the
Duke of Mataluni.

A public Ban was fixed upon the Church-doors, and in the public Market
place, as also upon the gates of the City, that all Cavaliers who had withdrawn
themselves from the City might return with safety, which was done at the
importunity of the Artisans, who cried out that all Trade was failed, which
they imputed principally to their absence. The 20. of September there was a
general assault made, and the most pertinacious was at Santa Lucia upon the
hill, and at S. Martins; They of the people would have forced their passage
that way, but the Spaniards being strongly entrenched, they could do no good,
notwithstanding that the Dispnte was extreme eager and hot; eleven Spaniards
were taken prisoners, besides those that were hurt and killed. The next day
there was a furious Dispute at Porta Medina, where the people had made a Mine,
which wrought a contrary effect, and flew in their own faces, insomuch that
diverse were blown into the air, some killed on the ground, and diverse pitifully
disfigured.

The next day the people caused their own Head to be beheaded, which was the
Prince of Massa, Turaldo their General, because he had caused sand to be put
into some Barrels in lieu of Gunpowder, specially in those which were to do
execution near Jesus Church: His Body and his Head were brought to the open
Marketplace, to be a spectacle to all people: And about that time the
Spaniards sallied in diverse places out of their Trenches, and did notable
execution upon the Citizens, while they were gazing on the Head of their
General.

Tuesday the 22 of September, having been engaged in fight all night long, the
people put forth a public Manifesto in print, with their reasons why they had
taken Arms, therefore they desired his Holiness, together with the Emperor,
and all the Princes of Italy, as also all other Christian Princes, to be
sensible of their sad condition, and assist them, not only with their prayers,
but with their Arms, in so just a quarrel; concluding, that besides the
recompense which they might expect from the goodness of God in an act of so
much lawfulness and piety, that most faithful people would be ever bound to do
the like or greater courtesies unto them upon all contingencies.

The Prince of Turaldo who had a good while served the people in quality of a
General, having received the Passport to go to the other World without his
Head, Gennaro Arnese succeeded him in that public charge: The first piece of
Justice he did was to condemn a Captain to have his Head struck off, for
violating a Woman in the Doury of Virgins where he had his Command.

Turaldo being gone, 'twas imagined by some that it would facilitate the way to
peace; and that which raised the hopes of some the more, was, because his
Holiness's Nuntio had gone to the Castle, where he received that solemn
audience; but nothing came of it, so that all the next day there was nothing
but skirmishing up and down in every corner.

The 23. of September, six hundred of the people 'twixt Horse and Foot, went to
Marano in succor of that important Post, where they found three thousand Horse
of the Barons; in particular, the Marquess of Vasto, the Duke of Cagnano, the
Duke of Mataluni, the Prince of Monte Sarchio, the Duke of Caivano, the
Marquess of Marianella, the Duke of Siana, and a number of other Cavaliers, all
which were repelled by them of the place, and the succor which came from the
City; among other, their Captain General was killed, and thirteen more, whose
Heads were brought to the great Marketplace in triumph, with diverse prisoners
besides.

The next day the great Cannons from the three Castles played more furiously
than ever, and made both Towers and Steeples, Houses, Monasteries, and
Churches, to tremble every where. The Spaniards attempted to open a passage at
Vemero, which was a Post of mighty consequence; the Dispute was very stubborn,
and wonderful hot, lasting above three hours; but the Spaniards were made to
retire at last, being surprised by night. That day the people did strictly
command, that under great penalties the Cavaliers should keep within their
houses, nor were they suffered to go hear Mass inany Church for fear of
Conventicles: They sent their Orders abroad likewise in the Country
circumjacent, that they should bring provision to the City, and other
Assistances, under pain of Rebellion. The day following it was pitiful how the
Women went howling up and down with their Children at their breasts, crying out
for Bread, which was come down to 11. Ounces. There came into the post eleven
Galleys from Genoa with the Duke of Tursi, who all saluted the Castles, and the
Castles them; besides, the Torrion of Carmine gave them also diverse Salutes in
behalf of the people; but the said Duke coming ashore was afterward clapped up
in prison.

There came six hundred fresh Soldiers from Sanseverino and the precincts
thereabouts for succor of the Neapolitans, who upon their Ensigns brought the
picture of Death; They were quartered about the Monastery of S. Andrea, the
Nuns being removed thence to another place.

Certain Letters which were sent from the Ambassador of the most Christian
King to the most faithful people of Naples were publicly read, being consigned
to Don Luigi Ferro, who had been Ambassador for the people in dispersing the
foresaid Manifesto up and down: The proffers which the Christian King made
therein to the Republic of Naples were accepted, which was two Millions of
Gold, twenty Galeons, eighteen Galleys, and forty Tartanas: Thereupon a Feluca
was dispatched with an Express from the people to embrace the said
propositions, and whatsoever was contained in them. This Express was to go to
Don Luigi Ferro, who was then in Rome, negotiating with the French Ambassador.

Sunday the 26. of September, the people sent out a Ban to call in all the
Barons up and down all the Country for their assistance, under pain of burning
their Houses, and other penalties.

The Viceroy understanding what had happened betwixt Franee and Naples, and
that Johu Baptista Ferro was sent expressly to Rome about it, he sent present
advice thereof to his Catholic Majesty's Ambassador there resident at that
time, to do what diligences he thought fitting in so pressing occasions. In the
mean time all that day there was fighting in diverse posts about the City, and
much blood spilt. The Viceroy caused the great Cistern of Oil, which was near
Porta Reale, to be emptied, and to be sold for the use of the Soldiery,
wherein there was computed to be above one hundred thousand Sesters or Quarts.
The Viceroy, Cardinal Filomarino, and the Duke of Tursis, they say, had a
private Conference over the Walls thereabouts that afternoon.

The next day the voice in many places of the City, Viva Francia, Let France
live, in other places, Viva il Parlamento d'Inghilterra, Let the Parliament of
England live, which caused Don John of Austria and the Viceroy to have Fleas in
their Ears. The rumor went that Monsieur de Fountain, Ambassador at Rome for
his most Christian Majesty had sent four Veteran Captains for the service of
the City, who had order to let them know that he had a Million every year to be
expended for the preservation of their liberties, terming them a most noble,
and a most generous people. They of the long Robe went melancholy up and down
the Streets, complaining that they were undone for want of practice, w ich was
no wonder, for Inter armasilent leges; there was news brought, that the Duke of
Mataluni was toward Aversa.

There came another express from Rome by Baptista Ferro that the King of France
was resolved, and would make good his purpose, and promise, to preserve Naples
in quality of a Commonwealth; thereupon the cry up and down went Viva Francia,
Let France live; which they strained their throats to cry so loud, that the
sound thereof might reach to Castelnovo, which was but a harsh note in the ears
of the Viceroy and his Highness. That day there was fire put to the house of
Nicolo Tinano in the Piazza ofS. Elmo.

The General Gennaro Arnese put out'a Declaration, that none under pain of
death should say, that the Letter of the King of France was false; wherefore
another Express was sent to the French Army to solicit their haste. The 30. of
September the fight was somewhat cold, as if the spirits on both sides had
languish'd.

The Viceroy caused a Letter to be Printed in form of a Manifesto to be sent to
all the Barons throughout the Kingdoms, wherein he required them in his
Catholic Majesty's Name, to contribute and send speedily what Auxiliaries and
assistants they could to bridle the tumultuous humors of these Mechanics.

On the other side, they caused the Capitulations which were made with the
Crown of France to be stamped and fairly printed. They also put out a protest
against the Barons, If they contributed any aid or advantage whatsoever to the
Viceroy against them.

'Twixt the Conciaria and Lavinaro there was a great contest whether they
should receive the King of France, or continue still under the Catholic King;
but at last it was concluded that they would have neither; but they would
reduce themselves to the form of a Republic, according to the example of old
Rome, their next neighbor, who never flourished more then under the form of a
Republic. Another answered, that to establish any thing, it must have first a
foundation; we must not be transported with Chimeras, and build Castles in the
Air.

The report ran that diverse of the Nobles had taken Port at Capo di Chino,
which filled the City full of odd thoughts; because it was a post of infinite
advantage: Therefore all that night there was nothing but shooting of small and
great Guns, ringing of bells to fight, and much hurt was done on both sides,
both to men and houses, which ceased about the morning.

News came to the City, that yesterday morning there was a great contention
betwixt the Brigades that the Nobles had levied, whereof some would cry Viva
Francia, others Viva Spagna, and the Dispute went so high, that from words they
fell to Arms, and 200. were slain upon the place of those that cried for
France. The Army of the Barons were advanced as far as Aversa, where they made
a hal^ (...) they passed to Nola, thence to Scafati, and thence ^o the Tower of
the Anuntiata, and the Greek Tower, with a notable slaughter of the people.

The next day the Bell of Santa Barbara within Castelnovo rung out as a Signal
to battle, which was not done before; Thereupon the Spaniards came down with a
great deal of violence; and the people endeavoring to get Porta Medina and
Porto Reale, specially Vomero, which was next under the Castle, the dispute was
very eager and bloody; but those places by the advantage of the great Cannon
were notably defended, and a great slaughter made of the Citizens which made
the women go up and down the streets like frantic folks; one crying out for
her husband, another for her brothers, another for her Children; so that it
would have softened a heart of stone, and they began then to revile not only the
Viceroy, and Don John of Austria, calling him unlucky Bastard; but they fell
with foul terms upon the King of Spain himself, crying out, Viva Francia, Viva
il Parlamento d' Inghilterra.

The Barons bestir'd themselves notably in the Country, and made themselves
Masters of Scafati, and the Greek Tower where the people were strongly
entrenched, but forced to yield and run away: And the same hour that I was
writing this, there was a bloody combat at Porta Reale and Porta Medina, and
New Jesu, which was so battered, that it can never be repaired again: The
slaughter was such, that dead bodies were carried away by Cart-loads, and great
pits made to hurl in the carkases; so that one Priest served for many to sing
their requiems; Then they discharged some Cannons in the Castle with powder
only for joy and triumph.

I will now relate here what persons they were that were the first raisers of
these horrid tumults. It must be presupposed that about the lower places of the
great Marketplace, as also in Lovinaro, Conciaria, Sellaria, at Saint Anthony,
and Santa Maria Loreto, and the hourg of the Virgins, there were about thirty
thousand men that used to go barefoot, with Canvass slops, and only their
shirts upward; these men living most of them upon the Retailing of Fish,
Herbs, Sallets, Flowers, and such petty Commodities; and some of them carrying
Cruses of Oil, Fruits, Bread, Honey, with other things of the like Nature about
the Streets; Most of them have their Wives, who attend their Labors at home,
as beating of Flax, spinning and washing; These people are very prolifical and
fruitful, that they have abundance of Children; they fare hard and lie upon
Mattresses; for few of them have any sheets, yet they earn about twelve pence a
Day; They have no stable possessions at all, but what they have is from hand to
mouth: They are called in Naples Scalzi, that is, unshod people; because they
go most an end barefooted; Their ordinary Food, besides Roots and Fruit, is a
little Bacon put betwixt two pieces of Bread, having boiled or roasted it before
to make it melt upon the Bread to make it savory; They have nothing but Water
to drink after it, and this is commonly their Dinner; for Supper they have
commonly but Herbs and Grass, whereof they will eat as much as a Horse, a
little Oil and Vinegar; and diverse of them without Bread.

They live best in Fruit time, whereof there is greater store about the City of
Naples then any where else; and Fruit time does last there near upon six
Months: They feed much upon Figs, which are there very great, and most
delicate; yet these people are plump and well to pass, vigorous and hearty,
notwithstanding that their greatest sustenance is fruit.

The Viceroy Duke of Arcos had imposed a ^ornese which is less then a farthing
upon every two pounds of Fruit by way of Gabel, and this year afforded more
quantity of Fruit then ordinary: These poor people grew half mad thereupon,
considering what Taxes were imposed upon all other Commodities as far as bread,
which is the staff of Life: Massaniello, as was related before, assisted by a
number of these poor people, burnt the Gabell-House in the Market place, and
committed other high Acts of Audacity.

The Viceroy commanded the House to be set up again, and continued still to
exact the said Gabell upon Fruit: Thereupon they grew more incensed and
resolute then they were before; and the Artisans with other of the best sort of
Citizens joining with them for the Common interest and Freedom, the Tumult by
Degrees ascended to this monstrous height, that whereas before they spoke
Reverently of the King of Spain, they now villifie him together with Don John
his Bastard, and cry up the King of France, knowing him to be a mortal Enemy
to the Spaniards, and to be now in Actual War against him; besides by the
information of some Merchants here, they had notice how matters passed in
England; Therefore oftentimes they cry out, Viva el Parlamento d' Inghilterra;
and in this manner ended the Month of October within the City of Naples.

We are now on the first day of November, the Feast of All Saints; and to begin
the Month, the Spaniards shot very furiously from the Castle of Saint Elmo,
and gave them hot Alarums; but this was only in the Morning; they were quiet
all the Day after.

WHile these prodigious tumults succeeded in the City of Naples, I must not omit
to declare that in Calabria at most Towns by a kind of strange influence, the
same spirit of insurrection did possess the people. They of Monteleone did
tumultuously rise up, and burnt 3 houses, which made Don Fabricio Pignatello,
Duke of the said City, to hasten thither for suppression of the broyls in his
own person, and for that time his presence did so prevail, being attended by
the Nobility, and others of best rank, that he quenched those popular flames,
and brought diverse of the chief Mutineers to punishment, whereby he settled a
perfect quietness, not only in the City of Monteleone, but in all the places
adjacent.

But when the said people had understood how stoutly the people of Naples held
out still, notwithstanding the Arrival of Don John of Austria, whom they called
the By-blow of his Majesty: The said Duke of Monteleone finding the
inclinations of the people generally for an insurrection, and their spirits
elevated to a high pitch, by the example and constancy of Naples, he wisely
gathered what choice men he could to a considerable number, and having got a
good Vessel, together with a Brigantine, he arrived safely to the Port of
Naples the first of November, whence he went presently to Castlenovo to do his
Observance to Don John of Austria, who with extraordinary demonstrations of
favor and affection received him. Whereupon the said Duke offered with many
hot Protestations to make litter of his life for the service of his Catholic
Majesty the King his Master, upon all occasions, though never so full of
imminent and unavoidable danger; which Protestations he made good afterward by
his Actions; so he dis-imbarqued the fifteen hundred men he brought, with a
good quantity of Arms, Corn, and other Provisions which he brought along with
him from Calabria. That night the Spaniards being much animated by these new
Auxiliaries, and the person of so gallant a man, made sallies out of the
Castles down toward the City, where they sought in three several posts all
night long, and the people of Naples were ready to receive them; so that they
got little at that time. The next day the Viceroy had a design upon Pusilipo,
and to that purpose sent thither a considerable force; but the passages being
narrow, and the people resolute to live and dye with the Napolitans, the
Spaniards were repelled with some considerable loss, so that they re-imbarked
themselves, and so retired.

The next Morning three hundred Calabreses more were sent from the Prince of
Satriano as a new supply for the Viceroy, in behalf of the Catholic King his
Master. There were tidings also brought from the Army of the Barons, That Don
Vicenzo de Tuttavilla had parted from Aversa toward the Greek Tower, and
Scafati, where runs the source of the waters that drive all the Mills
thereabouts; it was beleagured by three thousand of the people; Tuttavillia had
with him six hundred Horse, the Duke of Andria, with others, six hundred more,
the Duke Martina sixty, the Marquess of Turiviso two hundred Horse, and fifteen
hundred Foot, the Prince of Yorella three hundred Foot, and three hundred
Horse, the Prince of Supino fifty Horse, the Count of Santa Maria in Grisone
thirty Horse, the Duke of Cassa Massima fifty Horse, and Tonno Gentili having
left Aversa to the Government of the Duke of Mataluni, who had two hundred
Banditi, together with the Duke of Sora fifteen hundred Horse, the Prince of
Sernia fifty Horse, and the Camp-Master Marco Laudulpho of the said City was
inordered to keep his Station at some distance from the City.

The Viceroy having seasonable notice of the motion of the Army under the
Barons, gave Order to batter the Trenches about Porto; but they were so well
fortified and barricadoed that the Artillery could do no good.

The next morning Massaniello's Command was renewed in the City, That none must
go abroad in a Cloak or upper Garments, but all en cuerpo. The Duke of Mataluni
maintaining his Brigade upon his own expense, without one Carlin charge to His
Majesty, and demanding some Quarter to guard, he was assigned that of Santa
Lucia on the Hill, a place of the greatest consequence, because the Enemy had
means thence to batter Castelnovo. About midnight an Alarm was given by the
Enemy, and the said Duke would have exposed his own person in the Van, which he
did, and did notable execution upon the Citizens. The next day being returned
to the castle his Highness Don John fell embracing of him, expressing much
Thankfulness and Joy.

The people the day following took eight of Puzzuolo men Prisoners, with a
Corporal of the Duke of Mataluni's, who had been freed formerly by the said
people when the Vicaria was taken; he was hanged in the Market-plaee. The City
made great provisions for the Frenchmen, whom they expected to come for
Auxiliaries; whereupon the Viceroy sent some choice Galleys to Pusilipo, and
other places, with two hundred men upon a design. The same morning the General
of the Barons Army marched to Cerra, where he found the Prince of Montesarchio,
the Prince of Fraia (who was Governor of that place) with three hundred Horse
and two hundred Foot; with these three was Don Francisco Caracciola, the Son of
the Duke of Cosenza, Don Fabricio Spinello, Don Jusepe Mastrillo, and Carlo
Gartano a Captain of a Troop of Horse, together with Don Antonio Tuttavilla,
Don Francisco de Vargas, 'twixt Tonn^ and Somma. Being come at night to Nola,
where Don Fernando Caracciola was Governor; they found also there the Prior
his Brother, Don Giovanni Sanchez, with the Prince of Ottoiano, and others, who
had four hundred good Horse, and three hundred Foot, conducted by the said
Barons.

Upon Monday the fourth of November the Citizens of Naples sent in the Name of
the most faithful People two thousand Foot well armed toward the Greek-Tower:
The Duke of Tursis with much difficulty did land his Goods, with some of His
Highnesses Don John of Austria. The rumor ran, That his Catholic Majesty sent
a peremptory Command, that an Accommodation should be made with the people by
all means possible, and that the War should cease. Thereupon his Highhess sent
a person of quality to tell the people how he received a great deal of
consolation that he had found so much experience of the most faithful people in
the Alleglance to his Catholic Majesty, in that they had caused some of theirs
to be taken off, whose tongues had cried out, Viva Francia, therefore there
should be reasonable Justice done to all their just demands. Thereupon they
proposed, That the Duke of Arcos should be removed: Secondly, That His Highness
might govern them; Thirdly, that the Spaniards in Vallom should retire to
Castlenovo; Fourthly, that the chief Incendiaries should depart the Kingdom:
Fifthly, that the Castle of S. Elmo should be in the hands of the people, with
the posts about it, as it was in the time of Charles the Emperor; Sixthly, and
lastly, they desired a performance of the Capitulations agreed upon at first.

The next day the Forces of the Duke of Montelione imbarqued themselves, who
came to preserve that City in her obedience and security. The people thereupon
removed, and planted some of their Artillery in the Palace of Cardinal
Filomarino and S. George the Great, that they might the more conveniently shoot
at the Castles; which many wondered at, considering there was an Overture of
Treaty made; the Barons Army met all in one gross Body, the General being the
Prior Caraeciola beforementioned, and Don John Sames with two hundred Horse
went toward Scafati, where he arrived about fix a clock, and found the place
beleaguered by two thousand of the peoples Forces; There were within fifty
Spaniards, who had but an Alferez for their chief Commander, they were in want
of Match and Bullet, having been besieged four days, and they were forced to
make use of their Shirts for Match, and melt Copper-money for Bullet; The
Italian Tercia under the command of Prospero Tuttavilla came very luckily at
that time, together with Captain Siglia and Osman, two Companies of Musketeers,
one of Don Diego de Cordova, the other were Burgundians; there was another
Brigade of ^oluntiers, theMarquess of Turicuto, theD. of Bovino, the P. of
Mondervino, the P. of Supino Don John Sanchez, Don Francisco Caracciala, Don
Lucio san Felice, Don Gulliermo Tuttavilla Don Joseph Orilla, Don Thomaso
Guinazzo, Tonno Dentici, AndreaSanfelice, Duarde Andria, the Marquess of San
Juliano, Michael Ruffia, Don Jeronomo Suardo, Don Carlo Aquaviva; all these of
the Barons Army were missing, in regard that every one attended his own Post.
The Enemy had eight Troops of Horse, who were commanded by Poleto Pastina of
Salerno. The people lost 1500 persons, and 25 were taken prisoners, the rest
were pursued as far as Stradono novo, near the Territories of Aversa; On the
Barons side only one Burgundian was slain, and 2 more wounded; they made a
Halt there, and the Barons Army sacked and burnt many houses, among the rest
the house of Pietro Cassale. There was also much pillage and treasure seized
upon, most part whereof was distributed among the fifty Spaniards who kept
Scafati so gallantly.

Afterward they marched to the Tower of Aversa, where they hung out white
Flags in sign of obedience; and the General being entered he gave them an
universal pardon, and while he marched toward the Greek Tower of Castelmare,
the Duke of Montelione appeared to receive further Orders, together with the
Duke of Girifallo, the Marquess of S. George with 400 Foot, together with the
Prince diValle, came also unto them; the whole Army being come to the said
Tower, whither they of Scafati had fled, before they gave any Assault, the
Enemy did abandon the Post.

While thus in the Country there was a course taken to straiten the people to
the obedience of his Majesty, there was no time lost in Naples; for the Duke of
Montelione did bestir himself notably, who advanced boldly toward the Dogana;
he attempted also to force the passage to Sancta Lucia to confront the Enemy,
having done so oftentimes before: At last having advice, that in Calabria there
were new Tumults, he made it appear to his Highness how necessary it was for
him to return thither; hereupon parting from Don John, with many expressions of
endearments, he had the Title conferred upon him of Vicar General, with a very
ample Commission to that effect, yet with this restrictive clause, That the
Kingdom being quieted he would be willing to resign the Cha^^^: So leaving the
best part of his Brigade behind for the service of Naples, he imbarqued
himself the night following for Carantaro.

In the morning betimes they of the Greek Tower came to tender their obedience
the sixth of November; So for the guarding of that place the
Camp-master-General quartered there 150 Calabreses, and 200 Neapolitans, to be
commanded by the Duke of Nartina and Luigi Minutulo with their Troops of Horse,
and Seignior Caesare Caraffa: But being settled there, there came the day
following 1200 of the peoples Army under the command and conduct of Capitan
Rosso, who suriously assaulted them, and having gained the first Trenches with
the death of 15 Calabreses whom the Duke Monteleone had brought, and 4
Spaniards, they burnt the Monastery of Santa Maria, together with the Hospital
of the Incurables, cutting off the heads of 15 sick men; but they within making
a virtue of necessity, sallied out with that magnanimous resolution, that they
put them to flight, and took about 300 of them prisoners, and did execution
upon above 100 in the pursuit; Cavallero Medici got the Colors of the Horse,
the Count of Santa Maria, Don Michael Almaide, the Prince of Castillaneta, with
the Marquess of Trevico did signal service that day.

In Naples, in the interim, Judge Palma, who had retired himself into the
Castle, did frame a Writing, exhorting the people to conform themselves, and
submit to the mercy of his Highness, who did offr to stay there for Hostage,
until the Capitulations came from his Majesty: In that Writing of the Judge
there were many Proposals worthy of the consideration, with Cautions how the
French in former Ages did carry and miscarry themselves in that Kingdom: How
that in the compass of less than 4 months they were forced to send them away
packing, and desire the Spaniard to enter: now it is not observed, that the
French are any thing altered in their Natures to this day, but are still the
same, insolent and unstable men, as they were from the beginning.

Yet for all these Overtures of Reconcilement, the great Cannons played still,
and all sorts of small shot, and acts of hostility committed night and day
'twixt both parties; and this day the Musketeers came as far as the Nuncio's
house, which was much wondered at. It was expected about this time, that a
general Indulgence or Amnestia should be published through all the Kingdom, and
that for 10 years there should be a Freedom given of all the Lands; moreover
that the power of the Barons over their Tenants should be restrained.

There came news to Naples, that the Marquess of Velez was dead in his
Viceroyship of Sicily, and that Cardinal Trivultio was appointed to succeed him
in the Government of that Kingdom. Tidings were brought also, that 4. Feluca's
were come from Rome, with certain Commanders of War, for the service of the
people; there came news afterward, that 7. more were arrived, and thought to
be French; and that a great Personage was aboard of them, which was thought to
be the Duke of Guise; therefore the Town made preparations to receive and
entertain him according to his quality in point of diet and housing. There
sallied out of the Town that day 5000. soldiers upon some Design on the Greek
Tower, but they came back Re infecta.

The 8. of November, all night long, the great Bell of San Lorenzo rung out,
and the great Cannons played more furiously then ever; Drums and Trumpets
sounded every where, the Castles did a great deal of hurt to the City: At Donna
Alluina the Spaniards made two Mines to force their passage that way further
into the heart of the City; but the Mines played not, which made them return to
their own Posts with some Mortality: Yet two of the fairest Houses in Naples
were blown up that night: And about the Dogana there was skirmishing for six
hours together, 'twixt the Spaniards and the people, which caused such
mortality on both sides.

The next day the people understanding that the Prince of Montesarchio was
coming with 3000. fresh Combatants for the Royalists, the great Bell gave an
Alarm, so there sallied out of the City 500. men to repel him which took
effect; for they made the Prince to sind his way back again: Now, because the
business of the people might go on more regularly, they might go on more
regularly, they elected 4. Doctors of the Law, and 4. Swordmen as a Committee
to consult what was to be done: Some houses were burnt without the Gate of the
holy Spirit; and upon the Palace of Tonno d' Angelis, there was a black Flag
set up, so that the Cannons played most part of the day.

Yesternight there was a great Brigade of Cavalry and Infantry discovered in
form of a Squadron beyond the Bridge^ of Santa Madalena; there came also two
Galleys which were laden with dead bodies from diverse places of the Country, to
receive honorable burial in the City, whereof there were diverse Commanders.
St. Elmo had got a supply of Gunpowder from Sicily by a Gally of purpose; so
the next day the Castle thundered for 7. hours together.

This incensed the City so much, that the next day there was a Bando published
that none should speak of peace; but that every soul should prepare to defend
himself by Arms, and annoy the Enemy as much as he could. The Cavaliers, and
General of the Barons, who kept up and down the Country, made a halt at
Marigliano, and Sequestered the goods of Ciccio Ferlingero, General of the
Calvary to the people, where they found 500. Butts of Lacrime Christi, a choice
sort of Wine; the Prior Caracciola was left Governor of the said place with
200. Soldiers, and Ottaiana the Prince himself guarded the place.

Wednesday following, they marched toward Aversa; in the way they made a halt
at Marigliano, and Sergeant Major Nega was left Governor of the place, with 4.
Troops of Horse. In many places of the Country circumjacent to Naples; the
tenants rose up in great numbers, hoping that the City would be able to free
them from the yoke of slavery they groaned under, and the excessive Rents they
paid to their Landlords. They of Naples had so fortified the Dogana, that it
looked like an impregnable Bulwark; it commanded one side of the Sea; so that
the Spaniards could not pass to the little Mole to and fro, which was a great
incommodity unto them; for diverse were, killed as they went along from time to
time, and it hindered the conveyance of necessaries to the Castle.

For two days together there was nothing but shooting of great and small Guns,
and the Bullets flew up and down every where, which made no distinction of
persons, whereby you may conjecture what a mortality there was. The civiller
sort of people, as Lawyers, Clerks, Notaries, and other of the long Robe, were
commanded to put themselves in Arms for the common defense, and were assigned
several Posts for them to Guatd.

There came gladsome news to the City that the Prince of Montesarchio was
routed, who came to stop the watets of Poggio Reale, insomuch that he himself
was put to fly, nor was the service without considerable loss to the people
also: There was one of the house of Capello, that was surprised and taken for a
spy to the Duke of Mataluni, with diverse other prisoners of quality brought to
the Marketplace: Thereupon there were bonfires of joy made in diverse places of
the City, and the Bells rung out, and the Cannons played to congratulate their
good successes. The Cavalry of the people thought to assault some posts about
Vomero; but by the valor of the Germans and Burgundians, who served the
Viceroy, they were repulsed with no little loss: They took an eminent man
called Andrea Carola, who belonged to the Prince of Massa, prisoner, and a
Council of War went upon him, so he was condemned to have his head cut off.

The Camp-master General, Scipione Latro, was appointed by the Viceroy to have
the chief charge in guarding Puzzuolo. The people that night marched with 500.
resolute men, and advanced just under the Castle of S. Elmo; they entered into
an outward House that belonged to the Governor of the Castle, where they found
some provision, and great store of Wine, which they let out upon the ground,
and burnt the House: The chief Leader of this venturous Brigade did play his
game so well, that he came off with the loss of ten men only.

The Duke of Arcos did publish a Bando, that whoever could bring him the Head
of Gennaro Arnese, who was Elect of the people, should have 10000. Crowns:
Thereupon the people caused another Bando to be published, that whosoever could
bring into the Marketplace the Head of the Duke of Arcos, who was Viceroy,
should have 12000. Crowns; or whosoever did kill him any way, should have 6000.
upon certainty of the act: Insomuch that the eagerness and enmity on both sides
grew hottet and hotter. They of the long Robes and diverse Priests went up and
down the streets en cuerpo all in black, with Muskets on their shoulders, and
Pistols on both sides hanging at their Girdles.

There came unwelcome news to the City the day following, That the Count of
Conversano was come to Puzzuolo with four thousand fresh Combatants, to join
with the Cavaliers by the way of Ansignano; there was brought in the afternoon
a Cart-load of Heads into the Marketplace, which had been cut off in the
Country. The fight grew very furious toward the people, especially at Porta
Reale, where a Spanish Camp-master Don Jeronymo Guzman, kinsman to the Viceroy,
fell gloriously; yet his body was rescued, and received honorable burial in
the Church of Spirito Santo: Eleven Spaniards more perished in that place; but
of the common people 'twas thought there were about a hundred slain.

The next day the Castles saluted the City betimes with their Cannon from St.
Elmo; an unhappy bullet came and killed one of the principal of the Black-coats
that was in Arms. There came news from the Country, That Don Julio Aquaviva was
slain about Marigliono, with others who had sold their lives very dear, with
slaughter of diverse of the people.

The Popes Nuntio, there having come unto him a Courtier expressly from Rome to
that purpose, desired to have Audience of the people in the Name of his
Holiness, to whom he had some things to communicate that tended to the public
Incolumity and Welfare of the City: Thereupon there was a Consultation had in
Gennaro Arnese's House, the General of the people, where it was deliberated
that he should be heard; but that he should pass through some private Houses,
not through the open streets, to the place of Audience, because he might not
discover their works: Thereupon the General of the Napolitan Republic put
himself in State all in Cloth of Silver, to attend the Nuntio; who came at last
with an Auditor, whom the Pope had sent purposely with a Brief, exhorting the
City to conform themselves to a serious treaty of Peace, otherwise the holy
Church must do her duty, and exercise her Spiritual Arms for the preserving of
Christian blood, and preventing the effusion of it. 'Twas said he styled
Gennmaro by the Name of Excellency; who answered the Nuntio, That he could not
expect a sudden Answer to so grave an Embassy; Therefore the most faithful
People desired some time to consult and consider of it: So the Nuntio parted,
and some did laugh in their sleeves at him when he was gone, so little they
feared the Arms of the Church.

But this message from the Pope did so little prevail, that the next day the
people buckled themselves for fight more earnestly then ever, being now so long
fleshed in blood that it made them little sensible of danger; therefore all
that day there was Skirmishing in all places.

Toward the evening there was a Feluca discovered, which had been chased by
two Galleys, but narrowly escaped them; this Feluca came safely to Port, and she
brought in her the Duke of Guise, who had lived a good while retired in Rome,
having left France upon some disgust: Hereupon there went off from the Torrion
of Carmine twenty six shot of Ordnance, and then the Bells did ring out a
Gloria: The Duke had with him but four Servants: Gennaro Arnese went to meet
him in splendid Equipage, and he was received by the people with extremity of
gladness; the Cannons upon the Bastion of the great Church went off again, and
he was conducted to the Carmine, where there were Church-Offices performed to
God and the most blessed Virgin for his safe arrival to Naples. His Quarter
was provided for him behind the Bastion of Carmine. The next morning he
appeared in the Windows of His Lodging, and hurled money among the people,
telling them that they should be of good cheer, for the French Army was near:
That evening he did the like; but as they were discoursing of this business
news came that the said Army was sailed toward Toscany. About night there were
brought eight Heads into the Marketplace; and it was reported that one of the
Sons of Count Conversano was dead. The next day there were sixteen Fe^ucas that
brought French Officers and others from Rome, for the Duke of Guise, who threw
moneys again among the people up and down the streets. That evening there was
skirmishing at every Post about the City.

But there came cold news from the Country, That there about three hundred of
the people killed by the Barons Army, who was recruited much by the Cavaliers
of Castlemare. The Duke of Guise went to view all the Trenches that were raised
up and down for the defense of the City, as also at Vomero, and Puslipo, at
which time a fire happened in the Vicaria, which was extinguished before it had
done much hurt.

About this time Polito Pastina the Cape of the Banditi, for to be revenged of
some enemies of his in Salerno, made himself Master of the place by force,
notwithstanding that he had received some refreshments there a little before:
He secured the Town for the people; but the Camp-master Boccapianola of Leve
came with three thousand well appointed men presently after, and besieged
Pastina in the Town of Salerno, where he apprehended so much fear, that he
proposed suddenly some Articles, That if the Viceroy would pardon him he would
for the future constantly serve his Majesty with all his Brigade; which was
accordingly accepted.

These are the successes out of Naples; but within her Walls there were hot
disputes all this day without any intermission, which lasted till night and
darkness parted them.

The Duke of Guise the next dav went to the Archbishops Palace, to take on Oath
of Fidelity to the people, and hear Mass, and so he took the Communion by the
hands of Cardinal Filomarino. News came that the City of Nocera was in great
commotion, and that much slaughter was done there, some adhering to the people,
but the greatest number to the King, who hated the very name of the French.
That evening there was a hot encounter at San Carlo all Mortelle, where a
Knight of St. Jago was slain, with diverse others; but the people lost more; for
they were in a better condition to spare them, having ten times more store of
men then the Enemy.

The Duke of Guise got a choice Brigade, to give a general assault to Donna
Alluina, whereupon the Bells rung out to Arm; in this Service very many fell;
but re infecta thence they went to Santa Maria la Nova; but the success was not
great. The Viceroy caused nine to be executed that he had taken prisoners into
the Castle, and published a Ban, That whosoever took up Arms against His
Majesty should suffer death without mercy.

The next day there were very hot encounters in diverse places, and many were
slain, hurt, or taken prisoners; the great rain caused them to be quiet in the
afternoon, which foul weather came accompanied with a tempest that endangcred
some of Don J. of Austria's Fleet, which was in the Port, expecting what would
be the issue of these broyls.

The Duke of Guise desired to have 6000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, and he would go
to find out the Barons Army, which did so much spoil in the Country: he had
his desire, and so marched to Auversa. The Barons having timely intelligence
hereof, joined all in a Battaglion, and came with a great deal of resolution
toward the Duke; and understanding there were many French in the Army, it
heightened their spirits the more: The people hearing the noise of so many
Trumpets, and sound of Drums, were seared, and so astonished that they thought
of flying away; but the Duke with other Commanders did encourage them, so that
a furious Fight lasted for 2 hours; but at last the Dukes people gave ground,
and so ran away with the the loss of 300 upon the place, and about half so many
wounded, and 40 prisoners. The Lieutenant General of the people was slain, who
was a Frenchman, with a Camarade of the Duke of Guise, whose body he bought
for burial: On the Barons side there fell the Marquess of San Juliano, Don
Emmanuel Vaaz, with 30 more; the victorious Barons retired (the night being
come) to Aversa, and the people for another place that stood for Naples.

They had been somewhat quiet in Naples all this while, attending the success
of the Country Army abroad, which when they heard, it somewhat dejected them.
The Duke being returned to Naples, went to visit all the posts up and down; the
next morning the City had a hot Good Morrow given her by the Castles, that put
her in a palsy for a great while; There came more French from Rome to find
out the Duke of Guise, but they were very few. Some of the people remembering
the words of the Duke, that the French Army was near, made a motion, that if
the said Army came not by such a day the Dukes head should pay for it; Many
thought this French Army was a mere Chymera, and a pure Cheat; nor did there
want some Instruments os the Viceroy to infuse this into the peoples heads.

About the Dogana the next day, there was a tough Dispute, where 20 were
killed, and 30 of the people wounded, many fell likewise on the other side. The
Admiral of Don John's Galeous died about this time, having been sick diverse
days of a continual Fever. There was a new Patent to be given to the Duke of
Guise, wherein he should be styled the Doge of the Royal Republic of Naples;
but some under hand gave advice, it was not fitting to be done until there were
some certitude of the French Army he spoke of. Besides some reports were flown
from the Castle, that the confirmation of the Articles was come from the
Catholic Court, and was a printing with addition of further Graces for the
City of Naples. In the interim there came reports daily how diverse places in
Calabria, as Pizzo and others, were mightily troubled with factions, which were
grown so high that much blood was spilt, many houses burnt, and other mischiefs
done.

In some places the Kings party prevailed, in others the people; Yet the
Marquess of Santa Catherina did a great deal of good, who went up and down with
2000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, and did quiet sundry places that were in uproars
with such moderation and prudence that it is admirable; He suppressed besides
some Rogues, that taking the advantage of the times robbed up and down the
Country, hanging them up on the Highways on Boughs of Trees, that they might
be a terror to the passengers. And in one little Grove which lay upon the
common passage, they say, he did such an execution of those Free-booters, who
were worse than Banditi or common Robbers, that every Tree was laden with their
dead bodies, some having 4, some 5, some 6, or more, dangling upon their
branches.

Upon Mund^y the second of December, leaving the affairs of Calabria, and
returning to Naples, from 3 hours of night to 7 in the morning, there was a
kind of general battle given, specially about the Kings D^gana; there fell of
Spaniards and Germans above 60, and twice as many of the people; This afternoon
t^hre were imbarqued about 300 Soldiers to go for Aversa for a further supply
to the Barons, those Galleys which carried them had Ammunition and Arms also
for the service of the said Barons.

Upon the third of December there was quietness on both sides, as if there were
no war at all, but afterward there began a fiery Encounter about the Dogana,
being the nearest post to Castelnovo; the Duke of Guise ordered that some place
should be filled with earth and fagots, that the Cannons toward the Castle
might be mounted higher; whereupon many hundred people were set on work for
that purpose accordingly; There was order also, That all the Wines near Naples
should be brought into the City, because the Enemy should not make use thereof:
There were likewise diverse private Magazines of Corn found in the City, which
being discovered they were made use of for the public good.

The Duke of Guise was resolved to raise a Regiment of men upon his own charge,
that they might be more faithful unto him, and as it were his own creatures; he
offered 20 Carlins by way of advance to every one, and a greater pay than
ordinary; thereupon diverse came to enroll themselves, and he promised to pay
3000 men upon his own score; to which purpose he had Letters of Exchange for
considerable sums: One of the greatest things that pinched the City, was the
Galeons and Galleys which were in Port, in regard they were a great hindrance
for Commodities to come to the City, which was reduced now to a great necessity
of victuals. The Spaniards had made a secret Mine in the Prince of Rocca's
house; but the people having intelligence of it, spoiled it, though it cost the
lives of many.

The fourth of December there were very hot Disputes about the Dogana, where
many fell of both parties; The Duke of Guise sent 300 men to Castelamare, to
hinder the refreshments that used to come that way for the Castles.

The sixth of the same Month, there was a Truce for 3 hours; in the mean time
his Highness Don John of Austria gave notice to the City of a Letter sent from
his Catholic Majesty, wherein he ratisied all the Capitulations of Peace
agreed on by the Duke of Arcos, and this was thought to be procured principally
by the the intervention of his Highness Don John. The Letter being sent to the
Captain General of the people, and communicated to the Duke of Guise, the said
Duke exhorted the people to accept of it, in regard their King had therein made
Concession unto them of so many signal Graces, and indeed of whatsoever they
desired; Thereupon the people boiling with heat answered twice, that they would
be cut to pieces rather than to be subject to that Nation any longer; The Duke
finding the people so stiff in that resolution, he took a Meduill from his
breast, saying, that his most Christian Majesty had given him that Meduill for
a Token, that whenever he sent it to his Majesty, there should come an Army
forthwith: so at the very instant there were 7 Feluca's dispatched toward the
said Army, ^o solicit it should come away for the succor of the City, and
most faithful Napolitan people.

Upon the 7. of the same Month, the Bread was commanded to be made at twenty
four Ounces, by reason of scarcity of Corn; but the poorer sort of people
extremely murmuring hereat, it was forced to be made at five tonesses the loaf,
for fear of some Revolutions.

Advice was brought that from Calabria there came four thousand soldiers under
the conduct of Polito Pastana of Salerno, who had executed an hundred persons
in that City for their insurrections, reducing also Cava and Nooera to a firm
obedience. The people imprisoned three Walloons upon some jealousies of Treason.

The eighth of the same, the Duke of Guise reviewed all the posts with much
vigilance, accompanied with his most understanding Officers, giving strict
Orders every where to look to their Charge; The people were constrained to send
forth some Brigades out of the City to preserve the Market folks and others
from plundring.

The Duke caused three Bans to be published; one concerning the Gunpowder, the
other to regulate the Markets: and the third, that whosoever did not come to
keep his watch, he should forfeit so much.

The City began to be fcant of Corn, so that much bread was made of Indian
Wheat: Upon the 12. of December the Castles began to give hot salutes to the
Cisitens, and the Spaniards sallied toward the Dogana, where the Son of Regent
Casanate was slain, with diverse other persons of quality, and a Cavalier of
Sant Jago was one of them; there were fifty wounded men carried to the Castle:
Don Joseppe de Sangro also fell within the ditches of the entrenchments, so
that his body could not be rescued: The Spaniards made this fight as it was
said, of purpose to divert the Duke of Gui^e from going to the Country toward
Aversa, with 6000. Foot, and 1500. Horse, which he had determined to do that
day.

Yet the Duke of Guise went on in his Design, and with 15. Troops of Horse, 14.
pieces of Cannon, and 4000. Foot, he marched toward Juliano, and so to Aversa;
he had 20. Carts, besides his train of Artillery: The people renewed the Order,
That none should wear Cloaks that very day. The Duke of Guise being come to
Juliano with such a force, the Guardian Giacomo Rosso presented him the Keys of
that place kept formerly by the Duke of Mataluni; so that he recruited his Army
there to 15000. Combatants making Juliano his randevouz: When he was departed,
the Castles did so let fly their Ordnance, as if the day of Judgment were
come. In San Lorenzo the Carmine, and San Carbonaro, the Bells rung out to give
Alarms, and those shootings began an hour before day, and continued all the
morning; they sallied out of the Castles with much Resolution, and passed
through some of the Trenches, advancing as far as S. Peter the Martyr, where
the gross of the peoples Army falling upon them, they made a very handsome
retreat, and got back to their posts; notwithstanding, there was an ambush made
for them in the way, which they avoided, but with the loss of the third part of
their number; that Evening there came tidings that Count Conversano had burnt
Fratta Picciola with great slaughter.

Afterward it was inordered; that the Duke of Guise should be treated his
Highness; He was now at Juliano, where among other things he found 4000. sacks
of Grain: He put sorth an Order, That none should part from the present Army
which he had then, under pain of death. In Naples there were hot doings the 14.
of December, both in Castles and City, and one unlucky Bullet did good
execution against Castelnovo, for it battered down a little Turret, and made a
breach in the Wall.

The cry was still The French Army will come; but some said, 'twas but a
Fancy: News came that the Duke of Guise not being able to lodge all his men in
Juliano, he was forced to find them Quarter in the places circumjacent. The
business was still hot in Naples, and many skirmishes on both parties. A
company of Lazzari were assaulted by some of the Duke of Mataluni's men,
whereof the Duke of Guise having notice, he got presently a Horseback, and
with a choice number went to their succor, so there was a tough Dispute
wherein many of the people perished, and twenty of the Lazzari.

In Naples there were some suspected of foul play, and to have intelligence
with the Castle, among whom, the Captain of the Post hard by Saint Domingo
Suriano, and others of the House of Colentano, who were all imprisoned by the
people; some of them freed themselves, but others were condemned to die, and
executed.

A Mariner come from Genoa reported that he had seen at Piombino thirty four
French Vessels under sail designed for these Seas, and that others who were
their consorts were scattered by a violent tempest.

It was given out, that the Duke of Guise had sent a Herald to assign a day of
battle to Tuttavilla, who was in Aversa, and that he answered, That he much
wondered that the most Christian King, and he himself being a Prince of the
House of Lorrain, who had so many Obligations to his Catholic Majesty, should
offer to assist the vilest people of Naples. The Duke replied, That the King of
France being the Protector of the oppressed, as it appeared to him the
Napolitans now were, had commanded him to defend them in their just
privileges; therefore he sent him notice that he should make himself ready for
combat, for he was resolved to have a battle.

There were the day following a Fleet discovered at Sea, and some thought it
was the French Armada, and so rejoiced exceedingly; But they of Castle Ovo,
thought it to be a Fleet of Spaniards, consisting of twenty three Vessels;
thereupon up went the Flags within the Castles, crying out, Armada de Cielo,
Armada Catholica, the Armada of Heaven, the Catholic Army: Others said, it was
the Indian Plate-Fleet which was come to succor them here: This bruit ran
through all Toledo street; afterward from the Castle they spied six more; they
were all about two miles distant from the shore; so night came on, that they
could see no more for that time.

The next morning that Fleet proved to be French indeed, which came to assist
the people of Naples, as they made their approach toward the shore, they
reduced themselves to the form of a half Moon, as if they came to besiege the
Spanish Fleet, which was in post. The Spanish Admiral seeing that French Fleet
sailing toward the shore, he wondered at the rashness of those who had the
guidance of it, that they would offer to enter into that Gulf, having no post
of security: therefore he gave out a Rodomontado that he would not leave a
Vessel unsunk of them. 'Twas thought that Fleet would sail toward Posilipo to
disimbark some men and ammunition, and so depart.

The Napolitan people finding it was a French Fleet, displayed their Colors up
and down the City, and raised up the great Standard with the Image of the Lady
of Carmine, of San Gennaro, and other Protectors of Naples, with the Arms of
the Royal Republic; and those of France, and all being brought to the Church
of Carmine, solemn Mass was sung in presence of the Duke of Guise (who was now
returned to Naples for the timee) and Gennaro Arnese the Captain General, with
an incredible multitude of people about them; and after Mass the Standard was
set up in the bastion of Carmine, by diverse of the principal Officers, and the
great Guns went off every where in token of joy.

The next day there came on shore many Commanders and others from the said
French Fleet: they landed also six hundred Cows and Buffalo's; which the people
took for provision for City and Soldiery: The French Fleet kept still in form
of a half Moon; and it was a goodly sight to behold it; it consisted, as
formerly was said, of twenty eight great Vessels, and one small one; they kept
their distance so far, that they were out of the reach of the Spanish Fleet, or
Castles.

There came about this time a Declaration set forth by the Napolitans, that
they never had done, nor intended to do any thing against the Nobility and
Gentry, whereat diverse did very much wonder, considering the state of things
then.

The next day Ginnaro Arnese resigned his Generalship with great applause of
the people; who cried out aloud, Let the Duke of Guise, let the Duke of Guise
live: There was a purpose thereupon to make him Doge of the Royal Republic of
Naples six years, and the said Arnese Governor of the Bastion of the Carmine,
till some of the Castles should be taken, allowing him twelve thousand Ducats
provision per annum. The Duke also assured him of the greatest Offices of trust
that could be in the said Republic.

That Evening the six thousand Sacks of Corn which the Duke of Guise had found
in Juliano was brought to Naples for supply of the City; and the Duke of Guise
parted again for Juliano.

There was great expectation what would become of the two great Fleets at Sea;
but in the interim by distress of Weather two Vessels were sunk; one on this
side Posilipo: the second the other side toward Chaia: The sirst saved her men,
but they were all cast away in the other; and it was a ruthful sight to behold
Men swimming, being closed arm in arm.

They say, that there was another sunk, and two more were boarded; so that with
those of Castleamane, they accountd fourteen Vessels in all, and one more lost
in full Sea five Tartana's: The Spanish Fleet had the Wind on their side at
first, but then it turned contrary; in so much That the French Fleet followed
the Spanish almost under Castle Ovo, and the Tower of Saint Vincent, by
perpetual shooting; so that this night there were great expressions of joy in
Naples, and the Bells rung a Gloria.

The Duke of Tursis had Order from the Castle to propose a Truce for three
hours, which lasted above six between the Castle and the Town: The rumor ran,
that the French Fleet was gone very ill handled, and also disgufted by the
people, who would not consigne the Bastion of Carmine into the French hands;
and there wanted not those who painted out the Frenchman to the life, and
exaggerated his ill qualities. It was given out, that the French Fleet had
disimbarked both men and victuals at Bagnoli.

It was Christmas Day; and in honor of that holy Tide there was a cessation of
Arms on both sides, and no hurt done: On the peoples side there was a Letter
intercepted from Tuttavilla to the Viceroy, wherein he complained that he could
not furnish him with either men or money, therefore he advised him to manage
the business as well as he could; he expressed likewise, that they had scarce a
shirt left amongst them; for all went to make clouts for the wounded men.

The Galley Santa Agata went voluntarily to find the French Fleet, which came
on almost under the command of Castelnovo, putting it self in the posture of an
halfmoon: there were among them three vessels so huge that they seemed as so
many Mountains in the Sea: They came upon the point of Pusilipo, and got 'off
again clear by the favor of the wind: The dearth of bread increased in the
City of Naples, which made their spirits to faint somewhat; yet the next day
they advanced toward the Castle of Saint Elmo, and the Spaniards sallying out
toward them, they lost five and twenty of their men. There was a plot
discovered for the murdering of the Duke of Tursis, who had been lately taken
prisoner, and the Accomplices received their condigu punishment. Don John of
Austria's Steward came in a Feluca of purpose, with white silk Flags, to treat
with the people for the freedom of the Duke of Tursis, and a Ransom was put
upon him of forty thousand Ducats.

There came a recruit of three thousand men from Farino for the service of the
people; their Leader was Antonio Donato, who had the title of Camp-Master from
the Duke of Guise: The Spaniards took a Feluca that was coming from Pozzuolo
full of people of good quality; but it cost them dear; for among others a
Knight of S. Jago was slain in the action, three hurt, whereof one was a
Captain of note; the weight and price of bread was regulated.

There came tidings, that the City of Aversa was yielded up, which had been so
well fortified: The people took likewise Caviano, where there were diverse
Cavaliers mingled with Spaniards, so that the Campmaster Tuttavilla fled into
Capoa with hundreds more: Cerra also made a rendition of it self; The Duke of
Guise appointed Governors in those places according; and there were forty
thousand measures of Corn brought to Naples from those places, for the common
sustenance of the people.

Don John of Austria sent to the Duke of Guise an offer of three thousand
Ducats for the Duke of Tursis by a Spanish Camp-Master: The Duke answered,
That the City of Naples wanted no money; and when he would yield the Castles,
and the Fleet of Galleys, the Duke of Tursis should be given up. The Tower of
Anuntiata, a Post of great consequence was taken by the people, and likewise
all the Advenues about Castelamana; the Post of San Leonardo was also reduced
to the peoples obedience. There was a hot dispute between the Spaniards and the
people at Chaia, where the peoples Soldiers advanced as far as Pedro de
Toledo's house: A Letter of Don John of Austria's intercepted going to Sicily,
wherein he inordered Cardinal Trivultio to send the Sicilian Armada hither, for
preserving of Naples, which with the whole Kingdom was in danger to be lost.

The first day of the year 1648. there came letters from diverse places in
Apulia, from the Capipopolo there, That they had twenty thousand good
Combatants ready to assist the Royal Republic of Naples, if need were: An
Alfarez going that day to the Elect of the people for Corn to make bread for
his Soldiers, and the Elect refusing, the Alfarez took out his Poniard, and
would have stabbed the Elect; whereupon the Alfarez was taken and hanged that
very day in the Marketplace. The Duke of Guise removed his dwelling to the
Palace of the Prince of Santo Buono, in S. John of Carbonaro.

The Collateral Council gave the Duke of Arcos to understand, that he should
sit no more among them in quality of Viceroy, but that his Highness should
Govern; but this was done, as 'twas thought, in policy, to induce the people to
a conformity; but it is certain that Don John, speaking of him, said, Vayase en
hora mala che ha hecho perder este Reyno a mi Padre: Let him go, in an ill
hour; for he has lost my Father this Kingdom. There were two attempts made
upon Pozzuolo by the people; but they were repulsed both times. Letters came to
the Duke of Guise from Abruzzo, That they were ready to serve the Republic
upon all occasions, and to obey their Summons.

Don John of Austria sent an Express to the Barons, that they should make
themselves ready, and appear in the Field in a Body. The Judge Onufrio was sent
to Santa Clara, to persuade them to render themselves to his Catholic Majesty,
alleging how that that great King had long Arms; but the people fell a
laughing at the Judge.

There was News brought that the passage of Scafati was re-gain'd, whereupon
there was great rejoicing in the City; a special Guard of Halberdiers was
appointed to attend the Duke of Guise; the Governor of Salerno came to do him
reverence, bringing him a present of four choice Ginets with rich Saddles, and
the Arms of the Duke upon them. There came also 2 Capopoli from the Territories
of Otranto to do reverence to the Duke of Guise, with Presents and assurances
that they were at the disposing of the Royal Republic. Most of the Judges were
removed through all the Tribunals of Naples, and well-affected men put in.

On the other side Don John inordered some part of his Fleet to go to Sardinia
to fetch men and munition. There came news also from Rome, that the Conde d'
Ognate (who had been Ambassador in England, Anno 1635.) had a Commission to be
the Viceroy of Naples. There came also a Courier from Milan, that there were
three Regiments appointed. and ready to serve His Catholic Majesty for the
quieting of Naples.

Thereupon the next day there was a most terrible fight made betwixt the Castle
and the City for 4 hours together, wherein some hundreds perished on both
sides; the morning after, the Duke of Arcos with his Family departed, and the
Castles gave him a Farewell; that afternoon Don John of Austria made a
C^vulcata to Jesu novo, where he lighted and went to Church to be sworn Viceroy
for the time, whereupon Te Deum was so emnly sung; then he returned to the
Castle by the street of Incoronata, where the great Guns went off for joy.

A general Pardon was published that day by Don John of Austria; whereupon the
grave Judge Onufrio di Palma made a moving eloquent Speech to the people, that
since the Duke of Arcos with the chiefest Incendiaries were gone, and that they
now had a Kings Son, so gallant a young Prince, to govern them, it was high
time for them to return to their former obedience to their Monarch and lawful
King, who had maintained them in peace and plenty so many years, and now did
make a gracious offer to take off all kind of Gabels, and grant a general
Indulto or Pardon. The people answered, That if the Spaniards would go home to
their own Country, the Peace was made. So this alteration of Governor wrought
little effect for the present, but both parties jear'd one another; so that the
Phlegm and longanimity of the Spaniard did wonderfully appear in these
Traverses of affairs.

The Report was very rife that the Condc d'Ognate was preparing to come from
Rome with a Recruit of 1500 choice men for the service of his Catholic
Majesty, and to be Viceroy of Naples. In the mean time the War did not languish
a whit; for the people were now beleaguering Surrento and Pozzuolo with much
resolution; so that the noise of the Cannons was heard from Naples. News was
brought that in Santa Maria de Capra many of the people were slain, which did
much exasperate matters as they then stood.

There was a new Election of Deputies made; Prior Caracciola, Don Diomede
Caraffa, and Marco Antonio Gennaro were appointed for the Nobles and City, who
exposed to his Highness the grievous calamities and confusion that so
flourishing a Kingdom was reduced unto by reason of the present Tumults; that
the people took up Arms for no other end but to recover their Liberty and
Livelihood; that they might be the better able to serve his Catholic Majesty,
and continue in their fidelity to their natural King; and for the future they
offered to keep Arms no more in their houses, but live quietly, and in
brotherly concord one with another.

The next morning there came thirty thousand Ducates from Spain for the support
of the War: that Afternoon the Duke of Mataluni came to Naples, to do reverence
to his Highness; and a Rumor ran that two Cardinals were to come from Rome
with the Conde d'Ognate to accommodate matters: The people received a foul
Repulse before Surrevto; insomuch that they were forced to raise the Siege with
much loss. The like ill success they had before Puzzuolo; The Duke of Guise did
a notable piece of Justice upon a French Baron, who had held intelligence with
the Puzzolani, and underhand had been a means to convey them corn and other
provisions. The people put to death a Franciscan Friar, a man of an ill life,
and a dishonor to his Frock.

Notwithstanding the fair hopes of Accommodation, yet for two days and nights
there was nothing but fighting and skirmishing at every Post; insomuch that
there was a computation made of near upon five hundred slain on both sides in
the space of forty hours There was order given out that the Lazzari which are
the scum of the Neapolitan people, being most of them Porterst, Scavengers and
Tankerd-bearers, having now grown very innsolent, should be suppressed.

There was new Money stamped with the Arms of the Royal Republic. The same
night Antonio Manella Elect of the people was slain by Jacomo Rosso Camp-master
of the people, by order of the Duke of Guise, chopping off his head afterward,
and carrying it up and down the City upon a Halberd, and his body was dragged
to the Marketplace, and so hanged by the one foot, because he had secretly
conveyed Corn to the Spaniards.

The next day diverse kinsmen and acquaintance os the Duke of Guise came to the
City. Gennaro Arnese Governor of the Bastion of Carmine having had private
intelligence that the Duke of Guise had a Design to introduce the French, and
make himself King; the said Gennaro, together with Vincenzo Andrea and a great
multitude of Citizens, most whereof were on hors-back, rid up and down the
City, and cried, Viva la Republica, Viva il Popolo; At which Rumor every one
did shut up his Shop and his Doors, and the City was generally in Arms; which
being understood by the Duke of Guise, he commanded his Regiment of Horse to be
presently put in equipage, calling together all his Confidents, making all of
them a good Squadron before his Palace; and Arnese passing by at that time with
his Brigade, he was so saluted with some Muskets that six of his men dropped
down dead, which made the rest betake themselves to flight: the Duke afterward
rid up and down the Streets, and the people cried out, Viva la Republica, Viva
il Duca di Guisa, Vivasualtezza; And so going to the Carmine he had some
conference with Gennaro Arnese, whereupon all was quieted in a mavelous
suddenness, considering the quality of the Commotion.

The first of February 1648. The Castle of S. Elmo put up the royal Standard,
upon discovering three Galleys, one whereof was the Capitana of Naples, wherein
was imbarqu'd the Conde d'Ognate; upon his arrival to the Post he was saluted
by all the Castles, first by Castelovo, then by Castelnovo, and lastly by the
Castle St. Elmo. The Bastion of Carmine did also salute him, but it was with
Bullets, as he passed by, whereby three of the Gally-slaves and two more were
slain, which caused him to remove into a Feluca, and so went first to salute
his royal Highness, and then into the Palace, where he was attended by the C
llateral Council and all the Nobility, with all the Punctilio's of Ceremony.

There happened a great Commotion at this time among the people and Citizens of
Naples; some crying up Spain, others France, some The Parliament of England,
and others the Republic: so that every one began to arm, and it was like to
produce very ill consequences, unless the Duke of Guise by a French boldness
and resolution had appeased the uproar.

The D. of Guise reformed the Officers of the Militia, which tended afterward
to the advantage of his Catholic Majesty's service. He sent also Manifesto's
to the Nobles throughout the Kingdom, that they should inform the people, That
for the future no Gabels or Impositions should be laid upon them, but new
Graces and Concession should be done them, provided they would continue in
their loyalty and devotion to the Royal Republique.

The Marquess of Turiano took the command of the reformed Soldiery, Biasio di
Fosso being now dead: All the S^ldadesca with their Officers intervened to see
the solemnity, and among others the Marquess of Rattivelle.

Upon the thirteenth of February 1648. The Royal Republic of Naples did
establish certain Senators, with the consent of the Duke of Guise and the
People, together with the approbation of the Council of State and War; and they
were six in number, three Noble men, and 3. Citizens.

Don Diomede Carratta Cesare de Bologna, The Prince della Roeca
For the Nobles.

Augustine Mollo, Gennaro Arnese, Vincent d'Andrea.
Were chosen for the people.

It was also determined that there should be Elected two Senators for every
Province throughout the whole Kingdom, which were Twelve in all; so that the
whole Number would come to twenty four; Twelve for the Nobles, and Twelve for
the People, to avoid Confusion that might arise from a greater Number.
Moreover, it was Ordered that certain Officers should be elected for the
government of the Cities and Towns with Subaltern Instruments under them;
specially for the Government of Saponara, and the two Provinces of Calabria.
The same day those new Officers which had been chosen formerly were put in
possession of their authority derived from the Republic, both in the Vicaria
and other Tribunals, who were to regulate themselves according to the new model.

The new Viceroy did stir himself notably, and left no stone unremoved to
settle Peace and quietness, thereupon he did insinuate into many of the
Captains and Citizens.

The sixteenth of February a Brigade of the people went by night under the
Conduct of a Genovese, called Colonel Grillo, and brought with them scaling
Ladders, with other Instruments to surprise the Town of Surrento; but they
within having timely notice thereof prepared accordingly, and sallied upon
them, with much Animosity and Courage, which caused a great slaughter of the
people, and diverse were taken prisoners; the said Grillo had both his arms
bruised, so that the rest were put to flight, leaving behind them Bag and
Baggage, with all their scaling Ladders, and Instruments.

His Excellency understanding, from Genoa, that there were fourteen Vessels
laden with Corn to come for the service of the City from Provence in France, he
went in person with some of his Cape-officers to Nis^ta, whither he carried a
train of Artillery, with munition for ^outh and War, and placed there a hundred
Spaniards in Garrison.

Tidings came, that the Prince of M^ntesarchia had reduced the City and Castle
of Arian^ to the Devotion of his Catholic Majesty; at which time he had taken
a Convoy of four hundred Mules laden with Corn; he cut off the noses and ears
of the chiefest Conductors, who would obstinately resist, and be of the Freneh
party.

The Prince of Roc^a Maria had also brought diverse places of consideration to
their wonted A legeance, and among others Sporlongo, a Pass of very great
Consequence to go and come from Rome, where there was a hot Dispute before a
Rendition would be made by the Governor and inhabi^ants of that place, whereof
diverse were slain, and the Town plundered.

There arrived the first of April, 1648. in the Port of Naples a Vessel from
Malaga with five hundred Spaniards, a great proportion of Victuals and Arms:
This Ship gave notice that there were eight more under sail, and diverse other
from several Ports in Spain, to come for the service of his Majesty in Naples.
There came also two Galleys from Genoa, with two hundred thousand of Ducates
put up in Chests, a hundred Barrels of Powder, Saltpeter, with an infinite
number of Bullets, great store of Match, with many sorts of edible Commodities.

There came also an Ambassador from Malta, with a splendid train of Cavaliers,
who were received by his Highness Don John of Austria with extraordinary
expressions of benignity: The Conde d' Ognate provided them Coaches to go up
and down the City from the Palace. The Duke of Guise considering the great
hazard and hurt which might befall those Corn ships that came from Province,
for the service of the Napolitan Republic, specially now that the Spaniards
had impatroniz'd themselves of the Post of Nisita, and so strongly fortified
it: He went with a considerable Army of Horse and Foot, with a train of
Artillery, and diverse French Commanders, and three thousand of the City
Soldiers upon a design to reduce that place to the ^isposition of the
Republic.

The sixth of the same Month, his Highness and the Viceroy, with great numbers
of Barons, Cavaliers, and a numerous ^ldadesca, with all the choicest and most
magnanimous Commanders, sallied out of the Castle with all the privacy that
could possibly be about twelve a Clock at night, having formerly implored the
Divine help, and so marched down toward the City: He had a train of choice
Artillery along with him, and diverse other Military Instruments, with good
store of fireworks: He came first to the Cisterna del' Oglio, with all his
Army, and caused the Church of Jesus, which was contiguous to the place, to be
gently opened; where having made fervent Orisons to the blessed Redeemer of
man, he desired Father Gerunda to confess him, which he did, and afterward he
took the holy Communion; the Viceroy with the chiesest Commanders did the like.
Then he inordered a Wall to be battered down which joined to San Sebastian, and
so passed to Porta Alba: Being happily advanced so far he mounted his Ginet,
and rid toward the street of Constantinople through a throng of Musketeers;
whereof some shot, others being astonished at so sudden a surprise, stood
amazed. Thence he went on to Saint Aniello's street, and the Virgins quarter;
where the most civil sort of people did inhabit, who were most of them always
well inclined to the King.

The Archbishop Filomarino was appointed to meet him, which he did, together
with the Bishop of Avers^ the Lord Caratta: Then he marched toward the Palace
of the Duke of Guise; who togethrr with Pulumbo were absent, which was a mighty
advantage to the business; and after some musket shot the Palace yielded; nor
would the great Cannon which was planted there go off, though fire was put to
it; so that all things seemed to conspire to make this Enterprise happy.

He marched thence to the great Marketplace; and approaching the great Bastion
of Carmine, where Gennaro Arnese was, with three hundred select Soldiers of
the people; he sent him word that it was expedient that the said Torrion or
Bastion should be put into his hands for his Majesty's Service; and if he would
not conform to so just a demand, he left him to consider what an act of
disloyalty it would be: Arnese calling his best thoughts to consultation, held
it a desperate temerity to refuse, considering that at the end he might be
constrained to do it; so he came forth, and presented the Keys to his Highness,
prostrating his person before him: Thereupon Don John employed Fru Paolo
Venati, a Knight of Malta, a Commander of renowned valor, and of high esteem
among the people, to let them know, That it was his pleasure to grant them an
Indulto or general Pardon, with an aboli ion of the Gabels, and of all faults,
provided they did presently range themselves to their wonted allegiance.
Hereupon the people remained satisfied; but they desired to have that grace
declared unto them by Don John of Austria himself, being so great a Prince of
the Imperial House of Austria; So when he came out of the Church the people
desired His Highness that he would be pleased to pronounce with his own mouth
what he promised by the Cavalier of Malta; whereupon he uttered aloud what the
said Cavalier had said before, assuring them besides of further demonstrations
of Grace srom his Father: So that huge crowd of people gave such an applause
that might have rent the Air as far as the middle Region.

This heroic Enterprise took effect almost without any effusion of blood at
all; only two Spanish Captains perished, and one of the peoples, with some few
wounded; all which may be imputed to a special providence of God in the first
place, and then to the prowess of a young General, and prudence of a grave
Viceroy; And lastly, to the absence of the Duke of Guise, who was much taxed of
inadvisedness to leave the City, as matters then stood.

The next morning betimes the Duke of Tursis was seen walking among the people
in the Marketplace, with his Nephew the Prince of Avella, with their naked
swords in hand, among a great confluence of people, who cried out, Viva Spagna,
viva ill Duca de Tursis; So all the Bells rang out a Gloria, and every one was
as it were wild with gladness.

That afternoon there were four hundred Spaniards put into the Torrion of
Carmine for a Garrison, where there were eighteen pieces of great Ordnance;
among them there were forty Italians: So all the rest of the posts of the City
were secured, together with Chaia. All other places in the Country rendered
themselves upon discretion, when they understood this not able news, and
particularly Aversa, notwithstanding that Palumbo, a great stickler for the
people, and in singular esteem, was there with considerable Forces.

The next day the noise was, that the Duke of Guise, hearing this dreadful
news, did cast about how he might return to Rome with all his Camerades; which
being come to the knowledge of Don Pompeo Tuttavilla, he went in quest of him;
and being come to the Country of Mosone, a little dist^nt from the City of
Capua, he met him; and although the Duke made notable resistance, yet at last
he was forced to yield himself, and so he was clapped up in the Castle of Capua,
and removed thence to Garta. The Collateral Council sat upon him, and
condemned him to die; but Don John prevented that, saying, It was more fitting
to send him Prisoner to Spain.

Pastina who would not conform nor accept those gracious conditions from Don
John, got two Feluca's, and with all his own and the plundered Goods he had from
diverse, sailed for Ligorno.

All those monstrous tumults of Naples being now quashed, the Conde d'Ognate
sent for the Camp-master Scipio Latro, Brother to the Lord Regent Latro, who by
the Marchioness of Vasto was appointed Governor of the Isle of Istria, the
Viceroy gave him a Patent to that purpose, and besides made him Camp-master
General in the said Isle; he told him besides that he had received advice how a
great French Armada made her approach; therefore it was fitting he should
prepare strength accordingly to resist; The Camp-master answered him, that at
that very instant he would go, and find out the said French; so the Viceroy
commending his promptitude presented him with a Pursefull of Pistols. He had no
sooner set foot upon the Isle of Istria but the French Fleet appeared; which
drawing toward the City of Naples did stay a while before the House of the
said Camp-master General at Ciattamone, in form of a Half Moon: The Castle
Dellovo discharged some Pieces at them, but the Bullets could not reach.
Toward night the French went to Pusilipo, the next day they attempted to
dis-imbarque at Istria, but they were hindered; so understanding how matters had
passed at Naples, when they had roved up and down those Seas some days, and
taken some few Tartana's, they set sail for Porto Longone.

A little after this when things were pretty well etled, the Viceroy commanded
Gennaro Arnesel to be shut up in prison, who had been Captain General of the
people a long time, during the greatest brunt of the Commotion; The pretense
was that he was thought to have intelligence with that French Fleet,
notwitstanding that his Highness had comprehended him before in the general
pardon, and conferred an Office upon him of five thousand Ducates per annum,
promising him besides the Cross of Santiago: the proofs were such against him
that he was condemned to die; so there was a Scaffold erected before the
Castle, where he received an honorable Death by having his Head severed from
his body.

There were also three Mariners, who had brought the Duke of Guise to Naples,
executed that day; There were diverse other condemned to suffer death; but his
Highness, Don John of Austria, going one day to the great Marketplace where
there were Gibbets set up to execute a great many more, the women did importune
him with their Petitions; whereupon he referring them to the Castle, the
Gibbets were all taken down, and the condemned persons sent to serve in the
Galleys.

The next day Don John of Austria imbarquing himself in a huge Fleet of
Galleons and Galleys, hois'd sail for Sicily, having been so fortunate as to
repress those prodigious uproars, and leave Naples settled in a perfect peace.

Sic furor evanuit tenues popularis in auras. The Flema Spagnuola, the
staidness, longanimity, and constancy of the Spaniard (for which he is so much
cried up) was not discerned more in any of their proceedings elsewhere, then by
their carriage in suffering a good while, and afterward by suppressing these
Commotions.

Moreover, the Conde d'Ognate, the new Viceroy, like a new Broom, swept all
clean, and carried himself with that dexterity and diligence, that by degrees
he found out the chiefest Fomentors, whereof he has dispatched away diverse to
the other world; and the Inquisition is not yet ended, but some suffer daily,
directly, or collaterally; And touching the Taxes or Gabels, he has found out
other ways to raise Sums equivalent unto them for the service of the King his
Master.

FINIS.

