Heic tutus obumbrer


(...)

THE PARLEY OF BEASTS; OR MORPHANDRA Queen of the ENCHANTED ISLAND:

Wherein Men were found, who being transmuted to Beasts, though proffered to be
dis-inchanted, and to become Men again; yet, in regard of the crying sins, and
rebellious humors of the Times, they prefer the Life of a Brute Animal before
That of a Rational Creture:

Which Fancy consists of various Philosophical Discourses, both Moral,
Metaphysicall, Historical, and Natural, touching the Declinings of the World,
and late Depravation of Human Nature;

With Reflexes upon the present State of most Countries in Christendom.

Divided into a XI Sections.

By JAM HOWELL Esquire

Senesco, non Segnesco. The First TOME.

London, Printed by W. Wilson for William Palmer, at the Palm Tree in
Fleet Street near St. Dunstan's Church, 1660.

MORPHANDRA, OR QUEEN OF THE Enchanted Island.
m I am Morphandra can turn Man to Brute,
And Brutes to Human Nature re-transmute.
p And I Pererius whom the gods did send
This Rare Admired Princess to attend.
In formas mutata novas men's dicere gestit
Corpora, and in primas iterum transversa Figuras,
Dii faveant coeptis --

The Scope and Substance of the ensuing SECTIONS.
PErerius, a wandering Prince, after many traverses of Fortune, and Tempests in
his long Pererrations at Sea, arrived at a strange Northwest Island, where there
reigned a Queen called Morphandra, descended of the Highborn Circe, daughter
of Sol, who (according to the Etymology of her name) had power to transmute and
metamorphose Men to Beasts; Pererius having obtained leave of her to see and
speak with diverse of them, viz, an Otter, an Ass, an Ape, a Hind, a Mule, a
Fox, a Boar, a Wolf, a Goat, a Soland-Goose, a Hive of Bees, etc. Morphandra
infusing the Faculty both of Reason and Ratiocination into Them during that
intervall of time; As also full and full and free election to resume the shapes
of Men, and so return unto their own Countries and Callings: Pererius attempted
to persuade them thereunto, but in regard of the rebellious Humors, the horrid
Sacriledges, the newfangled Opinions, and gingling Extravagances that Human
brains are subject unto, specially this last doting and vertiginous Age of the
World, with the nomberles Indispositions whereunto the Bodies of Men as well as
their Brains are exposed, They did choose rather to continu still in the state
and species of Brute Animals, than become Rational Cretures again: At last
Prince Pererius mingling speech with a Hive of Bees, who had bin formerly a
Monastery of Nuns, He prevailed so far by his melting persuasions, and high
discourse of the prerogatives and excellencies of the Human Soul, that He
induced Them to take on their first Natures again, and so return to their
Cloisters; These Discourses are divided into eleven Sections, every Section
carrying with it a new Fancy and Matter.

Touching the Etymologies of the feigned Words throughout the whole Work,
appropriated to the quality of every Country, Climat, and Peeple, the Roots of
them must be fetched from the Greek Tongue.

He is the true Author who creates a Fancy.

To the Great Ornament of her Sex, both for Choice Intellectualls, and High
Moral Virtues, The right Honorable, and excellent Lady, My Lady MARIE de la
FONTAINE.
MADAME,
THis Fancy bearing in the Front the name of a Rare Female, I thought it might
well stand with the rules of Congruity to make the Dedication correspond with
the Title; And after many revolutions of Thoughts who should be most proper for
my design, the contemplation of your Honor did cast such strong influences
upon Them, that at last They fixed there; Nor will any Discerning Reder
question my judgment herein, your Ladyship being so able and fit (as I have the
honor to know by experience) to receive this Admired Queen, and give her a
suitable entertainment; Therefore, Madame, if you please to admit Morphandra
into your Closet, I believe she will afford you several sorts of
divertisements, And she happily may work sometimes a Metamorphosis in your Self,
for she can transmute Passions as well as Persons, she can turn Melancholy to
Mirth, and Pensivenes to Pleasure; For as it is in the French (of which Language
you are so great a Mistress) Les Morts font revivre les Vivants, The Dead
enliven the Living, whereby is meant; that Books, though the Authors thereof be
dead and rotten many Ages before, can beget new spirits in the living Reder.

Now, such is the state of Mankind, that the foresaid Passions will have their
interchangable turns, they will follow one another as duly as Night succeeds
Day in any Human Creture, be the Humors thereof never so equally poised; It is
denied to Man to be always at Home within himself, and it will be so to the
world's end as long as He is composed of the four Elements, and as long as the
Natural humors within Him sympathize with the said Elements, who are in
restles mutation and motion among themselfs for mastery, which made one break
out into this excess of speech, that if the four Humors were balanced aright
in the human body, he would live easily many thousands of years upon earth; Now,
that person may be said to be the wisest among mortals who can rule and
control those Humors, It being a Principle among the Philosophers, That as the
conduct of the Passions (which arise from the Humors) is the greatest prudence,
so the conquest of them is the gretest pro^^^sse, when they grow rebelli^us:
The ensuing Work has diverse glances upon this subject, and variety of things
besides, for every Section affords a new Fancy and Matter.

It remains now, Madame, that I should humbly desire, your Honor would please to
interpret this Deditory Address as a small argument of my great Acknowledgment
of your so many noble Civilities, for which I stand so truly obliged; And this
Acknowledgment standing upon so public a Record, the Ages to come as well as
the present will testify, how much I am and was,

My highly Honored Lady, Your most humble and devoted Servant, JAM HOWELL.

To the Severer sort OF REDERS.
Some of the Ancient Sages, who were ranked among the Philosophers of the Upper
House, had a Speculation, That the World was but one huge Animal or Living
Creture, composed of innumerable members and parts, some Homogeneous or similar,
others Heterogeneous or dissimilar; And in order to that they held, That God
Almighty was the Great Soul which did inform and actuat the whole Bulk with
motion and life, with virtue and vigor, for every part to perform its peculiar
function toward the preservation of the Whole: According to this Doctrine an
Argument may be drawn by way of Induction, That if the parts begin to impair,
the Whole must be in a declining condition; It has been a Truth which has
passed from all times without control, that Mankind is one of the prime parts
of the Universe and Paramount of the Sublunary World, which is demonstrable by
that Dominion which was given him over all his fellow-Cretures in Air, Water,
or Earth; He can make the towering Eagle stoop to his Lure from the middle
Region; He can make the vast Leviathan, though a hundred times bigger than
himself, to flounce from the deep to do him homage on the Shore; He can make
the Elephant, though forty times stronger than himself, to draw up his Ships on
the Carine, and do other drudgeries; This appears also out of that Awe, which
by a kind of natural instinct all other Animals use to show Him; Insomuch that
trial has been made, how if a Man should go naked and with a confidence
through the Arabian Deserts, where the gretest concours of wild Beasts uses to
be, there is none will assault him, but in a gazing and awful kind of posture
they will keep their distance: Now, if Man, who is so considerable a part of
the world, does decay in his Species, it is a shrewd symptom that the Whole is
en decadence, in a declining state; Now, that Man does impair as well in his
Intellectualls and the Faculties of his Soul, as in the motions and affections
of his heart, this present Age can afford more pregnant proofs than most of the
Ages before; For touching the First, What fond futilous new Opinions have bin
hatched of late times, both in Divinity and in the Idaeas of holy things, as
well as in all other Sciences, specially in the Art of Policy, wherein such poor
Sciolists are crept up, that would turn ancient Monarchies into new popular
Commonwealths, and so set a Hydra's head upon an old Lion's neck, or make a
Child's shoo to fit a Giant's foot.

Touching the motions of the Heart, there is nothing of that love and offices of
Humanity which were used to be, not only among private persons and neighbors,
but that Allegiance and Love which Subjects were used to show toward their
lawful Prince decaies more and more, whereof there have been strange examples
of late years; In Aethiopia, a large ancient Empire, the common peeple did rise
up with a petty Companion against their Sovereign, and killed him with his two
Sons in open field; In Constantinople, two Gran Signors were thrust out of the
world by their own Slaves, yet they went not to that height of Impudence as to
arraign Them before a Bar of Justice; The Swed has quite revolted from the
Pole, the Portugues from the Spaniard, and so Naples would have done; What a
huge Army did the Basha of Aleppo raise lately? And in the Kingdom of Morocco a
mean Fellow, under the seeming show of Sanctity, what a crew of riff-raff stuff
did he drag after him against his lawful King? But touching these Northwest
Islands, they have out-gon all the rest: These metamorphos'd Animals do point at
all these, and other degenerations of the Human Creture: Nor is it the first
time that Beasts did speak, for we read of one in the Sacred Code who spoke;
and besides, Solomon sends in to some of Them for Instruction: The Phrygian
Fabler was one of the first who taught them their Abcee, then Anian, Barlandus,
and others taught Them Their Primer, and the two ingenious Florentines, Poggius
and Gelli may be said to have taught Them their Grammar: But these transmuted
Beasts speak in a louder Dialect, who having tried both Natures, they tell the
Human Creture his own, and how he grows daily from bad to worse, according to
the Prophetical Lyric Poet, Aetas Parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem Vitiosiorem.


Made English thus. Our Fathers who worse than our Gransires were
Got Us worse than Themselfs; And We, I fear,
Will get worse than Them both: Such a sad curse
Hangs on Mankind to grow from Bad to Worse.


(...);
(...);
Poema Tempestivum.
TRees spoke before, now the same strength of Art
Makes Beasts to cunn the Alphabet by heart,
And cut their Breaths to sounds Articulat,
Discoursive congruous accents to prolate,
For Speech is Breath, breath Air let in and out,
But it is the Mind that brings the work about;
Such a rare Charter the World's Architect
Vouchsafed to give the Human Intellect
To create Words, for it is Mankind alone
Can Language frame, and syllabize the Tone.
But here Beasts speak, they moan, chide, and complain,
And at the Bar of Justice Men arraign;
Such are our crying sins, that Beasts resent
Our miseries, and wretched case lament:
Nor let it seem a wonder, because now
Wonders and Monsters so familiar grow,
This is an Age of Wonders, every Clime
Abounds with Prodigies, There is no Crime,
Not a notorious Villainy or Fact,
No foul Infandous Thing, or ugly Act
That ever Adam's sons did perpetrate,
But we have flagrant Instances of late.
For Sacrilege, and horrid Blasphemies,
Base Lies, created Fears, and Perjuries,
For Scripture-pride, Extorsion, Avarice,
(The root of all our Ills, and leading Vice)
For public Fraud, false Lights, and fatuous Fires,
Fanatic Fancies clad in Faith's attire;
For Murder, and the crying sin of Blood,
The like but One was never since the Flood.
In sum, We may for these and thousands more
Vye Villainies with any Age before;
Which shows the World is Hecticall, and near
Its Gran and Fatal Climacteric year;
The whole Creation mourns, and does deplore
The ruthful state of Human kind; Therefore
If Men can not be warned when Men do Teach,
Then let them hearken here what Beasts do Preach.
In Formas mutata novas Men's dicere gestit
Corpora, and in primas iterum transversa Figuras.
Dii faveant coeptis --

J.H.

THE CONTENTS Of the several SECTIONS.
SECT. I
CONSISTS of diverse Interlocutions 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and an Otter,
who had bin first an Amstelian Mariner, and being proffered to be retransmuted
to his first nature by Morphandra, and to be transported by Pererius to his own
Country, yet he would hearken to neither, alleging the strange Chimeras, and
extravagant Opinions which Human Brains have been subject unto in this latter
Age of the World, etc.

SECT. II
Contains an Interlocutory Discourse 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and an Ass,
who had bin once an Artonian Peasan, wherein there are some glances upon the
Country it self, and upon the present Government thereof; But though Prince
Pererius used all the persuasions he could, and re-inforc'd Argument upon
Argument to induce him to reassume Human shape, and so return to his Country,
Calling, and Kindred, yet the Ass utterly refused it, and his Resons why, etc.

SECT. III
Consists of a Dialog 'tiwxt Morphandra, Pererius, and an Ape, who had bin once
a Preachman in Gheriona, who having bin carried away with every wind of
Doctrine, and folling any fanatic newfangled Opinion, was transmuted to that
Mimicall shape; In which Dialog there is an account given of the sad case and
confusion wherein Gheriona is involved at present.

SECT. IV
A Colloquy 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Hind, who had bin once one of
the gretest Beauties in Marcopolis, and for some youthful levities and wildnes
was transmuted to that shape; In this Section there are various Discourses of
the state and nature of Women pro and con, etc.

SECT. V.
Discourses 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Mule, who in his Manhood had bin
a Doctor of Physic in Tumontia, whom for some Quacking tricks he had played, and
for some other Resons, Morphandra metamorphos'd into a Mule; In this Section
there be discourses of the Art of Physic, of the various complexions of Mankind,
and of the nomberles diseases of body, and distempers of mind that are incident
to the Human Creture, etc.

SECT. VI
Consists of Interchangeable Discourses 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Fox,
who had bin a Saturnian born, whom for his cunning dealings and Mountebankish
wily tricks, she transformed from a Merchant to that Species; This Section
treats of diverse things, and particularly how the Art of true Policy is
degenerated, and what poor Sciolists or Smatterers therein are cried up of late
years, etc.

SECT. VII.
A Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Boar, wherein there are various
Discourses, and particularly of the rare Sympatheticall Powder that is lately
found out, which works sudden and certain Cures without any topicall
applications of Medicines to the part affected, etc.

SECT. VIII.
A Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Wolf, who had bin a Cuprinian
Soldier, whom for his Plundrings, Rapines, and Spoils she transfigur'd to that
shape, etc.

SECT. IX.
A discourse 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Goat, consisting of many
speculations both Natural and Metaphysicall, with other Criticisms, etc.

SECT. X.
A Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Soland-Goose, a Carboncian born,
who was transmuted to that shape for his foolishnes in rebelling against his
own Conterranean King, and so juggling himself into a Slavery from that
Free-Government he was formerly under, etc.

SECT. XI
Consists of a Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Hive of Bees, who had
bin once a Monastery of Nuns, and were transmuted to those small Insects,
because that after a years Probation, and their own praevious free Election,
they murmured at that Reclus'd Claustrall life, and wished Themselfs
uncloyster'd again; In this Section there be diverse Discourses of the
Immortality and high prerogatives of the Human Soul, as also of the Hevenly
Hierarchy, and Joys Eternal, etc.

Bibliopola Lectori.
If you will open this Work with ease,
You must from Greece go fetch your Keys.
M
P
F Barlowe (...)

R Gaywood fecit



A KEY To enter more easily into the Sense of MORPHANDRA, OR, The Parley of
Beasts
THe Otter represents a Dutch Skipper, or Mariner. The Ass represents a French
peasan. The Ape represents an English Preachman. The Mule represents a Spanish
Doctor of Physic. The Fox represents a Genoa or an Italian Merchant. The Boar
represents a German Count. The Wolf represents a Swedish Captain, or
Freebotter. The Goat represents the Old Britain, or Inhabitant of Wales. The
Soland Goose represents a Scotchman. The Hind represents a Venetian Courtisan.
The Hive of Bees represents a Monastery of Nuns.
An Etymologicall Derivation of some Words and Anagrams in the Parley of Beasts,
according to the ALPHABET.
A
AEtonia, the Eagles Country, represents High Germany, of (...) aquila.
Alpiana represents Savoy, being a Country indented among the Alps. Artonia,
the Country of Bread and Wine, represents France, of (...) panis and (...)
vinum.
C
Carboncia, the Coale-Countrey, represents Scotland. Cuprinia, the
Copper-Countrey, represents Swethland. The Cinqfoyl Portugal Cardinal Mazarine,
p. 21 The Coppices represents the common Peeple. Cerano, the Anagram of Nocera,
an ancient town in Italy.
D
Diogenes, p. 56 Sir Kenelm Digby, 148 Dr. Harvey, 141
G
Gheriona, the Country of Wool, represents England, of (...) terra and (...)
lana.
H
Hydraulia, the Country of Waters, represents Holland, with the Confederate
Provinces, of (...) Aqua, and (...) populus. Hebrinia, Ireland, being Hibernia,
anagrammatiz'd. The City of Hereford, p. 122 The Hollanders are meant, P. 72
L
Laroni, the D. of Lorrain. London Prentices, p 44.
M
Marcopolis, the City of S. Mark, represents Venice of (...) civitas and (...).
Morphandra, a Queen that can transmute Men into Beasts, of (...) formo and
(...) hominem.
N
Nopolia, Polonia, anagrammatiz'd.
O
Orosia, a Mountainous Country, represents Wales, of (...) Mons. Oxford and
Cambridge, p. 38
P
Pererius, a wandering Prince of pererrando. Polyhaima, the City of Blood,
represents London, of (...) civitas and (...) sanguis. The Phrygian King,
Mydas. The Phrygian Fabler, Aesop. The late K. of Engl. p. 35 The present K.
Chapter p. 39
Q
The Queen of Sweden, p. 114 Queen Elizabeth, p. 57
R
Rinarchus, the Palsgrave of the Rhine, of (...), princeps, etc. Rugilia, the
State of Genoa, the Anagram of Liguria, the ancient appellation of that
Territory. Rainsborough, and Admiral Dean, 40 Roundheads variously tormented
in Hell, ibid. Rovena, the City of Verona in Lombardy, anagrammatiz'd.
S
Saturnia represents Italy, Cilisia, Sicilia, ana grammatiz'd. The Standels
represent the Nobles and Gentry. Selenians, or Half Moon men, represent the
Turks; of (...), Luna.
T
Tumontia, a Country swelling with huge Hills, represents Spain Tomanto
Empire, the Dominions of the Great Turk; Tomanto being Ottoman, anagrammatiz'd.
Tarragon, Catalunia in Spain, the ancientest town whereof is Tarragona.
Therlu, the Anagram of Luther. Therologia, the language of Beasts; of (...),
fera; and (...), sermo.
V
Volganians, the Moscovits, of the huge River Volga.
W
The West Indies, p. 70
Z
Zundanians, the Peeple of Denmark.
(...).
The First Section.
Consisting of diverse Interlocutions 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and an Otter,
who had been first an Amstelian Mariner, and being proffered to be transmuted
to his first nature by Morphandra, and to be transported by Pererius to his own
Country, yet he would hearken to neither, alleging the strange Chimeraes, and
extravagant Opinions which Human brains have been subject unto, in this latter
Age of the World, etc.
Pererius, Morphandra, an Otter. Pererius. MAy those stars be ever propitious
which guided my course to this coast! may those Winds be ever prosperous which
filled my sayls, any blew me to this rare Island, this Theater of Wonders! May
this day be ever held Festival, and bear one of the chiefest Rubriques in the
Almanac of Time, that makes me so happy with the sight of Morphandra, the
divine Morphandra! And truly so, being descended in so direct a line from the
highborn Circe, daughter of Sol, the admired Queen Morphandra! who uses to
make Nature her self not only succumbent and passive to her desires, but
actually subservient and pliable to her Transmutations and Changes.


Morphandra. Prince Pererius (for so I understand your quality and appellation
to be); Touching the first part of your speech, which reflects upon this place,
we shall endeavor to make it good by the hospitality and entertainment we shall
command to be given You and your Train, as also by the rare Objects which you
shall see: But as for the second part of your speech, which relates to my self,
and to the power of Transmutations; I must tell you, that what I act this way,
is by a special dispensation from above, for the punishment of Humane vice in
an analogical or sympathetic way, according to the quality thereof, and the
humors of the men: I say, it is by the permission and Fiat of the Almighty, the
great God of Nature, that I do operat, not by any prestigious charms, or
confederacy with Cacodaemons; not by fascinations or philtres, by spells or
sorceries, as the shallow-pated common people imagine I do, and so traduce me
of Witchcraft, and Negromancy; yet, I confess, it is by way of Magic I act; for
Magic was the first Philosophy among those acute Nations which are nearest the
rising Sun, so that Magus or Magitian signified nothing else but a Wiseman,
which afterward came to be traduced, and taken in an ill sense; As it has
been the fate of Tyrant, Sophister, and other words besides, to incur the
same destiny, and I pray the same destiny may not befall the word Parliament.


Pererius. Most excellent Queen, now that my Stars have made me so fortunat,
as to conduct me hither, let it not be held to great a presumption, if for the
enriching of my knowledge, and satisfying my curiosity, I humbly desire to see
some of those Human Cretures that you have anthropomorphos'd, and transformed
to brute Animals.


Morphandra. I shall willingly comply with your curiosity and desire in this
kind; for you shall not only be brought to the sight of them, but you shall
mingle speech with them, and interrogat what you shall think fitting concerning
their present condition.


Pererius. But, Madam, how can that be? how can I expect that they should be
capable of what I speak, and consequently What answers or replies shall I hope
to receive from them, while they continue in the shapes of brute cretures?


Morphandra. Let that be your least care; for during that intervall of time, I
shall re-infuse into them the faculty both of Reason and Ratiocination, whereby
you may confer and discourse freely with them by interlocutions; Nor only so,
but for a further argument of the great esteem I have of you Prince Pererius,
and for the heightning of your welcome to my Court, as also that you may make
some real returns of your voyage hither, if you can induce and fairly persuade
any of them to reassume the shapes of Human cretures, and to be invested again
in their former condition, I shall give my free and full assent thereunto; nay,
to oblige you yet further, I shall give way that you take them a shipboard with
you, and transport them to their own Country, or whither you please besides;
Provided that it be a spontaneous act, and that you have their voluntary
election to this effect; for the universal Law tells us, that Volenti non fit
injuria, An unforced will cannot be wronged.


Pererius. Most admired Princess, you engage me beyond all measure or means of
retaliation, beyond all degrees of gratitude, and methinks by these high
civilities you have wrought a sudden kind of transformation in me, for I find
my self all transformed to admiration, to a thing of wonder, by these
unparalled favors. All that I can say for the present is, that, what air
soever I breath; under what climat soever blessed Heavens shall shed their
influences upon me, I shall blazon forth your nobleness for such transcendent
favors all the world over.


Morphandra. We use not such Complements under this Meridian, such a distance
does not use to be 'twixt the Heart and the Tongue; they are nearer Relatives
here. But, before you go to exchange words with these Animals, take this
Advertisement beforehand, that there are no wild or ferocious devouring
cretures within the Circumference of this I Will; they live all in a gentle and
general community, in an innocuous freedom, and sociableness: The Panther,
Bear, and Tiger, put off their belluine fierce nature here; the Lamb will play
with the Lion without any apprehensions of fear; the Heart fears not the Hound,
nor the Hare the Greyhound, nor the Bore the Lime-hound; the silly Sheep fear
not the Wolf or the Butcher's knife; nor Fish nor Fowl fear here the Dragnet or
Tramell: but all Animals, both of Air, Earth, and Water, live in an innocent
security; the reason being, that we neither kill, much less feed upon any
Creture here that has blood, and a sensitive life, but upon fruits, pulse,
roots, rice, with other nourishing and manducable things, that come forth
gently, by the general benignity of indulgent Nature, from the bowels of our
common Mother the Earth; And though we make Butter sometimes our aliment, we
abhor Cheese, because the cawle of a sensitive killed creture served for the
Rennet.


Pererius. Oh blissful Region! Truly Madam, I am of opinion, that this Island is
a part, or some promontory of Paradise it self before Adam's fall, which, being
slented off, and so got loose, was transported and fixed here; at least, there
are some grains of that metal which went to the composition of the Golden Age
of the world still remaining here unconsumed.


Morphandra. Well, that I may acquit my self of the promise I made unto you,
Prince Pererius, let us fetch a walk in those flowery fields toward the banks
of that River, to take in the freshness of the air, with the fragancy of those
Vegetals: And now, in a favorable conjuncture of time, I spy a metamorphosed
Creture among those seggs, fit for your purpose; It is an Otter, whom I
remember to have transmuted from a Mariner or Seaman, for his deboshments here;
and I observe, there are no people so given to excesses as Seamen when they come
ashore; which yet may be somewhat excused, for it is to recompense the hardships
they endured at Sea: Nor was it an improper change for me to metamorphos the
Hydraulian Mariner to that shape; for as the Otter is a kind of Amphibious
creture, living partly by water, and partly by land, so a Mariner, Navigator,
or Fisherman, uses to do: but there was another reason which induced me to this
transmutation, for it related to the quality of the Country whence he sprung,
which is so inlayed, and every where so intercutt, and indented with the Sea,
or fresh navigable Rivers, that one cannot tell what to call it, either water
or land; besides, the Inhabitants dwell so low, that they lie lower than the
Sea in some places. And now you may make your approaches, and parley with him
accordingly, while I walk up the River to visit my Nymphs.


Pererius. Otter, Otter! I conjure thee, as thou wast once a Man, let me
interchange some words with thee, and I may chance bring thee some news from thy
Country, and Kindred.


Otter. How is this? I not only hear, but I understand the voice of a Man,
oimee! I am afraid that Morphandra has a purpose to re-transform me, and make
me put on human shape again: Well, Sir, What Is your will with me?


Pererius. Let it not give any offense, if I desire to know What Countreyman
you were, when you were a Rational Creture?


Otter. I came first into the World in Hydraulia, not far from Amstena, and
was a Mariner by my Profession.


Pererius. Well, the most gracious Queen Morphandra has been pleased to
promise me the favor, as to turn you into Man again, if you have a mind to it;
and, from that grovelling quadrupedal shape, to make you an erect, and a
rational Creture once again.


Otter. Sir, you bid me to my loss, for I live far more to my contentment in
this species, wherein my heart and eyes are horizontal, than when I was in an
upright shape.


Pererius. Consult better with your thoughts, for Morphandra has not only
promised to re-convert you to Man, but also she has given me leave and liberty
to carry you aboard of me, and transport you to your Country again; And I have
a tite lusty Vessel in the Road, wherein you shall be accommodated with a
Cabin to your contentment, and all things necessary.


Otter. These civilities might happily deserve thanks from an other, but not from
me, in regard you proffer to reduce me from better to worse; for if Experience
be the touchstone of Truth, I find far more quietude and contentation in this
figure of body, than I did formerly; therefore with this shape, I have put on
also a resolution never to turn Man or Mariner again.


Pererius. I extremely wonder at this blindness, and unnatural obstinacy of
yours: but now that Queen Morphandra has, during this time of discourse betwixt
us, re-indowed you with the faculty of Reason and speech, I pray impart unto me
the cause of your strange aversion thus, to become Man again.


Otter. Truly, Sir, though Man does vaunt, and cry up himself, to be the
Epitome and Lord Paramount among all sublunary Cretures, though he vainly
entitle himself, the Microcosm, yet I hold him to be the most miserable of all
others; Go to his prime faculty, Reason, which, as he says, is the specifical
difference that distinguishes him from us, I have found, that it fills his
brain full of distraction, of extravagant opinions, and whimseys, of pining
griefs, panting doubts, and pannick fears, of violent fancies and imaginations,
which oftentimes turn to phrensies; it tortures him with vexation and
inquietude of spirit, insomuch, that some of the profoundest Philosophers, as I
have heard, affirmed, that the Rational Soul was given to Man for his
Self-punishment and Martyrdom; he may be said to be his own Tormentor, and the
greatest Tyrant to himself; nay, these cruciatory passions do operat sometimes
with such a violence, that they drive him to despair, and oftentimes to murder
and destroy himself, before Nature has exspird her due course in him, all
which, we, that are guided only by sense, are not subject unto; We only look
upon the present object before our eyes, and take no other care but for
shelter, and food, and to please our appetit only.


Pererius. It Is true, that all these turbulences, and perplexities of spirit
proceed from the Rational faculty; but, in compensation thereof, we have by
this Faculty the prerogative to know our Creator, to contemplat his works, and
the fair fabrique of the World; by this, we have a dominion and Empire over all
other Elementary Cretures, both of Air, Earth, and Water; by the reach of this,
Man with his crampons and harping-irons can draw ashore the great Leviathan; He
can make the Dromedary and Camel to kneel down, and take up his burden; He can
make the fierce Bull to endure his yoke; He can bring down the Vulture from his
nest; by this he can ride upon the back of the vast Ocean, and with his winged
Coursers ride post from one Pole to the other, as you know well by your own
Profession, when you were Man and Mariner.


Otter. Yet these advantages com short, in my judgment, to countervail those
calamities that are incident to the Rational Creture, which makes him come
puling, crying, and sometimes weeping into the world, as foreteling his future
miseries. But now that I have partly displayed the discomposures and vexations
of his mind, I will give a touch of those infirmities that his Body is subject
unto, which is no other than a Magazin of malignant humors; a hull, wherein is
stowed a cargazon of numberless diseases, of putrid and ugly corruptions,
insomuch that, as, in his life time, whiles he sleeps in the bosom of his
causes within the Womb, there is no Creture lies nearer the excrementitious
parts, so there is none whose excrements are more faetid, and stinking; the
fewmets of a Deer, the lesses of a Fox, the crotells of a Hare, the dung of a
Horse, and the spraints that I use to void backward, are nothing so foetid;
which may be the cause why, after Man's death, there is no carcass so ghastly and
noisome as his, so that Toads and Serpents engender often in his scull; nor is
his cadaver good for any thing when life is gone. It Is true, Mummy may be made
of it, but it must be don by embalment, and great expense of Spices. But many
things in our carcases after death, serve for diverse uses, as particularly in
mine; my Liver, reduced to powder, is good against the Flix and Cholic; my
Stones or testicles against the Palsy; and my Skin is of such value, that the
fairest Ladies will be glad to wear it, etc.


Pererius. It Is a great truth what you speak of Human bodies, but all this
comes accidentally; it proceeds from variety of viands, esculents, and
beverages, not from the primitive plastic virtue, and ordinance of nature:
Moreover, that which makes them so subject to putrefaction, is, because they
abound in heat and humidity more than other bodies, which oftentimes makes some
parts of the Compositum rott, before life and motion leaves them. But let not
these thoughts avert you from a return to your first Being, whereby, when this
transitory life is ended, you may be made capable to live in the Land of
Eternity; whereas all brute Animals, whose Souls soar no higher than the sense,
are born to have a being only in this World: Therefore take on a manly
resolution to be redintegrated into your first Principles, and so return to
your own Country, and Kindred, to go on still in your Calling, which is a useful
and thriving Profession, in the practice whereof you may see the Wonders of the
Deep, and thereby have opportunity more often to invoke your Creator, than in any
other Trade.


Otter. I cannot deny, but the common saying is, that He who cannot pray, must
go to Church at Sea; yet I have often known, and I have tried it in my self,
that a Mariner in a storm is a Saint, but when the storm is over he is a
Mariner again; witness He, who in a dangerous tempest made a Vow to offer a
Wax-taper as big as his Mainmast unto Saint Nicolas, if he would preserve him
from shipwreck; but being com safe ashore, a Rush-candle did serve the turn; so
that, nautical piety is of no longer duration than the danger.


Pererius. Without question, to be a Mariner or Navigator, as it is a necessary
and noble Vocation, so it affords more frequent opportunities to improve a
Man's devotion to Heven, if one makes right use of it; which cannot be don more
properly, than by comparing the frail Vessel wherein he sayls to his own Body;
If he contemplat, within the theater of his thoughts, that the Sea whereon he
tumbles, is the World; waves and surges are his passions; anger, choler, and
discontentments, are the storms and tempests; his body is the bulk or hull of
the ship, his neck is the stemm, the keel is his back, the planks are his ribs,
the beams his bones, the pintel and gudgeons are his gristles and cartilages,
the several seams of the ship are his arteries, veins, and nerfs, his bowels
are the ballast, his heart the principal hold, his stomach the cook-room, his
teeth the chopping-knives, his lungs the bellows, concoction is the cauldron,
hunger the sauce, his belly the lower deck, his kidneys the close cabbins or
receptacles, his arms and hands the can-hooks, his midriff the bulk-head, his
scull the steerage-room with the round-house, his ears are the two chief
scuttles, his eyes are the pharols, the stowage is his mouth, his lips are the
hatches, his nostrils serve as gratings to let in air, the beak-head is his
chin, his face and forehead the upper deck, Reason is the rudder, the anchor is
resolution, constancy the capstane, prudence the pilot, the prow-misen and
main-masts, are faith, hope, and charity, which last, reaches above the
Firmament: The owner of the ship is God Almighty, and Heven the haven to which
he steers his course, etc. Therefore recollect your self, and think seriously
upon it; shake off this brutish shape, and repair to the bosom of your own dear
Country, and Calling.


Otter. Truly, Sir, to deal freely with you, I am quite out of conceit with,
both: Touching the first; for me to remove hence thither, were to go from a
fair flowery field into a great bogg, or a kind of quagmire, for such a thing my
Country may be called, if you have regard to the quality of the soil, in
comparison of This: It is, for the most part, a foggy cobwebb'd air; so
canopied over, as it were, with thick fuliginous clouds, as if it were but one
great Brew House; they fence out both the Aquatical Creatures from their right
habitations, and the true Prince of the Country from his hereditary
possessions; insomuch, that some do not stick to call them double Usurpers: It
is one of the most infimous and lowest part of the terrestrial Globe; which
made one say, that they were the nearest confederats and neighbors to
Beelzebub. And this may be inferred also out of their natures and disposition:
for openly or covertly, they have blown the bellows of all the Wars (now War
is a fire, struck always in the Devil's tinderbox) that have happened round
about them, ever since their Revolt from Tumontia, and since they invol'd
Artonia, and Gheriona in their quarrel, who first raised them to a Free State;
though I believe they have repented of it since. Add hereunto that some do
doubt, Whether God and Nature did ever design that lump of coagulated Earth for
the Mansion of Mankind; for of it self it produces neither Bread to eat, nor
Stone to build, nor Wool or Silk to cloth him, nor Wood or Cole, or other
combustible stuff, for fuel; but the Inhabitants use to fish for Fire in the
Water, for (fresh) Water in the Air, and for Air out of Foggs; insomuch, that
if ever any Country may be called a Noun Adjective, surely it is that, for it
cannot stand by it self. I remember, while I woar the shape of Man in that dull
Clime, me-thought my blood was like so much Bonny-clabber within my Body, which
I find now to be more quick, spriteful, and hot; though my blood in statu quo
nunc be observed, I confess, to be the coldest of any Quadrupedals. Moreover, I
found that Mammon and Gain was their chiefest God, and Gold their greatest
Idol: but for the public Religion which they profess, they have it but in a
lukewarm degree; there is scarce any heat of holiness, and devotion among most
of them.


Pererius. I find now that you are of a true Brutish Nature, so to beray your
own Nest, and bespatter the native Soil wherein you first received life. It Is
true, there is no Nation that has not their peculiar humors; but touching those
you speak of in your Countrymen, they have many signal Virtues that make a
compensation for them; for they are one of the most industrious race of People
upon Earth; so that the whole Country may be compared to a Hive of Bees, or
Bank of provident Ants: They are the only Men that do Miracles now adays; they
are those, who put boundaries to the raging Ocean, and by rare repercussions
beat back his turgid and overwhelming billows, yet they reserve a power to
command him in, at pleasure; they are those Men, who know the true Mysteries of
Commerce, and how to regular it so, as to bring Trade and Policy to a Science,
and certain Principles. How much are they to be commended for their neatness?
Go to their Ships, they may be said to be as cleanly as a milking-pail; in
their Kitchins, the outside of their Utensils are as bright as the inside;
there is never a room in their house, where so much dust may be found as to draw
the name of Slutt upon it: There is no Country where there are fewer sorts of
indigent and poor people, or where they who are poor are better lodged, and
provided for. It Is true, they are somewhat heavy in motion, and dullish, which
must be imputed to the quality of the Clime; but this dullness is recompensed
with a grave advisedness, and circumspection in their Counsels; with a
constancy, and perseverance afterward, in their Actions. In fine, they are a
peeple who truly understand their own Interest, which may be said to be the
prime Principle of Wisdom, whereby they have fought themselves, from a company
of Fishermen, into a High and Mighty Commonwealth.


Otter. Truly, Sir, it is pity that you had not a better subject to spend your
Oratory upon. Now, Sir, concerning my former Profession, let me tell you, that
to be a Mariner, or Tarpaling, is one of the most servile and slavish condition
of life that can be, it is the most exposed to hardship and hazard; He was no
fool, who made a question, Whether he should number a Seaman 'twixt the Living
or the Dead, being not much above two inches distant from death, viz. the
thickness of a rotten plank: It may be also doubted, Whether he be a Freeman,
or Prisoner, being so cooped up within so narrow a compass all the while.
Touching the hardship and toylsomness of this trade, let me tell you, that to
plow, dig, delve, or thresh, are but exercises of ease, compared to our labor
in distress of wether: How many times, when I went a fishing, did I carry
isicles of frost at my nose, and fingers-ends? How often did I eat Biscuit, so
moldy, that danced up and down with ugly Maggots? How often did I stop my
nostrils while I drunk stinking Beverage? How often did the stench of the Pump
strike me into a swoon? But I thank the Fates, and Queen Morphandra, I am now
in a condition that I need not fear hunger or cold, I have a good warm Coat
about me, that will last me all my life long, without patching or mending;
which kind of fences against the injuries of Time, and tyranny of the Meteors,
indulgent Nature provides for us sensitive Creatures, before we com into the
World: whence may be inferred, that She takes more care for Our preservation
than she does of Mankinds; Beasts, have skins, Fish have scales, Birds have
feathers, but Man comes naked and wawling into the World, and clothes himself
afterward with our spoils: Nor has he any habitation or ready food, provided
him by Nature; whereas other Animals find the Table laid, and the Buttry open
for them as soon as they are born, and come out of the bosom of their Causes;
whence it may be concluded, that they are the nobler Cretures.


Pererius. It is given for granted, that Man comes naked into the World, yet he
has the mastery and command, he has the breaking, daunting, and disposing of
all other Cretures for his own turn, both in Air, Earth, and Water, to cloth
and feed him, according to his free election and pleasure; for all other
elementary Cretures are made for his use, and principally to that end. Now it is
a true Maxim, that the end is more noble than the mediums that serve for that
end, therefore in that point there can no comparison be made between us.


Otter. It is an experimental Truth, that You make use of other Cretures to
array and nourish you, but much labor and toil must be used, before you can
bring them to serve your turn; What a deal of work must precede, ere the Tanner
and Furrier can make our Skins fit for your wear? What huge varieties of labors
must go before, ere Wheat come to be made Bread, and Barley Drink? There must be
ploughing, harrowing, sowing, weeding, reaping, sheafing, stacking, barning,
threshing, winnowing, sacking, grinding, bolting, fermenting, and baking,
before you can get a bit of Bread to keep you from starving: What a deal of
stir must be used, before you can get a Shirt on your back, or a handkercher
to wipe your noses withal? There must be planting, cutting down, hundling,
watring, rippling, braking, wingling, and heckling of Hemp; which laberinth of
labors and fatigues, we sentiant Cretures are free from.


Pererius. It is without controversy true, that Man is born to sundry sorts of
labors, but it is principally to exercise his spirits, and the faculties of the
intellect, and so preserve him from the rust of idleness, which makes the
greatest Princes and Potentates among men to have some manual Trade, wherewith
to pass away some part of their time. But, Otter, let us word away time no
longer; let me know positively, whether you will make use of this singular
favor, now offered you by Morphandra, with my proposal, and advice, to reassume
your former nature, wherein you may so serve and praise your Creator, that may
make you capable of Eternity. In your whole life you cannot meet with so fair
an opportunity; for I have a Ship to transport you, and you shall be well
clothed, and covered, with accommodation of all things else accordingly;
therefore take Time by the Foretop, for he is bald behind, and you cannot take
hold of him.


Otter. You may as soon wash white a Negro, or blanch an Ethiop, as soon as
make me turn Man or Mariner again; therefore you do but beat the Air all this
while by your persuasions; and whereas you speak of Eternity, it may be an
Eternity of torments as well as of bliss, I Will none of that. But one of the
greatest Peeple among Mankind, I mean the Selenians, or half-Moon-men, as also
the Banians, do believe, that we also sensitive Cretures have a better World
provided for us, after we have run out our course here; for we likewise have
Souls in us, and certain expressions that countervail Speech, which is only
understood by the Great God of Nature himself, whom we do not use to offend by
any transgression of Laws, as you do.

But I feel the Sun dart his rays somewhat quick, therefore I will go to refresh
and solace my self in the gentle strems of that River.


(...).
The Second Section:
Containing an Interlocutory Discourse 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and an
Ass, who had bin once an Artorian Peasan; wherein there are some glances upon
the Country it self, and upon the present Government thereof. But though Prince
Pererius used all the persuasions he could, and re-inforc'd Argument upon
Argument, to induce him to reassume Human shape, and so return to his Country,
Kindred, and Calling: Yet the Ass utterly refused it, and his reasons why, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, and an Ass. Pererius. INcomparable Lady, you have
dilated my heart with a great deal of contentment, by admitting me to the sight
of that transmuted Animal I spoke withal last, and that you made him capable
all the while to entertain discourse with me pro and con, in so admirable a
manner.


Morphandra. I have my share of that contentment you speak of: But what
success have you had in your design, of working upon his inclinations to become
Man again, and so return to his Country and Calling?


Pererius. Madame, I have had conference with him of both, but he seems to
undervalue, or rather abhor the one, as much as the other, preferring the
Species, and present state he lives in under your Dominion, to the state and
former essence of a Man. Yet I am confident, that if you please to extend your
favor further toward me, that I may mingle discourse with some other, and put
him in a capacity to hear, understand, and answer me, I am confident, I say,
that I shall prevail with him, to be re-invested in his first Being.


Morphandra. I epsy upon the flank of that hillock an Ass, whom I remember to
have transmuted from an Artonian Peasan to that figure you see him in, whom I
will re-indue with Reason and Ratiocination to hearken unto your persuasions
accordingly: And if you can prevail with him, he shall put on his first Nature
again; But as the power comes from me, so the will must proceed from himself to
work this effect.


Pererius. Madame, you will perform hereby the part of an Angel, for I never
heard of any Ass that ever spoke (unless it were in Fables) but of one, and
that was at the appearance of an Angel, which was by way of true Miracle.


Morphandra. Yet I have been told, that one of your greatest Philosophers
Ammonius Alexandrinus, whose Disciple Origin was, has it upon record, That an
Ass was once an Auditor of Wisdom. But touching that Ass you mentioned
before, I hear, the Lawyers of your Country have something of his nature in
them, for they will not speak unless Angels appear unto them.


Pererius. It Is a great truth, Madam, for our Lawyers toungs are said to be of
an humor, contrary to the Axle-tree of a new Cart, in regard we use to anoint
that, because it may keep no creaking or noise, but the Lawyers toungs must be
anointed, and oil'd with an Unguentum Rubrum, that they may make more noise,
and to have their tongues more glibb.


Morphandra. The more is the foolishness of men discovered in this point, who
sometimes out of a pride, malice, or envy, sometimes out of a mere litigious
humor, use to exhaust their estates, and impoverish themselfs, to enrich
others by this means; As I remember to have heard a facetious passage of a
wealthy Lawyer, who having built a fair Palace of Freestone, with Marble
intermixed, and having invited a knowing friend of his to take a view of the
new house, and observe the symmetry, proportion, and conveniences of the
fabric, He asked his friend at last, what he thought that House was built of?
He answered, I see it is built of good Freestone and Marble, The Lawyer
replied, No, Sir, it is a deceptio visus in you, for this house is made of Asses
heads and Fools sculls, meaning the multitude of Clients he had had. To such
the proverb may sometimes be applied, that as the Ass oftentimes carries gold
on his back, yet feeds on thistles, so many poor Clients carry gold in their
pockets to feed their Lawyers, yet they fare hard themselfs, and are ready to
famish. But to leave off these impertinences, you may please to go on in the
pursuit of your enterprise, to try whether yonder long-ear'd metamorphos'd
Animal will bring your intent home to your aim, and turn Man.


Pererius. I most humbly kiss your hands, and will toward him. Poor stupid
creture, how came thou to be so unhappily transformed, or deformed rather, by
assumption of this shape? For I understand by Queen Morphandra, that thou wa'st
once a Man. How much do I pity thy condition, compared to that which thou
wa'st formerly of.


Ass. Sir, you may reserve your pity for others, in regard I need it not; for
I thank the Fates, and Queen Morphandra, I enjoy my self, and the common
benefits of nature, viz. Air, Earth, and Water, which are the staple
commodities of all sublunary cretures, I say, I enjoy all these more than ever
I did, Fenell excepted, which is my only enemy. It Is true, I was once a Man, an
Artonian born, my profession was both a Vineyard-man, and a Roturer, a poor
Peasan I was, who for all my labor and toil, could hardly gain what could bear
up the two columns of life in me, viz. the Radical moisture and Natural heat,
much less to maintain my wife and family in any vigor.


Pererius. How could that be in so rich and plentiful a country as Artonia is
known to be? where, according to her name, Ceres is said to have her chief
Granary, and Bacchus his prime Cellars; where Neptune has also his principle
Salt Pits, and whence Venus commonly uses to fetch her smocks?


Ass. It Is granted, that Artonia in fecundity and self-sufficiency, yields to
no other Region under the Sun, which makes some call her a Noun substantive,
that can stand by it self; yet it may well be said, that there is is no Country
under the cope of Heaven, where there is less want, and more beggars, or more
people, and fewer men; The reason of the first, to my grief I speak it, is, that
the common stock and wealth of the Country is by Mal-administration so
unequally proportioned, and distributed among the Native Inhabitants thereof;
for the Court and the Clergy suck the greatest part of the fat, whence grew the
Proverb, What the Cheque takes not, the Church takes. I speak not this, because
I repine at any acts of piety toward the holy and decent worship of God
Almighty, and Legacies left by sweet devoted souls. Touching the first, it is
too well known, that the very Tallies, besides the Demeans of the Crown, and
the Customs, amount communibus annis to near upon twenty millions of Crowns,
whereof it is true, that about four millions were remitted in the year 1648. Then
the Gabell of Salt amounts to about seven millions every year, which is looked
unto so narrowly, that a poor Peasan cannot carry a pocket or purse-full of
salt home to his poor wife, but he must be searched. Then there are the
Taillons, Aids, Droits, with diverse other Impositions and Taxes, which though
at first they were pretended to be imposed for the present necessity of the
times, yet Sovereign Princes are known to have the gift of making Temporary
things Eternal in this kind; Nevertheless, if this immense tresure went to
the King's tresure alone, for the common defense and honor of the State, it
would not so much trouble them that pay it; but three parts of four are drunk
up among hungry Officers, whence grew the proverb, that the King's cheese goes
away three parts in parings.

Touching the second, by a late computation that was made, the Clergy has in
annual Revenue a hundred and six millions of Crowns, and no wonder, there being
in that Country, besides Cardinals, and fifteen Archbishops, a hundred and
fifty Suffragan Bishops, and I know not how many fat Abbots, with other
Dignitaries, Monks, and Monasteries without number.

Then comes in the Noblesse, or Gentry, which have all the rest; Insomuch that
betwixt these three, the poor Commoner, who yet makes up the bulk of the
Nation, uses to be grinded as betwixt so many milstones, whence grew this
saying, that the Artonian Peasans are born with Chains: Yet they are the
supporters of all the other three, and whence they have their subsistence;
Insomuch that Artonia may be compared to a stately Palace, born up by
mud-pillars; While the poor toyling peasan melts the hoar frost with the sweat
that trickles down his cheeks, others by good fire-sides drink carowses in the
wine which he plants, while he with his panting breath and anhelation thickens
the air before him, others with Carrolls and wanton musical Catches do attenuat
it.

Concerning the second point I spoke of, viz. That no Country has more peeple
and fewer men then Artonia, it is a truth too well known; and the reason is, that
the oppressed Commons do so languish and groan under the insupportable burdens
of the foresaid Exactions, and heavy Rents besides to their Landlords, that
they use to grow so dejected, pusillanimous, and heartless, their spirits come
to be so cowed and cowardiz'd, that not one in twenty has the courage of a man
in him, or is found fit to shoulder a Musket, to trail a Pike, or perform any
other military or manly service.


Pererius. It Is an apparent truth, that the Artonian Gentry are so numerous,
and use to rack the Peasantry so, that it makes them very abject and
heartlesse; for herein the Political body may be faid to be like the Natural;
wherein if the blood and spirits were drawn all up into the upper parts, the
supporting members below, as the legs and thighs, cannot have that proportion
of natural heat and vigor to quicken themselfs, the blood being all engrossed
by the parts above. If the Standells be planted too thick in a Coppice, there
cannot be clean Underwoods, for they will turn all to dwarfish Shrubs. But the
common peeple of Artonia may thank their own volatile humors and nature for
this, which is so instable, and still so covetous of change, that if they were
fed high, and pampered with too much plenty, they would ever and anon rush into
civil commotions and tintamarrs, they would winch, and go about to shake off
the reins of Government, and overthrow their Rider; Therefore being so
fiery-mouth'd, it is fit they should be ridden with a bitt or curb, nor can it
be termed Tyranny, or any Soloecism in Government, that they are used so.


Ass. Sir, under favor you put the saddle on the wrong horse it is not the
Commonalty, but the Gentry, and they who are in high blood, that have such
tumultuous boiling spirits within them, they are those who cause fevers and
convulsions in the bowels of their own Country, which I confess are frequent,
whence some observe, that though the air of Artonia be not so hot as that of her
next neighbor Tumontia, yet she is more subject to distempers, Calentures, and
Tovardillios; Therefore it is one of the prime policies of Artonia to find her
Gentry some work abroad, and employ them ever and anon in foreign Wars; And
there have been of late two fiery Flamines, one after the other, who have put
this policy in practice to some purpose, their sanguin humors symbolizing with
the color of their habit, whereby nere upon a million of souls have perished
within these few years. Touching the second of these, his father little dreamt
when he sold hatts in Silicia, that his son should mount so high as to wear the
Red-corner'd Cap, and give the Law to all Artonia; whereby some hold it to be no
small disparagement to so gallant a Nation, and subtle a Clime as Artonia is
known to be, to have none of her own children that had brain enough to sit at
the helm of her Government, but to suffer a Forrener to lead all her Nobles by
the nose, as also to incorporat his family with the Blood-Royall of Artonia and
Alpiana.


Pererius. Well, let us leave these digressions, for as the proverb runs in
your country, We have leapt from the Cock to the Ass all this while, we have
gone astray from the matter, let us return to the first subject of our discourse,
and to my main design; Poor long-ear'd patient beast, will thou shake off this
thy il-favoured braying nature, and the species of a brute, to become perfect
Man again?


Ass. Sir, though I were acertain'd to be one of Artonia's Peers, I would not
do it; But, Sir, touching my Ears, you need not take me by them in so
reproachful a manner: for you know a Phrygian King did wear once an Ass his
ears, and he was the richest that ever was among Mortals; Besides, my Ears
have a prophetic virtue, for when I prick them up, it is an infallible presage of
foul wether; Touching my braying, it is the tone which Nature has given me,
and all the Individualls of my kind, and you must grant, that Nature the
handmaid of God Almighty does not use to do any thing ill-favouredly; But in
lieu of our braying you have a passion, and as I remember your Philosophers
call it the proper passion of man, that is a far more distorting and ridiculous
violent posture, it is your Laughter, which happens when your pleasure has the
liberty to scatter it self abroad, and that the senses bear a share therein, for
then it causes such an agitation, that the whole physiognomy of the face is
changed, it begins to sparkle in the eyes, and mingleth it self oft-times with
forced tears, the forehead stretches it self, the lips grow redd, they
tremble and slaver oftentimes, the voice becomes grosser then ordinary, and
resounds, the rest of the body is subject to this agitation, an unusual heat
and vapor shedds it self through all its parts, which swells, and gives a new
color, the eyebrows decline, the lidds contract themselves, and all the skin
about them becomes uneven, and wrinkles it self all over, the eyes extenuat,
they half shut themselfs, and grow humid, the nose crumples up, and grows
sharp, the lips retire and lengthen, there is an ill-favor'd kind of gaping,
and discovery of the teeth, the cheeks lift up themselfs and grow more stiff,
they have pitts dug in them during the time, the mouth is forced to open,
and discovers the tremblings of the suspended tongue, it thrusts out an
obstreperous interrupted sound, and oftentimes there is a stopping of breath,
the neck swells and shortens it self, all the veins grow greter, and extended,
an extraordinary hue disperseth it self over all the face, which grows reddish,
the breast is impetuously agitated, and with sudden reiterated shakes, that it
hinders respiration, the perfect use of speech is lost, and it is impossible to
swallow during the fit, a pain rises in the flanck, the whole body bends, and
as it were wreaths and gathers it self together, the hands are set on the
sides, and press them forcibly, sweat gets up on the face, the voice is lost
in hickocks, and the breath is stifled with sighs; sometimes this agitation gets
to so high an excess, that it produces the same violent effect as medicaments
use to do, which is to put the bones so out of joint that it causes syncopes;
The head and the arms suffer the same throws, with the breast and the thighs,
the body hurles it self with precipitation and disorder, and is cast from one
side to the other; The hands become feeble, the legs cannot support themselves,
and the body is constrained to fall, and tumble, nay it causes sometimes
dangerous syncopes in the heart, and so brings death. Weeping also the
counter-passion has many of these ill-favor'd motions, what an odd kind of
face does an infant make as soon as he is born? how some of ripe age will
screech, cry and howl in so many disordered notes, and singultient accents?
Whereas we by our braying hold up our heads only, and so breath out our
passions into the open air, without any forced tones, or such variety of
distorted postures.


Pererius. It Is true, that Laughter produces sundry motions and pleasing
violences in the human body, but they are recompensed by the joy that
accompanies it, which uses to rowse and raise up our slumbring spirits, and
melancholy thoughts with an unusual mirth and complaceny, whence it comes,
that after those two, Doctor Diet, and Doctor Quiet, Doctor Merriman is
requisite to preserve health; Touching the other passion Sorrow, and the various
emissions of it, it is an ease also to the spirits, which without such ventings
would be subject to strangulations; But, poor Ass, do not let slip this fair
opportunity which gracious Queen Morphandra offers thee, by my intervention, to
be redintegrated and made a Rational creture again.


Ass. I told you before but of the outward servitude and exigents that I
endured when I was a Man, which were incident only to the body: I have not
spoken to you any thing of the perturbations of the brain, and the inward
agonies of the mind, which did trouble and torment me much more; How was I
perpetually vexed not only to pay the common Taxes, and other pecuniary
erogations, with my domineering Landlords Rents, but to find daily bread,
sustenance, and clothing for my wife and children; Now children is one of the
greatest encumbrances that belong to mankind; for as the proverb goes, Children
are a certain care, and an uncertain comfort; But they of my species at present
are exempt from this, and a thousand inconveniences more which are entayl'd
upon mankind: It Is true, touching our offsprings while they are young, and
unable to do for themselfs, we are indulgent of them, and that for a short
time, but afterward we lose all care of them, being able to shift for
themselfs.


Pererius. Yes, and with your care you lose all affections unto them besides,
but such is the nobleness of Man's nature, that both continu in him during
life unto the third and fourth generation; Therefore without further ado, think
upon thy first Being, and to be restored thereunto: Otherwise thou will be
more foolish than that poor baffled Ass in the Fable, who when a Horse came
unto him, and out of wantonness had desired him to lift up his left hinder leg,
and take out a stone that had got into his foot, as soon as he had lifted up
the leg, the Horse fell a kicking him ill-favourelly on the face, and almost
dashed out his brains; Or thou will be as foolish as the Ass, who seeing a
Spaniell sawn upon his Master, and getting into his lap, where he was stroked,
the Ass thought to do so too, but instead of being stroked, he was struck and
bastinadoed away for his sauciness, which shows that an Ass is a more
contemptible thing than a Dog.


Ass. As contemptible as we are, there are two of us who have a bright place
in Heaven, as the Constellation of Cancer will show you; As contemptible as we
are, some of your gretest Philosophers have held grave disputes of our very
shadow, and Apuleius's golden Ass makes him famous to eternity; As
contemptible as we are, the strongest man that ever was, made use of the
jaw bone of one of us to destroy thousands of his enemies; The great Empress
Poppaea used our milk to make her skin the whiter, and you know what a
Sovereign thing that milk is against Consumptions, and Dysenteries; nay our
very Urine is found to be good against Tilers or Morphews in Ladies faces;
Lastly, you know who made his entry into Jerusalem upon one of Us, for which we
carry the Cross upon our sholders as the badg of a blessing to this day, which
made a zealous Tumontian break out into these lines upon the sight of that
History of Palm Sunday, near a Church door. Asno quien a Dios lleuays
Oxala yo fuera vos,
Supplico os Dios me hagays
Como el Asno en que vays,
y dizen que le oyo Dios.
O happy Ass who God do bear,
Such as Thou art, O would I were.
It Is said the man did pray so hard
That prayer and person both were heard.



Pererius. Poor besotted beast, yet thou know there can be no comparison
'twixt the best of Brutes and the basest of human cretures, who by the faculty
of Reason can tame and reduce to his subjection the strongest of other Animals,
though never so fierce and corpulent, and make them know that He is their Lord
and Master.


Ass. Whereas you speak of fierceness, truly Sir I think there is no Animal so
fierce and ferocious, so savage and intractable as Man: for whereas all other
cretures can be ruled, daunted, and broken, easily governed in time, the Art of
governing Men is the most difficult of any, because of their various fancies
and imaginations, their crosse-grain'd humors and pride, all which proceeds
from the faculty of Reason you speak of; Therefore I was very glad to be rid of
it by this transfiguration, and the time seems tedious unto me that I have the
use of it now so long to parley with you, for I remember when I was a Man, it
filled the cells of my brain ever and anon with turbid and turbulent
cogitations, with strange chimera's and crochets, which disquieted the
tranquillity and calm of my mind; And as for my Body, this shape which I now
bear is more healthful far and neat, for now I am not subject to breed Lice
and other Vermin; And whereas this pedicular disease, with a nomberlesse sort
of other maladies and distempers, attend Mankind, there is but one only disease
that our Species is subject unto, which the Veterenarians or Farriers call
Malila, and that is only in the head, when some unusual defluxion of rheum
falls thence into the nostrills, which being stopped turns to the improvement
of health, but if once it falls upon the lungs we are gone: And observable it
is, that being dead, we have cleaner carcases than Men, and diverse medicinal
things are found in them, as our Liver, Hoofs, or Bones being reduced to powder
are good, as the Naturalists note, against the Epilepsy or Comitiall sickness,
with other diseases; Nor do any crawling nasty worms grow out of our Cadavers,
but Beetles, and other airy Insects, which are not so noisome; But I have spent
too much time with you, I will therefore go now to browze upon the green leafs
of that Bramble.


Pererius. Well, I find here two Proverbs verified, the one is a homely one,
viz. Chanter a un Asne, il vous donnera un pet, Sing to an Ass and he will
give you a Bum-crack The other, that one may bring an Ass to the water, but
not make him drink unless he list himself.


Ass. It Is very true, I remember well they are proverbs used in our Country,
but the last shows much the temperance of our Species, for we do not eat or
drink but when we are a thirst or hungry, for the restoration of the parts
that are lost, that is when nature requires it; But you use to gourmandize it
upon full stomachs, to force carowses and Whole-ones until you be full up to
the very throat, and so transform your selves to worse then Asses, so that
oft-times neither hand nor foot can do their duty: which we never do.


Pererius to himself. It is a strange and strong incantation that holds this
poor Animal in this brutality, I will by the favor of Morphandra try a
conclusion next upon some other of a quicker apprehension, and one who had lived
in a more plentiful and contented train of life whiles he was Man.


(...).
The Third Section.
Consisting of a Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and an Ape, who had been
once a Preachman in Gheriona, who having been carried away with every wind of
Doctrine, and following any fanatic new-fangl'd opinion, was transmuted to that
mimicall shape; In which Dialog there is an account given of the sad case and
confusion, wherein Gheriona is involved at present, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, an Ape. Morphandra. I Saw you somewhat earnest in banding
arguments with that Ass, but how have you sped? does he desire to be
disasinated, and become Man again, as I promised he should be, provided his will
concurred thereunto?


Pererius. Truly, Madame, I find the old proverb true, that he who washes an
Asse's head does lose both time and soap; But, these two Animalls I have
treated withal, lived in a poor ignorant condition when they were Men: I
humbly desire I may mingle speeches with some transmuted Animals, who when they
were Rational cretures did live in plenty, and at ease, and who were bred up
in knowledge.


Morphandra. You shall have your desire, and in that Grove I spy an Ape, who
was once a prick-ear'd Preachman in Gheriona, whom for his mimicall foolish
humor, and following any new fond fatuous opinion, I thought it proper to
transmute to that shape; Besides, I turned him to that long-tail'd beast,
because they of his country are called Stertmen that is men with long-tailes,
for which there is both Tradition and Story; He came hither Chaplain to a
Frigot, and had not the ship quickly tacked about and got away, I had
transfigur'd all the rest.


Ape. By the earnestnes of your looks and gazing, I believe you would speak
with me, therefore I pray what is your pleasure?


Pererius Poor Ape, thou art an object of much pity; Queen Morphandra has
been pleased to discover unto me that thou wa'st once a man, and born in
Gheriona, a noble Country, and a Nation of no less esteem.


Ape. It Is true, the Country is good, but she may be said to be now like
Lucian's sick Eagle, shot and pitifully wounded with shafts of her own
feathers, Gheriona never showed she had in her as much to make her happy, as
she shows now to make her self unhappy; I fear me, there be some further
dreadful judgments, as the Famine and the Pestilence hanging over her: for it
has been observed that those three scourges of Heven, (...), and (...), the
Famine, the Plague, and the civil Wars are consecutif, and use to follow one
another, though the last has got the start of the other two; But concerning
the peeple, I verily believe there were never any so far degenerated since the
Devil had to do with mankind, never any who did fool and puppifie themselfs
into such a perfect slavery* and confusion; You seem to pity my
transfiguration from Man to Ape, but their case is to be much more resented,
for they are turned from Men to Wolfs, if you go to their humors, there is a true
Lycanthropy among them, else they would never worry and devour one another in so
savage a manner; All which proceeds from a sad disease which has seized upon
many thousands of them, it is a pure Scotomia, an odd kind of Vertigo that
reigns amongst them, which turns the head round, and fills it with new
chimera's ever and anon; It Is true that my countrymen were ever observed to be
inconstant in the fashion of their clothing, in their outward comportment and
garbs, which proceeded from Imitation more then natural Inclination; But this
mimicall apish humor has extended of late years not only to their external
habits, but to the inward habitudes of their minds, and taken hold of their
Intellectualls, by being carried away with every wind of Doctrine, and
fanaticall newfangled opinions, blown over from other Countries, and then
multiplying amongst them; For though my contrymen have not any great Genius
to invent, yet it is observed they have a faculty to add to any new invention;
and if any new odd opinion in Holy things has once taken footing among them,
they will make it run upon more feet; Now it is in Divinity as in Philosophy,
Uno absurdo dato sequuntur mill, One absurdity being granted a thousand will
follow, as Aristotle the Philosophers-Pope does affrim, for Errors like ill
weeds do grow apace; And truly I must confess, that this apish humor had
seized strongly upon me, which made me distrub the peace of the holy Church
wherein I was born, baptized, and bred, which made Queen Morphandra to transform
me justly to this shape you see, being entertained Chaplain to a Man of War
that arrived at this Island, though I had been sensible of mine own errors a
good while before.


Pererius. I know well that there was in Gheriona a comely face of a Church;
There were such solemnities, venerations, and decencies used, that might
discover some piety in the practice of holy duties; There was a public Liturgy
that linked the souls of the whole Nation in an unanimity, wherein there were
such pithy patheticall prayers that reached all occasions, and searched every
crany in the conscience; The Sacraments were administered with a fitting posture
of reverence, and genuflexion, yet far from any superstition; God's houses were
kept neat, cleanly, and in repair; There was such a prudent handsome Government,
such degrees of promotion, such possessions annexed to the Church, that made
them of that holy function not only to be esteemed and reverenced, but to be
able to do deeds of charity; But now I hear there is crept up such a nasty race
of miscreants, who have no more esteem of God Almighty's House than of a
Pig-sty, who have turned a pretended Superstition to a palpable Prophanenes,
who have plundered all that belonged to pious uses, who have nothing of that
veneration, that sweetness, and comfort that uses to attend true devotion, which
is turned to a giddy zeal, or a kind of lust still after more learning, as if
Christianity had no consistence or certainty, no sobriety; or end of knowledge,
wherein the inward man might acquiesce; These poor simpletons pretending to
imitate the Apostles time would have the same form of Discipline and Mode to
govern whole Nations, as it did at first a Chamber-full of men in the Infancy
of the Christian Church; They would make the same coat serve our Savior at five
and twenty years, as fitted him at five: But you were speaking of other
dreadful judgments that you believe were hanging over Gheriona, and what are
the resons that induce you to that belief?


Ape. I remember when I had a human shape I was much addicted to the reading of
History, which is a profitable knowledge, for the observation of former actions
may serve to regulat the future; I took notice of a world of examples that the
two nefandous crimes of Sacrilege and Perjury never went unpunished without
some signal judgments; Among diverse other these two do reign and rage in
Gheriona more then they ever did in any Country under the cope of Heven, and
must she not then expect the vialls of a just vengeance to fall down upon Her
from above? But that you may better understand the state of that calamitous
Country, that Country of confusion, I will recount to you what befell me before
my transmutation.


Perertus. You will oblige me beyond measure, if you impart unto me what you
intend, and I shall listen unto you with much patience, and no less
contentment.


Ass. It chanced one night I had a strange unusual Dream, I had fallen into
so sound a sleep, as if the Cinq-ports (my five outward senses) had been trebly
locked up; My Animula vagula blandula, my little wandering soul made a sally out
of Morpheus Horngate, as she uses to do often, and fetch vagaries apart, to
practice how she may live by her self after our dissolution, when she is
separated from the Body and become a Spirit; I had all night long a world of
visions, and strange objects appeerd unto me, which return now fresh into my
memory; During the said time I thought I was transported to the remotest place,
and of the greatest distance that possibly could be from Heven, me thought I
was in the Infernal pit, in the kingdom of darkness, in Hell it self among
the devils and damned spirits, I had neither that golden branch, nor the help
of a Sybilla Cumana to conduct me up and down as the Trojan Prince had, but a
spirit did lead me gently and softly all along until I came to Pluto's Palace,
where a special Council was held to take a strict examination what service
the three infernal Furies, Alecto, Tisyphone, and Megaera, with other
inferior Fiends that were their assistants, had done upon earth toward the
advancement of the kingdom of darkness since their last mission thither, which
was presently upon the appeerance of the last blazing Star 1618. Pluto
vouchsafed to be present at this solemn Council, and to be President or
Chairman himself, to which purpose he had a strong Legion of Cacodaemons for
his guard, but the business was prepared and facilitated for his hearing before
hand by a special Committee appointed of purpose for that end (whence I
observed, that Committees were first hatched in Hell) The three ghastly
Daughters of Night appeered with fiery conntenances before the Stygian King, in
lieu of air they evaporated huge flakes of fire which they took in, and let out
with the accents of their words, huge bunches of Vipers hung dangling and
wavring about their heads, having their tayls rooted in their sculls; A furious
clash fell betwixt them who should be Prolocutrix, but in regard that Alecto
and Tisyphone had given account of their former missions, the one of the League
in Artonia, the other of the Revolt of the Hydraulian, which was about the
appearance of the Comet in the tail of Cassiopaea, it came now in due turn that
Megaera should have the priority of speech; So the youngest of the Tartarean
girls began as follows.

May it please your high phlegetontic Majesty to understand, that since the
last happy Comet Anno 1618. which by the parallax was found to be in the Heven
it self above the Elementary world, we have for forty years together been more
active and eager in your Majesty's service than ever we were; We have stirred
the humors of the foolish Inhabitants of the earth to insurrections, to war
and praeliation; To effect which, our practice has been to bring on the
beggarliest and toughest peeple upon the nicest and softest, we brought the
Cuprinian upon the Aetonian, and the Zoundanian, the Tarragon, and Cinqfoyl
upon the Tumontian, the Tartar upon the Chinois, the Selenian upon the
Marcopolist, the Cosaque upon the Pole, the Carboneian upon the Gherionian; We
have continued a bloody lingering War in the bowels of Artonia for thirty
years together, we have thrust diverse Princes out of their ancient
Inheritances, among others the Duke of Laroni and Rhinarchos, we brought two
gran Selenian Emperors to be strangled by their own slaves, we have often
puzzled Vinalia, we have made the Kings of Artonia and Tumontia to bandy so
fiercely one against the other, as if the one had been an Infidel the other a
Jew, though each of them had one another's sister abed with him every night.
But may it please your Acherontic Majesty to be informed, that the most
advantageous and signal services we have done, have bin in the lsles of
Gheriona and Hebrinia, for whereas we divided our selfs before, and went singly
among other peeple, we went jointly thither all three, and brought a Regiment
of fiery red-coated Cacodaemons to guard us, because we might be sure to bring
our great work home to your Majesty's aim; The Nation fittest for our turn at
first were the Carboncian, who have bin so obedient to their Kings, that of
above a hundred they brag of, scarce two parts of three died in their beds, but
were made away violently; We did incite them first against their own
Countryman and Native King, and to appear in a daring high hostile manner
before him upon the borders; At which time it cost us a great deal of artifice
so to besot the Gherioniams, and to abase their courage, so to entangle them
with Factions, having sure Confidents to that end among them, that they durst
not present Battle to the Carboncian at that time; And this, Sir, was an
important piece of service, for had they fought then, or had they bin sensible
afterward of the dishonor they received at that time, their King being then
amongst them in person, with the flower of his Nobility and Gentry, and
consequently had they stuck to him afterward to have vindicated that
rebellious affront, all those we have fomented since might have bin prevented.

We shortly after transmitted the same spirit of Insurrection into Hebrinia,
who being encouraged by the good successes of the Carboneian, who got then what
terms he listed, yet could he not sit quiet; and the Hebrinian Commissioners
being but harshly entertained by the great Council of Gheriona, who intended
to send them over a Governor that should pinch them more than they were before
in their consciences, and for diverse other provocations, we caused the
Hebrinian also to rise in blood, which he did to some purpose; Then came we to
work upon the Gherionian, whom we found as fit to receive our impression as
flax is to receive fire, in regard of their long Furseit of peace and plenty;
We broke up one great Assembly upon a sudden, because the members thereof were
not for our turn, But then we called another which was fit for our purpose, and
we steered their courses all the while with a great deal of care; The first
thing we did was to endue them with a faculty to create fears and jealousies,
whereof we made excellent use, and although those fears and jealousies appeared
afterward to every common man as plain as the nose on his face to be but mere
forgeries, and supposititious things, yet we did still so intoxicat their
intellectualls, that we made them to adore still the coyners of them; And to
give your Stygian Majesty among diverse others, one most pregnant and undeniable
demonstration what firm footing we got in that Island, we did raise in few
years more Pythonesses, which the ignorant vulgar call Witches there, then ever
were in that Country since your Majesty tempted Eve; and we enabled our said
Pythonesses to send their inferior Imps abroad upon our service; We stood at
the King's elbow when he passed the Act of continuance, wherein a Carboncian
was our chief Engineer; But the great City Polihaima stood us in most excellent
steed to compass our designs, we made the riffraff and rakehells of that
wanton City, whom some called Myrmidons, others their Bandogs, to rabble the
King out of Town, we brought also thither the silly Swains of the Country like
a flock of Geese to gaggle up and down the streets with papers in their hats
they knew not about what; We managed the business afterward so dexterously,
and did aggravate things by degrees, that we made their credulous King, because
he was so professed an enemy to your Majesty, to go disguised in serving-man's
habit to his Countrymen the Carboncians, with whom we prevailed so far, that
they delivered him over as a Sacrifice, and betrayed him Judas like to the
Gherionians, who crucified him sufficiently afterward by tossing and tumbling
him up and down, by depriving him of the comfort of all things that use to be
dear unto man, as his wife, children, friends, and servants, by working upon
his conscience in a compulsatory way, and stretching it upon the very tenter;
In sum, we have reduced that Country to a conformity with this of your
Majesty's, to a perfect Chaos of all confusion, we have brought the sway into
the common peeples hands, making all the Nobility and Gentry to crouch and
cringe unto them; And never did common peeple more truly act the part, and
discover the genius of a common peeple more lively, whose nature is still
thirsting after novelties, and Utopian Reformations, though oftentimes they
fool themself thereby into a a baser kind of slavery, finding when it is too
late those specious idaea's, and confused forms of Government they apprehended
at first, and hugged in their own conceits, to be at last but mere absurdities,
when they com to the application and practice thereof.

And, Sir, the most advantageous instruments we have used to bring all this
about have bin the Pulpit and the Press, by these we diffused those
supposititious fears and jealousies, formerly spoken of, to distract the brains
of the silly vulgar; Instead of Lights we put Firebrands in their Churches,
who, according as we did dictat unto them, did baul out nothing but sedition,
war, and blood; We have made some of them to have as good an opinion of the
Alchoran as of their own Liturgy; We made new Ordinances to batter down all the
ancient Canons of the Church, we have made them to un-saint all those who were
called Apostles, to profane and plunder all places that were consecrated, we
brought some of them to put a division 'twixt the Trinity it self, we have
brought them to keep their Fasts more solemnly than the Sabbath, upon which day
we made them usually not only to sit in Council, but to put in execution
their chief designs of blood; To work all this, the main and most material
thing we made use of was spiritual pride your Majesty's old acquaintance,
which pride we have infused into the mind of every Mechanic, or Country-Swain,
who will boldly now undertake to expound any Text of Scripture new or old upon
the warrant of his own giddy brain; Insomuch that we have made that Book which
they call the Bible, that was ordained for the Charter of their Salvation, to
be the chiefest instrument of their Damnation; We have brought those exotic
words Plundring and Storming, and that once abominable word Excise to be now
familiar among them, they are all made free Denizens, and naturalized among
them; We have made those who came petitioners for peace to the great Council
to be ill entreated, and some of them to be murdered, but those that came for
war to be countenanced and thanked; We made the mother to betray her child,
the child the father, the husband the wife, and the servant his master; We have
brought a perfect Tyranny over their souls and bodies, upon the one, by tedious
imprisonments and captivity, with a forfeiture of all their livelihoods before
conviction, or any preceding charge, upon the other, by forcing them to take
contradictory Oaths, Engagements, and Protestations; On that foolish
superstitious day of Christmas, with other Festivals, we have brought them to
shut up their Churches, and to open their Shops and Shambles, so that in time
they will forget the very memory of the Incarnation of their Savior; We have
brought them to have as little reverence of their Temples as of their
Tap-houses, and to hold the Church to be no more than a Charnell-house of
rotten bones; And though they still cringe and stand bare-headed before any
wrangling Bench of common pleading, yet we have so stiffned their joints, and
made their heads so tender in that which they call God's House, that there,
they can neither bow the one, nor scarce uncover the other; We have made the
fundamental Laws to be called but mere formalities; We have made that which
was called their Great Charter to be torn to a thousand flitters, and stretched
the privilege of the Commons so wide, that it has quite swallowed the Royal
Prerogative, and all other privileges; We have grub'd up, and cast away those
hopeful Plants that grew in their two Seminaeries of Learning, and set in them
graffs of our own choice; We have made the wealth of Town and Country, of Poor
and Rich, to shine in plunder upon the Soldiers backs; We have made them
command free quarter of those, that were more sitting to ask alms of them; We
have made them rifle the Monuments of the dead, to rob the very Lazaretro, to
strip the Orphan and Widow; We have made them offer violence to the very
Vegetables and inanimat Stones, to violat any thing that was held holy, to make
Socks of Surplices, to water their beasts at the Font, and feed them on the
Altar, and to term the thing they call the Sacrament to be but a two-penny
Ordinary; We have made them use on the closestoole that Book wherein the public
Devotion of the whole Nation consisted; In fine, we have made them turn
supposed superstition to gross profaneness, preaching to prating, praying to
raving, government to confusion, and freedom to fetters; We have so intoxicated
that dear daughter of yours Polihaima, that she knows not what way to turn her
self; And whereas her Apprentices did rise up like so many Cubs of Tigers
against their lawful Prince, they are now become as came as so many silly sheep
against the Soldiery; We have puzzled their Pericranium with vertiginous
fancies, and fears among themselfs, that one neighbor dare not trust the
other; To conclude, we have eclipsed the glory of that Nation, we have made
them by all peeple far and near that ever had knowledge, correspondence, or any
commerce with them, to be pitied by some, to be laughed at by others, to be
scorned of all, and to become the very tail of all Nations; In fine, Sir, we
have brought that Country to such a pass of confusion, that it is a fit place
only for your infernal Majesty to keep your Court in, for there is never a
Cross there to fright you now: It Is true they retain it still upon their coins
of gold and silver, in honor of your Plutonian Highness as you are Dis and
god of riches.

Megaera having thus given up an account in behalf of her self and her two
sisters, they all bowed their snaky heads down to their very feet, which were
toed with Scorpions, before the black Throne of Beelzebub, who giving such a
humm that made all Hell to tremble, answered thus,

My precious and most trusty Tartarean daughters, we highly approve of the
super-erogatory service you have don us for the propagation of our Empire upon
Earth, and specially in Gheriona; we have sued a long time to have a lease of
that Island, and we hope to obtain it, touching Carboncia it is not worth the
while; Therefore when you have visited those of that Nation whom you have sent
hither already to peeple this pit, I would have you return thither, and prepare
that place for one of our principal habitations, never leave them till you
have thrust out Religionem ex solo as well as Regem ex solio; make Law,
Religion, Allegiance, and every thing else Arbitrary, let not one government
last long, but shuffle the Cards so that a new Trump may be turned up often,
create still new fears, and foment fresh divisions among them; let the son seek
the fathers throat, let brothers sheath their swords in one another bowels,
let the Country clash with the Towns, the Towns one against the other, and the
Sea with both, till that the whole Nation be at last extinguished that one may
not be left to piss against a wall; Let not a Church or Chapel, Hospital or
College stand in the whole Isle. I intend to have a new Almanac of Saints at
my coming, for I have some Star-gazers there fit for my purpose; Make haste
therefore, and acquit your selfs of your duty for fear a peace be shuffl'd up,
and that Artonia and Tumontia appeer in the business, and espouse the quarrel
of young Caroloman; And if you carry your selfs well in this employment, I may
chance give you Carboncia for your reward.

The three Lethean Futies with a most profound reverence replied, May it please
your Majesty, your Ferriman Charon is continually so pestered with such
multitudes of Gherionian and Carboncian passengers, that we were forced to stay
a long time ere we could be transported hither, and we fear we shall be so
hindered again. Therefore we most humbly desire for our better expedition, that
you would vouchsafe to give us a special Mandamus that we may be served first,
with a non obstante, when we com to the banks of Styx.

You shall dear daughters, said Pluto, and my Warrant shall be addressed to some
Gherionian Tarpalins, whereof there are abundance these few years past, whom
Charon has entertaind for his journey-men.

Having listened all this while unto what passed 'twixt Pluto and his Furies, my
guiding spirit did lead me up and down Hell to see the various sorts of
torments that are there, which indeed are innumerable both old and new; The
first I beheld was Ixion who was tied with ugly Vipers to a wheel that whirled
about perpetually, and I might perceive a multitude of lesser wheels newly made
therabouts, whereunto great nombers of Gherionians, and diverse of my
acquaintants were bound in like manner; I might discern also hard by a huge
company of new Windmills, and bodies tied with black-spotted Snakes at every
wing turning round perpetually; A little further there were a great many broken
by Milstones who were whirled with them about incessantly; In another place I
might see black Whirlpools full of tormented souls turning still round, I asked
what was the reason of so many whirling tortures? My good Spirit answered, All
these, except Ixion's wheel, are new torments appointed for Gherionian
Sectaries, who had destroyed from top to bottom all Government both of Church
and State, And as their brains turned round upon earth after every wind of
Doctrine, so their souls turn here in perpetual torments of rotation.

A little further I spied Prometheus removed thither from Caucasus, with a
ravenous Vulture tearing and feeding upon his liver, which as one part was
eaten, renewed presently after, and abundance of new comers were tormented in
the same manner, these I was told they were Gherionians also that were punishd
like Prometheus, because as he was tortured so for stealing fire from Heven, by
which was meant for prying too far into the secrets of the gods, so those fiery
Zelots of Gheriona were tortured, for offering to dive too far into the high
points of Predestination, Election, and Reprobation, being not contented sapere
ad sobrietatem, but were gaping ever and anon after new lights, and flashes of
illuminations to pry into the Book of Life.

Then I came to the bottomless Tub which Danaus daughters were a filling, a
nomberles company of other such tubs were there, and Gherionian women and men
were incessantly laboring to fill them up with the stenchy black waters of
Acheron; I was told that they were those overcurious peeple in Gheriona which
would be never satisfied with spiritual knowledge, having no other devotion than
to be always learning, and never coming to the truth, as these poor restless
fillers could never come to any bottom.

Then I beheld the most horrid tortures of those Giants who would have pulld
Jupiter out of his Throne, and a world of Gherionians among them, who partaked
of the same tortures, because they had conspired on earth to destroy their
lawful King.

Not far further I might spy dazzling my eyes fiery glowing tubs made
Pulpit-like, and I was told they were prepared for those profane presumptuous
Mechanics, and other laymen who use to preach, and so abuse the sacred
Oracles of God; And Uzza was not far off, who lay in torments there for being
too bold with the Holy Ark.

Not far distant I saw hoops of iron that were made Garter-like of hot candent
steel, I was told that they were designed for the perjured Knights of that
Order in Gheriona to wear upon their legs when they com thither, for breaking
in the late war the solemn Oath they had taken at their Installment, to defend
the Honor and Quarrels, the Rights and Dignities of their Soverain, etc.

Nere unto them I might see brass hoops glowing with fire, and they were
Scarfs-like, I was told they were ordained for those Knights of the Bath to
wear for Ribbands next their skins when they came thither, for infringing that
sacred Sacramental Oath they took at their election, which was, To love their
Soverain above all earthly creture, and for his Right and Dignity to live and
die.

A little beyond I saw a Copper-table with chairs of the same, all candent hot,
I was told that those were for perjured Privy-Councellors who had broke their
Oath to their King, which obliged them to be true and faithful servants unto
him, and if they knew or understood any manner of thing to be attempted, done,
or spoken against his Majesty's Person, Honor, Crown, or Dignity, they swore
to let and withstand the same to the uttermost of their power, and cause it to
be revealed either to Himself, or any other of his Privy Council.

Hard by I saw a little Furnace so glowing hot, that it looked of the color of
a Ruby or Carbuncle, I was told that it was to clap in the Master of a King's
Jewellhouse when he comes thither, for being so perfidious and perjurious to
his Master.

Not far off I might see a huge brass Caudron full of molten lead, with some
Brewers cruelly tormented therein, for setting their own Country on fire.

I was curious to know, whether there were any other infernal tortures besides
those of fire; Yes, I was answered, for to speak of fire to a peeple habituated
to a cold Climat were not only to make them slight Hell, but to have a mind to
go thither; So my Spirit brought me a little Northward, and showed me a huge
Lough, where there were frosted Mountains up and down, and I might discover
amongst them a world of Blew-caps lying in beds of ice, with their noses and
toes nipt, the isicles stuck to their fingers ends like horns, and a bleak
hispid wind blew incessantly upon them, they made the most pitteous noise that
me-thought I had heard in all Hell, for they wawl'd, screech'd, and howled out
ever and anon this dismal note, Wea is me, wea is me that ever I betrayed my
gid King.

Among all those damned souls I desired to see what punishment an Atheist had,
my Spirit was ready to answer me, that there were no Atheists in Hell at all;
it is true they were so upon Earth before they came hither, but here they
sensibly find and acknowledge there is a God by his justice and judgments, for
there is here poena sensus and poena damni, there is inward and outward torture,
The outward torments you behold are nothing so grievous as the inward regrets
and agonies the souls have, to have lost Heven whereof they were once capable,
and to be eternally forsaken by their Creator the Lord of Light, their chiefest
Good; Add hereunto that they know these torments to be endless, easelesse, and
remediless; Besides these qualities which are incident to the damned souls,
they have neither patience toward themselfs in their own suffrances, nor any
pity toward others, but their natures is so accursed that they wish their
neighbors torments were still greter then their own; Moreover their torments
never lessen, or have any mitigation by tract of time, or degrees of sense, but
they persevere always in the same height, they are still fresh, and the soul
made stronger to bear them; I saw that everlasting Villain who committed one of
the first sacriledges we read of, by burning the Temple of Diana, whose
torments were so fresh and cruciatory upon him, as they were the first day he
was hurled in thither; Judas was in the same degree and strength of torture as
he was the first moment he fell thither; Jack Cade, Wat Tyler, Jack Straw, and
Ket the Tanner did fry as fresh as they did that very instant they were tumbled
down thither; Amongst whom it made my heart to melt within me when I saw some of
their new-com'd Countrymen amongst them, whereof I knew diverse; And though
society is wont to be some solace to men in misery, yet they conceived no
comfort at all by these fresh companions.

It is high time for us now, said my good guiding Spirit, to be gone to the
other world, so we directed our course toward the Ferry upon Styx; But Lord
what a number of lurid and ugly squalid countenances did I behold as I passed;
There was one sort of torment I had not seen before, there were diverse that hung
by their toungs upon posts up and down, I asked what they were, answer was
made, that they were prick-ear'd Preachmen, Judges, and Lawyers, who against
their knowledge as well as against their consciences, did seduce the ignorant
peeple of Gheriona and Carboncia, and incite them to war; And there was a new
tenter-hook provided for one gran Villain, who pronounced Sentence of death
against his own Soverain Prince, whose Subject he was, and whom by a sacred
Oath of Allegiance he was tied to obey.

A little further I might see multitudes of Committee Men and others, slopping
up drops of molten lead in lieu of French Barly-broth, with a rabble of
Apprentices sweeping the gutters of Hell, with brooms tufted with ugly Adders
and Snakes, because they running into the Wars and leaving their wares, had
thereby broke their Indentures with their Masters, and their Oaths of Allegiance
to their lawful Prince.

Passing then along toward the Ferry, a world of hideous shapes presented
themselfs unto my sight; There I saw corroding cares, pannick fears, pining
griefs, ugly rebellion, revengefull malice, snaky discord, oppression, tyranny,
disobedience, perjury, sacrilege, and spiritual pride (the sin that first
peepled Hell) put to exquisit torments; Couches of Toads, Scorpions, Asps, and
Serpents were in a corner hard by; I asked for whom they were prepared, I was
answered, for some Evangelizing Gherionian Ladies, which did egg on their
husbands to War; So having as I thought by a miraculous providence charmed
three-headed Cerberus, by pointing at him with the sign of the Cross upon my
fingers, we passed quietly by to the Ferry, where being com I found true what
Pluto had said before, that there were diverse Gherionian Tarpalins entertained
by Charon, but they were in most cruel tortures, for their bodies were covered
all over very thick and close with canvases pitched and tarr'd, which
continually burnt and flamed round about them.

Herewith I got awake again about the dawning of the day, and it was high time
to do so; For lo, the golden Oriental gate
Of gray-fac'd Heven 'gan to open fair,
And Phoebus like a Bridegroom to his Mate
Came dancing forth, shaking his dewy hair,
And hurls his glittring beams through gloomy air.
So Rest to Motion, Night to Day does yield,
Silence to Noise, the Stars do quit the field,
My Cinq-ports all fly open, the phantasy
Gives way to outward objects, Ear and eye
Resume their office, so does hand and lip;
I hear the Carrmans wheel, the Coachmans whip,
The prentice (with my sense) his shop unlocks,
The milkmaid seeks her pail, porters their frocks,
All cries and sounds return, except one thing,
I heard no bell for Mattens toll or ring.
Being thus awaked, and staring on the Light
Which silverd all my face and glaring sight,
I closed my eyes again to recollect
What I had dreamt, and make my thoughts reflect
Upon themselfs --


I say, that having after such a long noctivagation, and variety of horrid
visions, returned to my perfect expergefaction, I began by a serious
recollection of my self to recall to my thoughts by way of reminiscence those
dismal and dreadful objects that had appeerd unto me, for though I was in
Hell, yet I did not taste of Lethe all the while, insomuch that I did not
forget any thing which I had seen; All the said objects presented themselfs
unto me so real, that if I had bin transported with that opinion whereof many
great Clerks have bin, viz. That Devils are nothing else but the ill
affections, the exorbitant passions and perturbances of the mind; I say, if I
had bin placed in such an opinion, this trance would have convinced me; You may
easily imagine what apprehensions of horror these Apparitions left in my brain
behind them, just as a River when by an inundation she has swelled out of her
wonted channel, does use to leave along the neighboring meadows seggs and
other weeds with much riffraff stuff behind her upon her return to her former
bed; so did this Vision after that deluge of objects wherewith my brain was
overwhelmed for the time, leave behind them black sudds, and many a ghastly
thought within me, which after some ruminations wrought in me a perfect change
and detestation of those mimicall giddy opinions wherewith I was carried away
before, but while I delayed the time of declaring my self that way, I was
suddenly surprised, and justly transmuted to this shape and species.


Pererius. You may perceive by the effects of this visional Dream the
excellency and high prerogatives of the Human Soul, who by the ministry of the
Imagination can make such sallies abroad, that leaving the gross tabernacle of
the body she can at pleasure climb up to the skies, and make a Scale of the
stars to conduct her to the Empyrean Heven; she can also descend in a trice to
the great Abyss, and take a survey of the kingdom of darkness, And though it be
a common Maxim that, ab Orco nulla redemptio, there is no returning from Hell
the passage thence being irremeable, yet the Rational soul while she informs
the body has this privilege, that she can make egresses and regresses, she can
enter and come off clear from Hell it self, when she list, and all this in an
instant; Wherein she may be said to participat of that admired quality which is
inhaerent in that most comfortable of all cretures the Light, which is held the
Souverain of all sensible qualities by the Philosophers, and to com nearest to
the nature of a Spirit, for Light requires but an instantaneous moment or point
of time to perform its office of illumination, and to dilate it self from one
Pole to the other throughout the whole Hemisphere, whence some infer that Light
is incorporeal, because it is an unquestioned principle among the Naturalists,
that all bodies require a succession of time in their motion, which Light needs
not; But there is this difference 'twixt the Imagination of a human soul and
Light, that there besom places wherinto Light cannot enter, but there is no part
of the Universe so impervious where the Imagination may not make his accesses
and recesses at pleasure, as appeers by yours while you made that progress
during the time of that ecstasy; And now methinks that these, and other
excellencies of the Rational soul should incite you to shake off that brutish
nature, which has no other idaea or object of happiness, but what sense
exposes for the present time to corporeal things only; I say the
contemplation of what I said before should move you to become Man again.


Ape. Man! Truly Sir, I am sorry the shape I now bear resembles Man so much, I
could wish it were far more unlike, for the horrid and unheard of sacrileges
and perjuries of my own Nation makes me abhor the very name of Man, much more
his nature; For I dare confidently assert, that there were never since the
Devil had power to possess poor Mortals such Heteroclites in Religion, such
a Bedlam of Sectaries, who to exalt the Kingdom of Christ would heave it up on
Beelzebub's back, for it is the Devill's Reformation to turn order to confusion,
and certainties to incertitudes as they have done; But these Refiners of
Government will prove Quack-salvers at last, for in lieu of raising up a
Commonwealth, they have pulled down the two main Pillars which use to support
all States, viz. Religion and Justice, making both Arbitrary, and tumbling all
things into a horrid disorder and hurliburly, insomuch that it may be truly
said, these new sorts of Recusants did more hurt than ever the old could have
don, if the subterranean plot of Nitre had taken effect; For that had only
destroyed some few of the Royal Race, of the Prelates and Peers then in being,
but these hell hounds have wholly extinguished and blown up all the three to
perpetuity, and all this only by the stench of their pestiferous breath; Nor
have they offered violence to Religion only, but they have affronted Reason it
self, nay they have baffled Common sense; And for all this we may thank
Carboncia, and Polihaima that rotten-hearted City, who like a fat cheese is so
full of Maggots; And indeed what could be expected else from these
pseudopolitians but disorder, confusion, and ataxy, considering how their first
reach of policy was to throw the ball of discord 'twixt the Subject and his
Souvrain, whom yet they had vowed to make the best belovedst Prince that ever
was; Insomuch that darkness it self is no more opposite to light, as their
actions were diametricall to their words, oaths, and protestations.


Pererius. Truly they are stupendous things that you have told me, but touching
the difference you speak of that they did put 'twixt Prince and Peeple, it was
the most compendious way to bring all things to confusion and ruin, to which
purpose I shall relate unto you an Apolog; There happened a shreud commotion and
distemper in the Body Natural 'twixt the Head and the Members, not only the
noble parts (many of them) but the common inferior organs banded against Him
in a high way of presumption; The heart which is the source of life with the
pericardium about it did swell against him, the spleen and gall flowed over,
the liver gathered ill blood, all the humors turned to choler against him; the
arms lifted up themselfs against him, neither back, hamms, or knees would bow to
him, nay the very feet offered to kick him; The ribbs and reins, the
hypocondrium, the diaphragma, the miseraik and emulgent veins were filled with
corrupt blood against him, nay the hypogastrium and the bowels made an
intestine war against him; While this feud lasted, it happened that these
tumultuary members fell out among themselfs, the hand would have all the fingers
equal, nay the toes would be all of an even length, and the rest of the
subservient members would be Independent; They grew so foolish that they would
have the fundament to be where the mouth is, the breast where the back, the
belly where the brain, and the yard where the nose is; The sholders should be
said to be no more backwards, nor the legs downwards; a bloody quarrel fell
out 'twixt the heart and the liver which of them received the first formation,
and whether of the two be the chiefest shop of languification, which question
bred so much gall 'twixt the Aristotelians and the Galenists; While this
spleen and strange tympany of pride lasted, it causd such an ebullition and
heat in the mass of blood, such a stiffnes in the cartilages and gristles,
such a lanknes in the arteries, that it put the whole compositum in a high
burning Fever or kind of ravening Frenzy, which in time grew Hepticall, and so
threatened a dissolution of the whole frame of the body.

It Is to be feared that the same fate attends the Political body of your Nation
as did the Natural I spoke of; But matters may mend, and as you began to find
a Reformation in your self before you were transmuted to this shape, so the
whole Nation may come to their old temper again; Therefore you shall do well, now
that you are invited by so pregnant an opportunity, and so real a proffer, to
shake off that Apish or Monky-fac'd figure you now wear, and resume the noble
erect shape of Man, to look toward Heven, and be safely transported to the
bosom of your own dear Country, where you may by your advantageous holy
profession, do a great deal of good offices to your deluded Compatriots, by the
contribution of your endeavors and talent, to reduce them to their right wits
again, and so to the temper of their famous progenitors.


Ape. Sir, you may as soon Quadrat a Circle, which the Philosopher holds to be
impossible, as convert a Roundhead, for I have felt his pulse so well, that
when a crochet has got once into his noddle, it is like Quicksilver in a hot
loaf, which makes it skip up and down to the astonishment of the ignorant
beholder; So when a caprichio, or some fanaticall idaea has once entered into
the pericranium of this pack of peeple, it causes such a Vertigo, that all the
Druggs of Egypt cannot cure them: Therefore, noble Prince, you may please to
practice your eloquence upon some other, but as for me you spend your breath in
vain, and all this while you have said as good as nothing, for I so far detest
human kind, that, in the mind I am in, I had rather undergo an Annihilation, or
to be reduced to a Nonentity, which is so horrid a thing to all created
natures, that the very devils themselfs abhor it, then be as I was: Therefore
I am resolved never to turn Man again, much less a Cherionian, for, in statu
quo nunc, I hold him to be not only the prophanest sect of Christians, but the
worst race of Mankind; The wildest Moor, Arab, or Tartar is a Saint in
comparison of him.

But I espy an ill-favored Snayl creeping hard by, with her house upon her
back, and stretching forth her ugly horns, which base creture those of my
present species do naturally loath, there being a perfect antipathy betwixt us,
as well as with all Shellfish.


(...)
The Fourth Section.
A Colloquy 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Hind, who had bin once one of
the gretest Bewties in Marcopolis, and for some youthful levities and wildnes
was transmuted to that shape; In this Section there are various discourses of
the state and nature of Women pro and con, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, and a Hind. Morphandra. IT seems, most princely
Pererius, by that clowd I perceive waving in your countenance, that you cannot
prevail with any of those transformed cretures with whom you have hitherto
conferrd, to comply with your so laudable desires of wearing again the shapes
of Men; Therefore I would wish you to try a conclusion upon a Female, which sex
uses to be more soft and pliable, and there is one just before you, That lovely
white Hind (though she has some black spots about her shingle) which I see
browsing upon that hedge, she was once a Woman, therefore try what you can do
upon her.


Pererius. Madame, By treating with this last Animal, I find the old Adage
confirmd, that Simia erit Simia, quamvis induatur vest aurea, An Ape will be
an Ape though he be clad with Tissue, he will never shake off his brutish
nature; But, most sagacious Queen, though Truth, as the proverb runs, begets
hatred oftentimes in the minds of those to whom it is spoken, yet, knowing well
that noble spirits do disdain to have one thing in the mouth, and another in
the heart, I will take the boldness to make a free discovery of my mind,
though I fear to incur thereby your disfavor.


Morphandra. Sir, you may frankly speak what you please, for there is no greter
a friend to generous souls than Truth.


Pererius. I doubt, though you have vouchsafed the gift of Ratiotination to
those Animals I have tampered withal, yet you have not bin pleased to give
them the full faculty of Reason, in regard I have found them so averse to
reassume their first being from that of Beasts, which could not surely be if
they had the full power of their former Intellect.


Morphandra. Truly if I had don so, you might have justly thought your self to
have been deluded by me, and that I had don you but half a courtesy or a
fained promise; Now touching promises a noble mind should not make any, that he
has not the will to do, or the power to perform, for the one proceeds from pure
dissimulation, and the other from mere foolishnes: But know, that all that
intervall of time you have held a parley with those transmuted Animals you have
tried already, they had the same reach and full light of Reason as they had when
they were Men.


Pererius. Oh, how is it possible then that the eyes of their understanding
should not be opend, to discern their own error?


Morphandra. It may well be that they find and feel more contentment, and
sweetness in that life they now lead, whereof men have no sense or knowledge,
therefore it is no thing of wonder that they desire to continue so; But go and
poursue the point of your enterprise, for it may be you may find some other that
will be conformable to your counsel herein, and it is very probable that Hind
may do it.


Pererius. It Is observed by wise men, that they who can prescribe a way of
themselfs to live contentedly and well, are to be placed in the first degree of
virtue; And they which cannot do it of themselfs, but are content to be directed
by the counsel of wiser men, are to be placed in the second degree; But they
who are not capable to counsel themselfs, nor receive counsel from others,
are not worthy to be ranked in the number of Rational cretures; Of this last
kind those silly Animals are with whom I have held discourse, therefore it is no
marvail that my persuasions could not take place with them; But knowing it to
be the greatest part of humanity for one to commiserat and help another, I will
push on my endeavors in this point, and see what I can do with that lovely
white Hind, for that sex whereof she was formerly uses to be more tender, and
to take impressions more easily: Gentle creture, I come to be the messenger of
good tidings unto you.


Hind. O! may Heven be blessed, I understand the accents of Man, and have the
strings of my tongue loosned to talk again.


Pererius. I hope now to have met with one fit for my purpose, for I hear her
thank Heven that she is come again to the gift of speech: Give me leave to ask
you, gentle Hind, how came you to be thus so strangely transfigured?


Hind. It was the great Queen Morphandra who has put this shape upon me; But,
Sir, give me leave to return you a question, Wherefore are you so desirous to
know the cause of my transmutation? for I was never asked the reason ever since
by any, nor had I my speech returned unto me till now, ever since I went upon
four legs.


Pererius. The reason that I desire to know the cause of your transfiguration is
for your infinite advantage, as you shall find, therefore I pray dispense with my
curiosity, if I desire to know further what country and condition you were of
when you were a Rational creture.


Hind. Sir, I was born in Marcopolis that rare Maiden City, so much renowned
throughout the world for the strangenes of her situation, for her policy,
riches, and power; But though she continu still a Virgin, yet she is married
once every year to Neptune whose minion she is, which makes her accounted so
salacious; There I had my first birth, and was accounted one of the Beauties of
my time, till for some dissolut courses and wildnes of youth, it pleased
Morphandra to give me a second kind of generation, and transmute me to this
shape you behold.


Pererius. You may then thank those Stars that guided me hither, for I have
obtained leave of Morphandra to talk with you, nor only so, but she has bin
pleased to promise me that she will re-invest you in you former fair nature if
you desire it, therefore I quickly expect your resolution, for the sudden
counsels and answers of women are observed to be the best, in regard that the
more you think on a thing, the more your thoughts use to be entangled; Therefore
tell me whether you will be a woman again, I or no?


Hind. No; there is a short and sudden Laconicall answer for you.


Pererius. It Is short I confess, but I conceive it to be as rash and
inconsiderat, I hope you will think better on it, for what an infinite advantage
it is to be transversed from a beast to be a noble Rational creture.


Hind. To be a Rational creture is not the thing that I am so averse unto as
much as to be a Woman, which sex is so much undervalued and vilified by you,
that some of your Philosophers (or Foolosophers more properly) have had the
faces to affirm that we were not of the same species with men, and if we were,
yet it was by an inferior kind of creation, being made only for multiplication
and pleasure; Others have given out, that in point of generation woman by
Natures design is still meant for man, and that a female is a thing brought
into the world beyond Nature's intention, either by the imperfection of seed,
or some other defect; Which absurd opinion how contrary it is to the just order
of nature, is manifest to any one that has but a crum of wit, considering how
we also concur to your generation, though some of your old doting Wisards have
held the contrary, holding us to be merely passive in that point.


Pererius. It Is true, that Aristotle who was one of the Secretaries that
attended Nature's Cabinet-councell does affirm, that in the female there is no
active principle of generation, but that she is merely passive, affording only
blood and the place of conception, the plastic formative virtue residing in the
Male's feed; But this opinion is exploded by our modern Physicians and
Naturalists, who assert that in the female also there is an active and plastic
principle of generation, with a procreative faculty, as appeers in the
engendring of a Mule which is a mixed species proceeding from the Horse and the
Ass, whose whole form is made up by the concurrence of both parents, so that
the Horse alone is not sufficient to produce such a creture, but the Ass must
co-operat as the efficient cause.


Hind. You may well add hereunto that the child oftentimes resembles the
mother, therefore she must also be an active principle in the formation; If it
be so, what a wrong is it to the justice and rules of nature that Women should
be held but little better than Slaves? how comes it that they should be so
vilipended and reviled? As that foolish Naturalist or Ninny, who wished there
were another way to propagat Mankind than by copulation with Women; Another
blurted out, that if men could live without the society of women, Angels would
come down and dwell among them; But that stinking Cynick was the worst of all,
who passing by a tree where a woman having been abused and beaten by her
husband, had done her self violently away, he wished that every tree might bear
such blessed fruit.


Pererius. Such speeches as these proceeded from a kind of raillery or way of
jesting, not from the judgment or wishes of the parties that spoke them, and it
is commonly seen that they who play upon them with their wits, have them most
in their wishes; For there is no sober-minded man but does acknowledge them to be
born for our comfort and dearest companions, and to be of equal degree with us
in point of creation and excellence, as also capable of the same Beatitude.


Hind. There is good reason to think so, for the Creator took the first woman
out of the midst of man thereby to be his equal, and without any ostentation be
it spoken she was made of a more refined matter, viz. of the Rib, which is a
purer substance than the red slimy earth whereof Adam was framed; And daily
experience tells us, that We are composed of purer plasticall ingredients than
You, because that if a man, be he never of so fine a paste, wash his hands with
the clearest water in several clean basins never so often, yet he will leave
some foulnes and faeculence behind; but a Woman can do so and leave the water at
last so clear, so fair and limpid, as when it came from the fountain or source
it self in few times washing.


Pererius. It Is true, she was made of a Rib, but 'twas a crooked one, which
makes many of your sex to be so crosse-graind; This causes many of them to be
kept under a greater servitude than otherwise they would be.


Hind. A servitude indeed, or rather a tyranny, and we must purchase this
servitude with the weight of gold, you having made that fine Law, that when any
woman is to be your companion, she must bring money with her, which you call
Dower or Matrimonial portion forsooth.


Pererius. This Law is enacted for your good, for knowing that you, in regard
of your in-experience and weakness, cannot tell how to conserve your estates,
the said Dower is consigned to your husbands to improve it for your further
profit, and to maintain you; Insomuch that your husbands cannot be called
Patrons of your goods, but your Procurators in conserving them, and if you
chance to survive them they all return to you, and most commonly with some
advantage; In the interim we trudge and toil without, and you within doors,
only to conserve it, which is but an easy task.


Hind. You say very well in that, for unless there be a good houswife at home
to keep, in vain does the husband labor abroad to gather; But whereas you say
that we have not that prudence to manage an estate, and govern it, I pray call
to mind the Kingdom of the Amazons, how long and how wisely was it governed by
women? Look upon that of Babylonia which was so much amplified by Semiramis,
and that of Scythia by Tomiris, especially upon a late notable Queen in
Gheriona, who ruled triumphantly near upon 45 years; And whereas you speak of
the want of wisdom that we have, I pray what were the nine Muses the
Inventrices of all Sciences? what were the three Graces? what were the twelve
Sybills? what are the three spiritual Virtues? nay what was Minerva the
goddess of Wisdom, born out of the brain of Jove himself? were they not all
women?


Pererius. It Is true that Minerva issued out of Jupiter's brain, but she had no
woman to her mother, for so she had not proved so wise; And touching the Muses,
Graces, and Sybills you speak of, you know as well that the three fatal
Sisters, and Erynnis the mother of Discord, were all women as well, together
with the three Furies of Hell; But if you look upon Heven, you are but few
there, for among the Planets there are but two of your sex, ( viz. Venus and
Cynthia) all the rest are male.


Hind. You may as well argue, that because among the twelve Celestial Signs
there are but three human cretures, and seven brute Animals, (with two inanimat)
that there are more brute Animals in Heven than Men; But, Sir, under favor,
whereas you alledg that among the Hevenly Planets there are but two females, the
rest males, it shows that men are of a more erratic and wandering humor than
women; Now Sir, touching that wisdom you speak of, you have more opportunity to
get it by conversing with the world abroad, and so pourchasing Experience which
is the mirroir of wisdom; Whereas we are kept within doors, and shut up 'twixt
a few walls, whence you have a saying, That that woman deserves only respect
and honor, whose actions and praises go not out of the walls of her own house:
And hereunto that you put us to all the drudgery and servile offices at home,
while you are joviall and feast it abroad; nor do you only coop us up so in a
kind of prison, but you clap oftentimes a barbarous kind of lock upon us,
whereas you, though you have Enclosures of your own, yet you may go abroad when
you list, and, when your lust drives you, feed upon the Common without
control; And is not this pure slavery in us, and tyranny in you?


Pererius. Concerning the first, Apelles used to paint a good Houswife upon a
Snayl, which intimated, that she should be as slow from gadding abroad, and when
she went she should carry her house upon her back, that is, she should make all
sure at home; Now to a good houswife, her House should be as the Sphere to a
Star, (I do not mean a wandering Starr) wherein she should twincle with neatnes as
a Star in its Orb; And how can you call that a prison whereof you keep the keys,
and are commandresses in chief? The Imperium domesticum you rule within doors,
whither we bring all that we gain abroad, and it is your office to improve and
augment it, though many of you are so lavish that you make the poor husband
oftentimes to turn a noble to nine-pence, as is intimated by that famous
picture of Polygnottus made of one Ocnus, who being a Cordwayner by his Trade,
as he was making new Ropes, there was a Wisell hard by that gnawed off the
Cordage, by which was meant his Wife; For it is in the wife to husband what the
man gets, according to the Poverb, Ask my wife whether I thrive or no, for if
she be prodigal she will bring her poor husband quickly to thwitten a
mill-post into a pudding-prick.

Touching the second point, of laying artificial restraints upon your bodies,
it is because some of you can be no further trusted than you are seen; But this
ill-favored custom I confess is used only in that Country, where women are
more hot and lustful than under other climes, for the Naturalists observe
without any partiality, that your sex is more salacious than the Masculine,
whereof there might be produced a clowd of examples, I will instance only in
two, and they of the highest rank, viz. in two Empresses, the one a Roman, the
other a German; the first was so cunning in her lust, that she would take in no
passenger into her Barge (for women are leaking vesells) until the Barge was
freighted, for fear the resemblance of the child should discover the true father,
and then she would take in all comers; The second having buried a most gallant
man she had to her husband, her Confessor advised her with ghostly counsel,
that for the future she should live like a Turtle during the remnant of her
life, because it was impossible to find such another Mate again among the whole
mass of Mankind; Whereto she answered, Father, since you will have me to lead
the life of a Bird, why not of a Sparrow as well as of another Bird?


Hind. I shall confront your instances by two other examples, as memorable
altogether, the first of Zenebia, who would have no carnal copulation with her
husband, after she found her self once quick, but would continue in an admired
course of continence all the time of her pregnancy; Moreover the Saint-like
Empress Bettrice, who in the verdant spring of her age after Henry her
husbands death, lived ever after like a Turtle as you speak of, by immuring her
self in a Monastic Cell, and burying her body alive as it were when he was
gone; But what an extraordinary rare example was that of Queen Artemisia, who
living chaste ever after her husband Mausolus his death, got his ashes all put
in urnes, whereof she would take down a dramm every morning fasting, and next her
heart, saying, That her body was the fittest place to be a Sepulcher to her
most dear husband, notwithstanding that she had erected another outward Tomb
for him, that continues to this day one of the Wonders of the world:
Furthermore you know, I believe, better then I, Sir, that at this day in many
parts of the Oriental world, such is the rare love of wifes to their dead
husbands, that they throw themselfs alive into the Funeral Pile to accompany
his body to the other life, though in the flower of their years.


Pererius. It is confessed that many of you have noble spirits, that mavelous
rare affections lodge in you, and so you may be deservedly called the second
part of Mankind, in regard you are so necessary for the propagation thereof,
and to peeple the world.


Hind. Yet you call us the weaker vessels, but as weak as we are, we are they
in whom the whole mass of both sexes is molded; nevertheless some use us as
Spice-bags, which when the spices are taken out are thrown away into some moldy
corner; And though we have the mould within us wherein you are all cast, though
we co-operat, and contribut our purest blood toward your generation, though we
bring you forth into the world with such dolorous pangs and throws, though you
are nourished afterward and nursed with our very bloods, yet our os-spring
must bear only your sirnames, as if we had no share at all in him, his memory
living only in you, though Tumontia in this point be more noble than other
Countries, by giving the surname of the Maternall line oftentimes to some of the
male children.

Notwithstanding all these indispensible necessities the world has of women,
yet there is no other species of cretures wherein the female is held to be so
much inferior to the male as we are amongst you, who use to slight, misprize,
and tyrannize over us so much; For there is one huge race of men, I mean the
Volganian, who use to beat their wifes once a week as duly as they go to bed to
them.


Pererius. The reason of this is, because there are so many of you either shrews,
or light and loose in the hilts, and it is a sad case when Viri fama jacet inter
uxoris fempora; Touching the first, there is an old proverb, that Every one
knows how to tame a shrew but he who has her, and though there might be
multitude of examples produced, yet I will instance but in a few, the first two
shall be Zappora and Xantippe, the one married to Moses a holy man, the other
to Socrates a great Philosopher, how cross-grained the one was, the Sacred
Oracles will tell, and for the other, her husband coming one day in when she
was in an ill humor, she scolded him out of doors, and at his going out she
whipped up into an upper room, and poured down a potfull of piss upon his
sconce, which made the poor patient husband shake his head, and break forth
into this speech, I thought that after so much thunder we should have rain.
Another damnable scold having reviled and cursed her husband a great while, all
which time she had the Devil often in her mouth, to whom she bann'd him, at
last he said, Hold thy tongue wife, and threaten me no more with the Devil, for
I know he will do me no hurt, because I have married his Kinswoman; This made
the Epigrammatist to sing prettily, Conjugis ingentes animos linguamque domare,
Herculis est decimus-tertius iste labor.


Hence grew that cautious proverb, Honest men do marry, but Wise men not.


Hind. I, we use to be the common subject of your drolleries, and you would
want matter for your wits to work upon were it not for us; But, touching those
humors you pointed at before which are incident to us sometimes, they proceed
from the ill usage, and weakness of the husbands, who know not how to manage a
wife, which is one of the prime points of Masculine prudence; We say
proverbially, that a good Jack makes a good Gill, a discreet husband makes a
good wife, though being the weaker vessel, and having no other weapon than her
tongue she break out sometimes into humors; What a sad thing is it for a woman to
have a thing called a husband weaker than her self? how fullsom would such a
fool be? such silly coxcombs as are jealous upon every slight occasion, and
restrain them so barbarously as was spoken before, deserve to wear such
branched horns, such spilters and trochings on their heads, as that goodly
Stagg bears which you see browsing among those trees, accompanied with those
pretty Fawns, Prickets, Sorrells, Hemuses, and Girls, whereof some are mine which
I brought into the world without any pain or help of Midwife, and quickly lost
all care of them afterward.


Pererius. Well, let us give over these impertinent altercations pro and con,
and go to the main business; I told you that Queen Morphandra is willing, at my
intercession, to restore you unto your former nature, and I have a lusty Galeon
in port to convey you to Marcopolis, that renowned and rare City.


Hind. It Is true Marcopolis is a most famous City, having continued a pure
Virgin from her infancy these twelve centuries of years and upwards, and it is
said she shall continue so still, according to the Prophecy, Until her husband
forsake her, viz. the Sea, with whom her marriage is renewed every year; But
'twas observed when I lived there, that her Husband began to forsake her, that
the Adrian Sea did retire and grow shallower about her, which some interpret to
be an ill Omen, and portends the loss of her Maidenhead: But, Sir, touching my
former nature, truly I would desire nothing of it again but the faculty of
speech that I might talk sometimes; In all other things I prefer by many degrees
this species wherein I am now invested by Queen Morphandra, which is far more
chaste and temperat, far more healthful and longer-liv'd: Touching the first,
There Is no creture whose season of carnal copulation is shorter, for the
Rutting-time lasts but from the midst of September to the end of October, nor
is there any other creture whose enjoyment of pleasure is shorter in the act;
moreover when we are full, we never after keep company with the male for eight
months; Concerning the second, viz. our temperatnes, we never use to overcharge
or cloy nature with excess, besides our food is simple, those green leafs and
grass you see are our nutriment, which our common mother the Earth affords us
so gently, we require no variety of Viands, which makes that our breath is
sweeter than the fairest Ladies in Marcopolis, and our fewmishes with what else
comes from within us is nothing so unsavory; Nor need we that monthly
purgation which is so improperly called Flowers, it being such rank poison that
it will crack a true crystal glass; Nay it is observed, that if a menstruous
woman come near an alveary or hive of Bees, they forsake their food all the
while, finding the air to be infected; Nor have we any gall within us, and
herein we are like the Dove among Birds, and the Dolphin among fish; only
there is a kind of acid humor that nature has put in our Singles, the smell
whereof causes our enemies, viz. the Dogs, to fly from us; Moreover, we are
not subject to abortions, and that curse which the Creator inflicted upon
Womankind, that they should bring forth their children with sorrow and pain,
which we are free from; And such is our love to Mankind, that when we have
brought forth our young ones, we trust them rather with them than with other
beasts, by putting them near highways, or dwelling-houses for protection;
Touching the third, which is healthfulnesse, it is far beyond that of women, as
appears by our longaevity and extension of life, which is next to that of an
Elephant, (whose youth begins not till he be threescore year old) according to
the Tumontian Proverb, A Hedge lasts three years, a Dog three hedges, a Horse
three dogs, a Man three horses, a Heart three men, an Elephant three hearts;
Histories are full of admirable examples how long some of of us have lived, let
one serve for all, When Archesilaus dwelt in Licosura, as the Arcadian Annalls
relate, he took a Hind who wore a collar, whereon was engraven, I was a Fawn
when Agapenor was taken in Troy, which by the computation that then was made,
was above three hundred years; Nor had Aesculapius, that Archiatros or god of
Physic, arrived to so fair an age, and to such a miraculous perfection in that
Art, had he not been nursed with Hinde's milk; For length of time brings
experience, and wisdom with it along, and sometimes the gift of Prophecy, as
was that ancient Hind of that great Captain Sertorius, whom 'twas thought
Diana had inspired with a fatidicall spirit; Insomuch that Sertorius never gave
Battle, or attempted any great design without advising first with that Heart:
Add hereunto, that when after so fair an age we come to die, there is nothing
within and without our dead bodies but is useful for Mankind, how much are our
very skins valued? how medicinal is that kind of bone which is found in the
left ventricle of a Hart's heart against the Hemerroids? how excellent is our
marrow against the Gowt and Consumptions? how our blood fried with oil, and
applied to the inferior parts, presently ste^^^eth the loosnes of the belly,
and being drunk in wine is a rare antidote against poison? what exquisit
virtues has the Hart's horn, with other parts of the body, as the Naturalists
observe? Whereas there is nothing in the most noisome carcases of Women that is
good for any thing, except their hair, which is either but an excrescence, or
excrement rather, useful only to make fantastic foolish Periwigs, and it has
bin found, that this hair being buried in some kind of dung turns to Snakes;
Therefore, under favor, there is none of sane judgment, considering the advantages
I have by this present shape, will advise me to change it for that of a frail
Woman; If I should do so, I would be more foolish then that Stagg in the Fable,
who seeing a Horse with rich trappings, and carrying a velvet saddle upon his
back, repined at his happiness, and wished he were such a creture; The Forester
taking notice of it, put the velvet-saddle upon the Stagg's back the next day,
and having mounted him, he rid him diverse heats up and down the Launds, till
the poor Stagg began to faint, and sink under his burden, and then he repented
himself of that foolish and inconsiderat wish he had made.


(...).
The Fifth Section.
Discourses 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Mule, who in his Manhood had bin
a Doctor of Physic in Tumontia, whom for some Quacking tricks he had played, and
for some other resons, Morphandra turned to a Mule; In this Section there be
discourses of the Art of Physic, of the various complexions of Mankind, and of
the nomberlesse diseases that are incident unto Human Bodies, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, and a Mule. Morphandra. I Took notice that you courted
and complemented that female creture more then ordinary, but how have you
prevailed? have you made her inclinable to a resumption of her former nature?
Is she willing to go back to that Syrenian City, that great Mart of all female
plesures, Marcopolis, where she slept in the bosom of her first causes?


Pererius. Madame, we have a proverbiall saying among us Soldiers, Que la
Femme, and la Forteresse qui commence a parlementer, est demi gaignee, The
Female and Fortress which begins to parley is half-gain'd; But I do not find it
so here, for this Female would have bin contented to have parlyed with me
everlastingly if I had held her discourse, insomuch that she desires nothing of
a Woman again but only the faculty of talking, only a woman's Tongue, touching
other parts, she is utterly alienated in her affection toward the whole Sex,
alleging the inequall value that uses to be put upon Women in relation to
Man, who holds himself to be of a superior Creation: Then she spoke of the
domestical kind of captivities and drudgeries that women are put unto, with
many such good-morrows; But, Madame, in all humblenes I desire, that you would
vouchsafe to enlarge your Princely favors toward me so far, that I may mingle
speech with some more solid creture.


Morphandra. You shall presently be partaker of your desires, for I spy upon
the brow of that hillock a Mule nibling the grass, He was by nativity a
Tumontian, and by his profession a Doctor of Physic, whom I transformed to that
shape, not that he wanted understanding (as the Horse and Mule are said to do)
for that Nation has generally a competent proportion of that, but partly
because Physicians there use to ride upon Mules to visit their Patients, as
also because that Nation in general use to be taxed for their slow pace and
phlegmatic disposition, with their dilatory proceedings in their designs and
counsels.


Pererius. It Is true that the Tumantian is tardy and slow in his counsels when
he is moulding of a design, and therein he may be said to have a Saturnian
motion, but when his design is ripe, and ready to be put in action, then he is
nimble enough and follows the motion of Mercury; Add hereunto, that he is not
only slow, but wonderful secret in his counsels, insomuch that his designs
may be called Mysteries while they are sur le tapis, while they are in the
agitation of counsel, which makes them afterward turn from Mysteries to
Exploits.


Morphandra. But there was another reason that induced me to transmute that
Tumontian Physician to a Mule, which was, that he oftentimes uses to retard
the cure and sanation of his Patients for drawing more fees from them, and
letting them blood in the purse, as also for other Empyricall and Mountibankish
Quacking tricks he played, coming hither Physician to a Carack; Therefore you
may please to make your approaches to him accordingly.


Pererius. Poor stupid Animal, how came thou to be thus so pitifully
disguised and transformed from thy first species, and so honorable a
profession? for among all other vocations of life, they say the Physician is to
be honored; Art thou desirous to be re-invested and settled in thy first Nature
and Calling, in case Queen Morphandra condescend thereunto? for I have power
from her to feel how thy pulse beats that way.


Mule. Truly no, for I have an utter disaffection both to my first Species, to
my Country, and Calling, in regard I find far more contentment in this
constitution of body, and course of life; Touching the first, I am, as I am
now, free from those vexations of spirit, and perturbances of mind whereunto
Mankind is so miserably obnoxious, or rather enslaved; I feed here upon pure
simples, such as the gentle earth produces and puts out of her prolificall
womb, my stomach is never overcharged with surfeits, nor my brain intoxicated
with strong drink and the juice of the grape, in every berry whereof there lurks
a kind of Devil, for according to the modern proverb, From the berry of the
Grape, and grain of the Barley,
Comes many a sore fray and hurli-burly.


Moreover, when I was a Man, my head was distracted ever and anon with strange
whimseys, and extravagant opinions, which now I am free from.


Pererius. It Is true, that human brain is like a garden, wherein sundry sorts of
herbs and flowers do grow, but touching your Countrymen, they are least
subject of any peeple to such distractions and diversity of opinions, in regard
of their exact obedience to their Spiritual and Civil Governors: But what is
the cause that you are so out of conceit with your Country, where you received
your first essence and existence?


Mule. First, because of the immoderat heat thereof, the Sun being too lavish of
his beams, which causes such a sterility and barrennes, that in some places men
live like beasts, feeding most of all upon grass and sallets, only they have
happily a bottle of Oil, and another of Vinegar in their houses to pour amongst
them, they seldom see a loaf of bread or bit of meat, but when noon or night
comes, they go abroad and gather the said grass for their dinners and suppers,
and if they chance to have a few toasted Chestnuts it is a great banquet; Which
barrennes proceeds not so much from the heat of the Clime, as from the
paucity and lazines of the Inhabitants, who are so naturally given to ease and
sloth, from cultivating the earth, and doing other parts of industry.


Pererius. It must be granted that Tumontia, in point of fecundity, is
inferior to some Regions, as also for number of men, for if she had enough of
both, she would make a Hen of the Cock, that is, she would be too hard for her
next neighbor Artonia; But touching the first, it carries some convenience
with it, for it keeps the peeple more temperat, and able to endure hardship;
Then the Country is not so subject to be overrun by foreign force, for in point
of Invasion, an Army would be hunger-starved there before they could march far:
Yet I have observed, that as much as there is of any commodity in Tumontia, it
is better then what grows in other Countries, their Wines, their Flesh, their
Fruits, their Horses, their Silks, their Wool, etc. is better there than in
other places, and let Artonia her neighbor never vaunt so much of her plenty,
yet the Tumontian carries a better cloak on his back, he wears better shoos on
his feet, he has a better sword by his side, he drinks better wine, eats
better fruit, and has a better horse under him, etc. than the Artonian; And if
Riches consists in Tresures, in plenty of Gold and Silver, Tumontia goes far
beyond all other Countries in that particular.


Mule. It Is true, that the Tumontian King is Master of the Mines both of Gold
and Silver, yet if you go to the common peeple, one may say, Who goes worse
shodd than the Shoo-maker's wife? for by mal administration, there is little of
that gold and silver that is current among the Inhabitants, either among
Merchant, Yeoman, or Artist, but all is a base Copper-coin, which the King
enhanceth or decries at pleasure: That tresure you speak of is sent abroad to
feed and foment wars in other countries, from which the Timontian King is never
free, his sword being always out of the scabbard to secure or enlarge his
Territories, which makes the Artonian say, that the Tumontian Ambition has no
Horrizon, it is interminable and boundless.

Add hereunto that the Tresure you mention is an exoticall commodity, it is had
from far, from another part of the world, where the Tumonitan is said to be a
Buggerer of his common Mother (the Earth) more than any, for he fetches it out
from her bowels sometimes 50 fathom deep, where the poor slave that digs it
sees neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars once in a twelmonth, being chained to a kind
of infernal darkness under ground, and is as it were buried alive before
Nature has outrun her due course in him; And it is a sad story to relate, how
many millions of human cretures were made away in the discovery and conquest of
that huge Continent, what a world of blood was spilt, and innocent souls swept
away; Insomuch that if the Tresure which was got ever since, and the Blood
which was shed were put in counterscales, the latter (as one said) would
outpoise the first.


Pererius. It Is true, that the reduction of that vast piece of Earth was somewhat
Tragical, but it was impossible to perform the work otherwise, and secure the
Conquerors, in regard of that huge mass of Peeple and swarms of Men which were
found there, who could not by fair means be brought to civility: Now it is a
dubious question to determine, whether those Savages gained more by the
Tumontian, or the Tumontian by them; It Is true, that he got by them Gold,
Silver, and Gemms, which it is confessed are the most precious productions of
Nature; But what did they receive from the Tumontian by way of exchange? They
recived Religion and virtue, civility and knowledge, government and policy;
Therefore the rest of the known World should vail to the Tumontian for this
mighty Exploit, and happy Discovery, which it seems the Great God of Nature had
reserved for him as a benediction from the beginning; And certainly a mighty
blessing it was, if we enter into a due contemplation of the Thing, and
acknowledge it so, for thereby there was as much of the Terrestrial Globe found
out, in point of extent and amplitude, as the Geometricians give out, that did
very near equal all the Old World: But what a world of dangers and
difficulties did the Tumontian overcome in this achievment? At first the
incertitude of the business, the huge distance, the perils of the tnmbling
Ocean did offer themselfs; On the other side, the Expenses of the Expedition,
and the despair of more provisions when the old stores were spent, as also
being to take footing on a new Earth, the Inhabitants might prove stronger than
the Invaders etc. It cannot be denied, but such encumbrances as these might
have distracted and deterrd the highest human nature from such an uncertain
attempt; But at last the Tumontian courage and magnanimity was such, that it
broke through all these difficulties: And as the generous Boar, being entangled
in the Toyls, does try all possible ways, he turns about and strugles how to
get out, at last, when all will not serve the turn, he lies down 'twixt
quietness and despair, putting himself upon the mercy of the Huntsman; So the
Fortune of that great Action being tied as it were to those apprehensions of
fear and doubt which did possess it, at last she does prostrate her self at
the feet of the Tumontian valor and virtue, tying her self thereunto by a
perpetual tribut; She brings him afterward Mines and Mountains of Gold, yea
Rivers running with red Oar, Seas full of Pearl, Soiles full of Aromatical
Spices, new Species of useful cretures etc. All this did that new World afford
Tumontia as a grateful return for such indefatigable labors, and constancy in
poursuance of that glorious Enterprise.


Mule. Noble Prince, truly Tumontia is infinitely engaged unto you for these
high Elogiums you please to give of her, yet, under favor, there is a strange
fate, I am loath to say a curse, which attends that far fetched Tresure you
magnify so much; For observable it is, that not long after the conquest of
those harmless peeple, whom God and Nature had planted there from the first
Creation, the revolt of Hydraulia and the confederat Provinces happened, which
consumed of that Tresure you speak of above five and twenty hundred millions
first and last, otherwise the Tumontian Kings might have paved their Courts,
and til'd their Palaces (as it was said elsewhere) with Gold and Silver; For
as I told you before, the least part of this Tresure remains in Tumontia, and
that is only in Monasteries and other Religious Houses, the common coin is
Brass and Copper, wherein the Hydraulian it is thought has don more mischief to
Tumontia than any other way, for copper and brass being cheap with her, she is
so dextrous in counterfeiting the Tarmontian coin, that whole Sows of Lead,
and Masts hollowed within have been found crammed with that coin among her
Cargazons, when she came to the Ports of Tumontia to trade.


Pererius. Well, let us cut off these circumlocutions, and com again to the main
point; Have you a disposition of returning to your primitive Nature, to your
Country, and so learned a Calling? It is impossible for you to meet with a
fairer opportunity, and let me tell you, Opportunity is the best moment in the
whole extension of time.


Mule. Concerning my former Nature, I gave you some touches formerly why I
prefer my present condition before it, I had also some reflexes upon my Country,
I could say much more of her, but that I am dissuaded by the proverb, that it is
a sorry bird that beraies his own nest: Now Sir, touching my former profession,
which you applaud so much, it is true, there is a kind of learning and lucre that
does attend it, but withal there is a great deal of sordidnes; I will converse
no more with ulcers, cankers, and impostumes; I will pry no more into
close-stools and urinalls, or rake gold out of excrements, as the Poet tells
us, Aurum Virgilius exstercore colligit Enni,
Fecit Virgilius quod facit and Medicus.


No are the Fees which belong to that Profession in Tumontia any thing
considerable, where Doctors of Physic use to attend a Patient, with their Mules
and Foot-cloaths in a kind of state, yet they receive but two shillings for
their Fee for all their gravity and pains; Add hereunto, that there are up and
down the world so many poor Empiricks of this Trade, that it is nothing of that
esteem as it was; which makes the British Epigrammatist sing wittily, Qui modo
venisti nostram Mendicus in Urbem,
Paulum mutato nomine fis Medicus;
Pharmaca das Aegroto, aurum tibi porrigit Aeger,
Tu morbum curas Illius, Ille tuum.



Pererius. Touching the first part of your speech, it shows the exact
government of Tumontia, where there is an exact Tax laid upon the Fees both of
Physician and Lawyer, which they dare not surpass; Touching the other part,
they are but clinches and passages of Drollery, nor do Physicians much value
such gingling conceits all the while they finger our coin, for all the world
does grant, that the study of Physic is both learned and necessary, and it is
the chiefest kind of Learning, for thereby a man comes to know himself; For the
Physician can say more truly than any other, Nosco meipsum.


Mule. Though Physicians know themselfs never so well and the constitution of
their bodies, yet when they are sick they commonly take their Receipts by
prescription of others, being distrustful of themselfs; And whereas you say,
the practice of Physic is necessary, I remember to have read, that the point
was debated before Pope Alexander the sixth, and canvased to and fro, some
alleging that Physicians were superfluous and not necessary for a
Commonwealth, because Rome stood and flourished many hundred years before the
use of Physic was first introduced, during which time men never lived more
healthful and longer; His Holiness opinion being desired at last, he said, he
was for the affirmatif, and that he held Physicians to be absolutely necessary
for a Commonwealth, in regard that were it not for physicians the world would
be so thick of peeple, that one could not live for another: Intimating thereby
that the Physicians help to make them away.


Pererius. Yet your experience tells you, that the Physical Art is noble, and
one of the seven liberal Sciences, consisting of undoubted and certain
Principles, containing a world of Natural knowledge.


Mule. There is Therapeutic or contemplative Physic, there is Diagnostic or
knowing, and there is Prognostic Physic; If we consider Physic as she is a
Seience, she has most true and certain Aphorisms, for she considers only
Universalls, which are eternal and invariable, and breed certitudes in us,
because she arrives to the knowledge of things by their causes, and so she may
be called Scientificall, and appertains to contemplation, whose only scope is
to discover Tnuth singly of it self; But if we consider Physic as an Art, which
proceeds from experience and action, she is uncertain and fallacious in her
operations, in regard of the various constitutions of human bodies, for those
Drugs and Receipts which do work kindly with some bodies, find cross operations
in others, and many times the true symptoms of the disease is not known;
Moreover we administer to others what we never take our selfs, which made a
great aged Physician, being asked how he came to live so long, to answer, I
have lived so long because never any Drug entered into my guts; Besides, when
any Pill or Potion has a kindly operation in the Patient, it is as much by hap
as by any good cunning; What a number of remedies are there for one only
disease? whence may be inferred, that there is not any one peculiar infallible
remedy; Insomuch that when the Physician applies Universalls to Particulars,
and administers any Purgation, Vomit, or Electuary, it is requisite that both
the Physician and Patient be fortunat, there is a kind of happiness required in
the business; Add hereunto, that the complexion of men and women are so
diffring, their appetite so irregular and disordinat, that it makes all
Physical operations to be so uncertain; Now touching the species of Us
Sensitive cretures, they are of so even and strong complexions, their appetites
are so regular, their nutriments and food, their drinks are so simple, that
they need not any physical Drugs; Whereas among Mankind, they make ever and
anon an Apothecary's shop of their bellies, being still in a course of Physic,
which makes them so miserable, for it is a true proverb, Qui vivit medice, vivit
misere; Therefore a kind of Tragical speech was that of Alexander the Great,
when upon expiring his last, he cried out, being but then in the Meridian of
his age, Pereo turba Medicorum, I perish by too many Physicians.


Pererius. It begets much wonder in me that you should thus traduce your own
Calling, and derogate from so learned and laudable a Profession, a Faculty that
has been always accounted to have a high kind of Divinity in it, being founded
by Apollo himself.


Mule. In the shape I now wear, I cannot lie nor flatter, I can neither cogg,
cageole, nor complement, as I did when I was a man, when I used ever and anon
to kiss those hands which I wished in my thoughts had been cut off, my heart
and my tongue lying now more level and even, there is nearer relation betwixt
them; Therefore what I told you before was truth, simple truth, wherein the Brute
Animal goes beyond the Rational, who is subject to innumerable errors,
dissimulations, and the humor of lying.

But to enlarge my self a little further upon the former subject of Physic,
which you call so learned an Art, you know that every one is a Fool or a
Physician to himself naturally, after he has passed the Meridian of his years,
therefore what great learning can there be in this?


Pererius. It Is much truth; I have heard of diverse irrational cretures that are
learned this way, who by the mere instinct and conduct of nature, can direct
themselfs to things that can cure them.


Mule. This cannot be denied, and therein many of them are more sagacious than
men; The Serpent goes to Fenell when he would clear his sight, or cast off his
old scruffy skin to wear a new one; The Stagg, Buck, or Do, when they are hurt
have recourse to Dittany; The Swallow when she finds her young ones have sore
eyes, makes use of Celandine, or Swallow-wort; The Snail heals her self with
Hemlock; the Wesill, when she prepares to fight with the Mole, uses to raise
her spirits by eating Rue; The Stork heals all his infirmities with Origanum;
The wild Boar with Ivy; The Elephant fenceth himself from the poison of the
Camelion with Olive leaves; The Bear makes use of Mandragora against Pismires;
The Patridge and wild Pidgeon do use to purge their superfluities with
Bay Leaves; The Dog, when he feels himself indisposed in his stomach, runs to
the green grass a little bedewed, etc. But what need I detain you with more
instances? take any sensitive creture you please, and you will find, that
Nature has taught him a remedy against all infirmities that are incident unto
him, not only to the species but to every Individual, and all this without
any expense of time or tresure, without any study or labor, without any fee or
reward, without any teaching or instructions from others; Whence it is apparent,
that Nature is more careful and indulgent of Us than of Ratinall cretures, who
though they are subject to a thousand infirmities more, yet not one in a
thousand knows how to cure himself; but he must have recourse to the
Physician, and so trusts him with his life, and if he chance to work a cure
upon him, he uses to give his purse a purgation also, for Though God heals,
yet the Physician carries away the Fees.


Pererius. It Is very fitting the labourer should have his hite, and that every
one should live by his calling, but how can money be better employed than for the
recovery of Health, which is the most precious of all Jewels, without which we
can neither serve God, man, or our selfs?


Mule. It is very true that Physicians sometimes restore health, but they miss
as often, how can they cure an Ague, which is called opporbrium Medicorum, the
shame of Physicians? besides, there is an Artonian proverb says, A la Goutte le
Medecin ne voit gout, The Gout makes the Physician blind; Yet they have this
privilege, that the earth covers all their faults: Now, what a world of
distempers and maladies is man's body subject unto? There is a common saying that
says, He has as many diseases as a horse, but it is false, for man has many
more; besides, a horse has few or no diseases at all, but what the cruelty of
man, does cause in him, either when he is over-ridden, and so becoms
broken-winded, when galled backd, foundered, or splinter'd by the carelesnes or
cruelty of the Rider, as I said before, whereas a good man should be merciful
to his beast; But there is never a part of the human body, but it has I cannot
tell how many peculiar deseases belonging unto it; Go to the Head, it has the
Cephalagia, the Hemicrania, or the Migrain, it has the Scotomy or Vertigo, the
Palsy, Convulsion, Epilepsy or Falling Sickness, It has the Phrenitis, Mania
or Phrenzy, Catarrs, Apoplexy, with many other; Go to the Lungs, it has the
Astma, Pluritis, Peripneumonia, Empyema, Ptisis, Haemocrises, with sundry more;
Go to the Heart the fountain of life, it has the Syncope or swooning,
Palpitation, etc. Go to the Stomach, it has Inappetentia, Fames Canina or the
Wolf, it has the Pica, Malacia, Singultus or the Hicock, spitting of blood,
choler, Abscess^s or Impostumes, Ulcers, etc. Go to the Liver, it has
Obstruction, the Jaundies, the Dropsy, Cirrhus, Inflammation, Ulcer,
Impostume, etc. Go to the Bowels, they have the Colique, Iliaca Passio or
voiding excrements at the mouth, Astrictio alvi, Lineteria, or smoothnes of the
guts, Caeliaca affectio or pappy stools, Diarrhaea or thin scowring, Dysenteria
or the bloody-flix, Tenesmus or sorenes of the fundament, Fluxus Hepaticus,
Lombrici or the Worms, the Hemerroids, Fistula, etc. Go to the Spleen, there is
Dolor lienis, Obstructio, Hypocondriacall melancholy or the Mother, etc. Go to
the Reins, Bladder, and Genitalls, there is Calculus or the Stone, Inflammatio,
Mictus fanguinis, Diabete, when one voids more urine than he drinks,
Incontinentia urinae, Ardor, Iscuria, when the passage is quite stopped, the
Strangury, when one pisseth drop by drop, Lues Venerea, St. Anthony's Fire, the
Chancre, and Botches, etc. Go to the Ioints, there is Arthritis, and sundry
sorts of Gouts, etc. Go to the Eye, there is Gutta Serena, Suffusio or a
Cataract with a film, Ophthalmia, Epiphola or hot rheum, Aegilops, Fistula
Lachrymalis, and above twenty more; Go to the Ear, there is Surditas, Sonitus,
Dolot aurium, etc. Go to the Nose, there is Ozana, Ulcus, Polypus or lump of
flesh, Faetor narium, Hemoragia or excess of bleeding, Coryza or the Pose,
Sternutatio, withdiversmore; Go to the Tongue, there is Paralysis, Laesus, Gustus
inflammatio, Ranula sub lingua, etc. Go to the Teeth, Throat, and Gums, there is
Angina or the Squinzy, there is fluxus, Uvulae relaxatio, with sundry more; There
is also abundance of peculiar diseases that are incident to Women, there is
Chlorosis or the Green-sicknesse, Cancers in the breasts, Suppressio mensium,
Fluor muliebris, Fluor uterinus, Histerica passio, Inflammatio, Ulcus uteri,
Cirrhus uteri, Cancer uteri, Gangraena uteri, Hydrops uteri, Clausura uteri,
Sterilitas, Obortus, Partus diffioilis, Faetus mortuus, Secundina retenta,
Proscidentia, with many more; Out of these premises the conclusion follows,
that Human bodies both male and female are naught else but frail Vessels, or
Bottoms wherein are slowed all manner of perishable Commodities; But these which
I have spoken of are corporeal, and most of them outward diseases that attend
the body of mankind, whereof I have not enumerated the twentieth part; But if
you go to his Rational Soul, she has also her distempers, the indisposition
of the inward man is greater, the anxieries and agonies of the mind, the
racking torments of the thoughts are more violent, the enchanting passions of
love transports him to frenzies. Incertitudes of holy things, and fits of
despair work sometimes so powerfully, that he becomes Felo de se, making him to
destroy himself, and cut off the thread of his life before Lachesis has wound
it half up; And were there a Physician that could cure the discomposures and
sicknesses of the human soul, he would be the rarest among mortals; And were I
sure I could have a faculty to do that, I would turn Man and Physician again.


Pererius. There are other kind of Physicians for those maladies, viz. the
Ghostly Fathers of the Church, acts and exercises of piety are the lenitifs for
such distempers, and preservatifs against them; For he who is in peace with
Heven, and uses to convers with his Creator, is free from such discomposures,
from all tumultuary confusions and perturbances of thoughts; It Is confessed,
there is no human creture has his humors so evenly poised within him, that he is
always the same, he is sometimes Ioviall and merry, he is sometimes Saturnin and
melancholy, and it must be so while the Stars pour different influxes upon
us, but especially while the humors within us have a symbolization with the
four Elements, who are in restles conflict among themselfs who shall have the
mastery, as the humors do in us for predominancy; Insomuch that the humors or
passions may be said to be to the soul as strings to a musical Instrument,
which sometimes use to jarre, sometimes to go in a true harmony; and this the
Physician who is Natures Student, has more advantage to know than others: But
let us spin out time no longer, for it is a true as well as a trite proverb, that
Spinning out of time never made good cloth; At a word, will you embrace this
comfortable proffer I make you from the gracious Queen Morphandra, and turn
Tumontian again?


Mule. Truly Sir I have neither mind nor maw to it, for in the state wherein I
am settled, I use to exercise the operations of nature with more freedom, and
much less encumbrance, following only the dictats of sense, and being solely
guided thereby.


Pererius. But what are the dictats of sense, compared with the intellectual
powers of the human soul? what is the Sense which trades alone with gross
bodies, and qualities emergent thence, compared with Reason, a faculty whereby
the soul converseth with blessed Angels and immateriat Beeings, and by
Metaphysicall and sublime notions wings her self up into the arms of Him who
breathed her first into the body of man? In the upper Court of the Soul's
residence, we may compare the Soul to an Empress, wisely restraining or giving
freedom to the misguided affections, according to the exact rules of Reason;
Here we have Man ruling in Man, dressing and manuring Man as another Paradise,
wherein is all possible variety, yet no confusion, no disorder, no unruly
passions tyrannizing over Reason, no disturbance of mind, no distemper of body,
but a most admirable harmony of all things in the whole Universe of Man; Reason
is that Diadem whereby the soul does rule and regulat the will, and the
affections, the Chancellor which does moderat the motions of both; Reason is
that Rod wherewith the Soul is kept in awe to obey, without any servile fear,
her Creator and chiefest Good; By Reason the Soul discerns there is a God,
deducing arguments from the Creation of the fair fabric of the world, which had
either existence from it self, or was produced by another; but it could not
give a first being to it self, in regard it is repugnant to the principles of
Nature, that any thing should be the cause of it self; Therefore the Inference
is undeniable, that the world was made by another which was pre-existent, and
such another that was the Efficient cause thereof, not produced by any other
former efficient cause, but was of Himself, and by Himself from eternity, which
can be no other than God; Another argument the Soul draws from the necessary
dependence of a finit Being upon an Infinite, for all created natures are
finit, both in respect of their essence, and operations; Now, every thing that
is finit must necessarily be limited by another, seeing it is impossible that
any thing should give bounds to it self; And there being not in things finit a
progress to Infinity, We must at length come to some certain Independent
Being, which is not circumscribed or limited by another, but is of it self
essentially and virtually infinite, which can be no other than God Almighty; A
third argument is drawn from the necessary dependence of a Secondary cause upon
a First, for unless we do here also grant a progress to Infinity, which is
absurd in mounting up the scale of subordination of causes, we must at length
meet with one primary both Efficient and Final cause, that has no other cause
superior or precedent unto it, which is only God: Another argument the Soul
draws, still by the ministry of Reason, to prove a Deity, is the constant
course of the Stars, those glorious Luminaries, and the continued order of all
things else in their first station, through all the vicissitudes of corruption
and generation, which does forcibly intimat an ubiquitary Providence, a wise
Rector, Governor, and Commander, upon whose direction all things depend; No
sooner does the Soul by such reaches of Reason thoroughly satisfy her self that
there is a God, but she mounts yet higher, endeavoring to know what God is; But
such is the transcendent refulgence of his Majesty, that she finds it
impossible to look God in the face, or to know him a priori; yet though she is
not able to behold his face, yet she has leave granted to know him a
posteriori, though she cannot define the incomprehensible Deity, yet she may
still, guided by light of Reason, describe him by an aggregation of Attributes?
To know God by his Attributes is a near approach to his Deity; Yet the
Rational soul goes still nearer, first prying into his Essence, then returning
to her self, and contriving which way she should know more, at length she says
within her self, Operatio sequitur Esse, Action follows its Being; Then she
busies her self in the contemplation of Gods Actions, which she finds either
immanent and inward, or transient and outward; The immanent actions of God are
such as are performed intrinsecally within Himself, without any external
respect to the creture, whereby he is said to contemplat, to know, and love
Himself; Here the Soul takes notice of a reflection of the Deity upon it self,
and so is heightened to the supposition of a Trinity, the cardinal and
abstrusest point, the highest pitch she can soar unto; She proceeds to argue,
that whereas God does conceive and know Himself, he does beget a perfect Image
of Himself, from which issues a perfect Love of Himself, and a complacency;
Now, seeing there is nothing in God which is not God, both the Image of God, and
the Love of God seem to be distinct Subsistences of the same Essence with Him
from whom they proceed, as when an Eye does see it self, there is first the Eye
seeing, secondly, the Eye seen, or at least the Image of the eye seen, from
which action of seeing her arises a desire of enjoyment; This comparison does
in some sort adumbrat the blessed Trinity; First, there is the Eye; Secondly,
there is a Reflection or Image of the Eye; Thirdly, there is a love or
complacency which proceeds from both; The first is God the Father, the Second
is God the Son, and the third is God the Holy Ghost; Now, although these three
Subsistencies be all concentred in the Deity, yet they are distinct each one
from the other in their operations ad extra, though in immanent, or in actions
ad intra, they are individual: Thus the Human Soul ascends to the knowledge of
her Eternal Good, by the ministry and reaches of Reason, therefore methinks you
should have an Ambition to be endued with that divine Faculty again, and so
return to your native soil from this society of irrational brute Animals, and
be a subject to so great a Monarch as the Tumontian King is, your natural
liege Lord and Prince, whose Dominions are of such a vast expansion that they
reach to the very Antipodes, the other Hemisphere of the world, whereby he may
say, that the Sun never sets, but shines upon some part or other of his
Territories every hour of the natural day, all the while Apollo fetches a
carreer about the world.


Mule. Touching the first part of this your last discourse, wherein you so much
magnify the faculty of Reason, and that thereby you arrive to the notion of
heavenly things, truly Sir, I am of his opinion who held, that all the knowledge
which man has of his Creator is but one degree above blindness; What the eye
of a Batt is to the Sun in its Meridian, the same is the most perspicacious eye
of man's understanding if he look upon his Maker: In the state that now I live
do not puzzle my brain with such presumptuous reserches and uncertain
speculations, but am contented with the doctrine and dictamens of Sense only,
which are more infallible.

Concerning the last part of your speech, it cannot be denied but that the
Tumontian King is one of the greatest Potentats that ever was upon earth, if
his Dominions were contiguous and united, but there is such an unsociable
distance between them, that the Artonian will tell you, His Monarchy is like a
great Cloak made up of patches; Moreover, I have no great comfort to be his
subject now, because he has gone down the wind for many years, having bin so
shreudly shaken in the saddle, most of that Country you spoke of which reaches
to the Antipodes being revolted from him, and he has very lately disgorged
many a good bit to Artonia: Add hereunto, that his peeple in Tumontia are grown
miserably poor of late years by such insupportable Taxes, and drainings of men
for the Wars, insomuch that there are scarce enough left to cultivat the earth:
Yet such is the rare obedience, and the phlegmatic humor of the Tumontians,
that they are still as awful, they are as conformable and quiet, as if there
King were as virtuous, as victorious, and the least exacter the ever Prince
was; But this they do for their own advantage, for if there were another
Governor set up, it would inevitably hurl the whole Country into civil tumults
and combustion, and so the remedy would be worse than the disease.


Pererius. They show themselfs a prudent peeple in that, for it is in
Governments as it is in choice of wifes, Seldom comes a better; But the
Tumontian has other commendable qualities, for besides his constant obedience
to his Prince, He is also constant to his Religion, he is in perpetual enmity
with the common enemy of the Cross, Moreover he never serves any Prince in the
wars but his own, nor goes he to trade abroad into and Country but to his own
Masters Territories: And are not you desirous to be one of that brave Nation
again? Therefore let me advise you now once for all, to shake off that dull
despicable shape, which uses, in natural production to have no better mother
then an Ass.


Mule. Truly Sir, you may please (as the proverb runs) to keep your breath to
cool your pattage, and spend it no longer upon me, for I am resolved to live
and die in this shape; But whereas you brand it with the term of despicable, I
would have you know, that our bodies have more virtues far in them than Man's,
and whereof Man makes common use toward his health: Our very foam drunk in warm
wine is good against pursines; Some of our hairs mingled with those of an Ass
and dried, and so put to a perfume, are good against the Epilepsie, The milt of
one of us is good against the Falling-evill, nay the very dust wherein one of us
has tumbled, is good to mitigate the ardors of Love, being sprinkled upon the
body; But take heed how you anger us, for our bitings are poisonous: We have
sundry other medicinal virtues, which I will here pretermit; Therefore whereas
you call this species of ours despicable, we deserve rather more respect
considering the said virtues; Insomuch that if I should exchange this shape for
man's, I should prove a greater fool than that Mule in the Fable, who seeing a
goodly barb'd Horse going to the Wars, and saying within himself, It may be
that gallant Horse and I had the same mother, therefore why should not I have so
much courage and stoutnes in me? I would I had such a rider, such a great
saddle, trappings and arms to try my courage; But seeing the Horse led back in
the evening all bloody and wounded, he repented himself of his former foolish
wish.


(...).
The Sixth Section.
Consisting of interchangeable Discourses 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a
Fox, who had been a Saturnian born, whom for his cunning dealings, and
Mountebankish wily tricks, she transformed from a Merchant to that species;
This Section treats of diverse things, and particularly how the Art of true
Policy is degenerated, and what poor Sciolists or Smatterers are cried up in
that Art of late years, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, and a Fox. Pererius. MOst admired Queen, I render you my
most humble acknowledgments for the continuance of your great favors toward
me, which I am now in half-despair that I shall not be able to make use of for
perfecting my designs upon these brute Animals; Touching this last, I find in
him also an aversnes both to his first Constitution, to his Country, and to his
Culling; Concerning the first, he complains of the nomberles diseases which are
incident to every part of that Microcosm of Man, as also the various and
violent distempers of the mind, with the stings of conscience, which brute
Animals are not subject unto, etc. Touching the second, viz. his Country, he
inveighs against the craggy swellings of it, the excess of heat, and
consequently the sterilities of it, which is such, that there is not a
competency of bread (which is the staff of life) for the twentieth man that
breaths in it, etc. Touching the third, viz. His former Calling, he complains
of the incertainties, the sordidnesse, and a kind of Atheism that it is subject
unto, for while the Physician tampers so much with second causes, it brings him
to a forgetfulness of the first, etc. But, Madame, I desire to try conclusions
upon some nimbler and wittier creture than that lumpish mongrell Mule.


Morphandra. You shall be partaker of your desires presently, for I espy a Fox
near that hedge who was a Saturnian Merchant, born in Rugilia, whom for his
cunningnes in negotiating, and for some Hocos-pocos and Mountebankish tricks I
transformed to a Fox, who you know is the most politic, the wittiest and
wiliest of all Quadrupedalls, whereof there are multitudes of examples; One time
he cosen'd the Crow, who having got a morsel of green cheese, and being
perched upon the bough of an Oak to eat it, a Fox perceiving it went under the
tree, and stood gazing upon the Crow, saying, What a base lying thing is common
fame, who says that thou art a black ill-favored Bird? truly methinks thou
art the fairest that ever I saw, and could thou but sing as others do, thou
deserve to be Queen of Birds; The Crow being tickled with these praises fell
a opening her beak, so down fell the cheese, and the Fox made merry with it;
But he was more wily with the Wolf, for a Fox having got into a Farmers yard,
and skulking up and down in a Moonshine night, there being a well in the yard
he peeped into it, and the reflex of the Moon being in the water, he thought it
was a new cheese, thereupon he whipped into one of the buckets, and down he went
to feed upon it; Being in that plunge, it chanced that a Wolf came also
skulking therabouts for his prey, and looking into the well, the Fox cries out,
O brother Wolf, here is most dainty cheer, and there is enough for us both; so the
Wolf leaping into the other bucket drew up the Fox, who being got on the top,
and he in the bottom of the well said, Farewell brother wolf, and much good may
the new cheese do unto you, so he got free, leaving another in his room; He was
also too hard for the Lion, who as he is King of Quadrupedalls, having put
forth a Proclamation, that all horned beasts should give attendance at Court on
such a day to a great Feast, (though his plot was to prey on them) the Ass
meeting with a Fox said, Come let us go to Court to see the great show, for if
there should be any danger we are free from it, in regard we have no horns,
though sufficient ears; I, quoth the Fox, but if the Lion says that our ears
be horns, they must be horns; Moreover I have observed the tracks of many
beasts going into the Lion's Cave but none coming back: This was only
caution, but it was a trick of wit that the Fox played with the Eagle, who
having got one of his young Cubbs, and carried it to the top of a high tree
where his nest was, to prey upon it, the Fox got a brand or two of fire and put
it to the trunck of the tree, which so scared the Eagle, that he brought down
the young Cubb and laid it in the place he found it; How commonly does the Fox
cosen both Huntsman and Dog, when being poursued he uses to get into a plowed
field, and stretching himself all along in a furrow he often scapes, his skin
and the earth being of a color; Therefore you may make trial now upon a brute
Animal that has some sagacity and wit, as well as activity.


Pererius. I will toward him; Signor Fox, you need not stare so much nor
startle, for I am com neither to hunt you, nor hurt you any way, rather I am
com upon a business that will tend hugely to your advantage; But I desire first
to be informd how you came to be transformed or deformed rather, from the noble
shape of Man to this grovling brutish figure.


Fox. I was once a Rugilian Merchant, and born in that proud City, (for that is
her Epithet above all other Cities) where, according to the proverb, there are
Mountains without Wood, Seas without Fish, Men without Faith, and Women without
Shame; where also the horned husbands are said to get their wifes with child a
hundred miles off; And being com hither upon a gallant ship, with a Cargazon of
diverse Commodities, I was transmuted to this shape you behold, for my
over-cunning and cautelous dealings.


Pererius. Well, have you a disposition to be redintegrated into your first
Being, for Queen Morphandra has bin pleased to promise me you should be, if
your will concur with my desire; Therefore tell me freely if you have a mind to
see Saturnia again, your native soil, the Mistress of the world, the Source
of all civility, the Nourse of true nobleness and virtue, the prime
Propagatresse of Religion and Learning; Where Nature has her chiefest Magazins
of Silk, Bacchus his Inner-cellars of sweet Wines, Flora her prime Garden of
Flowers, and Pomona her principal Orchard of Fruits; where Pandora has her
choicest Residence, Policy has her chiefest School, where Arms and Arts have
their chiefest Academy; Have you a desire to be transported to this your dainty
and dear Country, and put on the habit and habitudes of Man again?


Fox. Truly no, for here I live in a better Country, in a better Condition, and
in better Company, then I did in Saturnia.


Pererius. Do not deceive your self, for you will never be able to prove that,
though you had all the Logic that ever Athens taught.


Fox. Touching the first, whereas you magnify Saturnia so much for her
fertility, let me tell you, that to my knowledge there be diverse parts of her so
barren and desolat, that you shall not meet with a house in twenty miles
riding; Rugilia, that part wherein I came first into the world, may be called
nothing else but a Conventicle of Rocks and Craggs; In some places you may see
three Marquisses on one tree gathering Figgs to keep them from starving: They
bragg of a River that has Junkets in her, some Comfits, some Plumms, some
Cinnamon, but these Junkets are but white stones bearing the shape of all
these; There Is no Country has more Tempests, more Tremblings and Earthquakes,
whereof there have been very lately such formidable examples of utter desolation
and subversion of twenty Towns; There is part of the Country which is under a
perpetual shadowy darkness or adumbration, whence the whole Province takes its
denomination; There Is no Clime under the unequal of Heven where Meteors and
fulgurations are more impetuous and violent.

Touching the second, which was my former Condition, there is a thing called
Conscience which used to tyrannize and torture me when I was a Man, I often
found within me a gnawing worm, I often felt sore stings, sore pricks, and
remorses of the said Conscience, which the Theologues call Synteresis, that
ever and anon did discompose the quietude of my thoughts, and disturb me in my
gaining profession; But in this state I am free from such perplexities, for
now, though I suck the blood of twenty Geese a day, and destroy whole roosts of
Hens, the thing called Conscience never troubles me. Moreover, besides this
rack of Conscience, there is a vice called Covetousnes that Man is subject unto,
and when all other vices grow old in him, this vice grows younger and younger.
I remember I was slavishly addicted hereunto, I would have flayed a louse could
I have made benefit of her skin, but now I am free from that fordid vice, from
that kind of idolatry, for according to the saying, he is the worse Idolater
who adores Gold, for he may be said thereby to worship the Devil, for Pluto is
the god of Riches; In the shape I bear, I covet no more but what will satisfy
nature only: There is another cursed and cruciatory humor called Jealousy which
much afflicts Mankind, and it reigns more amongst that Nation I was once of
than among any other; Jealousy among the thoughts is like Batts among birds,
it does mightily discompose the whole inward man, and disturb the tranquillity
of his mind, nay it hurls him often upon desperate and bloody attempts.

Touching the third, which is Company, I have now far better, conversing with
these innocuous and simple Animals. The society of men is much more dangerous,
specially of my quondam Countrymen, for upon any occasion of distaste one is in
danger of a Saturnian Figg, or to be poisoned by the smoke of a candle, by the
suavity of a flower, or by a glove or handkerchief; For four or five Ducats
reward, one may be master of any man's life in some places of Saturnia, for he
will find a mercenary instrument to murder any body; Add hereunto, that my
Countrymen are full of revenge, and vindicatif in the highest degree, they
will seldom suffer one to do them a second wrong, but dispatch him away to the
other world, which is the occasion of a saying, Take heed of a slow Foe in
Saturnia, and of a sudden Friend in Artonia; I could give you many examples
hereof, but I will produce only two; In Marcopolis, the greatest Mart of the
Western world, (though two of her chiefest be but brittle Commodities, viz.
Lasses and Glasses) there were two rich Merchants who had been partners a long
time, it chanced that one of them knowing the other to be over familiar with
his wife, he dissembled his passion a great while, till his thoughts had
contrived and concluded a revenge upon him, so he solemnly invited his partner
to a Feast, and after dinner he led him to a Garden that he had by the
Seaside, being there alone together he brought him to an Arbor, where among
diverse other rarities there was a curious new large Chari made with such
artifice, that when one had put himself to sit in it, there were certain gins
and vices would suddenly rise up and clasp in his body both arms and thighs; His
Partner being thus locked fast in the Chair, he presently gaggs him, and having
locked the Garden door, he drew a great double-edg'd knife, and being upon the
point of stabbing him, the Partner said, Oh be not so inhuman and barbarously
cruel as to kill me before confession, therefore have some commiseration on my
soul; Well, replied the murderer, if thou will do one thing, I may spare thee
thy life, which is, If thou will defy the holy Trinity, and renounce all hopes
of salvation in it, etc. The Partner (in hopes of future repentance to expiat
his offense) repeated those words three times, and the third time as soon as he
had done repeating them, he stabbed him in the breast, and cleft his heart in
two, and so threw his body into the Sea to make food for Hadocks; But a while
after his body being retreev'd and taken up in a fisher-net just under that
wall, the murder was discovered, and the murderer being put upon the Strapado
he confessed all, and going up the Gibbe to be executed, he broke out into a
great fit of laughter; His ghostly Father and Confessor telling him, that he
was now going to give account of that horrid murder he had committed before
the great Judge of the world, therefore that passion of laughter did not become
him; Oh, said he, whenever I think upon that full revenge I had of that
villain, my heart danceth within me for joy, for I was not only revenged upon
his body but also upon his soul, in which humor he breathed his last.

Another was as bloody, if not more; In the ancient City of Cerano, there was a
Prince who left three sons behind him, Conradus, Caesar, and Alexander;
Conradus was used to come from his palace in the Country to his Castle in
Cerano, where he had appointed a Governor, and a Garrison of soldiers; The
Governor having a comely Lady to his wife, the young Prince was struck in love
with her, and at last enjoyed her; The Governor having knowledge thereof did
meditat upon a revenge, thereupon he sent to Conradus (his Lord and Master) that
he had lately discovered two or three wild Boars in the Forest of Cerano,
therefore if his Highness would please to com thither together with his two
brothers, there would be very Princely sport for them, and he would prepare all
things ready for the Game; Hereupon the young Prince and his second Brother
coming thither expressly for that sport, it chanced that Alexander the youngest
brother was then out of the way; So the Governor of the Castle having provided
a plentiful supper for the two Princes and their Retinue, being both gone to
bed, he calls his Officers together, and told them, Gentlemen, what does he
deserve, who for many good services and hospitalities done unto him, does in
lieu of thanks abuse ones wife, and defiles his bed? They all cried out, He
deserves death; Truly Gentlemen, thus has Prince Conradus used me; They cried
out again, Let him die, and we will stick unto you, and be faithful; So the
Governor taking some of those Officers with him in the dead of night, they broke
suddenly into the chamber where Conradus was asleep, and heaving up the
bed-cloaths, they first cut off his privy-members, then they chopped off his
head, then they quartered his body, and strewed them up and down the chamber;
So all was hushed that night; Prince Caesar coming to wait on his Brother the
next morning, the Governor ushered him in, and seeing his Brother's head
bleeding on the window, and his limbs scattered up and down the room, he said,
Oh! is this the wild Boar you writ to him of? Yes, said the Governor, and I
remember I writ of two or three; Hereupon he was also knocked down, and used in
the same manner? The Tragedy being acted thus far, he takes his Officers, and
going upon the Castle walls, he sent to speak with the Syndic and Burgesses of
the Town, unto whom he made a Speech, that they had been a long time in
servitude or a kind of slavery to Conradus and that Family, and now there was a
fair opportunity offered for them to redeem their liberties, for he had
Conradus and his Brother in his custody, and the Officers with the rest of the
Garrison were inclined to do them away, if the Town would join with them; But
the Town showing an aversnes, or rather a detestation of such disloyalty and
treason, sent to Prince Alexander the youngest Brother, and the Citizens of
Cerano joining with the forces he brought with him to expiat his Brother's
bloods, they beleaguer the Castle round; Thereupon the Governor taking his wife
and children with him to the top of the highest Turret, he first threw down
headlong his wife, then his three children, and last of all he precipitates
himself, and so the Tragedy ended.


Pererius. A Tragedy indeed, and one of the direfullest that ever I heard of;
It must be granted, that the Saturnian spirit is much bent upon revenges, he is
in the extremes commonly, Quod vult valde vult, quod odit valde odit; virtues
and vices are there in the Superlative degree: But truly if the virtues and
vices of that noble Nation were weighed in a balance, I am confident the first
would out-poise the second, for there might be more instances of actions of high
virtue produced, than of vice; I will make mention of one, and that a very
modern one, and no Romance; There was in the ancient Amphitheatricall City of
Rovena a young Marquis, who fell desperately in love with a Merchant's wife, he
courted her a long time but could not prevail, at last, the Merchant having a
Villa or Country House, whither he was gone a while for divertisment, the
Marquis went a Hawking therabouts one day, and letting his Hawk fly of purpose
into the Merchant's Orchard, he and his men rid luring after her, and retreeved
her in the Orchard where the Marquis himself was entered, having obtained leave
before; The Hawk being found, the Merchant invites the Marquis to a Treatment,
where his wife was present, and very officious to please; Being departed, she
asks her husband who he was? He answered, It Is the Marquis of such a place, one
of the gallantest and most hopeful young Noblemen in all Saturnia, a person
full of transcendent parts and high perfections, etc. These praises making deep
impressions in his wife, and the Marquis poursuing still his design, he at last
prevailed, and being admitted to her chamber by a back Garden-dore, he found
her a bed, and in a fit posture to receive him; so unbracing himself to go to
her, and having put off his doublet, she told him smilingly, Do you know whom
you may thank most for this courtesy? It is my husband, who* after the late
Treatment you had, fell a long time into such high commendations of you, that I
never heard him speak so nobly of any: The Marquis being put to a sudden stand
hereby, and struck with a kind of astonishment, put on his doublet again and
his cloak, saying, Shall I abuse so worthy a friend, and such noble affections?
No, I will die first; So taking his leave of the Lady in civil and thankful
posture, he departed the same way he was let in, and never attempted her again.


Fox. Truly it cannot be denied, but this was a most signal example of
continence, and no less of gratitude, to restrain himself so in the height of
such a lust.


Pererius. Well, will you conform your self to my advice, and turn Man, and
Merchant, to converse again with such a noble Nation, a Nation that may
prescribe rules of prudence and policy to all Mankind?


Fox. Sir, you speak of Policy, there is no true policy practiced now adays in
the world, it is degenerated together with the nature of man into subtlety and
craft; If there be any left it is in Marcopolis, where there are the truest
Patriots and most public Souls that I have known remaining amongst men,
otherwise she had never been able to tugg so long with the huge Tomanto Empire,
and other the greatest Potentats, upon earth; Yet sometimes she has used to sow
such another Tail as mine to her Lions skin, and proceed by craft as well as by
strength; Now, though Policy and Craft agree in their Ends, yet they differ in
the Means conducing to their Ends; The one proceeds by honorable and gallant
manly ways to attain her ends, the other by dishonorable and base subdolous
ways, she cares not what Oaths she swallows and breaks afterward, she cares
not what lies, fears, and jealousies she creates to amuse the silly vulgar, and
thereby to incite them to Arms and Rebellion, for tearing the bowels of their
own Country, and to loose all allegiance to their natural Prince; She makes no
scruple or conscience to make Religion her Mantle to palliat all her designs,
and by a horrid kind of prophanenes and blasphemy to make God Almighty the
Author of all Rebellions and Sedition: As was lately practiced in Gheriona more
then in any other Country that ever was under the cope of Heven; And now there is
a company of poor Sir politic Woodbies or Wise-akers, that would put a Cats head
upon a Lions neck, they would make a petty Commonwealth such as that of
Hydraulia, of that ancient spacious Monarchy with the Crowns thereunto annexed,
Kingdoms which have lasted thousands of years without any Interregnums at all
till now; And observable it is, that among other benefits (or plagues rather)
which Gheriona has received from Hydraulia for raising her first to a
Commonwealth from obedience to her hereditary Prince, one is, that she has
poisoned Gheriona in her Policy as well as in her Religion; For now she has
the fate to have such Wise-askers in Government that can see afar off no
farther than to the tips of their noses; They would take down the Royal Saddle,
and clap a pair of Panniers on Gheriona's back, never looking forward what will
follow, viz. an everlasting War; Nor do they fall to any account what a
disparagement it will be, that so large and noble a Kingdom should be cast into
so petty a mould as that of Hydraulia, who is above thirty times inferior to
Gheriona in extent of Territory, and more then forty times in point of Plenty.


Pererius. It is a clear truth what you affirm, that true Policy is much
sophisticated in this latter age, and touching the hints you give of Gheriona
in point of Government, and the present designs that are afoot to transverse
it, I know to Country full well; It may be a feasible thing to turn the great
City Polihaima to a kind of Commonwealth, for she has smelt a great while of
a Hans in regard of her many Corporations, which may be said to be petty
Republiques of themselfs; but for Gheriona her self, it will be a hard confused
task to reduce her to such a Government, it being incompatible both with the
Genius of the Peeple, the Posture of the Country, and Political Constitutions
established there for so many Ages; They who make inspections into the influxes
and virtue of Heavenly Bodies, find, that Mars is the Planet predominant over
Gheriona, and it is observed, that where he predominats, that Clime and Country
is fit for no other Government than Monarchall; Whereas those Countries where
the Moon is predominant, as Marcopolis and others, are naturally fittest to be
made Republiques; Therefore let those men, who have now the vogue of Power and
Counsel in Gheriona, beat their brains never so much, let them scrue up their
wits, and stretch all the policy they have as far as possibly they can, yet
they will never be able to constitute a lasting durable Government, or settle a
firm and general Peace without a King, that kind of Supreme Officer is
congeniall with the Nation it self, which will never be fixed till then;
Therefore, as I said before, let those men who are now upon the Stage of Power,
wind up their wits as high as they can, without this they will be still at a
loss, their consultations will be like a skein of ravell'd silk, they will be
in a labyrinth of confusions, and the end of one will be still the beginning of
another.

Now, there is no Art so uncertain, so subject to difficulties, as the Art for
Man to rule Man; There be many poor Sciolists in Gheriona, who of late years
have shot at rovers in prescribing Rules of Government, they take the ashes of
the Judicial, the Greek, and Roman Commonwealths to apply them to the present
times, whereas those Nations were of another temper, of other Religions, and
consequently of other kind of Intellectualls, and diffring Idaeas to the
present Age; They should rather produce examples from Gheriona's own Historians,
which would be far more suitable; But go to the chiefest Politians, Ancient or
Modern, that ever writ of Governments, you will find all their opinions
concenter in this point, That there is no Government which has a nearer analogy
with that of Heven, that is more lasting upon earth, that is more regular, or
that has any certain principles, but Monarchy; That great Chairman or Grandee
among Philosophers, Aristotle, in his Politiques, upon which there is such a
world of Comments, speaks of sundry species of Governments, as Aristocracy,
Democracy, Oligarchy, and Stratocracy, but he puts no Rules for any, only he
has this assertion, that Aristocracy or Optimacy allows no Artificer or
Mechanic to be a Citizen or Counselor; Much of his discourse is of the first
Founders of Commonwealths, then he proceeds to correct the errors of
Commonwealths, before he tells us what a Commonwealth is; Moreover, in
handling the kinds of Government in general, he flies forward and backward in
a disorderly way, but when he descends to particular forms, he is full, not
only of confusion, but contradictions and inconstancies to himself; In some
places he seems to deny any natural Right, much more any Majesty to be in the
People, whom he holds to be little inferior to Beasts; Whereas elsewhere he
affords a liberty to every City to set up what Government they please, either
by Force or Craft, which in effect is to allow the Peeple to do what they list,
if they be able. Now this high-reaching Philosopher cannot much be censured for
roving up and down in so uncertain a subject, it being impossible for any human
brain to prescribe any infallible universal Rules for Government, that may
quadrat with the nature of all Climes and Seasons, and be appliable to the
humors of all Peeple; Other Sciences have Demonstrations, and undeniable
Principles, but the Art of Government has no such Maxims, in regard of a
thousand sort of contingencies that attend human negotiations, as also for the
various dispositions of peeple, some Nations are so fiery mouthed, that they
must be ridd with a Bitt, if not with a Curb and Martingale, but a small Bridle
will serve others, nor are the same Constitutions fit for a Continent that are
proper for an Island, nor those of a Maritim Continent fit for a Mediterranean
Country, who know not what saltwater is.


Fox. Touching those modern Smatterers in Policy you speak of, the times abound
with such, such that while they take upon them to give Precepts for Government,
they amuse the Reader with Universalls, (and commonly there is deceit in
Universalls) or rather they lead him to a labyrinth of distinctions, whereby
they render the Art of mastring Man to be more difficult and distracted, then
it is in its own nature; But, under favor, the main cause that there are such
difficulties and incertitudes in prescribing general Rules to govern the Human
Creture, is the perturbances of his mind, his variety of humors, his seditious
disposition, his inconstancies, and an itching still after innovations; And
herein we Irrational Animals are more obedient, more gentle and docile; But
touching the policy you mention, there be some certain Maxims that may extend to
the whole mass of Mankind in point of Government; One is, That the common
peeple be kept still in such an awe, that they may not have any power to rise
up in Arms, or be sharers in the Government, and so be their own Caterers to
choose what Laws they please; Secondly, That there be a visible standing effectif
military strength still in being, to keep them in such an awe, as well to curb
them as to conserve them; It being the greatest Soloecism that can be in
Government to rely merely upon the affections of the Peeple, in regard there is
not such a wavering windy thing, not such an humorsom crosse-grain'd Animal as
the common Peeple, there is not such a Tyrant in the world if once he get on
Horseback; And all Authors that have pretended any thing to policy, either old
or new, affirm so much in their Writings; If the Governor in chief has not
such a constant visible Power, and moveable upon all occasions, the common
Peeple will use him as the Froggs in the Fable used the Logg of wood whom
Jupiter, at their importunity, had dropped down among them for their King, to
whom they stood a while in some awe and dread, but afterward finding no motion
in him, they leapt and skipt upon him in contempt and derision; There is
another certain principle of policy, That public Traitors and Rebels to their
Prince and Country should be dispatched to the other world without mercy, for if
they be but half punished, they will like Snakes get and cling together again,
therefore it is a good rule, and that may be a proverb hereafter, A Rebel and
mad Dog knock in the head,
They will not bite when they are dead.



Pererius. Had you not told me before, yet I should have judged you a Saturnian
by the wisdom of your Discourse, your Compatriots being accounted the prudentest
men upon earth, for whereas others are said to be wise after the Act, others in
the Act, you are said to be wise before, in, and after the Act; Moreover,
whereas the Artonian is said to be wiser than he seems to be, the Tumontian not
to be so wise as he seems, the Saturnian is wise, and seems to be so; Therefore
will you return to that noble Country, and become Man and Merchant again? of
which profession there are Princes in your Country, you well know.


Fox. There are so, yet I enjoy my self more contentedly in this shape and
species, I have now a more constant health, and if I find my self illish at any
time, which is seldom, I eat a little of the gumm of that Pinetree and it cures
me; But I am nothing so subject to distempers of body or mind in this
condition. Touching the first, when Nature has finished her course in me, I
will leave it for a Legacy to my friends, for it is good and medicinal for many
uses, my Brain is good against the Falling Sickness; my Blood against the
Stone, and the Cramp; my Gall instilled with Oil takes away the pain in the
ears; my Tongue worn in a chain is good for all diseases in the Eyes; my Fatt
heals the Alopecia, or falling off of the hair; my Lights, Liver, and
Genitalls are good against the Spleen; my very Dung pounded with Vinegar is a
certain cure against the Leprosy; my Milt is good against Tumors; and touching
my Skin, which is so much valued by the fairest Beauties, I will bequeath it to
the admired Queen Morphandra to make her a Muff, as a small Heriot for her
protection of me under her Dominion.


(...).
The Seventh Section.
A Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Boar, wherein there are various
Discourses, and particularly of the rare Sympatheticall Powder that is lately
found out, which works sudden and certain Cures without any topicall
application of Medicines to the part affected, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, and a Boar. Morphandra. HOw came you off from that
cunning Merchant you dealt withal last? has he accepted of the Bill of
Exchange you presented unto him?


Pererius. Truly, Madame, I may say, according to the homely proverb, that I
have received a flapp with a Fox tail, he has played the cunning Sophister with
me, he has protested against that Bill of Exchange, nor will he upon any
terms resume his former shape, but retain that which he has, alleging that
he is now free from those stings of conscience, from those corroding black
jealousies, from that vindicatif humor whereunto Mankind is subject, specially
those of his Nation, with other molestations of mind; He says, that in this
feature he is also more healthful; He braggs likewise how many medicinal
virtues are in his body after its dissolution from the sensitive soul, and how
much his skin is valued amongst the fairest Ladies, which he intends to
bequeath as a Legacy to your Majesty to make you Muffs of when he has paid
Nature the last debt; And truly, Madame, by his acute answers and replies, I
found that he had the full use of the faculty of human Reason, though appeering
in that brutish shape, which makes me more and more admire your power.


Morphandra. This power the great Architect of the world has given me, I
derive this prerogative merely from Him, not, as I intimated to you before,
from any compact or consultation with ill Spirits, although the flat and
shallow-braind vulgar think I do it so, by Magical and Negromantic means.


Pererius. I know full well, Madame, the ignorance, or rather insulsity of the
common peeple to be such, that when they find any extraordinary effects
produced, transcending the ordinary course of nature, they are presently struck
with such an admiration, that they think those effects to be done by the work
of the Devil, though they are operated by strength of Art, and by connection of
natural Agents and Patients properly applied, as of late years there is found
out a Sympatheticall cure of wounds at a distance, without any real
application of medicines to the part affected, which kind of sanation they hold
to be made by some diabolical compact, though revera it is performed by such
ways that do truly agree with the due course of nature, by which she constantly
works.


Morphandra. I pray be pleased to impart unto me the mode and manner of that
kind of cure, for though it be not Magical, it must needs be a great
mysterious thing.


Pererius. Madame, I shall most willingly comply with your commands herein;
Touching the Sympatheticall Powder or Medicine it self, It is made of a
Zaphyrian azurd salt, calcind by Solar fire into a Lunar complexion, operating
principally when the Sun is in the two celestial Signs of Leo and Cancer;
But, Madame, before I can make the thing truly understood, I must lay down some
universal Laws or Maxims of nature; First, it is true without control, that
all actions and motions are performed by Atoms or small invisible bodies,
moving to and fro after a different manner proportionable to their several
figures, all natural things operat thus, and not by I know not what Qualities
or Accidents, which have only a notionall subsistence, and no real being but
as they inhaere in the substance; Secondly, there is a perpetual constant
expiration of such Atoms from all natural bodies, caused by a compression of
other circumambient and neighboring bodies, driving the parts closer together,
or else by the motion of other Atoms crowding into the foraminous parts of that
body, interrupting as it were the quietude of the former inmates, and thrusting
them out to wander in the air till they meet with some other body where they may
get rest; This effluvium or emanation of Atoms by help of autopticall Glasses,
have bin sensibly discerned to flow from the Lodestone and other bodies, whose
pores are more plentiful, in form of a kind of mist; In bodies that are
actually hot this atomicall expiration is sensibly perceptible by the smell,
specially to cretures of an acuter sense, for the Atoms hovering in the
circumambient air, or upon the ground, are sure guides to the Greyhound while
he poursues the Chase, as if the hunted creture were continually in his sight;
These expiring Atoms are also as sensibly discovered by weight, it being
experimentally found, that those Iockies who use to run Horse-races can make
themselfs lighter by many pounds weight in a day or two, which proceeds by this
insensible emission of Atoms; Secondly, it is to be observed, that these
atomicall bodies are not of one figure, nor of one grossnesse or magnitude, some
being so slender and subtle that they admit of no opposition, but continu their
course through all Mediums, and whatever may be seen to stop them in their
journey cannot be discerned but by their effects, such are the contagious Atoms
of bodies infected with the Pest, or other taking-diseases, which are not only
imparted to others by lurking in the Visitant's cloths, but being scattered in
the air are transported to remote places and persons, on whom they exercise
their tyranny, not discovered till they break out into open violence; Other
Atoms are grosser, and cannot so easily pass by, but are driven back, and
forced from their intended voyage, and sometimes driven into the pory parts of
other bodies against their wills; Such Atoms are apprehended by our senses, as
heat, cold, color, smells, putrefactions, etc. which use to move more slowly
than others; Some are so corpulent and strong that they remove fixed and solid
bodies out of their stations, as the Wind, and many others, that are driven to
and fro by the impetuosity thereof, and forced thereby to change their places;
These Atoms are in a manner so palpable, that we must needs confess their
real Being and activity; Thirdly, it is another undeniable truth, that all
bodies desire rest, and would still dwell in their own proper stations if they
were not ejected by an intruder, for Rest is the appetite of all natural
bodies, because it is the mother of union; Now, there are some places more fit
than others for the receiving and retaining of the said Atoms, wherein they may
lodge more conveniently, and acquiesce a longer time, this proceeds from the
fashion and form of the pores wherein they are intromitted, which are
proportionable and more agreeing with the figures of the Atoms which are of
diverse shapes, for some are angular, some cylindricall, some are branched, some
smooth, others are sharp and rough; There are in most bodies pores agreeable to
these various figures, insomuch that every natural body is apt and ready to
admit such Atoms that are cognate and proportionable to their pores, and to
exclude others; Now no Atoms acquiesce any where but in such proportionat
pores, they may be driven into other bodies, or they may accompany other Atoms
into pores that do not exactly quadrat with their figures, but cannot take any
long repose there, being still extruded by those that do better fill the place,
and correspond with the capacity and proportion of those pores, whence arises
a natural propension and tendency toward those bodies where such pores are
found; Nor can those Atoms which are not suitable to the pores wherein they are,
stay there quietly, but they are still dislodged and sholder'd out, or pressed
to give room to those Atoms whose figures challenge a right to those pores;
Insomuch that it may be said, there is a kind of perpetual war 'twixt those
Atoms that are proportionat and proper to the pores they are lodged in, and
those which usurp them; For to have perfect rest in a place, and to claim a
natural right unto it, there must be a cognation 'twixt the atom and the pore
which may be called Sympathy, such as are all magneticall and attractive
motions; Fourthly, no distance hinders the motion of these Atoms toward their
natural cognate places, toward which they are perpetually traveling, and the
nearer they approach to their desired home, the swifter their motion is, and
the less resistance they find in their journey.

These prolegomena or general notions being premised, I com now to the
operative virtue of the Sympatheticall Powder, which, as I described it before,
is made of a Zaphyrian salt, calcind by a celestial fire, operating in Leo and
Cancer into a Lunar complexion (as the learned Doctor H. has it, who
discourses like a true Phoilosopher of these notions) The heat here of must be
such, that it may draw out all adventitious moystur, leaving it intensly dry,
and in this condition it must be kept, for if it chance to meet with any
humidity it loses its energy, and must to the aetnereall furnace again; It
must be also but a competent heat, for by excess of heat all the volatile
parts and finest atoms which only work the cure, will be evaporated, and only
the grosser saline parts remain, which neither can be raised to accompany the
atoms of the extravenated blood, nor if they could would they cure, but by their
sharper angles grate the orifices of the capillary veins, and so procure an
efflux of blood, and not a consolidation of the wound.


Morphandra. Noble Prince, these are high Philosophical Notions that you
discourse of, but now that you have spoken of the substance of this rare
Medicament, how must it be applied?


Pererius. The manner of applying it is in this manner, The blood or bloody
matter being taken from the wound on a cloth, or remaining still on the
wounding instrument, must be lightly covered over with this powder, kept very
dry, and afterward wrapped up close from the air, and so preserved in a
temperat heat, it must also be kept clean, and closed up with neat linen to
fence it from cold, for cold hinders the expiration and breathing forth of the
balsamicall Atoms, which should drain forth the superfluous humidity, and
restrain the efflux of blood; Now, the greatest rarenes of this Sympatheticall
Powder is, that by a virtuall contact it heals at a distance by the intercourse
of the Atoms proceeding from the extravenated blood of the Patient, which Atoms
like so many little spirits glide through the air, and never rest till they
come to their desired home, where being gladly entertained, they find an easy
entrance at the cognate parts, and proportionat pores of the wound; Being
admitted there they fall to work, and first, they dilate the superfluous humid
parts, and make them fit to be expelled, then by their more then ordinary
restrictive power they shrinck together the pores, and squeezing out that
noxious corrupt humidity, glue together the disunited parts, and so cicatrize
and cure: And truly, Madame, I could produce diverse pregnant examples of those
that were healed by the atomicall energy of this Sympatheticall powder, but I
desire one may serve for all; There was a knowing Captain who made often use of
it, and two of his Officers having drawn blood one of another in a Duel, he
got their bloodied Swords and applied his balsamicall Powder, so in less then
24 hours they were almost cured; But the Captain understanding that their
animosities were such, that they were resolved to fight again, he hung the
balsam'd bloodied Swords out at his window all night, so coming the next
morning to visit his Patients, they told him that they were in cruel pain all
night long; And so you shall be still, quoth the Captain, until you be perfect
friends, for I hear that you will fight again; So having made them shake hands,
and perfectly reconciled them, he cured both in a very short time.


Morphandra. I acknowledge it a singular favor, most gallant Prince, that you
have made me understand this great Secret, and the natural causes thereof,
though the common peeple, who use to condemn all they understand not, and
whereunto their short capacities cannot reach, for Magical. But, if you
persist in your desires to convert any of these metamorphos'd Animals, and
proceed further in your attempts, I spy amongst those Trees a Boar who was once
an Aetonian Count, whom for his deboshments and intemperancies I transmuted to
that shape; you may try what you can do upon him.


Pererius. I will, by the continuance of your noble favor, make toward him;
Miserable metamorphos'd Creture! how much do I resent the condition you are now
in in comparison of the former! for I understand by Queen Morphandra that you
were before not only a Man, but a personage of high account in Aetonia, that
masculine and generous brave Country, which is so full of large flourishing
Provinces, of opulent fair Cities and famous Marts, so full of magnificent
Palaces, of Mines of Tresure, of fruitful Orchards, of fragrant Gardens and
fat Fields, of navigable Rivers; so full of illustrious Families that can
extract their pedigrees thousands of years past; so full of great Princes,
wherewith Aetonia may be said to shine as the Firmament with coruscant Stars,
and the Septemvirat of Caesarean Electors are as the seven Planets; Are you
contented to return to so gallant a Country, to resume the figure of that noble
personage you represented when you were Man, and live again under Caesar the
Prince paramount of all others? If you have a disposition to it, Queen
Morphandra has promised me to transmute you, and I have an accommodation for
your transport; Therefore will you shake off that wild savage shape, and become
Man again?


Boar. Savage! Truly, Sir, I think Man is far more savage and cruel, for the
wildest of our Species will not strike at Man till Man has begun first with
him, and wounded him, and all Huntsmen will tell you so; But I could produce
many horrid examples of the cruelty and true culency of Man, and of my quondam
Conterraneans in particular, but let this serve for all; It chanced there was
one that bore malice to a woman great with child, he watching his opportunity
found her alone spinning in her house, he first cuts her throat, then ripps up
her womb, takes out the Embryo and carries it to the backside where there was a
Sow ready to Farrow, he kills also the Sow, rips up her belly, and taking out
the pigs, puts the child of the murdered woman in their room, then he took the
piggs and puts them in the woman's belly, and so sowed it up, proh scelus.

Touching the high Encomiums you give of Aetonia, it is true, that she was in
former times a gallant piece of the Continent, but now she is pitifully
impaired and degenerated from what she was; There was a Count there who proved
most unfortunat, both to his own Country and to himself, who aiming at a Crown
made war against Caesar, to whom he owed allegiance; And to abett his cause he
brought in foreign Princes for his Confederats, and so kindled a destructive
lingering War in the bowels of his own Country, which for thirty years
together did so harasse her, that to this day she is scarce come to her self;
Among others, he introduced a hungry Northern King who did her a world of
mischief, whose Successor keeps firm footing there still, and whiles the
Cuprinian has an acre of land in Aetonia, she will never be in a durable
secure peace; Touching the multitude of illustrious Families that are in
Aetonia, most of them may be said to be but mongrell Princes, for in the
forenoon they are Ecclesiastics, (having raised themselfs out of the ruins of
the Church) and in the afternoon they are Laics and Seculars; Now, those
variety of Princes are rather a weakness then a strength to Aetonia, as may be
inferred out of that witty Emblem which the Tomanto Emperor's Ambassadors made,
being present at the election of one of the Aetonian Caesar's, who observing
what great Princes attended him that day, whereof he was told that some of them
could raise an Army of themselfs if need required; The Ambassador smilingly
said, That he doubted not of the puissance of Aetonia, but it might be said,
that the Minds, Counsels, and Actions of the Aetonians were like a great Beast
with many Heads and Tails, who being in case of necessity to pass through a
hedge, and every Head seeking to find a several hole to get thorough, they
were a hinderance one to the other, every Head drawing after his own fancy, and
so hazarded the destruction of all the Heads and Tails; But the Tomanto Empire
was like a Beast that had multitude of Tails, but one Head that governed all
the Body, which Head being to get through any passage, all the Tayls follow him
in an exact obedience without any confusion of diffring fancies or clashing of
opinions.

Touching that Caesar you speak of, whom you would make Prince Paramount of all
others in point of Majesty and Might, it cannot be denied but that the
Imperial Eagle, when he was at the highest pitch of power, might be said to
have spread his Wings overall the then habitable Earth, he fixed his Talons
upon the banks of Euphrates Eastward, upon the Nile Southward, and he had all
the known Western world within his pounces; His annual Revenues were then
computed at a hundred and fifty Millions, whereof the Salary of the Legionary
Soldiers amounted to twenty Millions; But that glorious Empire, that mighty
Giantesse, is now shrunck up and shrivelled into a Pigmey's skin, insomuch that
the present Caesar may be said to have only one of the old Eagle's feathers in
his cap: He who was used to make the greatest Potentats pay homage unto him, is
now used to be baffled by every petty Companion.


Pererius. Such is the pleasure of the All-ruling Providence, with whom the
greatest Kingdoms upon Earth are but as so many kettle-pins, which he tips down
when he pleases, it is He who transvolves Empires, tumbles down Monarchies, and
cantonizeth them into petty Commonwealths, whereunto the Philosopher seemed to
allude, when being asked what Jupiter did in Heven, he answered, Magnas Ollas
frangit, and ex frustis earum parvulas componit, He breaks great Pots, and of
their fragments makes little pitchers; This shows the brittlenes, the
lubricity, and unfixednes of all sublunary things, as well Political as
Natural, so that to find out a true stability and permanence, we must travel
beyond Trismegistus's Circle, and seek it in the other world: But let not this
alienat your affections to visit again your own Country in human shape, and
return to your Religion, whereby when this mortal life is ended you may gain
Eternity.


Boar. Religion I truly there is scarce any left in Aetonia, for since the time
of Therlu, who being fallen into a lustful love with an Abadesse, unfrock'd
himself, and made Religion his Macarell to enjoy her; I say, since that time,
the Artonian fancy was never so greedy after new fashions in Apparel, as the
Aetonians high and low do daily thirst after newfangled opinions in matters of
Religion, both in point of Doctrine and Discipline.

Add hereunto, that there is a bosom peculiar vice Aetonia is addicted unto,
which is Intemperance, wherewith she has infected most of her neighbors; The
Hydraulian can tell you, that the immoderat use of drink came tumbling down
upon her from Aetonia like a huge, and a furious rapid Torrent, whence it found
passage over with wind in poop to Gheriona (and her subordinat Kingdoms) which
is as good at it being of an Aetonian race originally, and therefore apt to
imitat; Nay, as they say, as the Gherionian is good Inventis addere, to improve
any new thing, so they go beyond the Aetonians herein, for whereas they use to
pelt the brain with small shot, the Gherionian does storm it with great
Cannons, and huge carowses, for he, when he is at it, does not sip and drink by
halfs, or demur upon it by pauses, as the Aetonian does, or by eating some salt
quelque chose between, but he deals in sheer liquor, and is quickly at the
bottom of his cup without any intervening talk; Yet the Aetonian carries still
the report to a Proverb: Hereupon they use to characterise the Aetonian to be
an Animal that can drink more then he can carry, and who uses to barrel up
more than he can broach in point of knowledge, because commonly he uses to have
in him more than he can utter.


Pererius. It seems very strange to me that you should thus vilify your own
Country, and traduce so goodly and high-built a Nation as the Aetonian is.


Boar. It Is true, they are bulky and built high enough, but it is observed, that
tall men are like fabriques four or five stories high, where the garret or
upper room is worst furnished, you may guess at my meaning; Moreover,
magnitude is not the measure of worth, If the Aetonians wit and valor had been
suitable to their outward bulks, the Tomanto Emperor had not carried away so
many Territories from them, which mighty Emperor has grown so powerful by
the Divisions, and so fortunat by the Vices of Aetonia.


Pererius. Come, come, shake off those hispid staring bristles, and fordid
skin, that uses to tumble in sloughs and mire, and return to your own noble
Country, your Kindred, and that high Quality you were of formerly, for in the
condition you now stand, you are, like our base Misers, good for nothing till
you are dead.


Boar. It is a great truth, and when we are dead there is nothing that is bad in
us but our Excrements, which also though, in regard of the sharpnes thereof,
they be not good for compost to fertilize the Earth, yet they are found good
for diverse sorts of Trees, as the Pomgranat and the Almond Trees, as also for
diverse sorts of Apple Trees to free them from worms: Our blood being so full of
fibers is excellent good against Carbuncles, our brains are good against the
biting of Serpents; our lard with wonderful celerity makes firm broken bones;
the ashes of our cheek-bone are good against Ulcers; the liver of a Boar is
good against the biting of a mad Dog, and drowsines of spirit; the gall of a
Boar mingled with rosin and honey, is passing good against Ulcers, the Testicles
good against the Fallingsicknes; the hoofs of a boar made powder is good
against the stopping of the urine; a plaster made of Boar's dung is good
against all venomous bitings, as also against the pain in the spleen, or the
Sciatica; the ankle of a boar worn about the neck is good against quartan
Agues: Moreover it is found true by frequent experiments, that the milk of a Sow
in sweet wine is good to help women in travel, and restores milk in their
paps, it is good also against the bloody flix, and the tissick; Amber sodd in
Boar's grease receives nitor, and bewty: Now, all these virtues proceed from
our Bodies, because we have not so much corruption within us as Man; Our food
also being more simple and fresh, and our appetites more regular; So, Sir, I
bid you farewell, for I am going to herb it among that tuft of Trees.


(...)
The Eighth Section.
A Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Wolf, who had bin a Cuprinian
Soldier, whom for his Plunderings, Rapines, and Spoils, she transfigur'd to
that shape.
Morphandra, Pererius, and a Wolf. Morphandra. HOw did you bear up with that
Boar? could you not get him into the toil, and make him turn Man again?


Pererius. Truly no, he did in a manner grind his razers and tusks, and
extremely froam at his own Countrymen, taxing them of diverse vices; He pricked
up his bristles like a Porcupine, as if he would have darted them; So I left
him at a Bay.


Morphandra. I spy another transmuted Animal in that Thicket, it is a Wolf, who
was once a Soldier of Fortune, and a Cuprinian Free-booter, you may try whether
you can take him by the ears, for you will find him tame enough.


Pererius. I have leave from gracious Queen Morphandra to conferr with you, and
know whether you have an inclination to return to your Country and Calling
again; If you have, she is ready to unlycanthropize you from this Wolfish shape
to your former condition.


Wolf. Touching my Country and Calling they are both alike, they are both
naught, therefore I have no affection to either; For the first, it is a
pitiful cold and coorse Country, being so remote from the Sun, which made a
generous Queen lately to leave both Crown and Country; Touching the second,
it is a profession for the devil, to be hired for about three shillings a week
to kill men; I was once of that Calling, and I with my Camerades did a world of
mischief to the poor Boors up and down the Country, therefore it was very just
that Queen Morphandra should transform me to this shape.


Pererius. Yet you know, that the profession of Arms is noble, for every
Soldier is a Gentleman by his profession; And touching the coldness of your
Clime, it puts mettle and the more vigor in the Combatant, for they say that a
Cuprinian fights best when he sees his own breath, which is in frosty weather;
You know also what great atchievments and exploits your two last Kings have
done, to their eternal glory, and the renown of your Country.


Wolf. It Is true, the last two Kings have done some feats of Chivalry, yet the
world took them to be but Usurpers; Touching the first, he was killd in the
midst of his manhood, whereby Caesar against whom he warred got a full revenge
of him; And for the present King, the world wonders that it was not sufficient
for him to enjoy quietly the Kingdom of Cuprinia, which belongs by right to
Nopolia, but he must make war against that King, to whom he should de jure owe
allegiance; And had he conquered Nopolia, his ambition had not terminated
there, but he happily had visited Saturnia, and so, as the Goths and Vandalls of
old, he had troubled the repose of all the Western world; But as far as he has
gone, what miserable devastations has he made? how has he ruined the
flourishing Trade of those Countries, which are so full of great Mercantile
Towns both upon fresh and salt waters, so full of useful and necessary
commodities? And had he completed his Zundanian design, he had given Law to
all the Occidentall Princes, which Hydraulia sagaciously smelt out, and so
timely prevented him.


Pererius. And have not you a natural desire rather to be again one of that
warlick and adventurous Nation, than to continu in this hateful and rapacious
nature?


Wolf. Truly I may be said to be of as rapacious a nature when I was a
Cuprinian, for he is used to pick any quarrel with those that are weaker than
himself, of purpose to devour them; As I remember to have read of the Wolf in
the Fable, who finding a young Lamb, and intending to devour him, fell a
coining of reasons why he would do it, and so told him, that he and his
generation had don him wrong from time to time: Helas, said the Lamb, how could
that be? for I am but newly com into the world; I but, quoth the Wolf, you eat
up my grass; The Lamb replied, How can that be, Sir? for I have yet no teeth
in my head; I but you drink up my water, quoth the Wolf again; That cannot be
neither, Sir, said the Lamb, for I never knew what water is hitherto, in regard
I feed altogether upon my mothers milk; It Is not your reasons, replied the Wolf
again, can confute my appetit, for I mean to sup plentifully this night, and so
devoured him. But the same fate may attend the Cuprinian King as befell the
Wolf-fish, who living in a River where all the fish were lesser then himself,
they all admired, honored, and feared him, as if he had bin their King; He
thinking to enlarge his Dominions, thought to go to the Sea to be King there,
but meeting with the Dolphin in his way he was presently devoured; Or as
Aesop's Dog, passing by a River with a good piece of flesh in his mouth, and
the shadow of the flesh appeering in the water, he snapt at it thinking it had
been real flesh, and so lost that which he had in his mouth; So the Cuprinian
King may hap to lose his own Territories, while he thinks to devour others.


Pererius. Well, well, will you shake off that ugly shape, and put on Man
again, and go along with me toward your own Country?


Wolf. Truly no, for I have tried both natures, and find this to be far better,
for I have now no airy aspiring desires in me, no ambitious thoughts, or other
perturbances and inquietudes of mind; Moreover, I find this shape of body to be
far more healthful, nor is this species less honorable; A Wolf was the Crest
of the first Arms of Rome, in regard the King who traced the foundation of that
glorious City, and denominated her after his own name, was nursed up
miraculously by a Wolf; There have bin many famous men of that name, as Lupus
Fulvius a Roman Poet, Lupus Servatus a memorable Priest, and Lupus de Oliveto a
Saint-like Monk; There is a kind of Holiness also in this species, for they never
engender but in the twelve days of Christmas; There is likewise a mysterious
quality in this species; for if a Wolf sees a man first, the man grows hoarse;
If the tail of a Wolf be hung in the Cratch of Oxen, they cannot eat; If a
Horse treads in the footsteps of a Wolf, he cleaves fast as if he were frozen;
Nay, if a Mare big with Foal tread in the place where a Wolf had trodden, it
causes abortion, and will make her presently to cast her Foal; Lastly, strings
made of VVolfs guts have that predominance in Music, that if they be put among
other strings, there will never be any Consort.


(...)
The Ninth Section.
A Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Goat, consisting of many quaint
Discourses both Natural and Metaphysicall, with other Criticisms, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, and a Goat. Pererius. MAdame, I could not take that
Wolf by the ears to lead him home to his own Country, which he bitterly
inveighs against; and against the humor of the peeple, as also against his
former profession of a Soldier, tacitly intimating, that War is the chiefest
seminary of Thieves, according to the proverb, La guerre fait les larrons, and
la paix les ameine au gibet, War makes the Thief, and peace brings him to the
gallows; Therefore he prefers rather to pass his life peaceably under your
Government, than to be in Cuprinia, where of late years men are so pressed for
the Wars to serve the ambition of their Kings, that the whole Country is so
drained, that there is scarce any left but women, old men, and children; Therefore
he is very well pleased with this lycanthropy.

But, Madame, I spy a bearded Animal nibling upon the brow of that crag, I
desire by your favor to have some discourse with him, for by his long beard he
should have bin some Philosopher, and so have more wit in him than other animals.


Morphandra. You shall very willingly, but I will tell you what he was before;
He was an Orosian born, and I transformed him to that shape for being a
Mountaineer, and for having aspiring thoughts, with other resons.


Pererius. I Will go and accost him; Sir, will you please to come down hither
into the plain, for I have very good news to impart unto you that will make you
skip for joy.


Goat. I pray excuse me, it is against my nature to descend, if I did, I should
happily prove more foolish than the Goat in the Fable, who being invited and
persuaded by the fair speeches of the Lion to come down and feed in the meadow
where he was, being come down the hungry Lion devoured him presently.


Pererius. You need not apprehend any such fears here, but I will come to you;
Queen Morphandra tells me, that you were an Orosian born, a very ancient and
noble Nation; Have you a disposition to return thither, to resume the shape of
Man, and to be again the child of Reason?


Goat. What do you mean by Reason? I think the shape and species I now am in are
capable of Reason, for we can distinguish 'twixt good and bad, 'twixt what is
noxious or profitable for us, we have also the same organs, the same cells and
receptacles in the brain as man has for to lodge Reason, and the celestial
bodies pour the same influences upon us as they use to do upon the human
Creture.


Pererius. It cannot be denied but you have an Instinct that acts according to
Reason, and it may be called Instinctive Reason; But the Reason that Beasts have
is limited to corporeal objects, to the necessities only of life, to find out
food and shelter, and bring up their young ones, its only direct Reason that is
capable of Singulars, its restrained to an opinionative faculty, its a mere
shadow of ours, much like the objects that our fancy represents to us in sleep;
And this Instinct in Beasts is as much inferior to Reason in Man, as Reason in
man is inferior to Intelligence and Intuitions in the blessed Angels.


Goat. Yet, Sir, it must be granted, that actions whose successes are so well
ordered, actions which have so well regulated a progress, and concatenation so
exactly tying the Mediums to the End, must needs be performed by the guidance
and light of true Reason, and such actions you know sensitive cretures daily
perform; With what art do Birds build their nests, the Fox his hole, the Badger
his chamber, with what caution do they preserve their young ones, and fence
them from the injury of the Hevens? how punctually do they keep their haunts?
But what do you think of Pliny's Elephant repeating his Lesson at Moonshine,
or of Ptolomey's Stagg that understood Greek, of Plutarch's Dog who could
counterfeit the very convulsions of death, of the Ape that could play at
Chesse, and another that had learnt some touches on the Guittern? What think you
of Caligula's Horse who was made Consul? had not he Reason in him? What think
you of the Ass, who being used to carry burdens of Salt over a Foord was used
to stumble and fall constantly in such a place, that thereby the salt melting
away into water his burden might be the lighter, but his Master lading him with
a tadd of Wool, he fell at his usual place, but being helped up again, and he
feeling the pack of wool heavier in regard of the water that got in, he never
stumbled any more in the Foord after that time; What think you of the Crow,
that in the time of a great drowth finding water in the bottom of a barrel,
and being fearful to go down, carried so many stones in her beak, that letting
them fall down, they forced the water to rise upwards toward the top, and so
she dranck safely and at ease? I pray were not all these not only Instinctive
but Discoursive Resons?


Pererius. I confess that he who denies a kind of Reason and Resoning also to
brute Animals, may be questiond whether he be master of Reason himself, yet this
Reason and Resoning looks upon present and particular notions only; But human
Reason extends to universal notions out of the reach of sense, which cannot
be without abstractions, and some reflections it has on it self, which Beasts
cannot attain; This Reason that is conversant with Universalls is the true
specificall difference 'twixt Man and Beasts; It is the portion and property of
Man alone, whereby he has the Soverainty over all over his fellow-cretures
throughout all the Elementary World; There is Intuitive, there is Discoursive,
and there is Instinctive Reason, the first is proper to Angels, the last to Brute
Animals, and the second to Man, who can contemplat and discourse of generals
and things absent; And these three differ in excellency as the three degrees of
Comparison.


Goat. Yet though you excel us as you say in this kind of Reason, there is many of
us that surpass you in strength and quickness of sense, as the Eagle in
seeing, for he can look upon the Sun in the Meridian with full open eyes, and
not be dazzled; the Hare can hear better, and the Dog goes far beyond you in
smelling, as also the Stagg, therefore when he is removed from one Park to
another, you use to muzzle him, and carry him in close Carts that he may not
smell the way back again; And there be examples to admiration of this kind.


Pererius. Though some Beasts smelling be beyond ours in respect of celerity,
and way of reception, yet in point of dijudication, and differencing the
variety of smells which proceeds from the Rational Soul, we surpass them;
Therefore though we cannot see as Eagles, nor hear as Hares, nor smell as well as
Dogs, yet Hands, Speech, and Reason makes amends for all; The composition also
of the body being Erect is advantageous, the cause of which Erection (after the
beholding of Heven) is the exercise Arts, which cannot be done in another
figure; Man's body is likewise the most copious of organs, and though born
naked, yet this nakedness cuts out work for Reason; It abounds also more with
Animal spirits and heat, it has long feet that the body might be more steedy,
and his head is built upward like a Castle or Watchtower in the upper Region.


Goat. This faculty of discoursive Reason you glory of, that Man is endued
withal, though in some respects it be a benefit unto him, and given as a
recompense for his frailties, nakedness and weakness, yet in some kind it it may
be said to be a disadvantage unto him, for it makes him subject to a thousand
vexations of spirit, it fills him with inquisitive thoughts and scruples
touching his salvation, it makes him a tyrant to himself by sundry sorts of
perplexities and molestations of mind, for I have known it by experience, let
the thread of a man's life be never so well spun, yet it cannot be without
bracks and thrumbs: There is no creture so troublesome to himself as man, for as
rust adheres naturally to Copper, so ill affections and obliquities adhere to
human nature: Moreover, you, like us, are but rags of mortality, yet you are
so vain in magnifying your own species, that you make Man the epitome and
complement of all created natures; Nay, some have profanely affirmed, that if
all the Angels in Heven had bin a thousand years a forming man, they could not
have made him in greater perfection, and yet when I seriously oftentimes did
contemplat Man, and fell into a true account of his imbecillities, and that
world of weaknesses which use to attend his body and mind, I have often cried
out, Eheu nos miseri quam totus Homuncio nil est! What nomberles diseases is
his frail body, which is the socket of his soul, subject unto? how short are
his plesures, and what black sudds commonly they leave behind them? insomuch
that they may be said to have wings and stings, for sadness succeeds his joys as
punctually as night follows the day.


Pererius. Well, well, give over these Satyricall excursions, and think on your
dear Country, the healthfullest Country on earth.


Goat. It may well be said to be so, for of late years there were culled out
within three miles compass ten men that were a thousand years between them,
one supplying what the other wanted of a hundred years apiece, and they danced
the Morris diverse hours together in the Marketplace, with a Taborer before
them 103 years old, and a Maid Mariam 105. But Orosia is much degenerated from
what she was by the Gherionian Sectaries, who have infected the Inhabitants
with so many pseudodoxall and gingling opinions, which is the recompense she
receives from Gheriona for converting her first from an Infidel to be a
Christian, yet she has the impudence lately as to call her Heathenish;
Moreover, she twits her ever and anon with Leeks and Cheese, though both tend,
the one to the commendation of the Nation, the other of the Country; For whereas
the Orosian does use to wear the first in his hat constantly upon such a day,
it is to a commemorat the time that a famous Battle was fought, wherein other
Nations that werein the Army ran away, but the Orosians stood to their ground,
and got the day; Now, to signalize and distinguish themselfs from the Fugitifs,
they took Leeks in their caps which grew in a Garden hard by; Besides, it is
known how one of the acutest Nations on earth adored the Leek as one of his
gods: Touching the other, to have Cheese enough is the mark of a fruitful
Country, and good pasture; This makes me tell you a facetious Epigram, To make
a pure Orosian thirst for bliss,
And daily say his prayers on his knees,
Is to persuade Him that most certain it is
The Moon is made of nothing but green Cheese,
And then he will ask of God no greter boon
Then place in Heven to feed upon the Moon.


Now, during the late combustions in Gheriona, which were causd by a fatuous
fire that took hold of some frantic spirits, it is well known that the Orosian
stood firm both to his Prince and Principles, till he was o'repower'd by
multitudes.


Pererius. Well, will you put off that rammish and foetid carcass, and return
to your first Principles of Nature, and I will safely conduct you toward your
first home?


Goat. Rammish and foetid! As rammish and foetid as we are, we are of a far
more wholesome constitution than Man, let the rare qualities which are in our
bodies be judge; It Is known by daily experience how our blood has such an
energy in it that it can dissolve Diamonds, it also scowreth iron better then
any file, and being fried and drunck with wine it cures the bloodyflix; The
Lodestone rubbed with Garlic loses its attractive virtue, but being dipped in
Goats milk it recovers: There Is no creture hears more perfectly then a Goat, for
he has not only Ears, but an Acousticon Organ also in the throat: Our hair
burnt drives away Serpents, and cures decayed genitalls; The marrow of a Goat
is singular good against Aches; The gall mixed with honey good to clear and
fortify the sight; The very trindles drunck in wine are good against the
Jaundise, and to stay Female-fluxes, as also gargariz'd good against old
coughs; The fatt sodden with Goats dung is good if applied to the Gout; The
butter of the fatt of a male Goat is good for an old sore for Kibes, the
Kings-Evill, and Fellons, or mixed with honey or oil of Brambles it is good
against deafnes; The gall makes white hair grow on a horse; Goats milk is
excellent against Consumptions, and you know how the famous Aegistus was nursed
by that milk. To conclude, there is nothing within us or without us but it is
cordial or medicinal; Our entralls, livers, ashes, horns, milt, spleen,
urine, fine hairs, marrow, hoofs, gall, dung, sewet, trindles, milk, and blood,
etc.


The Tenth Section.
A Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Soland-Goose, a Carboncian born,
who was transmuted to that shape for his foolishnes in rebelling against his
own Conterranean King, and so by juggling himself into a Slavery from that Free
Government he was formerly under, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, a Goose. Morphandra. I Saw you in hot discourse a good
while with that bearded Beast, how did you feel his pulse beat? will he return
to live among those Mountains where he first breathed air, and put on his
primitive nature again?


Pererius. Madame, I find he has no list or lust at all to either, one of his
resons is, that the Gherionian his confining neighbor has so intoxicated his
Countrymen with such fond fanatic opinions, and made them deviat from their
true service and allegiance, both to the King of Heaven, and to his Vicegerent
their King upon Earth; He gave me also some acute resons, both Moral and
Metaphysicall, why he would not turn Man again, alleging at last that the shape
he now wears is far more sound and healthful, abounding more with natural
heat, which makes his body, and all the parts thereof within and without, to
have such medicinal virtues in them, whereas human carcases, though they had
bin Tabernacles to a far nobler Soul, are good for nothing when she parts with
them but to feed and feast worms; Therefore truly, Madame, I am in half despair
of prevailing with any of these metamorphos'd Animals, they live so peaceably
under your Dominions, and so contentedly in these shapes.


Morphandra. You have treated hitherto only with Terrestrial Creturs, try
what you can do upon that Volatile, that sooty-clour'd Soland-Goose, who was by
the first institution of nature a Carboncian born, but had lived in great
plenty and honor in the Gherionian Court, yet out of a crosse-grain'd foolish
humor he kicked against his own King and Countryman, and so fell to be a slave
to a new race of Governors, from being a freeborn Subject before.


Pererius. Poor Goose, you need not gaggle, nor fear any thing, for I bring you
good tidings, and the best that possibly can befall you; Queen Morphandra by my
mediation is pleased to retransfigure you to human shape, and let you go again
to Carboncia, your native Soil and dear Country.


Goose. Truly, Sir, I have lost all affections to both, I am only out of
conceit with the one, but I abhor the other, I had rather turn Cacodaemon than
a Carboncian again; What a pitiful coors cold Clime is Carboncia? it has
neither the warm Sun nor Gods blessing, it were a punishment for the worst
peeple upon earth to be removed thither; Rather then I should return to
Carboncia, my wishes shall be that of the Poet, Pone me pigris ubi nulla campis
Arbor aestiva recreatur aura,
Quod latus mundi, nebulae, malusque
Jupiter urget.
Let me to those black boggy Heaths repair
Where Tree was never refresht by Vernall Air,
That side of earth where Jove himself is bad,
And with dark squalid Clouds goes always clad.


Yet the Clime is good enough for the Inhabitants were it worse; They brag of a
hundred and odd Kings, but of these Kings above the one half came to violent
deaths, judge you then of the disposition of the Peeple; And for their two last
Kings, they sold and sent away one to the fatal Block, and made a sacrifice of
him to the Gherionian for a sum of money; And for the other, before they would
Crown him their King, they proposed that he should acknowledge his Father a
Tyrant, and his Mother an Idolatresse, a thing so abhorring to Nature.


Pererius. I find you are extremely incensed against your own Country, and your
Conterraneans, I pray what is the reason of this strange and violent aversion?


Goose. I told you partly before, but I will enlarge my self further, and
deduce matter from their first rise; Carboncia and Gheriona were in a sweet and
sound peace, with affluences of all felicities, when some Carboncian Soldiers of
Fortune returned from the Cuprinian Wars richly laden with spoils, they came
strutting into the Gherionian Court, the Aetonian plunder shining upon their
backs in gold and silver lace; These military Commanders expecting to receive
some honors from the Gherionian King for their services in Aetonia, though none
of them had received any Commission from him, nor fought on his score; Others
looking for some office at Court, and missing their aim that way, some of them
went to Carboncia discontented, and fearing the stock they had got in the
Cuprinian War would quickly consume, and having no other trade but fighting,
they fell to devise a way how to cast a bone 'twixt Gheriona and Carboncia,
that they might have employment; Therefore they set on some prick-ear'd hot-pated
Preachmen (who were in a kind of subjection unto them for their Stipends) to
give out, That Gheriona was on her way to Antichrist again; thus the Pulpits
did ring of invectives and calumnies against Gheriona's Church Government; Yet
all this while there was not matter enough for an actual Insurrection, or to
fire the Beacons, till by wily artifices of some of the said discontented Great
ones Gheriona's Liturgy was sent among them to be put in practice; This was
cried up to be the gretest Idol that ever came to their Kirk, and so the
common peeple in a furious unheard of manner outrag'd those who read it; The
King having notice hereof, sent a gracious Declaration, That whereas he had
only commended unto them, not commanded that public form of divine Worship,
wherein he himself did punctually and publicly twice a day perform his duty to
Heven, he did it out of a pious intention to beget an Uniformity as well as an
Unanimity of public Devotion in all his Dominions, and as it was already
practiced in Gheriona and Hebrinia, so he desired it should be used also in That
his Native Country; But since he understood it produced such tumultuous
consequences, he was contented absolutely to revoke it, for it was never his
intent to press the practice thereof upon any conscience, etc. Therefore he
required that every one should return to his former obedience, offering an
Amnestia for what had passed; But this would not serve the turn, for there was a
further design in it, which was to destroy the Hierarchy, and so make havoc
of the Patrimony of the Church; Hereupon the whole Country put it self in Arms,
and so those Soldiers of Fortune spoken of before brought their work about, and
got employment; For Soldiers in time of Peace are like Chimneys in Summer; They
thought to rush into Gheriona with an Army, yet they gave it out to the world
they came as Petitioners; So the Carboncian showed Subjects the way to present
Petitions to their Souverain upon the Pikes point, to bring a Supplication in
one hand, and a Sword in the other, or as one said, the Bible in the left, and
the Blade in the other hand.


Pererius. This was an odious Rebellion in the highest degree, for Subjects to
right themselfs by Arms, and wage War with their own Souvrain Prince; It is
very observable, that when God pleased to punish any of the Kings of Israel, he
did not do it with the Jews their own Subjects, but with the Philistines, and
other foreign Nations, whence it may be strongly inferred, that it was never
allowed by the Laws of God or Man, that Subjects should rise up in Arms against
their lawful King.


Goose. Yet the Carboncian rushed thrice into Gheriona against their own native
King (having thereby a greter share in him) in the compass of less then two
years, and he was dismissed Fidler-like, with meat, drink, and money; Though in
former times Gheriona was used to dismis the Carboncians (whenever they
infested her borders) with other kind of metalls, viz. with good steel and iron
in lieu of gold and silver.


Pererius. These were strange and uncouth hateful traverses, that a Nation
should prove so perfidious to their own Prince, a Prince born in the bowels of
their own Country, whose Father, besides Himself, had obliged and laden them
with so many signal and singular favors; Therefore there was here a
complication of many ugly things, there was Rebellion, there was Ingratitude, and
Unnaturalnes, for had he bin born elsewhere, I should not have so much wondered
at it.


Goose. Nay, I will tell you more, when their said King had made a long tedious
journey of 600 miles going and coming to visit them, he was so gracious, that
they did but ask and have any thing; He gave amongst them those ancient Demeans
that went to maintain the Mitre so many hundred years by the pious donation of
Progenitors; He conferred honors abundantly upon them of all kinds, and did
other wondrous acts of grace, for which the great Council in Gheriona use to
give a supply of Tresure to their Souvrain by way of an humble correspondence,
but he did all this to the Carboncian gratis; Yet they proved afterward the
gretest monsters of ingratitude that ever were, for they not only sided with
his Gherionian Insurrectors against him, but when by cross successes and
corrupt counsels he was brought to such an exigent, that he went away in a
mean disguise to the Carboncian Army, they most basely for a sum of money
delivered him over to the pleasure of his Gherionian enemies, who tormented him
afterward beyond expression by hurrying him from prison to prison, and chopp'd
off his head at last.


Pererius. One would have thought, that the Carboncians would have valued it for
a mighty honor, to have their own King in the height of his distreses to throw
himself thus into their arms, and to put so rare a confidence in them; But who
were the chiefest instruments in doing all this?


Goose. The unlucky Kirk-men, who as if they had bin so many of the Devils
Chaplains, preached nothing but War, and against the receiving of the King in
Carboncia in this his extremity; But there were never so many quick and apparent
judgments fell upon any Nation as have tumbled one upon the neck of another in
a few years upon this; First, there happened an outrageous Plague in their chief
City, which in one years compass swep'd away the Inhabitants by thousands;
What a huge number of Witches have bin arraigned and executed? How many
thousand Carboncians were bought and sold for slaves to be hurried over to
furnish foreign Plantations? What nombers of them were starved, and some tumbled
into their graves alive? How, while they thought to get into the upper-bed,
they may be now said to lie upon hard matts on the flat ground, the truckle-bed
they lay in before being taken away from them; And truly it is fit they should
still lie so low, it being the best policy Gheriona can use to keep that cold
northern door bolted up, whence so many bleak hispid winds and tempests have
broke out upon her.


Pererius. It is wholesome Policy indeed, if it be so as you say, to keep under
such a crosse-grain'd and stubborn inconstant peeple.


Goose. I will yet go further, this Rebellion in Carboncia caused another in
Hebrinia her neighbor, as one firebrand does use to kindle another; Examples
move, and make strong impressions upon the fancy, Precepts are not so powerful
as Precedents to work upon human nature; The said example of the Carboncians
did wonderfully operat upon the imagination of the Hebrinians, and filled them
with thoughts of emulation, that they merited to have as good usage as the
Carboncian, their Country being far more beneficial, and consequently more
importing the Gherionians, whereof many thousands had made firm and plentiful
fortunes in her; Add hereunto, that the Hebrinians had far more grievances than
the Carboncians (who really had none at all) for they were threatened to be more
pinched in the exercise of their Religion; There was new Plantations intended
to be made there of Carboncians and Hydraulians; There was every day a scrutiny
made of concealed Lands and dark defective Titles; There were new Imposts laid
upon them; they remained incapable of any preferments in Church and State,
whereas the Carboncians had Advancements and Offices every day in the
Gherionian Court, and some of them admitted to sit at the Council Table; These
motifs impelled the Hebrinians also to rise up in Arms, hoping they might speed
as well as the Carboncian, who obtained what he pleased; So they rise up to some
purpose, for many cruentous and horrid Massacres happened on both sides, which
took away hundreds of thousands; Now, all these things considered, will you
have me return among the Carboncians again?


Pererius. My principal proposal unto you is to turn Man again, and the Globe
of the Earth is large, you may live in what Country you please; You may plant
your self in Gheriona, a cheerful and plentiful Country, and so be nearer the
Sun.


Goose. It Is true, that Gheriona abounds with all things that Air, Earth, or
Water can afford; But it may be said, that all things are good in her except
one, which is that Creture who speaks; It has bin an ancient saying all the
world over, in nature of a proverb, That Gheriona is a good Country, but the
Peeple are bad, insomuch that her King has bin called the King of Devils; If
this has bin said of her now, in former times, much more may it be said of her
now, most of the Nation being so much depraved and degenerated from what they
were; Therefore if I were man again I would be loath to go thither; But to tell
you truly, Sir, I am grown a true Misanthropos, a hater of men, I had rather
continu in this shape then be Virbius again; In this shape I have far more
variety of pleasure, I fish for my food in the Water, I sleep on Earth, and I
solace my self in the Hevens, in the Airy Region where I am now to fly.


The Eleventh Section.
Consisting of a Dialog 'twixt Morphandra, Pererius, and a Hive of Bees, who
had bin once a Monastery of Nuns, and were transmuted to those small Insects,
because that after a years Probation, and their own praevious free Election,
they murmured at that Reclus'd Claustrall life, and wished themselves
uncloyster'd again, etc.
Morphandra, Pererius, a Be. Morphandra. I Belive your persuasions could
prevail little with that Volatile Creture, that Soland-Goose, in regard I
observed how she took wing, and fluttered away from you in a kind of have.


Pererius. Truly; Madame, I may say, that all this while according to the old
proverb, I have bin shooing of Goslings, I have spent my labor and breath to
little purpose in order to my main design, yet I cannot deny but that I have
gained a great deal of rare knowledge by communicating with these transmuted
Animals, and truly they have made me better acquainted with my self, and with
the state of Mankind in general; But for this last transformed thing, none of
all the rest did brand his own Countrymen so bitterly: He lays to their charge
originally all those fearful calamities, those horrid confusions, those
cataracts of blood which fell of late years both in Hebrinia and Gheriona; And
he said, that all that they have purchased thereby, is, to have foold themselves
into a perfect slavery, and to have brought themselfs under an Iron Rod in lieu
of that Golden Scepter under which they lived formerly.

And now, Madame, I have no hopes to do any good, for Hope is like Butter,
which the Physicians say is Gold in the morning, Silver at noon, and Lead at
night, in relation to the stomach; So I had golden hopes at first to redeem and
carry along with me some of these transmuted Animals, that are in such an
unnatural captivity, but my hopes are now turned perfect Lead, I am in utter
despair to prevail with any; Therefore, most admirable Queen, now that the winds
blow fair I must think of a departure, and touching those most Princely
civilities, and sublime inexpressible favors you have bin pleased to show,
since the happy Fates brought me to take footing in this your rare Island, I
will make the whole world witness of my gratitude, and to ring out Morphandra's
glory wheresoever I pass; Nay I will procure your most rare and transcendent
virtues, which are beyond the power of mortals, to be engraven with indelible
characters of the most burnished gold in the Temple of Immortality.


Morphandra. Most accomplished and heroic Prince, those civilities and
treatments you have received here were due unto you by the common Laws of
Hositality, and you might thereby have claimed them as a Right; But truly I
should be very well contented if you were made partaker of your so laudable
desires, as to have some of these metamorphos'd Animals re-transmuted, that so
you might carry with you some real returns of your Voyage; Therefore you may
please to try one conclusion more, and I spy a fit subject for you to work
upon, in yonder great hollow Oak you shall meet with a Swarm of Bees, who have
built up their Cells there, whereof I will capacitat some with a perfect faculty
of Reason and Ratiocination to interweave discourse with you; They were formerly
a Cloister of Nuns, who though after a due probation, and their own spontaneous
free choice, they undertook that austere, yet pious and plentiful train of
life, yet they fell a murmuring and a humming at the solitude and hardships of
that holy Profession, and to think too often on Man with inordinat desires to
be discloysterd, and lead a more dissolut and free unbridled life; Yonder they
are, therefore you may please to make toward them, and you cannot tell what
success you may have with those small airy Insects.


Be. What are you, Sir, that dare approach this Hive, this precious Cell, and
Confectionary of Nature?


Pererius. Gentle Bees, I come hither for no hurt, but for your infinite
advantage; I understand by Queen Morphandra that you were once Intellectual
Cretures, and the children of Reason; nay, you were a degree above ordinary
human happiness, being in a contemplative and sweet sacred course of life, wherein
you had secluded your selfs from the world with the vanities thereof, and
espoused your selfs to your Creator, by keeping the perpetual pure fire of
Virginity.


Be. It Is true, we kept that ceremonious outward fire, but within us we felt
too often such flamings, such furnaces or Mongibells of fires, such violent
affections and impetuous desires, that made us half mad for the time, the sense
of our restraint making these fires far more raging and vehement, for though in
external appeerance and habits, we showed some symptoms of mortification, yet
we could never extinguish the sparks of the concupiscible appetite, which is so
naturally inherent in every body.


Pererius. I thought that by performance of so many penances, by your temperat
diet, by your abstemious use and choice of meats, by your so frequent fastings,
by your hard lodgings having matts for your beds, and stones for your pillows,
by your early risings, by being always employed in something or other to avoid
idleness, which is the Devils couch; I say, by the practice of these
austerities, I thought you had quenched those concup iscentiall flames.


Be. The operations of nature can hardly be quite suppressed, but their
motions are irresistible; nor are these natural motions given by the Creator
to our sex to be a torment unto us, but for delight, and being lawfully and
moderatly used, they are destinated for the propagation of Mankind: Moreover
there is a saying, who fights against Nature fights against God himself, she
being his Handmaid.


Pererius. I cannot deny but that Naturam sequi, est Deo obseque, to follow
Nature is to obey God, yet as our gretest prudence is seen in the conduct of
our natural passions, so our gretest prowess is seen in the conquest of them,
when they grow exorbitant and rebellious; We need not seek for enemies abroad
to exercise our valor upon, we have too too many within doors, we have enough
of domestic and inmate enemies to cope withal.


Be. And will you have us to put on that nature again? But, Sir, besides what
we spoke of before, there was another thing that did torture us in that Monastic
life, it was the apprehension of our captivity, being sequestered and cut off
as it were from the society of Mankind, and in a manner from the Living, 'twixt
whom and us (in that state) there was this difference, that they were to die
before burial, but we were buried before death; Now, there is nothing so
tedious to all natures as imprisonment, which we showed when we slept in the
bosom of our Causes in our mothers wombs, whence we broke out to get liberty,
and to be a Nun is as it were to go into a kind of womb again.


Pererius. I, but there you were in a kind of Angelical condition amongst those
walls, you learnt there how to lead the life's of Angels upon earth, you were as
so many fixed Stars which being the higher are more noble, and nearer the
throne of the Almighty, than the Planets, which wandering up and down never keep
the same distance betwixt them.


Be. Sir, under favor, we are not of that opinion; For you know the Sun and
the Moon are called the Great Luminaries in Heven, therefore they must be the
more noble, specially the Sun, wherein God himself is said to have his
habitation, or Imperial Throne, whence he sees the motion of the Universe, and
over-looks all his cretures throughout the world; Now, these noble Erratic
Stars are in a perpetual progress, which the Moon finisheth in twenty nine
days, Mercury in four-score, Venus nine months, the Sun in a year, Mars in
two, Jupiter in twelve, and Saturn in thirty years.


Pererius. The fixed Stars have also a motion within their own Orbs, and the
Convent wherein you were before might be called a Constellation of fixed
Stars, which I say do move within the circumference of their own Spheres, as
you did within the walls of your Monastery amongst your selfs.


Be. But by the condition wherein we are now stated, we may be said to have a
larger Being, for we have turned our Convent to a Commonwealth, or rather our
Monastery to a Monarchy, wherein we have as exact an economy, and political
rules of Government, as ever we had in our Monastery; We have a Souvrain King,
who although he has no sting as all the rest have, yet he carries such a
Majesty that makes us all exactly obedient to his commands; Nor, though he bear
no arms himself, was there ever heard of any Rebellion amongst us against our
lawful Prince, as is so frequent amongst Mankind; It being a principle from
the very instinct of nature amongst us, that it is both detestable and damnable
for Subjects to rise up against their supreme Governor, and go about to right
themselfs by Arms; I say, that in this state we have a very regular Government,
we have a King, we have privy Counselors, we have Commanders in the War, and
gregarian Soldiers; We keep close in Winter, and have then our Centinells; We
go not abroad till Beans do blossom, and then, if the weather permit, there is
never a day passes in idleness; We first build our Cells and Combs, then make
Honey, and then engender; We make our Wax and Honey of the freshest and most
fragrant flowers, and abhor withered or stinking vegetalls; When the flowers
are spent in one place, we have our harbingers abroad to find out another;
being surprised by night in our expeditions, we sleep in a supine posture with
our bellies upward, to preserve our wings from the falling dew; Betimes in the
morning we are awakned by our Drummer, who punctually performs his office that
way; Then, if the day be mild, we fally forth in a great body, and we have an
instinct to foresee winds, tempests, and rain, which makes us keep often
within; When we go abroad to work, every one has his task, and the younger are
put to the hardest, while the elder labor within doors; We all feed together,
and if we be surprised abroad with a sudden wind, we take up a stone 'twixt our
feet to give weight to our bodies, that they may not be blown away; There is
among us a Censor of manners, and some Officers that watch those which are
slothful, who are afterward punished with death, and for the Drones, which
are a spurious kind of brood, we quite banish them; There Is not the least
foulnes seen in our Alvearies or Hives, for we abhor all immundicities and
sordidnes; When it is toward night, our hummings lessen by degrees, till an
Officer fly about and command silence and sleep, which is instantly done; We
first build houses for our Workmen and Plebeans, and then palaces for the
Nobles and the King; We punish sloth without mercy; we faithfully obey our
King, being always about him like a guard, and He in the midst; When the peeple
are at work, He goes about and cherishes them, He only being exempt from
labor; He has always his Officers ready to punish Delinquents; When He goes
forth, the whole Swarm attends him, if He chance to be weary, we bear him upon
our sholders; Whersoever He rests, there the general Randevous is; Wasps,
Hornets, and Swallows are enemies to us; We bury our dead with great solemnity;
At the Kings death there is a general mourning and fasting, with a cessation
from labor, and we use to go about his body with a sad murmur for many days;
When we are sick we have attendants appointed us, and the symptoms when we be
sick are infallible, according to the honest plain Poet, If Bees be sick (for
all that live must die)
That may be known by signs most certainly,
Their bodies are discolored, and their face
Looks wan, which shows that death comes on apace;
They carry forth their dead, and do lament,
Hanging of the door, or in their Hives are pent:
Hunger and cold consumes them, you shall find
They buzz as does t'th' woods the Southern wind,
Or as the Sea when as the waves return,
Or fire closed up in vaults with noise does burn.


Nor are we profitable only in our life's unto Mankind, by that precious Honey
we confect for their use, which though for the rare virtues and sweetness thereof
some held to be the gelly of the Stars, others the sweat of the Hevens, others
the quintessence of the Air, though really it be but our Chylus at the third
digestion; I say, that we are not only in our life's beneficial to mankind,
who receives the fruits of our labors, but after death also; Our bodies
pounded and drunck with wine, or any other diareticall thing, cures the
Dropsy, Stone, and Strangury; The honey scrapt off our dead bodies is
extraordinary good against diverse diseases; Moreover we have a kind of
transmigration among us, one into the other; Out of our brains, marrow, and
chine-bones, Kings and Nobles are bred, out of the rest of our bodies ordinary
Bees.


Pererius. Gentle Be, you have spoken as much as can be for the advantage of
your condition, yet nevertheles you are but fleshles poor sensitive Insects
only, of a short and a kind of ephemeran subsistence; You want that spark of
Immortality, the noble Rational Soul, whereby the human Creture goes as far
beyond you, as an Angel goes beyond him.


Be. I remember when I was a Nun I heard many characters given of the Rational
Soul, as were somewhat transcendent, if not presumptuous; The Theolog or Divine
called her, The Image of God Almighty; The Philosopher called her, The Queen of
Forms; And you call her now, A Spark of Immortality; Yet you know not how, nor
where this Spark enters into you, nor where it resides in any particular place
above other Souls, nor are you agreed whether she enters into you by divine
infusion, or by traduction from the parentall seeds.


Pererius. I shall endeavor to satisfy you touching these particulars; It
must be considered, that Man may be called the great Amphybium of nature;
First, he is a confused lump of dead matter, lying as it were upon the lees in
the womb, where the vegetable Soul enters first, making it capable of extension
and growth; Then the Sensitive Soul follows, who by the plasticall virtue falls
a forming the members or the organs; Then comes the noblest of all the three,
the Rational Soul, who swayes over the other two, and is -- Divinae particula
aurae, she is breathed from the Creator himself, and which no other creture in
Heven or earth can say, she is capable of a spiritual Regeneration afterward,
as the Body is of a Resurrection; At last, when she has shaken off the slough
of flesh, she becomes a Spirit either good or bad, she becomes a Saint or a
Devil, and so receives eternal beatitude or torments; By these degrees
observable it is, that Man has potentially in himself all created natures,
first or last, both in Heven, Earth, and Hell; All which may be comprised in
this Poem, which, though short, contains the whole story of Mankind from
first to last. Man is that great Amphybium in whom lie
Three distinct Souls by way of trigony;
He runs through all creations by degrees,
First, He is only Matter on the lees,
Whence he proceeds to be a Vegetal,
Next Sensitive, and so Organical;
Then by divine infusion a third Soul,
The Rational does the two first control;
But when this Soul comes in, and where she dwells
Distinct from others, no Dissector tells,
And (which no creture else can say) that state
Enables her to be Regenerat:
She then becomes a Spirit, and at last
A Saint or Devil, when that she has cast
The clogg of flesh, which yet she takes again,
To perfect her beatitude or pain:
Thus Man is first or last allied to all
Cretures in Heven, in Earth, or Hells black Hall.



Be. Whereas you alledg, that the Intellectual or Rational Soul enters by
Divine infusion, I remember when I was a Nun, that diverse learned men were of
opinion, that she was (like the other two Souls, viz. the vegetal and the
Sensitive) propagated and traduced by the seed and sperm of the parents, and
that this was done by the hereditary virtue of that gran universal Benediction,
pronounced by God himself to all his cretures, Increase and multiply; Then they
proceeded to urge the common Axiom, that like begets the like; Now, the great
God of Nature did constitut all other species perfect in their own kinds, with
a procreative power to beget their like by a complete generation; And why should
Man, in whom the ideas of all other created natures are collectively
resplendent? Why should he, I say, com short of this perfection and privilege?
for without it he may be ranck'd among those mutilat defective cretures, who
are destitut of power to procreat an Individuum like themselfs.


Pererius. This shows the eminency of the human Soul above others in point of
extraction, for if she were made of such poor frail ingredients as the seeds of
the parents, she would be perishable with the Body, whereas the is created to be
heir of Eternity.


Be. I remember the reply to this, That the excellency of the human Soul is
not to be derived from her creation and first materials, but from the Fiat, or
eternal Decree, and particular blessing of the Creator, who endowed her from
the beginning with such a prerogative, out of his free will and pleasure, to be
capable of eternity: But whereas you aver, that the parentall feeds are too
gross ingredients to produce so noble a Soul, I remember there are great modern
Doctors and Physicians who hold, that neither the seed of mother or father go
to the impregnation, but that the Female conceives only by a virtuall contact,
as the Loadstone draws Iron, and that she is made pregnant by conceiving the
general Idaea without matter; To make this new assertion good, they compare
the womb to the brain, and that what the phantasma or appetit is in the brain,
the same phantasma or its analogy is excited in the womb, for both of them are
called Conceptions.


Pererius. This is a wild extravagant opinion, for one may believe with more
reason, that the Tumontian Mares are impregnated, and made to conceive by the
South-west winds.


Be. I remember another argument that was urged for the traducible generation
of the human Soul, which was, that the Rational Soul begins to operat in the
prolificall seed the very first moment of conception, as soon as the
prolificall emissions of both sexes are blended by mutual fermentation, for
then the conformative and proper operations of the Rational Soul begin upon the
Embryo, who proceeds to majoration and augmentation accordingly; And it is no
less then an absurdity to think, that the Infant after conception should be
majorated by the influence of any other Soul then that from whom he received
his formation; Now, that this formation begins instantly after the conception,
appeers by the early activity of nature, which has bin sensibly discovered in
abortive Embryo's by autopicall observations, whereby it has bin visibly found,
that a Septenary Slip put into clear water, a subtle Inspector through a
magnifying Glass may discern all the rudiments of the organicall parts; There
may be seen there the general conformative faculty in the seed, wherein will
visibly appeer three small bubling conglobations, which are the materials of
the noblest parts, viz. the Brain, the Heart, and the Liver; there will appeer
also two small black Orbs, or atomicall points, which are the rudiments of the
Eyes: Whence may be strongly inferred, that if organization, and the
conformation of the Infant begins in the very punctillio or first moment of the
conception, that the Rational Soul then works in the seed, as being the most
vigorous part of it; From hence it follows, that Man does absolutely procreat
Man, which could not be if the Genitor did not communicate the Human Soul unto
his Issue; For since Man is composed of Soul and Body, if the parent cannot
cannot impart both to his offspring, he may be said to be inferior to Beasts,
who have intrinsic active principles, and power in themselfs to propagat, and
beget Individiums of their own species, without the concurrence of extrinsecall
causes.


Pererius. These are neotericall fancies, and derogatory to the noblenes of the
Rational Soul, who has a far more sublime and spiritual extraction.


Be. But to let pass this Quaere, how and when the Rational Soul informs and
actuats the Embryo, there have bin great researches and indagations made,
whether this Soul being so distinct from the Vegetal and Sensitive in her
operations, whether, I say, she has any particular domicile or cell within the
human body for her own residence.


Pererius. It was never found yet by any inspections which the Naturalists and
Anatomisers have made, that the Rational Soul has any peculiar lodging,
proper only to her self, and differing from other Animals; But being
indivisible, inextensive, and without parts, she is tota in toto and tota in
qualibet part, she is all in the whole, and whole in every part of the
compositum, she is diffused up and down the whole mass or fabric of flesh,
there being no movement at all without her; For as the beams or light of the Sun
displayeth it self every where through the whole Hemisphere, yet has it no
particular mansion in any place more then another, so the Rational Soul, which
is a beam of Immortality, diffuseth her self through the whole Microcosm of Man
to quicken it, yet she has no particular residence in any part; It Is true, that
she is radically in the heart, and principally in the brain, which is as it
were her Capitol, and the seat of the Animal-spirits; Thence she issues forth
her commands, and dividing her Empire into a Triarchy, she governs by three
Viceroys, the three Faculties, who though they are absolutely distinct by their
Commissions, and keep their Courts in several Regions, yet are they united by
so indissoluble a league, and sympathetic alliance, that the prosperity of one
enlarges the principalities of the other, and the detriment of each threatens
the integrity of the whole; The Natural or Vegetal Faculty claims superiority
of time in order of procreation, as being Governesse of our Minority,
commanding the third part of our lises; The Vital has pre-eminence in order of
necessity, keeping her Court chiefly in the Heart, which is the first part that
lives, and the last that dies; thence she transmits a souvrain and conservatory
influence through all the members, without which the whole Man must in the
fleetest article of time be but a Cadaver; The Animal Faculty challenges
supermacy in order of eminence, as regulating the sublimer actions, as Sense
and Motion, togegether with the Memory, Understanding, and Imagination, to
which, as to their perfection, the two former are designed.

Therefore, gentle Bees, think speedily on the free proposal I have made, and
of the fair opportunity you have offered you to be reinform'd with Rational
Souls, and to return to the Religious Convent you came from, where being weaned
from the frail world, together with the cares and encumbrances thereof; Where,
by the constant practice of holy duties night and day, you may act the parts of
Angels upon earth, and afterward of true Angels in the land of Eternity:
Therefore shake off this despicable poor humming condition, and go again to sing
Hymns and Halleluiahs to your Creator.


Be. Know, Sir, that we have also a Religion, as well as so exact a Government
among us here; Our Hummings you speak of are as so many Hymns to the great God
of Nature; And there is a miraculous example in Caesarius Cisterniensis, how some
of the holy Eucharist being let fall in a meadow by a Priest, as he was
returning from visiting a sick body, a Swarm of Bees being hard by took it up,
and in a solemn kind of procession carried it to their Hive, and there erected
an Altar of the purest Wax for it, where it was found in that form, and
untouched.

But whereas you spoke of Angels, how do the separated Souls of good men, when
they are exalted to Heven, differ from the Angels?


Pererius. As they agree, so they differ in many things; Angels and separated
Souls agree, in that both of them are Spirits; Both of them are Intellectual
and Eternal Cretures; They both behold the beatificall Vision; Both of them
are Courtiers of Heven, and act merely by the understanding, etc. Lastly, They
both are Parishioners of the Church Triumphant: Now, as the blessed Angels and
Souls separat do thus agree, So they differ in many things; They differ in
their Essentialls, for the principles of Angels are merely Metaphysicall, viz.
Essence and Existence; but a separated Soul continues still part of that
Compositum which formerly consisted of matter and form, and is still apt to be
reunited thereunto; Till then, she is not absolutely completed, for all that
while she changes not her nature, but her state of life: Moreover, they differ
in the exercise of the Understanding, and manner of knowledge, for a Soul
separat knows still by discourse and ratiotination, which an Angel does not but
by Intuition; They also differ in dignity of Nature, for Angels have larger
Illuminations, At the first instant of their Creation they beheld the Beatific
Vision, the sum of all happiness, yet separated Souls are capable to mount up
to such a height of glory by degrees as to be like them in all things, both in
point of Vision, Adhaesion, and Fruition.


Be. Now, Sir, that you speak of Angels, what degrees are there of them in the
Celestial Hierarchy?


Pererius. They are divided into three Hierarchies, and in every Hierarchy there
are three Orders; The first consists of Seraphims, the second of Cherubims, the
third of Thrones; The second consists of Dominations, of Virtues, and Powers;
The third consists of Principalities, of Angels, and Archangells; Now, those
of the supremest Hierarchy partake of divine Illuminations in a greter mesure:
And you were all born, gentle Bees, to be members of any of these glorious
Hierarchies.


Be. I remember when I was a Nun, that some presumptuous spirits would preach,
that Angels were created for Man, and that Man was of so high a creation that
he was little inferior unto them, if not their equal, and that their chief
ministerial function was to guard Him, etc.


Pererius. They were presumptuous indeed, and in a high degree of prophanenes,
as you shall find in these Stanza's of comparison, though some of them are
familiar, and too low for so high a subject.


1.
Such as the meanest Star in Sky
Is to the Sun in Majesty;
What a Monk's Cell is to high Noon,
Or a new Cheese unto the Moon;
No more is Man, if one should dare
Unto an Angel Him compare.
2.
What to the Eagle is a Gnat,
Or to Leviathan a Sprat;
What to the Elephant a Mouse,
Or Shepherd's Cott to Caesar's House;
No more is Man, if one should dare
Unto an Angel Him compare.
3.
What to a Pearl a peeble Stone,
Or Cobler's Shop unto a Throne;
What to the Oak the basest Shrub,
Or to Noah's Ark a Brewer's Tub;
No more is Man, if one should dare
Unto an Angel Him compare.
4.
Then let not Man, half child of night,
Compare with any Hevenly Wight,
He will appeer on that account
A Molehill to Olympus Mount;
Yet let this still his comfort be,
He has a capability
To be of Heven Himself, but on this score,
If he does not make Earth his Heven before.
Be. Noble Prince, you pleased to give diverse touches of the Immortality of
the human Soul, I pray be pleased to illuminat and rectify our understandings
touching that point.


Pererius. Concerning the immortality and incorruptiblenes of the Rational Soul
in the World to com, not only Christian Divines, but the best of Pagan
Philosophers, Poets, and Orators, have done her that right, as is evident in
their works; Moreover, the Intellectual Human Soul does prove her self to be
immortal, both by her desires, her apprehensions, and her operations; Touching
the first, Her desires are infinite we know, and never satisfied in this world;
Now, it is a Maxim among the Schoolmen, That there is no natural passion given
to any finit creture to be frustraneous; Secondly, Her apprehensions or
longings after eternal Truths, which are her chiefest employments, and most
adaequat objects, declare her Immortal; Thirdly, from her operations, it is
known, that all corruption comes from matter, and from the clashing of
contraries; Now, when the Soul is severed from the Body, she is elevated beyond
the sphere of matter, therefore no causes of mortality can reach her, whereby her
state and operations pronounce her immortal, which operations she does
exercise without the ministry of corporeal organs, for they were used to be a
clog to her; Add hereunto, that she uses to spiritualize material things in
the Intellect, to abstract Idaeas from Individualls; She can apprehend
negations and privations, she can frame collective notions, all which actings
conclude her immateriality, and as 'twas pointed at before, where no matter is
found there is no corruption, and where there is no corruption there is no mortality;
Now, her prime operations being without the ministry of Matter, she may be
concluded immortal by that common principle, Modus operandi, sequitur modum
essendi, Operations are according to the essence of every thing; Now, in the
World to com, the Soul shall be in a state of pure independent Being, for there
will be neither action or passion in that state; Whence may be inferred, she
shall never perish, in regard that all corruption comes from the action of
another thing upon that which is corruptible, therefore that thing must be
capable to be made better or worse; Now, if a separat Soul be placed in her
ultimat and utmost state, that she can be made neither, it follows, that she
can never lose the Being she has; Besides, since the egress out of the body
does not alter her nature, but only her condition, it must be granted, that
she was of the same nature while she continued incorporated, though in that
kind of imprisonment she was subject to be forged as it were by the hammer of
material objects beating upon her, yet so, as she was still of her self what
she was; Therefore when she goes out of the passible ore wherein she suffered,
by reason of the foulnes and impurity of that ore, she immediately becomes
impassible, and a fixed subject of her own nature, viz. a simple pure Being;
Both which (as a most noble Knight Sir. K. D. has it) may be illustrated in
some mesure by what we find passes in the coppilling of a fixed metal, which
as long as any lead or dross or any allay remains with it, continues still
melting, flowing, and in motion under the muffle; but as soon as they are
parted from it, and that it is become pure, defaecated, without mixture, and
single of it self, it contracts it self to a narrower room, and instantly
cease from all motion, it grows hard, permanent, and resistent to all force
of fire, admitting no change or diminution in its substance by any external
violence; In like manner it may be said, when the Rational Soul departs from
the drossy ore of the Body, and comes to be her single self, she is like
exalted Gold, and reduced to the utmost perfection; She can be no more liable
to any diminution, to action or passion, or any kind of alteration, but
continues fixed for ever in the full fruition of unconceivable bliss and glory.


Be. Excellent Prince, these are high abstracted notions, transcending the
reach of vulgar capacities; But you were pleased to reflect somewhat upon the
blisfulnes and joys of the human Soul in the other world, I pray be pleased to
enlarge your self upon this Theme.


Pererius. These joys, as they are beyond expression, so they are beyond all
imagination; That vast Ocean of Felicity which the separat Soul is capable to
receive cannot flow into her, until those banks of earth, viz. the corporeal
walls of flesh be removed; Those infinite joys which the human Soul shall be
ravished withal in Heven are unmeasurable, and beyond any mathematical
reaches; They have length without points, breadth without lines, depth without
surface; They are even and uninterrupted joys, but to go about to express them
in their perfection were the same task, as to go about to measure the Ocean in
Cockle-shells, or compute the number of the sands with peeble stones; Touching
these faint and fading plesures among the Elements, we use to desire them when
we need them, and when we have them, the desire presently languisheth in the
fruition; Moreover, we use to love earthly things most when we want them, and
less when we have them; The daintiest meats and drinks nauseat after fullness;
Carnal delights cause sadness after the enjoyment; All plesures breed not only
a satiety but a disgust, and the contentment terminats with the act: It Is
otherwise with Celestial things, they are most loved when they are enjoyed,
and most coveted when they are had; They are always full of what is desired,
and the desire still lasts, but it is a co-ordinat desire of complacency and
continuance, not an appetit after more, because they are perfect of themselfs;
Yet there is still a Desire, and a Satiety, but the one finds no want, nor can
the other breed a surfeit; The higher the pleasure is, the more full and intense
is the fruition, and the oftener it is repeted the more the appetit increases;
Whence this conclusion follows, that there can be no proportion at all betwixt
the joys of a separat Soul, and those of a Soul embodyed; For the least dram of
the spiritual joys in Heven is more than the whole Ocean of fleshly
contentments; One drop of those abstracted, those pure, permanent; and
immarcescible delights is infinitely more sweet, than all those mixed and muddy
streams of corporeal and mundan plesures, then all those no other then Utopian
delights of this transitory world, were they all cast into a Limbeck, and the
very Elixir of them distilled into one vessel.


Be. Incomparable Prince, you have conquered us with such strong Herculean
Resons, you have raised our spirits with such high raptures, and so illuminated
our understandings, that by the gracious Fiat of the great God of Nature, and
the favor of Queen Morphandra his handmaid in this particular, we are willing
to resume our first shapes, and so return to our dear Country and Cloisters,
where the remembrance of this transfiguration, we hope, will turn to our
advantage; In the interim, we render you most humble and hearty thanks in the
highest degree that can be imagined, for your flexanimous and hevenly
persuasions, which we found so melting and sweet, that we may justly think Bees
sat upon your lips, as they did upon Plato's, in your cradle, or that you might
be nursed with Honey in lieu of Milk, as Pindarus the Prince of Lyricks was; And
because Poesy is the gretest light whereby the Rational Soul may be discerned
to be a Ray of Divinity, we will conclude with some Enthusiasms to blissfull
Heven and the Hierarchies thereof in this graduall Hymn, beginning with our
Creator.


Natures great God, the Cause of causes, be
Adored and praised to all Eternity,
That supreme Good, that quintessentiall Light,
Which quickens all that is hidden, or in sight;
Who breaths in Man the Intellectual Soul,
Thereby to rule all Cretures, and control
What Water, Earth, or Air; etc.
1.
O holy Souls, O heavenly Saints,
Who from corruption and the taints
Of flesh and blood, from pain and tears,
From pining cares, and panting fears,
And from all passions, except Love
(Which only reigns with you above)
Are now exempt, and made in endless Bliss
Free Denizons, and Heirs of Paradis.
2.
O glorious Angels who behold
The Lord of Light from Thrones of Gold,
Yet do vouchsafe to look on Man,
To be his Guide and Guardian,
Praying always that He may be
Partner of your felicity;
O blisfull Saints and Angels, may ye still
The Court of Heven with Halleluiahs fill.
3.
Seraphick Powers, Cherubs, Thrones,
Virtues and Dominations,
Supernall principalities,
Glories, and Intelligencies,
Who guide the course of Stars in sky,
And what in their vast Concaves lie:
May ye for ever great Jehovah's will,
And His commands throughout the world fulfill.
4.
Archangels who the most sublime degree
Do hold in the Triumphant Hierarchy,
And can endure to see, and face alone
The glorious Beatific Vision,
A joy which all joys else transcends so far
As does a morning Sun the meanest Star.
Archangels, Angels, Saints, Souls severed, may ye still
The Empyrean Court with Halleluiahs fill.
Infantium Cerebri Sextus Post Quadraginta.

Gloria lausque Deo saeCLorVM in saecVla sunto.

A Chronogrammaticall Verse, which includes not only this year 1660. but has
Numericall Letters enough to reach above a thousand years further, until the
year 2867.

-- Heic Terminus esto.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Relating to ORTOGRAPHY.
There is a Saying, that has gained the repute of a Proverb, (though it be also
a kind of Reproach) That the French neither sings as he pricks, nor thinks as
he speaks, nor speaks as he writes; The first proceeds from abundance of
spirits, and his volatile airy nature; The second from his Exces of Complements;
The third, because he would have his Language retain still of the Romand or
Latin Tongue; Therefore when he writes Temps, Corpse, Estoille, Advocats, etc.
which com from Tempus, Corpus Stella, Advocati, he pronounces them, Tan, Cors,
Etoilis, Avoca; The English may be said to be as guilty hereof, for if the
French writes, Apres la tempeste vient le beau temps, and pronounces, Apre la
tampete vien le bou tan, After a Storm comes a Calm; If the French writes, Les
Advocats bastissent leuers maisons de testes de fols, and pronounces, Les
avoca batisset leur mesons de tete de fous, Lawyers build their houses of Fools
heads, (viz. Clients) The English comes not short of him, for whereas he writes,
God give you good Evening, he often says, Godi godin; Whereas he writes, Much
good may it do unto you, he often pronounces, Musgiditty: The French do labor
daily to reform this, and to bring both Writing and Pronounciation to be
consonant, by retrenching the superfluous letters, for whereas they were used to
write, Les Epistres que les Apostres ont Escrit, they now write as they
pronounce, Les Epitres que les Apotres ont ecrit: It has bin the aim of the
Author in this Book (and others) to do the like, (though the Press did not
observe his Ortography so punctually). Now, Strangers use to quarrel with our
Language, and throw away the Book in a chase sometimes, because our writing and
pronunciation are so differing; For when a stranger meets with treasure,
measure, feature, reader, weather, people, etc. he pronounces tre-asure,
me-asure, fe-ature, re-ader, we-ather, pe-ople; When he meets with witness,
sickness, witty, pretty, pity, star, war, etc. he pronounces
witness-e, sickness-e, witti-e, pretti-e, pitti-e, starr-e, warr-e, etc. Whereas
if we would write them as we pronounce them, viz. Tresure, mesure, feture,
reder, wether, peeple, witness, sickness, witty, pretty, pity, star, war, etc.
(which gives altogether as full a prolation) strangers would not find such a
difficulty and distaste in learning our Language; It has bin, and is still the
endevor of the Author to reform this, as also to bring those words which are
derived from the Latin Tongue to follow her Ortography rather then the French,
whereby diverse Letters are saved, as Magic, Tysic, Colic, Favor, Lahor, etc. not
Magique, Physique, Cholique, Favor, Labor, etc. For as it is a Principle in
Philosophy, Encia non sunt frustra multiplicanda, Entities are not to be
multiplied in vain, so it may as well hold in Ortography, That Letters are not
to he multiplied to no purpose; Add hereunto the Topicall Rule, (as the Author
observes els-where) Frustra sit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, More
is waste, when fewer will serve one turn.

THE INDEX.
A more particular Account of the Ingredients that went to the Composition of
this Work.
A
Fol. THe Art of governing Man the most difficult. 26 An Asse's body medicinal
for many things after death. Ibid. The Antipathy 'twixt an Ape and a Snail. 50
Aristotle, Secretary of Nature's Cabinet-Councell. 55 Ambition has no Horizon.
70 Aristotle held, that in the Female there was no active principle of
Generation. 55 Confutation of the said Opinion. Ibid. Apelles painted a good
huswife standing upon a Snail. 58 Aristotle inconstant to himself where he
treats of Policy. 98 The Affections of the Peeple an imperfect security to a
Prince. 99 Of Atoms. 103 The Activity of Atoms. 104 The Application of the
Sympatheticall Powder. 106 Aetonia uncharacterized. 108 Aetonia full of mongrell
Princes. 109 The advantages of the Human body. 120 An Ass cannot abide
Fennel. 18 Artonia a Noun Substantive that can stand by it self. ibid. The
Artonian Peasan born in chains. 19 Of Artonia with the plenty and beggary
thereof. 18 Of the great Artonian Favorit. 21 The Austerities of Nuns. 134
B
Bees, how useful after death. 138 Bees bodies pounded good against many
diseases. ibid. The Books of the Dead enliven the Living. In the Epist. Brute
Animals more easy to be governed than Mankind. 99 Of the Beast with many
heads, viz. the Common peeple. ibid. The Brains of a Fox good against the
Falling sickness. 100 The Blood of a Fox good against the Stone and the Cramp.
ibid. A dead Boar has nothing bad in him but his Excrements. 112 The Brains of
a Boar good against the bitting of Serpents. ibid. The Blood of a Boar good
against Carbuncles. ibid. Boar's liver good against the biting of a mad Dog.
ibid. Boar's lard good to make broken bones firm. ibid. Boar's testicles good
against the Falling sickness. ibid. Boar's dung good against all venomous
bitings, as also against the pain of the Spleen and Sciatica. ibid. A Boar
being dead has many virtues, and why? ibid. How Beasts go in many things
beyond Man. 120 The Carboncian sells his King. 129 A Bees Hive, the chief
Confectionary of Nature. 134
C
The Conduct of the Passions the greatest prudence, and the Conquest of them
the greatest prowess. In the Epist. Children a certain care, but an uncertain
comfort. 24 Comparisons 'twixt the Body Politic and the Natural. 48 Censures
pro and con of Tumontia. 69 A rare comparison of the holy Trinity. 83 A City in
Saturnia where husbands use to get their wifes with child a hundred miles off.
88 A Character of Saturnia. 89 Of the gripes of Conscience. 90 Of Covetousnes.
ibid. The Common peeple a crossgrain'd Animal. 99 A Comparison touching the
Tomanto Empire. 109 The Character of an Aetonian. 111 Of Cuprinia. 114 The
Cuprinian compared to a Wolf. 115 The Cuprinian had vast designs. 114 A
Carboncian turned to a Soland-Goose, and the resons why. 125 Carboncia a coors
Country. ibid. Carboncia's brag of her Kings. 126 Carboncia's late story. ib.
Carboncia found Fiddlers fare in Gheriona. 128 The Country of Gheriona good, but
the peeple bad. 131 A high Complement. 135 Concupiscence not given to Mankind
for a torment, but for delight. ibid.
F
A Description of the Morning. 48 A Discourse of Womankind. 56 A Devil lurks in
every berry of the Grape. 68 Diverse medicinal virtues in a dead Deer. 64 Of
the Discovery of the New World. 71 The Doctor of Physics Fee but two shillings
in Tumontia. 73 A Discourse of Physic, and the Art thereof pro and con. 74
Diseases belonging to all the parts of Human body. 78 Distempers of the mind
more cruciatory than those of the body. 80 A Discourse touching the Sense and
the Soul. ibid. A Discourse of Aetonia, and how she is impaired, 109 What Nation
is the gretest Drunkard. 111 A Discourse of the Instinctive Reason that Beasts
have. 119 What a damnable thing it is for Subjects to rise up in Arms against
their King. 128 A Discourse of Nuns. 134 A Discourse whether the Human Soul be
by Infusion or Traduction. 140 The Degrees of the Celestial Hierarchy. 145 A
discourse of the Immortality of the Soul. 147
E
Experience the touchstone of Truth. 6 Of the English Liturgy. 30 Examples pro
and con touching the chastity of Women. 59 An Emblem of a lavishing wife. ibid.
Every one knows how to tame a shrew but he who has her. 61 Examples of notable
scolds. ibid. Examples of the rare Longaevity of Deer. 64 The Elephant begins
his youth at threescore years. ibid. How pitifully the Empire is decayed. 111
Of Aesop's Dog. 115 The fearful and sudden judgment which fell upon the
Carboncians for their Rebellion. 129 Of the fixed Stars and the Planets,
touching their motion. 136 Exact Obedience among Bees. ibid. Exact Government
among Bees. ibid. An Epitome of the late confusions in Gheriona. 33 An Epitome
of the confusions throughout the world for forty years. ibid.
F
Fable of an Ass. 24 Of a foolish Naturalist, who wished there were another way
to propagat Mankind than by Women. 55 The Fable of the Stagg. 65 A Facetious
answer of a Pope touching Physicians. 74 The Foam of a Mule drunk in warm wine
good against Pursines. 85 The Fable of the Mule. ib. Diverse Fables of the Fox.
87 The Fable of the Frogs. 99 A Fox tongue carried in a chain good against sore
eyes. 101 Fables 'twixt the Wolf and the Lamb applied. 105 The Fable of the
Goat and the Lion. 118 The Fable of the Horse and the Ass. 24 The Fable of the
Ass and the Spaniel. ibid.
G
God heals, but the Physician takes the Fee. 77 No Government so wise that can
fit all Countries, and why? 98 The genitalls, lights, and liver of a Fox, good
against the Spleen. 101 The Gum of a Pine Tree eaten by the Fox when he is ill.
100 Goat's blood dissolves Diamonds, and scours better then any file. 123
Goat's milk recovers a Lodestone, when being rubbed with Garlic it has lost
its virtue. ibid. Goat's marrow good against aches. ibid. Goat's trindles drunk
in wine good against the Iaundies, etc. ibid. Goat's liver, entralls, ashes,
horns, milt, spleen, urine, marrow, hoofs, gall, dung, trindles, sewet, etc.
all medicinal. ibid. Gheriona censured. 131
H
A graduall Hymn to God and his Angels. 150 if the Humors were fixed in Man's
body, he might live eternally. In the Epist. History a profitable study. 31 The
horridnes of Annihilation. 49 Honest men use to marry, wise men not. 62 The
hardship the Tumontian endures. 69 Health, the most precious of Jewels. 77 The
high prerogatives of Reason. 81 A horrid kind of Revenge. 92 Another Hellish
revenge in Saturnia. 93 A late History of ten Morrisdancers in Orosia that made
above a 1000 years betwixt them. 122 The Horrid Ingratitude of the Carboncian
against their native King. 128 The Horrid Insurrections in Hebrinia took rise
from Carboncia. 130 Hope like Butter, gold in the morning, silver at noon, and
lead at night. 135
I
In some places of the Indies the living wife throws her self into the pile with
her husband. 60 Jealousy among Thoughts like Bats among Birds. 90 The
Insulsity of the common peeple to think any rare effect to be Magical. 102 Of
Instinctive Reason. 118 Ill humors adhere to human nature as rust to copper. 121
Of the Infirmities of Mankind. ibid. Idleness the Devils couch. 154
K
The highest knowledge a man has of his Creator but half blindness. 83 A
cruel horrid murder. 103 The Kirk-mens horrid ingratitude. 128 The Kings Cheese
goes away three parts in pairings in Artonia. 19 Why the King of Artonia keeps
the common peeple so low. 20 The King of Artonia's huge taxes. 19 The King of
Bees has no sting. 136 The King of Bees has a solemn Funeral. 189
L
A Lawyer like Balaam's Ass, he will not speak unless an Angel appear. 16 Of
Lawyers. 17 Lawyers build fair houses of Fool's heads. 17 Of Laughter. 22 Of
the long age of Deer. 64 Laughter a passion that has the most variety of
action. 22 The Laws of the Kingdom of Bees. 136
M
Mirth and sadness follow one another in human bodies as night succeeds day. The
Epist. Magic the first Philosophy. 2 Man Paramount of all the sublunary
cretures. 7 Man a tyrant to himself. ib. Man's body compared to a ship. 10 A
Mariner's life. 12 Man the most intractable of all cretures. 26 Of the great
maiden-City Marcopolis. 63 Man has more diseases than a horse, or any other
creture. 98 Of M^rchants. 70 Marther strangely discovered. 92 The mavelous
continence of a Saturnian. 94 Of Monarchy. 98 Some general Maxims of Policy may
extend to all Countries. 99 The mode of raaking the Sympatheticall Powder. 103
Man more savage then any Beast. 108 Of the Method of Providence. 110 A Miser
and a Hog good for nothing till after death. 112 Man taxed of presumption. 121
The Miser like an Ass, that carries gold but feeds on thistles. 17 The motions
of Nature irresitible. 135 Man's gretest foes are within himself. ibid. Man the
gretest Amphibyum of Nature for having three souls. 159
N
Of Navigation. 9 A notable proverb touching long life. 49 The noble gratitude
of a Saturnian. 94 Not such a Tyrant in the world as the common peeple. 99 The
Natural and Political body compared. 20 A notable Fable of the Ass and the
Horse applied. 24. Nuns a degree higher the the ordinary course of happiness. 134
Nature abhors captivity. 135
O
Of fading earthly joys. 149 Of hevenly joys. ibid. Otter's stones good against
the Palsy. 8 Otter's liver reduced to powder good against the Stone and
Cholic. ibid. Of old age. 64 Of the perturbances of human brains. 68
Opportunity the best moment in the whole extention of Time. 72 Of Physicians.
87 The odd life of a Soldier. 114 Orosia vindicated. 122 The Orosian faithful
to his King. 123 Orosia corrupted by the Gherionian Sectaries. 124 Of the three
Souls in Man. 159 New Opinions, that the seeds of the Parents go not to
impregnation, but the Female conceives by virtuall contact. 141 Of the three
Faculties of the Soul. 143
P
The Prerogatives that Man has over other cretures. 7 The Partridge and
Pidgeon purge themselfs with Bayleafs. 76 Policy how degenerated of late days.
95 The truest Patriots are the Marcopolits. 95 Policy and Craft distinguished.
ibid. The poor Politicians of Gheriona. 96 A false Policy that makes Religion
her mask. 95 Policy or the Art of governing Man the hardest. 97 Proverbs of
several Nations. Who preach War are the Devil's Chaplains. 129 The best Policy
Gheriona can use is to keep the Carboncian low. ibid. The Periodicall motions
of the Planets. 136 Potentially, Man has in him all created natures. 159 A
Poem, containing the whole History of Man. 14 The Prerogative of Angels above
Man in a Poem. 145
Q
Queen Morphandra descended of a Divine race. In the Prolog. Queen Morphandra
did perform all her Transmutations, not by any Magical ways, but by the Power
and Fiat of God. Of Queen Artemesia, who reared a wonderful Monument for her
husband Mausolus, and besides made her own Body his Tomb, by taking a doss
every morning of his ashes. 60
R
Reason the specificall difference that distinguishes Man from Beast. 7 The
high prerogatives of Reason. ibid. Of Roundheads. 49 Rebels and mad Dogs must
be knocked in the head. 100 Rebels but half punished, like Snakes cut in few
pieces they will cling again together. ib. A rare Cure wrought by the
Sympatheticall Powder. 107 The Reason that Beasts have is only Direct, and
capable of Singulars. 118 Reason distinguished. 120 The Rational Soul the Image
and Breath of God Almighty. 139 The Rational Soul the Queen of Forms. ibid. The
Rational Soul a Spark of Immortality. ibid. The Rational Soul has no
particular place of residence in Man, but is diffusive through all parts. ibid.
Resons alleged, that the Rational Soul is traducible. 141 A Rare example of
the Devotion of Bees. 144
S
Of a Seafaring life. 9 A Strange horrid dream. 32 Of the servitude and ill
usage of Women. 58 The Serpent cures himself with Fennel. 76 Of the Sagacity of
some Beasts. ibid. The Stagg cures himself with Dittany. ibid. The Snail heals
her self with Hemlock. ibid. The Stork heals himself with Origanum. ibid.
Spinning out of Time never made good Cloth. 80 The Sun never sets on the
Tumontian Dominions. 83 A strange story of two Saturnian Merchants. 91 The
Saturnian in the extremes of Love and Hatred, of Virtue and Vices. 94 The
Saturnians may prescribe rules of Prudence to all Mankind. 95 Of late
Smatterers in Policy. 99 Of the Sympatheticall Powder, and the rare virtues
thereof. 103 The Saturnian more subject to jealousy and revenge then other
Nations. 102 Strings made of Wolf's guts spoil all Music. 116 Strange things of
the Wolf. ibid. Soldiers in Peace like Chimneys in Summer. 127 Symptoms when
Bees are sick. 138 Some hold Honey to be the sweat of the Hevens, others the
gelly of the Stars, others the quintessence of the Air. ibid. How a Swarm of
Bees built an Altar. 144
T
The Torments of Hell. 40 Two notable Sayings in disparagement of Women. 55 Two
famous Examples of the gallantry of Women. 60 Talk, one of the gretest delights
of Women. 66 The Tumontian in his Councels follows the motion of Saturn, in his
actions of Mercury. 67 The Tumontian excused for the blood he spilt in
conquering the New World. 70 The Tumontian Monarchy like a Cloak made up of
patches. 84 The Tumontian serves no Prince but his own. ibid. The Tumontian
trades no where but into his own Kings Country. ibid. The Tumontian in
perpetual Feud with the common Enemy. ibid. A Town in Saturnia where there are
Mountains without Wood, Sea without Fish, Men without Faith, and Women without
shame. 88 Tall men like houses five stories high, the upper room worst
furnished. 111 A strange Tale of an Ass. 119 A Tale of a Crow. ibid. Though the
Thread of a man's life be never so well spun, yet it has many bracks. 121 Till
Beans blossom, Bees never go abroad. 137 The difference 'twixt separated Souls
and Angels, and how they agree. 145
V
Of the vexations and perturbances of spirit that Man is subject unto. 7 The
Variety of labors that go to make Bread. 14 The Vexation of spirit Mankind is
subject unto above other cretures. 68 The Volganians beat their wifes duly once
a week. 68 The Virtues of Deer. 63 When all Vices grow old, Covetousness grows
young in Man. 90 Of the Vices in Saturnia. 91 Of the Vices of Aetonia. III The
high Vanities of Man. 145 A Visionall Dream. 32 The Various torments of Hell.
40 Variety of new torments in Hell. ibid.
W
The Wisest of Mortals is he who controuls his humors. In the Epist. War a a
Fire struck in the Devil's Tinder-box. 10 Women of purer stuff then Men. 56 Of
rare Women. 57 Of good and bad Women. 58 The Woman and Fortress which begin to
parley are half won. 66 Women held by some to be of an inferior Creation, and not
the same species. 54 A Woman can wash her hands so long in a Basin of clear
water that she cannot foul, Man not. 56 Women praised and dispraised. 57 The
Wars with Hydraulia cost the Tumontian a hundred and twenty millions of
Tresure. 72 The Ways Hydraulia found out to counterfeit the Tumontian Coin.
ibid. The VVild Boar heals himself with Ivy. 76 What the Eye of a Batt is to
the Sun, the Understanding of Man is to God. 83 The great VVilines of a Fox in
sundry Fables. 88 Of the Weaknesses and frailties of Man. 121
These several Books are Printed, and are to be sold by William Palmer at the
Palm Tree in Fleet Street.
1. OCcult Physic; or, The Principles in Nature Anatomized, by Philosophical
operations, taken from Experience, in three Book; by W. Williams, in 8o

2. Phil-Anglus, Some sober Inspections made into the Carriages and Consults of
the late Long Parliament; by Iam* Howell Esquire in 8o

3. Metamorphosis Anglorum; or, Reflections Historical and Political upon the
late Change of Government in England, from the Death of Oliver Lord Protector
to this present time; by S. D. Gent.

4. That renowned Piece, Mr. Howell's Dodona's Grove, translated into the new
refined French by one of the prime Wits in the Academy of Blaux Esprits in
Paris, in 4o

The Art of Stenography, or Short-writing, with a Schoolmaster to the Art; by
John Willis.

And also there are to be had and sold all the pieces of Dr. Heylyns writing.


