

P P O E D P I A - A S I L I K: A DISCOURSE Concerning the PRECEDENCE OF KINGS:
Wherein the REASONS and ARGUMENTS Of the Three Greatest Monarks of Christendom*
Who claim a several Right Thereunto, Are Faithfully Collected, and Renderd.

Whereby occasion is taken to make Great Britain better understood then some
Foreign Authors (either out of Ignorance or Interest) have represented Her in
order to this Particular.

Whereunto is also adjoynd

A distinct Treatise of AMBASSADORS, etc.

Symbolum Authoris Senesco, non Segnesco.

LONDON: Printed by Ia. Co^trel, for Sam. Speed, at the Rainbow; and Chr.
Eccleston, at the middle shop under St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1664.

TO HIS MAJESTY OF Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc.
SIR,
There are many who have written of the Pre-eminences and Antiquity, of the
Power and Prerogatives of France and Spain in order to a Precedence or
Superiority; But while they magnify their own Kings, they derogat from other:
Moreover, while they produce their Resons, they often fall into such excesses
of speech, that they may be called rather Rodomontados then Resons.

But there is none who has written yet of Great Britain in relation to this
Point; therefore it is the principal scope of this Work, wherein there is an
Endeavor to make Her better understood; and to prove by Relevant and lively
Resons, (without offense to any) That the Monark of Great Britain if He go not
before, at least He ought not to come behind any King whatsoever.

Now, in regard it is a Theme of so sublime a Nature, and depends chiefly upon
ancient Records, History, and the Opinion of Civilians, (who have bin
principally consulted) the Author has had a special Care and Caution to be
very exact and true in his Quotati ons of all kinds.

Lastly, The Author (most humbly under favor) did deem Himself not altogether
incapable of such a Task, for having bin in most of the great Courts of
Christendom; For having Negotiated by Royal Commission above three years in the
Court of Spain; For having bin Orator in an extraordinary Embassage to Denmark,
and diverse Princes of Germany; For having bin so often in France, and sundry
Courts of Italy, etc. He may be thought not to be Impar Negotio.

May all the Blessings and best Influences of Heven light upon Your Royal Head
this New-Year, and many, many, many more, according to the due and daily
Devotions of the humblest of Calendis Januarii, 1664. Your MAJESTY'S Votaries
and Vassals, J. Howel.

To the Discerning Reader.
THe Ingredients and Matter whereof this New kind of Historical Piece is
composd, may be said to be all of Crown-Gold, the subject thereof being Kings:
Whence it is worth the observing, that History is a Lady of that Excellence,
that she has Kings to her Subjects.

We well know what a ticklish and tremendous Task it is to treat of Kings, who
have power of Life and Death; There must be as much Caution as Care usd therein;
It is as perilous as it is painful: It is as walking upon the Ridg of a high
House, or dancing upon a Rope, where unless one be well counterpoizd, he is in
danger to break his Neck; Especially a task of this high nature, that treats of
Regal Precedence. And we find that they who write too peremptorily thereof,
have done it with more offense then satisfaction. And indeed there was never any
binding Determination made thereof, but where Decisions have bin made, the
Princes upon new occasions have excepted or protested against them: Therefore
the Author here does not presume to determine the Question positively and
definitively en dernier ressort; for

-- Tantas componere lites
Non opis est nostrae --
Therefore he refers it to the Discerning Reader, who is left free, and evry way
unsubornd to pass his Judgment accordingly, in mesuring evry King by the merit
of his own Resons, which are here fairly and faithfully exhibited; and those of
France and Spain exactly drawn out of their own Authors, having not omitted any
that has any weight.

Now, it is found among Historians, that Contestations about Precedence of
Session and Superiority, with other Formalities, Complements, Visits and
Ceremonies, have bin very fatal to Christendom; And it is observd also that the
various Dignities in the Church has multiplied them: The great Clash twixt
Rome and Constantinople, (twixt St. Peter and St. Andrew) was the unhappy cause
of the Defection and total Separation of the Greek Church from the Latin: The
hot Dispute for Precedence twixt the Emperor Frederiki and Pope Adrian 4. did
put all the Christian world on fire: The great Ecumenical Council at Lions,
which concernd so much the interest of Christendom, broke up about Punctilios
for Precedencie: The great Contest twixt Patriarks and Cardinals bred a great
deal of confusion; but at last the Patriarks had the better, for they of
Constantinople, Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria precede the Cardinals,
though they be called the Princes of the Church, and have the Prerogative not to
be tried without 72 Witnesses, I mean the Bishop-Cardinals; 44 Witnesses the
Cardinal-Priests, and 30 the Deacon-Cardinal.

One of the 24 Causes, (and it proved the greatest) that the English lost
France, was a Clash that happend at St. Omers twixt the Duke of Bedford and
Burgundy about Punctilios of Complement and Precedence. That hopeful Trety of
Peace at Bullen twixt Queen Elizabeth and her Brother-in-law Phil. 2. King of
Spain, after a long lingering War by Sea and Land, broke off for question of
Precedence, or rather for the peevishness of the Spanish Ambassadors, who had
no other Argument that had any probability of reason, but that the Catholic King
was encreasd in Territories; whereas the Civilians say, that Supervenient and
Accessory Dominions, with accumulation of Titles, have no force twixt Princes
all the while they continue still in eodem gradu dignitatis. Nor could they
give any answer at all to the Arguments the English Ambassadors producd, whereof
one was, that of Volaterranus, who does plainly relate how the Pope did adjudge
the Prerogative of Precedence to Hen. 7. of England, before Ferdinand of Spain,
as it will appeer more at large in the following Discourse.

Now, there have bin diverse means found by prudent Mediators from time to time
for accommoding and reconcilement of differences in point of Precedence;
sometimes by dilatorious ways; sometimes by Alternatif Determinations, yet Jure
Partium integre reservato; As the great clash twixt Warwick and Buckingham in
England was composd that they should precede alternatim evry three years; so the
hot contest twixt the Ursini and the Colonnas, two of the antientst Families in
Rome, was reconcild, that the elder of the two who were living, should precede,
which makes the younger never come to the Popes Chapel, where they take place
next Kings Ambassadors. The difference Inter Scherensem, and Wolfeggianam
Familiam in Germany was reconcild, that the one should carry the Pomum Aureum,
the Golden Apple of the Empire going in, the other at going out. Among
Artificers, and Men of Trade, the Civilians say, that each one is to precede
according to the Dignity of the Stuff whereon they work. Moreover, when Publik
Instruments are made, that Kingdom in whose Right it is made has the Precedence,
so sometimes Scotland is namd before England, etc. General Precedences do differ
according to the Genius of some Nations; as among the Turks, to go on the left
hand is more honorable sedendo and incedendo in sitting and going then on the
right; and the reason is good, because he may seize upon his Companions Sword at
pleasure. In Spain the Pages and Laquays go before, and the Lords follow; And in
some cases it is so in France, as in going over a Bridge, a Plank or a River, the
Man goes before the Master, according to the old Proverb,

En Pont, en Planche, en Riviere
Valet devant, Maitre derriere.
Concerning Ambassadors, there is a way that they shall never clash, which is,
to make them Parallels, viz. that the Ambassadors of those Kings who stand in
competition for Precedence, do never meet (unless it be in visiting one
another) And the Mathematician tells us, That Parallelae etiamsi ducantur in
infinitum nunquam concurrent, Parallels although they be drawn in infinitum,
they will never meet; and if Ambassadors never meet, they will never jussle or
jarr.

J. H.

THE Civilians, Antiquaries, and Historians, BOTH Latin, English, British,
Italians, Spanish, and French, That were Consulted, and Cited in the
Compilement of this WORK.
GOldastus Cassanaeus Besoldus Valdesius Francisco Vasquez Volaterranus Bodin
Boterus Albericus Gentilis Lansius Augustine Caranato Thesaurus Politicus Ant.
Corsetus Camillo Borrello Boccolini Sleidon Dr. Gaspar Bragaccia Paschalius Don
Ant. de Zuniga Mariana Garibai Fredericus de Marselaer Carolus de Grassaliis Du
Haillan Comines Pierre Matthieu The Bishop of Rhodes Du Serres Vers^egan Il
Conte Losco The Lord Coke Bishop Usher Sir Thomas More Sir Walter Raleigh Sir
Robert Cotton Sir Henry Spelman Sir Richard Baker Sir John Finet Sir John Price
Judge Doddridge Humphry Lloyd Judge Ienkins Mr. Campden Mr. Seldom Mr. Fabian
Philipps Barclays Argenis Matthew Paris Polydore Virgile Sir Henry Wotten Sir
Isaak Wake Mr. Minshew.
Besides these Authors, many Ancient Records and Manuscripts have bin
consulted; and the perusing of old Parchment-Records is a hard and harsh Work;
it may be said to be like the peeling of old Walnuts.

ANALYSIS Totius Operis.
TOuching the Matter and Method in framing this Work, it is by dividing it into
four Compartments, viz. into four Sections; The first three treat of the
Precedence of Kings; The fourth of Ambassadors. Evry one of the Sections is
subdivided into ten heads or Paragraphs, containing still new matter.

The first Section consists of the Resons of the King of Great Britain, etc.
First, That He had to his Predecessors as ancient Kings as France and Spain,
and as famous; among others Mulmutius Dunwallo, who raignd here many hundred
years before the Romans came in, and he was so great a Legislator, that his
Laws are called Leges Mulmuntinae, and stand upon record to this day. Moreover,
his Majesty now Regnant is the hundred thirty ninth King of Britain, and the
hundred and ninth of Scotland; whereas neither Spain or France can show a
Catalog of half the number. 2. The King of Great Britain had to his Predecessor
the first Christian King that ever was upon earth, viz. King Lucius, according
to the concurrent Opinion of all Antiquaries, for St. Peter's Church in Cornhil
was built by him, as a Record yet extant shows; and this was many hundred years
before France or Spain had any Christian King, which made England to be
entitled in all dispatches from Rome, Primogenita Ecclesiae, the firstborn
Daughter of the Church. Now, it is a Canon among the Civilians, Summa Ratio
quae ducitur a Religione; and Grotius has also a Principle, Qui primo
Christianismum professi sunt Praecedant, etc. 3. The King of Great Britain has
a Merum and immixum Imperium he has as absolut Possession and Authority, and
more Independent then France or Spain, take Spiritual and Temporal together. 4.
The King of Great Britain for Eminence of Royal Dignity, for State and Titles,
has as fair Flowers, He has as rich Jewels in his Crowns as any other; He
has as Noble Arms, the Cross, and the Lion who is King of Animals. 5. The King
of Great Britain had to his Predecessor the first Christian Emperor
Constantin, and the first Christian Worthy Arthur the first Founder of Martial
Knighthood, whom there is Truth enough to make Famous without that which is
thought Fabulous. 6. The King of Great Britains Predecessors were the first who
freed themselfs from the Roman yoke long before France or Spain; and this is
one of the greatest Arguments that those Kings do produce for a Precedence one
of another. 7. The Kings of Great Britain had Precedence adjudgd Them both of
France and Spain in General Councils, as also by the Decrees of Popes, as it
will appeer in the following Discourse. 8. The King of Great Britain is
Souverain of as Noble an Order of Knighthood as any in Christendom, whereof
eight Emperors, and well near eight times as many Kings have bin, and is more
ancient then the Royal Orders of France or Spain. 9. The King of Great Britain
has had as Martial and Magnanimous Progenitors as any of the other two, who
performd great Acts both far and near; and touching Exploits in the Holy Land,
the Kings of Spain had little share in them. 10. The King of Great Britain has
as freeborn and strong sturdy Peeple of four several Nations to make Soldiers
of, as either France or Spain: He has the best Mariners, the stoutest Men of
War, the Noblest Haven, for so Milford is accounted by all Geographers: He has
the Inaccessiblest Coasts, with the greatest Command and Power at Sea both
Defensive and Offensive of any King whatsoever.
The second Section
Consists of Reasons and Arguments why France does pretend and challenge
Priority of Place; which Reasons (under favor) may be appliable also to the
King of Great Britain, and the world knows why: But for to make the King of
Great Britain come after the King of France, is to make him come behind
himself, which is no less then an absurdity.

The third Section
Consists of the Reasons and Arguments which Spain alleges for Precedence, at
least of an Equality with the two forementiond Kings; extracted with as much
fidelity as carefulness out of her own Authors, as Don Diego de Valdez, D.
Francisco Vasquez, with others.

The fourth Section
Consists of a Discourse of Ambassadors. It Is true, there are some who have written
of this subject already, yet not any under this Meridian; But those Forreners
who have discoursd thereof do amuse the Reader with such general Notions, that
the Breeding and Qualities which they require, as also the Monitions, Precepts
and Instructions which they prescribe, may fit any other Minister of State, or
Man of Business. But this Discourse does appropriat it self soly to the subject
we undertake, viz. to the Function, Office and Incumbency of an Ambassador.

A necessary Aviso to the Reader.
Whereas the four following Sections which may be called so many Decades, in
regard evry one consists of Ten several Discourses, which makes forty in all; I
say, whereas they are full of Quotations, Authorities, Texts, Testimonies, and
Examples, both Modern and Ancient; And whereas the Author was not so precise as
to point at the particular Pages, Paragraphs, or Chapters where they are found,
and wherewith other Books have their Margens so cloggd: The Reader is humbly
desird to take this Advertisement, That it belongs to Schoolmen, and
Professors of the Laws, who use to deal with matters of Meum and Tuum, or of
Life and Death, to be so punctual;

But, under favor, free Historians are not tied to such a strictness: Wherefore
they may modestly expect, that, with an Ingenuous Candor the Readers would carry
with them a Generous Confidence, which they may do here without scruple of
Conscience, or incurring any danger to wrong their Faith.

J. H.

Several Books worth buying, to be sold by Samuel Speed at the Rainbow near the
Inner Temple-gate in Fleetstreet.
GUillims Heraldry: Folio. Atter sol on Philemon: Folio. Ammianus Marcellinus:
Folio. Porta's Natural Magic: Folio. Pharamond, a Romance: Folio. Shepards
Actions on Deeds: Folio. Palmerin of England: 4. Artificial Changeling: 4.
Bacons History of England: 4. Dr. Griffiths Bethel: 4. Purchase of Bees: 4.
White on the Sabbath: 4. Genealogies: in 4. in 8. in 12.
Mountagues Essays: 4. Perkins Catechism: 8. Judge Ramsey of Coffee: 8. Ramsey
of Poisons: 8. Paracels^ of Metals: 8. Ainsworths Communion of Saints: 8.
Sadlers Art of Physic: 8. Burgersdicius Logic: 8. The Life of Henry the
fourth: 8. Latin Bibles: 12. Andrews Catechistical Doctrine: 12. Drexelius
Christian Zodiac: 12. Wollebius in Latin: 12. -- in English: 12.
These to be sold by Christopher Eccleston, under St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet.
CRooks Report: Fol. Wingates Reports: Fol. Latches Reports: Fol. Queens
Closet: 12. Wits Recreations: 8. Athanasius Life: 8. Life of St. Cuthbert: 8.
Littleton on the Church-Catechism: 8. Wars of the Jews: 8. Cases of Conscience
about things indifferent. Grand Case of the present Ministry. Review of the
Grand Case. Sales Epigrammatum, being the choicest Dysticks of Martials
Epigrams, of chief Latin Poets that have been these last two hundred years.
Shakespears Plays.
Touching the PRECEDENCE OF Soverain Princes.
COncerning the Pope and the Emperor, there never was any question or
controversy of their Precedencies, and consequently of their Representatives
in all Transactions and Signatures, at all Ecumenical Councils, with other
Public Meetings, being allowed to the One (by those who are devoted to him by
way of Filiation) as he is held The Vica^ of Christ, The Successor of the
Prince of the Apostles, The Holy Father, who has the command of the Spiritual
Sword which strikes deep, having Dominion over the Noblest part of Man which is
the Soul; Insomuch that some have magnified Him so far, and fallen to such an
excess of speech, as to say, That He antecels all Temporal Princes as much as
the Soul excels the Body. Nor do they only allow him Priority of place, but
out of high Ideas of Holiness, both Emperor and Kings esteem it a great honor
to hold the Basin and Towel when he washes his hands; nay, to hold his Stirrup
and Bridle, yea to kiss his Feet: according to the Poet, who gives this
Character of Him:

Ense potens Gemino, Cujus vestigia adorat Caesar, and aurato vestiti murice
Reges. He who commands the Two-edged Sword, whose Feet Caesar, and crowned
Kings with Kisses greet. Insomuch that when at the great Ceremony of his
Consecration by the Cardinal-Bishop of Ostia, the Papal Mitre is put on his
head, the chief Deacon says aloud, Accipe Tiaram tribus ornatum coronis, and
scias Te esse Patrem Regum, and Rectorem orbis, etc. Receive the Mitre adorned
with three Crowns; and know, that thou art the Father of Kings, and Rector of
the world, etc.

From hence is derived the Precedence that all other Churchmen have; as at the
Election of the Emperor, the three Ecclesiastical Electors, viz. the
Archbishops of Mentz, Colen, and Triers, take place of the King of Bohemia, and
all the rest. Moreover, out of a special Veneration of the Church, when the
Tremendous Oath is read and administered unto them to be just in their choice,
the Archbishops put their hands only upon their Breasts, whereas all the
Secular Electors hold their hands upon the Book all the while. Add hereunto,
that the Cardinals being Princes of the Church, deduce such a Pre-eminence from
the Pope, that they take Precedence of all Ambassadors whose Masters are
devoted to the Roman See. Moreover, among the Peers of France, the Six
Spiritual without any scruple take Precedence of the rest: as also our Bishops
do in England in the Parliament House of all the Lay Peers. Furthermore, the
Pope has still such a sway and influence upon the Emperor, that he cannot be
styled Augustus, or receive the Golden Crown, until he be confirmed by the
Consistory at Rome.

Of the Emperor.
WE come now to wait on the Emperor, who retains still the Title of Caesar,
and Semper Augustus: He also is styled Numen, Divus; and his Edicts are called
Sancita Divalia, God-like Decrees. For many Descents the Empire continued in
the Race of Julius Caesar, until Domitius Nero's time; then the Name of Caesar
grew to be Accidental, and given by way of Adoption to the Heir apparent of the
Empire, whereas before he was called Princeps Iuventutis: and when the Western
Empire came to be revived in Charlemain, the next to succeed was termed King of
Italy, but now he is created King of the Romans; which Institution was made by
Charles the Fifth.

Julius Caesar was the first who raised Rome to an Empire, though it cost him
dear: for the Foundation thereof was cimented with his own blood, being
assassinated in the Senate by his nearest Confidents in compassing that great
work: whereby it is observable what an extraordinary kind of Fate did betide
that City: for as the first Foundation thereof was sprinkled with Blood when
Romulus caused his Brother Rhemus to be put to death, when the first Walls
thereof were erecting; so the Roman Empire was afterward first raised by
Caesar's Blood. And the Spiritual Empire she enjoys since, may also be said to
have been raised by the Blood of Christian Martyrs, among whom above thirty of
the first Bishops of Rome were of the number.

Now, if one should compare the present Roman Empire with the Old when it was
at the highest flourish, the Parallel would bear no more proportion then a Wren
(who yet is called in Latin Regulus, a little King) does hold with an Eagle:
for the Roman Monarchy when she was at the greatest pitch of Sublimity and
Altitude of Puissance and Glory, may be said to have no Horizon, no Termination
(as the Author has it elsewhere) while she sat upon her seven Hills, she may
be said to have overlooked the World. The City of Rome was then fifty Miles in
circuit; five hundred thousand Free Citizens were computed to sleep within her
Walls, by that famous Cense which Vopiscus speaks of. The Roman Eagle fixed his
Talents upon the banks of Euphrates Eastward; on the Nile, and the Mountains of
the Moon, South; on the Danube and Rhin Northward; and West, as far as the
British and German Ocean. Her annual Revenues were computed at 150 Millions,
whereof the Salary of her Legionary Soldiers amounted yearly to above 20
Millions, etc. But that high-soaring Eagle, who with fullsumm'd Wing flew so
far, and may be said to have the Sun himself for her Companion, now with a few
broken and tattered flaggy Plumes flies only twixt Danube and the Rhin; and
were she not impd with Austrian Feathers, she would be as bald as a new-pluck'd
Capon.

Yet for all this Fatal Stoop, had the Emperor at present all Germany entirely
subject to himself, as he precedes in Title and Place, so he might happily
compare in Power with any one Christian Prince: for Almaine or Teutony is a
Continent of such a vast Expansion, that it might give the Law to any one
single Kingdom in Europe were it subject to one Head. But the Emperor in
statu quo nunc, may be said to be but Titulary Emperor of Germany: for of
those Ten Circles where into it is divided, viz. Austria High and Low,
Franconia, Bavaria, Saxonia, Westphalia, the Lower Circle of Saxony, the two
Palatinats, and Burgundy, he has no absolute Authority but only in Austria,
which is his Patrimonial Inheritance. The Government of the rest, though it be
principally in the Emperor, it is diffusedly in the Dier or Imperial Parliament,
but contractedly and actually in the seven Electors, who have a kind of Ius
Regale in them, as power of Life and Death, Coining of Moneys, Levying of Men,
and settling what Religion they please; it being a Rule and Prerogative among
them, That Quilibet Imperii Status tantum possit in suo Territorio, quantum
Imperator in toto Imperio: Every State of the Empire has as much power in his
own Territory, as the Emperor has in the whole Empire. Yet they cannot make
any League or Confederacy with any other Prince, but with this Reservation,
That it be not prejudicial to the common Peace of the Empire.

Now we find that there were many fatal Causes which concurred to bring the
Roman Empire to so low an ebb: The first was the Translation of the Imperial
Court from Rome to Bizantium or Constantinople, whereby the Eagle grew to be a
Monster with two heads, the one looking Eastward, the other West: yet he of the
East styled himself still for about 400 years The Roman Emperor, governing the
West by Deputies; during which time, a world of tough Northern Nations broke
into Italy to draw nearer the Sun; and there as well as in other places, took
firm footing, until Charlemain chased them away, who first styled himself
Emperor of the West by an Agreement made with Nicephorus at Constantinople:
which Western Empire also received soon after a fatal Blow by the Partition
that his Son Lewis the Debonnaire made to find Portions for his three Sons;
insomuch that the Roman Empire came to be cooped up at last within the German
Pale: and since that time it stands upon Historical Records, how from the Reign
of Rodolph the first, above 200 Princes, States, and Imperial Cities, have
dismembered and emancipated themselfs from the Empire; some by working upon the
Emperors Necessities, and furnishing him with Tresure to support his Wars; and
for their Moneys they had Immunities granted them equivalent to a Releasement
from Subjection. Moreover, as the Popes Temporal Dominions most of them were
Plumes taken from the Roman Eagle, so the change of Religion by the Lutherans
did much weaken him, for many since revolted quite from him without paying any
thing. the last were the Lituanians, the Swisses, and Geneva; the first fell
from Charles the Fifth, who summoning them to their Obedience, and threatening
else to reduce them by Arms, they returned this jeering Answer, That they
believed his Horse would tire before he could reach the Skirts of Lituania. And
the Swisse falling from their Spiritual Obedience to the Pope, fell also from
their Temporal Allegiance to the Emperor, and to have any thing to do with the
Chamber of Spire.

Thus we see in part the Degrees and Causes of the Declination ^f the Roman
Monarchy at first, and of the German Empire afterward, which may be said to
have shrunk from a great Lion into a Cat-skin. But to know the principal cause,
we must cast our eyes upward, and attribut all to the Will and high Pleasure of
the All-disposing Emperor of the Universe, who as he puts bounds to the raging
Billows of the great Ocean, so he sers Boundaries and Periods to all Earthly
Grandeurs.

Nevertheless, though in point of Power and Territories the Emperor be grown
so weak and naked in comparison of what he was, yet in point of Precedence and
Dignity he bears up still the same, being accounted the prime Potentat, and
Prince paramount of Christendom. And well may all Christian Kings esteem him
so, in regard that their Territories may be said to be but Branches of the
great Roman Tree, which falling off, and taking new Roots, they began to taper
up, and grow to be Regal Trees of themselfs. Great Britain, as she was the last
that was reduced under the Roman Yoke, so she was the first who shook it off,
and enfranchiz'd her self: which is no mean honor and advantage to her King in
point of Precedence, as will appeer more at large in the ensuing Discourse.

Nor is the Emperor and his Ministers thus esteemed among Christian Kings
only, but also by the Turk, who styles him still the Roman Emperor, and next
himself the greatest Monarch; reputing his Ambassadors accordingly, by
allowing them to have Palaces in Constantinople the same side the Seraglio is
on; and they go always concomitant with the Ottoman Court wheresoever it
removes. They have the Precedence given them of the Ambassadors both of the
Persian and Tartar, notwithstanding that the first holds himself the greatest
Potentat upon Earth, having a custom duly observed, that after Dinner an
Officer winds a Trumpet at his Court-gate toward the four parts of the world,
to give notice to all other Princes that he has Dined already, and so they may
go now all to Dinner. And concerning the Persian, the example of the Lo. David
Ungnadius shall serve, who being Ambassador in the Turks Court for the
Emperor, and coming for Audience to the Duana, the Persian Ambassador had come
before, and got the Chair; but Ungnadius offering to go away, the Gran Vizier
caused an upper Chair to be put for him. Another time at Mahomet the thirds
Circumcision, which lasted 40 days, there being then in Constantinople the
Ambassadors of the greatest Monarchs upon Earth, yet the Ambassador of
Rodulphus the Emperor had the Precedence of them all.

All this is but Collateral to the main Design of the intended Discourse,
which aims chiefly at Kings, whereunto we now hasten; but we will first give a
few Hints or Prolegomenas of the Original of Kingly Government.

Of Royalty, or Kingly Government.
THere is a Saying in France, Pape par voix, Empereur par Force, Roy par
Nature: Pope by Choice, Emperor by Might, King by Nature, viz. Successive, and
Hereditary Kings who ought to have the Precedence of Elective. Whence may be
inferred, That Kingly Government is most agreeable to Nature. Now it is a true
and elegant Principle, That Naturam sequi est Deo obsequi; To follow Nature is
to obey God.

Concerning the Character or Title of King, it is of a more ancient date then
that of Emperor. For they who grope at Government before the Flood, speak of
Kings in Chaldee and Egypt. Rome began with Kings, and it may be said, that it
was more the Peeples Wantonness then Tarquin's which put them down. Afterward
the Name of Emperor was given to that person who was Commander in chief of the
Army or Praetorian Bands, and Legionary Soldiers: it was not a Title of that
Sublimity and Transcendence as it proved afterward. Among the Greek Authors the
Names of Monarchs, Kings and Emperors are taken promiscuously: But all Writers
that pretend to Policy, acknowledge that Kingly Government of all other as it
is the most ancient, (and may be said to begin with Adam) so it has most
conformity with that of Heaven, whence the best patterns for all Humane Actions
are to be fetched, and it is no presumption to do it. Moreover, of all kind of
Ruling Powers, Royalty is the prime; for in it, as the Civilians say, there is
formalis, and completa gubernandi ratio, the most formal, and complete Essence
of Government. Royalty also has the easiest, the fewest, and certainst
Principles, (if any certain can be found) for there is no Knowledge so subject
to confusion and incertitudes, as the Art for Man to govern Men; It could never
yet be brought to a Science, which consists of general and true Apodictical
Demonstrations. The Reason may be, the various Inclinations, Caprichio's, and
Humors of Peeple, proceeding from the diversity of Climes, and Celestial
Influences; as also, from that World of Contingencies which attend Human
Negotiations; likewise from the diffring Positions of Earth, for those Laws and
kinds of Government which may be proper for the Continent, will not fit an
Insulary Peeple; nor those Laws of a Maritime Country can suit with mere
Inland, or Mediterranean Territories: Therefore, that Gran Senior of all
Knowledge, the Stagirite, whereas he uses to be constant to himself while he
gives Maxims for other Sciences, when in his Politiques he comes to Human
Government, and beats his Brain how to prescribe certain Rules conducing
thereunto, He is not found only at a loss, and wavering to himself, but he
wraps his Scholars here and there in Clouds of Ambiguities. Nor can we blame
him and others to rove up and down in that manner upon this subject, it being
beyond the compass of Human Brain to enact such Laws may fit all times, prevent
all accidents, and quadrat with the Genius of all Nations. Some Peeple are so
fiery-mouth'd that they must be rid with a Bit, Curb, and Martingale; but a
snaf^le and gentle hand will serve to manage others: Now it is observed, that
they who inhabit hard and barren Countries, are more easily governed then those
who live in fat and luxurious Soyls, where being pampered with Plenty and
Wealth, they are apt to grow wanton, and kick at, or overthrow their Riders.

Yet it may be said, that there is one certain and Universal Rule for
Government, and to keep a Peeple in a constant and exact Obedience; and that
Rule is, For the Sovereign Prince to have always a standing and visible actual
Power in motion, as well to conserve as to curb a Peeple in case of any
Commotion; And it is consentaneous to good Reason, that the Subject should
contribut for this general Protection, according to the saying, Defend me, and
spend me; that so evry one may rest under his own Roofs, and sit at his own
Fires in quietness and safety. In sum, All Statists concur in this, That there
is an Awe due to a King, as well as Affection; He must be a Dread Soverain, as
well as a Gracious; and that Goverment^s best tempered where a few Drams of
Fear are blended with the Peeples Love. But now to our main Work.

Touching The Precedence of Kings, And particularly of the great TRIUMVIRS, OR
The Three most Potent KINGS in Europe.
IN discussing this high Point, we will first look Westward: For there is a
Story tells us, That once when there were diverse who stood in competition for
the Kingdom of Persia, it was agreed between them, that the next morning they
should all meet in a great Plain, and he who did first see the Sun rising, and
that his Horse did neigh, should be the King. Being met on Horseback at break
of day, as the rest stood gazing toward the East, Darius one of the
Competitors, looked always toward the West; and at last finding a glance of
the Solar Beams, his Horse neighed; whereat he suddenly turned back, and so
claimed the Kingdom: So, to find the truth of what is here sought after, we
will first look Westward toward Great Britain, whose King may compare with any
other whatsoever for these Reasons.

First, for Antiquity of Predecessors, and particularly of Christian Kings.
Secondly, for an Independent, absolute and unhomageable Possession and
Authority, both Spiritual and Temporal. Thirdly, for Eminence of Royal Dignity,
State and Titles. Fourthly, for Martial Exploits and Atchievments abroad.
Fifthly, for a stout and strong sturdy freeborn Peeple, with a plentiful
Masculine Country, and generality of Wealth. Sixthly, for a Royal long-lind
Extraction and Blood. Seventhly, for Hospitality, and a plentiful Kingly Court,
with number of Officers, and stately Attendance. Eighthly, for diversity of
Nations, and diffring Maternal Languages; As also that no Kings Face shines
upon his Coin in purer Metal. Ninthly, for Prudential Laws and Constitutions.
Tenthly, for Greatness of Power by Sea and Land Defensive and Offensive,
With other Prerogatives: I say, that the King of Great Britain may hereby not
only claim an Equality with the other two, but stand fair for a Precedence.
Now, for proof of all the fore-pointed Particulars, we will put evry one by it
self, and treat thereof in several Paragraphs; and first,

Of the Antiquity of the King, and particularly of the Christian Kings in Great
Britain, whereby we take A Jove Principium. --
IT is observed by most Annalists who write of Countries and Nations, that the
Britains who were the Aborigenes, the Primitive Inhabitants, and may be said to
be Connatural with this Island it self, were by a special instinct much devoted
to the contemplation of heavenly things: For the ancient Druydes that were the
first Divines or Professors of Religion, (who in lieu of Monasteries or
Colleges, were used to retire themselfs to Woods and solitary places to
speculat the Works of God and Nature) were renowned far and near beyond the
Seas; and the Emperor Julius Caesar writes, that the Gauls (now French) were
wont to come over to be instructed by the British Druydes, who, as he says
elsewhere, and is seconded by Cornelius Tacitus, (which spent part of his life
here) had more pregnant capacities then the Gauls. Now, in those times there
were diverse Martial Kings here, whereas they scarce make mention of any in
Gallia. To avoid prolixity, we will instance only in Boadicia that admired
Virago, and Cataractus, who having maintained for many years this Kingdom from
the Romans more by the Bodies of Men, and pure Natural Valor, then by Arms,
was at last carried Prisoner to Rome, where being not a whit daunted, he
reproached the Romans, (yet with a kind of complement) That he wondered how
they having such stately Palaces at Rome, would take such long hazardous
Journeys to dwell in homely Houses of Clay, as those of Britain were in those
days. Before the Romans reigned here, there had been very many Kings of this
Island, for Cassibelan whom Caesar speaks of, was the sixty third British King
thereof; when it pleased the Father of Light to display the early Beams of
Christianity in this Island, which was very betimes: for, as Gregory the 15th
says in his Letter to his late Majesty at that time in Spain, (which he was to
receive in common civility as the Pope is also a Temporal Prince) No sooner did
the Roman Eagle fly over hither, but the Standard of the Cross was inarborated
and set up: I say, that then, which may be said to be in the nonage of the
Church, Lucius Surius, called in British, Llei vab Coel Lucius, the Son of
Coel, (who was King before him) sent to Eleutherius for his Laws to govern the
Church by, who returned him this answer: Vicarius Dei estis in Regno vestro,
Gentes vestri Regni pulli vestri sunt, etc. Habetis penes vos legem, and Fidem
Christi; Habetis utramque paginam, etc. You are Gods Vicar in your Kingdom,
your Peeple are your Chickins; you have the Law, and Faith of Christ; you have
both the Testaments, etc. This King Lucius afterward having frequent symptoms
and fits of extraordinary Devotion, forsook all earthly Pomp and Pleasure, and
went on Pilgrimage to Rome, where he employed the remnant of his life in the
Theory of holy things, and to study the Art of Mortification, as Venerable Bede
and Baronius, with all Authors both Old and New, do affirm.

Now, this was a long tract of time before there was any Christian King in
France or Spain, or indeed any where else. It Is true, that St. James the
Apostle was in Spain, but as the Story says, there were but nine persons that
were converted; but in Great Britain it may be said, that as the Sun when he
begins to appear and culminat in the East, does as it were in a moment
enlighten the whole Hemisphere; so the Rays of the Son of Righteousness did with
mavelous celerity and success (leaping over as it were many other Countries)
illuminat this Western Island first, insomuch that when Austin (whom many call
The Apostle of the Saxons or English) arrived here some Ages after, there were
then in Bangor and elsewhere above 2000 Monks. He found the Pentateuch of Moses
and the New Testament translated into British, as also a Form of Divine
Service, which stand yet upon record. The huge Continent of Germany, with
Norway and Denmark, with diverse other Countries, acknowledge to have received
the first light of Learning and of the Gospel from hence by Winfrid and
Willebrod, as an ingenious German-Poet confesses in these Numbers:

Haec tamen Arctois laus est aeterna Britannis,
Quod post Pannonicis vastatum incursibus Orbem
Illa bonas Arts, and Graiae munera Linguae,
Stellarumque vias, and magni sydera Coeli
Observans, iterum turbatis intulit oris,
Quin se Religio multum debere Britannis
Servata, and late circum dispersa fatetur;
Quis nomen Winfride tuum, quis munera nescit!
Te Duce Germanis pietas se vera, Fidesque
Insinuans coepit ritus abolere prophanos;
Quid non Alcuino facunda Lutetia debet? etc.
And as it is the consentient Opinion of all Antiquaries, That the first
Christian King who ever reigned in Europe was of this I Will, so the first
Christian Emperor ( Constantin the Great) came from her Bowels, being Son to
Helena that renowned British Lady, who bears one of the first places in the
Catalogue of Saints, and is called Elen luyddiog (the Warlike Helen) in Welc^
to this day.

These Premises being well weighed, this Conclusion may be deduced, That the
King of Great Britain may well claim de Iure the title of The first Son of the
Church. Therefore, under favor, it may be justly questioned why the next King
Eastward should assume it; for Clouis the first Christian King in France was
near upon 400 years after King Lucius, as all Historians do assert.

Moreover, it is well known that besides the title of Defendor of the Faith,
(whereof we will speak hereafter) the title of Christianissimus was sent to
Hen. 8. with much solemnity by Pope Julius the second, accompanied with a Cap
of Maintenance, and a Sword; which title was confirmed by Authority of the
Lateran Council: which great transaction was solemnly published in the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul, and seconded with Justs and Tournements; yet this
was but the renewing of an old Title, for among the Saxon Kings some were
called so, and there are Records yet extant that King Oswald and Edward the
third were styled so.

We will conclude this Paragraph with this Observation, That Great Britain was
the first Country in Europe who shook off the Roman Yoke, and raised some of
the former old British Blood to be Kings again for many Descents, insomuch that
the Romans here made but an Interregnum: And this was before any absolut King
was elsewhere in Europe upon the declinings of the Empire, specially in France
and Spain, who continued but Roman Provinces many years after. We will now to
the second Paragraph.

Of the Independent, Absolut and Unhomageable Possessions and Authority, both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, of the King of Great Britain.
FRom the precedent Paragraph it appears, That Albion or Great Britain was a
Royal I Will from the beginning, since there was any coalition or aggregations of
mankind within her to govern. For in the body of the British Laws made by
Mulmutius Dunwallo, which are yet to be read in fair British-Manuscripts, there
are these words, Un Goron arbennig y sydd y ynis Bridian; One Monarchical Crown
is held in the I Will of Britain: Just according to the ancient Greek Poet:

(...) Many Lords are not good, let there be but One. Now from that time to
this, the King of Britain had and has as Souveraign and incontroulable a sway
as any. It Is true that he admits others sometimes to share with him in Counsel,
but not in Power: by a kind of Influence he gives Light and Command to others,
but he himself receives none from any.

In the Neighboring Monarchies it cannot be said so, and particularly in
France and Spain, where it may be said there is Regnum in regno, there is another
Power a Legatus de latere, that in a Court of Plea sways ore the
Ecclesiastiques who make a considerable part of the Peeple. Touching the
latter, the King of Spain is Feodary either to the Pope, the Emperor, or to
France, for all the Countries he has: The Kingdoms of Navarre and Granada
were made Feodary to the Pope under Julius the second: Aragon to Innocent the
third, as also Sardinia in formula fiduciae. Sicilia is relevant from the
Church, as also both the Indies and the Canary Islands. For the Kingdom of
Naples and Calabria he sends a Mule, with a Purse-full of Gold, as a Heriot to
Rome evry year, (for fear of an Excommunication the next day) at the receipt
whereof the Pope says, Sufficiat pro hac vice. He holds the Dukedom of Milan
from the Empire, and most of the Provinces in the Netherlands from France,
whereof he is a double Peer, as he is Duke of Burgundy and Earl of Flanders.
Now it is questionable among the Civilians, whether a Feodary or Homager may be
called an Absolut Prince, specially when Appeals may be made from him to
another Court, as the Spanish Clergy may from the King to Rome in diverse cases.

The Kings of ENGLAND are free from Subordinations of that kind, as the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, and all the ancient Learned Judges do evidence.
It Is a Principle in the English Laws, (which is confirmed by Baldus, and other
great Foreign Jurists) That Rex neminem habet in Dominiis suis nec Superiorem
nec Parem: The King in his own Dominions has neither Superior nor Equal, (He
may be said to be both Caesar and Pompey.) There is another, Omnes sub Illo,
Ille sub nullo; All under Him, He under none. Another yet, Satis habet Rex ad
poenam quod Deum expectet Ultorem: It Is enough for the King that God is to be
his Judge; which is expressed in this Distic:

Subditus in Regem peccat, Legemque Fidemque
At Rex in Solum, Rex quia, nempe Deum.
There are diverse others that are conducing hereunto; As, The King must not be
put to do any thing per asperte, but of his free pleasure: The King never dies,
but the Heir apparent is King Inchoative as soon as the former dies; and the
Coronation is but a mere Ceremony not Essential: for diverse Kings, as Hen. 5.
and others, had Allegiance sworn unto them before they were Crowned. There are
more Maxims yet, That the King can do no wrong, but his Ministers may, through
whose mouths he pronounces sentence. Moreover, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi,
There Is no Immemorial or Prescription against the King. It is High Treson not
only to contrive, but to imagine ill against the King. By the Kings Prerogative
Life it self may be leased, etc. But that Traverse twixt King John and the
Legate Pandolpho, when they say he transferred the Crown to the Pope, is much
insisted upon: whereunto it is thus answered:

That there are four great things whereof the Records cannot be found: The first
is that wherein the Emperor Constantine gave Rome to the Pope; The second is
that wherein Venice has the Dominion of the Adriatic or Illyrian Gulf; The
third is the Salique Law; The fourth is that Instrument whereby King John passed
over his Crown, and made the Pope Lord Paramount of England. Sir Thomas More,
who was so far devoted to Rome that he is canonized for one of her Martyrs,
denies absolutely that King John either did or could make England Feudetary to
the Pope, because without the consent of his Barons an Act so much prejudicial
to his Royal Successors was not valid; and that the Peter Pence which they hold
to be a Tribut relating to the foresaid Act, was but a mere Alms which was
given by King Ina 500 years before. Moreover, put case there had been such an
Act, yet it stands upon good record that Innocentius the third did give a
Release in these words; Per Praeceptum Domini Papae 7 Iulii Homagium relaxatur
omnino. The Rome-scot also was but Regis larga benignitas, the Kings bountiful
kindness.

Add hereunto, that when the Pontificial Power was here at the highest pitch,
no Legate de latere was allowed, but the Archbishop of Canterbury (his Subject)
who by his Dignity is perpetual Legate de latere, He is Legatus natus (as he of
Toledo is in Spain, and the Primat of Armagh in Ireland) and in point of
Precedence, at the Council of Clermont anno 1096. a Prerogative was given him
for ever to sit at all general Councils at the Popes right foot; Pope Urban at
that time declaring in these terms, Includamus hun^ in Orb nostro tanquam
alterius Orbis Pontificem Maximum, Let us include him in our world as Pope of
another world. It Is true, there have been other Legates de latere upon
extraordinary occasions admitted, but it was with the Kings leave, and with
this Proviso, That he has no Authority to hold Plea in the Realm prejudicial
to the Laws thereof, or derogatory to the King.

Thus it appears that no Extern power has any thing to do in Great Britain;
and as the Pope, so the Peeple neither, whether considered Diffusively,
Collectively, Representatively, or Vertually, partake any thing of the
Souverain Power; there is no power either Co-ordinat, Coequal, Corrival, or
Collateral with it. The Kings of England have had always by the known Laws of
the Land a pure underived Power, not depending upon Pope or Peeple, or any
other Prince whatsoever: They are Kings by the Grace of God, which implies no
earthly Dependency. It stands upon good record, how King Ina in the Preamble to
his Laws (for he was a great Legislator) begins, I Ina, by the Grace of God
King, etc. and this was above a thousand years ago, about two hundred years
before Charlemain, in whose time that style of Dei Gratia came first in use in
the Empire.

And as on Land the King of Great Britain has such a Latitude and Independence
of Supreme Power, so by Sea he has the like; which is such, that (without
disparagement, much less any injustice to any) I may avouch no other Prince
has the like. The greatest claim of Sea-Dominion that France makes, is to the
Coasts of Armorica, or little Britany, and a few Leagues in the Mediterranean.
The Spanish Laws are for the community, and free use of the Sea, challenging no
Dominion at all. There are diverse States in Italy that claim a particular
command and propriety in some Seas; as the Duke of Tuscany challenges a
Dominion of the Tyrrhene Sea; the State of Genoa of the Ligustique; Venice
claims a right to the Adriatic as (symbolically) to a Husband, for she marries
him upon Ascention-day evry year, the Duke going in procession with great
solemnity in the Buantoro to that purpose, and throwing a Ring into the water;
and She has power to do in that part of the Sea which she calls her Gulf, as
much as she can do in Venice it self in point of laying Impositions and Gabels,
and to cause what Mercantile ships she please to unlade their Cargazons at the
City of Venice it self. God and Nature has much favored the King of Denmark
with the command of a Neck of Sea, I mean the Sound, for it is the strongest
Sinew of his Crown by the Tolls he receaves of those who pass and repass into
the Baltik. He commands also at large the Norwegian or Hyperborean Sea. But
among all, if we observe his Title, the King of Portugal has a greater
Maritime command then all these, which Title runs thus: Dom Manuel por Graca de
Deos Rey, etc. Senhor de Guinee, and da Conquista, Navigacaon, and Comercio d'
Etiopia, Arabia, Persia, and da India a Todos, etc. Don Emanuel by the Grace of
God King, etc. Lord of Guiney, and of the Conquest, Navigation, and Commerce of
Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, etc.

These are the Princes who have most command of Sea, but they command only the
Strands and Ports, or Maritime Tract. They cannot be said to command the Sea it
self, as the King of Great Britain does, for he commands no less then four
Seas, which are circumfluent about his Territories; and the Law says, The Sea
is of the Ligeance of the King as any other thing: He is Protector as well as
Lord of them: He takes both the Dominion and Defense of them; also he scowres
and secures them from Pirates and Praedatory Rovers: He makes all ships, whether
Merchants or Men of War, Forreners or Subjects, to dash their Colors, and
strike their Topsayls not only to his Castles, but to any of his ships Royal
as they pass and repass. Which mark of Dominion the Republic of Venice has
not, though she also has her Galleys always in course to scowre and secure the
Gulf from Cursaries and Robbers, which is one of the chief Regalia's St. Mark
has, though the Sea she thus commands be scarce 30 Leagues in extent, for it
is but fourscore Italian Miles.

Nor does the King of Great Britains Dominion terminat in his own Seas, but as
most Civilians hold, it extends as far as the shoares of his Transmarin
Neighbors, and as far North as the Artic Circle: which Grotius did once
acknowledge, and publish to the world (though another Caprichio came into his
head afterward) in the Panegyrike he sent King James at his Inauguration, when
he says,

-- -- Rerum Natura Creatrix
Divisit populos, and metas ipsa notavit;
Sic juga Pyrenae, sic olim Rhenus, and Aspes
Imperii mensura fuit. Te flumine nullo
Detinuit, nulla nimbosi verticis arce,
Sedtotum complexa Parens hic terminus ipsa
Substitit, atque uno voluit sub limite claudi;
Te sibi seposuit supremo in gurgite Nereus;
Finis hic est qui fine caret, Quae meta Britannis
Littora sunt aliis, Regnique accessio tanti est
Quod ventis, velisque patet --
We will put a period to this Paragraph with a Request to the Reader, That
having well weighed the Power of the King of Great Britain, and joined that of
the Sea with the Land, as also the Reasons of the preceding Paragraph with
this, to judge whether it be fit that He should go or come in the Arriere to any
King whatsoever. We will now to the third Paragraph.

Touching the Eminence and Royal Dignity, the State, Grandeur and Titles of the
King of Great Britain.
Corsetus, a known and well-accounted Author, divides Kings into Illustres, and
Super-Illustres; He gives the King of England the second place among the
Super-Illustres; and one of the Reasons are, that he is an Anointed King,
whereas the King of Spain and others are not, unless the King of Spain may
claim it as he entitles himself King of Jerusalem and Sicily; for besides the
Kings of England and France, they two are only capable of being Anointed. The
King of England has a Gift also to cure the Strumatical Disease, called
therefore in England The Kings Evil, ab effectu sanationis, whereas in French
it is called Les Ecrouelles, and Los Lamperones in Spanish, etc. Some have
written that the King of England has a Virtue to cure this Disease as he is
King of France; but that is a vulgar Error: for King Edward the Confessor was
used to heal that way, which was 300 years before.

Platina makes the King of England Filium Adoptivum Ecclesiae, the Emperor
Filium Primogenitum, and the French King Filium natu minorem; One the Adopted
Son, the other the Firstborn, the third the Cadet or younger Son.

Volaterranus is related by Philippus Honorius in a well-known Work of his
called Praxis Politicae prudentiae, anno 1610. that Julius 2. gave the
Precedence to the English Ambassador before him of Spain. Hen. 2. was King of
Jerusalem, and Edward 3. was made Perpetuus Vicarius Imper^i, which is no mean
Title.

The Spanish Ambassador never questioned the Precedence of the English
Ambassador till in the Council of Basile; and touching the Contest twixt them
in the Council of Constance, there was at Lovain Anno 1517. a Book entitled,
Nobilissima disputatio super dignitate and magnitudine Regnorum Britannici and
Gallici habita ab utriusque Oratoribus in Concilio Constantiensi; where you see
he puts Britains King before the French in the very Frontispice; and the
chiefest Reasons asserted therein are found in this Discourse.

Hen. 6. employed Thomas Polden Bishop of Chichester, with others, in quality
of Ambassadors to the Council held at Siena, to claim his session, otherwise he
would protest, and poursue the Protestation.

In the Reign of Hen. 6. there was a Public Instrument put forth by Ericus King
of Sweden and Denmark, wherein he puts England before France; which Instrument
^uns thus: Caveant omnino Mercatores and alii quicunque homines and subditi
Reg. Angliae and Franciae ne de caetero sub poena amissionis vitae and Bonorum,
visitare praesumant Terras Islandiae, Finmarchiae, Halghalandiae, seu alias
quascunque Terras prohibitas, aut Portus illegales in Regnis Daniae, Sueciae
and Norwegiae. An authentic Copy of this Instrument was brought by the Danish
Ambassador to Breme 1562. and showed to the English Delegates there at that
time from Queen Elizabeth about the great business of the Hans Towns.

In the Capitulations of Peace twixt Hen. 7. of England, and John 2. of Denmark
and Norway 1490. England is put before France: as for example: Sancitum est
quod Mercatores, and Homines Ligii, Piscatores and quicunque alii Reg. Angliae
and Franciae subditi libere possint temporibus futuris in perpetuum ad Insulam
Tyle i. e. Islandiam, etc.

Augustus de Cavallis, who is no obscure Author, infers the Queen of England
from her Ancestors, both in respect of Inheritance, Conquest and Gift, to be
Queen of France de Iure.

In the Treaty twixt Hen. the 7. and Philip of Castile 1506. the English
Commissioners subsign'd first. As also in the Treaty of Marriage with Queen
Mary, Anno 1533. the first Signature is given to the English Ambassadors.

When Queen Elizabeth employed the Earl of Derby, the Lord Cobham, Sir James
Crofts, Doctor Dale, and Doctor Rogers in quality of Ambassadors, with their
Assistants to Ostend, anno 1588. Dignitatis Praerogativa and incedendo and
sedendo, The Prerogative of going and sitting was given her Ambassadors.

In the Treaty at Bullen twixt England and Spain for renewing the Burgundian
League, Queen Elizabeth sent Sir Hen. Nevil, Sir John Herbert, Robert Beale and
Tho. Edmunds, who in their Instructions had command in no case to give
Precedence to the Spanish Ambassadors; but being met, there was a Contest
happend: The English produced a Certificat procured privately from Rome out of
the Book of Ceremonies there, which according to the Canon gives the Rule in
such cases, That the King of England is to have place before the King of
Castile; That the English quietly held this Right in the Councils of Basil,
Constance, and others: They alleged also that the Kingdom of Castile (which is
the Spaniards first Title) is but an upstart-in regard of England; for it had
no Kings but Earls till the year 1017. Moreover, Pope Julius 3. gave sentence
for Hen. 7. of England against Ferdinand of Spain in this particular, etc.

Furthermore, for Eminency of Title, Great Britain is oftentimes called an
Empire by Foreign Authors; nay, Pope Urban terms it a World of it self at the
Council of Clermont almost a thousand years since, wherein the Archbishop of
Canterbury is called Alteterius Orbis Papa, The Pope of another World: What
would he say now that Ireland and Scotland are added!

Some of the Saxon Kings styled themselfs Emperors, as Ego Ethelredus, Ego
Edgarus Anglorum Induperator, etc. William the Conqueror writ, Ego Willielmus
Rex Anglorum ab incarnatione Domini 1089. 2 Anno mei Imperii. This is found
upon record in his Charter to the Monastery of Shaftsbury.

In Hen. 8. Reign, the eighth year thereof, England was declared an Empire in
Parliament, where he had also these Epithets, Metuendissimus, Praepotentissimus;
and London was called the Imperial Chamber.

But most memorable is that of King Edgar in the Charter that he gave the
Church of Worcester; Which Charter is yet extant, and runs thus:

Altitonantis Dei largiflua clementia, qui est Rex Regum, Ego Edgarus Anglorum
Basileus, omniumque Regum, Insularum, Oceanique Britanniam circumjacentis,
cunctarumque Nationum quae infra Eam includuntur Imperator, and Dominus;
Gratias ago ipsi Deo omnipotenti Regi meo qui meum Imperium sic ampliavit, and
exaltavit super Regnum Patrum meorum; Qui licet Monarchiam totius Angliae
adepti sunt a tempore Athelstani, qui primus Regnum Anglorum and omnes Nationes
quae Britanniam incolunt, sibi Armis subegit, nullus tamen Illorum ultra ejus
fines Imperium suum dilatare aggressus est. Mihi autem concessit propitia
Divinitas cum Anglorum Imperio omnia Regna Insularum Oceani cum suis
ferocissimis Regibus usque Norwegiam, Maximamque Partem Hiberniae cum sua
nobilissima Civitate Dublinia Anglorum Regno subjugare. Quos etiam omnes meis
Imperiis colla subdere, Dei favente gratia, Coegi. Quapropter ut Ego Christi
Gloriam and laudem in Regno meo exaltare and ejus servitutem amplificare
devotus disposui, and per meos Fideles Fautores Dunstanum Archiepiscopum,
Ayeliolanum ac Oswaldum Archiepiscopos quos mihi Patres Spirituales, and
Consiliarios elegi magna ex part disposui, etc. Facta haec sunt anno Dom. 964.
Indictione 8 Regni. Ego Alfrye Regina consensi, and signo Crucis confirmavi.

This being so ancient a Record, and of so high a Tenure, I thought good to
render it into English for the satisfaction of the Common Reader.

By the clemency of the high-thundring God, who is King of Kings, I Edgar King
of the English, and of all Kings, of Islands, and of the Ocean circumjacent to
Britain, and of all Nations which are included within her, Emperor and Lord; I
give thanks only to Almighty God my King, that he has amplified and exalted my
Empire above the Kingdom of my Fathers, who although they had obtained the
Monarchy of all England from the time of Athelstan, who was the first that
subdued the Kingdom of the English, and all Nations who inhabit Britain, yet
none of them attempted to dilate his Empire beyond its bounds. But propitious
Divinity has granted unto me to subjugat, together with the Empire of the
English, all the Kingdoms in the Isles of the Ocean, with their most ferocious
Kings as far as Norway, and most part of Ireland, with her most Noble City of
Dublin. All whom I compelled to bow their Necks to my Commands, the Grace of
God so favoring me, etc. This King Edgar, though very little of stature, was
so magnanimous and successful, that he was Rowed upon the River of Dee by four
subjugated Kings, whereof Kennad King of Scots was one.

There is also a very remarkable and authentic story of King Canutus afterward,
who being upon Southampton-Strand at the flowing of the Sea, he sat in a Chair
of State which was brought him upon the sands; and the Billows tossing and
tumbling toward him, he gave the Sea this command: Thou art my Subject, and
the Earth whereon I sit is mine, and there was none yet that ever resisted my
Command who went unpunished: Therefore I command Thee that Thou come not up
upon my Earth, nor presume to wet the Garment, or the Body of thy Lord. But the
Sea continuing his course, dashed and wetted his feet and thighs illfavouredly,
without any reverence or fear: whereupon the King stepping back, declared, That
none is worthy of the Name of a King, but only He whose Nod both Sea and Earth
observd. And, as the story has it, he never wore the Crown of Gold again, but
being fixed to a Cross, did consecrat it to the Image of our Savior.

There have been also Titles of Dignity given to our Kings in the Abstract,
(which has more of State and Substance in it then the Concret) as Celsitudo
Tua, Magnitudo Tua, given by the Pope in his Letters to Ed. 2. And Edward the
4. was used to write, Nostra Regia Majestas; though indeed that word Majestas
began first in France, but in Hen. 2. Reign, (and sacra Majestas since.)
Therefore Pope Leo gave it betimes to Hen. 8. in that famous Charter he sent
him, when he commanded all Christians, that in their Directions to him for the
future, after the word King, they should style him Defender of the Faith. Which
great Charter signed by the Pope and 27 Cardinals, 1521. I thought proper and
worthy to insert here, having procured a faithful Copy from the very Original.

Leo Episcopus servus servorum Dei, Charissimo in Christo Filio Henrico Angliae
Regi, Fidei Defensori, Salutem, and Apostolicam benedictionem. Cum supernae
dispositionis arbitrio, licet imparibus meritis, Universalis Ecclesiae regimini
praesidentes ad hoc cordis nostri long lateque diffundimus cogitatus ut Fides
Catholica sine qua nemo proficit ad salutem continuum suscipiat incrementum. Et
ut ea quae pro cohibendis conatibus illam deprimere, aut pravis, mendacibusque
commentis pervertere, and denigrare molientium sana Christi Fidelium praesertim
Dignitate Regali fulgentium Doctrina sunt disposita continuis proficiant
incrementis parts nostri Ministerii, and operam impendimus efficaces. Et sicut
alii Romani Pontifices Praedecessores nostri Catholicos Principes, prout Rerum
and temporum qualitas exigebat, specialibus favoribus prosequi consueverunt,
Illos praesertim qui procellosis temporibus, and rabida Scismaticorum and
Haereticorum fervente perfidia, solum in Fidei serenitate, and devotione
illibata sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae immobiles perstiterunt; Verum etiam
tanquam ipsius Ecclesiae legitimi Filii ac fortissimi Athletae Scismaticorum
and Hereticorum insanis furoribus spiritaliter and temporaliter se opposuerunt.

Ita etiam nos Majestatem Tuam propter Excelsa and immortalia erga nos, and
hanc sanctam sedem in qua Divina permissione sedemus, opera and gesta condignis
and immortalibus praeconiis ac laudibus efferre desideramus, ac Ea sibi
concedere propter quae invigilare debeat a grege Dominico lupos arcere, and
putrida membra quae mysticum Christi Corpus inficiunt, ferro and materiali
gladio abscindere, and nutantium corda fidelium in Fidei soliditate confirmare.

Sane cum nuper dilectus Filius Johannes Clerk Majestatis Tuae apud nos Orator
in Consistorio nostro coram venerabilibus fratribus nostris sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae Cardinalibus, and compluribus aliis Romanae Curiae Praelatis Librum
quem Majestas Tua Charitate quae omnia sedulo, and nihil perperam agit,
Fideique Catholicae zelo accensa, ac devotionus Erga nos and Hanc sanctam sedem
fervore inflammata contra Errores diversorum Haereticorum saepius ab hac sancta
sede damnatos, nuperque per Martinum Lutherum suscitatos, and innovatos,
tanquam nobile and salutare quoddam Antidotum composuit, nobis examinandum, ac
deinde Authoritate nostra approbandum obtulisset, ac luculenta oratione sua
exposuisset, Majestatem tuam paratam ac dispositam esse, ut quemadmodum ver is
rationibus, ac irrefragabilibus sacrae Scriturae ac Sanctorum Patrum
authoritatibus, notorios Errores ejusdem Martini confutaverat: ita etiam omnes
eos sequi, and defensare praesumentes totius Regni sui viribus, and Armis
persequatur, nosque ejus Libri admirabilem quandam, and Coelestis gratiae rore
conspersam Doctrinam diligenter, accurateque introspeximus, Omnipotenti Deo a
quo omne Datum optimum, and omne Donum perfectum est, immensas gratias Egimus
qui optimam, and ad omne bonum inclinatam mentem tuam inspirare, eique tantam
gratiam superne infundere dignatus fuerit ut ea scriberes quibus sanctam ejus
Fidem contra novum errorum damnatorum hujusmodi suscitatorem defenderes, and
reliquos Reges and Principes Christianos Tuo exemplo invitares, ut and ipsi
etiam Orthodoxae Fidei and veritatis Evangelicae veritati in periculum and
discrimen adductae omni open sua adesse, orportuneque favere vellet. Aequum
autem esse consentes Eos qui pro Fidei Christi hujusmodi defensione pios
labores susceperunt omni laud, and honor afficere, volentesque non solum ea
quae Majestas Tua contra ^undem Martinum Lutherum absolutissma Doctrina, nec
minori Eloquentia^ scripsit condignis laudibus Extollere, ac Magnificare,
Autoritateque nostra approbare and confirmare, sedetiam Majestatem ipsam Tuam
tali honor ac titulo decorare, ut nostris ac perpetuis futuris temporibus
Christi Fideles omnes intelligant quam gratum acceptumque nobis fuerit
Majestatis Tuae Munus, hoc praesertim tempore nobis oblatum.

Nos qui Petri quem Christus in Coelum ascensurus Vicarium suum in Terris
reliquit, and cui curam sui Gregis reliquit, very successores sumus, and in Hac
sancta sede a qua omnes Dignitates ac Tituli emanant, sedemus, habita super
hiis cum iisdem Fratribus nostris matura deliberatione de ^orum unanimi
consilio and assensu Majestati Tuae Titulum Hunc, viz. Fidei Defensorem, etc.
Et profecto Hujus Tituli excellentia, and dignitate ac singularibus meritis
Tuis diligenter perpensis and consideratis, Nullum neque dignius, neque
Majestati Tuae convenientius nomen excogitare potuissemus, quod quoties audies
ac leges, toties propriae virtutis optimique meriti Tui recordaberis. Nec
hujusmodi Titulo intumesces, velin superbiam elevaberis, sed folita Tua
prudentia humilior, and in Fide Christi ac devotione hujus sanctae sedis a qua
exaltatus fueris, fortior, and constantior evades, ac in Domino bonorum omnium
Largitore laetaberis perpetuum hoc ac immortale Gloriae Tuae Monumentum
Posteris Tuis relinquere, Illisque viam ostendere, ut si Tali titulo ipsi
quoque insigniri optabunt Talia etiam opera efficere praeclaraque Majestatis
Tuae vestigia sequi studeant, quam prout de nobis and dicta sede optime merita
una cum Uxore and Filiis, ac omnibus qui a Te, and ab illis nascentur nostra
Benedictione in nomine Illius a quo illam concedendi potestas data est, larga
and liberali manu benedicentes Altissimum Illum qui dixit Per me Reges regnant
and Principes imperant, and in cujus manu corda sunt Regum, Rogamus, ac
obsecramus ut eam in suo sancto proposito confirmet, ejusque devotionem
multiplicet, and praeclaris pro sancta Fide gestis ita illustret, ac toti Orbi
Terrarum conspicuam reddat, ut Iudicium quod de Ipsa fecimus, eam tam insigni
Tit^lo decorantes, a nemine falsum aut vanum judicari possit. Demum mortalis
hujus vitae finito curriculo sempiternae illius Gloriae consortem atque
participem reddat.

Dat. Romae apud sanctum Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae millesimo,
quingentesimo vicesimo primo, 5 Idus Octobris, Pontificatus nostri anno nono.
Ego Leo Christ. Catholicae Ecclesiae Episcopus ss. Then his Seal or Signet,
engraven within, Sanctus Petrus, Sanctus Paulus; and this Motto about, Ad
Dominum cum tribularer clamavi, and Exaudivit Me.

Then the subscription of 27 Cardinals on both sides of the Signet, the
Cardinal- Bishops on the right hand of the Signet, and close to it; then on
their right hand the Priests-Cardinals; and on the left side of the Signet (as
it is accustomed in all Bulls, and other Public Instruments) the
Deacon-Cardinals have their place, and precedence.

King Henry's Book against Luther was presented to the Pope in full Consistory
by Sir John Clerk, (then Ambassador at Rome for the King) with a long solemn
Oration: the Original of which Book is yet to be seen in the Vatican at Rome,
with this Inscription written with King Henry's own hand:

Anglorum Rex Henricus Leoni X^. mittit Hoc Opus, and Fidei testem, and
Amicitiae. Henry King of the English sends this Work to Leo the Tenth, as a
Witness both of Faith and Friendship. And as the Kings of England themselfs
have such super-eminent Titles, so their Firstborn Sons have a Title not
inferior to any Royal Heir apparent in Christendom, which is Prince of Wales;
and this Title is many years more ancient then that of Dauphin in France.
Moreover, whereas other Kings Sons come so naked to the world that they have
not of their own wherewith to buy them Clouts, or pay their Nurses, but what
they have from their Parents, The Firstborn of the King of England, ipsissimo
instante, the very same instant that he is born, is Duke of Cornwall, and is
presupposed by the Law to have Liv^ry and Seisin then given him of the said
Duchy, with all the Lands, Rents and Honors thereunto annexed. It Is true, that the
conferring of the Title of Prince of Wales, depends merely upon the Kings
Pleasure, which was done out of a Political consideration, to keep the Kings
first Sons still in awe, and within the bounds of a greater Obedience.

Nor is there any Queen also lives in a greater State and Dignity, or has more
Prerogatives and greater Joyntures then the Queen of England: For though Aliens
at first, and still under Couvert Baron, yet they may pourchase Lands by
Fee-simple, They may make Leases and Grants without the King; They also must be
petitiond unto first, before any can implead them in point of right.

We will proceed now to the fourth Paragraph.

Touching the Martial Exploits and Achievments which the Kings of Great Britain
have performed from time to time, etc.
TO proceed in this Paragraph, we must make Retrosvects a far off: we will
begin with Brennus that bold Britain, who in the Government of Consuls took and
sacked Rome, (364 years before Christ) and did notable feats afterward in
Greece and Asia: insomuch that the Welsh in honor of that Hero their
Countryman, call a King from his Name Brenin to this day. Cataracus overthrew
a mighty Army of the Romans, and Boadicia slew 70 thousand of them in one
Battle, as their own stories declare. King Arthur is ranked among the Nine
Worthies, for he discomfited the Saxons in twelve several Battails, and erected
the first Order of Knighthood.

There was one English King, and three Kings Sons went to the Wars of the Holy
Land. What Exploits did Richard coeur de Lion perform there, so much to the
envy of the King of France, who therefore returned before him! He conquered the
Island of Cyprus, where Marrying Berengaria, he transferrd the Kingdom to Guy
Lusignan, who had right to the Crown of Jerusalem, which in exchange he resignd
to King Richard.

But the French are they whom the English did so often rout, subdue and
subjugat with the Grey-goose Wing, wherewith they did so often penetrat the very
heart of France in so many glorious Victories that can be hardly paralleld,
take all circumstances. We will instance in some of the most famous, and begin
with that of Cressy the first great Battle.

The Battle of Cr^ssy in France.
That Heroyk King Edward the third, having been provoked by diverse Affronts
that Philip of Valois the French King had offe^'d him, goes over in person to
France with an Army of 80000 men at Arms, and 10000 Archers, as Froissard has
it. He takes with him his Son the Prince of Wales and Duke of Guyenne, being
but 15 years of Age, (called afterward the Black Prince) to train him up in
feats of Arms. Landing in Normandy he carries all the Country before him as far
as Poissy, within ten miles of Paris, and after diverse Skirmiges a Battle was
appointed. King Edward had encamped near a Village called Cressy, where he
divided his Army to three Battalions; the first was led by the Prince of Wales,
the second by the Earls of Arundel and Northampton, in the third was the King
himself. The Battle thus orderd, being mounted upon a White Hobby, he rides
from Rank to Rank, encouraging evry man to the performance of his duty, and to
have a regard to the Honor of his King and Country. The French Kings Army was
at least twice the number, consisting of above 60000 Combatants, with all the
flower of the French Chivalry, whereof the chief were the Duke of Alanson the
Kings Brother, the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Lorrain, the Earl of Flanders
and Savoy, with other great Princes. The Vangard was led by the Kings Brother,
the Rear by the Earl of Savoy, the main Battle by the King himself. The French
King was so fierce in assurance of Victory, that he would scarce admit of any
counsel. The old King of Boheme advised that the Army should receive some
refreshment before, and that the Infantry of Genowais, whereof there were 15000
Crossbows, should make the first Front, and the Cavalry to follow: which being
agreed on, the Duke of Alanson did stomach that the Genowais should have the
honor of the first Rank; so in a kind of fury he caused them to change place:
which bred such a discontent, that they were more incensd against their Leader
then against the Enemy; but in the interim there fell such a shower of Rain that
wetted their Bowstrings, which they had not the wit to cover all the while, (as
the English did) that for the limmerness thereof when they came to action they
grew useless. At the ceasing of the shower the Sun did shine full in the face
of the French, thereby dazzling their eyes, but on the back of the English. King
Edward being got into a Windmil all the while, whence as from a Sentinel he
might explore and behold the face of the Enemy, and discovering the disturbance
that was made because the Genowais were put to change their place, instantly
gave order to charge that part, which made the discontented Genoway to recoyl.
Alenson perceiving this, rides on in a rage, crying out, Sa, sa; on, on; let us
make way ore the Bellies of these Genowais, for they do but hinder us. So
riding through them, he came up to the English Battle, where the young Prince
was. The fight grew hot, and doubtful, insomuch that the Commanders sent to the
King to come up with more power: The King asking the Messengers, Whether his
Son was hurt or slain, and being answered No, he replies, Then tell them who
sent you, that so long as my Son is alive they send no more to me, for my Will
is that he have the honor of the day. So the Fight on both sides growing very
furious, the French King having his Horse killed under him, withdrew; which
being known by the English, it added so to their courage that they soon after
won the Field. This was the first considerable Battle the English had of the
French, which was so sanguinary, that there were none made Prisoners, but all
put to the Sword, and the number of the slain French surmounted the whole Army
of the English; for the number of the slain were about 30000. the chief whereof
was Alenson the Kings Brother, the Dukes of Bourbon and Lorain, the Earl of
Flanders, the Dauphin de Viennois, Son to Imbert, who after gave Dauphine to
the King of France, provided his First Son should still be called the Dauphin,
which has continued ever since. This signal Victory was seconded the same
year, about six weeks after, with another the Queen of England got against the
Scots, then confederat with the French, where David the Scots King was taken
Prisoner: but this is reserved for another place, because for a more methodical
order we will hasten to the second great Victory in France, the Battle of
Poitiers.

The Battle of Poitiers.
The Black Prince being taperd up now to a good growth, was sent by advice of
Parliament to Gascony; whence the Truce being expird, he oreran and ravagd all
the Country as far as Tourayne. John the French King raises a potent Army,
more numerous then that at Cressy; and going to find out the Prince of Wales,
found him about Poitiers, having not much above 10000 effect if men in his
Army, whereas the French had six times as many: whereupon being advisd to make
for Bourdeaux, he was prevented by the French Army on all sides; so a Battle
being intended, two Cardinals came from the Pope to mediat a Peace, but the
French King would hearken to none, unless that he would as a Vanquished Man send
him four Hostages, and give up himself and his Army to discretion. The Prince
answered, That he was willing to restore what places he had taken of His in good
War, but without prejudice to his Honor, whereof he was accountable to the King
his Father, etc. John not harkening to this, but being resolvd to fight, the
Prince also resolvd to part with his Life upon as high a rate as he could being
reducd to this straight, therefore he providently makes use of the Position of
ground; and finding that the main Army of the French consisted in Horse, he
entrenchd among the Vineyards; where when the French Cavalry entered, being
wrapd and encomberd among the Vines, the English Archers did so ply and gall
them, that, being thereby disorderd and put to rout, the whole Army was soon
totally defeated. But, it seems this Battle was not so fierce as that of
Cressy, where no quarter was given: for in this, Prisoners were made, among
whom was King John himself, whom the Prince brought to England; and, as the
French Historians themselfs confess, he was so civil to him all the while, that
he knew not whether he was a Free King or a Captif. Besides Lords, there were
slain 2000 of the French Nobless, as Froissard has it, in this Battle; and,
as at Cressy, more French slain then the whole English Army was in number. We
will now to Agencourt.

Agencourt- Battle.
Henry the Fifth, that Man of men and mirror of Princes, being come to the
Crown, he did cast his Eyes presently toward France for claiming of his Title.
In order whereunto, he alterd in his Arms the bearing of Semy de Luces, and
quarters the three full Flower de Luces as the King of France himself did bear
them. He sends the Duke of Exceter, with the Archbishop of Dublin, and sundry
other Noblemen, in a magnificent Ambassy, attended by 500 Horse, to Paris, to
demand the Crown: but receiving no satisfactory answer, but rather a kind of
jeer, the Dauphin sending him a Sack full of Racket-court-Balls to pass away
his time; He replied, That for evry one of those Balls, he had so many fiery
Bullets to shoot at the proudest Turrets in France, as he should shortly find.
And he was as good as his word: for he presently got over, and encountering the
French Army at Agencourt, he gave it an utter overthrow, and took more
prisoners then his own Army had Soldiers; which was upon a Sunday-morning about
Ten of the Clock: whereof having sent notice to England before, and that
extraordinary Masses should be sung then in all Churches, he stood upon the
defensive part till that hour; but then making a Speech of encouragement to his
Army, and among other strains, telling how all England was praying for them at
that time, he carried away a complete Victory; he himself leading the main
Battle with the Duke of Gloucester his Brother, etc. But besides the foresaid
Piety, there was Policy also usd; for the King, to prevent the fury of the
French Cavalry, appointed diverse Stakes studded with Iron at both ends of six
foot long, to be pitched behind the Archers, and ordered that Pioners should
attend to remove them as they should be directed: which invention conduced much
to the success of the Action. The King himself charged the Duke of Alenson, and
beat him off his Horse, who thereupon was slain; so there was a complete and
glorious Victory obtained.

We come now to the Battle of Spurs, so called because the Frenchmen trusted
more to their Spurs in fleeing away, then to their Swords and Lances. It was
before Terwin in Hen. 8. Reign, when Maximilian the Emperor servd under his
Banner, and receavd pay. There came 8000 French Horse to relieve the place, and
a hot Dispute happend; but they were all routed, and put shamefully to flight,
so the Town was taken by the English.

There were a world of other Warlike Encounters and Skirmiges twixt the English
and French, whereof the stories are full; and it is observd, that the English at
most were but half in number to the French in all Engagements; insomuch that by
pure prowess and point of the Sword they possessd two parts in three of that
great Kingdom. We read that when the English were at the height of their power
in France, the Pope came then to keep his Court at Avignon; and there was a
common saying among the Peeple, which since is grown to be a kind of Proverb,
Ores le Pape est devenu Francois, and Jesus Christ est devenu Anglois; The Pope
is turned Frenchman, and Jesus Christ is become an Englishman: which was
spoken in regard we had such prodigious Successes.

Before I part with France at present, it is very fit (the main subject of this
Work being of Precedence) to speak something of the Black Prince while he was
Governor of Aquitane, where he performd such notable Exploits; and among other,
of that fa mous Charter of Precedence which was given to the Crown of England
by Don Pedro King of Castile, who being detruded out of the Throne by Henry his
younger Brother, fled for succor to the Black Prince in Gascognie, who had at
that time two other Kings in his Court, viz. Ricaredo King of Navarre, and Don
Iayme King of Mallorca. Which Charter being yet upon Authentic Record, and
not specified in the story of either Nations, may very well deserve to be
inserted here; and it runs thus.

Petrus Dei gratia Rex Castellae and Legionis, omnibus praesentibus pariter,
and futuris praesentes literas inspecturis, lecturis aut audituris salutem, and
fidem plenariam iisdem adhibere.

Cum in largitione, donatione, and concessione privilegiorum, libertatum,
franquesiarum, ac honorum Praerogativa, illis nos liberales, and gratiosiores
reddere debeamus a quibus multiplicia beneficia and honores nos recognoscimus
recepisse; Cumque Illustrissimus Rex Angliae, and Edoardus ejus primogenitus
Princeps Aquitantae and Walliae consanguinei nostri nos and praedecessores
nostros Reges Castellae retroactis temporibus fuerint favorabiliter prosecuti,
and specialiter cum nuper per Henricum quondam Comitem de Trestamare qui facta
cum quibusdam suis Complicibus coadunatione Regna nostra invasit, usurpavit,
and etiam occupavit more praedonico, and hostili, and ea indebite detinet
occupata de Regno in regnum, and de Dominio in Dominium, and loco ad locum ad
mortem nos esset insecutus a qua persecutione per receptationem dicti Dom.
Principi^ in Terra sua de nobis factam fuerimus liberati, and per ipsum and
gentes suas comfortati, ac honorabiliter recepti, and tractati, Nos memores
dicti accepti beneficii, and in aliqualem praemissorum Recompensationem, and
alias de nostra certa scientia, speciali dono, and regia donatione, and
potestate damus and concedimus pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris
Regibus Castellae per praesentes dicto Illustrissimo Regi Angliae, and Edoardo
ejus Primogenito Principi Aquitaniae and Walliae, Quod quandocunque idem Rex
and ejus Primogenitus qui nunc sunt, aut eorum Haeredes and successores Reges
Angliae, and eorum Primogeniti qui pro tempore fuerint, voluerint venire in
propria persona ad Guerram quam nos habebimus, aut Haeredes nostri Reges
Castellae habebunt contra Regem Granatae, aut alios Fidei inimicos, quod iidem
Reges, and eorum Primogeniti habeant primum bellum sive la Delantera ante omnes
Mundi Christianos, and omni tempore. Ita tamen quod Nos possimus and Haeredes
nostri Reges Castellae si voluerimus ponere vexilla nostra in dicto bello
pariter cum vexillis Regis Angliae, vel Ipsius Primogeniti. Item quod si
contigerit dictos Reges, aut eorum Primogenitos ad Guerram quam Nos and
Haeredes nostri habebimus contra Regem Granatae, aut Alios Fidei inimicos non
venire, aut nolle, vel non posse venire, volumus and concedimus quod unum
vexillum de Armis Regis Angliae sit omni tempore in dicta guerra in primo
bello, sive in la Delantera honorifice prout decet nostris, and successorum
nostrorum Castellae regum propriis sumptibus and expensis.

Item quia Patria ejusdem nostri Consanguinei plurima damna, and expensa
innumerabilia sustinuit tempore quo ipse pro nostro succursu exercitus suos
congregabat prout oculis propriis conspeximus, licet flebiliter gereremus, in
recompensationem praemissorum, privilegiamus, volumus, and concedimus quod
omnes homines, incolae, nobiles, peregrini, cujuscunque status, sexus aut
conditionis existant, Regni, Patriae, and dominii Angliae, and principatus
Aquitaniae sint immunes ab omni pedagio, leuda, costuma, maletota, ceu aliis
quibuscunque Impositionibus, Exactionibus in Regnis nostris impositis, seu in
posterum imponendis. Ita quod dicti homines dictorum Regni, Patriae, and
Dominii Angliae, and Principatus Aquitantae transeundo, morando, and redeundo
per Regna nostra per mare velper terram, Costumam, Pedagium, Leudam, Maletotam,
seu quamcunque aliam Impositionem vel Exactionem minime solvere teneantur, nisi
dicti homines causa Mercimonii vel pro emercimiando aliquid emerent. Super quo
an causa Mercimoniandi empta existant nec ne, per officiarios nostros, and
receptorum dictorum pedagiorum stare volumus dictorum hominum juramenta de
quibus rebus causa Mercimoniandi emptis non compellantur solvere, nec aliquid
ultra ab iis exigatur quam caeteri Mercatores solvere consueverunt. Et juramus
ad Sancta Dei Evangelia a nobis corporaliter manu tacta and in verbo
promittimus Regio concessiones, donationes, privilegia praedicta, and omnia and
singula in praesentibus Litteris contenta tenere, complere, and inviolabiliter
observare.

In quorum and singulorum Praemissorum testimonium, and ad ipsorum Majorem
firmitatem his praesentibus Nos manu propria Subscripsimus, and iisdem sigillum
nostrum in pendenti duximus apponendum: Volentes, and concedentes ac etiam
requirentes vos Magistrum Iohannem de London publicum Autoritate Apostolica
Notarium quatenus ad perpetuam omnium and singulorum praemissorum memoriam vos
cum praesentibus testibus subscribatis, praesentesque Literas signo vestro
solito consignetis. Datum apud Liborniam Diocesi Burdegalensis die 23 Mensis 7
bris Anno Dom. 1366. Praesentibus praecharissimo Consanguineo nostro Domino
Iohanne Duce Lancastriae, Regis Angliae filio ac fratre dicti principis, and
Reverendis in Christo Patribus Dom. Helia Archiepiscopo Burdegalensi, Dom.
Barnardo Episcopo Xancton. Iohanne Electo Bathoniensi, and Wellensi Cancellario
Aquitaniae, Iohanne Shandos Constabulario, and Thoma de Felton senescallo
Aquitaniae, Nigello de Loereyn Camerario dicti Principis, Balboyno de Frevilla
senescallo Xancton. and aliis testibus ad praemissa.

Yo el Rey. I the King.
Et Ego Johannes de London Cler. Winton. Diocesis publicus Authoritate
Apostolica Notarius undecima die mensis Februarii anno Domsupradicto,
Indictione quinta, Pontisicatus sanctissimi in Christro Patris, and Domini
nostri Dom. Urbani divina providentia Papae quinti anno quinto infra castrum
Civitatis Baionae in capella ejusdem castri una cum testibus infrascriptis fui
praesens quando dictus Dom. Rex Petrus promissa omnia and singula innovavit,
confirmavit, and juramento suo vallavit tangendo propriis manibus suis sancta
Dei Evangelia, and quando ipse Rex manu sua propria se subscripsit, and me
requisivit, and mandavit ut praesentibus Literis me subscriberem, and signum
meum apponerem consuetum. Testes qui fuerunt praesentes ad ista una mecum sunt
Dom. frater Martinus Lupi Magister Militiae Domus de Alcantara Ordinis Cistern.
Rogerus Dom. de la Wara, Gomeicus dicti Dom. Regis Magister, Paulus Gabrielis
Civis Ispalensis. Johannes Guttern Decanus Ecclesiae Segobien, and Magister
Robertus Fregand Notarius Cancellarius Domini Principis Aquitaniae and Walliae
supradicti.

Then the Great Seal of Castile and Leon was affixd.

By virtue of this Charter legally made to King Edward, and the Prince his Son,
and to their Heirs and Successors Kings and Princes of England for ever, it is
thereby granted that whenever it should please them to be in person in the Wars
with any King of Castile, against the King of Granada, or any other Enemy of
the Christian Faith, They should have the First place in the Vangard above all
other Princes of Christendom; and although neither of them were present, yet
there should be always provided by the Kings of Castile and their Successors a
Standard of the Arms of England to be born in the same place.

This Instrument was made after that the Black Prince had done the Work, and
restord Don Pedro to his Kingdom: therefore he passd it as a Monument of eternal
Gratitude unto him.

But before the Prince uudertook the business, there was also a Bond from the
King to pay so much money for defraying the Princes Army; and in consideration
also of this undertaking, it was legally agreed that the Prince should have the
Castle of Vermeo, de la Quet, Bilbo, Biscay, and the Castle of Ordials, A tenir
perpetuellement a li and ses Heirs and Successeurs, and pour doner la ou luy
plerra, to be held perpetually by Him and his Heirs and Successors, and to give
to whom he pleased. All which was ratified under the Great Seal of Castile, and
confirmd by Oath upon the holy Sacrament in the great Church of Burgos. The
Original of which Instrument remains yet in These. Regio apud Westminster.

We will pass over the Exploits done in Armorica or Little Britany, and cross
over to a tougher Peeple the Scot, who though Conterranean, and our near
Neighbors, yet they did always confederat with the French against England, and
England still boar up single and victoriously against both of them: For when
Scotland was at the highest pitch of power, when she had active and boisterous
Kings to her Generals, and the French for her Coadjutors and Auxiliaries, as
also the Danes in Ages past, yet the English carried away many fair Victories,
with diverse of their Kings Prisoners. As will appear by a short Survay we shall
take of such Battails and Warlike Encounters which intervend from time to time
twixt the two Nations.

We will begin with that famous Battle twixt King Athelstan and them, when
they had a great Army of Danes joynd with them, and being twice in number more
then the English, yet King Athelstan obtaind a signal Victory both by Prowess
and Policy; for the two Armies being ready to join, the English made semblance
to flee away, leaving their Bagage behind; which as the Scot and Dane were a
sharing, the English did suddenly wheel about by the advantage of a Woody
Hill, and finding them in disarray, and laden with Booty, they rushd upon them
with such a Resolution, that above 40 thousand of them, and, as Buchanan their
chief Chronologer has it, the flower of their Nobility, perishd there at that
time.

The first Fire-ball of War which was thrown twixt both the Nations since the
Norman Invasion, was in William Rufus his Reign, when the Scot having made
diverse Incursions into the English Borders, Moubray Earl of Northumberland was
sent against them, who incountring their King Malcolm with his eldest Son in
the Field, they were both slain, and the whole Army overthrown.

In King Stephens days, Thurston then Archbishop of York, was sent with an Army
against the Scot, who meeting the King himself in the head of his Forces,
utterly routed him, with the death of above 10000 of his Men.

Henry the second employed only the Knights of Yorkshire, as, Humphry-vile,
Scuttvil, and Vescy, to make head against the Scot, which they did with such
Valor and Success, that they took the King in the Field; and as a Trophy of
their good Service and Victory, they presented him Prisoner to the King at
Northampton, whence he carried him along to attend him in his French Wars.

William the Scots King attended Richard the Lion-hearted at his second
Coronation when he returned from the Holy Land, and carried the Sword before
him bare-headed.

Edward the first, called in story, and as his Tomb in Westminster tells us,
Scotorum Malleus, the Hammer of the Scots, summond King Baliol to Newcastle to
swear Fealty unto him: but fleeing afterward to the French King, at his return
King Edward summons him again to Berwick, where he re-submitted himself with
all his Nobles in open Parliament, which King Edward held there; and for Caution
brought Baliol along with him, leaving the Earl of Surrey Warden of Scotland.
Then started up a notable Blade, one Wallis, who notwithstanding that King
Baliol was Prisoner in England, gatherd such a strength, that causd King Edward
to go again in person, and at Fonkirk Battle killd outright 200 of their
Nobles and Gentry, with about forty thousand Common soldiers. Then he summons a
Parliament at Edinburgh, where all the Scots Nobles swore Fealty to him; and
then he carried away thence their Great Charter, called the Ragman-Roll, the
Black-Cross, and the Stone, wherein they believe the Fate of Scotland is fixd.
Then there was a third Provocation offered, for le Bruce was crowned King of
Scotland, whereupon the Earl of Pembrook was sent against him, who utterly
defeated him at Iohnston: yet all was not quiet, but King Edward was forcd to
make a fourth expedition thither in person, when he constraind le Bruce to flee
away to Norway, where he blew on his Nayls while King Edward lived. But Bruce
being come back, and Usurping during Edward the seconds time, (who we read was
so infirm and infortunat a King) his Father Edward the third restord Baliol by
force of Arms, and made him swear Fealty to England again. But some years after
King Edward being deeply engagd in the French Wars, David the next Scots King
rushed into England with about sixty thousand men, being confederat with the
French King to divert the War there. But Queen Philippa, with the Archbishop of
York, and the Lords and Knights of the North, encounterd this huge Army, and
utterly defeated it, one Copland taking the Scots King Prisoner, whom he he
reservd for a present to give King Edward when he came from France, and to keep
company with John the French King, who also was taken Prisoner by the Black
Prince: And there were but six weeks difference of time twixt both Victories.

In Richard the seconds Reign, the French King sent his High Admiral, with a
thousand choice men at Arms, in a Fleet of 60 Sail of Ships, with Arms for
12000 men more into Scotland. Thereupon an English Army being raisd, it struck
into Scotland like a Whirlwind, and piercing the very heart of the Country,
advancd as far as Dundee, and returned Victorious.

Henry the Fifth took James the first Prisoner, and carried him over to attend
him in his French Wars.

In Hen. 8. time, the Scots King (although his Brother-in-Law) taking his
advantage when he was in France, battring the Walls of Bullen, with the flower
of the English Nobility, raisd the greatest Army that Scotland could make for
invading England; thereupon King Harry sent a Commission to the Earl of Surrey
to raise Forces accordingly. The two Armies met at Flodden-field, where the
Scots King and the Archbishop of Saint Andrews his Brother were slain, with
twelve Earls, 14 Barons, and 12000 more. Not long after Solmosse Battle was
fought, where eight Scots Earls were taken Prisoners, with 200 Gentlemen and
others: insomuch that as the story says, there was never an English soldier but
had his couple of Scots Prisoners.

Four and thirty years after, the same day both of the month and the week, (as
the Historians observe) Musselborough-Battail was fought; which because it was
the last, and one of the most signal and sanguinary great Battails from the
Conquest that was fought twixt the English and the Scots, I will here
particularize, but with as much brevity as may be.

The Duke of Somerset was General of the English, the Earl of Warwik his
Lieutenant, the Lord-Admiral Clinton had 60 ships of War, which were to hold
course with the Landforces; the whole Army consisted but of about 13000 Foot,
1200 men at Arms, 2500 Light Horse, 16 Pieces of Ordinance, evry Piece having a
Guard of Pioners who came to about 1400. From Berwick they entered Scotland, and
marchd as far as Musselburgh far within the Country; they seizd upon three
small Castles as they passd, and with infinite pains overcame the Natural and
Artificial Difficulties of the Ways. They understood that the Scots Army far
exceeded them in number, and there came Recreuts daily unto it: For the
Fire-cross was carried about by the Heralds through all parts, (which is two
Firebrands upon the point of a Spear) that all above sixteen, and under sixty
years should repair to the General Rendevous: insomuch that the Scots Historians
themselfs do mention that there were above thirty thousand in the whole Army,
which was twice the number of the English. The Battle was fought with much
resolution and cagerness on both sides; yet notwithstanding that the Scot was
at his own home, and that the English were tired by a long difficult march,
they obtaind an absolute Conquest: there were slain of the Scots about 14000
outright upon the place, whereof there were 3000 Kirk-men, as Friars and Monks,
Huntley with other great Lords were taken Prisoners, 30 Pieces of Ordinance
were taken and shippd for England, with 30000 Iacks, as the Record says; and
the English plunderd the Country five days march further, and did what they
would.

We will conclude with the late Battle at Dunbar still fresh in memory, where
there were not much more then 8000 English, and the Scot had them at a great
advantage, yet the English making a Virtue of Necessity, utterly overcame an
Army of about 24000 Scots; an Army that had been long a moulding, and consisted
of many of their Nobility and Gentry: they lost both Bag and Bagage, Artillery
and Arms: there were above 3000 slain, 10000 taken Prisoners, whereof there were
260 Officers, 15000 Arms, and 30 Pieces of Ordinance, and near upon 200 of
their Colors were brought to hang in Westminster Hall for Trophies.

Out of what has been said, this Inference may be made: That in all those
Traverses and Encounters of War that England had with Scotland, which were near
upon an hundred since the Conquest, take small and great together, the English
did always foyl the Scot, except in Ed. 2. time, as shall be said hereafter. In
some Battails we may find how they carried away more Captives then they were
common soldiers themselfs, driving them as it were like sheep before them: And
observable it is, that the greatest Battails were fought in Scotland it self,
after that the English had been tired and dispirited by long marches, over
uncouth and strange places, being ignorant both of the Advenues and Advantages
of them.

True it is, that in Ed. 2. Reign they won two or three Victories, whereof that
at Bannocks-Battail was the greatest, where Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester,
and about 40 Barons, with 700 Knights and English Gentlemen, were killd.

In Hen. 8. Reign they got also a small Victory, when Sir Ralph Evers was
slain. In the time of the Long Fatal Parliament they did likewise many
Insolences, and rushed far into England: but those Invasions may be rather
termd Invitations by some spurious and unworthy-degenerated Englishmen, who
had contrivd their coming in long before; whose memories will stink in the
Nostrils of all Posterity.

But the English have taken four of their Kings Captives, killd two other in
the field, carried away their Crown, with the chiefest Ensigns of Royalty, etc.

Nor were such high Exploits performed by the Kings of England on Land only,
but by Sea they have been as glorious. Historians say how King Edgar had a Navy
of three thousand six hundred ships, and bottoms of all sorts, which he divided
to three Fleets that usd to coast about, and scowre the Seas as far as Norway
evry year, and he in person would go often Admiral himself, and be all the
Summer abroad.

Philip the French King not long before the Battle of Cressy, to hinder Edward
the thirds return into France, got a mighty Navy in Equippage of 200 sail of
ships, besides Galleys in the Haven of Sluice; whereof King Edward being
advertised, prepared such another Fleet, and encounters the French with such
resolution and success, having the Wind and the Sun for him, that he utterly
defeated the whole Navy, slew about thirty thousand men, and so returned with
mighty triumphs, and the admiration of all Europe.

Philip the second of Spain, having (as he conceavd) endured diverse Affron^s
and Injuries from Queen Elizabeth, conceald his Discontents a long time, until
he had provided the Invincible Armada, as it was called, wherewith he hoped to
have swallowed all England. It was three years preparing, it consisted of above
150 sail, whereof most of them were Galeons: they were mannd by 8000 Mariners:
they carried 20000 Listed soldiers, besides Volunteers: they had 1600 Brass
Cannons, 1000 of Iron, and 120000 Granado's, with other Fireworks of all sorts.
This Prodigious Fleet stood the King of Spain in 10 Millions first and last,
from the time that she set sail out of Lisbonne, as it is found in their Annals:
she lookd like a Forest at Sea as she steerd along. Q Elizabeth had first news
hereof from Hen. 4. of France. But then how did that Masculine Queen, that
notable Virago, bestir her self? how suddenly was there a great Fleet in a
readiness, and an Army by Land? how magnanimously did she view her Musters, and
encouragd the soldiers, riding up and down with a Plume of Feathers in her Hat
like another Boadicia? So that mighty Armada passing through the narrow Seas as
far as the Downs, her great Galeons were so plied and pelted by the English
ships, that they were utterly overthrown, only some few fetching a compass
about Scotland, got safe to Spain to bring news what became of the rest.

I have been somewhat overlong in this Paragraph, but there shall be a
compensation made for the Prolixity thereof by the Brevity of those that follow.

The Fifth Paragraph. That the King of Great Britain has as stout and
strenuous sturdy Freeborn Peeple to his Subjects as any other King, with as
generous a Country, and Generality of Wealth.
I Will begin this Paragraph with a late eloquent Character that an Italian
Nobleman the Count Alfonso Loschi of Vicenza gives both of the Peeple and the
plenty of England in his late printed Volume, called, Compendi Historici.

La popolatione d' Inghilterra e innumerabile, gli huonimi sono disposti, and
ben organizati, grandi di corpo, di faccia serena, bianca, and rubicunda, nella
guerra terribili, and audaci, nelle risolutioni precipitosi, and crudeli. Qe
Done riescono a Maraviglia belle, and gratiose and can la Leggiadria del
vestito rapiscono I cuori. Inghilterra vanta non immeritamente titolo di
Monarchia in expressione, and gieroglifico di che tiene il Re di sotto allo
scettro la palla per figura della dominatione del mondo. Non cie Potentato che
con armata maritima possa approdare a liti, a quali servendo per mura l'
Oceano, and per isbarco sicurissimi, and arenosi recessi non vimprontano l'orme
piedi stranieri, and se ben spesso con Intestine seditioni non havesse contro
le proprie viscere rivolto le seditioni, and l'armi riuscirebbe indomabile, ne
cisarebbe potenza sopra l'Inglese. L'aere salubre, ricchezze grandissime, li
terreni fecondi, and minerali, li pascoli abondanti, and delicati, onde le lane
d'Inghilterra tengono il primo luogo, etc.

Which Character coming from so indifferent a Judge, and so fresh an Author,
and a Personage of so high a Wit and Quality, I thought worthy the rendering
into English.

The Peeple of England are innumerable; the Men welldisposd, and organizd or
limmd; tallish of stature, of comely Countenances, white, and reddish: they are
terrible in the Wars, and bold, headlong and cruel in their resolutions. The
Women are marvellously beutiful and handsome, and by the quaintness of their
Dresses do ravish hearts. England not undeservedly glories of the Title of
Monarchy, by the Expression and Hierogliphic that the King bears under his
Scepter, which is a Globe or Ball that represents the Government of the world.
There is no Potentat whatsoever that with any Naval power can approach his
shores, whereunto the Ocean serving for a Wall, with most secure and sandy
Recesses for disimbarking, the stranger cannot plant his foot. And if England
did not use so often to turn the sword into her own Bowels by intestine
seditions, she would prove invincible, and there would be no power above the
English. The Air is healthful, mighty Riches; the Soil is plentiful, and
abounding with Minerals; the Pasture luxurious and delicat, whence it proceeds
that the English Wool is incomparable.

This new noble Author when he comes to deliver his Opinion of France and
Spain, does not speak half so much of either, nor of any Country else; for he
treats of all the Kingdoms of Europe, and of other besides.

Now, it is taken pro concesso, it is a truth granted by all, that there is no
King has more choice of lusty and stout Bodies to make soldiers of, then the
King of Great Britain has in his Dominions; there is the English, Welsh, Scots
and Irish, Nations that keep still entire their innated spirits, and stoutness
uncowd: And this may be imputed to the Policy and Moderation of Government, to
the equal distribution of the Wealth and Plenty of the Country. For the Yeoman
and Franklin goes well clad, has wholesome Nutriment; and as a return of his
Labor from the grateful Earth, has wherewith to provide for his children that
they may not increase the number of Beggars. It is not so in some Countries,
which made one say, (though there may be some excess in the expression) That the
Yeomen and Freeholders of Kent are able to buy half the Peasants of France.
Such Subjects and such a Country the King of Great Britain commands; which made
Eumenius in his famous and elegant Panegyric to Constantin the Great, to melt
thus into her praises.

O fortunata and omnibus beatior Terris Britannia, quae Constantinum Caesarem
prima vidisti; Merito Te omnibus Coeli ac Soli dotibus Natura donavit, in qua
nec hyemis est nimius rigor, nec aestatis ardor. In qua segetum est tanta
foecunditas ut muneribus utriusque sufficiat and Cereris and Liberi. In qua
nemora sine immanibus bestiis, Terra sine serpentibus noxiis. Pecorum mitium
innumerabilis multitudo lacte distenta, and onusta velleribus, Certe quidem
quod propter vitam diligitur longissimae dies, and nullae sine aliqua luce
noctes, dum illa littorum extrema planities non attollit umbras, noctisque
metam Coeli ac Syderum transit aspectus, ut Sol ipse qui nobis occidere videtur
ibi appareat solummodo praeterire.

O most fortunat Britain, (says Eumenius) more blessd then any other Country;
which did first see Constantin Caesar; Nature has deservedly endowed thee
with all Gifts both of Heaven and Earth. In thee neither the excessive cold of
VVinter, nor the ardent heat of Summer does offend the Inhabitant. Thou
swell'st with such a secundity of all kind of Corn, that thou may be called
the Favorit of Ceres and Bacchus. Thy Groves are without savage rapacious
Beasts, and thy Heaths without any poisonous Serpents. Thy Fields are covered
with innumerable multitudes of mild Cretures* laboring with exuberance of
Milk, and laden with rich Fleeces. For delightfulness of Life, thy days are
very long, and no night but has some glimpses of light: the glorious Sun which
sets and goes down in other Regions, seems only to pass by thy Horizon.

From this temperatness of Clime and Fertility, may proceed the
Well-favouredness, the Procerity, as also the Health and Longaevity of the
Inhabitants; in regard Nature does not finish her course in the bodies of Males
and Females so soon here as she does in France and Spain. For it is observd by
all strangers, that an English woman looks as fresh and beutiful at forty, as a
French or Spanish at five and twenty; it being very ordinary for them to
continue still teeming and prolifical when they are past fifty years. And for
the Men, it would be Registered for a Miracle in Spain or France to find ten men
of a thousand years, (one with another) as were found in Hereford about 60
years since, within two miles compass of the town, who were so vigorous, strong
and spriteful, that they danced the Morice-dance in the Marketplace for many
hours, with a Maid-Mariam of a hundred and three, and a Tabourer of a hundred
and five years old.

From the Fertility and Generousness of the Earth, may proceed also the
extraordinary Courage and Hardiness of the Peeple; which has been so well
known and felt in other Countries beyond the Seas, as the Examples in the
former Paragraph do prove at so many signal and difficult famous Battails,
where the English Army was never half so numerous in any they got, no not
sometimes the third or fourth part in number to the Enemy; and such an esteem
they had in France, that (as their own stories relate) when the Duke of Britany
or Armorica was to encounter the French Army in a Battle, he thought it a
Policy to clothe a whole Brigade of his Soldiers after the English mode, to
make them appeer the more formidable to the French.

Nor does that Primitive innate Courage languish a whit, or decline in them,
(as some think the World does) as we find it has done in other Nations, as the
Jew and Greek, with others, but it continues still at the same height; as it
appeerd in the year Eighty eight by Sea, as was said before, and in several
Exploits in the Low Country Wars, as Newport, the Retreat before Gaunt, etc. by
Land. Likewise by fresher Examples in the late Civil Wars twixt King and
Parliament, and since, wherein the Power, Strength and Wealth of England was
never more discovered: For the late usurper (having such a Command over the
Peeples purse, and never wanting money) made Spain and France strive who should
be his Confederat, as also the Hollander, the Swed, and others: I say, in those
times the ancient stoutness of the English appeerd in many Traverses of War; as
at Dunbar in Scotland, and by Sea against the Hollander, who were beaten and
batterd into a Peace. What a hazardous piece of service was performed when we
invaded Barbary at Tunis? but especially that desperate Exploit Blague did at
the Canaries? The French King confessed that the Brigade of English before
Dunkirk, commanded by a little bold Britain, though not the fifth part of the
Army, did contribut most to the late taking of that strong Praedatory Town. And
the King of Portugal acknowledgd, that in this years great Defeat 1663. he gave
Don John of Austria near Ebora, that Brigade of English who servd there, though
not much considerable in number, did perform the toughest part of the service,
and first showed them the way of using the Rests of the Musket to knock down
the Enemy; which made the Frenchmen cry out, Faisons comme les Anglois, Let Us
do as the English.

The Sixth Paragraph. Touching the Ancient and Long-lind Extraction,
Decendency, and Bloud-Royal of the Kings of Great Britain, etc.
THe Races of Kings may be said to be like great Rivers, that stream out into
diverse large Channels and Arms, which become great Rivers of themselfs
afterward: Or like huge Trees which use to stretch their Branches beyond the
Ocean, where being inoculated and graffd, they make diverse other Royal Trees to
sprout out of them in Foreign Soyls. There were diverse Royal Ingraftings of this
kind that Great Britain had with the chiefest Potentats, and some of them
Imperial: The first was before the English took footing here, between the
Emperor Constantius and Helene, a Britain born, and Mother to Constantine the
Great, the first Christian Emperor: for this Island was held in such high
esteem by the Roman Emperors, (when they had almost all the world besides)
that diverse of them kept their Courts here; among whom Severus, and Constantius
died at York: which City may deservedly vaunt of two things, viz. that two
Roman Emperors were buried, and a third born in her, viz. Constantin the Great.

After the Saxons came, this Island also continued in such a repute, that
Ethelwolph Son to King Egbert, Anno 830. married the Lady Judith, called the
Fair for her extraordinary Bewty, and Daughter to the Emperor Charles le
Chauue, Granchilde to Charlemain. The Emperor Otho the Great married the
Sister of King Athelstan, whose friendship was so much sought by all his
Neighboring Kings, that they wooed for it by rich Presents: which made the
King of France send him the sword of Constantin the Great, in the Hilt whereof
there was one of the Nails that fastened Christ to the Cross: He sent him also
the Spear of Charlemain. The King of Norway sent him a curious Ship, with a
Gilt Stem, Purple Sayls, and the Deck garnishd all with Gold. The Emperor Otho
his Brother-in-law sent him a Vessel of precious stones artificially made,
wherein were Landskips with Vines, Corn and Reapers so much to the Life, that
they seemd to move, and act, etc.

There have been eight Nuptial Conjunctions twixt Great Britain and France,
(besides the Scots alliance with that Country.) The first was about the year
900. twixt Charles the first of France, and the Lady Ogine Daughter to Edward
Son to King Alfred, that admired Saxon King, who is so famous in story for
diverse signal things: for He cleerd the whole Kingdom of the Danes, who had so
much infested and harassd it. He Founded the University of Oxford, Anno 895. He
was the first who divided England into Shires, Hundreds, and Weapontakes. He
divided the Natural Day also into three parts; eight hours for Recreation, and
matters concerning his Health, as sleep, etc. eight hours for Meditation and
exercise of Piety; and eight hours in Council, and the public Affairs of his
Kingdom. He Founded also Shaftsbury-Abby, Winchester-Church, and
Eldinsey-Monastery.

The second Marriage with France was twixt Hen. 3. of England, and the Lady
Margaret Daughter to Lewis the seventh of France.

The third was between Edward the first, (that great Hero of his time) and the
Lady Margaret, Daughter to Philip the Hardy of France.

The fourth twixt Edward the second and the Lady Isabel, eldest Daughter to
Philip le Bell King of France, Mother to Edward the third of England, who by
right of her claimd and carried afterward the Crown of France.

The fifth was twixt King Richard the second, and the Lady Elizabeth, Daughter
to Charles the sixth of France: but she was but his second Wife, for his first
was the Lady Anne, Daughter to the Emperor Charles the Fourth.

The sixth was between Henry the fifth of England, and the Lady Katharine,
another Daughter to Charles the sixth of France.

The seventh was twixt Lewis the twelfth of France, and the Lady Mary, second
Daughter to King Henry the seventh of England.

The eighth and last Inoculation twixt the Rose and the Flower de Luce, was
that of Charles the first of England, with the Lady Henrietta Maria of Bourbon,
youngest Daughter to Henry the great of France. In which Matches England has
had six Daughters of France, and France two of England.

By the fourth Match twixt Ed. 2. and Isabel eldest Daughter to Philip le Bell,
Edward the third of England being her eldest son, was Heir to the Crown of
France; and demanding his Right thereunto, he was answered, La Couronne de
France n'est pas liee a la quenouille, That the Crown of France was not tied to
a Distaff: whereunto he replied, That he would then tie it to his Sword; and he
was as good as his word. But Henry the fifth some fourscore years after tied it
faster, for he reducd Charles the sixth to such terms, that after his death he
should immediately possess the Crown and Kingdom of France, and that in the
interim the Dauphin his son (afterward Charles the seventh) should be
disinherited; That in the interim King Henry should be Regent of France, (in
regard the present King was sometimes crazd in his Intellectuals;) That he
should take to Wife the Lady Isabel, Daughter to the said Charles: All which
Capitulations not only the King, but the chiefest Peers and Nobility of France
did consent unto, and ratify by solemn Oath, obliging themselfs further to
uphold and assist Henry of England, with his lawful Heirs and Successors,
against Charles the Dauphin whom his Father had legally disinherited.

Hereupon Henry the fifth dying in France, (a Death much too soon and immature
for so brave a man) his son Hen. 6. was proclaimd King of England and France in
Paris: In which public Proclamation, it is very observable how England had the
precedence; and thereupon the chiefest of the Officers of the Crown and Nobles
swore Fealty and Allegiance unto him; diverse of which Nobles grew afterward
Apostats, and joynd with the Dauphin.

Against Edward the thirds Right the Salique Law was alledgd, which they would
force and pin upon a Text of Scripture, Lilia neque nent, etc. The Lilies
neither spin, etc. But though King Edward had cut the Labels of that Law with a
victorious sword, yet it was not quite cancelld: Nor indeed could it be
possibly done, for it was but a kind of Chymera, a mere imaginary Law; and one
of the Authentiqust French Historians Du Haillan has no better opinion of it.
They who are the greatest Champions of that Law, acknowledge that it was at
first a particular Topical Law made at Salem, a place upon the Rhine, but they
have stretchd it since to all France: As if the Law of Gavelkind, which is
peculiar to Kent and other distinct places, should be made to extend it self,
and be in force all England over. But some there are that will not allow any
Essence at all to the Salique Law, no not to be a Local restraining Law to the
foresaid place near the Rhine; Therefore the same answer may be fit to be given
un to the Assertors of It, as was given by the Venetians to the Pope, when there
happening a clash between them touching the Sea about Ancona, which they
alledgd belongd to the Venetian Gulf whereof they had the Dominion, And the Pope
demanding what warrant they had for it, it was answered, by a kind of Sarcasine,
If your Holiness please to produce the Instrument whereby the Emperor
Constantine the Great passd over the City of Rome to your predecessors, upon
the back of that Grant your Holiness will find Saint Marks Charter to the
Souverainty of the Adriatique Gulf: whence an Intimation was made, that
neither of the Charters had ever any being; which may be justly applied to the
Salique Law. And besides that, du Haillan, though a Frenchman, in the first
Volume of his History, confutes that Law. It is confirmd also that there never
was any such Law in France by the testimony of the Duke of Burgundy, who when
Philippe le long was created King, he openly cried out against his Creation,
alleging that the Kingdom of France belonged then to Jane daughter unto Hutin
King of France formerly: but to stop his mouth, Philip was forcd to make a Gift
unto him of the Dukedom of Burgundy in dower with his eldest daughter.

But touching the Title of Henry the Fifth, which was confirmed by Solemn
Agreement, and Sacramental Oaths, the French found out another Evasion. For it
was avouchd, That the Kingdom of France goes not by Descent or Inheritance,
but by Succession, which is grounded not upon a Law but upon Custom; by virtue
whereof the next of the Blood Royal, be He of the furthest degree that may be to
the kindred, succeeds, not as lawful Heir, but as a Successor by Custom, not
newly invented, but of long continuance, even from the time of Pharamond. But
this newdevised Objection is refuted also by the foresaid Du Haillan one of the
prime French Historiographers, and a Frenchman born, who reckons up a long
Catalog of French Kings which did not succeed one another, but were chosen one
after another.

Another Objection was also suggested, that Charles the sixth, who made the
foresaid Contract with Henry of England, was no better then a Lunatique, though
he had sometimes Lucida Intervalla. Whereunto it is answered, that at the time
when that Agreement passd He had a lucid interval, and was in his right wits
and memory: Besides, the chiefest Nobility of the Realm were parties in ir, and
did not only consent, but obligd themselfs by Oath to the performance of it.

There was a third Objection which kept a higher noise, viz. That the King of
France cannot alienate the Demeanes, Rights, Titles, and Interests of the
Crown, without the consent and suffrage of the Assembly of Three Estates, which
was not had then, because a great part of the Peers, Nobles, and others were
then absent. Whereunto it is answered, That in claims which go by plurality of
voices, it is not always necessary that all should be present, if the greater
and better part of them be there, specially if after Citation the rest absent
themselfs: For although the point that concerns All, should be approvd by All;
yet, as Civilians hold, when some or all may approve or disallow the things
which concern Them, and They will not be present to show their consent or
dislike, their Absence shall not prejudice the stipulation of the Contract. And
in this great business twixt two Kings, those who were away were Traitors to
Charles the sixth, for they were in arms against him, by taking part with the
Dauphin who was in Rebellion against his Father at that time; Therefore their
absence could not in any respect prejudice the validity of so solemn a Contract
whereupon depended Peace or War.

The fourth Objection carried more of pusillanimity with it, then strength of
proof, viz. That when the foresaid Contract was made, the English had almost
overrun all France, and that the King was coopd up in a corner of the country;
Therefore whatsoever He did being done by fear, duresse and compulsion, was of
no better force then a Covenant extorted by violence, or made in prison by a
private man, which when he is at liberty he is not bound by Law to perform if
it tend to his damage. To this it is answered, That the case is far different
twixt Souverain Princes and private men, for between the one there fall out but
Processes and Suits in law if they disagree, or not perform what is a greed
upon; But between Princes, blood and Wars, fire and Sword, death and
destruction sometimes of whole Countries and millions of human souls do Ensue:
Therefore when a King by the propitiousness of Heven, and his own prowess, by
the hazard of his life, loss of his peeple, with infinite pains and expense of
Tresure, has gaind a Victory by the justness of his Cause and Divine decree,
or redu^d his Enemy to a straight, All the Civilians concur in one unanimous
opinion that he may make the best advantage he can of his good successes, and
reduce his Enemy to what terms he please; And the Articles which shall then be
capitulated, consented and sworn unto, are to be exactly performd; otherwise
there would be no end of any War. Now, the French Chroniclers themselfs
acknowledge that Henry the 5. might at that conjuncture of time and fortune,
have destroyed the whole Realm of France, and taken the King prisoner, or
driven him quite out: But he was so far from doing so, that he sufferd him to
enjoy the Kingdom while he livd, and by taking his daughter to wife made her
Issue thereby capable not only of the French, but also of the English Crown,
with all the Dominions thereunto annexed. Whence some Authors observe that the
English have bin usd in all Treaties and Stipulations to be over-reasonable,
merciful, plain and downright; But the French crafty, double minded, inhumane,
high and subdolous upon all advantages: Insomuch that it is a question which was
sharper, the English blade, or the French brain.

I will conclude this digressive discourse with another argument of the French,
viz. That Charles the sixth could not legally disinherit his eldest son, being
Hei^ apparent to the Crown of France. To this may be answered, that neither
Charles the sixth was rightful King, nor consequently his son heir apparent:
for since Edward the third of England, all the French Kings were but Usurpers;
they were Kings de facto, not de jure. Moreover there are many Examples how the
eldest sons of the Kings of France have bin disinherited: We read that Robert
made his second son Henry King of France, by disinheriting Robert his eldest,
who for compensation was made Duke of Burgundy. Lewis le Gros, with the consent
of all the Peers and Estats of France, made also Lewis his second son King, and
gave Robert his eldest the Earldom of Dreux. Dagobert made Clouis his second
son King of France, by putting by Sigisbert his eldest son.

I have bin somewhat long in discourse of this great Transaction twixt England
and France, because the chief aim of this Work being at Precedence, the
discerning Reader may regulat his judgment accordingly.

We will now go on to conclude this Paragraph, the main scope whereof being
Antiquity, and continuance of Royal Blood.

The Genealogical Tree of the Kings of this Island, as all other Countries, has
had various Stems: the first were Britains (now called Welsh) who may contend
for Antiquity, and may be said to be coetaneous with the Island it self, yea
before it was an Island; for there want not some who hold that it was at first a
continent, or a peninsula tied to Gallia by an Isthmos or neck of land
stretching from Dover to Bullen: for the Rocks on both coasts being of a color
and shape, look as if they were slented one out of the other. Before the Romans
took footing here, which was near upon 200 years before they could do it
peaceably, the Britains did still so bear up against them; whereas Gallia or
France was fully conquered in less then 10 years: I say, before the Roman Eagle
fixd his talons here, there had bin 65 Kings of the British Blood: But then that
Race being interrupted by the Romans for above 400 years, the Island being freed
of Them, some of the old British Blood came to be Kings again, among whom some
were very famous, as (...), and Arthur his son the chief Christian Worthy, who
was the first Founder of Warlike honor conferrd upon his Knights of the Round
Table. And this Race of the old British Kings lasted till the reign of
Cadwallader, Anno 689; yet there were Welsh Princes that swayd still (as among
other Howel Dha the Great Legislator) and stood stoutly for their Liberty until
the reign of Edw. 1. in whose reign Leol^ the last Prince of the British Blood
being slain in battle, his head was brought to King Edward, who commanded it to
be crowned with I^ie, confessing that he had met with more valor in the Welsh
then the Scots, for he had fierce Wars with both. But Cadwallader being dead,
the British Race was interrupted again (till Owea Tewdors time, who descended
from Cadwallader, as shall be showed) by a G^rman peeple inhabiting the lower
Circuit of Saxony, and so called Saxons by the Welsh and Irish to this day. They
had a (...) a long time; but Egbert by conquest redu^d them to a Monarchy, and
he was the first who called himself King of England.

Then that English Race al^o of Kings had two short Interruptions, one by the
Danes whereof there reigned here three Kings, but all their raigns extended not
to ^5 years; Then by William of Normandy, and that Interruption ^asted about 40
years, till Henry the first married the lady Matilda daughter to Malcolme King
of Scotland by the Lady Margaret sister to Edgar Athel^g, whereby the English
Blood Royal was restord.

Then by a mavelous providence the British Royal Blood after about 800 years
Interruption was resto^d by Owen Tewdor, who married the Queen Dowager
Katherine, and so was Granfather to Hen. 7. which Tewdor by an exact (...) that
was made by the British Bards, and confirmed by the English Heralds, came
lineally from the foresaid King Cadwallader and Leolin: so there were three
Kings, viz. Hen. 7. Hen. 8. Edw. 6. with two Queens, viz. Mary and Elizabeth,
all Tewdors.

Then came in the Royal Race of Scotland by the Lady Margaret Tewdor eldest
daughter to Hen. 7. and first branch of the two Roses.

Now, by a due computation made of the premises, it will be found, that (take
British or English) the source and series of the Blood Royal of England is
above a thousand years since. And if from Cadwallader you go to the British
Kings before the Romans interrupted the Royal succession thereof, it will be
near upon 3000 years; which no kingdom ^ls can say. Moreover, the Blood Royal
of Scotland some hundreds of years before was incorporated in the British: for
the mother of the first King of the Stuarts was a British Lady.

And as there is a Register of 139 British and English Kings, so there is an
exact Catalog of 110 Scots Kings: whereas all the three Races of the French
Kings make but 64 Kings in all. Nor did any of those three Royal Races continue
much above 300 years in a Blood, but were quite extinguishd, both Merovingiens,
Carlevingiens, and Capevingiens. The House of Valois extinguished in the late
Queen Margaret, first wife to Hen. 4. And this present King is but the Third of
the House of Bourbon.

Spain cannot say so much: for the furthest Line that Her Kings can draw, is
not much above 500 years ago, from the Counts of Castile; nor was there ever any
King of Castile till the year 1017. And touching the House of Austria, it
became Royal but about 300 years since.

To conclude this Paragraph, his present Majesty of Great Britain, in point of
Royal Extraction and Lineage, is the Greatest born Prince that any Age can
produce. For whereas his Granfather and Father were allied only, if you regard
Foreign Consanguinity, to the House of Holstein, and that of Lorain; Charles the
second of England bears in his Veins not only That Blood, but also the Bloods
of all the Great Princes of Christendom, being nearly linkd to the Houses of
France and Bourbon, To the House of Austria, and consequently to the Emperor
and Spain by the Maternal side, as also to the Dukes of Savoy and Florence.
Moreover, He is nearly allied to the King of Denmark, and to all the prime
Princes of Germany, as the Saxe, Brandenburg, Bavaria, the Palsgrave, etc.

The seventh Paragraph. Touching the Hospitality, and plentiful Kingly Court,
with number of Officers and Stately Attendants of the King of Great Britain.
It Is ordinary for Latin Authors old and new, to break out into the praises of
Great Britain, and their Elogiums are many: but lets hear what a great Greek
Poet speaks of Her.

-- -- (...)
No I Will did ever dare
With Britain yet compare.
Among other Encomiums of England, she is much cried up for her wonderful
fecundity and fullness of all things relating to the nourishment of mankind,
all things that Earth, Water or Air can afford: which (with the Divine
benediction) must be imputed to the temper of the Clime; And besides, there be
gentle breezes that are conveyed from the circumfluent Seas, which refresh all
kind of animals both Brute and Rational. The clouds there may be truly said to
drop fatness, dissolving into silver wholesome showers to soften and fertilize
her Glebes: In December and January there is commonly Frost enough to knit and
corroborate the joints of the earth: In February there is usually Snow enough to
fill the Dikes, and like a gentle white rugg to cover her plowd fields, and
keep the bed of the earth warm from the inclemency of the circumambient cold
air. It is observd that there is not such a multitude of Volatils any where: And
touching her Seas, there are not any where so great variety of Fish swimming in
such huge shoals like mountains, and taking their turns and seasons about the
Island once every year: Her fresh rivers are also full of them. Her Forests and
Woods have not such ravenous beasts as other Countries use to have: yet there
are store of savage beasts for Recreation, as the Stagg, the Hind, the Heart,
the Hare, the Otter, the Fox and Badger, etc. The bowels of the earth are no
where so pregnant of Metals, Stone, and Fuel, etc. The Sun, which scorcheth
other Countries, may be said but to warm the English soil with his gentle rays.
The Air is nothing so foggie and dull as in many other Regions, but cleerd and
attenuated ever and anon with refreshing blasts. Nor is the body of the earth
so subject to shaking Agues and Earth quakes, to trepidation and quakings, as
other places are, which are full of sulphurous bituminous concavities. Touching
store and superfluity of Corn, with all sorts of Grain, Britain in the times of
the Romans was called, as Tacitus says, the Barn and Granary of the Western
world. Take all these particulars together, the Poet does not much complement
with England when he breaks thus into a Character of her.

Anglia Terra ferax, Tibi pax secura quietem,
Multiplicem luxum merx Opulenta dedit.
Tu nimio nec stricta gelu, nec sydere fervens,
Clementi Coelo, temperieque places.
Cum pareret Natura parens, variasq favore
Divideret dotes omnibus una locis,
Sepofuit potiora Tibi, Matremque professa
Insula sis foelix, plenaque pacis, ait,
Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid desiderat usus,
Ex Te proveniet vel aliunde Tibi.
This is the cause of that infinite Commerce she has to all parts of the
habitable earth as far as the Antipodes, and the incredible benefit which other
Nations make of her Commodities; Insomuch that Guicciardine, an Author well to
pass, relates that after the Articles of the Intercursus magnus were made with
Flanders or the Netherlands, the Annual Trade amounted unto above twelve
Millions Sterling, whereof the one half was in Woollen Manufactures, whereby the
17 Provinces did wonderfully improve in Negotiation and Wealth: Insomuch that
the ground of the Order of the Golden Fleece established by the Duke of
Burgundy, related to the English Wool, which proved so infinitely beneficial
unto them.

From this marvelous exuberance and superfluity of substantial
Staple-commodities proceed the luxe, the plenty and profuseness of the
Inhabitants: for there is no where such frequent Invitations and Feasts in Town
and Country; which made one say, That among others, England has an Enchanting
kind of quality, to make Forreners forget their own Countries, when they have
once tasted of the sweetness thereof. The Franklins, Yeomen or Freeholders live
like Gentlemen, The Gentlemen and Esquires live like Noblemen, The Noblemen
like Princes. The Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London have Tables most days of
the week fit to entertain Kings.

Now, touching the Royal Court, which may be called the Epitome of the whole
Country, There is no King whatsoever lives in that height of magnificence and
plenty. There was communibus annis servd in kind in provisions for his Majesty's
house by way of composition, 3790 quarters of Wheat; 1493 Oxen fat and lean;
7000 Muttons; 1231 Veals; 310 Porks; 410 Sturks; 26 Boars; 320 Flitches of
Bacon; 6820 Lambs; 40 Barrels of Butter; 145 dozen of Geese; Capons course 252
dozen; Hens 470 dozen; Pullets course 750 dozen; Chickins course 1470 dozen; Wax
3100 weight; sweet Butter 46640 pounds; Charcoals 1250 loads; Talwood, Billets,
Faggots, 3950 loads; Herrings 60 barrels; Wine-cask from the Vintners 600 Tun,
etc. Beer 1700 Tun, etc. This was for the first course: Now for the second course
innumerable sorts of Fowl and Fish according to the season, which was exactly
observd. This made Bodin the great Critique to confess, that considering all
things, there was not a more magnificent and plentiful Court upon earth. Now the
riches and fatness of a Country should be principally seen in the Kings house;
and indeed the greatest glory of England appeers there, as all observing
Forreners confess: and nothing conducd more to the continuance, increase and
support of his power and honor, and which drew more awe and reverence from all
peeple; all which are so requisite and essential to the prosperity of King and
Peeple, as they cannot be wanting, but are and should be perpetual attendants of
the Soverain Prince. Now, this cannot be without the concurrence and service of
the Peeple: Now, from all times the English were observd to be industrious, and
make it their chief care to provide the best things for the Kings Court;
according to that ancient, and no less eloquent speech of a great Lawyer: Domus
Regis vigilia defendit omnium; Otium Illius labor omnium; Deliciae Illius
industria omnium; Vacatio Illius occupatio omnium; Salus Illius periculum
omnium; Honor Illius periculum omnium. The Kings House should be the
watchfulness of All; His recreations should be the labor of All; His plesures
should be the inventions of All; His safety should be the danger of All; His
honor the object of All.

Now, the greatest cause of the honor and plenty of the Royal Court in
England, were the Preemption, Pourvoyances and Compositions he had from evry
County, which were so moderat, That they who have cried them down, thinking it
to be a great advantage and ease unto them, will find in time that they were no
wiser then the Ass in the Fable (as a very judicious Gentleman observes) who
thought to make his burden of Sponges the lighter by lying down with them in
the water: For those Compositions, considering the smalness of them, and how
many went to bear the burden, were scarce any weight at all, as will appeer by
those Shires I shall produce for instances.

All the thirteen Shires of Wales were chargd but at one hundred and fourscore
Sturks, which stood that whole Dominion but in three hundred and threescore
pounds, whereof Anglesey, which has 83 Parishes, paid but 5l. which amounts not
to 15 pence evry Parish.

The County of Derby, which has one hundred and six Parishes, paid but 254l.
per an.

Worcestershire, which has one hundred and two Parishes, was assessd at 495l.
which is about three pounds seven shillings upon evry Parish.

Yorkshire, which has 459 Parishes, besides many large Chapelries, was charged
but with 495l. which was not two and twenty shillings upon evry Parish one with
another.

Bedfordshire, which has one hundred and sixteen Parishes, paid four hundred
ninety seven pounds eight shillings four pence.

Cheshire, having sixty eight Parishes, was to furnish but 25 lean Oxen at the
Kings price, viz. four marks a piece, etc. with other things, which came not to
one pound nine shillings upon evry Parish.

Cornwall, having an hundred and sixty Parishes, did not bear so great a
contribution as eight shillings upon evry Parish.

The County of Devon, which has three hundred ninety four Parishes, paid no
greater sum for evry yearly composition then ten shillings upon every Parish.

Herefordshire, having one hundred seventy six Parishes, made evry one to
contribut no more then about twelve shillings six pence upon every Parish.

The huge County of Norfolk, which has 660 Parishes, paid but one thousand
ninety three pounds two shillings and eight pence; which in proportion comes
not to one pound eleven shillings upon evry Parish.

Somersetshire, which has 385 Parishes, paid seven hundred fifty five pounds
fourteen shillings eight pence, which amounts to about 40 s. a Parish.

The County of Northampton, which contains 326 Parishes, paid toward
Pourvoyance and Composition nine hundred ninety three pounds eighteen shillings
four pence; which was for evry Parish little more then three pounds.

Lincolnshire, which has 630 Parishes, paid one thousand one hundred seventy
five pounds thirteen shillings and eight pence; which amounted to less then
forty shillings a Parish.

Glocestershire, which has 280 Parishes, paid four hundred twenty two pounds
seven shillings and eight pence; which was not one pound eleven shillings per
Parish.

There be other Counties, by reason of their vicinity to the Court, and being
very great gainers for the vent of their commodities by the Kings constant
Residence, with his Tribunals of Justice in his Imperial Chamber of London,
were chargd deeper; as, The County of Kent, which has 398 Parishes, And is the
common road of Ambassadors passing to and fro, as also where his Arsenals,
Docks and Navy Royal lies, with four of his Cinq Ports, etc. paid three
thousand three hundred thirty four pounds and six shillings.

The County of Sussex, which has 112 Parishes, paid one thousand and sixteen
pounds two shillings and six pence.

The County of Surrey, having 140 Parishes, paid one thousand seventy nine
pounds and three pence.

Hertfordshire, which has one hundred and twenty Parishes, paid one thousand
two hundred fifty nine pounds nineteen shillings four pence.

The County of Essex, having 415 Parishes, for her neighborhood to London and
the Court, paid two thousand nine hundred thirty one pounds two shillings and
two pence.

The County of Buckingham, which has 185 Parishes, paid two thousand and forty
pounds sixteen shillings and six pence.

Berkshire, having 140 Parishes, paid one thousand two hundred and fifty five
pounds seventeen shillings and eight pence.

The County of Middlesex, which has 73 Parishes besides what are in the
Suburbs of London and Westminster, paid nine hundred seventeen pounds nineteen
shillings per an. which was no great matter in point of proportion to the rest
of the Counties, In regard of the great advantages this Shire has by the
propinquity and residence of the Kings Court, And so by letting and setting of
Lands, Pasturages, Houses, Lodgings at highet rates, with the improving the
prices of all other commodities.

The City of London, which has such mighty benefits by the constant sojourn of
the King, and of his principal Courts of Justice at Westminster Hall, by the
Records in the Tower, by the Inns of Court and Chancery, with variety of other
advantages, as the Kings Custom-House, whereby she is swollen up to be so vast in
Building, and to such infinite Rich^s, that she swallows up the Trade of all the
three Kingdoms; yet for all these advantages, she with the out-parts did
contribut in Grocery ware for the service of the Kings House but about 2000 l.
per annum. Nor did the Kings Brewers in London, and four miles compass about,
pay but one half*peny in every Bushel of Malt; which is now remitted: And what
an inconsiderable small ease it is to so many Brewers, let any man judge.

Out of the Premises touching Compositions for Pourvoyances, this inference may
be drawn, what a care and love our provident and prudent Progenitors bore to
the honor of their King, his Court, and Household; And under favor I may say
that these Royal Pourvoyances, and his tenures in Capite, were two of the
fairest flowers in the English Crown, in lieu whereof it may be said there is set
in an ear of barley, with a Chimney- Wallflower; there is froth and fume given in
exchange, which does so much sully the luster of it: for, as I intimated
before, the state and plenty of the Court was accounted the greatest glory of
the Crown of England, as Foreign Authors of most Nations do acknowledge in their
public Writings.

Now, whereas some do affirm that the yearly benefit of the Excise does make a
full compensation for the Court of Wards, and tenures in Capite, out of which
there was also computed fifty thousand pounds yearly toward the Diet at Court,
It is too well known that the said Excise does not make the King any Equivalent
satisfaction for his Tenures alone (if well managd) much less for his
Pourvoyances, Preemptions and Carriages: For there was an exact account made by
his Majesty's special command, of the last years expense, that there were
Seventy three thousand six hundred and seven pounds fourteen shillings and
seven pence spent more in the Court-diet, and provision of the Stables, then
were in the time of Pourvoyance, besides the extraordinary charge of Carriages
for his Removes, and Navy Royal.

Now, in expending those provisions that were servd into the Court by way of
Pourvoyance and Composition, there was the greatest care and Oeconomical good
husbandry usd that possibly could be: for when there were more Beefs and Muttons
with other provisions servd in then the Court wanted, The faithful Officers of
the Green-cloth caused them to be Sold, and with the moneys arising thence
they were commonly usd to buy Napery, and other Houshold-things for the service
of the Kings House, as also in paying the arrears of some of his Servants wages
with the surplusages.

But now that we dance after the French Fiddle so fast, as we always did so for
the back, and now begin to follow him also in things relating to the Belly, by
Board-wages, etc. I wish the time may not come that we do not follow him too
far; As that one cannot put a grain of Salt in his pot unless he buy it of the
King, whereby, in making Salt his own Commodity, the French King raises by the
mere Gabel which arises thence above 20 millions of Livres evry year, which is
two millions Sterling; which sum is twice more then the King of Great Britain
has from all Incoms whatsoever, as Crown Lands, Customs and Imposts, Excise
and Chimney-money, with other perquisits and casualities: And as the French
thus cannot put a grain of Salt in his pot, so the Spaniard cannot put a corn
of Peper into his Olla unless he has it from the King; Nor can he buy a pair
of Cards or Dice to pass away the time withal, unless he has them of the King;
Nay, he cannot buy half a sheet of Paper to write either Bond or Bill,
Acquittance or Receipt, or other legal Instrument, but he must buy all of the
King; Which adds millions to his yearly Revenues: yet the peeple of Spain are
cried up for a free peeple.

But touching the Imposition of Excise (which is given the King for his Royal
Tenures, and Housekeeping) I well remember the time, that Excise was held such
an abominable word, that my Lord Carleton but only for naming it once in the
Parlement-House, (yet to no ill meaning at all) was violently cried to the Bar;
and, though a person of that eminence, as being then a Privy Counselor, and
principal Secretary of State, he hardly escapd being committed to the Tower.
The Excise was then called the Dutch Devil, because it came first from Holland,
with other fine words, as plunder, storming, etc. which were all made free
Denizons of England by that so longd-for Long Parliament. And observable it is,
that the first imposing and use of Excise in England was to enable Rebels to
make War against their King and Country.

Having thus briefly run over the Sumptuary part of the English Court, we will
now proceed to the Servants and Officers, to the Attendance and State thereof,
which comes not behind any other Court whatsoever: And this might be the ground
of that ancient Proverb in England, and nowhere else, There is no Fishing to the
Sea, nor Service to the Kings. The Court is the randevous of Virtue, of Cadets,
and persons well qualified: It is the Scale by which they rise, the King being
the fountain of Honor, as well as of Bounty. But before we come to speak of
the Officers at Court, and of their Diet and Bouche, which by a pitiful
corruption is vulgarly called budg, whereas it is bouche a mouth; therefore it is
a French phrase, Il a bouche a la Cour, He has a mouth at Court, viz. he has
a Diet: I say, before we come to speak of the Dishes and Diet at Court, let the
Reader take this small Advertisement in the way, that evry Dish at Court was
computed to cost the King viis and modis at the years end 100 l. a dish: But
now since the Preemption and Pourvoyance is taken away, evry dish does stand in
four times as much, at least.

The Kings Court or Household.
The Lord Great Chamberlain and Earl Marshal are rather Officers of State, and
as it were extraneous in relation to the Household: so, in a manner, are the
four Officers of the Crown who use to have Houses abroad, viz. The Lord
Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal of England. The Lord high Tresurer. The
Lord Privy Seal. The Lord high Admiral. But the properst Domestic Officers
are as follow, viz.
The Lord Steward of the Household, who has allowed him evry day besides his
Fee -- 32 dishes. The Tresurer of the Household 32 dishes; and besides his table
he has a Fee of -- 123 l. 14 s. 4 d. The Controuler, besides thirty two dishes
a day, has a Fee of -- 167 l. 17 s. 4 d. The Cofferer, besides his Table, has
-- 100 l. The principal Secretary of State has besides his Table -- 100 l. The
Secretary for the Latin Tongue, Fee -- 40 l. The Secretary for the French Tongue,
Fee -- 66 l. 13 s. 4 d. The Clerks of the Signet, Fee every one -- 40 l. Four
Clerks of the Privy Council, Fee evry one -- 50 l. Clerk of the Council in the
Star Chamber, Fee -- 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Clerks of the Parliament, Fee The
first, -- 40 l. Two Clerks of the Parliament, Fee The second, -- 10 l. Clerk of
the Market, Fee -- 20 l. Postmaster, Fee -- 20 l. Thirty standing Posts
appointed by the Postmaster, evry one Fee -- 18 l. 5 s. Two Carriers To one --
24 l. 3 s. 4 d. Two Carriers To the other -- 12 l.

Officers above Stayrs.
Lord Chamberlain of the Household, besides his Table of thirty two dishes a
day, has a Fee -- 100 l. The Groom of the Stole, who is always a Gentleman of
the Bedchamber, has evry day -- 32 dishes. Vice-chamberlain, Fee -- 100
Marks. Knight-Marshal, Fee -- 100 Marks. The Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber,
whose number is indefinite, Fee evry one -- 50 l. Three Gentlemen-Ushers of the
Privy Chamber -- 30 l. Ten Grooms of the Privy Chamber, Fee apiece -- 20 l.
Four Carvers, Fee evry one -- 50 Marks. Three Cup-bearers, Fee evry one -- 50
Marks. Four Sewers, Fee evry one -- 50 Marks. Four Escuyers of the Body, Fee
evry one -- 50 Marks. Four Yeomen-Ushers, Fee evry one -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. Twelve
Ordinary Grooms, Fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Four Pages, Fee evry one -- 2
l. Clerk of the Closet, Fee evry one -- 4 l. Four Messengers, Fee evry one -- 5
l. The Band of fifty Gentlemen-Pensioners, Fee for evry one -- 50 l.
Standard Bearer to the Pensioners, Fee -- 100 Marks.
The Guard.
Captain of the Guard, fee besides a Livery-Gown -- 14 l. Two hundred ordinary
Yeomen of the Guard, Fee -- 16l. 13s. 4d. Fifty extraordinary, 8 d. per diem --
1 l. 13 s. 4 d. Standard Bearer to the Guard, Fee -- 100 Marks. Clerk of the
Check, fee -- 100 Marks.
The Great Wardrobe.
The Master, his fee -- 100 l. Livery -- 15 l. Two Clerks, fee each -- 4 l. 6.
8 d. Rent-gatherer, fee -- 5 l. 0 s. 8 d. Four Tailors, fee evry one -- 9 l. 2
s. 6 d. Skinner, fee -- 18 l. 5 s. 0 d. Three Embroderers, fee evry one -- 18
l. 5 s. 0 d.
The Butlary of England.
Chief Butler, Fee -- 50 Marks.
The Counting House.
Four Clerks, fee evry one -- 44 l. 6 s. 8 d. Clerk to the Cofferer, fee -- 20
l. Yeoman, fee -- 5 l. Groom, fee -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d.
The Iewel-House.
Master, his fee -- 50 l. Yeoman, his fee -- 6 l. Groom, his fee -- 2 l. 13 s.
4 d.
The Green-cloth.
I should have spoken before hereof in point of precedence, It being a Court of
Justice continually sitting in the Kings Palace; The chiefest whereof are the
Lord Steward, the Tresurer, the Controwler, and Cofferer, the Master of the
Household, two Clerks of the Green-cloth, and two Clerks Controwlers. Of these,
the first three are usually of the Privy Council; For unto This, being as some
hold the first and ancient Court of Justice in England, is committed the Charge
and surintendency of the Kings Court Royal for matter of government. It is
called the Green-cloth, from the color of the Carpet at which they sit, whereon
the Kings Arms are embrodered, and on each side the Arms of the Counting House
bearing verd, a Key and a Rod or white Staff argent saultie, signifying their
power to reward or correct, as persons for their great prudence and experience
thought fit to exercise both those functions.
The Robes.
Yeoman, fee -- 50 l. Groom, fee -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Page, fee -- 2 l.
Harbingers.
Knight-Harbinger, fee -- 50 l. Four Harbingers, fee evry one -- 10 l. Thirty
Yeomen of the Crown, fee evry one -- 6 l. 1 s. 8 d.
The Beds.
Five Marshals, fee evry one -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Four Sewers, fee evry one
-- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Two Survayors, fee evry one -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Two
Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Clerk, fee -- 14 l. Two Grooms, fee evry one -- 2
l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Pages, fee evry one -- 2 l.
The Pantry.
Sergeants fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1. ob. Four Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Four
Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Pages, fee evry one -- 2 l.
Bread-bearer, fee -- 1 l. 10 s. 4 d.
The Boteller.
Yeoman, fee -- 5 l. Groom, fee -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d.
The Hall.
Servitors sixteen, to four, fee -- 3 l. 8 s. 4 d. To the rest -- 2 l. 13 s. 4
d.
The Buttry.
Four Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Four Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Two Pages, fee each -- 2 l.
The Cellar.
Sergeant, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Seven Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Groom,
fee -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Pages, fee each -- 2 l.
The Ewry.
Sergeant, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob Three Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Two
Grooms, fee each -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Pages, fee each -- 2 l. Three Clerks,
fee evry one -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob.
The Bake-house.
Sergeant, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Seven Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Two
Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Four Conducts, fee evry one per diem --
4 d.
The Kitchen.
Two Master-Cooks, fee evry one -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Six Yeomen, fee evry one
-- 5 l. Six Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Eight Children, fee evry
one -- 2 l. Galapines, apparel for them of the Hall, Kitchen, and Privy
Kitchen -- 50 l. Surveyor of the Dresser, fee -- 22 l. 1 s. 3 d. To the Cooks
at Easter in Larges -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. To the Scullery, Larges -- 1 l. To the
Pastry, Larges -- 2 l.
The Spicery.
Clerk, fee -- 32 l. Yeoman, fee -- 5 l.
The Pitcher-House.
Two Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Two Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Two Pages, fee evry one -- 2 l.
The Chaundlery.
Sargeant, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Two Yeomen, fee each -- 5 l. Two Grooms,
fee each -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Pages, fee evry one -- 2 l.
The Larder.
Sergeant, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Yeoman, fee -- 5 l. Two Grooms, fee evry
one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Pages, fee evry one -- 2 l.
The Boiling House.
Two Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Three Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Two Pages, fee -- 2 l. Clerk, fee -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.
The Neatery.
Yeoman-Pourvoyer of Salt Fish, fee -- 40 l. Yeoman-Pourvoyer of Fresh Fish,
fee -- 7 l. 13 s. 4 d. Seven Yeomen-Pourvoyers of Oxen, Mutton, Veal, Lamb,
etc. fee evry one -- 7 l. 13 s. 4 d. Four Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4
d. Yeomen of the Storehouse, fee -- 5 l.
The Poultry.
Sargeant, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Clerk, fee -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. Four
Yeomen-Pourvoyers, fee evry one -- 7 l. 13 s. 4 d.
The Scalding House.
Yeoman, fee -- 5 l. Two Grooms, fee each -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Pages, fee
each -- 2 l.
The Pastry.
Two Sergeants, fee each -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Clerk, fee -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Two Yeomen, fee each -- 5 l. Four Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Four
Children or Pages, fee evry one -- 2 d.
The Scullery.
Three Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Two Grooms, fee each -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two
Pages, fee each -- 2 l.
Amners.
Gentleman-Amner, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Sub-Amner, fee -- 6 l. 16 s. 10 d.
ob. Four Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Two Grooms, fee each -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Chapel.
Gentlemen of the Chapel, fee apiece -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Master of the
Children, his fee -- 40 l. To the Children at high-Feast-Largesses -- 9 l. 13
s. 4 d. Allowance for their Breakfasts -- 16 l.
The Laundry.
Two Yeomen, fee each -- 5 l. Two Grooms, fee each -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two
Pages, fee each -- 2 l. One Woman-Laundress, fee -- 10 l.
The Wafry.
Clerk, fee -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. Yeoman, fee -- 5 l. Groom, fee -- 2 l. 13 s. 4
d.
The Wood-yard.
Sergeant, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Four Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Four
Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Two Pages, fee evry one -- 2 l. Two
Wood-bearers, Largess to them at Midsummer, and to the Grooms of the Kings Hall
-- 5 l. Six Porters and Scowrers, Largess at Easter -- 5 l.
Porters of the Kings Gates.
Three Yeomen, fee evry one -- 5 l. Three Grooms, fee evry one -- 2 l. 13 s. 4
d.
Master of the Horse.
Besides thirty two Dishes per diem, fee -- 100 l. In whose gift are, the chief
Avenor, fee -- 40 l. Fourteen Escuyers, fee evry one -- 20 l. Clerk of the
Stable, fee -- 16 l. 14 s. 7 d. Three Survayors, fee evry one -- 16 l. 14 s. 7
d. Sergeant of the Carriages, fee -- 22 l. 16 s. 3 d. Six Riders, fee evry one
-- 30 l. Sixteen Footmen, fee evry one -- 20 l. Eight Coach-men, fee evry one
-- 18 l. 5 s. Yeoman of the St^rrop, fee -- 13 l. 13 s. Three Sadlers, fee evry
one -- 9 l. Six Litter-men, fee evry one -- 10 l. Four Yeomen-Pourvoyers -- 12
l. 10 s. Three Yeomen-Granators -- 13 l. Yeomen of the Male, fee -- 12 l. 13 s.
4 d. Sargeant-Ferrier, fee -- 20 l. 15 s. 8 d. Three Yeomen-Ferriers, fee -- 9
l. Yeoman-Bittmaker, fee -- 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. Yeomen of the close Cart, fee -- 12
l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Sixty four Grooms, fee evry one -- 18 l. 5 s.
The Tents.
Master, fee -- 30 l. Controuler, fee -- 12 l. 3 s. 4 d. Clerk, fee -- 13 l. 6
s. 8 d. Keeper of the Tents, fee -- 10 l. Yeoman, his fee -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d.
Groom, his fee -- 5 l.
Revels.
Master, fee -- 100 l. Yeoman, fee -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. Four Masters of the
Requests, fee a piece -- 100 l.
Hunting.
Master, fee -- 18 l. 5 s. Sargeant, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. ob. Officers and
others serving under the Master, Wages and Allowance for them -- 113 l. 6 s. 8
d.
Harriers.
Master, fee -- 18 l. 5 s. Officers and others subservient to the said Master,
Wages and Allowance for them -- 79 l. 1 s. 8 d.
Otter-hounds.
Master, fee -- 13 l. 6 s. 8 d.
Buck-hounds.
Master, 12 d. per diem for himself, and to sundry Hunters serving at his
appointment -- 50 l. Two Sargeants, fee each -- 20 l. Two Yeomen-Prickers, fee
each -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. For meat for the Hounds to the Grooms -- 13 l. 6 s. 8 d.
Musicians and Players.
Sargeant-Trumpeter, fee -- 40 l. Sixteen Trumpeters, fee evry one -- 24 l. 6
s. 8 d. Two Luters, fee evry one -- 40 l. Two Harpers, fee evry one -- 19 l. 5
s. Eight Singers, fee evry one -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. Allowance to six Children for
Singing -- 50 l. Rebeck, fee -- 28 l. 6 s. 8 d. Nine Minstrels -- 151 l. 15 s.
4 d. Six Sackbutts, fee evry one -- 24 l. 6 s. 8 d. Eight Viols, fee evry one
-- 20 l. Three Drumsteds, fee evry one -- 18 l. 5 s. Two Players on the Flute,
fee a piece -- 18 l. 5 s. Two Players on the Virginals, fee a piece -- 30 l.
Seven Musician-strangers -- 183 l. 6 s. 8 d. Eight Players of Enterludes, fee
evry one -- 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. Two Makers of Instruments, fees -- 30 l.
Surgeons.
Two Surgeons, fees between them -- 60 l. Two other, fees to both -- 40 l. Two
more, fees between them -- 20 l. Three Physicians, fees evry one -- 100 l.
Three Apothecaries, fee evry one -- 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. Astronomer, fee -- 20 l.
The Kings Barge.
Master, fee -- 16 l. 8 s. 1 d. Twenty five Watermen for the Barge, one -- 8
l. 1 s. 8 d. Another -- 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. The rest evry one -- 2 l.
Artificers.
Stationer, fee -- 26 l. 6 s. 8 d. Printer, fee -- 4 l. Cutler, fee -- 6 l. 1
s. 8 d. Weaver, fee -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. Wheelwright, fee -- 18 l. 5 s.
Crossbow-maker, fee -- 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. Coach-maker, fee -- 10 l. Clock-maker,
fee -- ^8 l. 5 s. Budget-maker, fee -- 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. Feather-dresser, fee --
13 l. 6 s. 8 d. Lock-smith, fee -- 2 l. 13 s. 4 d. Arrowhead-maker, fee -- 6 l.
1 s. 8 d. Buckler-maker, fee -- 3 l. 0 s. 8 d. Handgun-maker, fee -- 24 l. 6 s.
8 d. Graver of Stones, fee -- 20 l. Sargeant-Painter, and others under him --
100 l. Arbour-maker, and Planters of Trees -- 25 l. 10 s. Stillers of Waters,
fee -- 40 l. Bowyer and Fletcher, fee a piece -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. Clock-keeper,
fee -- 12 l. 13 s. 4 d. Keeper of the Libraries -- 13 l. 6 s. 8 d.
The Kings Works.
Surveyor, for himself, one Clerk, Boat-hire, and Riding-charges -- 142 l. 19
s. 2 d. Controuler of the Works, fee -- 18 l. One Clerk, fee -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d.
Clerk of the Engrossment of the pay-book -- 18 l. 5 s. Pourvoyor, fee with
charge of a horse -- 18 l. 5 s. Paymaster, fee 12 d. per diem -- 18 l. 5 s.
Keeper of the Storehouse, fee -- 11 l. 8 s. 1 d. Clerk of the Check, fee 10 d.
per diem -- 15 l. 4 s. 2 d. Clerk of the Controulment -- 10 l. 12 s. 11 d.
Carpenter, fee per diem 12 d. -- 18 l. 5 s. Plummer, fee per diem 12 d. -- 18
l. 5 s. Mason, fee per diem 12 d. -- 18 l. 5 s. Joyner, fee -- 19 l. 9 s.
Glasier, fee -- 36 l. 10 s. Survayor of the Mines, fee -- 36 l. 10 s. Devisor
of the Buildings, fee -- 36 l. 10 s.
Kings at Arms and Heralds.
Garter Principal King at Arms, fee -- 40 l. Clarencieux King at Arms, fee --
30 l. Norroy King at Arms, fee -- 20 l. Kings Heralds seven, fee evry one -- 13
l. 6 s. 8 d. Poursuyvants at Arms four, fee apiece -- 10 l. Sargeants at Arms
twenty five, fee evry one -- 18 l. 5 s. Standard Bearer, fee -- 100 l.
Banner-bearer, fee -- 100 l
The Admiralty.
Lord High Admiral of England, fee -- 300 Marks. Vice Admiral, fee -- 100
Marks. Two Clerks fee of the one -- 18 l. 5 s. Two Clerks fee of the other --
15 l. 1 s. 8 d. Boat-hire upon all occasions -- 10 l. Riding-charges during his
travel, per diem -- 10 s. Tresurer of the Navy, fee -- 100 Marks. Two Clerks,
fee 8 d. per diem -- 24 l. 6 s. 8 d. Riding-charges upon occasion per diem -- 6
s. 8 d. Master of the Ordnance, fee -- 100 Marks. Three Clerks, fee among them
per diem -- 3 s. 4 d. Boat-hire upon all occasions -- 8 l. Riding-charges per
diem -- 6 s. 8 d. Controuler of the Navy, fee -- 50 l. Two Clerks, each per
diem -- 8 d. Boat-hire -- 8 l. Riding-costs per diem -- 4 s. Survayor, fee --
40 l Two Clerks, each per diem -- 8 l. Riding-co^ts per diem -- 4 s. Boat-hire
upon all occasions -- 8 l. Clerk of the Ships, fee -- 33 l. 6 s. 8 d. Boat-hire
upon all occasions -- 6 l. Riding-costs per diem -- 3 s. 4 d. Clerk of the
Storehouse at Deptford, fee -- 33 l. 13 s. 4 d. One Clerk subservient -- 6 l.
Pilot, fee -- 20 l. Victualler of the Navy, fee -- 58 l. One Clerk, per diem
-- 8 d. Riding-costs per diem -- 5 s.
The Ordnance.
Master of the Ordnance, fee -- 151 l. 11 s. 8 d. Two Clerks one per diem -- 10
d. Two Clerks the other -- 8 d. Surveyor, fee -- 36 l. 10 s. One Clerk, per
diem -- 8 d. Riding-costs per diem -- 6 s. Lieutenant of the Ordnance, fee --
100 Marks. One Clerk, per diem -- 8 d. Boat-hire upon all occasions -- 8 l.
Riding-costs -- 0 s. 0 d. Keeper of the great Store, fee -- 40 l. Clerk, per
diem -- 8 d. Riding-costs -- 0 s. 0 d. Keeper of the small Store, fee -- 40
Marks. Riding-costs -- 0 s. 0 d. Clerk of the Deliveries, fee -- 20 l.
Master-Gunner of England, fee per diem -- 2 s. 6 d. (...)-maker, fee per diem
12 d. -- 18 l. 5 s. Saltpe^er-maker, fee -- 18 l. 5 s. Two Gun-founders -- 33
l. 9 s. 2 d. Gun-smith, fee 6 d. per diem -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. Engin-Artificer,
fee per diem 4 d. -- 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. Master-Carpenter, fee per diem 8 d. -- 12
l. 3 s. 4 d. Ordinary Gunners or Cannoneers, one hundred and nine, fee -- 1161
l. 18 s. 4 d. Yeoman of the Ordnance, fee per diem 9 d. -- 13 l. 14 s. 1 d.
The Tower of London.
Constables fee -- 100 l Lieutenants fee -- 200 l. Porters fee -- 9 l. 2 s. 6
d. Yeomen-Waiters or Warders, fee -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d. Allowance for Fuel -- 6 l.
13 s. 4 d. Keeper of the Lions, etc. fee -- 36 l. 14 s. 6 d. Carpenter, fee --
12 l. 3 s. 4 d. Keeper of the Wardrobe, fee -- 12 l. 13 s. 4 d
The Armary.
Master of the Armary, fee -- 31 l. 18 s. 9 d. Armarers under the Master,
twenty, one at -- 36 l. Five, evry one at -- 20 l. Three, evry one at -- 15 l.
The rest evry one at -- 9 l. 2 s. 6 d.
The Mint.
Master, or Tresurer of the Mint, fee -- 100 l. Controuler of the Mint, fee --
100 Marks. Assay-master, fee -- 100 Marks. Clerk of the Mint, fee -- 10 l.
Auditor of the Mint, fee -- 44 l. 6 s. 8 d. Allowance for Paper, (...), and
other necessaries -- 10 l. Teller of the Money, fee -- 33 l. 6 s. 8 d. Survayor
of the Melting-house, fee -- 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. Clerk of the Irons, fee -- 13 l.
6 s. 8 d. Chief Graver, fee -- 30 l. Chief Finer, fee -- 10 l. Sinker of Irons,
fee -- 10 l. Three Melters, fee evry one -- 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. Two Branchers, fee
evry one -- 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. Pourvoyer, fee -- 10 l. Pot-maker, fee -- 10 l.
Porter, fee -- 10 l. Diet to all these Officers by the week -- 1 l. 10 s.
The high Court of Chancery.
Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, fee per diem 23
s. -- 419 l. For his attendance in the Star Chamber -- 200 l. More by name of
Annuity -- 300 l. Robes out of the Wardrobe -- 40 l. Wine out of the Butlery
twelve Tuns -- 72 l. Wax out of the Wardrobe -- 17 l. Sum. allocat. per an. --
1048 l. Master of the Rolls, fee -- 34 l. 15 s. 8 d. Livery out of the Hamper
-- 28 l. 8 s. 4 d. Masters of the Chancery, fee apiece -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. Clerk
of the Crown, fee -- 20 l. Livery for Summer and Winter -- 26 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Protonotary, fee -- 33 l. 13 s. 4 d. Clerk of the Hamper, fee -- 43 l. 13 s. 4
d. Annuity -- 40 l. Livery for himself and his Clerk -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Controuler of the Hamper, fee -- 10 l. Enrollers of Evidences, fee -- 20 l.
Seal, fee -- 6 l. 16 s. 10 l. Livery -- ^0 s. Sargeant at Arms, fee -- 18 l. 5
s. Crier, Fee and Livery -- 7 l. 16 s. 10 d. Chafer of Wax -- 7 l. 6 s. 7 d.
Necessary charges of Wax, Parchment, Paper, Riding Coats, and other yearly
Expenses -- 220 l.
The Privy Seal.
Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, fee per diem -- 1 l. Allowd for his Table at
Court -- 345 l. Clerks of the Privy Seal, fee apiece -- 50 l. Four Masters of
the Requests, fee apiece -- 100 l.
The Kings Bench.
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, who holds his place only by a short
Writ, not by Patent as others do, for his Fee, Reward and Robes -- 208 l. 6 s.
8 d. Wine two Tuns -- 10 l. Allowance for Justice of Assize -- 20 l. To three
Justices assistants, Fee, Reward, and Robes apiece -- 128 l. 6 s. 8 d.
Allowance to evry one as Justice of Assize -- 20 l. Clerk of the Crown, fee --
10 l. Livery out of the Wardrobe -- 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. Protonotary, fee -- 26 l.
13 s. 4 d. Keeper of the Writs and Rolls, fee -- 8 l. Crier, fee -- 6 l. 13 s.
4 d.
The Common Pleas.
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Fee. Reward and Robes -- 141 l. 13 s.
4 d. Wine out of the Butlery, two Tuns -- 8l. Allowance for keeping the Assize
of the Augmentation-Court -- 12l. 10s. Allowance for Justice of Assize -- 20l.
Three coadjutant Justices, Fee, Reward and Robes to evry one -- 128l. 6s. 8d.
Allowance for being Justices of Assize -- 20l. Attorney General, fee -- 61l.
Allowance for being Justice of Assize -- 20l. Sollicitor-General, fee -- 50l.
Keeper of the Writs and Rolls, fee -- 4l. Four Sargeants at Law, to each Fee,
Rewards and Robes -- 26l. 6s. 8d. Allowance as Justice of Assize -- 20l.
Allowance for keeping the Assizes of the Court of Augmentations -- 12l. 6s. 8d.
Crier, fee -- 5l.
Chief Officers of the Kings Revenues, and of the Exchequer.
The Lord High Tresurer of England, fee -- 368l. Robes out of the Wardrobe --
15l. 7s. 8d. Wine so many Tuns Impost free -- 0l. 0s. 0d. Allowance for Diet --
0l. 0s. 0d. Chancellor of the Exchequer, fee -- 113l. 6s. 8d. Livery out of the
Wardrobe -- 12l. 17s. 4d. Tuns of Wine Impost free -- 0l. 0s. 0d.
Officers of the Exchequer-Court.
Lord Chief Baron, fee -- 100l. Livery out of the Wardrobe -- 12l. 17s. 4d.
Allowance for being Justice of Assize -- 20l. Tuns of Wine Impost free -- 0l.
0s. 0d. The Barons of the Exchequer, to each fee -- 46l. 13s. 4d. Livery out of
the Wardrobe -- 12l. 17s. 4d. Allowance for being Justices of Assize -- 20l.
Other Officers of the Exchequer.
The Kings Remembrancer, fee -- 55l. 17s. 4d. Livery out of the Wardrobe -- 4l.
12s. 4d. The Lord Tresurers Remembrancer, fee -- 46l. 2s. 1d. Livery out of the
Wardrobe -- 2l. 13s. 4d. Clerk of the Pipe, fee -- 65l. 4s. 2d. Livery, etc. --
2l. 13s. 4d. Under-Tresurer of the Exchequer, fee -- 73l. 6s. 8d. Livery, etc.
-- 4l. 6s. 8d. Seven Auditors, fee evry one -- 10l. Foreign Opposers, fee --
16l. 13s. 4d. Clerk of the Extreats, fee -- 15l. Clerk of the Pleas, fee -- 5l.
Clerk of the Summons, fee -- 4l. Two Marshals, fee apiece -- 4l. Two
Deputy-Chamberlains, fees apiece -- 2l. 10s. Two Secondaries in the Kings
Remembrancers Office, fee evry one -- 8l. Two Secondaries in the Pipe-Office,
fee -- 5l. Four Secondaries in the Tresurers Remembrancers Office, fee evry one
-- 4l. Clerks of the Tallies, fee evry one -- 17l. 10s. Clerk of the Pell, fee
-- 17l. 10s. Four Tellers, fee evry one -- 13l. 13s. 4d. Clerk in the
Pipe-Office for offering Amercements, fee -- 9l. 13s. 4d. Clerk in the Office of
the Kings Remembrancer, fee for writing the Fines, Issues and Amercements due
to the King evry year -- 15l. 6s. 8d. Clerk in the Office of the Tresurers
Remembrancer, fee for offering the Amercements -- 6l. Clerk in the Office of
the Pleas, fee -- 3l. The four Ushers of the Court of Exchequer for their fees,
in delivery of Processes, and for Paper, Wax, and other necessaries by them
provided, and bought for the Officers of the Court amongst them -- 140l. Four
Porters, Livery to evry one -- 4s. Two Joyners for Tallies, fees apiece -- 10l.
Two Deputy-Chamberlains to write the controulment of the Pell, fees apiece --
6l. One Clerk to write the Tallies of Controulment, fee -- 9l. One Porter of
the Baggs, and Keeper of the Tresure-House-Keys, fee -- 6l. 6s. 8d. Four
Messengers, fee per diem -- 4d. ob. The Grooms of the Receipts fee by Rewards
and Allowances -- 2l. To the Tresurers, and Chamberlains Officers, allowd for
Parchment -- 6l. Three Ushers of the Receipts, Fees, for Diet, Wax, Paper,
Parchment, etc. -- 60l.
The Court of First Fruits and Tenths.
Chancellor, fee -- 200 Marks. Diet-money -- 100l. Hire for a house for
himself, and for the Records -- 9l. Tresurer, fee -- 20l. Diet-money -- 10l.
House-rent -- 10l. A Deputy -- 4l. A Clerk -- 6l. 13s. 4d. Attorney, fee --
26l. 13s. 4d. Auditor, fee -- 20l. Diet-money -- 51l. 10s. One Clerk -- 6l. 3s.
4d.
Other Allowances and Expenses.
Clerk of the Court, fee -- 40l. Keeper of the Records, fee -- 20l. Messenger,
fee -- 2l. 10s. 7d. Allowance -- 13l. 6s. 8d. Usher, fee -- 2l. 10s. 7d.
Allowance -- 3l. 6s. 8d.
The Duchy of Lancaster.
Chancellor, and Allowance with 4l. for Paper, Ink and Parchment -- 142l. 16s.
Survayor, Fee, and Allowance -- 66l. 13s. 4d. Attorney, Fee, and Allowance --
38l. 10s. 4d. Clerk of the Court, Fee and Allowance -- 27l. 10s. 4d. Messenger,
Fee besides Riding costs -- 10l.
Assistants in the said Court.
One Attorney for the Duchy in the Exchequer, fee -- 100l. Attorney likewise
in the Chancery, fee -- 20l. To the Usher of the Receipts in the Exchequer, fee
-- 20l. Four learned men in the Law retained for Counsel for the said Duchy,
fee evry one -- 7l. 6s. 8d. Besides Auditors, Receivers, etc.
The Presidential Court in Wales, or the Council of the Marches.
Lord President, Diet for himself and Council per an. -- 1040l. Diverse
Counselors, to some -- 100 Marks. To others -- 50l. To others -- 40l.
Secretary, his fee -- 13l. 6s. 8d. Attorney, fee -- 13l. 6s. 8d. Solicitor,
fee -- 10l. Surveyor, fee -- 6l. 13s. 4d.
Touching the Presidential Court in the North, where there was usd to be also a
Lord President, four of the Learned Counsel, a Secretary and other Officers,
the King saves nere upon 2000l. per an.

The like sum or therabouts is savd by the Court of Wards, though the loss
which the Crown of England has receavd thereby in point of honor by Tenures in
Capite, and Royal Pourvoyances, etc. be invaluable; which makes our next Foreign
Neighbors in a kind of jeer (and the best of their wit lies in jeering) to
say, that all the Noblemen and Gentry of England, since Tenure in Capite was
taken away, are become little better then Roturiers, then Yeomen that hold in
Soccage.

The former Catalog of Court-Officers was delivered to King James at his first
coming in, And there may be some alterations since. Now there is a mighty number
of other Officers belonging to the Crown: as Auditors, Receavors, Surveyors,
Escheators, Customers; Governors and Constables of Castles, Keepers of Forts,
Points and Bulwarks; Rangers of Forests; Keepers of Chaces, Parks and Woods,
etc. which would make a Volume of it self, and is not so proper to the design
of this subject, which aims principally at the Menial and domestic servants
attending at Court, though we have bin transported as we went along to other
Offices.

Out of the premises this result may be drawn, that besides the unparallelld
plenty, fatness and hospitality of the English Court in point of provision, and
munition de Bouche, as the Frenchman calls it, There is no Court in Christendom
servd with more punctual attendance and state; whereas if you cross ore the
Chanel, and take a view of the next transmarin Court, one shall see common
Laquays, Scullions, and greasy Galopins bring meat to the very rayls of the
Kings Table: And touching the Spanish Court, it is so pitifully thin at dinner
and supper-time, that one would think he were in some Monastery of Capuchins:
But go to either of their Kitchins, one may break his neck as soon as break his
Fast. While I was writing this, a pleasant Repartie came into my memory that
happend twixt that worthy and warlike British Knight Sir Roger Williams, (who
being General of an English Army in France, Henry the Great confessd to be a
better Soldier then himself) Sir Roger being at an Ordinary in Antwerp, where
among others there was a Spanish Alferez who began to speak much of the dainty
Fruits and Salades of his Country, Sir Roger let him go on a good while, and at
last answered bluntly, It Is true Sir we have not such Lemons, Orenges, and
Pomegranats which you have in Spain, but we have in England good Chines of
Beef, and Sirloyns of Veal, etc. We have the meat, and you have but sauce for
our meat. I will close up this Paragraph with this humble Advertisement; That
it highly concerns the common interest of the English Nation to introduce
again, and revive the most ancient and legal usage of his Majesty's just rights
of Preemption, and Pourvoyance or compositions for them; Otherwise it is
impossible for him to keep a Court any thing suitable to a King of Great Britain.

The Eighth Paragraph. Touching the diversity of Nations, and diffring Original
Mother-Tongs, with other Dialects, that are under the Dominions of the King of
Great Britain: As also, Of the variety of Royal Recreations, number of Palaces,
Forests, Chaces and Parks, which belong to the Crown, etc.
THe greatest Antiquaries and Linguists that treat of Tongs, and of their
Originals, do affirm that there are eleven Maternal Tongs throughout all Europe,
which are 1. the Greek, 2. the Latin, 3. the High Dutch, Teutonick or German,
4. the Slavonian, which has two Characters, both a Greek and Dalmatian
character, which come near the shape of the Latin; Then there is 5. the British
or Welsh Tongue; 6. Irish; 7. The Bascuence or Cantabrian, which is the relics
of the old Spanish, or Iberian tongue; 8. the Albanian, of a peeple who inhabit
about the mountains of Epirus; 9. the Hungarian, which came into Europe out of
Asia with the Huns; 10. Is that of Finland, near to which is that of Lapland in
the North of Sweden; 11. Is that of the Cosacks, and Tartars. Of all these the
Slavonian is of largest extent; for it is observed that three and twenty
several Nations speak it.

Now, The French King has not one Mother, and pure inde^ Tongue spoken in all
his Dominions; they are but dialects, Languages or Speeches derivd from other
Toungs: The purest French, which is spoken at Court, and upon the river of
Loire, is but a dialect of the Roman or Latin Tongue; so is the Walloon, the
Provensal, the Gascoon, the Limosin, and others: That of Bearn is but a Dialect
of the Bascuence and Gascon; That of Britany or Armorica is but a dialect of
the ancient British continued so wonderfully in Wales after so many revolutions
and changes of diffring Nations to this day.

Indeed the King of Spain has an old Maternal Tongue under his Dominions, which
is the Cantabrian or Bascuence; all the rest are but several Idiomes or
Dialects derived from the Latin, and inlayd with a multitude of Morisco words.
The Castilian, the Portugues, the Catalan, the Valenciano, are Dialects of the
Latin.

But the King of Great Britain has two pure ancient Mother-Toungs within his
Dominions; which is the British, or old Comraecan Tongue; And the Irish or
Hibernian Tongue, which are subsistent of themselfs, and have no derivation or
affinity at all with any other Tongue. There are six Dialects also spoken in his
Kingdoms; The English, which is a dialect of the Saxon or high- Dutch; There is
the Scottish, which is a sub-dialect of the English; There is the Mankmen, or
they of the I Will of Man, which is also a sub-dialect of the Welsh. There is the
Highlander or Redshank, which is a dialect of the British and Irish; There is
the Cornish, which is a dialect of the Welsh; And the Language of Iersey and
Gernsey (the only remains that are left us of Normandy) which is a dialect of
the French. Now, It cannot be soberly denied but that it is an addition of
Honor to the King of Great Britain to have more Mother-Toungs (reservd yet in
his Dominions, and as it were unconquerd) then his two Neighbour-Kings.

Touching variety of Palaces, and change of Royal Mansions, he may compare, if
not out-go any of the other Kings: For within half a days journey of London he
has eight several Houses, and diverse elsewhere; whereas the French King has but
the Louvre, Fountainbleau, Bois de Vincennes, St. Germain de Lay, and Madrid,
a small ruinous pile of stones which Francis the first causd to be erected in
commemoration of his captivity so many years in Madrid in Spain in a small
Brick House, wherinto there was a low little door built by the command of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, of purpose to make the King stoop when he entered;
which he observing, because he should not bow his head, went in backward,
putting in his bum first.

The King of Spain has but his Palace, and La Casa de buen retiro in Madrid;
he has Aranjuez with the Pardo between Madrid and the Escurial; where he has
a Royal House, yet it is but a Cantle of a Monastery, it is but the handle of a
Gridiron, which that great structure resembles, in memory of the Martyr St
Laurence; Philip the second having bin forced, for the advantage of avenues to
batter down a Convent dedicated to that Saint a little before the battle of St
Quinten, where he proud Victorious against the French; and to perform a Vow he
then made, he built the Monastery of Saint Laurence at the Escurial.

Now, touching all the foresaid Palaces in France and Spain, Winsore-Castle may
compare with any for Magnitude, Majesty and State; As Sir Thomas Roe, who had
bin Ambassador at the great Mogors Court, at the Seraglio of the Gran Senior,
at the German Emperors, at the French, Polonian, Danish and Swedish Courts; I
say, Sir Thomae Roe did confidently and knowingly affirm, that Winsor-Castle
may not only compare, but have the precedence of all the rest, in point of
Grandeur, Majesty, Situation and Stateliness.

Moreover, the King of Great Britain has Lodges, and other places of pleasure
without number; In regard of so many Forests, ^haces and Parks that are annexd
to the Crown. Touching Forests, there is no Potentat on Earth has so many, I
may truly avouch. Now, a Forest is a Franchise of so Princely a tenure, that
according to the Laws of England none but the King himself can have a Forest;
if he chance to pass one over to a subject, it is no more Forest, but a Frank
Chase. A Forest has peculiar Laws of her own to take cognizance of, and punish
all Trespasses: A Forest has her Court of Attachments, or Swainmote-Court
where matters are as legally pleadable as at Westminster Hall. The Heart, the
Hind, the Hare, the Bore, and the Wolf, are Forest-beasts; The Buck, the Do,
the Fox, the Matron, the Roe, belong to a Chase and Park. And all these kind of
Recreations the King of Great Britain has in so many Forests, whereof there are
in England (besides thirteen Chaces, and seven hundred eighty one Parks) these
whose names follow alphabetically.

Forests name. County. 1. Applegarth Ebor. N. Rid. 2. Arundel Sussex. 3.
Ashdown. Susses. 4. Bear-Forest. Hamp. 5. Birnwood Buck. 6. Blackmore. Wilt. 7.
Blethvay. Radnor. 8. Bowland. Lanc. 9. Braden. Wilt. 10. Buckholt. Hamp. 11.
Cantselly. 12. Cardith. Caermar. 13. Chur. Hamp. 14. Charnwood. Leicester. 15.
Chul. Wilt. 16. Coidrath. Pembr. 17. Copland. Cumb. 18. Dallington Suff. 19.
Dartmore. Devon. 20. Delamere. Chesh. 21. Dene. Gloc. 22. Dereford. Salop. 23.
Waterdown Suss. 24. Exmere. Devon. 25. Feckenham. Wigorn. 26. The Forest.
Cardig. 27. Fromselwood. Summers. 28. Gaiternack. Wilt. 29. Gautry. Ebor. 30.
Gillingham. Dors. 31. Hatfield. Essex. 32. Harwood. Salop. 33. Hay. Heref. 34.
Holt. Dors. 35. Huckstow. 36. Inglewood. Cumb. 37. Knaresburg. Ebor. 38. Kings
wood. Gloc. 39. Knuckles. Radnor. 40. Leicester. Leicest. 41. St. Leonards.
Suss. 42. Lounsdale. 43. Lowes. Northumb. 44. Lune. Ebor. 45. Leyfield. Rutl.
46. Mallerstang. Westminster. 47. Mocktry. Salop. 48. Narborth. Pemb. 49. Neroch.
Some. 50. New Forest. Hamp. 51. New Forest. Ebor. 52. Peak. Derb. 53. Pewsham.
Wilt. 54. Pickring. Ebor. 55. Radnor. Radnor. 56. Roscob. Card. 57. Rockingham.
Northam. 58. Sapler. 59. Savernack. Wilt. 60. Sherwood. Notingh. 61. Selwood.
Some. 62. Saucy. North. 63. Wabridg. Hunt. 64. Waltham. Essex. 65. West Forest.
Hamp. 66. Westward. Cumb. 67. Whichwood. Oxf. 68. Winfield. Westminster. 69.
Whitehart. 70. Whittlewood. Northam. 71. Whitway. 72. Wyersdale. Lanc. 73.
Winsore. Bark. 74. Wolmer. 75. Wood. Ebor. 76. Worth. Suss. 77. Wutmer. Hamp.

This is the old number of Forests in England (whereof a few, as Blackmore in
Wiltshire, with others, are deforested) which Forests cannot by the Laws be in
any ones hands but the Kings; and the reason is, because none has power to
grant a Commission for Justice in Eire but the King, which Justice is to keep a
Court evry three years once, but the Swainmoot-Court evry one year thrice.
Forests were at first for the Kings Princely delight, Venery and pleasure, meerd
with unremoveable marks and boundaries; And the old Law is, Omnis homo
abstinent a Venariis meis super poenam vitae: It was capital to hunt in any of
the Kings Forests without leave.

Now, if one should make the Perambulation of all France and Spain, he will not
find half the number of Forests in both Kingdoms: And whether this be not a
notable advantage to the King of Great Britain in point of Honor, let any
unpassionat and sober-minded man determine.

The Ninth Paragraph. Touching the Prudential Laws and Constitutions of Great
Britain, relating to Prince and Peeple: As also, The Eminence and Variety of
Honors which the King can confer, etc.
What the Arteries, Nerfs and Cartilages are to the Body Natural, the same are
Laws to the Political; they are the Ligaments of a Kingdom, which connect and
tie all sorts of peeple, though of so many different humors, in one Government,
and under one Souverain head.

The Common Law of England, though in some things it differs from the Civil, by
which most parts of Europe are governd, yet it has the rationability and
justness, the general notions and aim of the Civil Law, which is to preserve
evry one in the possession of his own, and the Souverain Prince in honor,
power and Safety. The main quarrel against it, is, that it wants Method, and
that it is not reducible to any, or capable to be digested into such a Pandect
as the Civil Law is. Whereunto it may be answered, That the Common Law of
England has for its grounds 1. Custom, 2. Judicial Records, And 3. Acts of
Parliament or Statuts. The two later being declarations of the Common or
Customary Law of the Land, are methodizd and digested to order, as the book of
Statuts, etc. whence the Sheriffs, the Justices of peace, and Constables, with
other Officers, may learn their duties, and how to execut their places, and any
subject else may know how to keep himself within the bounds of his obedience.
But the Common Law of the Land consisting of Cases, Precedents and Judgments,
as also of Immemorial and Uninterrupted Municipal Customs, which being no
Written Things, Therefore it is no wonder that the professors thereof have not
bin so curious, to attempt hitherto the Methodizing of that Art which consists
most of Custom and Usage; yet fair Essays are made daily for better retaining
the same in memory, by putting particular Cases under general Rules, whereof
there are diverse Volums frequently publishd of late years.

Now, the Laws of England look two ways, either upon the Souverain Prince, or
upon the peeple: Touching the later, there is no Law upon earth so careful and
tender of a man's life (or livelihood) be he the meanest subject under the
Crown, as the Common Law of England is: For whereas in other Countries a single
Judge and Witness may take away ones life (or estate) whereof the one may be
subornd, the other corrupted; it is not so in England, but besides Witnesses and
Judges, there be two sorts of Iuries, one the Grand Inquest, which consists of
twenty four Gentlemen, or able Freeholders, to consider by a previous
consultation of all Bills of Indictment to be preferred to the Judicial Court,
which upon strict examination they either approve, and transfer to the Court by
writing upon the Bill, Billa vera; or they disallow it by writing Ignoramus.
Such causes as they approve, if they concern Life and Death, are further
referrd to another Jury to consider of, because the case is of such importance;
but others of lighter moment, are upon their allowance fined by the Bench
without more ado, Except the party traverse the Indictment, or challenge it for
insufficiency, or remove the Cause to a higher Court by a Certiorari, in which
two former cases it is referrd to another Jury, and in the later transmitted to
a higher; and presently upon the allowance of this Bill by the Grand Inquest,
the party is said to be Indicted; but such as they disallow are deliverd to the
Bench, by whom they are forthwith cancelld or torn. The Indicted party being to
stand afterward at the Bar, and desiring to be tried by God and his Country,
there is a Petty Jury empannelld of Twelve, who bear the public repute of
honest men; and the Law of England is so indulgent of life, that the prisoner
may challenge or except against any to such a number; and withal a Butcher, who
is inurd to blood and slaughter, is incapable by the Law to be a Jury-man for
life. So the said Jury, after a strict and painful examination of the Fact,
with all the least circumstances thereof, deliver their Verdict according to
their consciences, whereby the Judge does acquit or condemn the party according
to the quality of the offense: nor can any pecuniary Mulct satisfy for the
life of any, as it is in other Countries. And as the Common Law of England is
thus so tender of humane life, so it is as cautious, indulgent and careful of
the livelihood and propriety of the meanest subject in the Land, which in case
of controversy is done also by Jury, and put home to the Consciences of twelve
indifferent good men, and not left only to the breast and opinion of any one
Judge, be he never so learned, and incorrupt. The English Law likewise favors
Widows and Orphans, and the poor have Counsel appointed them gratis, etc.

It appeers out of the premises what a great regard the Common Law of England,
the Lex Terrae, has to the life's and properties of the peeple in point of
Justice. Now in point of Reverence and Loyalty to the Souverain Prince (which
is more pertinent to this disourse) there is no Law has higher regards likewise
that way, nor also to his honor and dignity, to his welfare and safety, to his
Royal Prerogatives and glory, which Prerogatives intrinsecally stick, and are
inherent in the Crown, yet are they, and the Liberties of the Subject
determined, and bound by the Law. The Laws of England make the King their
Protector; and reason good, for they are his own Productions, it is he that puts
life into them; They bear such reverence to his person, that in his Presence
none can be seizd, or violently laid hands on, or arrested, his very presence
being a Protection for the time: He who gives but a blow to any in his Court,
the Law adjudgeth him to loose his Right hand. The Law says that the King has
his Title to the Imperial Crown of Great Britain, and to his Kingly Office and
power, not as a fiduciary thing conveyed from the peeple, but by inherent
birthright, and inalienable heritage immediately from God, from Nature, and from
the fundamental Constitutions of the Land: He has not only Ius paternum, a
paternal power over his subjects, but Ius despoticum and herile: he has
dominion over them, which Dominion is devolvd upon him gratia Dei, by Divine
dispensation and favor. There is no Allegiance or Fealty due to any other
power but to the King. The Law is so careful of the sacred person of the King,
that it reaches unto the very thoughts, and restrains them from machination of
any evil against him: For the Law says it is Treson to Imagine mischief against
the King, much more to attempt, act and execute it.

The Common Law of England makes the King the Supreme and independent
Governor, And all other persons derive their power and authority from him,
either by his Royal Writ, Patent or Commission. The Law presupposes that he
sits not only at the Kings Bench, but in other Courts of Judicature; for the
Writs go, Test meipso: And because the Law says that the King must govern in
Mercy and Justice, the sole power of Pardoning is in Him.

Moreover, the power of Coinage is only in the King, with the enhancing or
decrying the price of money: He is the sole Gran Master of the Mint; whereas in
France others partake with the King in this high Prerogative: Nor does any
Kings Face shine in purer Metal; for it shines only in pure Gold and Silver,
and that of the finest Standard, Mixture and Allay of any in Europe: whereas I
have seen and felt the face of the French King in Copper and Brass, with other
mixed mongrel stuff; As also of the King of Spain's, though he terms himself the
Monark of Gold and Silver Mines; yet the common current Coin twixt Merchant and
Mechanic is Copper, wherein the Hollander by his cunning has done him a world
of mischief from time to time, by counterfaiting that Copper Coin, and ^oysting
it in by diverse artifices; as in a ship laden with Lead and Tin, there would be
sometimes diverse Sows of Lead hollowed and crammd with quartils, as also in
hollowed Masts, with other inventions; Insomuch that one time, when all the
Vellon or Copper Coin was called in, and a scrutiny made how much had bin coynd,
there were many millions more found to be brought in, and counterfaited, then
had bin stampd in the Kings Mint.

By the Common Law of the Land, the King of Great Britain has three Royal
Ensigns which cannot belong to any other: He has the Crown, the Scepter, and
the ( Polemical) Sword, (as I have mentiond in another Treatise, and is proper
to touch here.) By the first, He reigns; by the second he makes Laws; by the
third, viz. the Sword, He protects them. Concerning the Crown, or Royal Diadem,
the Laws of England assert, that it descends upon his head by a right
Hereditary line, though through d^vers ancient Royal Races, whereof some were
Conquerors. The Crown is His, as much as any man's Cap's his own; And there is no
Crown stuck with fairer Flowers, I mean Royal Prerogatives, whereof diverse were
spoken of before.

Concerning the Scepter, it may be called an Individual Copartner, or a Royal
Appendix to the Crown: It does capacitate the King to Enact Laws: for before
his Assent, all the Results and Determinations of Parliament are but Bills; they
may be said to be but abortive things, and mere Embryos; nay, they have no life
at all in them, till the King by his breath infuseth vigor and animation into
them; and the ancient Custom was for the King to touch them with the Scepter,
then they are Laws, and have a virtue in them to impose an universal obligation
upon all sorts of peeple. Now, it is an undeniable Principle of the Law of
England, That nothing can be generally binding without the Kings Royal Assent,
nor does the Law take notice of any thing without it: This makes Them to be
called afterward the Kings Laws; and the Judges are said to deliver the Kings
Judgments: nay, he himself is always Lord Chief Justice of England, which Title
is not assumable by any Subject. Now, before an English Law is made, there is
mature and mighty long deliberation goes before: for first the business is
agitated and canvasd many days in the House of Commons (which represents all
the peeple of England) till it comes to the ripeness of a Bill: The Bill being
drawn, is read thrice in the House; and having passd the brunt of all
Exception, it is engrossd and transmitted to the Lords; and there also it is read
thrice, and debated with much deliberation: Then by concurrence of both Houses
it is presented to the King, who consults with his Learned Counsel whether there
be any thing therein derogatory to his Prerogatives: if not, He gives his Royal
Assent, and then it is created a Law, and generally binding. Touching the power
of the Sword, it is more proper to treat of it in the next Paragraph.

Moreover, the Lex Terrae, the Common Law of England makes the King the
Fountain of Honor; nay, without any disparagement or offense be it spoken, He
can confer Honor upon other Kings, and Souverain Princes, as he is Souverain of
the Order of Saint George, whereof there have bin eight Emperors; five Kings of
the French, four of Spain, seven of Portugal, two of the Scots, four of
Denmark, three of Naples, one of Poland, and another of Sweden; two Dukes of
Urbine, one of Millain, one of Ferrara, one of Savoy, one of Calabria, one of
Holland, one of Gueldres; four Princes of Orange, seven Counts Palatin of the
Rhin; two Dukes of Brunswick, two of Holstain, one of Brandenburgh, and one
Duke of Wittenberg, with diverse other Foreign Princes.

Now, among all Orders purely Military, there is not any now remaining in the
Christian world, either more ancient or honorable then the Noble Order of Saint
George, whereof the Garter is a Symbol; therefore are they called Equites
periscelidis, Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter; which Order was
first instituted by that Victorious King Edward the third, (who was offered to
be Emperor) Anno 1350. which was threescore years wanting one before the
Institution of the French Order of S. Michael by Lewis the eleventh; and 229
years before the Order of St. Esprit by Henry the third; and full fourscore
years before the erection of the Order of the Golden Fleece by Philip Duke of
Burgundy: It is also 209 more ancient then the Order of the Knights of the
Elephant, which was devisd by the Kings of Denmark; and much more then that of
Amaranta excogitated by Sweden, etc. Now observable it is, that among all these
Orders, l'ordre del toison d'or, the Order of the Golden Fleece related to the
English Wools which were transported to Flanders by our Merchants, whereby all
the Provinces adjoining did so infinitely enrich themselfs: And this Order of
the Golden Fleece, as it is one of the highest Esteem, so it has most affinity
with our Order of St. George in point of Regulation, as also that there are so
few of it. For our Order is accounted far the Nobler, because it has
constantly kept it self to the same number of Knights, viz. 26. since the
primitive Institution; whereas the French Orders have multiplied so fast in
number of Knights, that one said the Order of the French Knighthoods are now
become Collers for every Ass to wear about his neck.

And as this high Order of St. George has the precedence of all other now worn
by any King, in point of Antiquity; so the ground and design of it was very
Noble: For when the first Idea of erecting a new Order of Knighthood entered
into the head of the foresaid Heroic King Edward the third, his thoughts
reflected upon King Arthur, who indeed was the first founder of Knighthood not
only among Christians, but of any other Nation upon earth, As also the first
King who gave Royal Arms, His Coat being Azure, nine Crowns Or, marshalld 3. 3.
2. and 1. Afterward the Saxon Kings gave Arms; And Edward the Confessors Coat
was Azure, a Cross patence between four Martelets Or. And as King Arthurs Round
Table, which is yet to be seen at Winchester, had seats for twenty six Knights;
so it seems King Edward proportiond his number. Now, the occasion of it was,
That he having resolvd upon a War with France for attaining that Crown, which
was due unto him by his Mothers side, He conceavd it advantageous to invite and
engage to his party such as were of a Martial spirit, And to that end erected a
round Table at Windsore, in imitation of King Arthur, where they were
entertaind with Tilts and Tournements, magnificent Feasts, and other Princely
ways to unite and encourage them. Philip de Valois, who was in possession of
the Crown of France, went about to countermine him by erecting also the like
Table in his Court, and so drew many gallant and adventurous spirits that way,
and some out of England; so that King Edward not finding this design
answerable to his mind, he fell on another, such as might prove more adherent
and binding unto Him; to which end he establishd this high Order of Chivalry
consisting of twenty six persons of eminent note, whereof He Himself and his
Successors Kings of England were to be perpetual Souverains: All of them were
to be men of Heroic parts, and such as should be obligd by Oath and Honor to
adhere unto Him upon all occasions; which might be the probablest cause that he
made the Garter for a Badg thereof to be fastened about the left leg with a
Buckle of Gold to be continually worn; therefore are They stild Equites
Periscelidis, (as was touchd before) which has its Etymology from the Greek
word (...), that is, Crura ambiens, girding about the knee; which al^udes that
those Knights should be bound in one League and Confederation of love and
affection severally one unto another, and all of them in joint service to the
Souverain. Some there are who are of opinion, that the Garter was given because
that in a Battle where King Edward proud Victorious, he had given the word
Garter for a Signal: Others in a derogatory way would ground it upon the
Countess of Salisburies Garter falling off from her in a dance, and so taken up
by the King: But the Black Book in Winsore (which deserves most faith in this
point) gives the first Reason for it. Among other Laws that were enacted in the
Chapter when this Order was first raysd, one was, That evry Knight by solemn
Oath upon the Evangelists was sworn to defend the Honor and Quarrels, the
Rights and Lordship of the Souvrain, etc. Such a Sacramental Oath the Knights
of the Bath also take, which is, To love their Sovrain above all earthly
cretures, and for his right and dignity to live and die, etc. Therefore, I have
often stood astonishd at the largeness of the consciences of some Knights of
both these Orders, who besides other astringing Oaths, as those of Allegiance,
Supremacy, etc. could dispense with them All in the late Rebellion so far, as
not only not to adhere to their Sovrain Liege-Lord and King, when his life was
sought for by small and great Shots, with other instruments of open hostility
and slaughter, but to appeer for, to serve and stick unto the contrary party
all the while: Truly under favor, I wold*be-loth to exchange souls with them.
We will put a period to this Discourse of the ancient Noble Order of St. George
with a signal observation of Bodin's: Decretum fuit in Collegio Equitum
Periscelidis in Anglia ponere stemmata Regis Francorum ante caetera omnia post
Principem Ordinis: It was decreed in the College of the Knights of the Garter
in England, to put the Stems of the King of the French before all other except
the Prince of the Order. And the reason I conceive was, that Philip the second
whiles King of England was formerly put before. But Bodin was herin deceavd,
for the Emperors Arms (whereof there have bin eight of the Order) go before, and
have the precedence.

Out of the premises may be deducd this clear Conclusion, as a Meridian Truth,
that the Common Law of England in all things ayms at the Honor and glory, the
power and authority, the Safeness and incolumity of the Sovrain Prince, more
then the Laws of any Country: And whereas we had some touches before, how the
Common Law, which is peculiar only to England, has the rationability of the
Civil Law, though not so digested to Method, in regard it consists most of
Custom, Cases and presidents; we will conclude this Paragraph with some
principles wherein they both agree; As, Actori incumbit onus probandi, The proof
lies on the Accuser: Nemo oportet esse sapientior legibus, No man ought to
think himself wiser then the Laws: Ubi lex non distinguit, ibi non est
distinguendum; We must not distinguish where the Law does not: Accessorium non
ducit, sed sequitur suum principale, The Accessory does not lead but follow the
principal: Volenti non fit injuria, No wrong can be done to him who is willing:
Agentes and Consentientes pari poena plectuntur, Actor and consenter are to be
punished alike: Apices Iuris non sunt Iura, The punctilios of the Law is no
Law: Nemo potest esse Iudex in propria causa, No man can be Judge in his own
cause: Caveat Emptor, Let the Buyer beware: Contraria allegans non est
audiendus, Who alleges contraries is not to be heard: Cujus est dare ejus est
disponere, The Giver may dispose of his gift as he pleases: Quilibet in Art
sua est credendus, Evry one is to be believed in his own Art: Potestas
derivativa non potest esse major primitiva, A Commissioner cannot have greater
power then He who gave him the Commission: Dies Dominicus non est Iuridicus,
The Lords day is no day of Law: Dormit aliquando Lex, moritur nunquam, The Law
may sleep a while, but never die: Dilationes in Lege sunt odiosae, Delays in
Law are odious: Facinus quot inquinat aequat, All are principals in a crime:
Generale nihil certi implicat, No certitude can be had out of generals:
Ignorantia non excusat Legem, Ignorance of the Law does not excuse the breach
of it: Lex non cogit ad impossibilia, The Law does not tie us to
impossibilities: Lex est summa Ratio, The Law is the highest Reason: Lex citius
tolerat privatum damnum quam publicum malum, The Law tolerats a private damage
rather then a public: Mala Grammatica non vitiat Chartam, False Latin does not
destroy a Deed: Linea Recta semper praefertur transversali, A right Descent is
always preferrd before a Collateral in kindred: Nemo debet his puniri pro uno
delicto, No man is to be punishd twice for one offense: Nemo potest plus juris
in alium confer quam Ipse habet, No man can transfer a greater power to any
other, then he has himself: Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, No man is bound to
betray himself: Omnia quae movent ad mortem sunt Deo danda, All things which
cause death are forfeit to God: Qui non habet in aere, luat in corpore, Where
the purse cannot, let the body suffer: Qui peccat ebrius, luat sobrius, Who
offends when he is drunk, let him be punishd when he is sober: Qui sentit
commodum, sentire debet and onus, Who receive the benefit, ought to feel the
burden: Quod semel meum est, amplius meum non est, That which was mine, is none
of mine: Stat praesumptio donec probetur in contrarium, A presumption stands
till the contrary be proud: Ubi non est principal is ibi non potest esse
accessarius, Where there is no principal there can be no Accessory: Unumquodque
dissolvitur eo ligamine quo ligatur, Evry thing is untyed as it is bound: Par
in parem non habet Imperium, Equals cannot command one another: Nemo dat quod
non habet: No man can give that which he has not: And this does hold also in
Heraldry; therefore the Knighthoods (with other Honors) that Cromwell was so free
to confer, are void in Law, because he was never Knight himself.

By these few Principles, with multitudes more, it appeers that the Common Law
has much affinity with the Civil; whereof there are as learned Professors in
England as any where else.

Whence it may be inferrd, that the King of Great Britain is supplied with more
helps for the administration of Justice then any Nation in the world besides.
For in regard that England is an Island having such a great Trade at Sea, and so
great dealing with diverse other Nations; Having also besides Land-matters both
Temporal, Ecclesiastical and Maritime, which are not so proper for the Common
Law, He allows of the Civil Law answerable to the quality of the Case, which
has bin practiced in England beyond the memory of man, or the reach of any
Record. And though there happen often some Emulations and high Contests betwixt
these two Professions, yet such has bin the prudence of the Souvrain Prince to
keep them both in as equal a Balance as could be, and not to suffer the one to
insult or encroach upon the other, but to have the same freedom of study and
practice to the universal good of Forreners, as well as of his own Subjects.

And so much concerning the National Law, and Prudential Constitutions of
England.

The Tenth and last Paragraph. Touching the greatness of Power, of Military
Might and Puissance by Land and Sea, as well Defensive as Offensive, etc. of
the King of Great Britain.
THe Duke of Rohan in his Book called Les Interests des Princes, The Interests
of Princes, says, that England is like a great Animal that cannot die unless
he kill himself. He acknowledges Her also to be Latroise^e Puissance, the
third Power of Christendom: But by the Arguments that shall be producd in this
Paragraph, I believe it will appeer to any discerning and unbiassd. Reader that
England, taking her Kingdoms annexd along, with her strength at Sea as well as
shore, will be inferior to none.

There was a Comparison made long since, That Gallia and Hispania sunt quasi
lances in Europae libra, and Anglia est lingula sive libripendens; That France
and Spain were as the Scales of the great Balance of Europe, and that England
was the Tongue or Beam of the Balance, which keeps it in aequilibrio, in an even
counterpoise, that neither side should be trab^ccant. This has bin often
verified, specially in the Reign of Henry the eighth, whose Motto was, Cui
adhaereo praeest, He to whom I adhere prevails. He would sometimes make Francis
the first to weigh down, sometimes Charles the fifth: And touching the former,
He acknowledgd King Henry under God to be the chiefest Deliverer of Him and his
Children from his captivity in Spain; And so likewise did Pope Clement, when he
was freed from the Castle of St. Angelo, where Charles the Emperor had coopd
him up, Therefore was Henry of England called Liberator Orbis by the whole
Confistory at Rome, as he was before Protector of the great Clementine League,
And indeed the Arbiter of all Christendom in his time.

Touching the Martial Might of the King of Great Britain, we will first examine
that of England, which we must distinguish into Intrinsecal or Terrene, And
into Extrinsecal or Maritime. Concerning the first, there are five Counties
alone can put into the Field forty thousand men, all armd; for so many are
listed in the Muster-makers Book as Traind-Band-men, viz. the County of York
12000; Kent 8000; Norfolk, (...) and Devonshire above 6000 apiece; And the rest
of the Counties, whereof there are forty seven, may have twice as many at
least; which come to a hundred and twenty thousand Soldiers e^olld, and ready
upon all occasions either for general service, or private in the Counties where
they are, for assisting the Sheriff and other Officers in the execution of the
Law, in case of any resistance; therefore are they called Posse Comitatu^. The
power of the County. So that in time of peace England alone has an hundred and
twenty thousand Soldiers enrolld, besides those in Ireland and Scotland: And in
time of War, the late bloody Rebellion (bleeding yet in the purses and estates
of many thousand poor Cavaliers) has sufficiently tried the strength (and
wealth) of England: For there was a computation made at one time of those that
were in actual Arms for King and Parliament, and they came to near upon two
hundred thousand fighting men under Commission, whereof there were about fifty
thousand Horse and Dragoons: And I do not remember to have read that in the
time of the famous Ligue in France there were so many, take in strangers and all.

Hence we see that the King of Great Britain may be said to have a constant
standing Army in time of peace, of which he has the sole disposing: For the
Sword is his as much as the Scepter and the Crown, which are inalienable from
his power, and incommunicable to any other but by his Royal Commissions: And
indeed it is the Sword that makes all Kings powerful; The Crown and the Scepter
are but impotent, and poor unweildy things; they are but naked Indefensible
badges without it. There Is none so filly as to think there is meant hereby an
ordinary single sword, such as evry one carries by his side; Or some Imaginary
thing, or Chymera of a sword; No, it is the publik Polemical Sword of the whole
Nation; It may be called an Aggregative or compound Sword, made up of all the
Ammunition, the Artillery, Pikes, Muskets, Helmets, Headpeeces, with all kind
of arms small and great; It reaches to all the Military strengths both by
Land and Sea, to all tenable places, as Castles, Forts, Bulwarks, within and
about the whole Island: The Kings of England have had the sole power of this
Sword, and the Law gives it them by virtue of their Royal Signory from all
times: The very Law does gird it to their sides; They employ it for repelling
all Foreign force, For vindicating all Foreign wrongs and affronts, For
suppressing all intestine Tumults and Rebellions, And to protect and secure the
weal of the whole Body politic. The peeple of England (represented in
Parliament) were never capable to manage this Sword, the Fundamental
Constitutions of the Country flatly denies it them; This Sword is fit only to
hang at the Kings side, as the Great Seal hangs at his girdle, being as it were
the key of the whole Kingdom: and it is recorded of the Emperor Charlemain,
that he carried his Great Seal always embossd upon the pommel of his Sword;
which signified that he was ready to make good and maintain what he had Sealed.

Now, to let the Peeple have the Sword, is to put it into a Madmans hand: And
one of the pregnantst Foreign examples to prove this, is that notorious Popular
insurrection in France called La Iaquerie de Beauvoisin, when the Peasans and
Mechanics had a design to wrest it out of the Kings hand, for to depress all
the Peers and Noblesse of the Kingdom: and the Rebellion had grown to such a
strength, that it was like to take effect, had not the Prelates and Churchmen
stuck close to the King and the Nobility: but afterward, poor hare-braind
things, they desired the King upon bended knee to take the Sword again.

The Civilians, (who in all points are not so great friends to Royalty as the
Common Law is) assert, That there are six Praerogatives which belong to a
Souvrain Prince: 1. Armamenta Army: 2. Potestas Iudicatoria, power of
Judicature: 3. Potestas vitae and necis, power of life and death: 4. Bona
adespota, masterless goods: 5. Census, the numbering of the people: 6. Monetarum
valor, the raising or abating the value of the public Coin. Among these
Regalias we find that Arming, which in effect is nothing else but the Kings
Sword, is one, and as I said before, it is as proper and peculiar to his Person,
and to be soly on his side, as the Crown on his Head, or the Scepter in his
hand, and of greater importance then either: For by those two he draws only a
voluntary love, and an opinion from his Subjects; but by the Sword (as thread
through a Needles eye) he draws a Reverential Fear and aw. Now, these two mixd
with the other, are the best Ingredients of Government. With the Sword he
confers Honors, as dubbing of Knights, etc. From this Sword all the chiefest
Magistrates have their authority; The Lord Deputy of Ireland, the Lords Mayors
of London and York have their Swords by deputation from Him; and when he
enters any place Corporat, the first thing which is presented unto him is the
Sword.

Nor does the point of this Sword pass through the diameter, and reach only to
evry corner of his own Dominions, but it extends beyond the Seas, as well to
preserve his Subjects from oppression, and denial of Justice, as to vindicat
public wrongs and affronts, to make good the Interests of his Crown, as also
to assist his Confederats and friends. And this public Sword is so inseparable
from him, that by the Law of the Land he cannot ungird himself of it, or
transfer it to any other; for that were to desert the protection of his peeple,
which is point blank against his Coronation Oath, and Office. Therefore the very
Proposition it self, that the Long Parliament made to his late Majesty to have
the Militia passd over unto them, was no less then High Treason: for nothing
could be more derogatory to his Kingly Honor, which they had protested so
solemnly to maintain by their so many public Instruments and Oaths.

We proceed now from the Rural Power, or Country-campane of the King of Great
Britain, to his Oppidan Strength; And first of his Court at Westminster, where
there are 200 goodly tall men of his Guard; Then he has a Band of Pensioners,
who are Gentlemen of quality and wealth. Moreover, he has 3000 Foot, and 1000
Horse, for his Life-Gard, besides diverse Garrisons in sundry Towns.

And now we make our entrance into the City of London, that huge Magazin of Men
and Might; A City that may well compare with any in France or Spain not only
for Power, but for any thing else, and in some particulars may happily go beyond
them, and deserve a Precedence, as shall be showed. Nor does this Power extend
only to her own Self-protection, but it may be made use of for any part of the
Kingdom upon any Civil Insurrection, or otherwise, as it shall please the
Sovrain Prince (and no other whatsoever) to employ it.

The City of London is like a fair Quiver of keen strong Arrows for the King to
draw forth upon all occasions, for his own and his peeples preservation: For
besides twelve thousand choice gallant Citizens in London and Westminster, with
the Hamlets of the Tower, who are enrolld, and always ready, and have their
Arms fixd for Honor and Defense, there may be, as appears by diverse Censes and
Computations which have bin made, about two hundred thousand choice able men
raisd for service if necessity requires, and the City will scarce sensibly miss
them; nor are Seamen, Mariners and Watermen meant to be of this number.

The Kings of France and Spain, I may well avouch, have not any such Town or
City: That which is most capable of comparison with London is Paris, for which
she has many advantages, for she is a Cite, Ville and Universite, she is a
City, a Town and an University, as also the chiefest Residence of the French
King.

But lets go a little to particulars, and first to the Populousness of both
Cities. They say that the Parishes of St. Eustace and St. Innocent which lie
about the center of Paris, have above one hundred thousand Communicants in them
alone; and that by the last Cense which was made, there were near upon a million
of humane Souls in City and Suburbs, whereof the sixth part are made up of
Strangers and Churchmen, which the King cannot make use of upon Military
occasions: But look a little forward it will appeer that London has above a
Million of souls.

For largeness and magnitude it is true, that Paris has the advantage of an
Orbicular Figure, which is most capacious of any: But by the judgment of those
Mathematicians who have taken a survay of both Cities, if London were cast into
a Circle she would be altogether as big as Paris. Touching public Buildings,
it is true, that the Louvre is a vast Fabric, and the like is not found in
London; but it is the only Court the French King has in the City, whereas in
London there are four Royal Seats, with two Parks annexed to them. I hope the
Bastille will not offer to compare with the Tower of London, nor the River of
Seine with the Thames; much less I believe will Paris offer to make any
comparison with London in point of Traffic, and Societies of Noble adventuring
Merchants, who trade on both sides of the earth as far as the Antipodes; And
diverse Kings have been of their Corporations. Nor will the Provost of Paris I
think offer to compare with the Lord Mayor of London, being the prime Man in
England upon the decease of the King until another be proclaimed. The City of
London has diverse other advantages not only of Paris, but of any other City of
Europe take them all together; which for a more methodical proceeding we will
particularize as they are found in my Londinopolis; which being so proper to
this Paragraph, I thought fit to insert here, and being well considered, it
will be found that London need not vail to any City under the Sun.

1. For convenience of Situation, and salubrity of Air. 2. For strictness of
Government both Nocturnal and Diurnal. 3. For the Magnificence of the Chief
Magistrates. 4. For Regulation of all Trades Domestik and Foreign. 5. For
variety of Professions and Artisans. 6. For a greater number of Corporations
and Halls. 7. For plenty of all provisions that Air, Earth or Water can afford.
8. For Springs, Aqueducts, and other conveyances of fresh wholesome Waters. 9.
For Universality of Trade, and Bravery of the Adventurers. 10. For solidity and
richness of Native Commodities. 11. For Artillery, Ammunition, Docks, and a
number of Military and stout well-arm'd Citizens. 12. For an ancient and
glorious large Temple. 13. For an admirable mighty great Bridge. 14. For a
noble and straight Navigable River. 15. For a cheerful and wholesome green
circumjacent Soil. 16. For Hospitality and Festival publik Meetings of
Corporations, and other Societies to increase love, and good intelligence
between Neighbors. 17. For all sorts of Boats by Water, and number of Coaches
by Land for the accommodation of Passengers. 18. For sundry kinds of Reliefs
for the Poor and Lame. 19. For various kinds of honest corporal Recreations and
Pastimes. 20. For the number of Humane Souls.
It Is confessd that many of these conveniences may be found in other Cities,
which taken singly may exceed London in some; but take them all together she
may vie with the best of them, and run no great hazard.

Concerning the first advantage, which is convenience of situation, and
salubrity of Air, the wisdom of the old Britains our Ancestors is to be much
commended for the election of the place in point of the benignity of the
Hevens, with the temperature and influences thereof, wherein London is as happy
as any other City under the Skies. Some hold that that City is best situated
which resembles a Camels back, who has by nature protuberancies and bunches;
so a City should be seated upon small Hillocks or rising Grounds: It is just the
posture of London, for she is built upon the sides, flanks, and tops of diverse
small Hillocks lying near the banks of a great Navigable River, being
incompassd about with delightful green Medows and Fields on all sides: She is
at so fitting a distance from the Sea, that no Foreign Invasion can surprise her
but she must have notice thereof. The quality of her soil is Gravel and Sand,
which is held to be the wholsomst for habitation, and conduces much to the
goodness of the Air, though it uses to be barren: but that barrenness is
remedied by Art and Composts, insomuch that round about the City, within the
distance of a mile or two, one may behold two or three thousand milchd Cows a
grazing evry day of the week, besides number of other Beasts.

Touching the second advantage, which is a strict and constant course of
Government, there is no place goes beyond Her, or indeed can equal Her, take
night and day together. And whereas in Paris one dare not pass the Pont-Neuf,
with any place else, after Ten a clock at night without danger, one may pass
through London-streets as safely as in the day time; there being Constables and
their Watch up and down to secure Passengers: yet they must give good account
of their being abroad so late, there being strict Laws against Noctivagation.

Touching the Magnificence, Gravity, and State of the chief Magistrate, neither
the Praetor of Rome, nor Prefect of Milan; neither the Procurators of St. Mark
in Venice, or their Podesta's in other Cities; neither the Provost of Paris, or
the Mark-grave of Antwerp, or any other Oppidan Magistrate goes beyond the
Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London, if one go to the variety of their Robes,
sometimes Scarlet richly surrd, sometimes Purple, sometimes Violet and Puke. What
gallant Shows are thereby Water and Land the day that the new Lord Mayor is
sworn! What a huge Feast and Banquet is provided for him!

Touching the Regulation of all sorts of Trade, and Laws for the improvement
thereof, the City of London has not her fellow.

Touching variety of Artisans, London abounds with all sorts. It Is true, that
mingling with Forreners has much advantagd her herin: But those strangers
themselfs confess that the English having got an Invention, use to improve it
and bring it to a greater perfection.

Touching Corporations, Halls, Fraternities, Guilds, and Societies, London has
not any Superior; witness the twelve great Companies, out of which one is
elected yearly to be Lord Mayor, with threescore several Companies of Citizens
besides. And touching all sorts of Opificers, and variety of industrious ways
to improve all kind of Manufactures, and thereby gain an honest livelihood and
proportion of Riches, London may be called (as Luca is in Italy) a Hive of Bees,
or a Hill of Ants, which have always been accounted the Emblemes of Industry
and Providence.

Touching abundance, and plenty of all kind of Provisions, as Flesh, Fish,
Fowl, Fruits, Fuel, variety of Drinks and Wines, with any other Commodity that
may conduce to Pleasure and Delight as well as to supply Necessity, London may
glory to be as well servd as any City under Heven. A knowing Spaniard said,
that he thought Eastcheap-shambles alone vended more Flesh then is spent one
week with another in all the Court of Spain. Gascon Wines drink better in
London then at Bourdeaux: Canary Wines better then at Lancerote: Rhenish Wines
better then at Backrag. Nor does London abound with all things for the Belly
alone, but also for the Back, either to keep it warm, or make it gay. What
varieties of Woollen Stuffs are found in evry Shop! What rich Broad-Clothes!
some being wrought to that height of perfection, that some have been made of
Ten pounds a Yard in price. But our unlucky English-Schismatiques pretending to
flee for persecution of conscience, have set up their Looms, and showed the
Hollanders the way, to the great detriment of their own Country.

Concerning wholesome sweet Springs, and clear Waters, London may be said to
have as good Blood running through her Veins as any other, by those Aqueducts,
Conduits, and conveyances of fresh Waters round about to serve for all Uses.
What an Herculean work was that of Sir Hugh Middletons to bring the River of
Ware threescore miles by Compasses to run through her streets, and refresh her
houses, as also to preserve them from firing! for which there are diverse
ingenious useful Engines besides.

Concerning Universality of Trade, there is no City upon the surface of the
earth goes beyond Her; For there are no Seas that any of the two and thirty
winds blow upon from the Artik to the Antartik Pole, from the Orient to the
setting Sun, but London by her Navigations finds them out, and makes rich
returns by way of Barter or Emption.

Touching solid and useful Wares that she has of her own, what a substantial
Commodity, and of what high esteem all the world over is her Cloth, her
Kersies, and diverse kinds of Woollen Manufactures? Add herunto her Lead and
Tin, which she transmutes to Foreign Gold and Silver.

For Healthful Corporal Recreations, and harmless Pastimes, London may go in
the Van to any place that ever I saw: Go and walk in her Fields, you shall see
some shooting at long Marks, some at short; some bowling upon cheerful pleasant
Greens, some upon Bares and Alleys; some wrestling, some throwing the Bar, some
the Stone; some Jumping, some Running; some with their Dogs in Duck-ponds, some
at a Bear-baiting, some at the Bull; some Riding upon Naggs, some in Coaches to
take the fresh Air; some at Stool-ball, others at Kittle-pins; with variety of
other.

For a stately Cathedral Temple, and general Dome of Devotion, the time was,
and I hope will be yet within a few years, that London did not yield to any
City in this particular; Saint Paul's Church being esteemd by all Nations to be
one of the eminentst and visiblest Temples, one of the most glorious piles of
stones that ever was reard, taking all the Dimensions together, with the
conspicuous site thereof, being about the center of the City, and upon a rising
Ground. She has also this singular property to be founded upon Faith, by
having a large Parish Church of that name supporting her, and directly under
her Chancel.

Touching a rare huge Bridge, and Navigable River, London is not inferior to
any other City whatsoever. Concerning the first, what a rich Rent has it to
preserve it self yearly! what a vast Magazin of Corn is there always in the
Bridge-house against a Dearth! (as well as in many other places.) What a number
of Officers look to the reparations thereof, and are hansomly maintaind thereby!
Touching the second, viz. The River of Thames, she has not her peer, if regard
be had to the length and straightness of her course running from West to East,
without so many Meanders as other Rivers have; Her convenient distance from the
Sea to prevent all Surprisals; The Amoenity of the Soil on both Banks; The
wholsomness of her water, which makes the best Beer in the world, being so much
transported by other Nations, and sold as dear as Wine; The diversity of her
Fish, the fatness of her Mudd, etc.

For number of Humane Souls in City and Suburbs, London is nothing inferior to
Paris, whose last Cense, as is said before, came to about a Million: But in the
year 1636. command being sent to the Lord Mayor to make a scrutiny what number
of strangers were in the City, he took occasion thereby to make a general Cense;
And there were of Men, Women and Children near upon seven hundred thousand that
livd within the Bars of his Jurisdiction. And this being 27 years ago, it is
thought that London has since more by the third part in all probable
conjecture. Now for Westminster, the Strand, Bedford Berry, St. Martins-lane,
Long-acre, Drury Lane, St. Giles of the Field, High Holborn, with diverse other
thick-peepled places which are so contiguous, and make one entire piece with
London it self, I say take all these Buildings together, the forenamed number
of Seven hundred thousand may well be thought to be double so many. Touching
the shape of London, I find nothing to assimilat it unto more properly then to
a Laurel Leaf that is far more long then it is broad, which may be a cause she
does not appeer so populous as Paris, her passengers not encountering so often
as they would if she were of a round Figure. Touching her length, take all
Buildings that are adjoining one to another from the utmost point of
Westminster to the utmost point beyond the Tower, she may be well thought to be
five Miles long, about half so much in latitude, and in Circuit about twelve
Italian miles.

To conclude, touching the Defensive and Offensive Power of the City of London
in point of Arms of all sorts, of Artillery, Ammunition, Arsenals, and Docks on
both sides the River, Her Traind Citizens and expert Firelocks, neither France
or Spain has her equal.

It is recorded that in King Stephens Reign the City of London raisd 60000
Foot, and 20000 Horse: how many more were she able to do now in case of
necessity? For to compare her in statu quo nunc to what she was then, were to
compare a Giant to a Dwarf in point of proportion and strength. The Record has
it also that Anno 1293. London was able to put out a Fleet of 95 Ships to
scowre and secure the Seas from Depredations and Pirates, etc. which she was
often usd to do.

Such an Imperial Chamber, such, such a potent and well appointed City has the
King of Great Britain always at his command: And if some of the Roman Emperors
about Fifteen hundred years ago in their Diplomata's or Edicts stild her
Augusta, (which was always a name of Magnificence and State) how much more may
she deserve that name in the condition she now is arrivd unto!

Thus have we discoursd, though in weak imperfect Expressions, of the Power and
Military Might of the King of Great Britain, not including all this while his
two Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, which being cast into the Balance may
make his Power so much more.

Touching his Maritime Power, it is spoken of in another Paragraph going before;
whereunto we will add, that the King of Great Britain has such a Haven that
neither France or Spain, or indeed any part of the world can parallel, which is
Milford Haven, whereof the most famous ancient Authors, not only Latin but
Greek, make most honorable mention, calling it (...), the thousand foorded
Haven. One other passage we will add, which is but fresh, that besides the
reducing of the Hollander, the very last year a few of the King of Great
Britains Frigates did beat those desperate Pirates of Barbary into a Peace, whereas
neither France or the Dutch could do it: And this year those few English that
are in Tanger did also force Guyland the great Morocco Rebel to Articles of
Peace.

As I was writing this, me thought I had whisperd in my ear, that the French
King has one kind of Power that transcends any of the King of Great Britains,
which is, that he may impose what Taxes he please upon the peeple by his Edicts
alone. It Is true he can, and he may thank the English for that power; for when
they had coopd him up in a corner of France, (in Berry) the Victorious English
being Masters of the rest, That Power which before was in the Assembly of the
three Estates of laying Impositions, was invested in the King himself pro
tempore during the Wars because the three Estates could not assemble: But this
Power makes him a King of Slaves rather then of Free Subjects; and if they may
be called Subjects, they are Subjects of an Asinin condition which cannot have
any true manly courage in them, or a competency of wealth to bear it up; which
is the cause that though France be a rich and self-sufficient Country, yet some
think there are more Beggars in Her then in all Christendom besides. Now, it is
a Principle in the Civil Law, That Dominum habere nobiliorem confert ad
dignitatem Vassalorum, and nobiliorum habere populum confert ad nobilitatem
Principis; To have the nobler Lord conduces to the dignity of the Vassal, and
to have the nobler Peeple conduces to the dignity of the Prince. By this
Axiom the King of Great Britain is the more Noble, because he is Lord of a
freeborn wealthy peeple, and not of Slaves and Beggars. Yet it cannot be
denied but that it is one of the greatest advantages of power and repute for a
King to be Rich, (provided he come not to be so by grinding the faces of his
Subjects.) The Republik of Venice and the Seat of Genoa carry that high esteem
in the world, because the one has the Tresury of Saint Mark, and the other the
Bank of St. George. The Duke of Florence is stild the Grand Duke more then
other Dukes who have larger Territories, because he has always a rich Tresury.

Therefore I will draw toward a conclusion of this Paragraph with this most
humble Intimation to the great Council of England now Prorogued, that at their
Re-access they would please to consider; that whereas the fame of being Rich, and
to have the Coffers of his Crown well ballasted, conduces so much to the
Repute of a King, and so by Reflections upon the whole Nation, As also to make
Him redoubtable both abroad and at home; And whereas the contrary fame exposes
him to contempt, Insultings and Pasquils, (as some frisking French Wits have
bin lately too busy and bold that way) and likewise our Neighbor Hans who
daily offers us such insolences: which makes me think of an Italian Proverb,
which though homely, yet it comes home to this purpose, Cavagliero (o Principe)
senza quatrini, e come un muro senza croce da tutti scompisciato; A Cavalier
(or Prince) without money, is like a Wall without a Cross for evry one to draw
upon: Therefore I am bold to reiterat the foresaid humble Intimation (I will not
presume to say Advice, though it may be well called so) to the Honorable House
of Commons when They reassemble, That in their great Wisedoms they would have a
sense of the present condition in this particular of their King so miraculously
restord unto Us by a pure Act of the Omnipotent: And that whereas the Two
Neighboring Kings have of late years enhancd their Revenues and Incomes far
higher then they were formerly, They would be pleased to think it not only
agreeable to the Rules of true Policy, but most necessary for the Honor and
safety of the whole Nation, to make the Monarck of Great Britain to correspond
and bear up in a hansome proportion this way with either of Them, as He does in
all other things besides.

A Corollary to what has bin said in this first Section
IN the preceding Paragraphs it appeers by luculent and clear proofs, how the
King of Great Britain
Had to his Predecessor the first Christian King that ever was upon earth. He
had to his Predecessor the first Christian Emperor (and Empress.) He had to
his Predecessor the first Christian Worthy, and the first Erector of Military
Knighthood. He had to his Predecessors some of the most victorious Kings that
ever were. His Predecessors were the first who freed themselfs from the Roman
Yoke both in Temporals at first, and in Spirituals afterward. It has appeerd
how He is Sovrain of the Noblest Order of Knighthood that any King has. It
has appeerd that his Ambassadors had the Precedence given Them in diverse
General Councils. It has appeerd how the King of Great Britain has as
Freeborn and valiant Subjects as any other. It has appeerd that He has the
most plentiful and hospitable Court of any other King. That He has as
independent Authority as any other King. It has appeerd that He has the
stoutest Men of War, The Noblest Haven, The Inaccessiblest Coasts, with the
greatest Command and Power at Sea of any other.
Which makes the English Merchants to be so highly respected abroad above other
Nations, having more Privileges at the entrance of the Baltik in the Sound, as
also in Hamborough and Holland, where they have Houses like Palaces provided
for them gratis, and free from Excise. In Ligorne, in Constantinople, and the
gran Mosco, they are more esteemd then any other Merchants: And it is well known
how his Subjects the Scots have the privilege of Preemption in the Vintage at
Bourdeaux, with diverse other Immunities in France above other Nations.

Wherefore if any King may be called (...), it is the King of Great Britain, to
whom that famous Verse of the Father of Poets may be applied:

(...), A Scepter is given Thee to be Honored by all. To these particulars we
will subjoyn the Reasons that Sir Henry Nevill with the rest of the English
Ambassadors sent by Queen Elizabeth in a joint Legantine Commission to Bullen
in France to negotiat with Don Balthazar de Zuniga, and others sent Ambassadors
from Philip the second of Spain and the Archduke Albertus; I say, we will
insert here the Reasons which the English Ambassadors gave then for prerogative
and right of Antecedence, in the contest that happend then with those of Spain,
by a Remonstrance which they sent the said Ambassadors in these words, as it is
extracted out of the Record it self.

Illustres and Magnifici Domini,
Perlegimus scriptum quod Illustres and Magnificae personae vestrae ad nos heri
miserunt, and Illa capita quae substitutionis potestatem, and sigilli vigorem
attingunt statuimus non ulterius prosequi, confidentes de sinceritate
serenissimi Domini Archiducis, and acquiescentes integritate Illustrium and
Magnificarum vestrarum personarum quae nobis pollicentur bonam fidem in hoc
quod agitur negotio summo cum candore and humanitate conjunctum. Clausulam vero
quam in serenissimi Archiducis Commissione omissam esse superius
demonstravimus, quam primum commodumque videbitur quod polltcitae sunt vestrae
illustres and magnificae personae petimus inserendum.

Quod vero illustres and magnificae vestrae personae asserunt insolitum and
novum videri quod proposuimus de Praerogativa and Praecedentiae dignitate
serenissimae Reginae Dominae nostrae semper debita, non possumus dissimulare,
nos valde mirari illud viris vestrae conditionis, eruditionis and judicii novum
esse and insolitum, quod universo orbi terrarum notum est, and celebratissimum.
Res enim est exploratissima quod Regio Hispanica cum distributa fuerit in
diversa Regna, and devoluta in manus Regis Ferdinandi and Reginae Isabellae,
Regumque Granatae insuper ei adjunctum, una cum caeteris partibus Indiarum
Occidentalium orta est contentio speciose magis quam solid recteque fundata de
Praecedendi dignitate cum Regno Anglorum tempore quo Papatum occupavit*
Alexander ejus nomini sextus natione Hispanus, quae perducta ad tempora Iulii
secundi. Volatarranus Author imprimis bonus, Historiographus Italus nullo
privato beneficio Angliae obstrictus, quique eodem tempore Romae vixit, ea de
causa quemadmodum Res actae, gestaeque fuerunt probe potuit intelligere, de hac
Re ita refert. Inter Oratores Henrici septimi Regis Angliae and Hispaniae Regis
inter sacra sedendo orta est contentio quae etiam sub Alexandrio caeperat.
Julius Locum honoratissimum Anglis pro tempore adjudicavit, quod quidem Ius,
and praerogativam Regis Angliae possidentes tenuerunt usque ad tempora Caroli
quinti Imperatoris qui licet ratione Caesareae Majestatis supremam sedem
dignitatis inter* Principes (...), Illud tamen privilegium ad posteros suos in
praejudicium aliorum Principum transmittere non potuit. Ideoque post obitum
ejus quaestio illa Praecedentiae ad eosdem terminos unde ante digresserat
reversa est. Cum igitur Reges Angliae semper tenuerunt priorem, and augustiorem
sedem prae singulis illis Regibus priusquam Regna eorum in unum reducta
fuerint, reductisque in unum indeque ea de requaestione mota jus suum ex
sententia Papae retinuerint de quo nullo unquam tempore aut occasion
cesserunt: Extra controversiam igitur putamus illud de Iure pertinere ad
Coronam Angliae, utcunque propagata and amplifica sunt Territoria and Dominia
Regni Hispaniae quod recta rerum aestimatione nihil valet aut valere debet
inter Christianos Principes ad hanc Praecedentiae quaestionem: Alioqui plurimi
Reges and Principes assumerent sibi Praecedentiam in multos alios Principes
quibus jam and libere and libenter concedunt.

Amplius de haec praesenti controversia de Praecedentiae dignitate hoc ipso
tempore aliud est quod se non indigne offert judici is vestris examinandum,
nempe quodunus e nobis quem serenissima Regina Domina nostra ad hunc tractatum
pacis concludendum elegit, Legatus ejus est qui quotidie residet apud
Christianissimum, quam dignitatem una cum omnibus Praerogativis quae eam
comitantur retinet quoad in Regno Galliae commoratur. Primus vero e vobis licet
sit Legatus Catholici Regis apud serenissimum Archiducem cum jam sit extra
territorium Archiducis, qualitatem eam, dignitatemque exui: censemus quoque
nostrum in quo multiplicata ista dignitas elucet, and dominatur Iure
praeferendum unicuique qui singulari and nudo titulo deputati scilicet ad
tractatum pacis inductus prodit. Vobis igitur si placeat quaestio ista alto
silentio praetermittatur, haecque praerogativa de qua agitur maneat habitetque
in serenissima Regina Domina nostra ad quam Iure spectat, pertinetque. Ita
alacrioribus animis ad conventum, colloquiumque cujus causa huc accessimus
feremur. Ista omnia pro prudentia and moderatione vestrarum illustrium and
magnificarum dominationum petimus amice and candide accipi, ut quae profecta
sunt ab observantiis and religione officii nostri, non a studio tempus
consumendi aut contentionis excitandae. Datum Boloniae 26 Maii, stylo veteri
1600.

Renderd thus in English.
Illustrious and Magnificent Lords,
We have read through the Writing which your illustrious and magnificent
Persons sent us yesterday; and touching those heads which appertain to the
power of your substitutition, and the vigor of the Seal, we have resolvd not to
prosecut further, confiding in the sincerity of the most serene the Lord
Archduke, and acquiescing in the integrity of your illustrious and magnificent
Persons, which does promise us a good faith in the business we are to agitat
with the greatest candor and humanity that may be. And touching the Clause we
demonstrated before, we desire it may be inserted as soon and as conveniently
it may be, as your illustrious and magnificent Persons have promised.

And whereas your illustrious and magnificent Persons assert, that it is
unusual and new what we proposd concerning the Prerogative and dignity of
Precedence due always to the most serene Queen our Mistress, we cannot
dissemble, but we much wonder that that should seem new and unusal to men of
your condition, learning and judgment, which is so well known, and most
celebrous to all the world. For it is a most explored truth, That the Region of
Spain distributed to diverse Kingdoms, when it was devolvd to the hands of King
Ferdinand and Isabella, whereunto the Kingdom of Granada was adjoined, and the
West Indies, a Contention did arise more speciously then solidly and rightly
grounded, touching the dignity of Precedence with the King of England at that
time, when Alexander the sixth, who was a Spaniard born, held the Papacy, which
continued to the time of Julius the second: and Volaterranus a special good
Author, and an Italian Historiographer, being not engagd to England for any
private benefit, and one that was well capable to know how matters passd, and
were transacted, does relate that betwixt the Ambassadors of Henry the seventh
King of England, and the Ambassador of Spain, a contention did arise about
Precedence of session in the Church, and Julius adjudgd the most honorable
place to the English; which Right and Prerogative the Kings of England possessd
until the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who in regard of Caesarean
Majesty, had the supreme place among all Princes. But he could not transmit
that privilege to his posterity, to the prejudice of other Princes: Therefore
after his decease, that question of Precedence returned to those terms whence it
had formerly digressd. Since therefore the Kings of England always held priority
of place and session of those several Kings before their Kingdoms were reducd
to one, a question being movd therabouts, they have retaind their Right by the
Popes sentence, and never yielded it upon occasion. Therefore without
controversy we think that Right to appertain still to the Crown of England
notwithstanding that the Territories and Dominions of the Kingdom of Spain be
propagated and amplified, which in the right estimation of things prevails not,
or ought to prevail twixt Christian Princes touching this question; For then
other Kings and Princes would assume a right of Precedence above others, to
whom now they grant it, ever and anon, if their Dominions increase.

Moreover, touching this present controversy about Precedence, there is another
thing which does not unworthily offer it self to be examined by your
Judgments, which is, That one of Us which the most serene Queen our Mistress
has chosen her Ambassador to conclude this Treaty of Peace, is one who daily
resides in that quality in the Court of the most Christian King; which Dignity
with all Prerogatives he retains as long as he sojourns in France. But the
first of you, although he be Ambassador to the Catholic King with the most
serene Archduke, and being out of the Dominions thereof, he puts off that
quality and dignity. We think also that our Ambassador in whom this Dignity is
multiplied, and shines more, ought by right to be preferred before any that is
appointed by a single and bare title only for this great Treaty.

Therefore if you please, let this Question be pretermitted with deep silence,
and let this Prerogative remain, and dwell in the most serene Queen our
Mistress, to whom it justly belongs and appertains; so we shall more cheerfully
apyly our selfs to the business for which we are come. All this we desire may
be heartily and friendly accepted according to the prudence and moderation of
your illustrious and magnificent Lordships, as proceeding from the Observances,
and Religion of our Office, not with any dessein to consume time, or raise
contentions. Bullen 26 Maii, 1600.

Henry Nevil,
John Harbert, etc.

The Spanish Ambassadors made an answer herunto, which we reserve for the third
Section, wherein the Arguments of Spain for Precedence are set down, whereof one
of the strongest he urges is the Multiplication and increase of Dominions,
which according to Besoldus and Cassaneus, with other great Civilian Jurists,
is no Argument at all, in regard it does not hold among ordinary Nobility. As
for example: He of Arundel is first Earl in England; He of Angus in Scotland;
And He of Kildare in Ireland, by the Laws of Heraldry and Hereditary Right: Put
case that some other of their fellow Earls in either Kingdom should grow
richer, and have more Manors, Possessions and Lordships, yet they will not
offer to take place or precedence; so the Argument may hold A minori ad majus:
For if it be so among Noblemen, much more should this Rule have validity among
Souvrain Princes.

I will go on with a passage that happend in Paris a little above twenty years
since. Hugo Grotius residing at Paris in quality of Ambassador for the Crown of
Sweden, attempted to make his Coaches go before those of the Earl of Leicester,
pretending a right of Precedence, because the King of Sweden whom he
represented, was King of the ancient Goths and Vandals, etc. which was, under
favor, but a feeble Argument, For there were Kings of Great Britain thousands of
years before the Goths or Vandals were scarce known to the Christian world; nor
do any stories make mention of them until a little after the declinings of the
Roman Empire, about the year 350 from the Incarnation, nor came they to be
Christians till a long time after; And it is the Position of Grotius himself in
his Book de Iure Belli, Inter Reges qu^ primo Christianismum professi sunt
praecedunt, Who first professd Christianity ought to precede. Moreover, the
King of Denmark entitles himself King of the Goths and Vandals as well. But my
Lord of Leicester carried himself so like himself, that our Swedish Ambassador
was put behind with a Disgrace somewhat answerable to his Presumption, and to
the explosion of the Spectators.

Now, Let the prudent and unpassionat Reader weigh with leisure the foregoing
Particulars, and reserve his Judgment till he has run through the Reasons and
Arguments of the other two Kings in order to a Precedence.

It Is time now to cross over to France, and produce the Arguments of that King,
faithfully extracted out of the most receavd and celebrated Authors who assert
his Right to sit next the Emperor upon all occasions, As Cassanaeus, Ferhaut,
Besoldus, Carolus de Grasseliis, Hierome Bignon, Pierre Matthieu, etc.

And let this be a close to the First Section.
The second Section, Consisting of the Reasons whereby the French King pretends
and claims Priority of Place, and Proximity of Session next the Emperor at all
Solemn Meetings, and in all publik Transactions of State, etc.
Which Reasons, In regard they lie confusd and scatterd in other Authors, we
will reduce to Ten Heads or Arguments, whereof the first shall be drawn
1. A Nobilitate Regni, from the Nobleness of the Kingdom. 2. The second A
Nobilitate Regionis, from the Nobleness of the Country. 3. The third A
Noblitate Regiminis, from the Nobleness of the Government. 4. The fourth A
Religione, and Nobilitate Ecclesiae, from Religion, and the Nobleness of the
Church. 5. The fifth A Nobilitate Gentis, and multitudine Subditorum, from the
Nobleness of the Nation, and multitude of Subjects. 6. The sixth A plenitudine
Regiae Potestatis, from the absolutness of Regal Authority. 7. The seventh A
Potentia ipsius Regni, from the Power of the Kingdom it self. 8. The eighth Ab
opulentia ipsius Regni, from the Riches thereof. 9. The ninth A Fortitudine and
Rebus in Bello gestis, from Valor and Exploits done in the War. 10. The tenth
and last Argument shall be drawn ab Exemplo and Antiquitate, from Examples and
Antiquities.
Of the first Argument, A Nobilitate Regni, from the Nobleness of the Kingdom.
There is a speech drawing near to the nature of a Proverb, Great Britain for an
Island, France for a Kingdom, Milan for a Duchy, and Flanders for a County or
Earldome, are preferrable before all other; They are (...) in their kind: this
shows the supereminence of the Kingdom of France. There is also a signal saying
of the Emperor Maximilian the first, who being in some Critical Discourses
with his Lords about the Dominions of Europe, broke out into this high Encomium
of France, That if it could stand with the Order of Nature and the Pleasure of
the Almighty that any mortal Man were capable to be a God of the Elementary
world, and that I were He, I would so make my last Will and Testament in the
disposing of my Estate, That my eldest Son should be God after me, but my second
should be King of France. This saying or excess of speech must be interpreted
with a sane sense, for the Emperor meant nothing else hereby but to intimate
his opinion touching that potent and noble Kingdom: which Kingdom has
continued an Heredetary successive Monarchy near upon twelve hundred years by
three Races of Kings, whereof Lewis the fourteenth now regnant is the sixty
fifth Monark.

Now, whosoever will behold that noble Kingdom, will find that no other
stands so commodious and strong by the position of Nature her self. It is
situated in the center of Europe, having Westward the Island of Great Britain;
Eastward, Italy and Swisserland, with other Regions; it has Southward the
Kingdom of Spain; and Northward the great Continent of Germany high and low:
And it is notably fenced against all these by a special Providence; Against the
First, it has a huge Salt Ditch, the Sea it self; against the Second it has
the stupendous Alpian Hills; against the Third it has the Pyrenean Mountains
cast up as Trenches by Nature her self for the defense of France; against the
Fourth she has strong fortified Towns, Castles and Rivers: The Ocean on the
one side, and the Mediterranean on the other do wash her Skirts, and mightily
invite Trade. And that which adds also much to the advantage of her situation,
is, that she lies accessible and open to all Mankind for Commerce and
Negotiation by Sea and Land. Moreover, being seated so in the midst, she is
fittest to be Arbitratrix, and to give Law to the rest of Christendom, as
being properly seated to divide or unite, to admit or hinder the Forces of
Europe. She stands also in an advantageous posture to reach her hand to her
Friends in point of Auxiliary Assistance, or heave her hand against the Enemy.
She has diverse Provinces, the Governors whereof are equal to Viceroys: And for
her Nobles, they are without number; for she can horse about 50000 Gentlemen
for the Wars. Add herunto that she has a mighty advantage to be of a round
Orbicular shape, which makes all parts lie nearer for the assisting each other
in case of necessity.

There is one other quality that makes for the Nobleness of France, which is,
though he be Turk or Tartar, Moore or Egyptian, or of any Nation, if he be in
quality of a Captif or Slave, as soon as he treads upon French ground he is eo
instante frank and free, and as it were manumitted of the tie of slavery: for
as Bodin has it, it is a Principle in France, Servi peregrini ut primum
Galliae fines penetraverint liberi sunto; Let stranger-slaves as soon as they
come within the borders of France be free. Among other, let this example serve:
A Merchant came to Toulouse and brought with him a Slave whom he had bought in
Spain; The Slave being told of the Laws and Privileges of France, came and told
his Master, Sir, I have had relation to you hitherto as a Slave and Bondsman,
but now by the Laws of this Noble Country I am a Freeman; yet I am contented to
serve you still, but as a Free Attendant. The like happend at the Siege of
Mets, where a Slave had played the Fugitive, and ran away with his Master Don
Luysd' Avila's horse; Don Luys sent a Trumpeter to the Duke of Guyse for his
Man and his Horse; The Duke understanding that his Horse was sold, causd the
Money to be sent the Spaniard, but for the Man he sent him word, That he was
upon French ground, therefore was Free by the custom of the Country.

In fine, France is so Noble a Region, that as the Sun shines among the Stars
in the Firmament, so France shines among the rest of Kingdoms.

The second Argument, A Nobilitate Regionis, from the Nobleness of the Country.
WE proceed now from the Nobleness of the Kingdom, to the Fertility and
Riches of the Country of France, as also to the temperature and healthfulness
of the Clime or Climes thereof; for France participats of the nature of diverse
Climes: Normandy, specially la Basse Normandy, partakes of the Clime of her
next Transmarin Neighbor Great Britain: Picardy and Champagne of that of
Germany; Provence and the Countries toward the Alps, partakes of the Climat of
Italy; Aquitania and Languedoc being walld Southward by the Pyrenean Hills,
have much of the Climat of Spain; And the I Will of France wherein Paris is built,
and the Country therabouts, has a particular Clime of its own. These varieties
of Climes make the Country the more fruitful for universality of Wealth and
Plenty. Nor is France only a fat Country and full of marrow, but she has as
much Delightfulness as Fecundity, as much real Pleasure as outward Bewty: There
is no Soil under the Sun where there is more Agriculture for Bread, which is the
staff of Man's Life; Insomuch that she may be called the Granary of Ceres, and
she may be called as well one of Bacchus his chief Cellars, for a world of
Vineyards wherewith the Country is coverd, with innumerable sorts of fruits;
insomuch that the character which Salvianus gives of Aquitania may extend to
the whole Country, when he elegantly says, Illic omnis admodum Regio aut
intertexta est Vine is, aut florulenta pratis, aut irrigata fontibus, aut
interfusa fluminibus, aut distincta culturis, aut consita pomis, aut amoenata
lucis, aut crinita messibus, ut vere possessores Illius Terrae non tam soli
istius portionem quam Paradisi imaginem possidere videantur: There evry place
is either interwoven with Vines, or flowrd with Medows, or set with Orchards,
or meerd by Cornfieldsd, or peepled with Trees and Woods, or refreshd with
Fountains, or enchanell'd with Rivers, or periwiggd with all sorts of Grain;
Insomuch that the Inhabitants may be said to possess a part of Paradise rather
then a portion of the common earth.

Now, among all these, the four Staple Commodities of France may be said to be
Corn, Wine, Hemp and Salt, which Boterus calls the four Loadstones of France:
For as the Loadstone (whereof the Blew Ethiopian is the best) has an attractive
Virtue to draw unto them Iron and Steel in a mysterious manner, so the foresaid
four Commodities have a Magnetical Virtue to draw into France the Gold and
Silver of all Nations. Concerning the French Corn, it is reputed the best of
all other; Pliny, one of Natures principal Secretaries, has left upon record
that the Gallic Corn is nitidissimi grani, and plus panis reddere quam far
aliud, It is of a neat grain, and yields more bread then other wheat. The
Spaniard and others might starve were they not sustaind by French Corn, yet she
vents but her superfluities, and transmutes them to Indian Gold: for such is
the scarcity of Spain, that having not bread enough of her own for the
hundredth Child she produces, whosoever brings thither a Cargazon of Corn, may
make his return for it in Gold or Silver, and carry it openly in the palm of
his hand without fear of seizure.

Touching the French Wines, it may be said they need no Bush: what vast
proportions are carried away by all the Northwest Nations? Bodin speaks of one
Merchant in Cambray which bought at one Vintage 33000 Barrels; and it is worth
the observation what a world of variety of Wines grow up and down, for one can
scarce go twenty miles but there is still a differing sort of Grape: In some
places in Burgundy and Champagne there are Wine-vessels as big as some houses in
height, not inferior to those vast Vessels of Heidelberg, Tubinga, and
Groninghen, (as the ingenious Lansius has it.)

Touching Hemp and Flax, the third Staple Commodity of France, what mighty rich
Procedes come thereof! For though it be a despicable Vegetal in sight, and
unsavory in the handling, yet it is of such virtue that it can remove Rome to
Hercules Pillars, Egypt to Italy, the East and West Indies into England; a
Vegetal that can control Eolus, and overmaster Neptune himself, I mean the
impetuous Whirlwinds of the one, and the tumbling Waves of the other. Now,
where does this most useful Commodity grow more plentiful then in France? Nor
does she hereby furnish her Neighbors far and near only with Sayls for their
ships, but with shirts for their backs, sheets for their beds, and napery for
their tables.

Touching the last great Staple Commodity of France, which is Salt; it is so
savoury in the Kings Coffers, that he draws twenty Millions of Livres evry year
from the Gabel of it: besides that incredible proportion which is spent in
France it self, what Millions of Mesures are laden out for other Countries!
Spain also has this Commodity to a superfluity, but her Salt is more corroding
and acrimonious then the French; Therefore when the Emperor Charles the fifth
(as Lansius relates) had put out a Placart prohibiting that no French Salt
should be brought into the Netherlands, the Country was like to mutiny for that
tart Proclamation, because the Spanish Salt which was permitted only to be
imported, was not so sweet and vigorous as the French; specially as that of
Rochel, wherewith if Flesh be salted, and a Ship victualld with it to the
furthest part of the East Indies, it will eat as sweet at the return of the
Ship as it did at first, as it is found by the frequent experience of our
Navigators.

Concerning the Air and Clime of France, it is the most cheerful and temperat
of any other under the Canopy of Heven, which makes the inhabitants thereof so
spritful and debonnaire: It Is rare to find a French-Woman melancholy, which was
the ground of the Proverb, To make a complete Wife, let her be English to the
Neck; From the Navil to the Knee Dutch; From the Knee downward Spanish; But
from the Neck to the Navil French, which relates to the Heart, and to the merry
disposition thereof. Nor are the French-women spriteful and merry most of any,
but they are also wise and judicious: for Cassanaeus relates in his Catalogo
Gloriae Mundi, that in the famous old League which was struck twixt Hannibal
and the Gauls, it was capitulated that if any Gaul was wronged by a
Carthaginian, a Carthaginian Magistrate should be his Judge; but if any
Carthaginian should be wronged by a Gaul, Gallic Women should be Judges thereof.

I will conclude this Argument with the quaint Verses of Baptista Mantuanus an
Italian:

Ignea Men's Gallis, and Lactea corpora, nomen
A candore datum populis, Muliebra tingit
Ora color Tyrius, Paphium meditata colorem
Ex geminis fecit Natura coloribus unum:
Laeti, alacres, lusu, choreis, and carmine gaudent;
In Venerem proni, proni in Convivia, proni
Ante Dapes adsacra Deum servire, j^gumque
Far negant, fugiunt figmenta, and hypocrisin, Ore
Liberi, and ingenuus mos est, Tetricosque perosi, etc.
The third Argument, A Nobilitate Regiminis, from the Nobleness of Government.
THe form of Government in the Kingdom of France, is partly Civil, partly
Polemical; It is a mixed Government between Peace and War, composd of Military
Discipline as well as of Civil Justice, in regard that France having so many
open Frontires and powerful Neighbors by Land, they cannot as other Countries
join Peace and Security together.

Touching their Martial Government it is very exact, there are diverse Regiments of
Horse and Foot in perpetual pay, being inrolld, and always ready for any
occasion of Service. Moreover, in all the Provinces and places of strength,
there are Governors and Garrisons dispersd up and down, which is very
advantageous for the preferment of the Gentry. Now, the Governors are so
cautiously disposd of by the King, that not any of them has means to betray or
deliver up a Province into the Enemies hands, the commands thereof being so
divided: For though the Governor commands the Country in general, and commonly
the chief Town, yet there is a Lieutenant that holds also by Patent immediately
from the King, and not from the Governor, and betwixt these two there are some
emulations and umbrages ever and anon. Then most part of their Towns, Castles
and Fortresses have particular Governors not subordinat to the Governor of the
Province, but deriving their power expressly from the King; so that in many
places the Town has one Governor, and the Castle another; Indeed the Country
of Provence only was usd to have a Privilege, that Her Governor held it without
a Lieutenant.

The Noblesse or Gentry in France are the sole body which participat in some
fort with the Prerogatives of the Crown; for from it they receave Privileges
above other men, and a kind of limited Regality upon their Tenants, besides
real Supplies to their Estates by diverse Employments, Pensions, and exemption
from Tallies upon their own Demeans and Lands as long as they manure them by
their own servants: but what Lands they let out to Tenants is presently
Talliable, which causes proportionable abatements in the Rent; and in
compensation for this, They only owe the King the service of the Ban and
Arriereban, which is to serve him or his General three months within the Land
at their own cost. Now as in time of War the Noblesse undergo most part of the
danger, so is their power then more peremptory above the rest of their
fellow subjects; whereas in time of Peace the King is ready to countenance
inferior persons against them, and is contented to see them wast one another
by contention in Law, or otherwise, for fear they grow too rich, Because it is
a principle of State in France, That as the Noblesse use to do him the best
service, so, They only misapplyed can do him most harm. Now, the ancient French
Gentry was much diminished in the Croisades, or Wars of the Holy Land, because
that to enable them for the service, diverse of them did hipotheque or morgage
their Fiefs and Lands to the Church, which are not redeemd to this day:
Insomuch that it is thought by sundry Computations which have bin made, that
the Gallican Church possesses the third part of the fattest Fiefs in France.
Now, upon the foresaid diminution, the French Gentry have been repaird and made
up since from time to time of Advocats, Financiers, and Merchants, whereof a
great many by the Kings favor are daily ennobled.

Such a gallant Government France has for the common Incolumity and publik
defense of the Country, and for the employment of the Gentry who are more
numerous there then in any Kingdom else; whereby the true Rules of Policy are
observd that should be in a Monarchy, which are For the King to command, The
Nobles to execut, and The Peeple to obey; and indeed the Peeple should know
nothing else but how to obey.

Now, one of the prime Principles in France is to keep the common Peeple under
a perfect subjection, so that they may not be able to do any hurt. And if they
are kept poor hereby, let them thank themselfs; for if they were pamperd with
wealth, They would be ever and anon kicking at Government: for we know there is
not a more instable hair-braind Monster in the world then the Common Peeple, as
England of late years has had such woeful experience.

Touching the Civil Government of France, and administration of Justice, it is
of that high esteem that diverse Foreign Princes have referrd their Causes to be
determind to the Court of Parliament in Paris, as a Consistory of high Reason
and Integrity. It stands upon record how the Emperor Frederik the second
referrd the controversies betwixt him and Pope Innocent the fourth touching the
Kingdom of Naples to the decision of this Court, En dernier ressort, to pass a
Definitif unappealable Judgment. The Count Namurs in a Difference twixt him
and Charles de Valois, did cast himself upon the verdict of this Court: Philip
Prince of Tarentum overcame the Duke of Burgundy in this Court touching the
Expenses he was at in recovering the Greek Empire: The Dukes of Lorain have in
diverse things stood to the Arbitrament and Justice of this Court: They of
Cambray when they were a Free Peeple have, been willing to be tried by this
Court: The Confederacy also of the Kingdom of Castile and Portugal was
confirmd by this Court. Now, the reason why this Court gains such a high
Repute, is, That none are admitted to sit in that Tribunal but persons of known
Integrity, Erudition and Gallantry; which made Henry the second, as Lansius
has it, when by the importunity of a great Princess he had recommended one to
sit there, and being a person but of shallow parts, and so rejected, the King
said merrily, Ie pensois que parmy tant de Ginets un As^e pourroit bien passer;
I thought that among so many Ginets one Ass might have passd well enough.

Besides this of Paris, there are diverse other Courts of Parliament (and
Praesidial Seats) dispersd up and down the Country in such a convenient
distance, that the Client may not be put to make long Journies for Justice, and
that the Poor be not oppressd by the Rich for want of means to make such long
Journies whereby they suffer the suit to fall, as many use to do in England in
the remotest places from London for want of such Courts.

I will conclude also this third Argument with some choice Verses of Ludovicus
Bologninus a celebrated Civilian:

Francorum Reges sacro sub nomine nati
Consilio semper valuerunt, semper and Armis,
Sanctaque fautores Bonitatis Iura tenentes
Appellat Romana suos Ecclesia gnatos,
Et Primogenitos tali sunt nomine digni,
His Deus Imperium dedit, and sua Iura tuetur,
Unguntur, sancti fiunt quicunque creantur.
The fourth Argument, A Religione, and Nobilitate Ecclesiae, from Religion, and
Nobleness of the Church.
SOme Authors affirm, that when our Savior sufferd upon the Cross, He lookd
toward France; whence they infer, that it was a blessed Omen that Christian
Religion should flourish most in that Kingdom. Moreover, it is a rare, and
indeed an unparallelld thing, that there was in France before the passion of our
Savior a Church, viz. Ecclesia Carnotensis, as it remains upon good record,
which was dedicated Virgini Pariturae, to the Virgin that should bear; as we
read there was in Greece an Altar erected (...), To the unknown God. This made
the Emperor Julius Caesar, who had felt the pulse of that peeple more then any
other, to give this Encomium of them in his Commentaries, Natura est omnium
Gallorum admodum dedita Religioni, It Is the nature of all the Gauls to be much
addicted to Religion.

As in the dark times of Paganism they were observd to be so devout, so since
the glorious Light of Christianity did shine upon the Flower de Luces, the
French Nation has bin found to be transported with an extraordinary zeal to
Religion. And this Heavenly Light began to shine and shoot its Rays betimes:
for we read that Iraeneus one of the first Primitive Fathers was Bishop of
Lions, and he was Disciple to Polycarpus, and Polycarpus was Disciple to St.
John the Evangelist, by whom he was sent from Asia among the Gauls for the
plantation and propagation of Christian Faith, as St. Hierome relates. St.
Hilarious who was another Father of the Primitive Church, was also Bishop of the
Picts in France, where he composd his excellent Works which are partly
Expository, partly Controversial, though there occur often some African
barbarous Latin words in them, as disfrocite for degenerate, Zabulus for
diabolus, etc.

What a multitude of Hevenly Martyrs has France had! for in all the ten
Persecutions there were some of them signd still their Faith with their blood.
In the Emperor Valerians time there were famons French Martyrs, as Florentius
Bishop of Vienna, Pontius Cassius Victorinus, Liminius, Anatolianus, with
others whom Gregory Turonensis mentions, and whose names are enrolld in the
Catalog of Saints to all posterity. And this was a little before the unluckly
Novatian Heresy crept into France, and infected diverse other Countries.

Nay, to go higher up, and to the very source of Christianity, there are some
Authors who avouch that St. Paul was in France, and that the chief Church in
Vienna was built by him, as this ancient Verse there engraven shows:

Paulus praeco Crucis tibi dat primordia Lucis. There be other Authors who
affirm that St. Peter also was in France; And that there landed at one time in
Marseilles Lazarus, Mary Magdalen, Martha and Marcella, as it is recorded in a
Manuscript of the English History in the Vatican whereof Baronius makes mention;
And about that time Joseph of Arimathea, that Noble Decurion, passd through
France into Britain with the foresaid Marcella, who was she that is mentiond in
the Gospel, who being divinely inspird, cried out with a loud voice when Christ
was preaching, Happy is the womb that brought Thee forth, and the paps that
gave Thee suck.

Spencaeus also makes mention that St. Luke was in France; As also Savinianus
one of the 72 Disciples, and Martialis another of them, who some do affirm to
be He who sold the five Barley Loaves and the two Fishes wherewith our Savior
fed five thousand.

And if the Holy Relics of blessed Saints may add to the Nobleness of a
Country, the Churches of France are full of them; Reperies in Francia (as
Cassanaeus relates) omnes Christi Exuvias, quippe praeputium, Inconsutilem
togam, Spineum diadema, Crucem, Clavos, Spongiam, Lanciae cuspidem, and cum qua
sepultus est sindonem. You will find in France all the Exuvias or Spoils of
Christ, his praeputium, his seamless coat, his Cross, the Nayls, the Sponge,
the point of the Spear, and the Winding Sheet wherein he was buried. Cassanaeus
goes further, and says, that in Burgundy the body of Lazarus is buried, as also
Mary Magdalens ashes are kept in a noble Chest, and likewise those of Martha,
Martialis, and of the three Mary's. Add herunto the most precious head of John
Baptist, and the finger wherewith he pointed at the immaculat Lamb of God. The
eleven thousand Virgins are yet kept in France; And likewise the relics of
St. Denis, Martin, Cosma, Damianus, Sebastian, with other Christian Hero's are
to be found in France; As Claudius and Edmundus, whose bodies, bones and flesh
are to be seen to this day, and are frequently visited by Pilgrims. There are
also to be seen the three Twins, St. Geneveva, St. German, St. Hilary, with
sundry others. I must not omit the Body of St. Quintinus a great Martyr, who
has a Town of his name to this day, which formerly was called Samarobrina from
the River Samoria; which Martyr after many persecutions and punishments under
Dioclesian and Maximinianus was at last beheaded; his body and head were thrown
into the River Samoria, where it lay many years, until a Roman Matron called
Eusebia being warnd by an Angel came to search for the body, which being found,
it immediately cured her sore eyes; and so she put the body and head under
ground, whereon since a mighty Sanctuary was erected bearing his name, and called
St. Quintin: 300 years after, in the reign of King Dagobert, his body was taken
out of the earth and put in a gold Chest, where it remains to this day, and
whereunto a great confluence of Pilgrims do frequently resort by reason of the
great miracles that he has wrought in point of health to many thousands; all
which particulars Cassanaeus relates.

Touching the Nobleness of the French Fabriques erected and consecrated for the
worship and service of God Almighty, as Basilicas, Temples, Churches,
Sanctuaries, and other Domes of Devotion, the whole earth has not fairer or
more magnificent; as also Priories, Abbeys, Convents, Monasteries, etc. What a
glorious and indeed admired structure is the great Carthusian Monastery in
Provence! It may be called a little Christian Commonwealth of it self, and has
Revenues able to bear up the port of a Souvrain Prince.

Now there is no Church upon the surface of the Terrestrial Globe that is
comparable to the French in Revenues and Riches; for the last computation which
was made, the Revenues of the Gallican Clergy amounted to above three hundred
and twenty millions of Livres; a stupendous sum! And indeed They need have so
much; for besides such a world of Abbots, Priors, Monks, Priests, and other
Ecclesiastical Dignitaries, there are in France 15 Archbishops, and 150
Suffragan Bishops; and such is the honor which is born there to the Mitre, that
they are all Privy-Counsellors by their Dignity, and by the Laws of France,
though few do come to the said Council unless they have an intimation of the
Kings pleasure by particular Letter.

The fifth Argument, A Nobilitate Subditorem, from the Nobleness of Subjects.
IN the third Argument going before, there were some touches of the French
Noblesse and Gentry, how numerous they are, and the many ways of Preferment the
King has for Cadets or younger Brothers, whereas the elder use to have great
Estates of their own; For indeed some of them have mighty Fortunes by
Patrimonial Inheritance. The last Duke of Guyse kept a House like a Souvrain
Prince; he had above two hundred Gentlemen waited on him as menial servants,
and having Domestik dependency, unto whom he gave such a liberal allowance and
long Leases out of his estate, that they might live like Gentlemen; which made
one tell the Duke that he had turned all his Estate to Obligations; meaning that
he had obligd so many unto him by his munificence and bounty.

Yet there are three sorts of Subjects that live but poorly in France, which are
the Roturier, the Vigneron, and the Peasan. But they who dwell in Towns, and
have any Profession or Trade, live well enough: But the main wealth of the
Country is among the Gentry or Noblesse, who live plentifully and well.

Among diverse others, there is one singular quality in the French Gentry, that
they are extraordinarily affected to their King, and they are pleased in nothing
more then to have access, and see him. There is a world of examples how close
they have stuck to him in the Wars when his person was in hazard, and rescued
him though danger and death were inevitable in the Action. For Horsmanship and
Chivalry they surpass all other; and indeed there is none that becomes a Horse
so well, and has a more comely seat on his back then a Frenchman.

Add herunto that the French Noblesse are naturally Valiant, quick and hardy,
not only in the Wars, and public Engagements, but in private Feuds, there being
more Duels fought there then in all Christendom besides. Nor is there any
Nation more covetous of Honor, or more careful and tender to conserve it when
they have it.

I will conclude this Argument in brief with the opinion of a famous Poet, who
sings thus of them:

Gallia fert acres animos, and Idonea bello
Corpora, non illis ausit componere sese
Thracia quae Martem genuit, non Parthia versis
Quaebellatur equis fugiens, licet inclyta Crasso
Facta sit extincto signisque superba Latinis.
Quas Gentes olim non contrivere? per omnem
Invecti Europam quasi grando Aquilone vel Austro
Importata gravi passim sonuere tumultu.
Scit Romanus adhuc, and quam Tarpeia videtis
Arx attollentem caput Illo in monte superbum;
Pannones Emathii norunt, scit Delphica Tellus
Quam nisi terrificis subito convulsa ruinis
Oppressisset eos, non defendisset Apollo.
The sixth Argument, A Plenitudine Potestatis Regiae, from the Absolutness of
Royal Power.
There is no Monark among Christians that has a more plenary and absolut power
then the King of France, take together all the Prerogatives that a King is
capable of. He only can make Peace, or denounce War; He only can convoke,
discontinue and dissolve Parlements, I mean the Assembly of the Three Estates;
He only can pardon; He only can naturalize and ennoble; He only can put value
upon Coin; He only can press to the War: Nay, He has power not only to do all
this, but he can make Laws, and impose Taxes at pleasure; All which he does by
his own Royal Edicts. For as touching the formality that the said Edicts should
be confirmd by the next Court of Parliament, that is, by the next Assembly of
the Three Estates, That Assembly is now grown as obsolete as a General Council,
for there has been none these fifty years and upward.

Besides the Real Demeans of the Crown, the King has to support his Greatness,
2. La Taille; 3. Le Taillon; 4. Les Aids; 5. Les Equivalents; 6. Les
Equipollents; 7. Les Crues, ou Augmentations; 8. L'Octroy, ou Benevolence; 9.
La Gabelle; 10. Les Imposts; 11. Le haut passage, or Domain forain, (for goods
exported;) 12. Le Trait Forain, (for goods imported;) 13. La Sold de 50000
Soldats; 14. The Tenths besides. All these Impositions are as old as Lewis the
eleventh, who, whereas before most of them were laid and levied upon
extraordinary occasions, he found a way to make them perpetual. And if those
fourteen Strings touchd before will not serve his turn, he has power to make
more for his Bow when he pleases; and herein the King of France has the
advantage of his two Neighboring Kings: This is that indeed which makes him so
potent; Hereby he can lade an Ass with Gold when he will to break in through
any Wall though otherwise never so inexpugnable. It is a full Purse that makes
a King both feared at home, and formidable abroad; whereas the contrary makes him
but a kind of Scar-crow King, as the Spaniard tells us in his Proverb, Don sin
dinero no es Don, si no Donayre.

I will conclude with the Greek Poet, who sings to this purpose very elegantly:

(...). Wherewith the Latin does verbatim and exactly correspond both in sense
and verse:

Argenteis pugna telis, atque omnia vinces. Fight with Silver Weapons and thou
shall conquer all. The seventh Argument, A Potentia Regni, from the Strength of
the Kingdom.
There is not such an intrinsique united Power, such a knot of Strength any
where as France is: There are in France thirty thousand Parishes, so that taking
but ten men out of one Parish with another, an Army may be composd of two
hundred and fifty thousand Combatants; besides the City of Paris, that huge
Mass and Miscelany of all Nations, which may furnish well-neer as many more:
And it may be said that France was never so powerful since the time of
Charlemain as now she is, nor so entire, and that for many reasons. First, in
regard that the Hugonots, or they of the Protestant Religion, are reduced to an
exact subjection, who indeed were the greatest weakness of France before; for
oftentimes they servd as Dark Lanterns to other Princes both abroad as well as
at home, to put Combustions in France at pleasure. They might be called Regnum in
Regno, having such a considerable strength as above 200 Towns, in many whereof
they kept Garrisons, for the maintenance whereof the King himself was to
contribut by Article. Two of these Towns commanded the great River of Loire,
and others were near the Sea, so consequently fit to receave Foreign assistance,
as Rochel, the taking whereof did much startle Spain, who had she foreknown that
England could not have done it, she would have sent assistance her self: which
made Cardinal Richelieu to raunt that he had taken Rochel en depit de Trois
Roys, in despite of three Kings, viz. the King of England, the King of Spain,
and the King of France himself, who was a great while averse to that business.
But now all those Towns of caution and safety the Hugonots had, are dismantled;
besides, they have no Garrison any where, so that they are to rely for the
future soly upon the Kings savor, whereby they are brought to a perfect pass of
obedience; which great Five Kings of France before the last endeavored to do,
but could never effect it.

Secondly, France is far more powerful because of the three Keys which
Richelieu said he had got, viz. Brisac to enter Germany, Pignorol to enter
Italy, and Perpignan to enter Spain at pleasure, having thereby besides added to
France the whole County of Roussillon.

Thirdly, because he has got in a manner all Lorain, which was formerly a
Countermure twixt France and Germany, being engagd by homage to the Empire.

Fourthly, he has got the Garrison of Strange Soldiers which were in Orange to
be dismissd, and the Castle as good as dismantled; which lying within the
bowels of one of his own Provinces, might be said to be another weakness to
France. He has also got the Italian Garrison in Avignon to be casheerd, which
also was another inconvenience to France lying within her Verge, and has made
himself Master of the place, though it was part of St. Peter's possession above
300 years.

Lastly, he has Graveling with Dunkirk and other Towns in the Netherlands. All
which considered, it may be said that the power of the Kingdom of France is
much more improvd then it was formerly in many hundred years.

The eighth Argument, Ab Opulentia and Fertilitate, from Wealth and Fertility.
IN one of the former Arguments we spoke of the four Staple Commodities of
France, viz. Corn, Salt, Hemp and Wines; To these may be added Silks, Oils,
Woollen Stuffs, and Saffron; All manner of delicat fruits, as Orenges, Lemons,
Cytrons: The Lady Flora also has one of her choicest houses of pleasure there,
as well as Ceres and Bacchus, there being such abundance of choice fragrant
flowers to be found in evry Garden; As likewise all sorts of Edible Roots and
Salade-Herbs. Pomona also may be said to have her best Orchard there, for the
excellentst Cider is made in Low Normandy; and those who are habituated to
drink it, are observd to have cleerer Complexions then others who have only
Wine for their drink. There are not more delightful Medows and Fields on the
surface of the earth, such huge herds of Cattle, and variety of Stuffs and
Cloth made, which makes Le. Drap de Berry in such high request; with the most
curious rich Sattins and Velvets of Tours. There is not such a Beau-die, such a
Scarlet Die in any Country. What thick swarms of Bees, and delicat Honey is
found in every Peasans Garden? What delightful Woods and Lawns, Chaces and vast
Forests, with whole Hosts of huge headed Deer, (and other Beasts for Venery)
range up and down! Such Forests that the Sylvan Gods themselfs are seen
sometimes to hunt in them: As there is a rare Passage recorded by the Bishop of
Rhodes in his late Annals of Henry the Fourth, that at a great appointment of
Hunting one day in Fountainbleau, as the King was in the heat of his chase,
there was another cry of Hounds and Horns heard, which afterward coming near, a
black man plainly appeerd to all, who cried out three times, Amendez vous,
Amendez vous, Amendez vous; and so he and his Hounds vanished: The Wood-men and
Officers of the Forest being questiond about it, they answered, That that black
man was often seen to hunt there with his Dogs, and would suddenly disappeer,
but he never usd to do hurt to any body: And surely this could not be the
Devil, as some poor shallowbraind Authors do assert all Spirits of the Air to
be. Go to the Bowels of France, and she is full of Mines, and Marble in many
places, with great plenty of Iron, (the best and worst thing belonging to
humane use.) Look upwards toward Heven, and you shall see the Air throngd with
Volatils of all sorts. Nor is there any Country on earth so conveniently waterd
as well with Sources and Sanative waters, as with great Navigable Rivers; which
makes evry part of the Country communicable one to the other in point of mutual
commerce, for all the great Towns are situated upon some Boat-bearing Rivers:
And besides, they are so delightful, that some of them are said to be embroderd
with Swans, borderd with Crevices, and pavd with Troutes, with all sorts of
delicat Fish: Insomuch that there is nothing which Air, Earth or Water can
afford as well for Voluptuousness and Lux^, as for necessity and common
sustenance, but France affoords it in a kind of exuberance. Paris is such a
place of infinite provision, that Monsieur Vigner said, If he were to give a
Treatment to the most luxurious Feasters among the Romans, (were they alive) as
Apitius, Lucullus, Pompey, with many more, he would desire but one days warning
to do it, and they should be so servd that they would confess they never found
the like in Rome. How many Ordinaries are there in Paris of Pistol-price, and
the Tables servd all in Plate? Which makes the Italian Poet break out very
ingeniously into the praises of France, thus:

Gallia Terreni pars est non infima mundi,
Sed long lateque patens --
Terra Hominum, Frugumque ferax, Armenta, Gregesque
Uberius pascens, plebis non languida Coelo
Tabifico. Non mortiferis infecta venenis
Ut Lybiae, non perpetuis adoperta pruinis
Sicut Hyperborei Montes, non torrida ab aestu
Qui faciat steriles, ut decolor India, campos.
Non etiam noctis pallens semestribus umbris,
Quale sub Arcturo positum Mare, and ultima Thule;
Sed nec ut Egyptus quia fusa palustribus undis,
Sed Coelo, and tenerae faecunda uligine Terrae,
Venatu, Aucupio campos, Montana, lacusque
Sallicitant, bellandi usu laetantur Equorum
Terga fatigantes, loricae, hastilia, and arcus.
Deliciae Genti sub dio ad sydera somnum
Carpere, fuscari sole, and ferrugine pulchrum est,
Pulvere conspergi, and gravius sudare sub Armis
Pro Patria, pro Cognatis, pro Regibus ire
In pugnam, and gladios, and morti occumbere dulce est.
The ninth Argument, A Fortitudine and Rebus in Bello actis, from Valor and
Exploits performed in the War.
IT is recorded in good Story, that Alexander the great Founder of the third
Monarchy, viz* the Greek, hearing much of the Fortitude of the Gauls, and it
seems having read of the great Exploits performd both in Italy, by ransacking
Rome, as also in Greece her self, under the conduct of Brennus that valiant
Britain, the Cadet of Mulmutius Donwallo the famous Legislator, and first King
that wore a Crown of Gold in Great Britain many hundred years before the
Romans entered: I say, that Alexander hearing so much, and reading of the
Martial Achievments of the Gauls, (now French) sent to know of Them, What they
feared most? They answered, Ne Coelum rueret, Lest the Heven should fall: A
magnanimous answer! And the French Nation must by natural inclination be
magnanimous and Martial, because the Astronomers who are so conversant with
Hevenly Bodies, and their virtual power in relation to Earth, affirm, that the
Planet Mars is the Ascendent of France, and has a peculiar influence upon that
Nation more then upon any other. To pretermit for brevities sake many other
victorious Kings who had raignd formerly, what a triumphant Hero was
Charlemain! He vanquishd the Saracens in the Holy Land, He freed Spain from
them; He was a mighty Champion of Christ, and of the Roman Church: For He
restord two Popes, viz. Adrian and Leo, the one being besiegd, the other
banishd, and living in exile. This was the Prince who repaird the Western
Empire being almost mouldred into dust, and raysd it to as high a pitch of
sublimity as ever it was, by congregating the scatterd Dominions thereof: This
was He who overthrew the Tyranny of the Longobards which his Father Pepin had
begun, and quite freed Italy of them, where they had lived and lorded above two
hundred years. He subdued the Empire of the Huns, securd England, tamed
Bavaria, subjugated Spain, and possessd Italy. He drive the Moors out of
Corsica, the Carthaginians out of Sardinia, the Saracens from the Baleares
Insulae Malliorca, etc. This was he who trounc'd the Bohemians, checkd the
Impiety of the Danes, broke the fierceness of the Sclavonians, and reducd the
Saxons to Civility.

This is He whom all the Oriental Princes admird, (as well as the West)
receaving their Ambassadors laden with rich presents, and desiring a friendship
and confederacy with him. This is He who was the founder of the University of
Paris, being very learned himself by the Instructions he receavd from Alcuin
that famous Englishman.

This was that pious Prince who confirmd the Donation which Constantin the
great his predecessor made unto the Holy Father the Vicar of Christ of the City
of Rome, and conferd also upon Him the Exarchatship of Ravenna: Therefore was he
as deservedly as gloriously Crowned in Rome Emperor of the West, and the Title
of Christianissimus given Him, the Empire continuing in his Race by direct Line
above a hundred and ten years.

What glorious Expeditions have bin made since in the Holy Land by five several
Kings of France in person? Me thinks I behold Godefroy of Bouillon being
countenancd and assisted by the French King, and having morgagd some part, and
sold the rest of his Duchy for that Enterprise, marching with a huge Army
through Germany, Hungary and Greece, and so passing to Asia to encounter the
Forces of Solomon the Ottoman Emperor, and Chalypha the Sultan of Egypt, with
other Infidel Kings whom he put to flight, making himself Master of Nice, of
Antioch, and Jerusalem her self, with the Holy Sepulcher of Christ. Me thinks
I see Him when he was to be crowned King of Jerusalem, throwing away the Crown
of Gold, and taking one of Thorns in imitation of our blessed Savior. Me
thinks I see all the Princes therabouts Tributaries unto him, and bringing him
rich presents, though He himself went clad but in the habit of a common
Gregarian Soldier; whereat some of the said Princes being astonishd, askd, How
comes it to pass that so great a Conqueror who has shaken all the Eastern
world should go so plain and homely?

But to draw to a conclusion of this Argument, let us descend lower to some of
the Modern Kings of France, and the two last will afford matter enough to
confirm the Fortitude of the French Nation, viz. Henry the Fourth, and his Son
Lewis the Thirteenth: Concerning the first, Valor and Fortune may be said to
contend which should entitle him Henry the Great; They both strivd for mastery
in Him, and which should overcome: He was Conqueror in four signal Battails; In
thirty five hot Skirmiges; In above a hundred personal Encounters, with the
siege of about three hundred several places, wherein He proud always Victorious;
which makes his memory to continue still fresh in France, and makes new
impressions from Fathers to Sons to render it eternal. There is scarce any
considerable Town but has his Statue in Brass or Marble, and Pictures
innumerable; insomuch that one said, Una Henrici Oblivio erit occasus Humani
generis, The Oblivion of Henry alone will be the end of Mankind: But for a true
Character of him, I will insert here that which is engraven on the Cheval de
bronze, the Brazen Horse on the Pont-Neuf in sight of the Louvre his most Royal
Castle in Paris; which character runs thus:

Ie suis Henry grand Honneur de la Terre,
Astre de Paix, and Foudre de la Guerre;
L'Amour de Bons, la Crainte de Pervers,
Don't les Vertus meritoient l'Univers.
Henry I am, the Glory of Mankind,
The Star of Peace, and Thunderbolt of War;
The spur of Virtue, scourge of Vice; A Mind
That merited to sway more Scepters far.
Touching his Son and immediate Successor Lewis the Thirteenth, he also did
mighty things. He began to bear Arms, and wear Buff almost when he was no
higher then a Sword, at which height they say the Kings of France are out of
their Minority: but before he came out of His, he repressd two ill-favourd
Commotions in Poitou and Britany. He continued Conqueror all his lifetime, nor
did He know what it was to be beaten. He bangd all his Neighbors round about
him: He clammerd twice with his Armies ore the Alps, and came back again,
having done the business he went for. He climd likewise with his Troops up the
Pyreney Hills, and establishd a Viceroy in the Kingdom of Catalonia. He crossd
ore the Meuse, and made many deep Hacks in the Ragged Staff. His Horses foorded
ore the Rhine, and helpd to cuff the Eagle ilfavouredly in the German Air. And
lastly, He foyld the English at the I Will of The. These were Exploits abroad. At
home also within his Kingdom He did marvailous things, by suppressing so many
Civil Insurrections; and lastly, by debelling the Hugonots, which his five
immediate Predecessors could not effect, though they attempted it many ways:
Then which Action nothing could conduce more to the security and improvement of
the power of the French Crown, and the tranquillity of the Country.

The tenth and last Argument, Ab Exemplo and Authoritate Historica, from
Examples and Historical Authority.
THe Arguments which went before may be said to be Embroderies and Florishes of
Reason; yet those Florishes were wrought upon good Substantial stuff: but this
last Argument has more of solidness, legality and weight in it, for it
consists of Examples, and Historical Authentik Proofs of Antiquity, which the
Logitian tells us is one of the strongest way of Argumentation.

We will not make such overcurious Retrospects as to look on the times before
Charlemain, though there be diverse examples that ever since the time of Clouis,
who was the first Christian King of France, (which was above 300 years before)
which prove that the Kings of France had Prerogatives of Session, and
Precedence both of Place and Person next to the Emperor. But since Charlemain
had the title of Christianissimus given him, there be diverse clear and
convincing proofs, how after the Empire was devolvd from Charlemains Race to
the houses of Saxony, Suevia and Austria; nay since Austria came to the highest
cumble of greatness and multitude of new Dominions, the Kings of France have
still had the Antecedence both in General Councils, in assisting the holy
Offices of the Church, and in attending the Popes Person. Now it is known that
the Court of Rome, with the Rules and practice thereof, is fittest to determine
this Question of Precedence.

Mausonius and others have it upon good record, how Anno 1564. Pope Pius the
fourth passd a solemn Decree, That the Kings of France ought to have the
Precedence of any other King. Nor indeed in former Ages did any King contend
with him herabouts but the King of England. The Spaniard did but of late years
stand for it; it is but since the Reign of Charles the fifth. And as the Kings
of France before claimd it as succeeding Charlemain, so the Kings of Spain would
challenge it as succeeding Charles the Fifth.

Yet in the famous Treaty at Vervins 1598. after long Concertations and
canvassing of the point Pro and Con, the Spanish Ambassadors made a Cession of
Precedence to the French; And Baldus the great Civilian, as Purpuratus relates,
affirms categorically, Nemo praesumat Honorem super vexilla Invictissimi
Franciae Regis. It is true, that some Writers rank Kings thus; The King of
Jerusalem, the King of France, the King of Sicily, and the King of England;
which four are the only Anointed Kings: And for this they show an old
Manuscript of the Church of Rome, called Provincialis. Saint Gregory writes to
Childebert, Quanto caetero^ homines Regia Dignitas antecellit, tanto caeterarum
gentium Regna Regni vestri culmen excellit: As far as Royal Dignity excels all
other men, so far does the glory of your Kingdom excel others. H^norius the
third says, Reges Gallorum opposuerum se tanquam marus inexpugnabilis pro
populo Christiano: The Kings of France opposd themselfs as an inexpugnable Wall
for the Christian People. Gregory the ninth says, Regnum Galliae est quasi
Pha^etra quam Christus sibi circa femur accinxit, ex qua sagittas electa^
extr^hens, (...) ^t sibi gentes and Regna subjiciat, in arcum brachii potentis
em^: France is a Quiver which Christ tied to his thigh, whence he draws Arrows
for the subduing of Nations and Kingdoms, etc.

Now, touching the point of Precedence, the notablest Contests that France has
had, have been with Spain in the Council of Trent, which lasted so many long
years by intermissions: the relations whereof lie scatterd up and down in diverse
Histories, but we shall endeavor to give here a distinct and uninterrupted
Narration thereof, but first we will speak of a signal Contest in Venice.

The famous Contest twixt the most Christian and Catholic Kings in Venice, as
also in the Council of Trent.
IT is well known how that before the rearing up of that huge Colosse of the
House of Austria, which was Anno 1516. when Ferdinand of Aragon died, Charles
rendered himself very potent both in Italy as well as in Spain. But he encreasd
more strength after the death of Maximilian, being chosen Emperor in his
place, at which time he was mounted to the highest pitch of sublimity and
power: I say, it is well known how till that time the Kings of France were
acknowledged the first after the person of the Emperor, who has still
preference given him before all secular Princes whatsoever. Now, the Question
was never Sur le tapis, was never controverted about Priority twixt France and
Spain till the house of Austria started up to that enormous greatness. And
although before Charles the fifth there were Six Emperors of that House, and
that the quality of Emperor gives precedence to any who legally possesses the
title, be he of what Family soever, yet that Prerogative is not given to any of
their posterity being not called to the Empire. In regard in Electif States the
Election adhering only to the person of the Elected, gives the Eminence only to
his person, excluding all other; yea his own Sons unless they be formally
elected, although in Successif hereditary patrimonial Estates it is otherwise.
Insomuch that the house of Austria has no more right to the Empire then the
house of Saxe, Luxemburg, or Brandenburg, with other Families who were Caesar's
before them.

Another House which much strengthend that of Austria, was that of Burgundy,
which yet was feudetary to France, as also the Counties of Flanders and Artois,
though the rest of the seventeen Provinces (which came to Spain by this
alliance with Burgundy) are Fiefs of the Empire. The other Houses who did
aggrandize Charles the fifth, were Castile and Aragon; Castile came to be a
Kingdom but after the year 1000. And the Kings of England took always
precedence of them. Arragon was but a small State, feodary to the Church of
Rome, until the Kingdom of Naples which is also a Fief of the Church was
annexd unto it. Hereunto as Fortune would have it, were added the West Indies,
discoverd first by an Italian, and offered to the King of England. Then by
alliance with Portugal the East Indies came also to the Crown of Castile. This
increase of Countries raisd the Spirits of the Spaniard to claim Precedence of
France and England, two of the most ancient Christian Kings. And to go more
methodically to work, we will divide the State of the house of Austria to three
times; First, to that which preceded the year 1519. when Charles was establishd
in the Empire; The second during his Reign, until he retird to a Claustral Life
Anno 1555; The third to his Progeny since.

Touching the first, it is certain that notwithstanding the promotion of this
Family to the Empire, yet it continued still homageable to the Empire: For
Philip the Father of Charles the Emperor rendered solemn homage to the
Chancellor du Rochefort, and Charles after him for the Counties of Flanders and
Artois Anno 1507. so that the said Charles being born in Gant, was born a
Vassal to the King of France.

That in the Interview of Lewis the twelfth, and Ferdinand of Aragon Anno 1507.
at Savona, although King Lewis usd great civilities to Ferdinand coming to
visit him upon his own Territories, and so gave him Precedence, yet the world
knows that it was but by way of Complement: But before Charles mounted the
Empire, this Dispute of Precedence never entered into the Spirit of Spain.

In the year 1519. Charles was created Emperor, which Anno 1555. he resignd to
his Brother Ferdinand; and at the same time he made a voluntary and absolut
Cession of all the rest of his Dominions to his Son Philip the second, except
the Archduchy of Austria, and the dependences thereof in Germany* Philip though
he succeeded in the Empire to which the Precedence only belongs, yet he
endevourd to keep it still, under pretext that he succeeded the Emperor his
Father in all his large her hereditary Dominions, who always took place in all
Assemblies, Enterviews and Tretises, specially in the great Council of Trent,
though it was confusedly, because two qualities were in him of Emperor and
King which could not be distinguished or separated.

But in the year 1555. when meditating upon a retirement he resignd the Empire
to his Brother, and all his Kingdoms to his Son Philip, perceaving that his
Son could not take precedence of the King of France because he was not
Emperor, He made use of another artifice for conserving this pre-eminence for
his Son as well as for his Brother. Before his retirement he revokd Don
Francisco de Vargas his Ambassador in Venice, who had always taken precedence
of the French Ambassador without scruple: Now, after his resignation of the
Empire, he sends again the said Vargas to Venice as his, and also his Sons
Ambassador jointly, though indeed he was but Ambassador only to the King of
Spain: But he thought to overreach the Venetian because he employed still the
same man qualified in appearance as formerly. Vargas demanded of the Senate the
same precedence as formerly, which the Bishop of Lodeve, Ambassador at the same
time to Hen. 2. of France, opposd, remonstrating to the Senate that Charles was
no more considerable to the world being a reclusd person; And if the Ambassador
of Ferdinand to whom he had transferrd the Empire were present, he would yield
place unto Him, but he would not come after the Ambassador of King Philip.

The Senate apprehending some ill issue from this Dispute, orderd that neither
of the Ambassadors should be present at the Feast of St. Mark; and so the
business remaind at a stand by the irresolution of the Senate, and the
simplicity of the French Ambassador, who at last was contented to give way to
the Ordinance of the Republique in favor of Vargas. But Anno 1558. Francis de
Novailles Bishop of Acs succeeding him of Lodeve, renewd the Dispute; and the
Ambassador of Ferdinand arriving about the same time, Novailles demanded of the
Senate to be maintaind in his Rights, and to have the first place next the
Imperial Ambassadors, and so took it courageously before Vargas, who observing
the cunning of the Emperor Charles, (who died in this conjuncture of time) was
discoverd, and that he passd for no more then for the Ambassador of King
Philip, Vargas began to speak high of the Grandeur of his Master, and to
display the large Dominions and States he lorded over, far more in numbee then
those of the French King; alleging that these Customs of Honor and
Antecedences ought to be alterd according to the times: That his Master was the
greatest King of the world, That he was able to assist the Republique with
Arms, Men and Money more then the King of the French, etc. But the Bishop of Acs
though much heat intervend, obtaind of the Senate a Deer^e whereby the precedence
was adjudgd him before the Spanish Ambassador; who loudly complaining thereof,
the Senate made answer, That the Republik did not trouble her self to examine
the greatness of their Majesty's, but she found within her Registers that in
all Acts both publik and private, in all Ceremonies, Visits, and Audiences, the
Ambassadors of France preceded those of Spain; wherein she would acquiesce. This
answer offended King Philip, who thereupon revokd his Ambassador. But Michael
Surianus Ambassador for the Republic in the Spanish Court, defended the Decree
of the Senate very vigorously, and in some mesure appeasd the spirit of King
Philip, who notwithstanding advancd this question upon all occasions. The
greatest endeavors he usd, was four years after in the Council of Trent, which
was the greatest Theater of Religion and Honor that had been seen above a
hundred years before, whereof we shall give an exact Relation as follows.

Of the Council of Trent.
A General Council after the Revolt of Luther Anno 1517. was desird by all
Christians, and often proposd by Charles the fifth and Francis the first of
France to Pope Leo the Tenth, Clement the seventh, and Paul the third, who at
last convokd an Ecumenical Free Council to be held at Trent, which was also
kept at Bolonia some part of the time, and there were ten Sessions made in
eighteen months. Then it ceasd until the death of Paul the third, 1549. The
Cardinal John Maria de Monte who had bin first President of the Council under
Paul 3. succeeded by the the name of Julius 3. who presently made an Indiction
of the Council again, which recommencd at Trent Anno 1550. and lasted also
under this Pope above 18 months; during which time there were six Sessions: but
being summond again by the same Julius, it ceasd under Marcellus 2. who held
the Pontificat but 22 days. Then it continued under Paul 4. Anno 1559. Pius 4.
succeeding him, made a new Indiction of the Council again, which began 1561.
under whom it lasted two years, during which time the nine last Sessions were
made: Insomuch that the whole Council by intermissions lasted about eighteen
years, from the year 1545. to 1563. but the Council sat together in
deliberation but five years, take all the Adjournments together.

Now, to understand the Right of the Precedences of Ambassadors, we must know
that in the said Council three kinds of Assemblies were made, viz.
Congregations General, Particular Congregations, and Sessions. In the
particular Congregations the Doctors assisted by some Bishops examined
Questions of Faith and Reformation, according to the distribution that was made
them; and in this there was no consideration had of Precedence or Ceremony; They
were Actions intra privatos parietes, within private Walls.

In the General Congregation all the Prelates assembled, and the Legates
presided, who proposed what ought to be treated in the particular
Congregations: There the Theologians were heard, and Ambassadors of Princes had
audience after their Commissions had been examined. In brief, all things were
concluded there which were to be promulgated in the following Session, and
Ambassadors had their places there according to their Rank.

At last the Session was the solemn day, at which after the Mass of the Holy
Spirit, and a Sermon preachd by some Prelat, or great Theologian, the Prelat
Officiating, pronounced aloud the Decrees already resolvd upon, which had been
approvd by the Fathers by this Canonical word Placet. Now all Ambassadors had
their seats of honor in those Sessions, and at Mass; and this Honor appeerd by
the places where they sat, as also by the Censer and Pax which were given them
to kiss during the celebration of the Mass.

In the Council held by Paul 3. and Julius 3. Charles the Fifth was Emperor,
and without any the least contradiction his Ambassadors preceded all others,
though the French scarce appeerd there, and in the 16 first Sessions there was
hardly any Prelat of France: so there was no dispute of any precedence at all,
the Emperor having the first rank; and there was no occasion at all for any
Ambassador from the King of Spain, because it was involvd then in the Empire:
yet there intervend some things which declard the Prerogatives of the King of
France.

First, in the Bull of indicting the Council by Paul 3. the King of France is
namd expressly after the Emperor, and all other Princes spoken of in general
terms without any name, in these terms: Charissimos in Christa Filios nostros
Carolum Romanorum Imperatorem semper Augustum; Et Christianissimum Regem
Franciscum duo praecipua Christiani Nominis firmamenta atque fulchra or are
atque obsecrare instituimus. Then a little after: Supra autem dictos
Imperatorem Regemque Christianissimum, nec non caeteros Reges, Duces, Principes
quorum praesentia si alias usquam, hoc quidem tempore maxim Sanctissimae
Christi Fidei, and Christianorum omnium futura est salutaris, rogantes atque
obsecrantes per viscera misericordiae Dei, etc. We have appointed to desire and
pray our most dear Sons in Christ, Charles Emperor of the Romans always
August, and Francis the most Christian King, the two chiefest Supporters and
Props of Christianity, etc. So that there is no other Prince particularly namd
in the Bull but the Emperor and the King of France, the other Kings and
Princes go under one general notion, which is a great advantage of Honor to
the Kings of France.

Secondly, From the entry of the Council 1545. Francis the first of France had
appointed for his Ambassadors Claude d' Urfe Seneshal of the Forests, Iacques
de Ligneres President of the third Chamber of Enquests, and Dean Peter Danes
afterward Bishop of Vaur: but being advertisd by some Bishops which were at
Trent how there were but little hopes that the said Council was like to have
good success, he revokd the said Ambassadors who appeerd not at all in the
Council. But Anthony Filiolo Archbishop of Aix being there, and demanding that
in the publik Prayers which were made for all Christian Princes, the King of
France should be expressly nominated as he was in the Bull of Indiction: the
Legates eluded this demand, insomuch that the Pope and the Emperor were only
namd in the Prayers, and all other Princes conceavd in General terms.

In the year 1546. King Francis 1. sent Peter Danes Bishop of Vaur for his
Ambassador to the Council, where making an eloquent Oration, he represented the
sad state of Christendom, and the disorders which were crept into the Church,
yea into the Roman Court: whereupon one Bishop laughd, saying, Gallus cantat,
The Cock crows. Danes replied suddenly, Utinam illo Gallocinio Petrus ad
resipiscentiam and fletum excitetur; I would to God that by this crowing of the
Cock Peter would be raisd up to repentance and tears. And this saying was
afterward in evry ones mouth.

In the year 1547. Paul 3. in regard of the Plague and Wars then in Germany,
transferrd the Council from Trent to Bolonia: but this he did, Communicato
etiam Consilio cum Imperatore, Christianissimo Rege, and aliis Regibus ac
Principibus Christianis, where the King of France is particularly namd.

In the year 1551. when Julius 3. had re-established the Council again at
Trent, although Hen. 2. the King of France had entered into a hot War against
Pope Julius for the Affairs of Parma, yet he employed Jacques Amyot Abbot of
Belosana, and afterward Bishop of Auxerre with a Letter bearing this
Inscription, Sanctissimis in Christo and observandis Patribus Tridentini
Conventus. Which Letter the said Amyot having delivered to Cardinal Crescentius
President of the Council, and the Secretary having read the Inscription, the
Spanish Bishops cried out, That it was a wrong done to the Council to call it
Conventum, a Convention, therefore protested against it. Nevertheless after long
dispute upon the signification of the word Conventus, it was concluded that it
might be taken in good part. The Elector of Mentz to apologize for France,
stood up and said, How shall we receave the Papers of the German Protestants
which we call Concilium Malignantium, if we reject the King of France's Letter
for calling us Conventum?

Hitherto Charles the Emperor being also King of Spain, there was no Question
of Precedence: but at the third Indiction of the Council by Pius 4. Anno 1561.
there were diverse clashes happend twixt the French Ambassadors and those of
Philip, which engendered great jelousies twixt the two Crowns, and high Contests
which happend principally from the imprudence of Pius 4.

In his Bull of Indiction he used other terms then Paul 3. and Julius 3. did;
for he names not the King of France as formerly, but involves him under the
general notions of other Christian Princes: Thereupon Philibert de la
Bourdesiere Bishop of Angouleme, Ambassador for the King in the Popes Court,
complaind of this omission in the Kings name; yet with a protestation, that
notwithstanding this misprision and prejudice to his Crown, he would not hinder
the continuance and progress of the Council whither he had commanded his
Bishops to repair. The Pope made answer, that he had given order to some
Cardinals to draw the Bull, and it seems they had not been careful of this
punctilio: for having namd the Emperor, they judgd it not so necessary to name
all Kings, but to comprize them under one general notion: whereupon the French
Ambassador replied, That it was one of the Prerogatives of his most Christian
Majesty not to be involvd in generals, but in express terms. The Pope rejoynd,
That he could not foresee all things, and for the future there should be a care
had there should be no such omission.

In the year 1562. there arrivd at Trent, Lewis de Saint Gelais, Lord of Lansac;
and three days after Arnaud Ferrier, and Guy du Faur Pybrac, Judge of Toulouse,
who were receavd very honorably by the Council: nay, a great part of the
Prelates subject to the King of Spain, went out to meet them; but Ferdinand de
Avalos Marquess of Pescara and Ambassador to King Philip, departed from Trent
three days before, and retird to Milan, whereof He was Governor, under pretext
that there were some apprehensions of danger from the Hugonots of Dauphine, and
from the Swisse; But in effect it was to avoid the meeting of the French
Ambassadors who took place in the General Congregation next the Imperial. The
Lord of Pybrac made a notable Oration, wherein speaking against the enormities
of the Church, the small progress the Council had made in so long a time, and
also for freedom of Opinions, it was not fit to stand waiting of things so
long from Rome: and being seconded by Lansac and Ferrier upon the same subject,
the Pope complaind thereof, and spoke loud that the King of France had not sent
Ambassadors to the Council, but rather Advocats for the Hugonots, etc. The
French Bishops arrivd afterward at Trent in November, conducted by the Cardinal
of Lorrain, who was receavd honorably by the Cardinal of Mantua, and other
Legates; but hitherto the point of Precedence was not touchd.

A little after the Arrival of the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Gallican
Bishops, Philip the second having revokd the Marquess of Pescara, employed to
Trent Ferdinand Quiniones Count of Luna in quality of Ambassador, who having
passd before to Germany to be assistant at the Coronation of Maximilian Son to
the Emperor Ferdinand, the Count of Luna desird to know of the Fathers of the
Council what place he should receave. Thereupon the Cardinal of Mantua the chief
Legate having consulted the Ambassadors of France, and the Cardinal of Lorain,
he proposd unto them a form of Accommodation, That concerning them they should
hold their place next the Imperial Ambassadors, and another place should be
given the Count of Luna opposite to the Legates on the other side, or after the
Ecclesiastical Ambassadors, or in some other part out of the bank of
Ambassadors. Whereunto the French replied, That they were employed by their King
not to judge of Processes, or decide the Rights of King Philip, who was a good
Friend and Brother-in-law to Charles the ninth; But if any offered to take that
place which was due to them, they were resolvd to defend it against any person
whatsoever. And if the Council would question it, they had in their Instructions
order to withdraw themselfs with all the French Prelates, and to protest against
the nullity of all resolutions that should be there transacted. To this the
Legate made no reply. This Answer in appearance was fair and generous, but in
effect it gave occasion of affronts, which afterward were done to the French
at the Council, and tended to strengthen the pretensions of the Spaniard, which
continue to this day. For the Right of the King of France is not only to be
immediately next the Emperor, but to see all other Kings come behind him:
insomuch that it was the French Ambassadors duty at that time to stand still
upon it, and oblige the Count of Luna to take his place after them; but to
permit him to sit elsewhere, was to cut out matter for a Process: For although
the French Ambassadors did hold their places, yet to suffer the Count of Luna
to sit apart, was tacitly to receave him into an equality: Insomuch that as
well in this first rancounter as afterward when the dispute happend in the
General Congregation, the Cardinal of Lorain was blamd that he was not punctual
enough in things relating to his Masters Honor.

In the year 1563. the Legates apprehending some clash twixt the Spanish and
French Doctors in point of Precedence of delivering their Opinions, ordaind,
that without distinction of Nation evry one should speak according to the
antiquity of his Doctorship. And because there were some French Doctors that
were more ancient then the Spanish, yet not permitted to speak first, the
Legates quickly satisfied them, saying, That the Doctors do not represent the
Prince his person as Ambassadors use to do.

But to compose these differences which grew very high, the Doctors were
divided to four Classes; and it was orderd that those which were sent from the
Pope being de Iure to speak first, the French Doctors should speak next; which
was accorded by the Legates: Therefore it was voted that after Salmeron the
Jesuit, and the Popes Theologue, Nicholas Maillart Dean of the Faculty in
Paris, should speak, and after that, evry one should speak according to his
reception into the degree of Doctor, which was practisd accordingly. But to
content the Spaniard, it was couched in the Register of the Council, that the
French Doctor Maillart had spoken according to his antiquity into Doctorship,
no relation being had to precedence of Nation.

In the same year 1563. on Easter Day the Count of Luna was receavd at Trent;
at his entry he marchd between the Ambassadors of the Emperor and the King's
of France. This action passd with much honor and civility twixt both Nations;
and the same time the Cardinal of Lorain writ to the Emperor Ferdinand, who
was then at Insbrug in the County of Tirol three days distant from Trent, upon
diverse affairs of the Council, and at the end prayed him to find out some
temperament for allaying the dispute of Precedence twixt the two Crowns. But
this clause of the Cardinal to the Emperor was blamd by diverse, for he should
not have desird a temperament in the business, but demanded Right. The Emperor
made answer, That it did not concern him to determine the Differences twixt the
two Kings in this particular; But to speak his sentiment herin, He thought that
if the French Ambassadors come immediately after His, and that none disturbs
them, what matter is it where the Spanish Ambassadors sit? But these words were
held to be of dangerous consequence: For in point of Precedence, whosoever
quits his place is presumed to scorn it, and seek after a higher; which cannot
be done without a prejudice to them who sat higher before.

Upon the 21 of May, at the General Congregation, the intention of the
Spaniards appeerd more clear: The Count of Luna after the foresaid solemn Entry
absconded himself for 40 days, without appeering openly in any Ceremony or
publik Act; and so being puzzled what course to take in this business, Somtimess
he resolvd to enter the Assembly in the midst of the Emperors Ambassadors, and
after they were ^ate to stand by them while his Commission was verified, and
then retire to his House. But thinking this course not generous enough for his
Masters honor, He prayed the French Ambassadors not to be there that day; which
being denied him, the Spanish Bishops proposd that Secular Ambassadors should be
prayed not to enter into the General Congregations, but only the day of their
Reception, and that They would be contented to assist the Ceremony at the
Session only; alleging, that it was practisd so in other General Councils. But
all the Ambassadors did mainly oppose this.

Then it was privately suggested to the Spanish Bishops by the Count of Luna,
that they should propose some point that might make the French Ambassadors
Parties, and so not capable to sit in the Assembly. As for example, they should
represent the Domages which the whole Church has receivd by the peace which
the King of France had made with the Hugonots, or some such other thing. But
that also taking no effect, and the Congregation being put to delays from day
to day by the obstinacy of the Count of Luna, at last that the Affairs of the
Council should not be retarded, the Cardinal of Lorain and the French
Ambassadors declard to the Legates, that, provided their place should remain
immediately after the Imperial Ambassadors, they did not much heed what place
the Ambassadors of Spain should take.

This weakness of the Cardinal, and of the French Ambassadors, did scandalize
all Christendom; and in France they blamd Him to have betrayed the Honor of
their Master; Nay, the Fathers of the Council took it in ill part, and at Rome
the Cardinal de Bourdesiere who was with the Pope for the King, having
complaind of this Spanish Ambition, and of this Innovation introducd against
the Ancient Orders, Pope Pius made answer, That he should blame the French
Ambassadors, and their imbecility; For his part, although he had bin solicited
before and after the Count of Luna's arrival at Trent, that he should favor this
dessein, yet He remaind constant and inflexible; and He wonderd that the French
Ambassadors were wrought upon so easily.

The great day of the Congregation being come, and evry Ambassador having taken
his place, the Count of Luna enters, and seats himself face to face to the
Legates, a good distance from the bank of the Ambassadors; and standing up, he
presents his Orders, and the Will of his Master; protesting afterward, that
although the first place was due to him after the Emperors Ambassador, as
representing the greatest Prince of Christendom, the greatest Pillar of the
Church, etc. yet not to introduce any confusion in the affairs of the Council,
he deported himself from this Right; yet with condition that this his
Protestation should be inserted in the Acts of the Council, and that they should
not be printed or publishd without it; besides, that a Copy should be delivered
Him by the Secretary of the Council. When he had said these words, he took the
place which was appointed Him near the Table of the Secretary of the Council.
Thereupon the French Ambassadors who were next the Imperials, said, That if the
place which they had were not the most Honorable after the Emperors, as it was
acknowledgd in all Councils, and namely in the Council of Constance, and in the
last Lateran Council held under Leo the tenth; Or if the place they had given
the Count of Luna was any way prejudicial to them, they prayed the Council to
provide presently either by Orders, Commandments, Excommunications, or other
courses taken in such a case, without having any regard to the person; But
because no body spoke a word, and that also the Imperial Ambassadors connivd at
this Innovation, although they had equal interest to hinder it as well as the
French because it might be disputed on against them, they added, that without
any blemish to the Honor of King Philip, and to the alliance of the two Crowns,
they protested for a nullity of these Proceedings, and requird that their
Protestation might also be inserted in the Acts of the Council, and a Copy
deliverd them. After these Disputes, the Fathers of the Council not saying any
thing, Fontidon a Spanish Doctor made a Latin Oration in the name of the Count
of Luna, wherein he exalted the Grandeur of the King of Spain, His Zeal to
Religion, and the Church in such extravagant expressions, and so derogatory to
other Princes, that the Imperial Ambassadors themselfs made complaint thereof to
the Count of Luna, who excusd himself, saying, That that Harang had displeasd
Him as much as any other. Now, the Promoter of the Council having made answer
to the said Oration, the Spanish Ambassador suddenly went from the Assembly,
(not staying until the Legates had risen up) it seems of purpose to prevent a
Dispute that might happen with the French, which He observd also in the
following Congregations, sitting always a part, and going out alone.

But the same Order could not be observd in the Church upon the day of the
Session, because the mode of sitting was otherwise, and the Ceremonies were
more precise in point of Precedencie, as that of the Pax and Censer at the
celebration of Mass. Therefore the Fathers of the Council consulted the Pope
before the Session, who being gaind by the Spaniards, and thinking also that
the French would show another trick of weakness, He writ to his Legates, That
although in the Session a place was given apart to the Spanish, yet that the
Pax and Censer should be given to both the Ambassadors at one time: But they
were commanded to keep the business secret until the very point of the action,
to prevent that the French should make no stir.

The day of the Session being come, which was 29 June, being St. Peter's day,
after that the Bishop of Valdasto in Savoy had begun to sing the Mass of the
Holy Spirit, there was suddenly a chair of Black Velvet brought from the
Sacristia or Vestry, which was placed twixt the last Cardinal and the first
Patriark, wherein the Count of Luna sat; The Cardinal of Lorain, together with
the French Ambassadors, made a great noise, and did rise up with an intention
to depart, when they understood that the Pax with the Censer should be presented
at the same time: But for fear to trouble the solemnity of the act, they were
contented to protest only against it, and to declare that the Right of the King
of France did not consist in an Equality, but in Precedence. The Gospel being
read, and a Theologue going up to the chair to make an Oration, the Legates,
with the Cardinal of Lorain, and the other Cardinals, with the Ambassador of
the Emperor, and Ferrier the second French Ambassador, (for Lansac was
returned to France, and had left behind him Ferrier and Pybrack) I say, all
these enterd into the Sextry, whither they called the Archbishop of Granada, (a
Spaniard) to find out some way of Accommodation: at last, after many disputes
and contestations on both sides, with many entrances and returns of the Count
of Luna, it was concluded that Mass should be ended with the Pax or Censer;
whereupon Luna went out of the Church accompanied by his Spaniards, triumphing
as it were that he had made this first pass for the advantage and honor of his
Master.

This action seemd very scandalous, and the Legates were much cried down, until
at last being not able to bear the outcry, they were constrained to produce the
Commands they had receavd from Rome: and the Injury was held the more sensible,
because it was offered to an Infant and Pupil King as Charles the ninth was, who
was at the same time assiegd by the Hugonots, and entangled in a Civil War; The
Cardinal of Lorain did write stinging Letters to the Pope, yet all within the
compass of Reverence: But Ferrier being a spritful and violent man, cried
aloud, That if at the first public Mass the Preference of the Pax and Censer
was not given to his Master, He would protest not only against the Legates and
the Council, who had their hands as it were tied up, nor against King Philip
who made use of these advantages, nor against the Church of Rome, (toward
which he would never loose due respects) but against the proper person of the
Pope himself, who, as he would prove, had bought the Pontificat, and so would
appeal from Him to a Legal Pope, and to a free and true Council; And if the most
Christian King his Master would convoke a National Council, it should be as
numerous and

It is very true that Ferrier and Pybrak had prepared a most acrimonious Harang
against the Pope, and against this Innovation which Ferrier was to pronounce,
and to command at the same time all the French Bishops and Doctors to retire
home, with a promise they should return when God should please to give his Church
a Legal Pope, and re-establish the Councils in their ancient and full Liberties.

This Harang was printed, but not pronouncd: in the mean time the Count of Luna
did glory that the Legates had promisd Him that at the first Mass he should be
receavd in an Equality touching the Pax and the Censer.

The Legates apprehending some ilfavourd issue from these rancounters, and
because the Ambassador of Poland declard that if the Ambassador of France would
withdraw himself from the obedience of the Council he would quickly follow him,
as the Ambassadors of diverse other Princes would do; The Legates, and the most
advised Members of the Council, specially Madruccio Cardinal of Trent in behalf
of the Emperor, thought it expedient to sing public Mass without giving the
Pax or the Censer; whereunto they had the consent of the Count of Luna.

This is the course which was taken to offer so signal an affront to the King of
France, whereof so much has been spoken, and which hindered the good that was
expected in France from this great Council. A little after, the Cardinal of
Lorain retird to Rome, and Ferrier declaimd loudly in one General Congregation
against the enormities and disorders which had crept into the Church, etc.

The Pope took this much to heart, and for to sweeten the business, he sent the
Cardinal of Lorain back again to the Council with full authority to regulat,
together with the Legates, what was amiss in the Proceedings of the Council. He
assisted at the twenty fourth Session held the 11 of November. 1563. the day of
the Sacrament of Marriage, and having receavd order from France to retire
speedily with all the French Bishops, the Legates hastened the conclusion of the
Council, and inorderd that the five and twentieth and last Session should be
held the third and fourth day of December, wherein as before, the French
Ambassadors took place, and the Count of Luna sat near the Secretary of the
Council; and in the public Masses there was no speech either of the Pax or
Censer.

So the Council of Trent finishd the 4 of December 1563. and Cardinal Moron who
was then President gave the publik Benediction to the Fathers, saying, Post
gratias Deo actas reverendissimi Patres Ite in pace: Most reverend Fathers,
after giving God thanks go in peace: whereunto all answered, Amen.

But because the custom is, that at the end of evry General Council
acclamations should be made to felicitat the Popes who had convoqud it, the
Fathers who had held it, and the Princes who had assisted, the Cardinal of
Lorain took a particular care this should be performd, for which he was censurd
as a care too inferior to his Eminence, which he should have left to the
Deacons, Promoters, Secretaries, and Masters of the Ceremonies of the Council.
But above all he was blamd that in the Acclamation made for the Secular
Princes, he causd not the name of the King of France to be particularly
mentiond, as it was observd in the Bull of Indiction; and for omission whereof,
complaint was made that Pius the fourth did it not, whereof the Cardinal could
not be ignorant.

Now, the Acclamation that was made in favor of the Secular Princes, (wherein
the name of the King of France was omitted) ran thus: The Cardinal said aloud,
Caroli quinti Imperatoris, and serenissimorum Regum qui hoc universale
Concilium promoverunt, and protexerunt, Memoria in Benedictione sit; Let the
memory of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and of the most serene Kings who have
promoted this universal Council, be always Blessed. Then, Serenissimo
Imperatori Ferdinando semper Augusto, Orthodoxo, and Pacifico, and omnibus
Regibus, Reipublicis, and principibus nostris multi anni: Many years to the
most serene Emperor Ferdinand ever August, Orthodoxal, and Peaceful; and to
all our Kings, Commonwealths, and Princes. Then the Fathers answered, Pium and
Christianum Imperatorem Domine conserva, Imperator Caelestis Terrenos Reges
Rectae Fidei conservatores custodi: O Lord, conserve the Pious and Christian
Emperor; O Celestial Emperor defend Earthly Kings, Conservers of the Right
Faith.

The first Acclamation was for the Dead, wherein the Cardinal forgot to express
the name of Francis the 1. and Hen. 2. who had contributed their care and zeal
for the good of the Council. The second was for living Princes, wherein he also
omitted the name of Charles 9. for which the said Cardinal was blamd at the
King of France his Council. He excusd himself that it was for the fear he had
to put division between the two Kings; and withal, that Charles of France being
yet a minor, he was like to be troubled about matters of Religion in regard of
the Hugonots, and might have need of King Philip, therefore it was no wisdom to
exasperat Him.

Thus have you a kind of Epitome of the great Council of Trent, specially of
the celebrous Contests, Intrigues, Competitions and Artifices twixt France and
Spain in point of Prerogative of Place, and Priority of Session.

The next Contest was at the Congress of Ambassadors in Vervins, 1598. (touchd
at before) where the French Ambassadors receivd an Accommodation by the
moderation of the Cardinal of Medici. The manner of this Accommodation was
thus: The Cardinal Legate being under a Cloth of State at the end of the Table
where the Treaty was to be held, had upon his Righthand the Nuntio, and next
Him the Spanish Ambassadors; upon his Left Hand the Legate had the French
Ambassadors, and in that posture they proceeded to negotiat and Treat without
any exception or animosities; whereby the Business producd peaceful and blessed
effects, whereof all Christendom did reap very wholesome fruit.

After this, there happend a tough competition upon the same account of
Precedence in the Court of Rome; and when the Spaniard could not prevail there,
He went to the Emperors Court Maximilian the second his near Kinsman, where his
Ambassadors had the Prerogative of Place before the Ambassadors of Charles the
ninth King of France: whereupon Gaspar Coligni protested loudly against this
apparent injury, and that it was a sufficient cause to denounce War. But
Mendosa the Spanish Ambassador being much pressd hereabouts, and reducd to a
narrow straight, found out at last this witty evasion, saying, Se nolle quidem
anteire, tamen cogi non posse ut Francorum Legatos sequeretur: If He did not go
before, yet He could not be forcd to follow the French Ambassador.

Besoldus (with others who are great Advocats for the Spanish Precedence) beat
their Brains to find out arguments to that effect: amongst which, the greatest
is, the multitude of Dominions that have accrued to the Spaniard: whence they
deduce this Principle, Ex facto sumitur Ius, Right is to be taken out of the
Fact; and the Fact being changd, the Right also changes. Therefore the Fact and
circumstances of things being changd on the Spaniards side, and respect had to
his increase of Territories, and present condition, it may well alter the
former custom of giving precedence to France.

Then he takes the Cudgels against England in behalf of Spain, notwithstanding
that he acknowledges out of Meteranus that the English are the most ancient
Christians, and that Germany his own Country owes her Religion first to Them;
That the Kings of England are descended of the Noblest Families of any, which
makes him instance in King Cunobelinus, whose Coin is to be seen to this day,
who raignd in Great Britain about our Saviors Nativity. He alleges further
how the King of England is feodary or subordinat to no earthly Power, but is
Gods immediate Vicar in his own Dominions: yet he concludes simply and
irrationally in these words; Verum and Angli nimis antiquis argumentis pugnant,
and praesenti Majestati Hispaniae aequiparandi minime esse videntur: The
English fight with too ancient arguments, and seem not to be compard to the
present Majesty of Spain. He speaks also as simply, and indeed not without some
absurdity, when after those uncontrollable arguments, he says, Sed porro
absonum est quod Anglus Hispano Sessionis litem movet; It is a senseless thing
that the English should move any debate with the Spaniard for privilege of
Session.

And another great Champion for the Precedence of Spain, viz. Diego Valdez,
discourses as weakly; for notwithstanding that he acknowledges Lucius to be a
Christian King of England in the time of Pope Eleutherius, (which was many
hundred years before there was any in Spain) and that he confesses that Summa
Ratio est quae ducitur a Religione, yet he would not have England compare with
Spain in point of Precedence: whereby he discovers not only a great deal of
injustice and partiality, but also a gross Ignorance in Antiquity, by calling
Lucius King of England, whereas this Country had not that Name till the Saxons
came in, which was above three hundred years after: For till then it was called
Britannia by all Forreners, and Loegria or Lloygher by the native Inhabitants;
which name continues among the Welsh to this day. Nor is this His Error alone,
but of many other great Antiquaries, and some of our own Authors, who having no
due regard to the computation of time, do very frequently call this Country
England many hundred of years before the word was created.

Thus have we producd and faithfully alledgd the principal Arguments that
France has for a Precedence: We will conclude with two late Passages which
happend in this kind; One was in the Hague twixt Monsieur de Thou, and Don
Estevan de Gamarra the Spanish Ambassador; whose Coaches meeting casually in a
place where there were two Rails, there happend a scustle for Precedence; but a
band of Soldiers came and kept them quiet till notice was sent to the Council
of State; who sitting three or four hours about it, at last they gave command
that the Rails should be cut down; and so the way being left open, the scustle
ended.

The second was in London twixt Monsieur l' Estrade and the Baron de
Batteville, both of them Ambassadors at the English Court, the latter for the
King of Spain, the other for France; A new Danish Ambassador was to make his
Entry through London; and His Majesty of Great Britain having intimation that
there might be some clash between the Coaches of the foresaid Ambassadors if
they sent them according to custom to bring in the said new Ambassador, He
sent unto them that they would forbear to send their Coaches because some
inconvenience might arise: Batteville answered, That he would conform to his
Majesty's pleasure, provided l' Estrade did likewise do so: But l' Estrade gave
answer to the Kings Message, That his Predecessor the French Ambassador
immediately before him had receavd a check at his return to France for omitting
this ceremony, and so was he like to do if he did not perform it. So both of
them sending their rich Coaches and Laquays to Tower-wharf where the new
Ambassador was to land, Batteville it seems had taken such a survey of the
place, that his Coach stood in such a posture that none could get before it and
the Kings Coach: besides, he had causd the Rains and Harness of his Coach to be
lined with Wire, making them thereby poof against the strokes of Swords: so there
happend a hot and fierce Scirmige, there being Pistols on both sides besides
Swords, and the French had some horsemen also; so the poor Horses were slashd,
and some Laquays killd on both sides, and one Spanish Gentleman was killd in
the Coach: but Batteville stood firm to his ground, and so his Coach went next
to the Kings all the way. News being sent hereof to Paris, it was much resented,
and the Spanish Ambassador there being confind to his House, he presently
dispatchd an Express to Madrid; who being returned, He sent to the Louvre that
he had receavd such Orders that would give his Majesty satisfaction touching the
late Traverses in England, and so desired Audience, which was appointed him the
next day: In the interim command was sent that the Princes of the Blood and
chief Officers of the Crown should be there. The Spanish Ambassador being come,
and expecting a private audience, but finding such a solemn meeting, was a
little stunnd at first; yet he went on, and deliverd his Message to the King:
which was, that touching the late Contest in England, it was done without his
Catholic Majesty's direction and knowledge, therefore he would take a course
that no occasion should be offered for such differences herafter. Besides these,
he pronouncd other Explanatory words that were equivalent to an acknowledgment
of Precedence to his most Christian Majesty, which were suddenly commanded to
be registered in the Council for an Act of State, and so to stand upon Record to
Posterity.

Hereupon there was a most prudent Act of State passd in the Privy Council of
the King of Great Britain, That in regard of the inconvenience and disturbances
which did thence arise, his Majesty commanded that no Foreign Ambassadors
Coaches shall for the future go to accompany and introduce any new Ambassador
whatsoever, because his Majesty's Coaches are sufficient to accompany them in a
fitting Equippage: which Act I believe will be a leading case to all the Courts
of Christendom.

Before we conclude this Section touching the Right of Precedence which the
French King claims of other Princes, we will add what Mr. de Breves says in
his Appendix of the Negotiations in the East, where he says, That in the Reign
of Henry the Great he took Precedence of the Ambassadors of Rodulphus the
Emperor in Constantinople at the Port of the Turks Court, who values Christian
Princes according to the merit of their Might.

WE will now proceed to weigh and winnow the Arguments of Spain in order to a
Precedence, which we will extract also, and distill out of their own Authors, as
Valdesius, Francisco Vasquez, Camillo Borrello, Besoldus, Morales, Augusto
Cavaisll, Caranato, with diverse others.

And let this be a Close to the second Section.
The third Section, CONTAINING The Reasons whereby the King of Spain pretends,
and claims Priority of Place, and Proximity of Session next the Emperor at all
solemn Meetings, and in all Publik Transactions of State, etc.
Which Reasons We will reduce also to Ten Heads or Arguments;
The first Argument, Proving, That the Catholic King may challenge Precedence,
because Spain is the Noblest Kingdom of Europe, as being always accounted the
Head thereof. The second Argument, Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge
Precedence by the Authority of General Councils, and the Learned Doctors of the
Church. The third Argument, Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge
Precedence, because Spain first receavd and professd the Catholic Faith; That
the first Christian Church was built there; The first Council celebrated; The
first Bishop was elected out of Her, The first Emperor created, etc. The
fourth Argument, Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge Precedence,
because He is the Catholic King, which is a more ancient Title then
Christianissimus. The fifth Argument, Proving, That the King of Spain may
challenge Precedence because that in magnitude of Kingdoms, in Power and
Tresure he excels all other. The sixth Argument, Proving, That the King of
Spain may challenge Precedence for Nobleness of Family, and that the Kingdom
of France did justly belong to Philip 3. The seventh Argument, Proving, That
the King of Spain may challenge Precedence because he is King of Jerusalem. The
eighth Argument, Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge Precedence
because of free and absolut Dominion, and that he has Empires under Him. The
ninth Argument, Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge Precedence
because he has done such great Offices to the Christian Church. The tenth and
last Argument, Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge Precedence because
the Catholic Church receaves greater Protection and Emoluments from Him then
from any other Prince whatsoever.
OF all these Arguments we shall treat distinctly in several divisions
according to the former method, and distill out of the chiefest Spanish Authors
that write of this subject, the Elixir and strength of their Reasons. But let
the Reader take this Advertisement, That he must not expect here the particular
Quotations and Marginals wherewith the Spanish Writers use to abound, and which
indeed belong to Civilians and Iurists: No, the Author here goes on in a freer
and generous way, and the Reader without abusing his Faith may believe what he
delivers, being extracted with much fidelity, and care out of the forementiond
Authors who write for the Crown of Spain, and in their own expressions; and so
we begin with the first Argument, viz. That Spain is called the Head of Europe,
and consequently the Noblest Kingdom.

I.
THe beginning of evry thing as it is the hardest, so it is always accounted
the worthiest and most Noble part, as being the head and source whence the rest
are derivd: so our blessed Savior is called Principium and Caput, the beginning
and Head whereof all the Faithful are Members: He is (...) as well as (...); And
his Vicar General upon earth (the Pope) is called Caput Ecclesiae Militantis,
The Head of the Militant Church. For in the Head, as Philosophers teach us,
Nature shows her chiefest skill in the architecture and composition of Man (the
Microcosm) in regard that in the Head all the Senses are placd; The Eyes which
are the Casements of the Soul are there; The Tongue which is her chief
Interpreter moves there; Nay, all her Faculties, as the Will, the Memory, and
the Intellect, by which we are distinguished from Beasts, have their dwelling
there as in a Capitol: Therefore, as Cassanaeus says, He is a Monster of a Man
who would compare the Body with the Head. Now, by consent of all, if the Head be
the predominant part of the Body, surely He who governs the Head must be more
excellent then He who governs the Body; As the City of Rome being the Capital
City of the Christian Empire, the Pope being Bishop of Rome, is acknowledgd the
Metropolitan and chiefest among the rest, because he has the excellentst City
and Diocese.

Now an Argument for Precedence drawn A Nobilitate Regni, carries much strength
and reason with it: Therefore if the King of Spain be He who governs the Head of
Europe, it follows that He may be called the chiefest King. Now, to prove that
Spain is so, we will produce these proofs; First, the Authority of Pliny, who
says thus: Terrarum Orbis Universi in tres dividitur parts, Europam, Asiam,
Africam, Origo ab Occasu Solis, and Gaditano Freto, quo irrumpens Oceanus
Atlanticus in Maria Interiora diffunditur: The Globe of the earth is divided
into three parts, Europe, Asia and Afrik, the Head is from the setting of the
Sun, and the Gaditan Frete, which Navigators commonly call The Streights mouth,
where the Atlantic Ocean breaking into the inner Seas diffuseth it self.
Whence it appeers, that the beginning of Europe is placed in the Gaditan
straight. Strabo likewise in his Cosmography, and others of the most ancient
and best Geographers concur herin, among whom Nicephorus says, In Hispania
seeds fixerunt quae prima ab Hespero Regio est; And Lucius Marinaeus Siculus,
speaking of the situation of Spain, begins thus: Hispania sicuti Plinius
aliique Scriptores tradiderunt, Regio prima in Solis occasu Europae terminos
claudit. Abraham Ortelius also in his Theater of the World, and Cassanaeus
confess all this; and while they compare Europe to a Virgin, Spain is placed in
the head of her by the Geography of Ioannes Encys^s; And it may be proud by two
Reasons that Spain is the Head, First, that since the Terrestrial Orb is begirt
with the Sea on all sides, the Sea cannot diffuse it self to visit other
Regions but by the Regions of Spain, where the Gaditan Straight is as it were a
Fountain, beginning and origin; where there is a gate open, and whence as it
were from a Head it derives it self through Europe, flowing one way into the
Mediterranean, and on the other side into the Ocean, and so protends it self to
Asia and Afrik; insomuch that from this Head the other members proceed, and
from this Spring other Seas flow out like Rivers, as Pliny commemorates in
another place.

Secondly, it make infinitely for the King of Spain, that he does Lord over the
New World where Asia, Afrik, Europe, and diverse parts of the East, West, North
and South do converse, and where Spain commands as Queen and Head, and reduces
daily other Regions to the Catholic Faith as Members of that Head.

It being thus proud that Spain is the Head of Europe, it remains to prove that
it is the Noblest Region, and that it is a Kingdom then which the Sun does not
behold a more large and flourishing; for whatsoever has Nobleness, Wit or
Splendour in it, she has. There is not any thing that can be expected from
Nature, Virtue and Fortune, but Spain has it abundantly; she has subdued most
Noble Peeple, most Resolut Spirits, most Warlike Nations by Wisdom as well as
by Arms: Therefore Spain is to have Precedence after Italy of all other European
Regions. Hear what Iustine speaks of her: Hispania neque ut Africa violento
sole torretur, neque ut Gallia assiduis ventis fatigatur, sea media inter
utrasque hinc temperato calore, inde felicibus, and tempestivis imbribus in
omnia frugum genera foecunda est, adeo ut non ipsius tantum Incolis, verum
etiam Italiae, urbique Romanae cunctarum Rerum abundantia sufficat: Spain is
neither roasted by a violent Sun as Afrik is, nor is she troubled with
continual Winds as France is, but in a middle temper twixt both she enjoys a
moderat heat with happy and seasonable showers toward the production of all
kind of fruit, in such plenty that she has not only sufficient to serve her
own peeple, but she commonly furnishes Italy and the City of Rome with her
superfluities.

What shall I speak of the amoenity of the Soil, of the salubrity of Air, of
her excellent Metals, of her exquisit VVoolls, of her incomparable Iron and
Steel, of her rare VVines, of her Silks, of her Riches and Tresure! What shall
I say of the Fidelity and Fortitude, of the Temperance and Sobriety, of the
Devotion and Sanctimony, of the Religion and Piety, of the Abstinence and
Sobriety, of the admired Patience and Constancy of her Inhabitants! Nor does
she supply other Nations with her excess of diverse Commodities, but she
furnishes them with Emperors and Generals. We may read in the Maccabees that
one of the Arguments which the Roman Captains usd, to terrify the Jews, was,
how that they had subjugated many parts of Spain.

Hear what the famous Poet Claudian sings of Her in this Rapture:

Quod dignum memorare tuis Hispania Terris
Vox Humana valet? primo lavat aequore Solemn
India; Tu fessos exacta luce jugales
Proluis, inque tuo respirant sydera fluctu;
Dives equ^s, frugum facilis, pre^iosa metallis,
Principtbus foecunda piis; Tibi saecula debent
Trajanum; series his fontibus Aelia fluxit,
Hinc senior pater, hinc Iuvenum Diademata Fratrum;
Namque Aliae Gentes quas faedere Roma recepit,
Aut Armis domuit, varios aptantur in usus
Imperii; Phariae segetes, and Punica Messis
Castrorum devota cibo, dat Gallia robur
Militis, Illyricis sudant Equitatibus alae;
Sola novum Latiis vectigal Iberia Rebus
Contulit Augustos, fruges, aeraria, miles
Undique convenient, totoque ex Orb leguntur.
Haec generat quae cuncta regit, nec laud Virorum
Censeri contenta fuit, nisi Matribus aeque
Vinceret, and gemino certatim splendida sexu
Placillam, Mariamque daret, pulchramque Serenam.
And whereas innumerable things do offer to be spoken to the glory of Spain,
whereof both Poets and Prose-Authors are full, I will make choice here of that
eloquent Character which Pacatus Latinus gives of her in his famous Panegyrik
to Theodostus the Emperor. Nam primum tibi Patria est Hispania Terra omnibus
Terris foelicior, cui excolendae, atque adeo ditandae impensius quam caeteris
gentibus supremus Ille Rerum Fabricator indulsit; Quae nec Austrinis obnoxia
aestibus, nec Arctois subjecta frigoribus, media fovetur Axis utriusque
temperte. Quae hinc Pyreneis montibus, Illinc Oceani aestibus, inde Tyrrheni
Maris littoribus coronatae Natura solertis ingenio velut alter Orbis
includitur; Add tot egregias Civitates, add culta incultaque vel fructibus
plena, vel gregibus. Add auriferorum opes fluminum, add rad^antium Metalla
gemmarum. Scio fabulas Poetarum auribus mulcendis repertas aliquando nonnullis
gentibus attribuisse Miracula, quae dum sint vera, sunt singula, nec jam
excutio veritatem, etc. In the first place thy Country is Spain, a Land happier
then all Lands, which for Agriculture and Riches, the supreme Fabricator of all
things has indulgd more favorably then other Nations; for it is not obnoxious
to Southern Heat, nor subject to Northern Cold, but is cherishd with a middle
temper of both the Poles. This side Spain is crowned with the Pyrenean Hills, on
that side with the Breezes of the Ocean, then with the shores of the
Mediterranean Sea, being fencd by the industrious hand of Nature, as if she
were another world. Add herunto so many gallant Cities, Add cultivated and
incultivated places, all either full of Fruit or Cattle; Add the Wealth of the
Goldbearing Rivers, Add Mines of shining Metals, etc.

The Renown of the Spanish Nation was before that of the Romans; for the fame
of their Valor did ring among the Greeks in the Wars of Peloponnesus; and
Alcibiades in an Oration that Thucydides mentions of his, calls them
Fortissimos and Pug^acissimos omnium Barbarorum, The Valiantst and VVarlikst of
all the Barbarians, as the Greeks termd then all other Nations besides
themselfs, which the Romans did afterward. Annaeus Florus calls Spain
Bellatricem, Viris Armisque Nobilem, Annibalis Eruditricem; Warlike, Noble for
Men and Arms, and who taught Hannibal; for all the Exploits which he performd,
he did with Spaniards. And observable it is, that after the Romans had invaded
the Provinces of Spain, they were the last whom they subdued, fighting in Her,
and for Her in many desperate doubtful Battails, being sometimes Victors,
sometimes Vanquishd, the space of about two hundred long years, whereas they did
spend not near so much time in bringing under the Roman yoke any other Country
unless it was Great Britain, (now England) who also wrastled so long before she
could be reducd to a general obedience; which discovers the innated stoutness
of the two Nations; whereas all Gallia was brought under in less then Ten years,
which may be the reason that Julius Caesar (their Conqueror) should say, Plebe
Galliae nihil contemptibilius, There Is nothing so contemptible as the Peeple of
Gallia.

Argum. 2. That the Catholic King may challenge Precedence by the Authority of
General Councils, and the Learned Doctors of the Church.
THe Philsopher beats still upon the Anvil of Reason to make his Conclusions
good; The Mathematician by practical and visible Experiments brings his
Conclusions to Demonstrations; The Jurists and Theologues do commonly make good
their Tenets by Authority of the Ancients, by Examples of Antiquity; And indeed
Responsa Patrum, Consulta Prudentum, have bin much reputed in all Ages; there
was always a venerable and religious esteem had of them, so that it is held one
of the strongest ways of disputing; therefore the dint of this second Argument
shall be to produce the Authority of ancient Ecumenical Councils, that the
Noble Kingdom of Spain has had the Precedence from time to time of France,
and consequently of all other Countries.

But let this previous Advertisement go before, That superiority of session,
and subscription in General Councils, has bin diversely usd: For sometimes the
Bishops have not subscribd, taken place, or given their suffrages in their own
names, but in the name of the Province or Kingdom which they represented; and
in that case there is not so much regard had of the Person, or antiquity of
Consecration, but the Dignity of the Nation, as it appeers in two Decrees of
Gratianus: Therefore the Bishop of Milan did subscribe before him of Ravenna,
though Ravenna be much the more ancient. This course was observd in the Nicene
Council, where the Bishops voted, and subscribd not according to Priority of
Consecration, but Dignity of Provinces, and of the Souverain Prince who sent
them. The like course was taken in the first Constantinopolitan Council, and
others. But as Baronius observes, to sit on the Right Hand does nor always
imply superiority of place; for he relates according to the ancient order of
Rome, that the Priests had sometimes the Right hand of the Bishops, as appeers
by these words, Sedebunt ex locali dispositione ut intrantibus Ecclesiam
Episcopi sint ad sinistram, Presbyteri vero ad dexteram; and quando Pontifex
sederit, and ad eos respexerit, Episcopos ad dextram, Presbyteros intueatur ad
sinistram: They shall sit by local disposition so, that in entering the Church
the Bishops shall be on the Left hand, and the Priests on the Right; but when
the Pope shall be sat, and looks upon them, the Bishops shall be on the Right,
and the Priests on the Left.

In the first Act of the Nicene and Chalcedonian Synod, it is left upon record
that the Pontificial Legates sat on the Left hand, the Bible being placed in
the middle of the Hall, which denoted that Christ was present and President.
Moreover, in the celebration of the Mass the Epistle is read upon the Right
hand, and the Gospel on the Left, though we know the Gospel to be the worthier
of the two.

This being premisd, we will now to the promised Authorities of ancient
Councils. We read that in the time of the Apostles, and the very infancy of
the Church, there were four publik Assemblies or Councils; The first was of
about 120 of the Faithful who met to elect and substitut Matthias to be Apostle
in the room of Judas. The second, was to choose Deacons, in whose number the
blessed Protomartyr St. Stephen was one. The third, was to confute Cerinthus
the Heretic, and whether Circumcision was to continue. The fourth, was to
give the Circumcision an honorable Burial. Now, it is to be observd, that
before the two last were held, St. James the Apostle had travelld Spain, and
having reducd that Peeple to Christianity, he brought over some of them to
Jerusalem, who were in all probability present at those two last Councils: for
in the Acts of the Apostles we read that all the Faithful were at them. Then
was St. James the first Converter of Spain, made the first Martyr of all the
Apostles, being beheaded by Herod Agrippa, 44 Anno after the Incarnation of our
Savior.

It having appeerd that some Spaniards had bin at the first Councils of the
Apostles, We will now pass to the Nicene Council, (pretermitting the Ancyritan
and Illiberitan Synods, with others) Now, That of Nice was the first Universal
or Ecumenical Council that ever was; for it was convokd by authority of the
secular power the Emperor being then become Christian. This celebrous Council
was in the time of Pope Sylvester 325. And as in the Acts it stands upon
record, the Bishops therein did not subscribe according to antiquity of
Consecration, but according to the Dignity and Renown of the Province for which
they servd; Osius Bishop of Cordoua servd then for Spain, and Nicasius
Diviensis for Gallia, but Osius subscribd first to the Canons of the Council,
and they are the first most authentik and legal Canons of any, for the Emperor
did consent thereunto. Now as the Record has it, 318 Bishops subscribd to the
Acts thereof, which begin thus:

Osius Episcopus Civitatis Cordubensis Provinciae Hispaniae dixit* Ita credo
sicut superius scriptum est: Osius Bishop of the City of Cordoua in the
Province of Spain, said, I believe so as it is written above. Victor and
Vincentius Presbyteri Urbis Romae, pro Venerabili Viro Pap^ Episcope Nostro
sancto Sylvestro subscripsimus, Ita crede^tes sicut suprascriptum est: Victor
and Vincentius Presbyters of the City of Rome, we have subscribd for the
Venetable Man Pope our Bishop Saint Sylvester, believing so as is above
written. Provinci^ Egypti Alexander Alexandriae Magnae, etc. Of the Province of
Egypt Alexander of great Alexandria, etc.
And when all Provinces had in their order and several degrees thus subscribd,
the last supscription runs thus:

Provinciae Galliarum Nicasius Diviensis, Of the Province of Gallias Nicasius
Diviensis. I know the French have objected that Osius might be then Legate for
the Pope, and so had precedence; but not a syllable of this is spoken of in the
Records of the Council. Others alledg, that Osius being a Man of extraordinary
Renown at that time because he had had a great hand in the conversion of
Constantin the Emperor, an extraordinary respect was born him; for Nicephorus
calls Him the Miracle of that Age, and Athanasius styles him Patrem
Conciliorum, Ducem, and Antesignanum: But Ambrosius Morales with others aver,
that he subscribd first out of no other respect but as he was Bishop of
Cordou^, and represented the Noble Region of Spain: And for that regard He
preceded also the Bishop of Constantinople, as it appeers in a Letter which was
written from that Nic^ne Council to the Pope, which runs thus: Beatis^imo Papae
Urbis Romae cum omni reverentia colendo Sylvestro, Osius Episcopus Provinciae
Hisp^niae Civitatis Cordubensis; and Macarius Ecclesiae Constantinopolitanae;
and Victor and Vincentius Presbyteri Urbis Romae Ordinati Ex directione Tua. To
the most Blessed Pope of the City of Rome to be worshipped with all reverence
Sylvester, Osius Bishop of the Province of Spain and City of Cord^a; and
Macarius Bishop of Constantinople; and Victor and Vincentius Priests of the
City of Rome ordaind by thy direction, etc.

After the Nicene Council celebrated under Pope Sylvester, other Synods or
small Councils met where the Bishops of remote Provinces did not repair, but
they who were not far distant. But at the great Council of Sard^ (for so it is
called by Athanasius) there assembled 300 Occidental Bishops, and 70 of the
Levant, who were most of them Arrians: In this Council also Spain is namd next
Rome, as it appeers by the Record which goes thus: Sancta Synodus Dei gratia ex
Urbe Roma, Hispanis, Gallis, Italis, etc. And Athanasius relates in his
Apology against the Arrians thus: Fuere in Magno S^rdico C^ncilio plures quam
trecenti Epis^opi qui ex multis Provinciis Egypti, Lybiae, (...), Palestinae,
etc. Hisponiarum, Galliarum, Britanniarum, etc. eo se ad Concilium contulerunt:
There were in the Council of Sardis above 300 Bishops, who out of many Provinces
of Egypt, Lybia, (...), Palestine, etc. Spain, Gallia, Britain, etc. did repair
to the Council.

In the reign of Constantius the Emperor 358. He causd two Councils to
convene, One of the Oriental Bishops at Seleucia; The other at Ariminum in
Italy, consisting of Western Bishops, and in the Acts thereof Spain is still
nominated before France. At the first Council in Constantinople, and that at
Rome under Pope Symachus, with others, there can be no judgment made of
Precedencies, until Lugdune^se Concilium, the second Council at Lions, Anno
1274. held under Pope Gregory the tenth, where among diverse other there were
Ambassadors from Paleologue the Eastern Emperor, and the King of Tartary. This
Council was convokd principally for reconciling the Greek Church with the
Latin, for the conversion of the Tartars, and also for an Expedition to the
Holy Land. There assembled 500 Archbishops and Bishops, 40 Abbots, and 1000
Prelates and Doctors, among whom ^onadventure and the Angelical Doctor Thomas
Aquinas who assisted there did die. Don Iaime King of Aragon was earnestly
solicited by the Pope to be there, as Peter (...) has it upon good record in
the Spanish Tongue, as follows: Viendo el Papa Gregorio que la yglesia tenia
gran necessidad de Concilia para much as cosas, y especialmente para las de
Ultrama^ determino d^ juntar Concilio en Leon en Francia para la p^scua del
Espiritu (...)* y embiava a (...) al Rey de Aragon, (...) que no faltasse d^
(...)necessidad de (...) presentia, para dar Consejo, y favor a la santa Ig be
(...), etc. Pope Gregory seeing that the Church had great necessity of a
General Council for many things, specially for Affairs beyond the Seas,
determind to convoque one at Lions in France toward Whitsontide; and sending
notice hereof ^o James King of Aragon, he endeard the business unto him,
desiring his presence, in regard there would be great want of his person to
afford counsel and favor to the Holy Church, and ^.

King James came accordingly in a splendid Equip page; and the Cardinals,
Bishops, and the world of Prelates there came to meet him three miles, were so
numerous, that though they set forth betimes in the morning* ye^ it was after
noon before he arrivd at the Popes Palace: The next day* He made a Noble
Speech, and Hortative for a Cruzada to the Holy Land, taking the superior place
all the time he was there* which raising some envy in the Ambassadors of other
Kings, discontents grew, and so nothing took effect.

Under Clement the fifth, Anno 1311. a Council was convokd at Vienna, wherein
there were 300 Bishops, besides other Ecclesiastiks, where Philippe le Bell, with
his Son Luys Hutin King of Navarre, and two other of his Sons came, but there is
no mention made in the Records of any matters of Precedence, nor likewise in
the Council of Mantua held by Pius 2. 1458.

Then came the Council of Basil, and hear what Platina says in the Life of
Eugenius 4. Et quod Basiliense Concilium jam (...) inchoatum Martini Decreto
augeri indies cerneret, conturrentibus eo Hispaniae, Galliae, Germaniae, etc.
principibus qui communem Christianae Reiqublicae causam in arbitrio Concilii
disponebant. And because the Council at Basil begun before by the Decree of
Marlin was seen to increase daily, some Princes of Spain, France, and Germany,
etc concurring thither for disposing of the common cause of the Christian
Republik, according to the arbitrament of the Council, etc. where you find that
Spain is nominated before all other Countries.

In the Council of Florence begun at Ferrara under Eugenius 4. where Johannes
Paleologus the Greek Emperor, and the Patriark of Constantinople, and a great
confluence of Greek and Latin Prelates were assembled, there is no superior place
mentiond in the Acts of that Council, nor among the Writers of the History
thereof.

We come now to the Council of Trent, where the Marquess of Pescara and the
Count of Luna were Ambassadors for Philip the second, the mighty King of Spain:
you may find that in the Acts of that long Council they never came behind the
Emperor, but sat between the Secretary of the Council and the Popes Nuncio on
the right hand, whereas the French Ambassador fate upon the left hand both of
the Legate and the Imperial Ambassador.

Now to go from Ecumenical Councils to National, whersoever the Bishops of
Spain and France met, Spain had the first Session, Voice and Nomination as the
Nobler Kingdom. As appeers in the third Council at Toledo, in the reign of
King Ricaredus, as may be plainly read in the Works of Garsia Loaisa, Preceptor
to the glorious and Catholic King Philip 2. and afterward Archbishop of
Toledo, whose sublime Erudition joynd with integrity, and signal sanctity of
Life and Manners do so contend for precedence, that it is hard to judge which
of them excels most, they all are so perfectly resplendent.

In the fourth Toledo Council there is frequent mention made in Morales, de
Hispaniae and Galliae praesulibus; de Hispaniae and Galliae sacerdotibus.

Go to the ancient Doctors of the Church where there is mention made of Spain
and France, Spain most commonly is namd first: we will first instance in
Tertullian in his Book Adversus Iudaeos, where speaking of the multitude of
Nations that were converted to Christianity, He speaks Hispaniarum omnes
termini, and Galliarum diversae Nationes and Britannorum inaccessa loc^
Romany, Christo vero subdita, etc. There is a remarkable thing in Irenaeus, Et
si in mundo loquelae dissimiles sint, Virtus tamen Traditionis una and eadem
est; and neque hae quae sunt in Germania fundatae Ecclesiae aliter credunt, a^t
aliter tradunt; Neque hae quae in Iberis sunt neque hae quae sunt in Celtis;
neque hae quae sunt in Orient; neque hae quae sunt in Egypto; Neque hae quae
sunt in Lybia; neque hae quae in medio Mundi sunt constitutae* sed sicut Sol
creatura Dei in universo mundo unus, and idem est, sic lumen ac praedicatio
Veritatis ubique lucet, and illuminat omnes homines qui volunt ad Veritatis
cognitionem venire. Although the Languages of the world be differing, yet the
Virtue of Tradition is one and the same: For neither those Churches that are
founded in Germany do believe, or deliver otherwise; nor those which are in
Spain, nor those which are in France, etc.

We will conclude with Saint Hierome: Hoc in Ecclesiis suis faciant quod
Romae, sive quod in Italia, etc. quod in Hispania, quod in Britannia, quod
etiam ex part per Gallias, etc.

This precedence for Spain is also confirmd in the Imperial Laws of Justinian,
where he says, Quae cunque in partibus Hispaniarum, Galliae sive Francorum
aguntur, etc. And there was great care and caution usd to give evry Country and
Nation its Right touching this particular in the Justinian Laws, whose
principal aim was suum Cuique tribuere, to give evry Country and Kingdom its
due in point of Dignity as well as of Possession, and common Right.

Argum. 3. That the King of Spain may challenge Precedence, because Spain first
receavd, and professd the Catholic Faith; That the first Christian Church was
built there; The first Council was celebrated there; The first Bishop and the
first Emperor was out of Her, etc.
THey who write of the Glory of Nations, should in the first place look upon
their antiquity and origin. There is a Topik Axiom, That Bonum quo antiquius
eo melius; Therefore Antiquity conduces much to the Honor and Dignity of a
Peeple; As Pliny does elegantly express, Reverere gloriam Veterum; nam hanc
ipsam senectutem quae in Homine venerabilis, in Urbibus sacra est: Reverence
the Glory of the Ancients, for that Old Age which is venerable in Man, is
sacred in Cities.

Touching the Originals of Spain, and of Her Inhabitants, with the propagation
and succession of them, there are four things to be considered in the enquiry
thereof; first, of what Peeple they first descended; what transmigrations they
made; at what time; and by what Right or Title. These may be called the
principles of a Country. The Arcadians did vaunt that they were synchronical,
or contemporary with the Gods; that they were before the Sun and the Stars.
Other Nations do labor much to derive themselfs from before the Flood. Now
concerning Spain, all Annalists concur that Tubal Cain was her first Populator,
being allurd by the amoenity and fruitfulness of the Country and Clime; and
this was 2173 years before the Nativity of our Savior, and 1179 from the
Creation, and 143 years after the general Deluge. Berosus affirms that Tubal
raignd in Spain 151 years, and Strabo concurs with him* some call him Iobel,
and Josephus calls the Spaniards Iobeles from him. Setubal in Portugal receaves
her denomination thence, as also Tudela in the Kingdom of Navarre. Some are of
opinion that Noe came also to Spain, for in Asturia there is a Town called Noega,
and Noela in Galicia. Spain was called Iberia from King Iberus; and there is a
great River also of his name, vulgarly called Ebro, wherein many other Rivers do
disburden themselfs, which was the occasion of the Proverb, Me Llamo Ebro
porque de todas aguas bevo. It is also called Hesperia from the Occidental Star;
At last it came to be called Hispania from King Hispanus.

We will now proceed to prove that Spain receavd, and professd the Christian
Religion first of any. And, as this Inferior World is governd by the motion,
and circumgyrations of the Heavens, so Christian Kingdoms are governd by
Religion and Faith, and by the holy Professors thereof. Now, Spain had the
advantage and honor to have the first Martyr among the Apostles for her Father
and Founder, which was St. James, who though he was beheaded in Jerusalem, yet
his Body was transported to Spain by a wonderful Providence, where a stately
Dome or Church is built for him, frequented by Emperors and Kings, with
innumerable sorts of Pilgrims. Charlemain came of purpose to do his Devotions
in that Church where such mighty miracles are daily wrought. Now in Tarragona
the most blessed Virgin appeerd to St. James, and gave him order to erect a
Church there, which is the ancientst of any in the Christian world.

Moreover, for the predication of the Gospel, the hevenly tidings of salvation,
it began in Spain three years after the passion of Christ, as it is recorded in
the Ecclesiastical History of Baronius, and confirmd in the Council of Trent,
with the whole current of Antiquity, so that it can be no less then an Impiety
to make any hesitation therein.

After the predication of St. James, Saint Paul also came to Spain; nay the
Prince of the Apostles St. Peter performd a peregrination thither; and among
others he converted Epinetus; so that the Christian Faith was founded in Spain
by these three great Pillars of the Church. Saint Torquatus Bishop of Guadix
was one of the first whom St. James reducd to Christ, and there is an Olive Tree
planted by his hand which bears fruit to this day; and the Bridge is yet
remaining which broke and fell down under those who did poursue and persecure
the Christians in those days.

Saint Cecilius his Church near Granada is standing to this day, where also so
many miracles and wonderful cures are commonly wrought. There also is the
famous Valparayso, the Valley of Paradise, where so many Martyrs sufferd, and
their Relics remain to this day, as appeers by this Record which I thought
worthy to insert here.

In nomine Dom. nostri Jesus Christi, En el anno ix. del Pontificado de nuestro
santissimo Padre Clemente Octavo, y el anno 2. del Reyno del Clementissimo, y
Catholico Don Philippo 3. Nos Don Pedro de Castro, por la gracia de Dios, y de
la santa sede Apostolica Arsobispo de Granada, del consejo del Rey ^uestro
senor, con consejo, y asenso de los Reverendissimos Prelados Don Iuan de
Fonseca Obispo de Guadix del consejo de su Magestad, provincial, y sufraganeo
nuestro, y Don Sebastian Quintero Obispo de Gallipoli, y Don Alfonso de Mendosa
Abad de Alcala la real. A^iendo tratado de las Reliquias que el anno del
nacimiento de nuestro Salvador I^su Christo de 1595. se hallaron deribando una
torre antiquisstma en esta santa Iglesia, y otras en el monte que Llaman
Valparayso el conocimiento y aprobacion de las quales nos pertenece por
derecho, y por el santo Concilio de Trenta, y por commission especial de nuestro
muy santo padre Clemente Octavo; Visto este processo, y todas las
informaciones, averiguaciones, y diligentias en el hechas, y aviendo avido
conse^o, y deliberacion con barons may doctos, pios, y Theologos, y de otras
facultades con nos congregados, y todo lo demas que fue necessario, y verse
convino. Fallamos de un mesmo parecer, y asenso en que fueron todos conformes,
que devemos declarar. --

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, In the ninth year of the Pontificat of
our most holy Father Pope Clement 8. and in the second year of our most
merciful and Catholic King Don Philip the 3.

We Don Pedro de Castro by the Grace of God, and the holy Apostolik Seat,
Archbishop of Granada, of the Council of the King our Lord, with the counsel
and consent of the most reverend Prelates Don John of Fo^seca Bishop of Guadix
of his Majesty's Council our Comprovincial and Suffragan, and Don Sebastian
Quintero Bishop of Gallipoli, and Don Alonso de Mendosa Abbat of Alcala; Having
treated of the Relics which were found 1598. by pulling down a Wall in this
most ancient Church, with others in the Mount Valparayso, the knowledge and
approbation whereof belongs to Us by the holy Council of Trent, and by special
commission from our holy Father Clement the 8. The process hereof being seen,
with the Informations, Averiguations and diligences done therein; and having
taken the advice and deliberation of most learned and pious Theologues, with
other Faculties which was convenient and necessary to be done;

We find according to the concordant and unanimous consent of all, that we
ought to declare, and we do hereby declare, define and pronounce the said
Relics in this process containd, viz. the one half of the cloth wherewith the
glorious Virgin Mary wipd her Tears at the passion of her Son our Savior, and
a bone of St. Stephen the Protomartyr, are the true cloth of our Lady, and bone
of St. Stephen; and that having bin hidden, lockd up, and kept in the Wall of a
most ancient Tower which was built near this Church, being put in a Leaden Box
lind within and without, and within the said Box a Letter of most ancient
parchment, wherein Patricius the Priest relates the said Relics to be; and
that he did hide them there by the command of Saint Cecilius; and all was found
within the said Box upon St. Joseph's day, 19 of March, by pulling down and
destroying the said Tower; We likewise declare, define and pronounce the said
Bone, Dust and Ashes, and white Mortar which were found in Valparayso, to be
really the Relics of holy Martyrs who now rejoice and reign with God in
Heven; viz. of Saint Cecilio, Saint Hiscio, Saint Cthesiphon, Disciples to the
most blessed Apostle Saint James Zebedeus; and of Saint Setentrio, and Patricio
Disciples of St. Cecilio; and of Turillo, Panuncio, Maronio, Centulio,
Disciples of Saint Hiscio; and of St. Maximinio and Lupario, Disciples of St.
Cthefiphon, and St. Mesiton; And the said Saints sufferd Martyrdom some, by
fire being burnt alive, some shut up in the Caves and Caverns of the said
Mountains for the Faith of our Redeemer Jesus Christ, and for preaching and
publishing his Gospel in the second year of the reign of Nero, St. Cecilio with
his Disciples suffering upon the Calends of February, St. Hiscius on the Calends
of March, and St. Cthesiphon with his Disciples on the Calends of April, as
four Leafs of Lead do manifestly show in Latin Letters written in most ancient
characters, with other old Instruments of Lead, all which was hidden and found
in the caverns of the said Mountains, and never discoverd until now; and this
process is verified, and God has confirmd it by diverse miracles. In
consequence whereof we declare that the said Relics ought to be receavd,
honored, reverencd, adord with honor and holy worship, as the true Relics of
the most blessed Virgin our Lady, and of the said Martyrs who reign now w^h
God, according as the holy Catholic Church does accustom to have in due
veneration such Relics of Saints, and expose them to publik view to that
effect, That they may be incited to invoke them accordingly. And we with others
here congregated do so receave and reverence them, commanding that they be kept
in safe custody, and in a decent place according to the pleasure and appointment
of the most Reverend Archbishop that shall be then of this Church.

And we further declare the said Valparayso, and the Caverns wherein those
blessed Saints sufferd Martyrdom to be holy places, which ought to be reverencd
and honored, and have prerogatives accordingly, as the holy Canons do allow to
such places. And so we pronounce this our sentence, and firm it with our Names,
sealing it also with our Seals.

Petrus de Castro Archiep. Granatensu.
Johannes Episcopus Guadix.
S. Episcopus Gallipoli.
Alfonsus Abbas.

Besides these, there was, after due process made, a sentence passd also for
seven more great Saints, viz. St. Secundus Episcopus Abulensis, where his body
is had in great reverence to this day; St. Indalecius Episcopus Urcetanus, in
the Kingdom of Aragon upon the confines of Navarre; St. Cthesiphon Bishop of
Almeria; St. Hesichius; St. Euphrasius Episcopus Illurgitanus of Iaen in
Andaluzia, who as Baronius affirms was Auditor and Disciple to St. James the
Apostle, and was ordained Bishop anno Christi 43. in the reign of Claudius
Caesar. Besides these seven, there is Athanasius and Theodorus near the body of
the holy Apostle, the one on the right, the other on the left hand of the
Apostle, preserved with great vigilance to this day. Now, all these Martyrs and
Patrons of Spain are mentioned by Cardinal Baronius and Galesinus in their
Martyrologies, as also by Vaseus, Morales, and Mariana, etc. Now, that St. Paul
was in Spain, hear what Pope Gregory the seventh says in his Epistle:
Gregorius Episcopus Servus servorum Dei, Alfonso, and Sanctio Regibus
Hispaniae, Abbatibus, and Episcopis in ditione sua constitutis salutem, and
Apostolicam Benedictionem. Cum B. Apostolus Paulus Hispaniam se acti isse
significet, ac postea 7 Episcopos ab Urbe Roma ad instituendos Hispaniae
populos a Petro and Paulo Apostolis directos fuisse, qui destructa Idololatria
Christianitatem fundaverunt, Religionem plantaverunt, ordinem, and officium in
Divinis cultibus agendis ostenderunt, and sanguine suo Ecclesias seminarunt,
vestra diligentia non ignoret quantam concordiam cum Romana Urbe Hispania in
Religione, and ordine Divini Officii habuisset satis patet. It appeers herby,
as by a world of testimonies besides, what a sweet harmony and concordance there
has bin always twixt Spain and Rome; And how that the predication of Christian
Faith, with the institution thereof, begun by the Apostle St. James, was
increasd by Peter and Paul, and confirmd by the seven forementioned Martyrs,
who were Auditors and Disciples of St. James; besides many others whose names
are found in the Book of Martyrologies.

In the second persecution under Domitian, after the cruelties of Nero,
Eugenius Bishop of Toledo was Disciple of Dionysius Areopagita. This Eugenius
being a man excellent for wisdom and Doctrine, made choice of the City of
Toledo for his fear, as being situated in the center of the Kingdom, that the
Spirit of Christ might be diffusd thence as from the heart into the whole body
of the Country. The Body of which Eugenius was removd from France into the
great Church of Toledo, and carried upon the sholders of the most religious
King Philip 2 part of the way, Anno 1565.

Moreover, it stands upon good record according to Mariana, how Pope Clement,
St. Peter's immediate Successor, sent Philip and Marcellus into Spain as Legates,
and with Letters and commission accordingly; And it is agreed by all that they
were the first Legates, and they carried the first Letters that ever were sent
from Rome by any Nuncios, which are to be found to this day in the Church of
Compostella.

In the third persecution of Trajan, Sanctus Mancius florishd in Spain, who was
one of the seventy two Disciples of our Savior, and servd him at
administration of the Holy Sacrament, and spread his vestment when he entered
into Jerusalem upon Palm Sunday, who afterward was made a glorious Martyr.

Vaceus relates an Epitaph which runs thus: Belila Hispana se^va Jesus Christi
requievit in Domino, Obiit era 115. hoc est anno Dom* 77. Belila a Spaniard,
servant of Jesus Christ, did rest in the Lord; she died in the year 77 after
the passion. Venerus writes that this Epitaph was found in Biscay.

There is another Epistle of Pope Clement written to the Bishops of Spain, which
is also conservd in Compostella-Church to this day. And this was the state of
the Spanish Church the first century of years after the Nativity of Christ,
wherein John the Evangelist livd, during which time thirteen Bishoprics are
registered in Spain, and a great number of the Faithful; for in the City of
Pampelona 40000 were converted, and Biscay or Cantabria was most inhabited by
Martyrs, as Iraeneus relates, an Author who was near the time of the Apostles.

Furthermore, there was a most signal and notable rare thing happend in Spain;
for the same night that our blessed Savior was born, there were three Suns
appeerd visibly in the Spanish Region, which by gentle degrees came to
concentre into one. Out of these premises it is apparent that the first
Martyr-Apostle preachd in Spain; That he erected there the first Church
dedicated to the blessed Virgin; That she appeerd there being conducted by
Angels; That the body of St. James lies there inhumd wi^h so much state: And
this was before there was any predication of Christian Doctrine in France; so
that the first Faithful, the first Apostle, the first Church, the first
Apostolical Nuncio, and first Epistle was sent by Pope Clement the first into
Spain. St. Paul did second what St. James had begun; and all this is confirmd
by St. Irenaeus, one of the first among the Primitive Fathers.

Argum. 4. Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge Precedence because he
is the Catholic King, which is a more ancient Title then Christianissimus.
ONe of the greatest Foundations whereon France does build her right to a
Precedence, is, that she would persuade the world, that her Kings are more
Ancient both in the reception and profession of Christianity; which assertion
being well examind and discussd, it will appeer that both generally and
privately there were Catholic Kings in Spain before any in France; and to proceed
more methodically, we will deduce the business from the beginning. We know that
the blessed Apostle St. James was put to death with the sword by Herod, as
appeers in the Epistle of Pope Leo touching his Martyrdom, and the translation
of his Body into Spain; which Epistle he destinated for the Spaniards; wherein
He relates, that when the Jews had hurld his whole body without the City to be
devourd by Beasts and Birds, his Disciples having notice thereof in his
lifetime, they recoverd the whole body, head and all, in the nightime, and
carried it to Ioppa for transportation of it to Spain; where being careful for
the embarcation thereof, they found a ship ready in the Port, and some say it
was of stone, where, after thanks being given to God, they placd the body of
the most holy Apostle; and after many dangers they arrivd at Iria Flaria, now
called Padron; thence they carried it to Liberum Donum, now called Compostella,
where they entombd it in a Marble Monument: But, as the Disciples were seeking
for a place fit for so great an Apostle, they made their address to Queen
Luparia or Lupa, who sent them to King Philotrus, who casting them into an
obscure prison, they were freed by an Angel; and while the soldiers were in
pursuit of them, they were all drowned in a River, the Bridge and all falling
down with them, by which miracle King Philotrus was converted. But Luparia
continuing obstinat, she threw their Bodies to Bulls and Dragons, whereof some
they slew, and some grew mild. Then Luparia being overcome by these miracles,
causd a Temple to be erected there for the holy Apostle, as Faber out of
Sophorinus does affirm; And although Morales makes a doubt hereof, in regard
that Spain was then subject to the Romans, and so could have no Kings, yet there
might be some Kings there though subject and tributary to Rome, as Herodes
Agrippa was in Jerusalem, and as Queen Candacis was. But because these
passages are so overgrown with years, let us hasten to later times.

The second signal time that Spain receavd extraordinary influence of Christian
Faith, was in the reign of Constantine the great, who was so glorious an
Instrument to the Church, his Mother, a British Lady being a Christian, and
Osius a Spanish Bishop having taken so much pains for his conversion; Then
Theodosius who did propagat the Faith more openly, and did destroy the Pagan
Churches which were stuffd with Idols, was by Nation a Spaniard, and his sons
who succeeded him in the Empire.

The third time was, when the seat of the Roman Empire being translated to
Constantinople, diverse rough Northern Nations broke in, and seazd upon most
parts of the Western Territories thereof, so that the Goths invaded Spain, and
came to possess it; and then by the special benediction of God, there was a
Catholic King in Spain before any in France: For an. 554. Athanagildus King of
the Goths, according to the current consent of all Historiographers, professd
the Christian Faith, as Lucas Tudensis has it. Then succeeded him Leonegi^dus;
Then a little after came Richaredus, and in his reign the whole Kingdom of
Spain became Catholic, and florishd exceedingly.

But the French object that Anno 496. Clodovaeus was baptizd by St. Rhemigius,
and so had the start of Richaredus in Christianity; but to that it is answered,
That the whole Kingdom of France was not then converted; Nor was He King of
all the Kingdom, as Richaredus was of Spain: For Gregorius Turonensis relates,
that Clodovaeus with his two sisters were baptizd, and three thousand French
more, the whole Kingdom came not to be Christian a good while after, whereas
all Spain was reducd entirely to the Faith a good while before, and did make
open profession thereof in the Council of Toledo. Moreover, a good part of
France was then subject to Theodoricus King of the Ostrogoths, who then raignd
in Italy; who were of the Arrian Heresy. But Spain was then totally under
Richaredus: whence may be inferrd that Spain generally had a Christian King
before France. But if we divide Spain into Provinces, there were diverse of them
had Christianity planted, and publicly preferrd before Clovis; for Rechiarius
King of the Suevians was Christian Anno 440. Furthermore, it is very observable
that from Richaredus no King in Spain fell from the true Catholic Church;
whereas, diverse in France did after Clodoveus, as Chilperik and others; witness
what Gaguinus writes, Nec multo post Chilpericus cujus malitia ut in Homines
multis fraudibus perspicua esset, in Deum quoque impietatem meditatus est; de
divina quidem Trinitate ita credi noluit, ut tres in Illa Personas sed unam
confiteretur, etc. Not long after, Chilperik, whose malice was so evident
against men, did meditat malice also against God; for he would not confess
three, but one Person in the Trinity: And Mausonius says, Chilpericus cum
multis rebus impie gestis Deum sibi iratum reddidisset mense quarto a Natali
Clodovaei successoris sui apud Callam vicum Parisiorum occididitur: Chilperik
when for many things impiously committed he had made God angry with him, was
killd in Calla, a small Village of the Parisians.

And in this last Age, the last King of France before Hen. 4. having done some
acts of Impiety, as imprisoning of Cardinals, and other things, it induced a
Brother of the Dominican Order to dispatch him violently out of the world.

Besides, a King of Spain Rechiarius was the first, who out of a Zeal to
protect the true Religion, made the first War against the Enemies thereof, which
were the Arrian Goths; and ever since the Kings of Spain have bin the greatest
Champions and Propugnators of the Catholic Church upon all occasions.

But now we will take in hand the Titles of Christianissimus and Catholic, and
make it appeer that the Kings of Spain had the one, before the French Kings had
the other; and because that Names are the Images of Things, we will give you
their primitive derivations.

The first Propagators of Christianity we all know were the holy Apostles, and
their Disciples; but some of the latter falling into errors, the Orthodoxal
Disciples to distinguish themselfs from the false, called themselfs Christians,
which name they first assumd at Antioch, and then it grew general, being derivd
from Christ, and Christ a Crismate or Unction. It was afterward raisd to a
superlatif, to Christianissimus, which was first given to the Emperors, and to
this day, as Castaldus observes, they are solemnly prayed for in Oratione
Parasceue, in Good-Friday-Prayer evry year, Oremus and pro Christianissimo
Imperatore nostro; wherein Ferrault is deceavd by attributing it only to the
French King. Moreover, diverse Kings of Spain had that Title given them upon
oceasion, as all the Spanish Annalists do aver; For Richaredus was called
Christianissimus Anno 589. and after him Sisebutus Anno 616. when he expelld
the Jews out of the Territories of Spain; and Cinthillanus is called so in the
sixth Council of Toledo; and Pope Leo writing to Quirico calls Flavium Ervigium
then King of Spain, Christianissimum in the fourth Council of Toledo; and this
was before Charlemain, who first bore that Title in France. Ramirus King of
Aragon, and Sancho 3. as also Alphonsus Magnus, was entitled so.

Now let us examine when this Title Christianissimus was given to the French
Kings: Most do affirm that it began in Charlemain, but observe, it was given
him, and to some of his Successors as they were Emperors: for the ordinary
Title which was usd to be given the Kings of France before, was Illustris. There
is another opinion, that Pope Pius 2. gave Lewis 11. of France the Title of
Christianissimus, and that his Father Charles had it in the Council of Mantua
Anno 1459.

But grant that the French Kings had the Title Christianissimus given them
since Charlemain, yet the Title Catholicus was given before to the Kings of
Spain: For Alfonso Son-in-law to Pelagius had it Anno 734. as Garabai and
Morales do affirm, and the Epitaph upon his Tomb does justify it, which is
Alfonsus Catholicus. Others are of opinion that Richaredus who quelld the
Arrian Heresy was first entitled Catholicus.

But now that we have spoken of the Antiquity of these two Titles in relation
to the two Kings, we will examine which is the superior and more excellent,
Christianissimus or Catholicus, not but that both of them are sublime and
glorious. Touching the Title Catholic, it is so complete a word that nothing
can be added to it, therefore it admits no superlatif; it is of that
comprehensif latitude, that it is Universal, which is the true Etymology of the
Greek word: now it is an Axiom in all Sciences, Qui totum dicit, nihil
excludit; Who says All, excludes nothing: therefore we say, Ecclesiam
Catholicam, not Catholicissimam; as we say, Concilium oecumenicum, or
Universale, not Universalissimum.

And certainly this word Catholicum must be of extraordinary value, and ancient
extraction, since it was an Epithet given the Church of Christ in the
Apostolical Creed, in that first Symbol of Faith, Credo in Spiritum sanctum,
and sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam. Now, as we pointed at before, whereas any
Believer was called Christian at first, and that by erroneous interpretations,
some Heresies began to creep in, the name of Catholic was given him who was a
constant embracer of the true Doctrine of the Church: whereas the simple name
Christian might comprehend also a Heretik, as Pacianus observes against the
Novatians, Christianus mihi nomen est, Catholicus vero cognomen; Illud me
nuncupat, Istud ostendit; Hoc probat, Illud significat: My name is Christian,
my firname Catholic; the one calls me, the other shows me; this proves, the
other signifies. Insomuch that the word Catholic did distinguish a true Believer
from a Heretik. Whence the excellency of this word appeers, being a primitive
attribut given both to Church and Faith; for they were both called Catholic. Nor
does it follow though evry Catholic be a Christian, that evry Christian is a
Catholic: For when one is called Catholic, it is understood that he is an Elect,
that he is saithful, pure, constant and obedient to the Doctrine of the holy
Church without mixture or taint: Therefore most meritoriously is this high
Epithe^ peculiar to the King of Spain, because he permits no Aposta^s, no
Schismatics to be in his Dominions, as the French, and other Kings do: But by
an humble filial obedience he adheres to the Catholic Mother Church, which is
the Roman; For the Roman and Catholic Church are Synonimas according to Saint
Cyprian, in these words, Dividi a Romano Pontifice idem quod ab universa
Ecclesia scismate separari; Rursum illam communicare id ipsum esse quod
Catholicae Ecclesiae unitati conjungi: To be divided from the Roman Bishop, is
to be separated by Schism from the universal Church; and to hold communion with
him, is the same as to be joynd in unity with the Catholic Church.

Argum. 5. Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge Precedence because
that in Magnitude of Kingdoms, in Power, Territories and Tresure He excels all
other.
MUltitude of Regions, Affluence of Wealth, and Magnitude of Power, is so
considerable in Kings, that this one Reason of it self were sufficient by
Divine Laws as well as Humane, to yield unto Him who excels in these
Particulars superiority of session and precedence.

Now, in all things by the very constitution of the Creator, there is a
superiority and excellence; Eternity is above Time; The Intellect is beyond
Reason; and Reason above Sense. Go to the Fabric of Celestial Cretures, and
the pulchritude of the Stars; We see the Sun is as their Prince; and one Star
exceeds another in glory: so in this Elementary and the lower world, specially
among Mankind, some are more Illustrious, some more Potent then others; Nature
will tell you that all the Fingers of the hand are not equal; and this
inequality conduces to the bewty of the Univers, and Manilius tells us,

Est aequale nihil, Terrenos aspice tractus. By which Ratiocination he is most
sublime, and may claim superiority who exceeds in multitude of Peeple, in
extent of Regions, in Wealth and Dominions; and since the Catholic King excels
in all these, as the French Authors themselfs confess out of Cassanaeus,
certainly the higher seat is to be assignd Him. The wisest of Kings tells us,
that In multitudine Populi dignitas Reg is, and in paucitate Plebis ignominia
Principis; In the multitude consists the dignity of a King, and in the paucity
of peeple his shame. Therefore at the meeting of Councils, an Universal Council
which is made up of most Bishops is more illustrious, and carries a greater
stamp of authority then a Provincial, which consists of fewer; As the
Emperor and Pope have three Crowns apeece, denoting Asia, Afrik, and Europe,
where the first exercises Souvrain Power in Temporals, and the other in all
Spiritual Affairs.

Now, to prove that the Catholic King is more potent then any other in spacious
Dominions, it is no hard task: For go to Spain it self, it cannot be denied but
it is a large Empire. It Is true, that Spain in former times was divided into many
Kingdoms, as Castile, Aragon, Navarre, Leon, etc. but now they are all
concentred in one Crown; Add herunto the Kingdoms of Naples and Calabria, with
the Duchy of Milan, which make up about the one moity of Italy. He is Lord of
Belgium, or the Netherland; He has Sicilie, Sardinia, with other Islands in
the Mediterranean Sea, and the Canaries, with diverse other in the Atlantik. He
has sundry places up and down the Coasts of Afrik; He has the Moluccas and
Philipi^a Islands, which are without number in the Indies. It was the Spanish
Navigation that refelld the Paradox, for which we read that a Bishop was once
imprisond for a Heretik because he held there were Antipodes.

O Immortal God! what an heroik and incomparable exploit was that of
discovering and conquering the West Indies, which counterbalanceth all the old
world were they cast into a pair of scales! which mighty benediction was
reservd by a special Providence for Spain. But what a world of dangers, doubts
and difficulties did precede the work! On the one side the incertitude of the
Thing, and the perils of the angry-tumbling Ocean did offer themsells; On the
other side the vast expenses of the Viage, with despair of new provision when
the old was spent; And in case they should take sooting on a new earth, the
Clime might perhaps not agree with their bodies, and the Savages might prove
stronger then they, as they were in number above a thousand for one. It Is true,
that such imaginations as these did much distract them a while; but at last
their courage and constancy was such, that they broke through all these dissi
culties. And touching that huge mass of peeple in America, as a wild boistrous
Boar taken within the toyls does foam, struggle, and turn about to try all ways
how he may get out, at last when all will not serve, and having wasted his
spirits he lies down with quietness and despair, putting himself upon the mercy
of the Huntsmen; so the wild American having tried all ways of opposition, lay
down at last succumbent and prostrat at the Spaniards feet; and for a reward of
their indefatigable pains and prowess, the Divine Providence gave them
afterward Mines and Mountains of Tresure, yea, Rivers running with Gold, Seas
full of Perl, with all sorts of Gems and precious stones; all kind of Aromatik
Spices, sweet Woods, with a world of new Species of Birds, Beasts, Plants and
Fishes which Europe never knew.

But what Exchanges and recompense did Spain make to America for all this?
Marry, she affoorded her a far more precious Jewel, which was Christian
Religion, Praequa quisquiliae caetera, In comparison whereof all other things
are but Bables: And what a world of pious pains did the Spaniards take to plant
that Tree of Life among them? It is recorded by Boterus that one Franciscan
Friar did baptize about 400000 Savages in the sacred Laver of Regeneration;
insomuch that one may now travel thousands of miles in America, and very
frequently meet with Christian Churches, Chapels, Monasteries, Convents,
Nunneries, Towns, Villages, Castles, Forts, or Bulwarks as he goes along.

What a coil do the Historians keep about the Achievements of Alexander the
Great? We well know that he subdued but part of Asia; But here a new world is
conquered about thrice as big as whole Asia: Therefore the Kings of Spain may be
only said to have done Miracles in steed of Exploits. And as God Al mighty when
He builds, creates no less then a World; when He is angry, sends no less then
an Universal Deluge; when He confers Grace, does sacrifice no less then the
prime Son; when He rewards, gives no less then Paradis; when He wars, sends no
less then Legions of Angels, making also the Elements to fight, the Sea to
open, and the Sun to stand: So, if Finite things may bear any proportion with
Infinite, the Kings of Spain have bin desigud to do mighty things, if not
miracles: when They build, they build no less then an Escurial; if They are
angry, they drive forth whole Nations, as the Jews and Moors; if they provide
for the public good, they sacrifice no less then their own Sons; if they take
Arms, they conquer not only whole Kingdoms, but new Worlds: insomuch that the
King of Spain may be, according to the Proverb, truly called Rex Hominum, the
King of Men; whereas those of England and France are called, the first, King of
Devils, the other King of Asses. It is the King of Spain alone to whom the Gran
Mogor and Sophy use to send this superscription, To the King who has the Sun
for his Helmet; alluding to his vast Dominions in all parts of the world, and
that the Sun does always shine on some of them: besides, it is no mean
preeminence to the Catholic King, That God Almighty is servd evry hour of the
Natural Day in some of his Territories.

Therefore it can be no derogation from any other Monark, if for Glory and
Amplitude of Dominions, for Men and Mines, for fulgor of Majesty and Power, for
Islands and Continents, for a long Arm and Sword, the Catholic King be
preferred before any other Prince or Potentat upon the Terrestrial Globe, take
both the Hemispheres together.

Argum. 6. Proving, That the King of Spain may challenge Precedence for
Nobleness of Family, as also for Royal Arms and Ensigns, etc.
NObility among the Heralds is of two sorts, the one is of Parental Extraction
and Blood, and this is rather our Progenitors then our own, being ingrafted or
traducd unto us from them: There is another Nobility which is accidental,
underivd or personal, and this comes either from abundance of Riches, or from
excellency of Parts, or from the Merit and Glory of some great Exploit. The
first proceeds from Descent, the other from Desert.

Now among other Prerogatives of Kings, one of the highest is, that they are
the source and fountain of Nobility and Honor; Therefore no Vassal whatsoever,
be he of never so ancient and illustrious extraction, is capable to compare
with the King, though I am not ignorant that some of your French Monsieurs will
vapor sometimes that way. Now, it contributs much to the honor of any Country to
have a King of a long-lind Royal Race. There is a good Text which tells us,
That Beata Terra, cujus Rex nobilis est; with another, Quam puchra est
generatio cum claritate, Immortalis enim est memoria illius, quoniam, and apud
Deum nota est, and apud Homines: The Land is blessd whose King is Noble; How
beutiful is a Generation with brightness! the memory thereof is Immortal,
because it is known with God and Men.

The Kingdom of Spain may glory to have had Kings of both the foresaid
Nobilities, both Progenial derivd from their Predecessors, and Personal from
their own Merit, and heroik perfections of Virtue, as Magnanimity and
Fortitude, as Prudence and high Wisdom, as extraordinary Devotion and
Sanctity.

Touching the Royal Tree of the Genealogy of the Kings of Spain, we can fetch
it from the Families of the Amalis and Baltheis, whence the Kings of the
Visigoths and Ostrogoths descended above a thousand years since: Then from the
glorious house of Austria, which may be called a true Imperial Tree by having
producd so many Emperors that have continued in that stem above these two
hundred years without interruption, which House began with Theobarto who came
from Sigebart Duke of Germany, Anno 604.

Touching the Shield-Ensignes and the Royal Arms of the King of Spain, they are
as noble as any; and it adds much to the Nobleness of a Kingdom to have noble
Arms; which has bin accounted no small blemish to the Crown of France, whose
ancient Arms were three Toads in a black field, though the signification of the
Hieroglyphik makes some amends for it, which relates to the fruitfulness of
France; for Toads choose always the fattest soil, yet is he an ugly slow
poisonous creature, and abhorred by humane Nature. But upon the conversion of
King Clouis to Christianity, the French do vaunt that a Shield with three
Flower de Luces of a Caerulean color fell down miraculously from Heven, (as
Numas Shield did in Rome, and the Palladium did in Troy) which Arms France
gives ever since. But the truth of that miracle is much questiond: for the
greatest Authors, as Emilius, Gillius, Reginon, and Gregorius Turonensis in the
Life of King Clou is makes no mention of any such thing.

But grant that France has reason to give the Lilies or Flower de Luces for
her Royal Arms, yet Spain has a nobler; for Spain gives the Cross in her
Shield: For we know that many ancient and Authentik Writers affirm, how the
Cantabrians or Biscayners (who were left unconquerd by the Romans) carried a
Cross in their Banner long before the Nativity of our Savior; which King
Pelagius carried when issuing forth of the great Cave called Cobadonga to this
day, with not much above 1000 Christians, he utterly routed 60000 Saracens; to
the memory whereof it is thought the great Church Cangas called St. Crosses Church
was erected, where he lies buried with a Cross engraven upon his Tomb. And
after King Pelagius who is called the Instaurator of Spain, with other Kings had
the Cross in their Banner. And San Isodorus, who after St. James the Apostle
is the Patron of Spain, always usd it, who was a Bishop and a Knight, so that
wheresoever he is represented either in shadow or stone, he is painted in a
Pontifical vest, having the Cross in one hand, and the Sword in the other; and
as the Oriflambe is the chiefest Banner of France, which is kept in the great
Church of St. Denis; so in the great Church of Leon in Spain Saint Isodorus
Banner is devoutly kept up, which upon occasion of urgent necessity was usd by
diverse Kings to be brought to the Field against the Saracens, and afterward
against the Moors, whereby many glorious and wonderful Victories were obtaind.

Nor is the Cross the Ensign only of Biscay and Castile, but also of Arragon
and of Navarre; and the ground of it is related in Beuter, Illescas, and
Turapha to be, that when King Garcia Ximenez was ready to fight a Battle
against the Saracens, and that the Christians under his command grew to be
dejected and faint-hearted, there appeerd in a green Tree a red Cross very
resplendent, which struck such a comfort and courage, and made such impressions
in the heart of the fainty Soldiers, that they fell upon the Infidel-enemy with
so great a resolution, that they did utterly discomfit him; whereupon he was
called Rey de Sobrarbe, because that the holy Cross appeerd above a Tree.

Argum. 7. Proving, That the Catholic King may claim Precedence because he is
King of Jerusalem, and that the Right of Unction belongs also to Him, etc.
ALl Authors concede that in all solemn Pomps and publik Places, the first seat
in the Church (after the Emperor) belongs to the King of Jerusalem, as
Corsetus, Grasalius, and others, do observe: And the Reasons are many; Because
our Savior preachd and sufferd there; Because he made choice of his Apostles
and Disciples there; Because he wrought most Miracles there; Because he
conversd and had conference with Men there; Because he instituted his last
Supper there; Because he did consummat the Eternal Salvation of Mankind there,
and because he was buried there; with multitude of other Reasons.

Now, that the King of Spain is right King of Jerusalem, I believe there are but
few will deny it: for the Holy Father in all his Bulls, in his Apostolical
Letters, and all publik spiritual Dispatches, does style him King of Jerusalem;
and so does the Conclave, the College of Cardinals, the Rota, or Judges of the
Apostolik Chancery: And it is as clear as the Meridian, that this Title is due
to him as he is King of both the Sicilies, viz. of Sicily, Calabria and Naples,
which appeers evident in all Annals and Chronicles; Although the French do
cavil with him for a Right to those Kingdoms, which Valdesius and Vasquez do
sufficiently answer, and refute.

Nor can it be denied but a double Unction belongs to him as he is King of both
those Kingdoms; whereas the Kings of England and France have but one Unction
apeece relating to single Kingdoms. Now, that Kings are to be anointed with
holy Oil, the sacred Code tells us plainly; for it was the warrant which God
Almighty himself, the King of Heven and Earth, gave unto the Prophet Elias,
Unges Asachel Regem super Syriam, and Iehu silium Namasi unges Regem super
Israel: Thou shall (...) ^sachel King over Syria, and thou shall anoint Iehu
King over Israel. In another place he speaks himself, Inveni David servum meum,
and oleo sancto meo unxi eum: I have found David my servant, and with my holy
Oil have I anointed him. Therefore Kings are called Christ's upon earth, because
they are anointed by God: Nay, Cyrus is called Christ in this sense, as the Text
says, Haec dicit Dominus Cyro Christo ejus; Thus says God to Cyrus his Christ
or his anointed. One of the Prerogatives of the Emperor is, that he is to be
anointed by the Pope himself; But Kings are anointed by their own Prelates.
Augustine de Ancona gives the reason for this Ceremony, because Oil signifies
gladness, and promptitude to debel the Enemies of the Church, to fight for the
Orthodoxal Faith, and carry away Victories. Thereupon at the celebration of the
Olympik Games the Wrastlers were usd to be anointed, as the Poet sings:

Exercent Patrias Oleo labente Palestras
Nudati Socii --
The holy King says, Dilexisti justitiam, and odisti iniquitatem, propterea
unxit te Deus Oleo laetitiae prae consortibus tuis: Thou have loved justice,
and hated iniquity, wherefore God has anointed thee with the Oil of gladness
above thy fellows. By Oil also is understood cleerness of Conscience, as we
read, Prudentes Virgins acceperunt oleum in vasibus suis: The wise Virgins
took oil in their lamps.

Now they are Hevenly wide of the truth who hold that these two Kings, viz. of
Jerusalem and Sicily, with those of England and France, are only capable of
holy Unction: For it belongs to all Kings; especially to the Catholic King, who
is a mixed Person twixt Temporal and Spiritual, for he is Canon of Burgos as the
French King is of a Church in Poitou; But the Kings of Spain have bin from all
times anointed from the time of King Vuamba, and after him Ervigius: for the
Text of the Council of Toledo says plainly, Serenissimus Ervigius Princeps
Regni conscenderit Regni culmen, Regnandique per sacram Unctionem susceperit
potestatem: Most serene Ervigius Prince of the Kingdom shall ascend the top of
the Kingdom, and by the holy Oil take a power to reign. After these the Gothik
Kings were also anointed from Pelagius downward. Therefore it is a pure Paradox,
or rather a vulgar Error, that none but the four mentiond Kings are capable of
holy Unction.

Argum. 8. Proving, That the Catholic King may challenge Precedence because of
the free and absolut Power he has over his Dominions, and that he has Empires
under Him, etc.
IT mightily concerns Royal Dignity to have a whole Plenary Dominion and Rule,
and not to be subordinat to any other Temporal Power whatsoever: Such an
absolut Dominion the Catholic King enjoys, and is entaild upon him by the Laws
of the Land; though as a dutiful Son to the Church, out of pure Ideas of
Devotion he is contented to be obedient unto his Mother in spiritual things.

Yet, there are diverse Tramontan Writers both Italian and Germans, who being
devoted to the Emperor, would make the Kings of Spain, England and France to
acknowledge the Emperor, and they who do it not remain in no less then mortal
sin; And one of the main Arguments which they urge, is, That the Emperor
Sigismund before the Council of Constance assembled, sent his summons among
other to Ferdinand King of Aragon to be there for the universal good of
Christendom. But herunto it is answered, That the glorious Emperor Charles the
fifth made a solemn Protestation, that he decreed nothing in Spain under the
notion of Emperor: For though he had a double quality, yet, whatsoever he
acted in Spain was singly as he was King thereof. This signal Diploma, or
public Protestation is yet to be seen in the Archives of Spain, and is
mentiond in the History of Pedro Mexia, which runs thus.

Don Carlos por la gracia de Dios Rey de Romanos, futuro Emperador semper
Augusto, Rey de Castilla y de Leon, etc. En uno con la muy alta, y muy Poderosa
Reyna Donna Iuana mi Sennora Madre.

Por quanto despues que plugo a la Divina Clementia (por la qual los Reyes
reynan) que fuessemos Eligidos Rey de Romanos futuro Emperador, y que de Rey
Catholico de Espanna (con que eramos bien contentos) fuessemos promovido al
Imperio convino que nuestros Titulos se ordenassen dando a cada uno su devido
lugar; Fue necessario conformando nos con razon segun la qual el Imperio
precede a las otras dignidades seglares por ser la mas alta y sublime dignidad
que Dios instituyo en la I^ierra, de preferir la dignidad Imperial a la Real, y
de nombrarnos y intitularnos primero como Rey de Romanos y futuro Emperador que
la dicha Reyna mi sennora lo qual hizimos mas apremiado de necessi^d que de
razon, que por voluntad que dello tenemos, porque con toda reverencia, y
acatamiento la honramos, y desseamos honrar y acatar, Pues que demas cumplir el
mandamiento de Dios a que somos obligados por Ella tenemos, y esperamos tener
tan gran sucession de Reynos y senorios como tenemos. Y porque de la dicha
prelacion no se pueda Seguir ni causar perjuizio ni confusion adelante a los
nuestros Reynos de Espanna, ni a los Reyes nuestros Successores, ni a los
naturales sus subditos que por tiempo fueren;

Por end queremos que sepan todos los que agora son, o seran de aqui adelante,
que nuestra intencion, y voluntad es que la libertad, y exempcion que los
dichos Reynos de Espanna, y Reyes dellos han tenido, y tienen, de que han
gozado, y gozan de no reconocer Superior les sea agora, y de aqui adelante
observada, y guardada inviolablemente, y que gozen de aquel estado, etc.

Yo el Rey.

Thus rendered into English.
Don Carlos by the grace of God King of the Romans, and future Emperor always
August, King of Castile and Leon, etc. together with the most high and most
mighty Dame Joan my Lady Mother.

Whereas since it pleased the Divine Clemency, by which Kings reign, that we were
elected King of the Romans, future Emperor, and from a Catholic King of Spain,
(wherewith we were well contented) we were promoted to the Empire, it was
convenient that our Titles should be orderd giving evry one his due place; It
was necessary (conforming our selfs to Reason, whereby the Empire precedes to
other secular Dignities, it being the highest and most sublime Dignity which
God has instituted on earth) to prefer the Imperial Dignity before the Kingly,
and to name and entitle our selfs as Kings of the Romans and future Emperor
before the said Queen my Lady; which we did being pressd more by necessity then
by any willingness we have thereunto, because we honor and respect, and desire
to honor and respect Her with all reverence and duty, in regard that besides
the accomplishing of Gods Commandment whereunto we are obligd, we hold by Her,
and hope to hold so great a succession to Kingdoms and Dominions which we
hold. And because no prejudice or confusion may ensue to our said Kingdoms of
Spain, nor to the Kings our ^uccessors, nor to the Native Subjects that shall
be for the time,

Therefore our desire is, That all those who now are, and shall be herafter, may
know, That our intention and will that the Liberty and exemption which the said
Kingdoms of Spain and their Kings have held and do hold, that they have enjoyd
or do enjoy, Not to acknowledge a Superior, be observd unto Them now and
herafter, and be inviolably kept; And that they enjoy the same liberty and
ingenuity which at the time of our promotion, and before they had and enjoyd,
etc. And our will is, that this Declaration have the force and vigor of a
Pragmatical Sanction, etc.

Given in the City of Barcelona, 5. 7bris. 1519. I the King.

This Royal Manifesto, or Pragmatical Sanction you see does assert the absolut
and independent Authority of the Kings of Spain, and that they do not only
renounce all subordinations, but are free from the least acknowledgment to any
Foreign Power: insomuch that it is enacted by the Laws of Spain, that to avoid
the least suspicion of any obedience to the Empire, the Civil Roman Law is not
to be kept, or alledgd as Law. Nor indeed for driving out the Saracens, and
other Infidels was Spain ever obligd to the Empire, or any other Extrinsik
Power, but she did it by the effusion of her own blood, by the strength and
valor of her own Natives.

Moreover, the Kings of Spain are so far from any recognition of subjection to
the Empire, or any outward power, that they themselfs in former Ages have bin
frequently called Emperors in publik Instruments, as Decretals, Acts of
Councils, and Apostolical Epistles from Rome. Now if they did merit to be called
Emperors then, how much more is that Title adaequat to the Kings of Spain in
these latter times, wherein they are grown to be Lords of above half of the
whole Terrestrial Globe?

Nor is the King of Spain thus exempt from all Foreign extraneous Authority, but
in point of intrinsecal and domestik Power he is as absolut as any other: for
it has not bin found this hundred years that his Subjects did refuse the
payment of any Impositions, which have bin many in regard he wars with all the
world who repine at his Greatness. Yet is he still Re^ Hominum, a King of Men,
viz. of Free Subjects, and not a King of Asinigos, as his next Neighbor is
called.

Argum. 9. Proving, That the King of Spain may claim Precedence because he has
bin so obsequious a Son, and done such great Offices to the Christian Church.
There are three Offices which all Christian Kings are bound to perform toward
the holy Church.

The first is, To obey the Precepts, Canons and Injunctions of the Church,
though it be only by an humble implicit Faith. The second is, To protect and
defend the holy Church not only from Infidels, and open Enemies, but from
Heretics and Scismatiks. The third is, To erect Temples and decent Domes of
Devotion for the service and worship of God, and to bewtifie and enrich them
accordingly with Rents and Ornaments.
The Kings of Spain have bin more renownd for these three then any in
Christendom. Touching the first, There is no King or Souverain Prince
whatsoever has bin or is so exactly obedient to the Canonical Laws, and the
Constitutions, Commands and Sanctions of the Church, as the Catholic King is
known to be. There are no Kings that do more Corporal Penances when they are
laid upon them by their Ghostly Fathers: For that Penitential Whip which
Charles the Fifth usd, and left all besmeard with his own Blood, is usd often
by this King, whereby he mingles his Blood with that of his great Granfather,
besides that of his Granfather and Father; which Penitential Whip is the most
precious Legacy that the Kings of Spain use to leave their Sons upon their
Deathbeds, and is like so to continue to all Posterity.

Touching the second Office for protecting the holy Church as well from
Aposta^s and Scismatiks as from open Enemies, I may well say without any
derogation, that there is no King comparable to the Catholic King. Spain did
clear her self with admired Valor and Prudence of three Nations that were
enemies to the Christian Church, viz. the Saracens, the Moors, and the Jews:
And the Cat^olik King always bore such a high reverence to the holy Church,
that they never got any considerable Victory but they sent the Trophies thereof
to the Vicar of Christ. I will produce one signal example: When King Albohazin
Belamarin had invaded Spain with a mighty Fleet, transporting 20000 Horse, and
400000 Foot, the King of Granada joining with him also, with all the Moriscos
that were yet left in Spain, He first besiegd Tarifa, but Alfonso the eleventh
King of Castile, with Alfonso King of Portugal did comport themselfs with such
admired Courage and Magnanimity, having no Auxiliaries from any other Christian
Nation, but a pure Army of Spaniards, that they obtaind a wonderful and
glorious Victory, so that above 200000 Moors were destroyed in fight and
flight, the rest made all slaves, as Mariana and Zurita make particular mention
in their Chronicles. As soon as the triumphs for so blessd a Victory were ended
in Spain, King Alfonso sent a splendid Embassy by Don Iuan de Leiva to Pope
Benedict II. then keeping the Apostolik Seat at Auignon in France; which
Ambassador presented his Holiness with a great Banner, and four and twenty of
the chiefest Colors they had taken from the Moors. There were presented besides
100 Barb Horses with rich saddles, whereunto Shields, Swords and Javelins were
hung, and evry horse had a Marisco slave to attend him. Then the very Ginet
whereon King Alfonso himself did ride when he got the Field, was presented with
rich Caparisons embroderd with Perl. The Pope having notice hereof, sent all the
Cardinals, with a great number of Prelates to meet the Ambassador; who being
conducted to the Pope, he descended from the Pontifical Throne, and taking the
Kings Banner into his hands, he sang with a loud voice, Vexilla Regis prodeunt,
Fulget Christi mysterium: so making a pathetik elegant speech of so glorious an
Exploit, they went all to the great Church to give God the glory, where the
said Colors, Ensigns and Shields were hung up.

I could bring many instances more of this nature, how highly respectful the
Catholic Kings have bin always of the holy Church, and of her chief Governor in
all Ages; and how ready they have bin to sacrifice their bloods in defense of
her. But let us go to these modern times, we know that his Catholic Majesty is
in perpetual feud with the Common Enemy the Turk, and how he still disdaind to
make a Peace with him though often wooed thereunto, whereas other Kings make not
only a Peace but Confederacies with him ever and anon. We know what a professd
eager Enemy the Catholic King is to all Heretics, how he suffers none to
breathe in his Dominions; How ready he is always to suppress them in defense of
the Catholic Church, and St. Peter's Chair, which by the supplantings and
Machinations of the late Apostats had quite fallen down, unless the Catholic
King had reachd his arms to support and bear it up.

Touching the third Office of a Christian King, which is to erect Temples, and
hansome places for the worship of Almighty God, no Kings have bin more pious
and munificent in that kind: Witness that mighty Monument the Royal Monastery
of St. Laurence at the Escurial, a Monument built to Eternity, and to ^ug with
the Iron teeth of time, as the thickness and solidity of the walls do show.
This one stupendous Monument of Piety, which is worthily accounted the eighth
Wonder of the World, would afford matter for one entire Volume of it self: Let
it suffice to know here that it cost above twenty Millions the building: It was
twenty years before it was finishd; yet the Founder Philip the second, of
eternal memory, enjoyd it twelve years after, and at last carried his own bones
to be interrd in that glorious Pantheon he had expressly causd to be built for
that use. What a world of Religious Houses did this pious Prince erect besides
I for in Europe and America he built upon his own charge above a hundred
Churches, Monasteries, and Hospitals. Now, it is a great matter for other Kings
if they build a College, or Chapel, and are prayed for as great Benefactors;
then I pray what Prayers and Praises does such a King deserve as Philip the
Prudent was!

Argum. 10. Proving, That the King of Spain may claim Precedence because the
Catholic Church has and does receave greater Protection and Emoluments from
Him then from any other Prince.
IT is recorded, That when Pope Gregory the thirteenth was sick, it was told
him that he was much prayed for, in regard his Life so much concernd the
welfare of the Church: He answered, Helas, the prolongation of any Life can
little avail the Catholic Church; but pray for the health of King Philip, for
his Life concerns Her more.

Now, Spain has been always renowned not only for protecting of the Church,
and conquering of Infidels, but also for converting of Heretics. We know that
Osius Bishop of Corduba had the chiefest hand in the conversion of Constantin
the Great, after his Mother Helena a British Lady, from whom he had suckd
Christian milk at first, though it was not concocted to good blood until Osius
did it. What great favors and indulgence did the poor persecuted Christians
receave from ^rajan, from Elius Hadrianus, from Antoninus Pius, from
Theodosius? all Spanish Emperors in the time of the ten Persecutions. How
strongly did Spain tug with the Arrian Heresy till she was quite put upon her
back, and at last converted? The Albigenses in France who had such nefarious,
and indeed nefandous Principles, As that it was lawful to destroy Churches, To
pull down Crosses, To have Wives in common, That the Humane Soul was of Gods
making, but the Body of the Devils, and c. I say, that these ugly Heretics were
principally converted by St. Dominik and by Didacus, (Episcopus Oximensis) both
of them being Spaniards, and sent by Pope Innocent 3. expressly for that service
in the reign of Lewis 7. of France; wherein also Blanch Queen of Spain took
much pains with great success. How much did Charles the fifth labor to quell
Luther, and to crush the Cocatrice in the shell! which causd this Distik to be
made in those times of him, and Henry the Eighth of England:

Carolus, Henricus, Christi Defensor Uterque
Henricus Fidei, Carolus Ecclesiae.
Charles and Henry both Defendors of Christ;
Charles of his Church, Henry of his Faith.
And Spain is so zealous a Christian, that it is not only sufficient for her to
abstain from Heresy, but from the very suspicion thereof; which made her to
erect, and raise up that wall of brass against it, I mean the Tribunal of the
Inquisition. By which sacred Office the Vineyard of the Lord in the Spanish
Dominions is kept free from brambles and thorns, with all noisome weeds; It Is
preservd and hedgd thereby from all wild ravenous Beasts that so much annoy her
in other Kingdoms, and set fire on her skirts so often, which Spain by the
most prudent and pious establishment of this holy Office is so happily made
free.

Moreover, there have bin no Kings so eminently liberal, and munificent to the
holy House of God, together with their Governors and Ministers, as the Kings of
Spain have bin in all Ages; insomuch that a computation has bin made, that
well near the third part of Spain are spiritual Revenues, and the third part of
the Churches have bin founded by Kings. The Archbishop of Toledo is the
greatest Ecclesiastical Dignity in Christendom next the Papacy; for it has
above 300000 Crowns annual Revenues, which countervails three of the best
Archbishopriks in France. Nor have the Catholic Kings thought it any derogation
to make their Sons Archbishops of that place, and Chancellors of Castile.

Furthermore, there has bin a late calculation made, That of those five or six
hundred Millions of Tresure that has bin transported to Spain from Mexico and
Peru since the discovery of the West Indies, the Church has the tenth part;
insomuch that in some petty Rural Churches one shall see huge massy
Candlesticks of Silver, with large Chalices, Pixes, Crosses and Crucifixes,
some of them of massy Gold, and inlaid with precious (...)* Nor is this
Tresure lost that is given the Church; For the Clergy of Spain have bin always
ready to serve and assist their King in all his exigents and necessities:
insomuch that it is a saying in Spain, That los tesoros de la yglesia son como
(...) contra ^na tormenta, The tresures of the Church are as anchors against a
storm.

Add herunto that no Kings of Spain have felt the fulminations of the Vatican,
viz. the sentence of Excommunication, as other Kings have done; But they have
always obeyed with much exactness the Doctrine of the holy Church, resigning
their Intellectuals, and the whole inward man to the determinations thereof; as
also to defend them against all Opposers; whereas diverse French Kings have had
clashes, and frequent contestations with the holy Father. What high feuds had
Philippe le Bell with Pope Boniface 8! for he passd an Edict of Interdiction,
that none of his Ecclesiastiks should have commerce with Rome: He obeyed not the
Pontificial censures, but toar his Letters, detaind his Legates, and convoqud a
Provincial Council in Paris against his order, wherein there were Accusations of
Simony and Schism obtruded against him. But all this while the Kings of Castil^
and Aragon adherd to his Holiness as being the Head and Common Father of the
Catholic Church.

Lewis the eleventh of France against the Ecclesiastical Liberties did institut
the Pragmatical Sanction, enforcing the Pope to assent thereunto, whereby all the
Cano^cal Laws and Discipline fell in France, as Mausonius observes.

Charles 8. enterd Rome against the Popes will, and did as good as war with
him, as with an enemy, but the Catholic King Ferdinand 5. adherd to him to very
good purpose.

Touching Lewis 12. what a bitter enemy he was to the Apostolik seat! what
troubles he excited against Julius 2. which gave the first countenance and rise
to those Heresies that have pullulated in the Church, and so miserably torn the
very Bowels of her ever since!

Philip 2. of France repudiating his lawful Wife, married another not only
without the consent of Celestin, the holy Father, but against the opinion of
his own Ecclesiastiks, whom he handled with so much rigor and tyranny.

Philip the first of France did no less bandy against the Decrees of the Church
in diverse things, and did likewise cast off his Legitimat Wife, and forcd
another.

Lewis 6. of France did so persecut the holy Church, that he drew Anathemas and
spiritual Execrations upon him.

Lewis 7. of France had such contentions with Pope Innocent (...). that he
remaind under the heavy sentence of Excommunication three full years.

Charles le Bell was so highly disobedient to Pope John 23. that he interdicted
to pay him his Tenths, and other Ecclesiastik Rights.

Francis 1. and Hen. 2. of France to their eternal reproach called in the Turk
to their assistance against the Christian Emperor. Of all which particulars
there are Authentik Historians who make mention, and leave it upon record to all
Posterity.

But the French speak very loud how Charles the fifth raisd such a fierce war
against Clement 7. that he besiegd Rome, and made the Pope prisoner. It Is
confessd, but it was upon a pure temporal score; yet he resented it so much,
that it drew repentance from him; nor did he grieve a whit that his General the
Duke of Bourbon was killd as he was scaling the walls of Rome, because he had
exceeded his commission: Nor when the news came to Spain of the success of the
Emperors Army, was any joy of triumph showed at all, but rather a dark sadness,
and all the signs of sorrow, which possessd him to his dying day; And for a
compensation to the Holy Father, he establishd his Nephew in the State of
Florence.

Thus have we collected the Reasons and Arguments of these three great Monarks
in order to a Precedence of Place, and Superiority. Concerning the Reasons of
the two latter, they are excerpted, drawn and deprompted out of the eminentst
Authors who have written in their behalf; and that with such fidelity and
truth, as the Majesty of so high a subject does require, not omitting any
Argument that had weight in it.

Touching the competition twixt other Souverain Princes, as that twixt the King
of Denmark and Him of Sweden, who both entitle themselfs Kings of the Goths and
Vandals; as also that twixt the Portugues and the Pole; Twixt the Republiks of
Venice and Genoa, who both pretend to be Test Coronate, to be Crowned Heads,
because the one had the Kingdom of Cyprus, the other has that of Corsica
under her Dominion; as likewise the old Competition twixt the Duke of Savoy,
and Him of Milan, (which is now drowned in the Spanish Titles) Nor of the
Princes of Germany; I say, that the Disputes of these Precedencies do not
belong to this present Discourse.

There are also diverse other Competitions twixt Cities as well as Souvrain
Princes, as twixt Milan and Ravenna in Italy; twixt Strasburg and Norimburg in
Germany; twixt Toledo and Burgos in Spain, which Philip 2. did in some mesure
reconcile: For when in a Parliament (which they call Las Cortes) there was a high
feud twixt these two Cities, whose Bourgesse should speak first; the King stood
up and said, Hable Burgos, que por Toledo hablare yo; Let Burgos speak, for
Toledo I will speak my self.

The like Competition is in England for Precedence twixt Oxford and Cambridge,
which has bin often debated in Parliament, though Oxford had always the better,
because she is namd first in all Acts of Parliament for Subsidies. Nor indeed
has Cambridge reason to contend in this point, if Antiquity take place, and
Antiquity is a good argument; for Lucian will tell us, that when there was a
Contest in Heven twixt Esculapius and Hercules for Precedence, Esculapius
carried it, because he came first thither. Therefore Cambridge need not be
offended with the Poet when he sung,

Hysteron and Proteron praepostera forma loquendi,
Exempli causa Cant'brigia Oxonium.
There Is also another Argument for Oxford drawn ab Etymologia, which the
Philosopher tells us is a good way of arguing, viz. There was an Ox and a Ford,
then Came a Bridge. But these two Noble Sisters as they are unparallelld by any
other in their kind, let them be equal among themselfs, and listen unto the
Poet,

Sisters, why strive you for Antiquity?
The older still the likelier for to die;
Would you wish your own ruin? surely no,
Let Mouldring Age on meaner things take hold,
But may You flourish still, and nere grow old.
And let this be a Close to the Third Section.
The fourth, and last Section, CONTAINING A DISCOURSE OF AMBASSADORS.
There is a good Rule in the Schools, Qui been dividit been docet: Therefore we
will make this Fourth Section to conform and quadrat with the other Three in
point of Division* It shall also be a Decade with the rest; and as there is
Affinity of Matter betwixt them, so there shall be affinity of Method; For it
shall likewise consist of ten Parts or Paragraphs.

1. The first shall be of the derivation and Etymology of this word
Ambassador; with the Definition, Division and Denomination of Ambassadors and
Legates. 2. The second shall be of the indispensable and absolut necessity of
Ambassadors, and that Mankind cannot subsist without Them. 3. Of the Antiquity,
the first Rise and Pedigree of Ambassadors; as also of their Dignity, high
Honor and Pre-eminence, and who are capable to employ them. 4. Of their
Privileges, Reception, Security, and the inviolable sacred esteem of their
Persons. 5. Of the Breeding and Education, the Parts and Perfections both
acquird and natural which are requird in an Ambassador. 6. Of the Election and
choice of an Ambassador, that he should be Par Negotio, adaequat to the
Employment he goes about. 7. Of the Office and Duty of an Ambassador in the
execution of his Place, and acquitting Himself of the great Fiduciary Trust
reposd in Him. 8. Of the Laws of England relating to Ambassadors, how they use
to be receavd, and treated in the English Court, and what Rewards they receave,
etc. 9. Of the wise Comportment, and witty Sayings of diverse Ambassadors during
the time of their Negotiation. 10. Of the extraordinary Prudence and
Reservedness, the Stoutness and Generosity of diverse English Ambassadors, etc.
There are many Authors who have made it their business to write of Ambassadors,
and of their Office, Incumbency and Charge; as also of their Qualities,
Breeding, and suitable Parts. They have moreover undertaken to prescribe them
Rules, Precepts and Cautions; but those Precepts may fit any other Minister of
State, or Magistrate, and so they amuse the Reader with Universals. But this
Discourse shall keep close to the Person of the Ambassador, and to the Nature
of his Function, Office and Duty. And so we will take the first Paragraph in
hand.

1 Paragraph, Touching the derivation and Etymology of this word Ambassador;
With the Definition, Division, and Denomination of Ambassadors and Legates.
NEither Don Antonio de Zuniga the Spaniard, nor Doctor Gasparo Bragaccia the
Italian, with diverse others who have written so largely of an Ambassador, do
let us know what the Word is, either Ambassadeur, Ambasciatore, Embaxador, or
Ambascia. Now we find them all to be of great Antiquity, for they are derivd of
an old Celtik or Gaulish word; which Celtiks were before the Greeks or Latins,
a Peeple that dwelt where Paris in France now stands, being called so before the
Romans or the Franconians came in. Now Embassy or Ambascy comes of Ambachten,
which is to work; and Ambacht was a servant in the old Gaulik or Celtik tongue,
whereunto alludes Bachken, usd yet in Wales for a servant; whereby among diverse
other Arguments it is very probable that the ancient Gauls and Britains spoke
one Language originally; From hence came Ambactus which Tacitus uses, when he
says, That Galli plurimos circumse Ambactos Clientesque habent. So that
Ambasciator derivd hence, is come now to be a servant, or Minister of honor;
for in some Translations we have Paulus Dei gratia Diaconus, and Ambasciator:
Insomuch that it may well extend to the holy Function of Priests: For the
Minister on the Desk may be said to be the Peeples Ambassador to God, and in
the Pulpit Gods Ambassador to the Peeple. But the Italians would have
Ambasciatore to come from the old Hetruscan word Bascer, which signifidth
nunciare, to report or declare. Others have a conceit that it may come from the
word Ambo, because he is a Mediator twixt both Parties.

Now, touching the Definition of an Ambassador, or Legate, Don Antonio de
Zuniga, defines him thus: A Legate or Ambassador is a Conciliator of the Affairs
of Princes; A Man sent from far to treat of publik Concernments by particular
Election, not by strength and stratagems of War, but by Eloquence and force of
Wit. Others define him to be a Subject who resembles a Mediator of Love.
Concerning the word Legate, Resoldus tells us in brief, that He is one who is
sent to deliver the Commands of another: but none of these can be called
properly Definitions according to the Rules of Logik, but Descriptions. They
are called sometimes Orators, from Oracion, or the fluency of the Tongue, which
is the chiefest tool of an Ambassador. They are called also Nuncii, because they
come to declare and tell. Now, Nuncii and Legates are of late Ages they whom the
Popa sends, whose Ministers of this kind have a mixed employment twixt Spiritual
and Secular. Legates are of three sorts, there is Legatus Natus, Legatus Missus,
and Legatus a Latere: The first has a perpetual successif Legantine Power, as
the Archbishop of Canterbury in England, is endowed with that Prerogative as a
Dignity annexd to the Archbishoprik above 1000 years since; therefore there can
no other Legates come to England without the Kings special consent: whereupon one
of the Articles against Cardinal Wolsey was, That he exercised a Legantine
Power in England without the Kings privity. Then there is Legatus Missus, and he
signifies as much as an ordinary Nuncio. Then there is Legatus a Latere, or
Apostolical Nuncio, who is desumd out of the number of Cardinals only, and they
are sometimes G^vernors of Provinces, or called Pro-consuls; and they are called
Legati de Latere, because they are nearest the side, and the greatest
Confidents of the Pope.

We may read in Iustine that Ambassadors by some are called Lenones Bawds, (but
taken in a chaste sense) because by smooth and alluring Language they move the
affections of the Prince to whom they are sent. The Greeks call their
Ambassadors (...), because they ought to be of years, and well salted in the
world. There are also Deputies and Commissaries who have the same Office as
Ambassadors; but the Civilians make this difference betwixt them, that
Ambassadors are sent to Equals, Deputies to Superiors, and Commissaries to
Inferiors.

There is also a publik Minister of State called Agent; and he is sent when there
is a suspicion that the Ambassador will not be honored as he should be. Therefore
the French Kings of late years have no Ambassadors in the Emperors Court, but
Agents, because of the Competition for Precedence twixt him and Spain. Agents
are likewise employed sometimes to save charges, or that the Business may be
done without noise. Ahd of late years there is a new Minister of State invented,
which is a Resident, who is superior to an Agent, and inferior to an
Ambassador. Both Agent and Resident have the Security, though not the Session
and state, or such a latitude of power as Ambassadors have: Now, Agents may
dispatch Businesses of as great consequence as Ambassadors, though they do it
more secretly, and with less stir. Therefore Hottoman says, That the Queen of
England, and the Princes of Germany had des Agens Secrets in Venice, because
that in regard of diversity of Religion, the Senate would not seem to make too
strict a friendship with them; and for these secret Employments Merchants have
bin thought to be the fittest Instruments, because under the cloak of Trading
they may also hide Affairs of State.

There are also Heralds which are a sort of Ambassadors, and they are very
ancient; They are called Caduceatores, whose Office is to denounce War: for such
was the open honesty of our Ancestors, that they would not commence a War until
they had sent notice of it in a convenient time beforehand; and these had also
the security of Ambassadors for the time, but they were strictly tied to the
very same words that were dictated unto them. Their persons also are to be as
free from any outrage as Ambassadors are, which made the Earl of Essex check
his soldiers in Keinton-field when the late King sent Sir William le Neve King
of Arms the next morning after the Battle was sought; who would have outragd
Him. There are also other Ministers of State that draw near to the nature of
Ambassadors, which are called Consuls, whereof some have Royal Commission, though
the nature of their Office be to protect and assist the Merchant, being
practisd in the Custom and Language of the Country, in their Lawsuits; and
there is as much esteem had of these as of Agents. Of these England has more
then any, and they are allowd very noble allowance; as he of Aleppo has 4000
Dollars yearly, and they of Smyrna and Mosco little less: but if there be an
Ambassador in that Dominion where they serve, they are subordinat to his
commands in diverse things.

We will conclude this Paragraph with this distinction of Ambassadors, That
some are extraordinary or pro tempore employed upon some particular great
Affairs, or Condolements, or Congratulations, or for Overtures of Marriage,
etc. and they use to go with greater luster and magnificence, and may return
without sending for leave, unless there be a restraining clause in their
Commission. The other are Ordinary or Lidger Ambassadors commanded to reside in
the place until they receave Letters of Revocation; and as their time of return
is indefinit, so their business is uncertain, arising out of emergent
occasions, and commonly the protection and affairs of the Merchants is their
greatest care. But Albericus Gentilis, with all the great Civilians, allege
that these kind of Ambassadors were not known but of late years, and
Paschalius calls them no better then Emissaries, Explorators or Spies, which
made Hen. 7. of England, as he says, admit of none.

The second Paragraph, Of the absolut and indispensable necessity of
Ambassadors, and that Mankind cannot subsist without them.
IF it were not for Ambassadors Wars would be endless, and Enmities everlasting;
There would be no knowledge, no friendship among Princes, nor commerce among
Nations. Brunus says, That among all Functions, all Offices and Employments of
a Commonwealth, there is none more necessary, more difficult, more honorable,
and that requires greater discretion, sagacity and caution, then that of an
Ambassador: but as it is accompanied with honor and profit, so it is with
danger and hazard. Ambassadors are the emissititious Eyes of a Prince, they are
his ears and hands, they are his very understanding and reason, they are his
breath and voice; in contemplation whereof the Poet sings that an Ambassador is

-- Vox Regum, lingua salutis,
Foederis Orator, pacis via, Terminus irae,
Semen Amicitiae, Belli fuga, litibus hostis.
It is observd in all stories, and confirmd by multitude of examples, that the
Interview and encounter of Kings has bin rather a disadvantage then an advance
to any great business, specially in treating of Capitulations of Peace.
Therefore in the Politiks it is a Principle, that in Colloquies for Pacification
Princes should not appeer in person, but be represented by their Ambassadors and
Commissaries. A Journey to be performd by Kings requires much trouble and
charges; much ado there is in fitting their train, that they may appeer in a
fitting equippage; all which consumes time, as also what high ceremonies are to
be usd in so solemn an action. Philip Comines, who always dismisseth his
Readers wiser then they came, gives special Cautions for this, Affirming that
the congress of Souverain Princes in regard of the various circumstances that
attend it, is a mere folly; it is exposd to emulation, jelousies, and envy, as
also to delays, and retarding of things by needless solemnities. He makes an
instance in the personal Encounter which the Kings of England and France had,
(where it is observable that he puts England before France) adding further,
that Lewis the eleventh though a politik wise King, was much afraid beforehand
that some word might slip from him which might give offense, or some advantage
to the King of England, or his Ministers; Herunto he adds an infortunat Journey
that the King of Portugal made to the said King Lewis for assistance against
the Castilians, which perhaps he might have procurd by a discreet Ambassador,
which makes him give a caution touching this point. Bien tard ^n Prince se doit
mettre soubs la main d'un autre, ni aller cercher son secours en person: A
Prince should hardly put himself under the hands of another, or go seek aid of
him in person. Paulus Emilius also describing the personal meeting that was
between King Richard of England and Philip Augustus of France, (who also in the
relation puts him of England before France) says, that their often
Conversation and Colloquies did much retard and disadvantage the great business
of an Expedition to the Holy Land.

We will add herunto the memorable example twixt Matthias King of Hungary, and
Uladislaus King of Bohemia, who after a long War were to meet for concluding a
peace in Olmutts in Moravia, where Matthias (merely out of state) made
Uladislaus stay for him 15 days; Moreover, Matthias came with a green Garland
about his temples in policy that he might not uncover his head: Uladislaus
thereupon causd his Cap to be so girded and knotted about that it could not be
taken off.

-- Sic Ars d^luditur art. But there is a Modern Example far more pregnant then
any of these, of Charles the first King of England, whose Journey to the Court
of Spain, though the design was Princely and Noble in it self, for it was to
endear himself the more to the Lady Infanta; yet it proud very disadvantagious,
for it distracted and retarded the whole business both of Match and restitution
of the Palatinat, when by the negotiation of Ambassadors it had bin brought to
such a pass of perfection, that it had taken effect had not the Prince come
thither, which gave occasion for the two great Favorits Buckingham and Olivares
to clash one with another, which broke the neck of so great a Business that had
bin a moulding above ten years; which had it bin left to the sole management of
Ambassadors, had in all probability bin consummated.

Thus we see how absolutely requisite and necessary, how advantageous and
essential Ambassadors are to a Kingdom or Commonwealth; which made the Roman
Orator say, Sentio Legatorum munus tum Hominum Praesidio munitum esse, tum
etiam Divino Iure circumvallatum: I ^old the function of Ambassadors to be
fencd by men's power, and fortified by Divine right. We will conclude with a
Cannon of the Civilians, Legatorum munus perquam utile est, ac perquam
necessarium: The Office of Ambassadors is most (...), and most necessary; which
makes the Spaniards call it Santo Officio y Ministerio de los Angeles, The holy
Office and Ministry o^ Angels.

The third Paragraph, Of the Antiquity, the first Rise and Pedigree of
Ambassadors; as also of their Dignity, high Honor and Pre-eminence, and who are
capable to qualify, and employ Ambassadors.
FRom the Necessity of Ambassadors we will proceed to their Antiquity; and
surely they must needs be very ancient if they are so necessary.

Some draw their antiquity from Belus the Father of Ninus; but Josephus makes
them more ancient, and refers their Original to God Himself, who was pleased to
create the Angels for this Ministry; Therefore Embassy in Greek is called (...),
as being derivd by imitation from the Hierarchy of Angels, who are made the
Ambassadors of the great King of Heven upon extraordinary occasions, either for
revelation of the success of Kingdoms, as the Archangel Gabriel was to Daniel;
Or for the declaring of some rare and signal thing, as He was sent also to the
Blessed Virgin of the Conception of our Savior, etc. Now, there is no Order or
Government in this lower World as well Ecclesiastical as Secular but it is had
from the Pattern of the higher, in regard that God Almighty created the
Elementary World, and appointed the Government thereof to conform with the
Architype and chief Pattern, or Ideal Form of the same conceavd at first in the
Divine mind, and prescribd to the Hevenly Kingdom.

Herunto alludes the Fiction of the ancient Pagans; For Aristides tells us, that
in the first Age of the World, whereas Mankind was infected by Brute Animals,
whereof some were far stronger, others swifter, others were Venomous, which made
Mankind become often a prey to Birds, to Beasts and Serpents, Prometheus being
sollicitous and studious for the safety of the humane Creture, became
Ambassador, or Orator to Jupiter for declaring the misery of Mankind; Herupon
Jupiter resolvd to send his son Mercury to teach Man Rhetorik, that is, to
speak well and movingly; but with this restriction, that he should not
communicate this Art to all, but to the excellentst, the wisest and valiantst
sort of men: By means hereof they came down from the mountains, and forth out of
Caves and places of fastness, and by means of that Art of Rhetorik or Eloquence
they united themselfs to civil Societies and coalitions. Hence it may be
inferrd that Mercury the God of Eloquence was the first Ambassador, and he is
painted with wings on his heels to denote expedition; Besides, he carries a
white Wand called Caduceus in his hand, encircled with two Dragons greeting one
another, which signifies that his Office is to make Peace, Alliances and
Legues, as also to de nounce War, which is intimated by the immanity of the
Dragon. Having thus displayed the Antiquity, we come now to the Honor of
Ambassadors; and questionless they must needs be very honorable being so
ancient.

Royalty may be said, without profaneness, to be a Ray of Divinity; and Honor is
a Ray of Royalty; The first is derivd immediately from Heven, the other from
Earthly Kings, who are called the Fountains of Honor. Now, the reflections of
this second Ray falls no where so directly as upon Ambassadors, who represent
and personat Souverain Princes, which makes their Houses Sanctuaries, and their
Persons so sacred, inviolable and excellent: and they have this high honor
given them not only for their own sakes, and their Masters, but as they are
Instruments of so universal good, as suppressing of Wars by making Peace,
Friendship and Concord; or for the advancement of Commerce and Friendship.

Now, it adds much to the Honor of Ambassadors that none can send any under
that Title unless he be a Souverain Prince: There is no subject capable to send
or receave any Ambassador, be he never so great a Viceroy; if he do, it is no
less then High Treson. Therefore before the beginning of the last Civil Wars in
England, it was Treson in the highest degree for the Scots Inconsulto Principe,
to send Lowden and others in quality of private Clancular Commissioners to treat
with the French King in the name of the whole Nation for assistance. And though
the King himself made a semblance not to admit or hear them, yet his fiery
Cardinal huggd them; whence it may be well said the first flames of the said
Wars broke out.

It is recorded in the Life of Eliz. Queen of England, that the Duke of Alva
when he was Governor of Flanders sent Christopher Assonville in quality of a
Minister of State; but the Queen would not admit him, because he could produce
neither Commission or Credential Letter from the King of Spain, whose Vassal
Alva was. In the year 1604. the King of Spain motiond that the publik Minister
who was here for the Hollanders should not be stild Ambassador, because they are
subject to the Empire, and have a Superior, having bin incorporated in the
Empire by Charles the fifth 1548. at the Diet of Auspurg, as Meteranus relates,
and says besides that Rodolphus 2. writ Letters unto them 1607. as to Vassals
of the Empire, and consequently they had no power to make Peace or War without
the consent of Caesar, which they then acknowledgd by their Letters sent to
Colen.

The Electors and Princes of Germany have got a privilege to send and receave
Ambassadors touching matters that concern their own Territories, but not the
state of the Empire: The like the Hans Town may do.

But Rebels have no capacity to employ any in quality of Ministers of State, no
not so much as an Herald: Therefore Charles the fifth was censurd for admitting
a Herald with Letters denouncing a War from the Lutheran party in Germany, and
dismissing him unpunishd; though he told him that if he came again, in steed of
a Gold Chain he should have a Halter for his reward.

Touching the Electors or Princes of Germany, and the Hans Towns, or Cities of
the Hansa, it has bin much controverted whether they had Ius Legationis,
whether they had a capacity to make a Mission of Ministers of State that might
bear the quality and privilege of Ambassadors. Concerning the first, Kirknerus
a great Civilian holds, That the German Princes may have such a Prerogative,
but it is secundario tantum Iure. Et qui Ius mittendorum Legatorum secundario
tantum Iure habent mittuntur Legati non de Rebus universum concernentibus
Imperium, sed tantum sui Territorii ratione, eo enim Ipsis intuitu tantum
datum; ultra igitur terminos non est procedendum, fieret enim altas prejudicium
Imperatori, etc. The German Princes may employ Ambassadors to Foreign Princes by
a secondary Right, not to treat of Affairs concerning the Universal Empire, but
of things only appertaining to their own particular Territories, and beyond
those bounds they must not proceed. And there are some Princes in Italy also
that are no less under the Majesty of the Empire in this kind, but, etc.

As for the Hans Towns and Corporations, they claim the same privilege as the
Princes do, for they are free Imperial Cities, and communicate of the same
Regalias, yet all by the indulgence of the Emperor, whereunto his necessities
from time to time enforcd him. The Provinces of Belgia, or the Netherlands,
under pretext of such a Right sent the Baron of Montigni as Ambassador to Spain
at the beginning of the tumults; but Philip the second choppd off his head,
saying, That Vassals, much less Rebels, have no power to employ Ambassadors;
Yet this King his Grandchild admitted Ascham who came from as notorious Rebels,
(though not in reference to him) which he excusd in regard that Queen Elizabeth
had receavd Ambassadors from Holland at their first revolt before they were
acknowledgd a State, and that she was the chiefest supportress of them.

We will conclude this Paragraph with this Ticklish Point, Whether a
Protestant Prince may not send an Ambassador to the Pope, and by way of civil
correspondence receave another from Him: though Justice Ashton was of a
contrary opinion, yet Sir Edward Coke was for the Affirmatif; and his reason
is, because that besides his Spiritual Jurisdiction the Pope is a Temporal
Prince; and there may be Ambassadors sent to him as well as to the Turk, or
Mogor.

The fourth Paragraph* Of the Privileges, Security, Reception, and the
honorable sacred esteem which has bin always had of the Persons of Ambassadors.
AMong many other Privileges which Ambassadors enjoy, and are endowd withal
Iure Gentium by the Law of Nations, not only their Persons have bin always
esteemd sacred and inviolable, but their Houses have bin held and allowd as
Sanctuaries, all their Servants from the Stuard to the Scullion-Boy are free
from all kind of outrages, violence or arrests. And they have this security not
only in Courts and Cities, but in the midst of Armies in the Field, twixt
Swords, Muskets and Guns: for though Ambassadors come from an Enemy, yet they
are accounted none. Whensoever they take footing upon the shore, or confines
of any Prince to whom they are sent, they use to be attended by Harbingers and
other Officers all the way, till they arrive at the Court. If they be robbd,
the King makes good their losses: If an extraordinary Ambassador, he is
attended at his first entrance with a more splendid equippage; he is Lodgd, and
Dieted at the Kings charge for so many days with his whole train. At his
Audience the King rises to him, pulls off his Hat, and bows his Body, etc.
Besoldus produces the King of England, anno 1527. for an example how he
observd the French Ambassador as if he had bin the King himself; His words are,
Angliae Rex Gallicum Legatum plane ut Regem observavit, eique supremum locum
concessit, adeoque honoravit, ut in Comoediis ipsius Regis filiae sustineret
personam: The King of England observd the French Ambassador plainly as the
King, and gave him the upper place, and he so honored him that he held by the
arm the Kings Daughter to a Comedy.

But the Princes Electors carry themselfs high in this particular, for they
take place of Ambassadors; and the reason which Guetta and other Civilians
give, is, In praesente Principe vera Majestas, in Legato tantum dignitas
aliena; In Principe reiveritas, in Legato effigiata and adumbrata est: ut autem
umbra Luci, ita Principi Legatus; quamvis enim Fictio tantum operetur quantum
rei veritas ipsa, tamen ubi veritas and Fictio adidem collimant, veritas
praevalet Fictioni. In the present Prince there is real Majesty, in an
Ambassador only a representative; In the Prince there is the truth of the thing,
in an Ambassador the effigies or shadow: Now as the shadow yields to the light,
so an Ambassador must yield to a Prince; For although a Fiction operats as much
as the truth of the thing, yet where Truth and Fiction aim at one thing, Truth
is Prevalent. Nay, the Electors jointly hold themselfs to be more then the
Emperor, he being their production, and made by their Suffrages and election;
and the Rule of Heraldry is Honor est in Dante. But all this is by the by.

Now, so high and transcendent is the privilege of an Ambassador, and his
Person so sacred, that whosoever does perpetrat any thing against his safety,
he is guilty of High Treson of Laesae Majestatis, that is, of prostituted
Faith, Publik Authority, and of a breach of the Law of Nations. Qui violarit
Legatum Lege Iulia de vi publica tenetur, Who violats an Ambassador by the
Julian Law he is guilty of publik violence; and by the Pontifical Law it is no
less then a Piacle, therefore he is interdicted from the benefit of holy things.

We will produce some Examples what revenges have followd for the violation of
Ambassadors. The King of the Ammonits did deride and ill entreat the
Ambassadors of King David, and to make them more contumelious, their Beards
were half shaven, and their garments torn to their tails; but what ensued? the
Ammonits afterward were overcome in Battle, and Rabba their chief City being
taken, it was sacrificed with other Cities also to free plunder, and the fury
of the soldiers; so the affronts done to the Ambassadors were vindicated. The
Romans usd for a Piaculary Revenge to send those who had violated an Ambassador
to the King whose person he represented as a victime, that he might inflict
upon them what punishment he pleased for the a^rocity of the Fact. So Minutius
and Manlius were sent to Carthage by a solemn Decree of the Senate because they
had wronged her Ambassadors at Rome. And so respectful were the Romans of the
sacred Persons of Ambassadors, that if any free Citizen of Rome did offer the
least violence though by words only, he was degraded of being a free Citizen
ever after. Nay, the very name of Ambassador is so sacred, that there is a rare
example that though some did counterfeit it, yet they would lay no violent hands
upon them; For Scipio Africanus having taken a ship laden with many illustrious
Carthaginians, they said that they were Ambassadors sent to him, yet, though it
was found they were none, he dismissd them peaceably, That as Valerius has it,
Romani Imperatoris potius decepta fides quam frustra implorata videretur.

Ambassadors also have a privilege that what children they get abroad, be it
under what Climat it will during their Legation, they are freeborn Denizens of
that Country whence they come, and need no Naturalization; and the reason which
Hotoman gives, is, that they cannot be said to be absent thence all the while,
being still doing the business of their own Country, though they live as Exiles
for the time for the common good. Besides, if they chance to die there, their
goods are not subject to droit d' Aubaine, that is, they do not fall by
Escheatage to the King as other strangers goods do in some Countries. When they
are revokd home, they are advanced to the best Offices, and not only as a
jeering Frenchman said to pluck Capons, as Sir Henry Vane, Sir Peter Wichts,
and Sir Thomas Edmonds were, who were made Officers of the Green-cloth in the
Kings Household; Lastly, after their deaths there were statues erected to
perpetuat their memories.

The fifth Paragraph, Of the Breeding and Education, of the Parts and
Perfections both Acquird and Natural which are requird in an Ambassador.
AS in a General, or Commander in chief of an Army, there is requird Valor,
Magnanimity and Courage; so in an Ambassador there is Wisdom, Discretion and
Prudence requird: The one is for Performance and Action, the other is for
Counsel and Negotiation. There is also Elocution requisite in both, in the one to
enforce the justice of the Quarrel, and to infuse courage into the soldiers by
his Hortatives, in lieu whereof Sermons are made use of in latter Ages; in the
other to move the affections of the Prince he is sent unto. Therefore Mercury
was appointed to be Ambassador of the Gods in regard of his Eloquence. And this
strain of well-speaking in an Ambassador must be natural as well as by art; for
the Italian tells us, Una oncia di Natura vale una libra di Dottrina, An ounce
of Nature is worth a pound of Learning. Touching matter of Literature, there are
two principal Qualities requird in him, viz. to be a good Historian and a good
Linguist; being the first, it is presumd he is stord with Examples, Precedents
and Observations of the Carriage of other Ambassadors; Of what encounters and
difficulties they found in their Negotiations, and what successes they had. By
being a good Linguist he has extraordinary advantage to facilitat his affairs,
to converse with other Ambassadors upon the place; to get intelligence, and
gain the knowledge and friendship of the prime men and Ministers of that Prince
to whom he is employed, and to get his favor also. But it is a caution which the
Civilians give, That an Ambassador should not speak but in a Language which he
well understands for fear of slips, and placing a word amiss: Now, it is a great
truth specially in an Ambassador, that Meglio e sducciolare co 'piedi che con
la lingua, It Is better to slip with the foot then with the tongue: Now, the tongue
being by the institution of Nature in udo posita, put in a moist place, is very
subject to slip.

That worthy Knight Frederik Marselaer in his Book called the Legate, and the
Civilians, point at diverse qualities that should be in an Ambassador.

1. He should be an Indigena born in that Country whence he comes, that all his
hopes of preferment may be there: and certainly a Stranger or Alien though made
free Denizen cannot be so proper; for a true-born Child must needs negotiat
with more affection for the honor and safety, for the benefit and interest of
his own native Country and Mother. 2. He must be a Gentleman born, or Noble;
for all Gentlemen are accounted Noble in other Countries. He must be no Agaso
or Caprimulgus, and then he will gain more respect from the Prince and Peeple
to whom he is employed: for since he must take Precedence of Princes, Dukes,
Marquisses and Earls, etc. they will not think it much to give him priority of
place being well born. 3. He must be a comely and graceful Person being to
represent the person of his Prince; for the peeple of that Country to whom he
is sent will be apt to think that the Prince whom he personats is so. We read
that Artaxerces culld out sorty of the hansomst men that could be found to send
in quality of Ambassadors to Alexander, who were also hansomely clad, so that
it was a question whether they were a greater ornament to their Garments, or
their Garments to them, as the Greeks said. An Ambassador being employed from
England to Rome with a train of very comely Gentlemen, the Pope beholding them,
said, Hi videntur potius Angeli quam Angli, These appeer rather to be Angels
then Englishmen. Aristotle being askd why outward beuty and comeliness begat so
much love, answered, That this was a Blindmans question. 4. That he should be
well in years; for Experience being the great Looking-glass of Wisdom, and
Wisdom being the principal Virtue requird in an Ambassador, Men that have many
years on their backs qui ont piss en beaucoup de neiges, as the Frenchman
says, must needs have more experience by observing the vicissitude of worldly
things, and the successes thereof; who have passed the unruly affections of
Youth, which like so many Mastiffs do daily set upon us. Senators (or
Counselors of State) are denominated from Senes, Old men; and an Ambassador,
who may be rankd among the highest Counselors of State, should be so. It Is a true
saying, Qui in multis versati, versuti sunt. 5. That he should be of a
proportionable good Estate, and not indigent, for then he will be the more
sedulous, diligent and careful in his charge, because he has something to
loose: for his Estate may be said to be his Bayl all the while he is abroad.
Moreover, it will add much to the reputation of an Ambassador if he be known to
be rich. 6. He must be liberal and munificent, remembering the Person whom he
represents: for a sordid parsimony and niggardness is odious in all men,
specially in an Ambassador. The Spaniaro says, That Dadivas entran sin
taladro, Gifts make their way in without a Wimble, and nothing concerns an
Ambassador more then to make his way into the Consults and Transactions of
state of that Court where he resides, which cannot be done if he be
close-fisted. When Sulpitius Galba and Aurelius Cotta did contend who should be
sent to Spain Ambassador in the time of Viriatus, Emilianus one of the Senators
said, That neither of them was fit; for the one was poor, and the other was
covetous; the one had nothing, and nothing would satisfy the other. There is a
remarkable passage in Iovius, That when the Florentines sent Ambassadors to
Charles 5. and Clement 7. being then at Bolonia, together with their
household stuff, they brought covertly many rich Commodities to sell, because
they might be free from paying the Gabel: But the Searchers of the Custom
house having discoverd it, they became a laughing stock; and, as unworthy of
the Office of Ambassadors, they were remanded home without audience. By this
example it appeers that Ambassadors Luggages may be searchd; Whereunto we may
add another of Sir Thomas Chaloner sent Ambassador to Spain by Queen Elizabeth,
who sending complaint home that his Chests had bin searchd, the Council sitting
thereupon determind, as Campden has it, in these words, Legato omnia aequi
bonique ferenda, dummodo Principis Honor non direct violetur; An Ambassador
must bear all things patiently, provided that the Honor of the Prince (whom he
serves) be not directly violated. 7. He must be accostable and courteous, and
not of a moross humor, yet reserving still his sta^e and gravity when time,
place and persons require. Urbanity and gentleness works much upon all
affections, and he is a cheap Friend who is got by a Complement: Therefore it
becomes and behooves an Ambassador to comply with all in civilities by being of
a winning, complacentious and benign behavior; yet not to make himself too
cheap, and to have a special care where he places his Complements. 8. An
Ambassador also must be constant, and tenacious of the Religion of his Prince
and Country, both in the confident profession, and constant practice thereof; if
he cannot publikly, yet privately within the walls of his own House; for nothing
raises a repute more then an opinion of Piety. Therefore he must be very
careful in the choice of his house, that it be fair and large, and a good
distance from the Court, otherwise he may be pesterd with too many Visiters
that will have their feet under his table ever and anon. He must be also
constant to the habit and vests of his own King and Country: For he who does
not follow the fashion of his Prince herin, may be said Exuere Personam; and
this was imputed as a great fault and fantastiqueness in my Lord Rosse when he
went to Spain in King James his time, who appeerd at his first Audience, and
continued afterward in the Spanish habit. An Ambassador must be also very
careful in the choice of Liveries for his Pages and Laquays, that they be rich
and fair, but not fantastical: As likewise that he be well Coachd, and that his
Coach be well drawn by good Horses; for nothing sets forth the luster of an
Ambassador more.
The sixth Paragraph, Touching the Election and appointment of an Ambassador,
that He should be Par Negotio, or adaequat to the Employment He goes about.
THe discretion and prudence of a Prince discovers it self in nothing more then
in the choice of his Instruments. The old Poet tells us,

If Carpenter have not good Tools,
He makes ill-favourd Chairs and Stools.
But of all other Instruments and Officers, there must be most inspection had in
the choice of his Ambassador: for as the incolumity of the Kingdom depends
upon the King, so the welfare of the King depends much upon the ability of his
Ambassador. Therefore this trustful Charge, this sacred Function must not be
prostituted to evry one, for Ex quol^bet ligno non fit Mercurius, Evry one is
not cut out for a Mercury, that is, an Ambassador; for Mercury is accounted the
God of Ambassadors.

The Romans for a time did choose Ambassadors Sortilegio, by Lots, as the
Venetians now choose their Doge; and this was to prevent competitions and
corruptions: Some were chosen Toga, by the Gown for their wisdom; some Sago,
by the Cassock ^or their experience in the War, according as the quality of the
present business did require; and indeed it is a great advantage to an Ambassador
to have something of a Soldier in him, howsoever he must go always Cinctus
gladio, with his Sword by his side; and the Prince who sends him must have also
his Sword in his hand though he treats of peace. The principalst quality
requird in him is to be Intrepidus, to be fearless, resolut and stout. He must
not be pusillanimous and sheepish; for the witty Proverb will tell him, Chi
pecora si fa il lupo se la mangia, Who makes himself a sheep the wolf will
devour him: Therefore there must be a special care had to pry into the genius and
natural disposition of the party in this particular; for it is a true principle in
humane Nature, That a Coward cannot be an honest man, and Honesty is a main
thing requird in an Ambassador. Therefore he must not be dejected and cast down
at the cross traverses and success of any business; his courage must not be
daunted or dashd at any thing. He must be also bold and confident in his
Proposals and Demands; for Qui timide rogat docet negare, Who asks with fear
teaches how to deny: And let him be sure to ask rather too much then too
little; for Domanda assai, che non manchera poi a calare; Ask enough, and there
will be enough to aba^e afterward: Therefore let him not be stanchd, or
mealy-mouthd in his Demands and Audiences; Blushing and Bashfulness are
commendable in Maids and Boys, but odious in Ambassadors; therefore the Spaniard
has a witty Proverb, Al Vergonzoso el Diablo le truxo al Palacio, The Devil
brought the Bashful to Court. Wherefore in the election of an Ambassador there
must be a regard had to his natural disposition, that he be confident and
hardy. There is a memorable observation and saying of Philip the second King of
Spain, called El Prudente, that when he had designd one for an Ambassador, he
came faintily and coldly to him to propose some things for the accommodation of
his Embassy; The King observing it, said, How can I expect that this man can
promote and effectuat my Businesses, when he is so fainty and fearful in the
solicitation of his own? To prevent this, the probablest way is to make choice
of a generous and well- extracted person, for Degeneres animos Timor arguit.
One of the greatest blemishes that Historians do cast upon Lewis the eleventh
of France, is, that he made choice of his Barbe^ to be Ambassador to the Duke
of Burgundy; and it was upon no ordinary business, for it was to make an
overture of a March with the young Princess his Daughter; but the mean opinion
which was had of the quality of the man overthrew the business. Matthaeus
Palmerius an Apothecary of Florence had better luck then the French Barber had;
For he being sent in quality of Ambassador to Alfonso King of Naples, and
having acquitted himself so elegantly, and with so much generosity at his first
audience, and the King understanding that he was an Apothecary, said, Se tali
sono gli Speciali di Fierenze, quali debbono essere gli Medici? If the
Apothecaries of Florence are such, what shall we think of their Physicians? But
this Apothecary although he was of an ordinary Trade, yet he was an
extraordinary man in point of Parts and Erudition, which made compensation for
the meanness of his Profession.

Moreover, it is an advantage to the affairs of a King that he make choice of a
proper and graceful person, and of a sound healthful constitution to represent
him abroad. We read that it was prohibited by the Law of Moses that any man who
had any blemish or mutilation should be made a Levite: Now, Levits, as it was
insinuated before, are as the Legates of God Almighty, and Kings being types of
him, should not have any to personat them that had any deformity or
indisposition. I remember when Count Gondamar and the Marquess of Inojosa were
here Ambassadors for the King of Spain, the one was troubled with the Fistula,
and the other had lost a piece of his Nostril, thereupon a Libel was made that
the King of Spain made an odd choice of his Ambassadors to England, for the one
had the Pox in his Brich, the other in his Nose.

It has bin much controverted among Statists whether one person singly, or
many joynd in Commission be fittest for an Embassy: this business is much
canvasd Pro and Con among the Civilians; they that are for plurality urge
Solomon, That in multitude of Counselors there is safety. They instance in
diverse examples, and produce Virgil,

Qui dicta ferunt, and foedera firment
Centum Oratores patria de gente Latinos.
Darius employed ten in an Embassy to Alexander; The Romans sent ten to appease
the tumults of Asia; They sent ten to Macedonia; Four to the Fidenates; Three
to the Carthaginians, etc. But Paschalius gives a Rule herein, Tentando aut
Tractando unus satis est; consummando plurtum interventus desideratur: In
trying or treating one is enough; in consummating a business the intervention
of many is requird. So Peter Matthieu relates that there were 400 Spanish
Gentlemen at the confirmation of the Peace of Vervins twixt Spain and France,
which might be called a Legion rather then a Legation.

But the most political Civilians are for one single person, trop gran nombre
est encombre, too great a number is an encumber among Ambassadors, it is
subject to confusion and delays; it will make the business in treaty to take
air, and be sooner discoverd. One is far more secret and sedulous when he acts
by himself, then when he must concur with others. Then there are Maxims in the
Law, Cura plurium, cura nullorum; The care of many, the care of none; Quod
multos tangit, paucos angit. Then many emulations and envy do often creep in
with other inconveniences amongst many. Therefore the most expedit and
advantageous course is, that there be but one Ambassador, but the Prince must
choose a choice man to be he; He must be Lectus antequam Electus.

Another debate there is, Whether Legatio be only a Virile Munus, a Masculin
task, or whether Women are capable to be employed in an Embassy; and more are
for the Affirmatif part then the Negatif. It was much controverted in Rome
whether Veturia and Volumnia, two Roman Matrons, were fit to be sent as the
desperatness of the case then stood, upon an Embassy to Cori^lanus and the
Volscians; it was determind they should, and the treaty took good effect. There
were Roman Dames sent upon an Embassy to Constantius the Emperor for revoking
Pope Liberius, and they prevaild. It was a practice among the Romans to send
the Vestal Virgins upon Embassies. There is a memorable example how Guelpso the
Duke of Bavaria having provokd the Emperor Conradus, he set so close upon his
skits that he coopd him up in Winsberg, where he beleagerd him; Caesar was so
incensd that he vowed to put all to fire and sword. So the Duke being reducd to
great extremities, it was thought fit to send the Duchess as Ambassadress to
the Emperors Camp, where she performd her part so gallantly, that she so movd
and melted his heart, that for her sake all the Women in Winsberg should have
safe conduct to depart, and carry away upon their backs as much of the most
precious wealth as they could bear, but the Men should abide his mercy. Herupon
the Duchess took the Duke upon her sholders, and evry Wife after her example
took her Husband; Maids and Unmarried Women took up some their Brothers, some
their Kindred, and so all marchd out; so Caesar pardond all. I will conclude
with a late example of Madame Sardaus, who went so often privately twixt Bruxels
and the Hague until the peace was concluded twixt Spain and Holland after
fourscore years Wars by Sea and Land: Therefore she was called La Maquarelle de
la Paix; which was no disgrace to her.

The seventh Paragraph, Touching the Office, Function and Duty of an Ambassador
in the execution of his Place, and acquitting himself of the great Fiduciary
Trust reposd in Him, etc.
THe Civilians, who are best versd in the Laws of Embassies, say, Legatio est
mysteriosum quid, that it is a mysterious thing; It is full of secrecy and
darkness, as it is of Faith and Trust. The Lord high Chancellor of England, who
is Keeper of the Kings Conscience as well as of the Great Seal, has a great
trust reposd in him for to mitigat the rigor of the Laws by way of Equity. The
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, he of the Common Pleas, and the Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, have great trusts reposd in them: but all these
deal twixt Subject and Subject, and sometimes twixt King and Subject: But
Ambassadors have a higher trust, for they deal twixt Kings and Kings, twixt
Countries and Countries; therefore as the burden is heavier, so the honor is the
greater: there is no secrecy belongs to the other Offices; but reservedness and
secrecy is the soul of Embassy; which made one say, If his Cap knew his private
Instructions, he would hurl it into the fire and burn it. And as there is honor
in this high employment, so there is much honor attends it; which made one say,
That that Ambassador who loses one hair of his Masters honor, forfeits his
head at his return.

One of the principal Duties of an Ambassador, is to stick close to his
Instructions, and the Mandats of his Master; and therein an Ambassador Lidger
does not run so much hazard as an Extraordinary, who has many things commonly
left to discretion by way of implicit trust. Besoldus defines the Office of an
Ambassador thus, Ut Mandatum fideliter, and cum dexteritate exequatur, and
acceptum responsum diligentissime notatum referat Mittenti; That with
faithfulness and dexterity he execut the Command, and report to him who sent
him the Answer most diligently noted. There is a shorter definition, Officium
Legati est ut Mandata Legationis diligenter conficiat, and ex F^de, That he
perform carefully the Command of the Embassy, and with Faith. He derives all
his Power from his Instructions; for without them there is no Mission or
Embassy. There is an Example of the Athenians, that having employed Ambassadors
with diverse Iustructions, whereof one was, that they should take such a way as
they went, they going another way, though they had performd all the rest of the
Instructions, yet they were put to death at their return for infringing this
one.

There are diverse instances how Ambassadors exceeding their Commissions, and
falling into follies, have bin punishd upon the place. Hector Boethius relates
that Olaus and Evetus killd the Scots Ambassadors. Teaca Queen of Sclavonia
killd a Roman Ambassador, as Polybius mentions. The Athenians causd Darius
Ambassadors to be thrown into a Well. Dandolo the Venetian Ambassador had his
eyes pluckd out by the King of Sicily. But let us descend to latter Ages:
Francis the first of France sent Fregosa and Rinion Ambassadors to the Turk;
Charles 5. soldiers discoverd, surprizd and flew them in Italy: The fact was
justified by the Emperor because they were both his subjects, the one being a
Milanois, the other of Genoa, and servd his Enemy, for there were Wars then
twixt Charles and Francis. Edward the second of England employed a French
Gentleman Ambassador to France, who had bin executed for a Traitor for serving
the Enemy had not the Queen interceded. Anno 1302. the Pope sent an Ambassador
to France, where he practisd some Treson; and being arraigned, convicted, and
condemned to die, the Popes Friends procurd that he should be banishd only. The
Venetian drew out of the French Ambassadors House some who bad discoverd their
secrets to the Turk, where resistance being made, Cannons were sent for from
the Arsenal, and so they were taken out by force, and the French King not
offended.

The Ambassadors in these latter examples by their own indiscretion and
misdemenures drew these violences upon themselfs. We will concude this point
with a latter example in England 1624. at which time there were two Spanish
Ambassadors residing in London, who were the Marquess of Inojosa, and Don
Carlos Coloma; and the Prince of Wales being newly returned from Madrid Re
infecta, without the Infanta, matters began to gather ill blood twixt England
and Spain, in regard that the Treties both of Match and Palatinat were dissolvd
by Act of Parliament, which was done by means of the Duke of Buckingham. The
said Ambassadors finding that, they contrivd a way how to supplant and destroy
the Duke. Herupon falling into consideration that King James was grown old, and
that the least thing might make impressions of distrust and jealousies in him,
therefore in a private audience they did intimat unto him that there was a very
dangerous design against his Royal Authority traced by the Duke of Buckingham
and his Accomplices, which was, that at the beginning of that Parliament the said
Duke with certain Lords, and others consulted of the argument and means which
were to be taken for the breaking and dissolving of the Treties both of the
Spanish Match, and for the restitution of the Palatinat; and if his Majesty
would not conform thereunto, their consultations passd so far, that he should have
a house of pleasure where he might retire himself to his sports, in regard that
the Prince had now years sufficient, and parts answerable for the Government of
the Kingdom. The King for the present dismissd them with thanks; But the next
day he made earnest instances that as they had discoverd a Conspiracy, they
would also detect the Conspirators, this being the only means whereby their own
honor might be preservd in proving the truth of things. To this they replied,
That they had reveald enough already in order to the care and zeal they had to
his Royal Person and Dignity. Thereupon the King commanded that the Duke of
Buckingham should be put to his Oath, with others who were most suspectful,
which they all took for clearing their integrity.

This being done, the King returned to make new instances to the said
Ambassadors, that they would not prefer the discovery of the names of the
Conspirators to the security of his Person, as also to the truth and honor of
themselfs, and to the hazard of an opinion to be held the Authors and Betrayers
of a Plot of so much malice, sedition and danger; but they would discover no
more.

Yet a few days after they desird new audience, which was suspended to be given
them, and in the interim the King sent Sir Edward Conway his principal
Secretary of State, and Sir Francis Cottington Secretary to the Prince, (both
Lords afterward) to signify unto the said Ambassadors that he desird nothing
more then a continuance of friendship twixt the two Crowns; therefore if they had
any thing to say they should communicate it to the said Secretaries as persons of
trust, which he employed expressly for that purpose; and if they made any
difficulty of this also, then they might choose among his Council of State
those whom they likd best, and he would command that they should presently repair
unto them: and if this also should seem inconvenient, they might send him what
they had to say in a Letter by whom they thought fittest, and he would receave
it with his own hands. But they gave no answer to all this: thereupon the said
Secretaries told them according to their Instructions which they had receavd
from his Majesty, That they being the Authors of an Information so dangerous
and seditious, had made themselfs incapable to treat further with the King
their Master; and were it not for the respect he bore to the Catholic King his
dear and beloved Brother their Master, and that they were in quality of
Ambassadors to such a Majesty, he would and could by the Law of Nations, and the
right of his own Royal Justice, proceed against them with such severity as
their offense deservd; but for the reasons before said he would leave the
reparation to the Justice of their own King, of whom he would demand and require
it.

Herupon Sir Walter Ashton Ambassador then in Spain for the Crown of England,
had audience of that King, wherein he said, That the King of Great Britain his
Master had commanded him to demand refaction and satisfaction of his Majesty
against the Marquess of Inojosa and Don Carlos Coloma for scandalizing the Duke
of Buckingham, (with other of his best subjects) and through his sides aiming
at the Prince himself; for it is unlikely the Duke would have cast himself upon
such a design without the communication of it to him, and to know his pleasure:
so he remonstrated the whole circumstance of the business, etc. And in
conclusion he said, That he humbly beseechd his Majesty to observe and weigh
well the care and tenderness wherewith the King his Master had proceeded toward
his Majesty's Ambassadors; not obliging them to any precipitat resolutions, but
giving them time, and opening a way how they might have cleerd themselfs, etc.

It was expected that the said Ambassadors at their return to Spain would have
bin punishd, or at least checkd; but matters growing daily worse and worse
twixt England and Spain, the said Ambassadors were rather rewarded then
reprehended at their return, Inojosa being made afterward Governor of Milan;
and Coloma receavd addition of command, and honors in Flanders.

But the high civilities of England at that time toward the said Ambassadors
was much cried up abroad, that notwithstanding so pernicious a machination to
demolish Buckingham, and to discompose the whole English Court, yet they were
permitted to depart peaceably; and Sir Lewis Leukner was commanded to conduct
them to the Seaside for prevention of any outrage upon their persons.

We have dwelt the longer upon this business, in regard there are extraordinary
traverses of State in it, being a Plot of an unusual reach of policy, which
will be found more amply related in the addition the Author made to Finets
Ambassador: but in regard it is so pertinent to this Paragraph, he thought it
fit to insert the substance of it here.

We will now resume things touching the Office of an Ambassador. It is very
necessary he should have his Credential Letters exact and plain; His Commission
plenary, and fortified with as much authority as he can. The Spanish Ministers
when the Prince of Wales was there, objected against the Duke of Buchingham
that his Commission (for he came also in quality of Ambassador) was not so
complete and authentik as that of the Earl of Bristols; for he had his
Commission under the Broad Seal of England, whereas the Duke had his by the King
only.

The Civilians make a question, Si a Legato Mandata poscantur, is adigi possit
ad ea exhibenda. Their opinion is, That besides his Credential or Fiduciary
Letters, and his General Commission, he is not bound to show any more. Touching
his private Instructions, Paschalius says, Mala eum agitat res qui in Legati
Secreta irreligiose irrumpit. It is questiond further, Whether it may stand
with the Office and Honor of an Ambassador to receave Gifts and Presents from
the Prince he is sent unto, which the Civilians call Lautia, a word peculiar
only to Ambassadors: some are for the Negative, which the Hollanders do follow;
for their Ambassadors use to receave none, not so much as a Bottle of Wine: But
most are for the Affirmatif. But the Venetians (who are reputed to have the
best Rules touching Ambassadors) though they allow it, yet, their Ambassadors
are bound to exhibit their Presents to the Senate; and it is thought much of St.
Marks tresure consists of it. They are also bound in a large Oration to give an
account (besides that of their Embassy) what they observd most remarkable in
the Government, State and Quality of the Country; of which Oration they bring
also a Manuscript which is put up in their Archives. John Earl of Bristol at
his departure from Madrid (notwithstanding that the weather had grown foul
twixt us and Spain) receavd a Cupboard of huge massy Plate valued at 20000
Crowns of this King of Spain, who also gave him a Diamond Ring off his Finger,
rated at 1500 l. sterling; and the reason was, because he had found him so
wise, faithful and industrious a servant to his King.

The Civilians make likewise a doubt whether it may not interrupt the Office of
an Ambassador to have his Wife and Children along with him; but they who hold
the contrary are rather exploded then approved: For to leave his Wife, is for
one to leave half himself behind him; besides, Conjugal society is counted the
prime of comforts: moreover, it saves trouble of Writing, and charges for
Letters and Packets, which come to no small sum at the years end, etc.

We will conclude this Paragraph with two special things which the Civilians
require further for the performance of the Office of an Ambassador, viz. That
he be reservd and secret in an intense degree; he must not be Plenus Rimarum,
full of chinks: and herin the Italian and Spaniard are eminently imitable; for
all the Drugs in Egypt cannot draw away a secret from them, whereas a small
Purge or Vomit will make others cast it up.

Furthermore, that an Ambassador may facilitat the discharge of his Office the
better, it is requisite that he have a previous knowledge of the Court and
Country whereunto he is employed: that he be well versd in the Speech thereof; for
it is a sad thing when one is sent Ambassador to see fashions, and learn the
Language of a Country.

Lastly, there is nothing more concerns the Office and Duty of an Ambassador (as
it was touchd before) then to be true to his Instructions. Brunus tells us,
that Qui extra Mandatum agit, aliud agit; Who acts beyond his Commission, acts
another thing: Yet it cannot be denied but many things in point of circumstance
are left to the discretion of a Plenipotentiary Ambassador; therefore, as I take
it, there was by the twelve Tables in Rome a latitude of power left to Legates,
Quae bonum Patriae eminenter tangunt etiamsi non Mandentur, agunto: What
eminently concerns the publik good, though not commanded, let them be done.

The eighth Paragraph, Touching the Laws of England relating to Ambassadors in
point of Reception, Audience, Treatments and Rewards; as also what prudence
has bin usd for composing of Contestations betwixt them in point of
Precedence, etc.
HAving spoken hitherto generally of the concernments of Ambassadors, and the
privileges of Legation, We will now make some inspections in particular into
the Constitutions and Common Laws of England, which may be called Civil, and
very complying in this point.

The Law of England, as the great Father of it my Lord Coke says, That Honor
Legati honor mittentis est, The honor of an Ambassador is the honor of him who
sent him: That Legati, aut Proregis dedecus redundat in Regem, The affront
offered an Ambassador redounds to his King. By the Common Law of England it is
High Treson to kill an Ambassador; as among others there are Examples in the
persons of John Kerby and John Algore, the one a London-Mercer, the other a
Grocer, who were both arraignd, convicted, and condemned for killing John
Imperial, who was Ambassador from Genoa, for a Patent he had got of the King
for the sole importing of all Commodities from the Levant parts. I. Hill was
also condemned of High Treson for killing of A. de Walton who was Ambassador,
etc. Then the high civilities that were showed by King James to the Marquess of
Inojosa, and Don Carlos Coloma the Spanish Ambassadors, notwithstanding their
high misdemenures for calumniating the last Duke of Buckingham, and through him
the Prince of Wales his sole Son, and Heir apparent to the Crown, as it is
mentiond in the next preceding Paragraph.

And as the Law of England is so respectful of Ambassadors, so for her own she
uses to furnish them with as political Commissions and Instructions, and as
exactly couchd as any other Kings Ambassadors whatsoever. I will produce only
two Examples, the one ancient, the other modern: the first is of Ambassadors
sent to the Council of Basile, which runs thus:

Ad Concilium Basiliense sub Eugenio Papa destinati sunt per Regem
Ambasciatores, and Oratores Episcopus Robertus London, Philippus Exoniensis,
Johannes Roffensiis; Johannes Bajocens, Edwardus Comes Moriton; Abbas
Glastoneensis, and B. M. Eboracensis; Prior Norwici; Henricus Bromflet miles
Dominus Vesciae; Thomas Brown Legum Doctor, Decanus Sarum, Johannes Coleville
Miles, and alii. Dantes and damus iis, and Ipsorum majori parti potestatem, and
Mandatum tam generale quam speciale nomine nostro, and pro nobis in eodem
Concilio interessendi, tractandi, communicandi and concludendi tam de iis quae
Reformationem Ecclesiae Universalis tam in Capite, and in Membris quam in iis
quae Fidei Orthodoxae fulcimentum Regumque ac Principum Pacificationem
concernere poterint. Nec non de and super Pace perpetua, guerrarumque
abstinentia inter Nos, and Carolum adversarium nostrum de Francia; ac etiam
tractandi, communicandi, and appunctandi, consentiendi insuper, and si opus
fuerit aissentiendi iis quae juxta deliberationem dicti Concilii initi statui,
and ordinari contigerit. Promittentes and promittimus bona fide nos ratum,
gratum, and firmum perpetuo habiturum totum, and quicquid per dictos
Ambasciatores, Oratores, and Procuratores nostros aut Majorum partem Eorundem
actum, factum, ceu gestum fuerit in praemissis, and singulis praemissorum. Et
Hoc idem cum de, and super iis certiorati fuerimus ad Nos, and Christianum
Principem attinet executioni debitae curabimus demanda^i. In cujus rei
testimonium has Literas nostras fi^ri fecimus Patentes, Datum sub sigillo
nostro Magno in Palatio nostro West monasteriensi, x die Julii, etc.

We delegat to the Council of Basil under Pope Eugenius for Ambassadors and
Orators Bishop Robert of London, Philip of Exceter, etc.

Giving, and do herby give them, and the major part of them power and command
as well general as special in our name, and for us to be present, to treat,
communicate and conclude things as well concerning the Reformation of the
universal Church, as the Pacification of Kings and Princes; and likewise of and
concerning a perpetual peace and abstinence from War betwixt Us and Charles of
France our Adversary; and also to treat, communicate, appoint, and to consent
besides, and if need be to dissent from such things that shall happen to be
appointed and ordained according to the deliberation of the said Council:
Promising, and we do promise in good Faith to hold for ratified, acceptable and
firm to perpetuity whatsoever shall be acted or done by our said Ambassadors,
Orators, or Proctors, or the greatest part of them in relation to the Premises,
and any part thereof whenever we shall be certified, and as becomes a
Christian Prince; we shall have a care that all be put in due execution. In
testimony whereof we have causd these our Letters to be Patents, Given under our
Great Seal in our Palace at Westminster, x Iulii, etc.

There repaird to this Council also Henry Beaufort Son of John of Gaunt, Bishop
of Winchester, and Cardinal of St. Eusebius, having had license to transport
20000 l. in Gold and Silver, which was a mighty sum in those days; which
money, as the story has it, though mute, yet they were moving Ambassadors.

The second example shall be of Robert Sydney now Earl of Leicester, in an
extraordinary Embassy to the King of Denmark, and other Princes of Germany,
whose Instructions were these following.

CHARLES R.

Instructions for our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosen Robert Earl of
Leicester, Vicount Lisle, and Baron of Sulney, our Ambassador to our dear Uncle
Christian 4. King of Denmark, etc.

We have preferrd you before others to this honorable Employment, because we
have observd your constant application to virtuous and noble courses; and would
have it known to all that we esteem Titles not of those that bury them in
obscurity and Vice, but of such that improve their worth for publik service in
War or Peace, whereby true Nobility raises it self above the common sort. We
send you to a great King whom we love and honor not only for his Crown and
Alliance, but also for neerness in Blood.

Your Message in the first part is a Ceremony suitable to the affections and
obligations of Princes, to express the sense they have of the mortality of
their Friends; which Office is best performd by a person of noble rank, capable
of the impression wrought in noble hearts. But the substance of your Embassage
is for the publik Peace, and the interest of our Brother, (the Palsgrave) and
our dear Sister depending thereupon.

To advance this great work, you must with convenient speed fit your self for
your journey, and pass the Seas in a ship appointed to transport you to the
Sound, or the River of Elve, as by the way you shall learn where our Uncle the
King does now reside. When you are landed, you shall forthwith give notice of
your coming, that your Reception may be with honor due to our Ambassador of
your rank. Then, after your coming to Court, you shall in our name demand
Audience, and then attend the Kings pleasure for your access; but you shall not
visit any other until you have had the honor of his presence to whom you are
employed.

At your first audience you shall deliver our Letter of Credence to our Uncle;
and then with a significant expression of our entire and cordial affection
proceeding from the obligations of friendship, you shall tell him what great
sorrow we have conceavd together with him for the death of our dear Granmother
the late Queen his Mother, whose memory you must adorn with her style, and due
Praises enlargd, as the information of her Life and Death, and your own
Judgment will best direct.

This Office being performd with the King without any mention of other business
at that time, you shall address your self to the Prince if he be present, or
otherwise by special audience, and deliver with our Letter of Credence our like
condoleance, with expression of our hearty affection, as to a Kinsman whose
prosperity and inward friendship we very much desire.

Our Letters to our Aunts the Kings Sisters you shall deliver afterward, with
signification of our condoleance and of our love to either of them; and if more
of our Cosens be there, you shall pass like Offices with them all.

Whilst you attend this Ceremony, you are to inform your self by Avery, who
has the charge of our affairs at Hamborough, and is also chosen Commissioner
for our sister: what is done concerning that Portion of our Granmothers
personal Estate which is due unto Us, as by our Uncles own Letters now to be
deliverd unto you, may appeer. Which Portion we have given entirely to our said
Sister, with order to her Commissioners to solicit for the same at the
appointed time: and in case you find performance to our Sisters satisfaction,
according to our former Letters sent on her behalf, you shall take notice of
it, and give our Uncle hearty thanks for his just favor and expedition. But if
you find refusal, or delay for the discounting of such debt as upon former
Treties, and by his last Letters our Uncle does demand; you shall assure him
that before the receipt of those Letters which mention the compensation of such
Debts, We had conveyed by Deed of Gift to our Sister all our interest in the
Goods; and given warrant to her Commissioners to attend the division: and we
hope our good Uncle in his Royal justice and favor to our Sister his Niece, and
her many distressed children, will not add affliction to affliction, but rather
give them help by his forwardness in this our gift, which we can no more
revoke.

If this prevail not, you shall modestly demand what those Debts are whereof he
expects compensation; and therein to clear all misunderstanding, you are thus
to distinguish. The Debts to which our Uncle pretends, are of two kinds, all
contracted by our Father of blessed memory, and not by us.

First, our Father after that our Uncle had undertaken the German War, sent Sir
Robert Anstruther with an advance of forty six thousand pounds present moneys,
and promised to pay thirty thousand pounds monthly so our Uncle would maintain
one thousand horse, and four thousand foot, for restoring our Brother and
Sister to all their Patrimonial Dignities and Estates. If then our Uncle shall
declare, that this is the debt he pretends to defalque out of the divided
Goods; you shall with due respects (and as it were unwillingly) call unto his
mind what manner of performance was found on his part, and how little those
designs have bin advanced for which our Father expressed his Royal affection
by so large an offer; which caused us at our coming to the Crown to send the
Duke of Buckingham and Earl of Holland to meet our Uncles Ambassadors at the
Hague to qualify those indigested assumptions, made de been esse, for the
present, without debate of Articles indifferent for both parts. And then (as
our Uncle well knows) we settled the account upon a new foot, and therefore
ought no more to be called back to those exorbitant demands, which
notwithstanding upon due calculation of all our disbursements in money, and in
charges of our Auxiliary aids and diversions, we have so much exceeded: That
(laying a side all exception for not performing conditions) we have just cause
to claim retribution, or at least acknowledgment of well-deserved thanks, and
not to be now strained for compensation of those Debts. Of our ^ast expenses
there has bin a List transmitted to Avery from Sir Henry Vane, whereof you may
make use by a Copy to be now delivered unto you, to acquit Us of those debts.

But there is another debt for money borrowed by our Father, which we do
acknowledge both principal and interest, and for liquidation thereof have given
former directions to our Ambassador Sir Henry Vane, who is to meet the Kings
Ministers at the Hague in his return out of Germany, and to consider of a course
for our Uncles satisfaction, according to his expectation and our desire. Upon
this meeting (if otherwise you cannot) you must discharge your self; and having
settled the division of the Portion, and put off the accounts in this manner,
you shall afterward proceed as you find time and opportunity to your more
weighty negotiation concerning the common cause; representing to that King our
Uncle the present state of Christendom, specially of Germany, the seat of the
War, that upon a mature consideration thereof both he and we may best advise how
to govern our Proceedings, as well for our safety as for our interests with
others, and chiefly for the obtaining of a sure peace, which is to be desired
for the common good. To this purpose you shall move him to cast his eyes upon
that progress the King of Sweden (his Neighbor) has already made by his
sword, almost through the Empire, beyond all men's expectation: and to foresee
in his great wisdom what the consequence will be, if by victorious Arms he
shall obtain power to give the Princes and States on both sides what Law shall
please himself; which may reasonably be feared, if no course be timely taken for
preservation of their rights by treaty or otherwise.

On the other side you may lay before him the power yet remaining in the
puissant house of Austria, with the dependence of Bavaria, and other German
Princes; and how both sides are supported by foreign assistants, those with the
money and countenance of Spain, these with the actual arms of France, besides
the diversions of the Low Countries and Italy; so as in all probability the War
is like to last long, and the balance may be swayd as other Princes put to
their hands.

And the King of Swede having lately moved both the Princes and States of his
alliance, and others, to join league for the liberty of Germany, and for peace,
and inviting us to join therein: and the Emperor also discovering on his side
an inclination to treaty and to peace, you must entreat for our better
information our Uncles sound advice, and how he stands affected, and whether he
be engaged in any such treaty; with whom, and how far; and whether our
conjunction with the rest will be desired. To which we may by him be persuaded
to apply our selves, so as by the treaty the full restitution of our Brother
and Sister to their Patrimonial Dignities and Estates, (being the only interest
of our engagement) may be effectually provided for. If upon these intimations
the King shall reveal unto you any overtures of a treaty already in hand, and
that therein our conjunction will be desired, you shall with speed give us
account of the particulars, and of the grounds thereof, with all the
circumstances of persons, times and places, that thereupon we may send you such
further powers and instructions for your proceedings with our Uncle and other
Princes, as with the advice of our Council we shall think meet.

Besides this main business, other occasions may be apprehended there by you
for the advantage of our service; for i^ by conference with Avery you shall
understand of any impediment or obstruction of the trade of our Merchants
residing in Hamborough, caused by any difference betwixt that King and the
Town; or by his pretense of commanding the River of Elve, you shall do Offices
in our name betwixt our Uncle and the Town to remove offenses, and to settle
good agreement upon honorable terms for the King, and so as an Innovation may
not be made, which may prejudice the intended treaty, or which may restrain our
Merchants from that freedom of trade there, which they have enjoyed so many
years. And whereas by occasion of the War betwixt Poland and Sweden new
Impositions are raised in the Pellow, and elsewhere, with other restraints of
trade, which in the end will force our Merchants and the Low Countrymen also
to seek the Commodities of Eastland in America, to the great detriment of the
Kings Customs at Elsenore, you shall in this regard advise with our Uncle how
the ancient freedom in like manner may be restored in that trade.

For Island you shall signify to our Uncle that in conformity to his late
Letters we have prohibited our subjects that Fish in those Seas, or fetch Hawks
from those parts, either to export or import any Merchandise to hinder his
Farmers; not doubting of his gracious reciprocal favor to our said subjects in
their lawful proceedings.

Concerning our Collar of Rubies which has formerly bin engagd to raise
moneys, you shall inform your self by Avery how the case now stands, and shall
proceed as upon further advice thereof we shall direct.

You shall keep good correspondence with our Ambassadors and Agents in all
parts as occasion shall be offered, but especially with Sir Henry Vane, who is
employed with the King of Sweden, and with Sir Robert Anstruther at the
Emperors Court.

JOHN COKE.


By these two Presidents of Commission and Instructions, we may see how exact
and curious the English Court is in this point; how quaintly such Publik
Dispatches are couchd, not so plain and flat, with such superfluity of speech
as I have seen the Instructions of other Princes stuffd withal.

We will to the Reception, Attendance, Treatments, Gifts, ( Lautia) composing
of Differences, with other high civilities usd toward Foreign Ambassadors in
the English Court.

Touching the first, There are no Ambassadors whatsoever receavd more
splendidly, and with greater state both by water and land, then in England: For
first, he is brought in Royal Barges a good way upon a Noble Navigable River,
through a Forest of main Masts on both sides, and landed at the stairs of a
huge Tower in sight of a stupendous Bridge, such as I may well say the world
has not the like. Then is he conducted in the Kings Coach with a great number
besides through the center of the City of London, to a house expressly provided
for him if he comes extraordinary, where he is magnificently treated for diverse
days upon the Kings charge. Now the Rule of the Court is, That the Ambassador
of a King is to be brought in by an Earl at least; an Ambassador from Dukes and
Republiks to be brought in by a Baron. It Is a Rule also that no Ambassadors be
allowd this honor at private Audiences but only at the first and last publik, or
when any are invited to Dine with the King. Moreover, that no Ambassador except
a Kings, is to be met with the Kings Coach further off then the Tower-wharf:
And whereas the Coaches of other Ambassadors residing upon the place were usd to
go to accompany the new-landed Ambassador from Tower-wharf, which gave occasion
of clashing for Precede^ce of Coaches, as happened the last year twixt the
Spanish Ambassador, the Baron of Batteville, and Monsieur Lestrade the French,
which flew so high that it went to effusion of blood, and killing, (as it is
mentiond before in the last Paragraph of the first Section more particularly)
There is an Act of State passd, that all Foreign Ambassadors shall forbear for
the future from that complement of sending their Coaches to that purpose. Well,
the new Ambassador being so housd, is visited by persons of Quality, as also by
other Ambassadors: Now, it is a Maxim among Ambassadors, That the first come
is to visit the last come.

Touching Presents, there is no Court goes beyond that of England: It was a Rule
that the French and Spanish Ordinaries were to have 4000 Ounces of Gilt Plate
at their departure; The Venetian Ambassador 2000; The Archdukes 1600, etc. But
(by the Examples of other Courts) there was a retrenchment hereof, and it began
first with Monsieur Buisseaux in King James his Reign; who had but 2000 Ounces
sent Him; the Venetian 1600, and the Archdukes 1000, etc.

Touching diverse sorts of Clashes, Contestations, Differences and Punctilios
betwixt Ambassadors, there have bin as prudent and preventing courses taken in
the English Court from time to time as in any other; as will appeer in the
printed Observations of that worthy Knight Sir John Finets, to whom I refer the
Reader.

We will conclude this Paragraph with some further inspections into the Laws of
England concerning Ambassadors. In the 13 of Queen Elizabeth it was gravely
debated in the Bishop of Rosse his case, who was Ambassador here for Scotland,
An Legatus qui Rebellionem contra Principem ad quem Legatus, concitat, Legati
privilegi is gaudeat, an ut hostis poenis subjaceat: Whether an Ambassador who
raises Rebellion against the Prince to whom he is sent, is to enjoy the
privileges of an Ambassador; or whether he is to lie under a punishment as an
Enemy; It was resolved by all the Judges of the Land that he had lost the
privileges of an Ambassador, and was punishable by the Law of the Land. Herupon
Mendoza the Spanish Amdassador was commanded away because he fomented a
Rebellion, etc.

Moreover, as my Lord Coke has it, and therein he agrees with the Civilians,
If an Ambassador commits a delect contra Ius Gentium, as Treason, Felony,
Adultery, etc. he loses the privilege of an Ambassador, and may be punished in
England as any private Alien, and not to be remanded but upon courtesy: But
committing any thing against the private Municipal Law and Customs of England,
which is not Malum in se Iure gentium, He is not punishable. The breaking of
Truces and Safe-conducts was once High Treason by the Laws of England, but that
was mitigated 2 Hen. 5. Furthermore, my Lord Coke holds in his fourth Institut,
That if one be namd but Agent in his Credentials from a King, yet he is an
Ambassador.

The ninth Paragraph, Concerning the wise Compliances, and Witty facetious
Sayings and Carriage of diverse Ambassadors during the time of their
Negotiation, etc.
AS it is a principal quality in an Ambassador to be serious, abstruse, and
reservd in the discharge of his Function; so it is a mighty advantage for him
to be Witty as well as Wise; to be facetious, and play the Drol sometimes; for
the Italian says, Non e saggio chi non sa esser pazzo, He is not wise who knows
not how to play the Fool sometimes. Apt, pleasant and sudden Reparties discover
a great deal of wit. An Ambassador being sent to the King of Morocco (whose Law
we know is not to eat Swines Flesh) be brought him Letters wherein all his
Titles were not given him; The King said, Sus has Literas peperit, A Sow begat
these Letters. The Ambassador suddenly answered, Ne iis Vescaris, It was done
that you should not eat them. The Town of Agrigentum, as Herodotus reports,
having sent Gellias a very hard-favord man Ambassador to Centuripe, a low dirty
Town in Sicily, and being jeerd, and stard upon at his audience, he answered, Ne
Miremini Centuripini, ut Urbes sunt, ita Cives mei Legatos mittunt, pulchros ad
pulchras, deformes ad deformes: Do not wonder, O you of Centuripe at me, for my
Masters of Agrigentum send their Ambassadors as the Cities are, Fai^ to Fai^,
Foul to Foul. Don Pedro de Toledo being employed Ambassador to Henry the 4. of
France, there were many traverses between them at one private audience, and Don
Pedro magnifying much the power of the Spanish Monarchy, King Henry said, That
it was much like the Statue of Nebuchadnezzar composd of diverse pieces, but
having Feet of clay; Don Pedro then replying somewhat high, the King rejoynd
that if he were provokd he would carry flames even to the Escurial; and if that
he once mounted, he would be soon in Madrid. Don Pedro answered, Indeed King
Francis was there, meaning Francis the first, who was taken at the Battle of
Pavia, and remaind Prisoner in Madrid diverse years; The King going on further
to tax the King of Spain for usurping diverse Countries of his, and namely the
Kingdom of Navarre, which he might live to recover; Don Pedro answered, That
the Justice whereby the King his Master held Navarre, would help him to defend
it; The King replied, Your reason is good till I be in Pampelona; Don Pedro
thereupon rising hastily, and going toward the door; The King askd whither went
he so hastily? He answered, To provide entertainment for your Majesty at
Pampelona. A French Ambassador (Monsieur de Tilliers as I take it) residing
here, and being invited one day to Dine with King James, the King being well
disposd began a Health to him, saying, The King of France drinks the French
Kings Health; The Ambassador answered as pleasantly, Le Roy mon Maitre est bon
Lieutenant, Il tient bien la France de Luy; The King my Master is a good
Lieutenant, he holds France well from him. But of any that I have heard or read
of, Don Diego de Acunia Count of Gondamar, had an extraordinary faculty this
way; and besides, he had well studied the Genius of King James, (in whose Reign
he resided here) how he was pleased with sudden pleasant Reparties, therefore he
did Seria jocose, he did dispatch serious things in a merry way. When Sir
Walter Rawleigh was gone with a Fleet to Guiana, and when news was brought that
he had taken San Toma, plunderd the place, and killd the Governor, which was as
some say beyond the bounds of his Commission, wherein he was restraind from
doing any Acts of hostility upon the firm Land, Gondamar came early one morning
to the King, desiring to speak but only one word to his Majesty: being
admitted, he cried out, Pyratas, Pyratas, Pyratas; intimating that Sir Walter
Rawleigh was turned Pyrat; but that word was so fatal, that it took off Sir
Walters head, though upon an old score.

Another time having discoursd of many things with the King in a private
audience in French, the King askd him whether he understood Latin or no? Yes,
Sir, said Gondomar, I understand it, and speak it. Discoursing afterward in
Latin of diverse things in a free and facetions way, it happend that Gondamar
spoke false Latin once or twice; the King smiling, said, How comes it to pass
that you being an Ambassador to so great a King, who should be exact in all
things, how comes it that you break Priscians head so often? Gondamar replied,
Sir, I speak Latin like a King, and your Majesty speaks Latin like an
Ambassador.

Count Gondamar having bin outragd by the Rabble in London, who threw
Tobacco-pipes into his Litter, and did him other affronts, coming after to have
a private audience, and the King taking notice of it, he said, La Harina de
Ingalatierra es muy delgada, y fina, pero el afrecho es muy grossero: Sir, the
Flower of England (meaning the Gentry) is very fine; but the Bran is very
coorse, meaning the common peeple.

Another time being to dispatch a Courrier to Spain, and the old Countess of
Buckingham being then in extraordinary high favor, that most Suitors made their
address unto her, he writ in a Postscript to Count Olivares, That there were
never greater hopes then now that England would turn Roman Catholic, for the
Mother was more worshippd then the Son.

Count Gondamar being invited another time to Dine with the Reader at Grayes
Inn, at which time the Palsgrave was newly come to Prague, among other Healths
there was one begun to the King of Bohemia: He pledgd it very merrily, and
thankd the Reader, with the rest of the Company; for it was the first time that
ever he pledgd the Emperors Health in England.

Having another time dispatchd an Express to Spain, and the weather having
continued dark and clowdy in London for many days, the Post having receavd the
Packet, and taken his leave, Count Gondamar commanded, and told him, I forgot
one thing, I prithee when thou art come to Spain commend me to the Sun, for I
have not seen him here a great while, and I am sure thou will meet with him
there.

King James having granted leave to Count Gondamar to raise Volonteers to
Flanders for the service of the King of Spain under my Lord Vaux, and soldiers
coming but slowly to the sound of the Drum; Gondamar coming a little afterward
to Court, the King askd him what number of soldiers he had levied? He answered,
Truly, Sir, I can have but few soldiers, but thousands that would be Captains
though they were but common soldiers before.

I will conclude with Count Gondamar in this very witty passage: when he was to
take his leave of England in his last Embassy, the King sent to my Lord Mayor
of London to invite him to Dinner; which he did with much solemnity, having bid
the chiefest Lords of the Court to bear him company: At first the Lord Mayor
after other Complements told him, My Lord Ambassador, your Excellency me thinks
begins to grow very gray. Yes, Sir, said he; but my Lord Mayor, we have a
Proverb in Spain, Canos y Cuernos no Uienen Porannos; Gray Hairs and Horns come
not by years. Being sat at Table, the Lord Mayor began diverse Healths; at last
Gondamar calls for a good Glass-full of Canary, and said, You are the greatest
Magistrate in the world, for you give place to none but to your own King, as I
hear, and you live also as plentifully: But now that you have made so much of
me, that having pledgd so many Healths you put me in a Jovial humor, I crave
leave of these Noble Lords and you to begin a Health or two; and the first
shall be to the King of Spains Mistress; so the Health was drunk round. Then he
took another Glass of Canary, and began a Health to the King of Spains Wife;
which also passd round among the Lords and Aldermen. Then standing up, He
thankd them all with many Complements, and said, I will now discover who these
two Ladies are; The King of Spains Mistress is the East Indies, and his Wife
the West Indies; There Is none so fond of a Mistress but that if a Friend has a
favor of her, he will connive at it, as you my Lord Mayor, and these worthy
Aldermen whom I have in my eye, use to have of the East Indies. But my Masters
Wife is the West Indies, which he desires to have soly to himself according to
the Law of Nations; Therefore I pray you my Lord Mayor, and these Noble
Aldermen, do not offer to meddle with the King my Masters Wife.

We will now proceed to a few others. An Ambassador Extraordinary being sent by
an Italian Prince to the Emperor that he would confer the Title of Serenity
upon his Master as he had done lately upon diverse other Princes; But being to
depart Re infecta, and taking his leave of the Emperor that morning, and the
weather being foul and very tempestuous, he askd what was the reason he would
begin his Journey upon such stormy weather? He answered, Ilne faut pas craindre
la Tempeste, puis que votre Majeste a remply le monde de tant de Serenite; One
ought not to fear Tempests, since your Majesty has filld the world with such
Serenity.

Don Pedro Andrea being sent Ambassador to a Prince whom he had offended so far
that he threatened to have his head cut off, He answered, Sir, my dead head will
do you more mischief then now that it is living.

Francisco Marco being sent from Genoa to Galeazzo Duke of Milan, but being
delayed audience, and St. John Baptists day being come, who was Protector of
Milan, he presented the Duke with a Golden Vessel full of Basilique; Being askd
the reason, he sent word that the Genouois have the property of the Herb
Basilique, which if one handle gently, it will yield a sweet smell; but if it
be rubbd, and trod upon it, it will engender Serpents: And this witty passage
conducd much toward the ending of the differences which were then a foot.

The Samnits being pressd hard by the Romans, they sent Ambassadors to
capitulat; who said, Noble Romans, you are grown too strong for us; therefore if
you propose moderat terms we will observe them eternally: if otherwise, we will
observe them no longer then till we have opportunity to break them.

That Ambassador wanted no wit, who being in a Pagan Country, and standing in
the way where the great Idol whom all were to worship which passd by, he let
fall his Ring, and as he bowd to take it up, it was thought he adord the Idol.

The Ambassadors of Portugal and Poland being at Sigismund the Emperors Court,
and there being always competition between them for Precedence of Session, they
met casually at a place, where the Portugais having come before, he was got
into the upper Chair; The Pole rising up, and making a step forward in a
posture as if he would speak with him, and the Portugais coming toward him, he
whippd behind him into the upper Chair, and so kept it.

We will conclude this Paragraph with the two Ambassadors of Perugia sent to
Rome, whereof the one was witty, but the other not so wise: Being admitted to
the Pope, who was then very sick a bed, one of made them a long tedious Speech,
whereof the Pope had shown signs of distaste: Thereupon the second said, Most
Holy Father, our Commission implies, that if your Beatitude will not suddenly
dispatch us with satisfaction, my Colleague should recommence his Speech, and
pronounce it again more lesurely. The Pope was so taken with this, that he gave
order they should be presently dispatchd.

The tenth and last Paragraph, Of the extraordinary Prudence and Reservedness,
the Stoutness and Gallantry of diverse English Ambassadors, etc.
WE will begin with that Grandee of his time Cardinal Wolsey, who went over to
France upon an Extraordinary Embassy; and he had to attend him (though not in
joint commission) Cutbert Tunstal Bishop of London; the Lord Sands, late
Chamberlain to the King; the Earl of Derby; Sir Thomas Moore; Sir Henry
Guilford, with other Knights and Gentlemen of great rank, to the number of a
thousand two hundred horse: for after a short transfretation from Dover, he had
so many in his train when he went out of Calice. The French King Francis 1. in
person, with his Mother, and most of the chief Peers, came to meet Him as far
as Amyens, above two days distant from Paris. He carried with him 140000l.
sterling, a prodigious sum in those days, (though Silver was but 20d. an Ounce)
He transported that vast sum with him to assist the French King, and other
Confederats in a War against Charles 5. Emperor. There is no History can
parallel this Embassy, it was performd with such a glorious Equippage; Besides,
the Ambassador had such a Plenipotentiary and transcendent Cummission, that he
gave the Law both to France and the Popedom; and he comported himself with
such dexterity and high wisdom, that all the Princes of Christendom (who had
their eyes fixed upon him) admired him.

This second example shall be of another strain of Gallantry by Sir Jerome
Bows, who was employed Ambassador to the Emperor of Russia, who was cried up
for a Tyrant; Sir Jerome at his first audience having some affronts offered to
be put upon him, that he should put off his Hat, else it should be naild to his
head, he was not a whit daunted, but kept it on still, saying, he had no such
commission from the Queen his Mistress. Thereupon the Emperor slighting the
Queen in comparison of the Emperor of Germany, who was the only Prince
Paramount; Sir Jerome replied, That his great Mistresses Father had the
Emperor (his Majesty speaks of) to serve him in the Wars, and receavd pay of
him. Whereupon with a kind of astonishment at his courage he parted peaceably.
But afterward being advancd in his Journey as far as Archangel, and being
embarkd, there came some of the Emperors Officers with Presents of rich Furs
for the Queen, and some for himself; and being come to the side of the ship
with them, He would not suffer them to board, but drawing out his Sword, said,
My Mistress the Queen of England has no need of your Catskins, nor I neither,
therefore you may carry them back.

Ambassadors being sent to Bourbourgh to treat of a Truce betwixt the King of
Spain and the Hollanders, Doctor Dale was sent for an assistant; and coming to
kiss the Queens hands, she told him, That understanding he was a Learned Man,
and a good Civilian, she made choice of him for that employment, and she would
allow him 20s. a day. He humbly thankd her Majesty, and said he would spend
nineteen of them evry day for her Majesty's honor: thereupon the Queen asking
him what he would do with the other odd shilling; he replied, I will keep that
for my Wife Kate: so the Queen encreasd his allowance. Being assembled to
treat, there was a Debate in what Language they should treat: the Spanish
Ambassador thinking to put a jeer upon our Ambassadors, said, Let us treat in
French, for your Queen is Queen of France. No, said Doctor Dale, then let us
treat in Hebrew, for your Master the King of Spain calls himself King of
Jerusalem.

Sir Edward Herbert late Earl of Cherberry, being Ambassador in France, it
happend that he had a clash with the great Favorit, and Constable Luynes, which
was thus: Sir Edward had receavd private Instructions from England to mediat a
Peace for Them of the Religion; and in case of refusal, to use certain Menaces.
Hereupon He coming to the Army which was then before St. Iean d'Angely, where
the King was in person, and he finding that the approches to the Town were
almost finishd, He hastened his address to the King for an audience. The King
referrd him to Luynes, desiring that what he had to say might be imparted unto
Him: Whereupon he went accordingly to Luynes Lodgings, and deliverd his Message;
but so that he reservd the latter part, which was Menaces until he heard how
the business was relishd. Luynes had hid behind the Hangings a Gentleman of the
Religion, who was upon point of turning Roman, that being an Earwitness of what
had passd between the English Ambassador and Luynes, he might relate unto Them
of the Religion what little hopes they were to expect from the intercession of
the King of England. The Ambassador and Luynes having mingled some Speeches,
the language of Luynes was very haughty, saying, What has your Master to do
with our Affairs? why does he meddle with our Actions? Sir Edward replied, It
is not you to whom the King my Master does owe an account of his Actions; and
for Me, it is enough that I obey Him: In the mean time I must maintain that the
King my Master has more reason to do what he pleases to do, then you have to
ask why he does it; Nevertheless if you desire me in a gentle fashion I shall
acquaint you further. Whereupon Luynes bowing a little, said, Very well. The
Ambassador answered, That it was not on this occasion only that the King of
Great Britain had desired the peace and prosperity of France, but upon all
other occasions whenever any troubles were raisd in that Country; And this he
said was his first reason. The second was, That when a Peace was settled there,
his Majesty of France might be better disposd to assist the Palatin in the
affairs of Germany. Luynes said, We will none of your advices. The Ambassador
replied, That He took that for an answer, and was sorry only that the affection
and good will of the King his Master was not sufficiently understood; and that
since it was rejected in that manner, He could do no less then say, that the King
his Master knew well enough what He had to do. Luynes answered, We are not
afraid of you. The Ambassador smiling a little, replied, If you had said you
had not loved us, I should have beleevd you, and made you another answer; in the
mean time all that I will tell you more, is this, That we know very well what
we have to do. Luynes herupon rising a little from his Chair with a fashion and
countenance much discomposd, said, By God, if you were not Monsieur the
Ambassador I know very well how I would use you. The Ambassador r^sing also from
his Chair, said, That as he was his Majesty of Great Britain's Ambassador, so
he was also a Gentleman, and that his Sword (whereon he laid his hand) should do
him reason if he had taken any offense. After which Luynes replying nothing,
the Ambassador went on his way toward the door, and Luynes seeming to
accompany him, the Ambassador told him, That after such Language there was no
occasion to use such ceremony, and so departed, expecting to hear further from
him. But no message being brought him from Luynes, he did in poursuance of his
Instructions demand audience of the King at Coignac, St. Iean d'Angely being
now renderd up; who granting it, he did in the same terms, and upon the same
motives mediat a Peace for Them of the Religion, and receavd a far more gentle
answer from the King. The Marshal of St. Geran coming to Sir Edward Herbart,
told him in a friendly manner, You have offended the Constable, and you are not
in a place of surety here. Whereunto he answered, That he held himself to be in a
place of surety whersoever he had his sword by him.

Luynes little resenting the affront he had receavd from Sir Edward Herbert,
got Cadenet his Brother Duke of Chaune with a ruffling Train of Field-Officers,
near upon a hundred, (whereof there was not one, as Cadenet told King James, but
had killd his man) I say, this Man came Ambassador Extraordinary to England a
little after, who mis-reporting the Traverses twixt Herbert and Luynes,
prevailed so far, that Sir Edward Herbert was presently revokd to answer the
Charge that should be laid against him. In the mean time the Earl of Carlisle was
employed Ambassador Extraordinary to France for accommodating Le Mal Entendu
which might arise betwixt the two Crowns. Carlisle was commanded to inform
himself of the truth of the business aforementiond, and he could meet with no
relation but what Luynes had made himself, wherein more affronting and haughty
expressions were laid to Sir Edward Herberts charge then had truly passed: For
though the first provocation came from Luynes, yet the Ambassador kept himself
within the bounds both of his Instructions and Honor. But as my Lord of Carlisle
was ready to send this misinformation to England, the Gentleman formerly
spoken of who stood behind the Hangings came to the Earl of Carlisle, and said,
That he owd so much duty to Truth and Honor that he could do no less then
vindicat Cavalier Herbert from all indiscretion and unworthiness; and thereupon
related the true circumstance of the business, which was as it was before told.
The Earl of Carlisle being thus rectified in knowledge of the truth, gave account
to King James accordingly, who cleerd Sir Edward Herbert, and resolvd to renvoy
him Ambassador to France, whereof he having notice, He kneeld to the King before
the Duke of Buckingham, and desird that since the business was publik in both
Kingdoms, he might in a publik way demand reparation of Monsieur Luynes: for
which purpose he beseechd his Majesty that a Trumpeter if not a Herald might be
sent on his part to Monsieur Luynes to tell him, That he had made a false
relation of the passages before mentiond, and that Sir Edward Herbert would
demand reason of him with sword in hand on that point. The King answered that he
would take it into consideration; but Luynes a little after died, and Sir Edward
Herbert was sent Ambassador to France again.

John the late Earl of Bristol being Ambassador in Spain, had many clashes with
the Alguazils, and the Alcalde himself, together with diverse Officers, to
preserve the Privileges of his House in point of Sanctuary, which was done with
much courage and discretion. But there was one signal passage among diverse
other, One Scoppius had publishd an infamous base Book against King James, and
being in Flanders, (where Sir John Benet was sent for, among other things, to
demand Justice of the Archduke upon him) he had fled to Madrid, and the Earl
being in despair to get him punishd there where the Jesuits are so powerful, he
employed a good resolut Gentleman Mr. George Digby his Kinsman to give the said
Scoppius a Bala^re or slash ore the face, which he did to some purpose, for it is
athwart ore his face, and his mouth that had offended, which he carried as a
mark of Revenge to his Grave.

The said Earl being also employed Ambassador to the Emperor in the height of
the Wars for the Palatinat, and returning near Heydelberg, or therabouts where
Count Mansfelts Army was, upon which the greatest strength of the Palsgrave
depended, which Army being ready to disband for want of Pay, the Earl of
Bristol pawnd his whole Cupboard of Plate to find money for the said Army, else
all had bin lost at that time.

Such an extraordinary Noble Act (and beyond Commission) the Earl of Leicester
did propose also to do when he was Ambassador to the King of Denmark: For
whereas that King made a delay to pay the Portion which was due unto the Lady
Elizabeth out of the Estate of Queen Sophia her Granmother, which amounted to
about 150000 l. and which the said Earl had power to receave; and the reason of
the King of Denmarks delay, being, because there were some accounts to be
liquidated twixt his Nephew the King of Great Britain and Him; The said Earl
(provided he might receave the said Portion due to the Lady Elizabeth to
comfort her now in her great extremities) offered to engage besides his Honor,
all the Estate he had in England, (which his Majesty must partly know) that
this should no way prejudice the accounts that were twixt Him and the King of
Great Britain. This motion of the Ambassadors was highly extolld by the King
and all the Danish Court for the Nobleness of it. The said Earl being
afterward Ambassador for many years in France, he would never give Precedence
to Cardinal Richelieu: and touching Hugo Grotius, who, as he was Ambassador for
Sweden, would have made his Coaches drive before his, he was put back avec un
pied de nez, with a Nose a footlong, as is mentiond more at large in the last
Paragraph of Great Britain which went before.

Liberorum Cerebri Sextus Post Quadraginta.
FINIS.
The Bookseller to the Reader.
THe Reason why there is no Table or Index added herunto, is, That evry Page in
this Work is so full of signal Remarks, that were they couchd in an Index, it
would make a Volume as big as the Book, and so make the Postern Gate to bear no
proportion with the Building.

CHR. ECCLESTON.


