SOME SOBER INSPECTIONS MADE Into those INGREDIENTS That went to the COMPOSITION
of A late CORDIAL, called A CORDIAL FOR THE Cavaliers.

For the satisfaction of some, who mis-apprehended the Author.



LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy lane, 1661.

So^ I(...)s m^de Into those Ingredients that went to the C(...) of a l^^e
C(...)ll, called A Cordial for the Cavaliers.
THe Author in the first place begi^^ wi^h very re(...)l Epi(...) (...) the
Ca^^lie^s, p(...)g them i^ (...) of the ^ig^e^t Re(...)d that (...)e (...) is
capable of, which they may w^ll e^pect, for showing themselfs, in such (...)e
(...) of (...), so good C(...), so good S^^j^cts, and so good (...), toward
their C(...), their King, and their C(...).

Then the Author de(...) by d^g^ees to the other Re(...)s, which they they may
cl^im (...) due, from their King and C(...)y, (...)g ^^em, that their condition
is far from being d(...)t, which words are equivalent, as if he h(...) said
they might rest c^nfident, that they s(...) (...) R(...)s from the other t^^,
therfo^e (...) (...) (...) Inti(...)n ^o His Majesty, and the Pa^lement, in
order theru(...), which has produced no small effects since, for diverse
Cavaliers, whose wants were apparent and pressing, have bin releev'd, I say,
there is an Intimation that the service of the Cavaliers being for the public
good, It Is reason, (all the reason in the world,) they should be satisf^ed o^^
of the p^bl^c (...), ^he^of the Commons in Parliament are the Dispensers,
therefore it is in Them, to furnish His Majesty to that end, and it is soly in
the King to give public Rewards, In allusion whereunto, His Majesty ^ath bin
pleased to say, That n^ne sh^^d (...)e the (...) to Re^^rd the Cavali^rs but He
himself. And (...)y, under favor, never any* So(...)in Prince (...) (...) and
honorable ground to conse^ (...), (...) no story can show that ever any stuck
so stoutly to their Prince and Principl^^ ^s the l^^e Cavaliers did, or e^^^
showed a clearer affecti^n, for they expo^'d their life's and livelihoods for
Him, when, in the eye of ^uman^ judgment, hi^ case was desperate, the (...)bells
^aving all the imag^^^ble advantag^^ that could ^e, for they had the Ci^y, the
Sea, and the S^^t on their side, yet the Cavaliers, transported by the fr^^
(...) of loyal* hearts adhered unto Him s^ill, (...) ^ith (...)nding the hug^
disprop^^tion, and int(...)y (...) (...)ngth; ^^y* though they knew* He had no
money to pay them, and truly there is no Nation can parallel such a love; The
German will speak high words of his love to the Keysar, the Sp^niard, and
French will cry out Vivele Roy, but not one of them will stir a f^ot for King
or Keysar, without money, for their pay, and hopes of some recompense besides;
which the Spaniard* uses ^o claim as his due by the name of Ay^^l^ de costas;
To this purpose there is a notable passage that happened twixt P(...) the Second
and a T^ledo Cap^ain, who being returned from the wars of the Netherlands, went
to see the King, who was then at the Escurial. It was the Captains chance to
meet Him (incognito) as he was a hunting there, being alone, and strayed from
his servants, the King saluting the Captain a^k'd him where he was going? he
said, that he was lately returned from Flanders, with his Wounds and Sca^s
about him to give D^n Pbelippe (...) account of his se^^ices, and to demand a
reward of him; The King asked, whether he had his Sala^y paid him? (...),
quoth he, I must confess I ^^ve th^ugh I stayed sometimes long enough for i^,
but I am come now for an Ay^d^ de costas, for some Reward besides; But, put case
the King will not do it* the Captain answered, Voto a di^^ ^u^b^s^ mi mula en
el culo, If he will no^ let him kis^ my M^^e in the t^yl; Thereupon the King
with a smile asked his name, who told him he was called Captain Rodrigo del
Rio; The King said Senior Captain Rodrigo I see you are a stout man, the
Counsel of war sits to morrow, where if you make your addresses, and bring with
you a sufficient certificat of your services, I shall procure you admittance to
the King and Counsel, by giving your name to the doorkeeper before hand; The
next day the Captain being let in, and seeing the King with all the Counsel
bare about him, the King told him, well Captain, do you remember what you said
yesterday, and what the King should do to your Mule, if he gave you no Reward
extraordinary? The Captain being nothing at all daunted, said, truly Sir, my
Mule is ready at the Court-gate, if there be occasion. The King liking the
stoutness of the man commanded 400. Crowns to be given him, and 2000. Rialls
for an annual pension during life: The condition of the English Cavaliers is
much more considerable, for the Spanish Captain had all his arreares paid him,
which our Cavaliers have not; now, there is no A^tizan or Labourer whatsoever
that deserves his hire, more then the Soldier, who besides his hard duties and
toil, ventures both life and lim for his wages.

Then comes the Author of the Cordial in an humble way, to speak of His
Majesty's condition at present, how lightly the Coffers of the Crown are yet
ballasted, what vast sums have bin taken out of them to discharge such
indispensable arrears, and how unable he is to do what he so heartily intends,
with what convenient speed he may; Then he gives a touch at some Roundheads
that were raised, who, computed with the Civaliers, are not one for twenty,
which, under favor, holds true, take all professions together; for go to the
Church there are twenty five Bishops for one; go to Deans, Canons, Prebends,
there is forty to one; go to the parochial Ministers, whereof there be above 9000.
in the Land, there is above fifty to one; go to the Universities, how many Heads
of Houses, and Fellows of Colleges have bin thrust out, and Cavaliers put in
their rooms? go to the City, scarce any Roundhead has received favor. The
Lieutenant of the Tower and six Commissioners of the Custom house, with diverse
other Officers, all Cavaliers; go to the twelve Judges there are ten to two; go
to the Sargeants, with other Officers at Law, go to the Army and Lifeguard; go
to the Court above and below stairs, the odds more then twenty to one holds for
the Cavalier: It Is true, fom few are crept in into Offices, but it is for their
mon y, whereof I believe the King has no knowledge (and it is only God Almighty
is omniscious.) Touching those Lords of the Privy-counsel, I take leave to say,
that we stood without the Curtain and could not see what was contrived within,
for His Majesty's coming over, where the Consultation of the said Privy
counselors with other choice Lords and Persons (that were the Kings Confidents
to that end) did very much avail to bring the business about; though indeed, as
the case then stood, it may be said that no humane wit or power, but it was
pure Omnipoten ce which did the work: But let it not offend any to remember,
that diverse great Kings have bin enforced to raise and reward those that were
once their very enemies for a time; The Kings of France, at the pacification of
Nants, and the Treaty of Loudun, were, by Article, to confer honors, in lieu of
punishments, upon diverse who in open Field fought against them; and the last
King was to remove his bosomest Counselor from him, as Sillery, and others;
that He should approve of all actions passed as done for his service, etc. And
all this by public Edict, which was verified by Parliament. In such a posture,
it seems, were things in our Edward the Seconds time, when dining in
Westminster Hall upon a great Festival, there came a Minstrell-woman on
horseback to show some sports, and going about the Table she left a paper
behind, as Stow has it in his Survey of London page 521. as also Daniel in his
History of Edward the Second, which paper was as follows, Our Soverain Lord
the King has nothing courteously respected His Knights that, in his Fathers
time, and also in His own, have put forth their Persons to diverse perils, and
have utterly lost or greatly diminished their substances, to the Honor of the
said King, and he has enriched abundantly such as have not born the weight, as
yet, of the business.

The Author of the Cordial proceeds then to His Majesty's great clemency,
whereat some seem to except; It Is true in some cases, That he who spares the guilty
wrongs the innocent; And it is as true, that th Innocence of a Cavalier is to be
preferred before the Repentance of a Roundhead; But the World knows what Rules
of Mercy His Father (of ever blessed Memory) prescribes him in his sacred
Legacies; Moreover, there is a world of examples how, after a Civil War, such
Acts of Indemnity, such Amnestia's and general pardons were granted of
necessity, for if the Law were permitted to pass in such cases, the King might
hang up half his Subjects; yet, it cannot be denied, but that it is a very sad
case, that one should have my Horses in his stables, my Hangings and Housh
old-stuff in his House my Oxen in his plough, my Books in his study, my Jewels
upon his wifes fingers, which he had robbed me of, with other things, and that I
should not have the benefit of the Law to recover them; yet, touching that, let
it be also considered how many hundred Cavaliers have bin restored since to
their Real Estates, and Offices, which, though it cannot be called properly a
Reward, yet it is a clear benefit we received by the Kings coming, which
benefit we were in despair of but twenty Months since.

Then the Author goes on with some encouragements, not as if he went about to
read a lecture of patience, it being not only an unseasonable thing, but a
piece of impertinency, to preach patience to those who are upon point of
sinking or starving; as, God wot, too many of the Royalists are; only He gives
a hint, that they should still keep up their spirits, there being no doubt but
that His Majesty being so so^sible of their condition, and the Parliament being
made up of so many Worthy and discerning Gentlemen, they will put Him in a
capacity to take them into due and speedy consideration, as it is well hoped
they will do upon their Re-accesse, 10 which purpose that Cordial may do more
good then they are aware.

To conclude, he who with a sober and wellbiass'd judgment will examine that
Cordial, will find, that there is never a Line, Word, or Syllable therein, but
breaths out the spirit of a perfect Cavalier, as above twenty other several
pieces of the same Author published upon Emergent occasions, do breath besides,
there is no fretful drug, or the least Corrosive dram in it, but all gentle
lenitifs, therefore he wonders how it should stir up such Malignant humors in
any, unless it were in them, who having something lying upon the stomach, made
wrong use of that Cordial to cast it up.

In fine, the Author of that Cordial is very confident, that there will be such
a noble consideration had of the Cavaliers, that they shall have cause to say
to His Majesty, as the Grave of Fustemburg said to Charles the Fifth after the
Wars of Saxony, who having don notable exploits in that War, and the Emperor
acknowledging it, Sir, said he, If there be occasion again, I will feed upon one
arm, and fight with the other, to do your Majesty service.

For the fuller Infomatrion of the Reader, the Cordial it self follows.

A CORDIAL FOR THE Cavaliers.
Worthy, and Deserving Gentlemen,
IN the Affairs and traverses of this life, it is a true Rule (and it is a
comfortable one). That he who discharges a good Conscience, of his Own,
wherewith to reward Himself, though he receive no compensation from any where
else: The World knows, and Envy it self does acknowledge, That in the late
Confusions (which were of that length that might have shaken the firmest
Spirits in their Loyalty) you have discharged a Good Conscience three ways,
toward your Creator, toward your Country, and toward your King; your
Religion bound you to the One, Nature to the Other, and your Allegiance to the
Third; And although many of you have not yet received what you expected for the
two last, yet touching the first (whereunto the other conduce) you are sure to
have such a Reward one day, that will not only be above all Merit, but beyond
all Imagination, in the Kingdom of Eternity.

Add hereunto, that I hold your Condition to be far from being desperate, but
that you may receive rewards, at least some Consideration from the other Two,
viz from your King and Country; For the present Parliament, which represents
your whole Country, being composed of so many Wise, and well-weighed Gentlemen
(whereof diverse has bin Co sufferers with you) will, as it is well hoped, out
of a sense thereof, have such reflections upon your Sufferings and Services,
both Active and Passive, that they will enable his Majesty, whom the Law
styles, The Fountain of Honor and Bounty, and whereof indeed no other Power
should partake with Him, I say it may well be hoped, that this Parliament, before
their Recess, will put His Majesty in a Capacity, and humbly Advise Him, if not
to Reward you, yet to Relieve your present wants in such a measure, that the
Steed may not starve, while the grass grows.

You know well that the King has bin among us but a little more then the
compass of one year, and his Grandfather Henry the Great of France, was above 7
years (which is an Age in our Law) before he could requite those, who stuck to
him not much above 20 months, in making him Master of the Elowerdeluces; You
know the vast debts His Majesty has paid both by Sea and Land, which yet were
not his own, nor his Kingdoms, but of that accursed usurping Commonwealth,
which exhausted more of the public Treasure, then all the Kings of this Land,
since gold and silver was first coind in its you know He is so shortened, that
He has not yet provided bread for all of his own house; He is in such a
condition, that He cannot give his Royal Aunt that treatment which might be
expected; He has not wherewith to go his Progress: Consider what vast expenses
his Fleets at Sea, his Lifeguard, with other Garrisons do stand him in, as
also what debts he drew upon himself so many years beyond the Seas, for his
necessary subsistence, etc.

Now, whereas some object he has revvarded Roundheads, Truly I believe if a
Catalogue were made of those upon whom he has conferred Honor or Office since
his Return, there will be found above twenty Cavaliers for one of any other
upon whom he has set any marks of Favor. It Is true, albeit he came not in by
the Presbyterian, yet he could not have come in without him so peaceably,
though some alledg that what the Presbyterian did, was not as much out of a
Love to the King, as out of a Hatred he bore to the Independent, who may be
said to have used the Presbyterian a^ the Fox uses to deal with the Badger,
who having found out his Chamber in the Earth, (...) ^o betrayeth it, that the
Badger comes thither no more, and so the Fox makes himself master of the hole.

Whereas some except against his Majesty's lenity, and indulgence, let them know
that Mercy is the inseparable Inmate of a magnanimous breast, and that the
noblest way of Revenge is to forget, and scorn injuries; I have read in story,
that one thing which made Lewis the twelf of France most famous was a Speech
which dropped from Him, when being advised by some of his Counsel to punish such
and such as were professed Enemies unto Him while He was Duke of Orleans, He
answered, That the King of France does not use to revenge the injuries of the
Duke of Orleans; no more (with most humble submission be it spoken) does King
Charles rese^t much the wrongs that were done to Charles Stuart.

Therefore, Noble Cavaliers, possess your Souls with patience, we have a most
gracious King who is in the Meridian of his years, and will live to reward all
in time. In the confused medley of mundane affairs, the Proverb often is
verified, Some have the happ, but some stick still in the gapp, Some have the
fortune of preferment, some not, and 'twill be so to the worlds end. The Author
hereof though during the many years that he was in prison for his loyalty, had
three sworn over his head in an Office of Credit that he should have had de
jure, yet it nothing discomposeth him, being more then in h^pe of a
compensation some other way.

And as we have a Gracious, so have we a Glorious King, the most Glorious that
ever wore these three Crowns, for all the eyes of Christendom are fixed upon
Him with a kind of astonishment and admiration, and not only of Christendom,
but of all the World besides, for it is written that the Great T^^k should say,
If he were to change his Religion, he would fall to worship the God of King
Charles of England, who has do^^ such miracles for him, such miracles that no
story can parallel: And certainly, God Almighty must needs love Him for whom he
does miracles: which that his Divine Majesty may continue to do, are the
incessant Prayers of

20 Iul^^ 1^61. J. H.

FINIS.

