

Two Discourses, Lately Revievv'd and enriched by the Author.

One, The Pre-eminence and Pedigree of PARLIAMENT. Whereunto is added A
Vindication of some passages reflecting upon the Author, in a Book called the
Popish Royal Favorit, penned and published by Master Prynne; wherein he styles
him, No Friend to Parlements, and a Malignant, page 42. With a clearing of some
Occurrences in Spain at His Majesty's being there, cited by the said Master
Prynne out of the Vocal Forest, whereunto the collateral Landskippe refers.

The second, ENGLANDS TEARS. By James Howell Esqr one of the Clerks of His
Majesty's most Honble Privy-Councell.

Printed at London according to Order, by Richard Heron. 1644.

The Printer to the Reader.
REader, These two Discourses, one, the Pre-eminence and pedigree of Parliament,
the other Englands Tears, I present again to your view: They went abroad
singly before, but I have conjoined them now in one piece, for your better
accommodation. They have bin surreptitiously printed in Oxford, and else where,
but mistaken in diverse places; They come forth now, not only corrected, but
enriched by the Author himself. When they were exposed first to the world,
they found extraordinary good acceptance, and have been very much sought for
since, as well for the richness of the style and matter, as for the gallant
worth of the Author, which is so well known at home and abroad.

R. H.

To my worthily honored Friend, Sir W. S. Knight.
SIR,
I Have many thanks to give you for the Book you pleased to send me, called the
Popish Royal Favorite; and according to your advice (which I value in a high
degree) I put pen to paper, and something you may see I have done (though in a
poor pamphleting way) to clear my self of those aspersions that are cast
upon me therein. But truly Sir, I was never so unfit for such a task; all my
Papers, Manuscripts, and Notes, having been long since seized upon and kept
from me. Add hereunto, that besides this long pressure and languishment of
twenty three Months close restraint (the sense whereof, I find has much
stupefied my spirits) it pleased God to visit me lately with a dangerous fit of
sickness, a high burning fever, with the new disease, whereof my Body as well
as my Mind is yet somewhat crazie: so that (take all afflictions together) I
may truly say, I have passed the Ordeal, the fiery Trial. But it has pleased
God to reprieve me to see better days I hope; for out of this fatal black
Cloud, which now oresets this poor Island, I hope there will break a glorious
Sunshine of peace and firm happiness: To effect which, had I a Jury, a
Grand Jury of lives, I would sacrifice them all, and triumph in the oblation.

So I most affectionately kiss your hands, and rest

Your faithful (though afflicted) Servant, James Howell.
From the Prison of the Fleet.
The Pre-eminence OF PARLIAMENT.
Sectio Prima.
I Am a Freeborn Subject of the Realm of England; whereby I claim as my native
Inheritance, an undoubted right, propriety, and portion in the Laws of the
Land; And this distinguishes me from a Slave. I claim also an interest and
common right in the High National Court of Parliament, and in the power, the
privileges and jurisdiction thereof, which I put in equal balance with the
Laws, in regard it is the fountain whence they spring; and this I hold also to
be a principal part of my Birthright, which great Council I honor, respect,
value, and love in as high a degree as can be; as being the Bulwark of our
liberties, the main boundary and bank which keeps us from slavery, from the
inundations of tyrannical Rule, and unbounded Will-government. And I hold my
self obliged in a tie of indispensable obedience, to conform and submit my self
to whatsoever shall be transacted, concluded, and constituted by its authority
in Church or State; whether it be by making, enlarging, altering, diminishing,
disanulling, repealing, or reviving of any Law, Statute, Act, or Ordinance
whatsoever, either touching matters Ecclesiastical, civil, common, capital,
criminal, martial, maritime, municipall, or any other; of all which, the
transcendent and uncontrollable jurisdiction of that Court is capable to take
cognizance.

Amongst the three things which the Athenian Captain thanked the gods for, one
was, That he was born a Grecian, and not a Barbarian. For such was the vanity
of the Greeks, and after them, of the Romans, in the flourish of their
Monarchy, to arrogate all civility to themselves, and to term all the world
besides Barbarians: So I may say to have cause to rejoice, that I was born a
vassal to the Crown of England; that I was born under so well molded and
tempered a Government, which endows the subject with such Liberties and
infranchisements that bear up his natural courage, and keep him still in
heart; such Liberties that fence and secure him eternally from the gripes and
tallons of Tyranny: And all this may be imputed to the Authority and wisdom
of this High Court of Parliament, wherein there is such a rare co-ordination of
power (though the Sovereignty remain still entire, and untransferrable in the
person of the Prince) there is such a wholesome mixture 'twixt Monarchy,
Optimacy, and Democracy; 'twixt Prince, Peers, and Communalty, during the time
of consultation, that of so many distinct parts, by a rare cooperation and
unanimity, they make but one Body Politic, (like that sheafe of arrows in the
Emblem) one entire concentricall piece, and the results of their deliberations,
but as so many harmonious diapasons arising from different strings. And what
greater immunity and happiness can there be to a People, than to be liable to
no Laws but what they make themselves? to be subject to no contribution,
assessement, or any pecuniary levy whatsoever, but what they Vote, and
voluntarily yield unto themselves? For in this compacted Politic Body, there
be all degrees of people represented; both the Mechanic, Tradesman, Merchant,
and Yeoman, have their inclusive Vote, as well as the Gentry, in the persons of
their Trustees, their Knights and Burgesses, in passing of all things.

Nor is this Sovereign Surintendent Council an Epitome of this Kingdom only,
but it may be said to have a representation of the whole Universe; as I heard a
fluent well-worded Knight deliver the last Parliament, who compared the
beautiful composure of that High Court, to the great work of God, the World it
self: The King is as the Sun, the Nobles the fixed Stars, the Itinerant Judges
and other Officers (that go upon Messages 'twixt both Houses) to the Planets;
the Clergy to the Element of fire; the Commons, to the solid Body of Earth, and
the rest of the Elements. And to pursue this comparison a little farther; as
the heavenly Bodies, when three of them meet in Conjunction, do use to produce
some admirable effects in the Elementary World: So when these three States
convene and assemble in one solemn great Iunta, some notable and extraordinary
things are brought forth, tending to the welfare of the whole Kingdom, our
Microcosme.

HE that is never so little versed in the Annals of this Islle, will find that
it has bin her fate to be four times conquered. I exclude the Scot; for the
situation of his Country, and the quality of the Clime has been such an
advantage and security to him, that neither the Roman Eagles would fly thither,
for fear of freezing their wings; nor any other Nation attempt the work.

These so many Conquests must needs bring with them many tumblings and
toffings, many disturbances and changes in Government; yet I have observed,
that notwithstanding these tumblings, it retained still the form of a
Monarchy, and something there was always that had an Analogy with the great
Assembly the Parliament.

The first Conquest I find was made by Claudius Caes^r; at which time (as some
well observe) the Roman Ensigns, and the Standard of Christ came in together.
It is well known what Laws the Roman had; He had his Comitia, which bore a
resemblance with our Convention in Parliament; the place of their meeting was
called Praetorium, and the Laws which they enacted, Pleboscita.

The Saxon Conquest succeeded next, which were the English, there being no name
in Welsh or Irish for an English man, but Saxon, to this day. They governed by
Parliament, though it were under other names; as Michel Sinoth, Michel Gemote,
and Witenage Mote.

There are Records above a thousand years old, of these Parlements, in the
Raigns of King Ina, Offa, Ethelbert, and the rest of the seven Kings during the
Heptarchy. The British Kings also, who retaind a great while some part of the
Isle unconquered, governed and made Laws by a kind of Parlementary way; witness
the famous Laws of Prince Howell, called Howell Dha, (the good Prince Howell)
whereof there are yet extant some Welsh Records. Parlements were also used
after the Heptarchy by King Kenulphus, Alphred, and others; witness that
renowned Parliament held at Grately by King Athelstan.

The third Conquest was by the Danes, and they governed also by such general
Assemblies, (as they do to this day) witness that great and so much celebrated
Parliament held by that mighty Monarch Canutus, who was King of England,
Denmark, Norway, and other Regions 150 years before the compiling of Magna
Charta; and this the learned in the Laws do hold to be one of the specialst,
and most authentic pieces of antiquity we have extant. Edward the Confessor
made all his Laws thus, (and he was a great Legis-lator,) which the Norman
Conqueror (who liking none of his sons, made God Almighty his heir,
bequeathing unto him this Island for a legacy) did ratify and establish, and
digested them into one entire methodicall Systeme, which being violated by
Rufus, (who came to such a disastrous end as to be shot to death in lieu of a
Buck for his sacriledges) were restored by Henry the first, and so they
continued in force till King John; whose Reign is renowned for first confirming
Magna Charta, the foundation of our Liberties ever since: which may be compared
to diverse outlandish graffs set upon one English stock; or to a posie of sundry
fragrant flowers; for the choicest of the British, the Roman, Saxon, Danish,
and Norman Laws, being culled and picked out, and gathered as it were into one
bundle, out of them the foresaid grand Charter was extracted: And the
establishment of this great Charter was the work of a Parliament.

Nor are the Laws of this Island only, and the freedom of the Subject
conserved by Parliament, but all the best policed Countries of Europe have the
like. The Germans have their Diets, the Danes and Swedes their Rijcks Dachs;
the Spaniard calls his Parliament, las C^rtes and the French have, (or should
have at least) their Assembly of three States, though it be grown now in a
manner obsolete, because the Authority thereof was (by accident) devolved to
the King. And very remarkable it is, how this happened; for when the English
had taken such large footing in most parts of France, having advanced as far as
Orleans, and driven their then King Charles the seventh, to Bourges in Berry;
the Assembly of the three States in these pressures, being not able to meet
after the usual manner in full Parliament, because the Country was unpassable,
the Enemy having made such firm invasions up and down through the very bowels
of the Kingdom; that power which formerly was inhaerent in the Parlementary
Assembly, of making Laws, of assessing the Subject with Taxes, subsidiary
levies, and other impositions, was transmitted to the King during the war;
which continuing many years, that entrusted power by length of time grew as it
were habitual in him, and could never after be reassumed and taken from him;
so that ever since, his Ediots countervaile Acts of Parliament. And that which
made the business more feasible for the King, was, that the burden fell most
upon the Communalty (the Clergy and Nobility not feeling the weight of it) who
were willing to see the Peasan pulled down a little, because not many years
before, in that notable Rebellion, called la laquerie de Beauvoisin, which was
suppressed by Charles the wise, the Common people put themselves boldly in Arms
against the Nobility and Gentry, to lessen their power. Add hereunto as an
advantage to the work, that the next succeeding King Lewis the eleventh, was a
close cunning Prince, and could well tell how to play his game, and draw water
to his own mill; For amongst all the rest, he was said to be the first that put
the Kings of France, Horse de page, out of their minority, or from being Pages
any more, though thereby he brought the poor peasans to be worse than Lacquays.

With the fall, or at least the discontinuance of that usual Parlementary
Assembly of the three States, the liberty of the French Nation utterly fell;
the poor ^oturier and Vineyard-man, with the rest of the Yeomanary, being
reduced ever since to such an abject asinin condition, that they serve but as
sponges for the King to squeeze when he list. Nevertheless, as that King has
an advantage hereby one way, to monarchize more absolutely, and never to want
money, but to ballast his purse when he will: so there is another mighty
inconvenience arises to him and his whole Kingdom another way; for this
illegal peeling of the poor Peasan has so dejected him, and cowed his native
courage so much by the sense of poverty ( which brings along with it a
narrowness of soul) that he is little useful for the war: which put's the
French King to make other Nations mercenary to him, to fill up his Infantery:
Insomuch, that the kingdom of France may be not unfitly compared to a body
that has all it is blood drawn up in to the arms, breast and back, and scarce
any lest from the girdle downwards, to cherish and bear up the lower parts, and
keep them from starving.

All this seriously considered, there cannot be a more proper and pregnant
example than this of our next Neighbors, to prove how infinitely necessary the
Parliament is, to assert, to prop up, and preserve the public liberty, and
national rights of a people, with the incolumity and welfare of a Country.

Nor does the Subject only reap benefit thus by Parliament, but the Prince, (if
it be well considered) has equal advantage thereby; It renders him a King of
free and able men, which is far more glorious than to be a King of Slaves,
Beggars, and Bankrupts; Men that by their freedom, and competency of wealth,
are kept still in heart to do him service against any foreign force. And it is
a true maxim in all States, that it is less danger and dishonor for the
Prince to be poor, than his people: rich Subjects can make their King rich
when they please; if he gain their hearts, he will quickly get their purses.
Parliament increases love and good intelligence twixt him and his people; It
acquaints him with the reality of things, and with the true state and diseases
of his kingdom; It brings him to the knowledge of his better sort of Subjects,
and of their abilities, which he may employ accordingly upon all occasions; It
provides for his Royal Issue, pays his debts, fines means to fill his
Coffers: and it is no ill observation, That Parlement-monyes (the great Aid)
have prospered best with the Kings of England; It exceedingly raises his
repute abroad, and enableth him to keep his foes in fear, his Subject^ in awe,
his Neighbors and Confederates in security, the three main things which go to
aggrandize a Prince, and render him glorious. In sum, it is the Parliament
that supports, and bears up the honor of his Crown, and settles his Throne in
safety, which is the chief end of all their consultations: For whosoever is
entrusted to be a Member of this High Court, carries with him a double
capacity; he sits there as a Patriot, and as a Subject: as he is the one, the
Country is his object, his duty being to vindicate the public liberty, to make
wholesome Laws, to put his hand to the pump, and stop the leaks of the great
vessel of the State, to pry into, and punish corruption and oppression, to
improve and advance trade, to have the grievances of the place he serves for
redressed, and cast about how to find something that may tend to the advantage
of it.

But he must not forget that he sits there also as a Subject, and according to
that capacity, he must apply himself to do his Sovereigns business, to
provide not only for his public, but his personal wants; to bear up the
luster and glory of his Court; to consider what occasions of extraordinary
expenses he may have, by increase of Royal Issue, or maintenance of any of
them abroad; to enable him to vindicate any affront or indignity that might be
offered to his Person, Crown, or Dignity, by any foreign State or Kingdom; to
consult what may enlarge his honor, contentment, and pleasure. And as the
French Tacitus (Comines) has it, the English Nation was used to be more
forward and zealous in this particular than any other; according to that
ancient eloquent speech of a great Lawyer, Domus Regis vigilia defendit omnium,
otium illius labor omnium, deliciae illius industria omnium, vacatio illius
occupatio omnium, salus illius periculum omnium, honor illius objectum omnium
Every one should stand Centinell to defend the Kings houses, his safety should
be the danger of all, his pleasures the industry of all, his ease should be the
labor of all, his honor the object of all.

Out of these premises this conclusion may be easily deduced, That, the
principal fountain whence the King derives his happiness and safety, is his
Parliament; It is that great Conduit-pipe which conveighes unto him his peoples
bounty and gratitude; the truest Looking-glass wherein he discernes their
loves; now the Subjects love has been always accounted the prime Cittadell of
a Prince. In his Parliament he appears as the Sun in the Meridian, in the
altitude of his glory, in his highest State Royal, as the Law tells us.

Therefore whosoever is averse or disaffected to this Sovereign Law-making
Court, cannot have his heart well planted within him: he can be neither good
Subject, nor good Patriot; and therefore unworthy to breathe English air, or
have any benefit, advantage, or protection from the Laws.

Sectio Secunda.
BY that which has been spoken, which is the language of my heart, I hope no
indifferent judicious Reader will doubt of the cordial affection, of the high
respects and due reverence I bear to Parliament, as being the wholsomest
constitution, (and done by the highest and happiest reach of policy) that ever
was established in this Island; to perpetuate the happiness thereof, Therefore
I must tell that Gentleman, who was Author of a Book entitled the Popish
Royal Favorite, (lately printed and exposed to the world) that he offers me
very hard measure; nay, he does me apparent wrong, to term me therein, No
friend to Parliament, and a Malignant; A character, which as I deserve it not,
so I disdain it.

For the first part of his charge, I lwoud have him know, that I am as much a
friend and as real an affectionate humble servant and Votary to the Parliament
as possibly he can be, and will live and dye with these affections about me:
And I could wish, that he were Secretary of my thoughts a while, or if I may
take the boldness to apply that comparison his late Majesty used in a famous
speech to one of his Parlements, I could wish there were a Crystal window in
my breast, through which the world might espy the inward motions and
palpitations of my heart, then would he be certified of the sincerity of this
protestation.

For the second part of his Charge, to be a Maligna^t, I must confess to have
some Malignity that lurks within me much against my will; but it is no
malignity of mind, it is amongst the humors, not in my intellectuals. And I
believe, there is no natural man, let him have his humors never so well
balanced, but has some of this Malignity reigning within him; For as long as
we are composed of the four Elements, whence these humors are derived, and
with whom they symbolize in qualities; which Elements the Philosophers hold to
be in a restless contention amongst themselves (and the Stoicke thought that
the world subsisted by this innated mutual strife) as long I say, as the four
humors, in imitation of their principles (the Elements) are in perpetual
reluctance and combat for praedominancy, there must be some malignity lodged
within us, as adusted choler, and the like; whereof I had late experience, in a
dangerous fit of sickness it pleased God to lay upon me, which the Physicians
told me proceeded from the malignant hypocondriacall effects of melancholy;
having been so long in this Saturnine black condition of close imprisonment,
and buried alive between the walls of this fatal Fleet. These kinds of
malignities, I confess are very rife in me, and they are not only incident,
but connaturall to every man according to his complexion: And were it not for
this incessant struggling and enmity amongst the humors for mastery, which
produces such malignant effects in us, our souls would be loath ever to depart
from our bodies, or to abandon this mansion of clay.

Now what malignity my Accuser means, I know not; if he means malignity of
spirit, as some antipathy or ill impression upon the mind, arising
fromdisaffection, hatred, or rancor, with a desire of some destructive revenge,
he is mightily deceived in me: I malign or hate no Creature that ever God
made, but the Devil, who is the Author of all malignity; and therefore is most
commonly called in French le Malin Esprit the malignant spirit. Every night
before I go to bed, I have the grace, I thank God for it, to forgive all the
world, and not to harbor, or let roost in my bosom the least malignant
thought; yet none can deny, but the public aspersions which this my Accuser
casts upon me, were enough to make me a malignant toward him; yet it could
never have the power to do it: For I have prevailed with my self to forgive
him this his wrong censure of me, issuing rather from his not knowledge of me,
than from malice, for we never mingled speech or saw one another in our lives
to my remembrance: which makes me wonder the more, that a Professor of the Law,
as he is, should ronounce such a positive sentence against me so slightly. But
me thinks PI over-hear him say, that the precedent discourse of Parliament is
involved in generals, and the Topique Axiom tells us, that Dolus versatur in
universalibus there is double dealing in universals: His meaning is, that I am
no friend to this present Parliament (though he speaks in the plural number
Parlements) and consequently, he concludes me a Malignant; Therein, I must tell
him also, that I am traduced, and I am confident it will be never p^ov'd
against me, from any actions, words, or letters (though diverse of mine have bin
intercepted) or any other misdemeanor, though some things ^re ^ather'd upon me
which never dropped from my quill. Alas, how unworthy and incapable am I to
censure the proceedings of that great Senate, that high Synedrion, wherein the
wisdom of the whole State is epitomized? It were a presumption in me, of the
highest nature that could be: It is enough for me to pray for the prosperous
success of their consultations: And as I hold it my duty, so I have good
reason so to do, in regard I am to have my share in the happiness; And could
the utmost of my poor endeavors, by any ministerial humble office (and
sometimes the meanest Boat-swain may help to preserve the Ship from sinking) be
so happy, as to contribute any thing to advance that great work (which I am in
despair to do, while I am thus under hatches in this Fleet,) I would esteem it
the greatest honor that possibly could befall me, as I hold it now to be my
greatest disaster, to have fallen so heavily under an affliction of this
nature, and to be made a sacrifice to public fame, than which there is no
other proof, nor that yet urged against me, or any thing else produced after
so long, so long captivity, which has brought me to such a low ebb, and put
me so far behind in the course of my poor fortunes, and indeed more than half
undone me. For although my whole life (since I was left to my self to swim, as
they say, without bladders) has bin nothing else but a continued succession of
crosses, and that there are but few red letters found (God wot) in the
Almanacke of my Age, (for which I account not my self a whit the less happy;)
yet this cross has carried with it a greater weight, it has bin of a larger
extent, longer continuance, and lighted heavier upon me than any other; and as
I have present patience to bear it, so I hope for subsequent grace to make use
of it accordingly, that my old Motto may be still confirmed, (...).

HE produces my attestation for some passages in Spain, at his Majesty's
being there, and he quotes me right, which obliges me to him; and I hope all
his quotations, wherein he is so extraordinarily copious and elaborate in all
his works, are so; yet I must tell him, that those interchangeable letters
which passed between His Majesty and the Pope, which were originally couched in
Latin, the language wherein all Nations treat with Rome, and the Empire with
all the Princes thereof, those letters I say, are adulterated in many places,
which I impute not to him, but to the French Chronicler, from whom he took
them in trust. The truth of that business is this: The world knows there was
a tedious treaty of an Alliance 'twixt the Infanta Dona Maria (who now is
Empress) and His Majesty, which in regard of the slow affected pace of the
Spaniard, lasted above ten years, as that in Henry the sevenths time, 'twixt
Prince Arthur, and (afterward) Queen Katherine, was spun out above seven: To
quicken, or rather to consummate the work, his Majesty made that adventurous
journey through the whole Continent of France, into Spain; which voyage,
though there was a great deal of gallantry in it (whereof all posterity will
ring, until it turn at last to a Romance) yet it proved the bane of the
business, which it is not the errand of so poor a Pamphlet as this to unfold.
His Majesty being there arrived, the ignorant common people cried out, the
Prince of Wales came thither to make himself a Christian. The Pope writ to the
Inquisitor General, and others, to use all industry they could to reduce him
to the Roman Religion; And one of Olivares first complements to him, was, That
he doubted ^ot but that His Highness came thither to change His Religion:
whereunto he made a short answer, That He came not thither for a Religion, but
for a Wife. There were extraordinary processions made, and other artifices used
by protraction of things, to make him stay there of purpose till the Spring
following, to work upon him the better: And the Infanta her self desired him
(which was esteemed the greatest favor he received from her all the while) to
visit the Nun of Carrion; hoping that the said Nun, who was so much cried up
for miracles, might have wrought one upon him; but her art failed her, nor was
His Highness so weak a subject to work upon, according to His late Majesty's
speech to Doctor Mawe and Wren, who when they came to kiss his hands, before
they went to Spain to attend the Prince their Master, He wished them to have a
care of Buckingham, as touching his Son Charles, he apprehended no fear at
all of him; for he knew him to be so well grounded a Protestant, that nothing
could shake him in his Religion. The Arabian proverb is, That the Sun never
soiles in his passage, though his beams reverberate never so strongly, and
dwell never so long upon the myry lake of Maeotis, the black turfd moors of
Holland, the aguish woose of Kent and Essex, or any other place, be it never so
di^ty; Though Spain be a hot Country, yet one may pass and repasse through
the very Center of it, and never be Sunburned, if he carry with him a Bongrace,
and such a one His Majesty had.

Well, after his Majesty's arrival to Madrid, the treaty of Marriage went on
still, (though he told them at his first coming, that he came not thither like
an Ambassador, to treat of Marriage, but as a Prince, to fetch home a Wife;)
and in regard they were of different Religions, it could not be done without a
dispensation from the Pope, and the Pope would grant none, unless some
Capitulations were stipulated in favor of the Romish Catholics in England,
(the same in substance were agreed on with France.) Well, when the dispensation
came, which was negotiated solely by the King of Spains Ministers; because His
Majesty would have as little to do as might be with Rome, Pope Gregory the
fifteenth, who died a little after, sent His Majesty a Letter, which was
delivered by the Nuncio, whereof an answer was sent a while after: Which
Letters were imprinted and exposed to the view of the world; because His
Majesty would not have people whisper, that the business was carried in a
clandestine manner. And truly besides this, I do not know of any Letter, or
Message, or Complement, that ever passed 'twixt His Majesty and the Pope, before
or after; some addresses peradventure might be made to the Cardinals, to whom
the drawing of those matrimonial dispatches was referred, to quicken the work,
but this was only by way of civil negotiation.

Now touching that responsory Letter from His Majesty, it was no other than a
Complement in the severest interpretation, and such formalities pass 'twixt
the Crown of England, and the great Turk, and diverse Heathen Princes. The Pope
writ first, and no man can deny, but by all moral rules, and in common humane
civility His Majesty was bound to answer it, specially considering how
punctual they are in those Countries to correspond in this kind, how exact
they are in repayring visits, and the performance of such Ceremonies; And had
this compliance been omitted, it might have made very ill impressions, as the
posture of things stood then; for it had prejudiced the great work in hand, I
mean, the Match, which was then in the heat and height of agitation: His
Majesty's person was there engaged, and so it was no time to give the least
offense. They that are never so little versed in business abroad, do know that
there must be addresses, compliances, and formalities of this nature (according
to the Italian Proverb, That one must sometimes light a candle to the Devil)
used in the carriage of matters of State, as this great business was, whereon
the eyes of all Christendom were so greedily fixed; A business which was like
to bring with it such an universal good, as the restitution of the Palatinate,
the quenching of those hideous fires in Germany, and the establishing of a
peace through all the Christian World.

I hope none will take offense, that in this particular which comes within the
compass of my knowledge, being upon the Stage when this Scene was acted, I do
this right to the King my Master, in displaying the Truth, and putting her
forth in her own colors, a rare thing in these days.

TOuching the Vocal Forest, an Allegorical Discourse, that goes abroad under
my name, a good while before the beginning of this Parliament, which this
Gentleman cites (and that very faithfully.) I understand there be some that
mutter at certain passages therein, by putting ill glosses upon the Text, and
taking with the left hand, what I offer with the right: (Nor is it a wonder for
trees which lys open, and stand exposed to all weathers to be nipt) But I
desire this favor, which in common justice, I am sure in the Court of Chancery
cannot be denied me, it being the privilege of every Author, and a received
maxim through the World, Cujus est condere, ejus est interpretari; I say, I
crave this favor, to have leave to expound my own Text, and I doubt not then
but to rectify any one in his opinion of me, and that in lieu of the Plums
which I give him from those Trees, he will not throw the stones at me.

Moreover, I desire those that are over critical Censurers of that piece, to
know, that as in Divinity it is a rule, Scripturae parabolica non est
argumenativa; so it is in all other kind of knowledge. Parables (whereof that
Discourse is composed) though pressed never so hard, prove nothing. There is
another Rule also, That Parables must be gently used, like a Nurses breast;
which if you press too hard, you shall have blood in stead of milk.

But as the Author of the Vocal Forest thinks he has done, neither his
Country, nor the Commonwealth of Learning any prejudice thereby (That maiden
fancy having received so good entertainment and respect abroad, as to be
translated into diverse Languages, and to gain the public approbation of some
famous Universities) So he makes this humble protest unto all the World, that
though the design of that Discourse was partly Satyricall (which peradventure
induced the Author to shroud it of purpose under the shadows of trees, and
where should Satyrs be but amongst Trees?) yet it never entered into his
imagination to let fall from him the least thing that might give any offense to
the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, whereof he had the honor to be once a
Member, and hopes he may be thought worthy again; And were he guilty of such an
offense, or piacle rather, he thinks he should never forgive himself, though
he were appointed his own Judge. If there occur any passage therein* that may
admit a hard construction, let the Reader observe, That the Author does not
positively assert, or pass a judgment on any thing in that Discourse, which
consists principally of concise, cursory narrations, of the choicest
Occurrences and Criticismes of State, according as the pulse of time did beat
then: And matters of State, as all other sublunary things, are subject to
alterations, contigencies and change, which makes the opinions and minds of men
vary accordingly; not one amongst twenty is the same man to day as he was four
years ago, in point of judgment, which turns and alters according to the
circumstance and success of things: And it is a true saying, whereof we find
common experience, posterior dies est prioris Magister The day following is the
former days Schoolmaster. There Is another Aphorism, The wisdom of one day is
the foolishness of another, and 'twill be so as long as there is a man left in
the world.

I will conclude with this modest request to that Gentleman of the long Robe;
That having unpassionately perused what I have written in this small Discourse,
in penning whereof, my conscience guided my quill all along as well as my hand,
he would please to be so charitable and just, as to reverse that harsh sentence
upon me, To be no Friend to Parlements, and a Malignant.

FINIS.
ENGLANDS TEARS, FOR THE PRESENT WARS, WHICH FOR THE NATVRE of the Quarrel,
the quality of Strength, the diversity of Battles, Skirmiges, Encounters, and
Sieges, (happened in so short a compass of time,) cannot be paralleld by any
precedent Age.

Hei mihi, quam misere rugit Leo, Lilia languent,
Heu, Lyra, quam maestos pulsat Hiberna sonos.
Printed at London, according to Order, by Richard Heron, 1644.

To my Imperial Chamber, The City of London.
Renowned City,
IF any showers of adversity fall on me, some of the drops thereof must needs
dash on thy Streets. It is not a shower but a furious Storm that powr's upon
me now, accompanied with fearful cracks of thunder and unusual fulgurations.
The fatal Cloud wherein this storm lay long engendring, though, when it began
to condense first, it appeared but as big as a hand, yet by degrees it has
spread to such a vast expansion, that it has diffused it self through all my
Regions, and obscured that fair face of Heaven, which was used to shine upon
me; If it last long, it is impossible but we both should perish. Peace may, but
War must destroy. I see poverty posting apace, and ready to knock at thy gates;
That ghastly herbenger of Death the Pestilence appears already within and
without thy Walls; And me thinks I spy meager-fac'd Famine a far off making
toward thee; nor can all thy elaborat circumvallations, and trenches, or any
art of Enginry, keep him out of thy Line of Communication if this hold.
Therefore my dear Daughter, think, Oh think upon some timely prevention, it is
the Counsel, and request of

Thy most afflicted Mother ENGLAND.

Englands Tears.
OH! that my head did flow with waters; Oh, that my Eyes were limbecks through
which might distill drops and essences of blood! Oh that I could melt away and
dissolve all in to tears more brackish than those Seas that surround me! Oh
that I could weep my self blind to prevent the seeing of those Mountains of
mischiefs that are like to fall down upon me! Oh, that I could rend the Rocks
that gird me about, and with my ejaculations tear and dissipate those black
dismal cloud^ which hang over me! Oh, that I could cleave the Air with my
cries, that they might find passage up to Heaven, and fetch down the Moon (that
^atry planet) to weep and wayle with me, or make old Saturn descend from his
Sphere, to partake with me in my melancholy, and bring along with him the
mournful Pleiades, to make a full consort and sing lachrymae with me, for that
woeful taking, that desperat^ case, that most deplorable condition I have
plunged my self into unawares, by thi^ unnatural selfe-destroying War, by
this intricate odd kind of Enigmaticall War wherein both Parties are so
entangled (like a skeine of ravell'd silk) that they know not how to unwind and
untwist themselves, but by violent and destructive ways, by tearing my
entrails, by exhausting my vital spirits, by breaking my very hear^^strings
to cure the Malady. Oh, I am deadly sick, and as that famous Chancellor o^
France spoke of the civil Wars of his Country, That France was sick of an
unknow^ disease; so if Hippocrates himself were living, he could not be able
to tell the tr^^ symptoms of mine, though he felt my pulse, and made
inspection into my wate^ never so exactly; only in the general he may
discover a strange kind of infecti^^ that has seized upon the affections of
my people; But for the disease it self it wi^^ gravel him to judge of it: nor
can there be any prediction made of it, it is so sharp which make some tell me
that I cannot grow better, but by growing yet worse; Th^^ there is no way to
stanch this Flux of Blood, but by opening some more of the m^^ster Veins: that
it is not enough for me to have drunk so deep of this cup of affl^^ction, but
I must swallow up the dregs and all.

Oh, Passenger stop thy pace, and if there be any sparkles of humane
compa^^sion glowing in thy bosom, stay a while and hear my plaints, and I know
they w^ not only strike a resentment, but a horror into thee; for they are of
such a nature that they are able to penetrate a breast of brass, to mollify a
heart hoop'd with Adamant, to wring tears out of a statue of Marble.

I that have bin always accounted the Queen of Isles, the Darling of nature, and
Neptune Minion; I that have bin styled by the Character of the first Daughter
of the Church, that have converted eight several Nations; I that made the
morning beams of Christianity shine upon Scotland, upon Ireland, and a good
part of France; I that did irradiat Denmarque, Swethland and Norway with the
light thereof; I that brought the Saxons, with other Germans high and low*
from Paganism, to the knowledge of the Gospel; I that had the first Christian
King that ever was ( E^^ius) and the first reformed King (the eight Henry) to
reign over me; I out of whos^ bowels sprung the first Christian Emperor that
ever was, Constantine; I that had five several Kings, viz. John King of
France, David King of Scotland, Peter King of Boheme, and two I^rish Kings my
Captifs in less than one year; I under whose banner that great Emperor
Maximilian took it an honor to serve in person, and receive pay from me and
quarter his Arms with mine; I that had the Lion rampant of Scotland lately
added to fill up my Scutchen, and had reduced Ireland, after so many costly
intermissive wars, to such a perfect pass of obedience, and settlement of
customs and Crown Revenues; I that to the astonishment and envy of the World,
preserved my own Dominions free and flourishing, when all my neighbor
Countries were a fire before my face; I that did so wonderfully flourish and
improve in commerce domestique and foreign both by Land and Sea; I that did so
abound with Bullion, with buildings, with all sort of bravery that heart could
wish; in sum, I that did live in that height of happiness, in that affluence
of all earthly felicity, that some thought I had yet remaining some ^ngots of
that old gold whereof the first age of the world was made: Behold, behold, I am
now become the object of pity to some, of scorn to others, of laughter to all
people; my children abroad are driven to disadvow me for fear of being jeerd,
they dare not own me for their Mother, neither upon the Rialto of Venice, the
Berle of Ausburg, the new Bridge of Paris, the Cambios of Spain, or upon the
Quoys of Holand, for fear of being baffled and hooted at. Me thinks I see my
next neighbor France, (through whose bowels my gray-Goose wing flew so often)
making mowes at ^ne, and saying, that whereas she was wont to be the chief
Theater where fortune used ^o play her pranks, she has now removed her stage
hither; she laughes at me that I should let the common people the City rabble,
(and now lately the females) to ^^ow their strength so much.

Me thinks I see the Spanyard standing at a gaze, and crossing himself to see
me so ^olish as to execute the designs of my enemies upon my self. The
Italian admires (...) see a people argue themselves thus into Arms, and to be
so active in their own ruin; ^he German drinks carouses that he has now a
Co-partner in his miseries; The Swed joyces in a manner to see me bring in a
foreign Nation to be my Champion; The ^etherlander strikes his hand upon his
breast, and protests that he wishes me as well once the Duke of Burgundy did
France, when he swoare, He loved France so well, ^at for one King he wished she
had twenty.

Me thikns I see the Turk nodding with his Turban, and telling me that I
should ^hank Heaven for that distance which is betwixt us, else he would
swallow me all up ^t one morsel; only the Hollander my bosom friend seems to
resent my hard condi^ion, yet he thinks it no ill favored sight to see his
shops and lombards every where ^^ll of my plundered goods, to find my trade
cast into his hands, and that he can un^ersell me in my own native commodities,
to see my gold brought over in such heaps, ^y those that fly from me with all
they have for their security; In fine, me thinks I ^ear all my neighbors about
me bargaining for my skin, while thus like an unruly ^orse, I run headlong to
dash out my own brains.

O cursed jealousy, the source of all my sorrows, the ground of all my
inexpressible miseries! is it not enough for thee to creep in twixt the husband
and the wife, twixt the lemmon and his mate, twixt parents and children, twixt
kindred and friends; have thou not scope enough to sway in private Families, in
staple societies, and Corporations, in common counsels, but thou must get in,
twixt King and Parliament, twixt the ^ead and the members (twixt the Members
amongst themselves?) but thou must get a twixt Prince and people, but thou must
cast up so deep a trench twixt the Sovereign and the Subject. Avaunt, avaunt thou
hollow-eyed Snake-haird monster, hence away unto the abisse below, into the
bottomless gulf, thy proper mansion; sit there in thy hair, and preside over
the counsels of hell amongst the Cacodaemons, and never ascend again to turn
my high law-making Court into a Council of War, to turn my best antidote
into poison, and throw so many Scruples into that Sovereign physic which was
used to cure me of all d^stempers.

But when I well consider the constitution of this elementary world, and find
man ^o be part of it, when I think on those light and changeable ingredients
that go to his composition, I conclude, that men will be men while there is a
World, and as long as the Moon their next neighbor toward heaven has an
influxive power to make impressions upon their humors, they will be ever greedy
and covetous of novelties and mutation; the common people will be still common
people, they will sometime or other show what they are, and vent their instable
passions. And when I consider further the distractions, the tossings,
turmoylings and tumblings of other Regions round about me, as well as mi^e own,
I conclude also, that Kingdoms and States and Cities and all body politiques
are as subject to convulsions, to calentures, and consumptions, as well as the
frail bodies of men, and must have an evacuation for their corrupt humors,
they must be phlebotomiz'd; I have often felt this kind of phlebo^omy, I have
had also shrewd purges and pills often given me, which did not only work upon
my superfluous humors, but wasted sometimes my very vital spirits; yet I had
Electuaries and Cordiall^ given me afterward, which fetched me up again;
Insomuch that this present tragedy is but vetus fabula novi Histriones it is
but an old play represented by new Actors, I have often had the like. Therefore
let no man wonder at these traverses and humor of change in me. I remember
there was as much wondering at the demolishing of my 600 and odd Monasteries,
Nunneries and Abbeis for ^^ing held to be Hives of drones, as there is now at
the pulling down of my Crosses Organs and Windows,; There was as much
wondering when the Pope fell hire, a^ (...) that the Prelates are like to fall;
The World wondered as much when the M^sse was disliked, as men wonder now the
Liturgy should be distasted; And God grant that people do not take at last a
surfeit of that most divine Ordinance of preaching, for no violent thing lasts
long; And though there should be no satiety in holy things, yet such is the
depraved condition of man, he is naturally such a Changeling, that the over
frequency and commonnesse of any thing, be it never so good, breeds in tract of
time a kind of contempt in him, it breeds a fullness and nauseousnes in him.

The first Reformation of my Church began at Court, and so was the more
feasible, and it was brought to pass without a War; The scene is now
otherwise, it is far more sanguinary and fuller of Actors; never had a Tragedy
Acts of more variety in so short a time; there was never such a confused
mysterious civil War as this, there was never so many bodies of strength on
Sea and Shore, never such choice Arms and Artillery, never such a numerous
Cavalrie on both sides, never so many Sieges, never a greater eagernes and
confidence, there was never such an amphibolous quarrel as this, both parties
declaring themselves for the King, and making use of his name in all their
Remonstrances to justify their actions, The affect on, and understandings of
people were never so confounded and puzzled, not knowing where to acquiesce, by
reason of such counter-commands. One side calls the resisting of Royal
commands loyalty, the other terms loyalty, the opposing of Parlementary Orders
and Ordinances. Both parties would have peace, the one would have it with
Honor, the other with Truth, (and God forbid but both should go together) but,
Int^a^a ring or Ego, in the mean time I, poor I am sure do suffer by both, the
one taking away what the other leav's, If the one polls me, the other shaves
me, and God grant they fall not a flaying of me at last. Insomuch that
whosoever will be curious to rea^ the future story of this intricate War (if
it be possible to compile a story of it) he will find himself much staggered,
and put to kind of a riddle before he understand it; for touching the intricacy
of it, touching the strange nature, or rather the unnaturalness of it, it
cannot be paralleled by any precedent example: In my Chronicles I am sure no
age can match it, as I will make it briefly appear, by comparing it with all
the Wars that ever embroiled me, which I find to be of three sorts, either
by the invasion of Forreners, the Insurrection of my Commons, or by the
confederacy of my Peers and Princes of the Blood.

I will not ^ake the ashes of Antiquity so far as to speak of that deluge of
blood I spilt before I would take the Roman Legions for my Garrison; I am loath
to set down how the Saxons used me, and how the Danes used Them, nor how I had
one whole brave race of people (the Picts I mean) quite extinguished in me, I
will begin with the Norman expedition, and indeed to make recearches of matters
before, is but to grop^ in the dark, but I have authentic Annals and Records
for things since. The Norman came in with the slaughter of near upon sixty
eight thousand Combatants upon the place, a Battle so memorable, that the
very ground which sucked in the blood retains the name of it to this day. The
Dane not long after struck in to recover his pretended right, with the sacking
of my second great City of York, and the ^iring of her, with the slaughter of
3000 of my children in one afternoon, yet he was sent away without his arrand.
In the reign of Rufus I was made of his color, red with blood both by the
Welsh and the Scot, who lost his King Malcolme in the Battle of Alnwick. All
my eight Henry's were infested with some civil broils, except my fifth Henry
the greatest of them, who had work enough cut him out in France, and he plied
his work so well that he put that Crown upon his Sons head. All my Edwards also
had some homebred insurrection or other; indeed two of my three Richards had
always quietness at home, though the first did go the furthest off from me,
and was longest absent of any; And the third, though he came in by blood, yet
the short time of his three years Vsurpership he was without any, and proved
one of my best Lawgivers, yet his life ended in blood, for having come in like
a fox, he dyed like a calfe. Touching my second Richard, and second Edward,
there were never any of my Kings came to a more Tragique end, and the greatest
stains that black my story are the violent deaths they suffered by the hands of
their own ( Regicide) Subjects. The two Sister Queens that swayed my Scepter
had also some domestique commotions; and now my CHARLES has them to the
height, insomuch that of those five and twenty Monarques who have worn my
d^adems since the Norman entered, there was only four, viz. the forementioned
Henry, and Richards, with King JAMES escaped free from all intestin broils! Oh
how it torments my Soul to remember how my Barons did tear my bowels! what
an Ocean of blood the two Roses cost me before they were conjoined, for during
the time that I came to be a Monster with two heads (made so by their division)
I mean during the time that I had two Kings at once, Edward the fourih, and
Henry the sixth within me, in five years space I had twelve Battails fought
within my entrails, wherein I lost near upon fourscore Princes of the royal
stem, and parted with more of my spirits than there were spent in winning of
France. The World knows how free and prodigal I have bin of my blood abroad
in diverse places, I watered the Holy Land with much of it; Against my
Co-Islander the Scot I had above twenty pitched Battails, took many, and killed
some of his Kings in the Field* the Flower de lyces cost me dear defore I
brought them over upon my Sword; and the reduction of Ireland from time to time
to civility, and to an exact rule of allegiance wasted my children in great
numbers. I never grudged to venture my blood this way, for I ever had glorious
returns for it; and my Sons dyed in the bed of honor: but for them to glut
themselves with one another blood; for them to lacerat and rip up (viper-like)
the womb that brought them forth, to tear the Paps that gave them suck, can
there be a greater piacle against nature her self, can there be a more
execrable and horrid thing? If a stranger had used me thus it would not have
grieved me half so much; It is better to be stung with a nettle, than pricked
by a Rose; I had rather suffe^ by an Enemy, than by my own natural born
offspring. Those former home-wag^ Wars, whereof there happened above fourscore
(small and great) since the Norman cam^ in, were but as fires of Flax in
comparison of this horrid combustion, which mak^ both my Church and State to
suffer so much. One may find those Wars Epitomiz^ in small volumes, but a
whole library cannot contain this. They were but Scratches being compared to
the deep wounds which Prince, Peer, and people have received by this; such
wounds, that it seems no gentle C^t^plasmes can cure them, they must be ^anc'd
aed canteriz'd, and the huge scars they will leave behind them will, I fear,
make me appear so deformed and ugly to all posterity, that I am half in
despair to recover my former beauty ever again. The deep stains these Wars
will leave upon me, all the water of the Severn, Trent or Thames will hardly
wash away.

The Sun yet has not run twice his course through the Zodia^, since the
two-edged ^word of War has raged and done many horrid executions within me,
since that Hellish invention of powder has thundered in every corner, since it
has darkened torn, and infected my well-tempered air, since I have weltered in
my own blood, and bin made ^ kind of Cockpit, a Theater of death to my own
children; And in so short a circumvolution of time, I may confidently affirm
take battles, re-encounters, skir^ishes, with sieges both winter and summer,
there never happened so many in any Country; not do I see any appeara^ce, the
more is my misery, of any period to be ^ut to these Distractions, every day is
spectator of some new Tragedy, and there^ations that are hourly blazed abroad
sound sometimes well on the one side, some^^mes on the other, like a peale of
bells in windy weather (though oftentimes in a ^hole volley of News you shall
hardly find one true R port) which makes me fear (...) the all disposing
Deity of Heaven continues the successes of both parties in a ^inde of
equality, to prolong my miseries. Ita serior, ut diu me sentiam mori, I am
^ounded with that dexterity, that the sense and agonies of my sufferings are
like to ^e extended to the uttermost lengt^ of time and possibility of nature.

But, O Passenger, if thou art desirous to know the cause of these fatal
discompo^^res, of this inextricable War, truly I must deal plainly, I cannot
resolve thee herein (...) any full satisfaction. Grievances there were I must
confess, and some incongrui^es in my Civil government (wherein some say the
Crosier, some say the Distaffe ^as too busy) but I little thought, God wot,
that those grievances required a redress ^^is way. Do thou ask me whither
Religion was the c^use? God ^orbid; That in^^cent and holy Matron had rather go
c^ad in the snowie white robes of meekness (...) longanimity, than in the
purple m^ntle of blood, her practice has bee^e to ^^ercome by a passive
fortitude without reaction, and to triumph in the milk-white ^^ory Chariot o^
inn^cency and p^tience, not to be ^urried away with the fiery ^^eels of War;
Dei lar^^es not les arms (^s my next neig^bour has it) groans not guns, (...)
nor swords, prayers not partis^ns were used to be her weapons unless in c^se
of (...) and impendent d^nger, in case of invincible necessity, and visible
actual una^^ydable extinguis^ment, and then the Arms she uses most is the
Target to shroud (...) self under, and fence away the blow* she leaves all
other weapons, to the (...) to propagate and exp^nd it self. Thi^ gentle grave
L^^y* though the Rubricks of (...) Service be in red characters, yet she is no
lover of Blood* she is an embracer of (...), and the sole object of her (...)
is the God of Peace, in who^e Highest ^ame, in the name I^h^vah, as the Rabbis
observe, all the letters are quies^^nt. That sacred Comforter, which inspi^es
her Ambassadors, uses to ascend in form of a Dov^, not in the likeness of a
(...), and he that brings him down so, may be said to sin agai^^t the (...);
To bent Religion into the brains with a Pol^axe, is to (...), to o^^er him
victims of humane blood; Therefore (...) wrong R^ igion if I should cast this
war upon her: yet me think^s I (...) lame^^ that she was not also without her
(...) Gove^^ors (for want of moderation) could not (...) the Church, but ^hey
must pu^ themse^ves (...) up to the Turr^ts of civil p^licy, many o^ her
Preachers (...) ^ome to the Count, some to the Country; some would h ve nothing
(...), o^^ers nothing (...) Privilege* some won'd gives (...), some to feed
zeal, would famish the understanding; others (...) underst^nding, and tickle
the outward ear (wit^ ess^ies and flourishes of (...)) would (...) the soul of
her true food, etc.

But the principal thing ^ ^ear that Reverend L^dy, (that Queen of souls, and
turn key of heaven) m ke (...) of, is (...) that Se^mlesse garment of Unity and
Love which our S viour left (...) and rent into so many Sci^sures and Sect^ by
those that would make (...) which she wore in her infancy, to serv^ her in
(...). I hear her cry out ^t the monstrous exorbitant liberty that almo^^ every
c^pricious Mechanique takes to ^imselfe to s^ape and form what Religion h^
list: for the world is come ^ow to (...) pass, ^h^t the T^ylor and Shoemaker
may (...) wh^t Religion they please; (...) and ^apster may breach what Religion
they p^e^se; The Druggest and Apothe^^ry m y ming e her as they please; The
H^^berd^sher may put her upon what block ^e p^eases; The Armourer and Cutler
(...) fur^^sh her as they please; The Dyer may put what col ur, the Painter may
(...) what face upon her be please; The Dr^p^r and Mercer may measure her as
th^^ please; The W^^^er may cast her upon wha^ (...) please; The Boatswain and
(...) may bring her to what dock they please; The Bar^er may trim her as he
plea^^ The Guard ^er may lop her as he please; the Blackesmith may forge what
Religion (...) please, and so every Mechanic according to his profession and
fancy may form he^ he please. Me thinks I hear that venerable Matron complain
further, how her (...) in some places are become mere Beacons to summon men to
Arms; How in (...) of lights, her Churches up and down are full of Firebrands;
How every capri^^ of the brain is termed now tenderness of Conscience, which
well examined is thing but some fond fa^cy, or fanatic frenzy rather of some
shallow-braind (...) For whereas others h^ve bin used to run mad for excess of
knowledge, some of children grow mad now a days out of too much ignorance. It
stands upon reco^^ my story, that when the Norman had taken firm footing within
me, he did demo^ many Churches and Chapels in New-Forrest, to make it fitter
for his pleasur^ venery* but amongst other judgments which fell upon this
Sacrilege, one was (...) tame soul grew wild; I fear God Almighty is more
angry with me now than and that I am guilty of a worse profanes; for not my
Fowl, but my Folk and peop^^ ^rown half wild in many places, they would not
worry one another so in that wol^ish belluine manner else, they would not
precipitate themselves else into such a mixed ^^ungrell War, a War that passes
all understanding; They would not cut their own ^hroats, hang, drown, and do
themselves away in such a desperate sort, which is now ^rown so common, that
self-murder is scarce accounted any news; which makes ^trangers cry out, that
I am all turned into a kind of Great Bedlam, that Barbary is come ^^to the
midst of me; That my children are grown so savage, so fleshed in blood, and
^ecome so inhumane and obdurate, that with the same tenderness of sense they
can (...) a man fall, as see a horse, or some other bruit Animal, they have so
lost all reve^ence to the image of their Creator, which was used to be more
valued in me, than amongst any other Nation.

But I hope my King and great Council will take a course to bring them to
their ^ld English temper again, to cure me of this vertigo, and preserve me
from ruin; (...) such is my desperate case, that as there is more difficulty,
so it would be a grea^^r honor for them to prevent my destruction, and pull me
out of this plunge, than (...) add unto me a whole new kingdom; for true
wisdom has always gloried ^uch in conservation, as in conquest.

The Roman, though his ambition of conquering had no horizon, yet he used to
tri^mph more (as multitudes of examples might be produced) at the composing of
an in^stine war, than for any new acquest, or foreign achievement whatsoever;
And though (...) was a great martial man, and loved fighting as well as any
other, yet his maxim (...), That no peace could be so bad, but it was
preferrable to the best war. It seems the ^^lian his successor retains the
same genius to this day, by the late peace, (notwith^^anding the many knots
that were in the thing) which he concluded: For although (...) absolute Princes
were interessed in the quarrel, and that they had all just preten^^s, and were
heated and heightened in their designs, yet rather than they would dila^^t the
entrails of their own mother (fair Italy) and expose her thereby to be
ra^h'd by Tramontanes, they met half way, and complied with one another in a
(...) kind of freedom, though every one bore his share in some inconvenience.
Oh at my children would be moved by this so seasonable example of the Italian,
who amongst other of his characters, is said to be wise, a priori, before the
blow is given. ^esire my gracious Sovereign to think, that it was never held
inglorious or deroga^ie for a King to be guided and to steer his course by the
compass of his great ^ouncell, and to make his understanding descend, and
condescend to their advice; ^^was it ever held dishonorable for subjects to
yield and bow to their King, (to be ^^lowes, not Oaks) and if any mistake
should happen, to take it upon themselves, ra^^^r than any should reflect upon
their Sovereign. And if, in case of difference, he ^^illing to meet them half
way, 'twere handsome they went three parts before to ^ent him. Therefore I
conjure them both, in the name of the great Deity of Hea^^d, (who transvolves
king domes, and tumbleth down Kings in his indignation) that they (...) think
of some speedy way to stop the issue of b^oud; for to deal plainly with (...)
see far greater reason to conclude this war, than ever there was to (...) Let
them consider well they are but outward Church rites and ceremonies they fight
for, as the rigidst sort of Reformers confess, the Lutheran (the first
Reformist) has many more conformable to the Church of Rome, which he has
continued above ^hese 120 years, yet is he as far from Rome as the first day
he left her, and as free from ^anger of relapse into Popery as Amsterdam
herself; and must I, unhappie I, be ^acerated and torn in pieces thus for
shadows and ceremonies? O let not posterity ^ind it upon record, that the
unparalled Act of grace for the continuance of this, be ^ore hurtful to me,
than the untimely dissolution of all Parlements passed. I know ^here is a
clashing 'twixt Prerogative and Privilege, but I must put them in mind of ^he
misfortune that befell the flock of sheep and the Bell-weather, whereof the
first ^ed in a common, the latter in an enclosure, and thinking to break into
one another ^asture (as all creatures naturally desire change) and being to
pass over a narrow-nar^ow bridge which severed them, they met in the middle
and justled one another so ^ong, till both fell into the ditch. And now that I
have begun, I will warn them by another fable of the Spanish Mule, who having
by accident gone out of the great road, and carried her Rider through a by-path
upon the top of a huge steepie rock, stopped upon a sudden, and being not able
to turn and go backward, by reason of the narrow^esse of the path, nor
forward, in regard of a huge Rockie precipice, she gently put ^ne foot behind
the other, and recoyl'd in that manner until she had found the great ^oad
again.

I desire my high Council to consider, that the royal Prerogative is like the
Sea, which as Navigators observe, and the Civilians hold, what it loses at one
time or in one place, gets always in some other; That Subjects banding against
their King, are like the earthen pitchers in the Fable justling with the great
brass kettle. I desire my dear King to consider, that the privilege of
Parliament, the Laws and liberties of the Subject, is the firmest support of
his Crown, that his great Council is the truest glass wherein he may discern
his peoples love, and His own happiness; It were wsdome that both did strike
sail in so dangerous a storm, to avoid shipwreck; I am loath to say, what
consultations, what plots, and machinations are fomenting and ^orging abroad
against me, by that time I have enfeebled and wasted my self, and lost the
flower of my best children in these woeful broils. Me thinks I spy the
Jesuit sitting in his cell and laughing in his sleeve at me, and crying out,
The Devil part the Fray, for they do but execute my designs.

Oh, I feel a cold quame come over my heart, that I faint, I can speak no
longer; yet I will strain my self to breath out this one invocation, which
shall be my conclusion.

Sweet Peace, most benign and amiable Goddess, how comes it to pass that
thou have so abandoned Earth, and taking thy flight to Heaven, as once Astraea
did, do reject the sighs and neglect the Sacrifices of poor mortals? was
that flaming Usher of Gods vengeance which appeared six and twenty years
since in the Heavens* the Herald that fetched thee away? for ever since poor
Europe has been harassed, and pitifully rent up and down with (...) Wars* and
now I am become the last Scene* Gentle peace, thou which make Heaven and
Earth to triumph, which gladdest not only the heart of man, but make the
very medo^^s and (...) the forr^sts and woods the hills an^ h^^ses to rejoice;
Thou which go always (...) by plenty and pleasure, Thou which fill^st the
(...), the Grasiers folds, the Tradesm^ns shop, the Vintners cell^rs* (...)
desk* the Me^chants M^g^^i^es, the Prin^es (...), how comes it (...) Throne to
Bellona, (...)-d^stroying (...) Y^oman wan^s H^^ds and Horse to p^ow up (...)
the morning dew with his anhel^d sweat, shakes at his work (...) p^undring; The
Tradesm^n shuts up his shop (...) would; The Merchant w^lks to the Exchange
only to learn new ^, not to negotia^e. Behold how my best sort of Children are
w^arie of their lives, e^^her for (...) endl^sse exacti^ns, or remediless
unthought-on imprisonments, and ill by an (...) confused power which the
nec^ssitie of this fatal war has drawn upon them. Sw^et (...) which wast used
to mak^ Princes Courts to triumph with Tilt and Tournements, and other
Gallantries, to make them receive luster by foreign Amb^ssadours; to make the
Arts and Science^ flour^sh; to make Cities and Suburbs shine with good y
structures to make the Country ring with the Hun s-mans Horn, and the
Shepherds Pipe, the Highways with Carriers bells; ^ow comes it to pass that
bloud-thirstie Discord now usurps thy place, and fl ^gs about her Snak s in
every cor^er, that the (...), the double-edg'd ^word of civil war does r^ge
and cu^ on both sides in so horrid and inhumane a manner? Behold, my Prince his
Court is now full of nothing but Buff Coats, Spanners and Musket Rests; both
Towns and Countr^y, and my Highways echo w th nothing but with t e sound of
D^ums and Tru^pets; Hea^k how pitif^lly my Lions roar, how dejectedly my Roses
and Flower de luces hang down their heads, what dol^full strains my Harp
gives.

O consider my case most blisfull Queen* d^scend, desc^nd again in thy Ivorie
Chariot? resume thy Throne, crown thy Temples with thy won^^d Laurel and
Olive, bar up Ianus gates, and make new Halcionian days to shine in this
Hem^sp^ere; dispell those Clouds which hover'twixt my King and his highest
Council, chase away all jealousies and ombrages of mistrust, that my great
Law-making Court be forced to turn no more to polemicall Committees, and to a
Council of war (unless it be for some foreign Conquest,) but that they may
come again into the old Parlementarie Road, To the path of their
predecessors, to consult of means how to sweep away those Cobwebs that hang
in the Courts of Justice, and to make the Laws run in their right Channel; to
retrench excessive fees, and find remedies for the future, that the poor
Client be not so peeled by his Lawyer, and made to suffer by such monstrous
delays, that one may go from one Tropique to the other, and cross the
Equinoctial twenty times, before his suit be ended; That they may think on a
course to restrain Gold and Silver from traveling without license, with other
staple commodities, and to punish those that transport Hides for Calf-skins; To
advance native commodities and Manufactures, to improve and balance Trade, and
settle it so, that it may stand upon its own Bottom, and not by any
accidental ways, as of late years a glut of Trade was cast upon me by the
wars 'twixt France and the House of Austria, and others.

That this Trade of mine (my chiefest sinew) be not cast into the hands of
Aliens, who eat me out in many places in my own commodities; That it be
prevented hereafter, that one Town be not permitted to ingrosse and ingulph all
(like the spleen, that by its swelling sucks both blood and moisture from the
rest of the members) but that my Trade and wealth may by some wholesome policy
be diffused up and down my Cities in a more equ^ll distribution. That they may
advise of a way to relieve the Orphan, who suffers more for his minority in
me, than any where else; That the poor Insolvent Subject be not so buried
alive, and made to rot in Prison, notwithstanding his apparent known
disability, whereas were he ^bro^d, he might be useful to the Commonwealth
some way or other, and come happily afterward to an ability to pay. To regulate
the business of drained lands, which well managed, would tend very much both
to enlarge and enrich my Quarters. To secure the Dominion of my Seas, the
fairest Flower of my Crown, which is now almost quite lost. To preserve my
Woods, whereof, if this coursehold, their will hardly be found in some places
enough to make a Tooth-pick. To settle the Revenues, and supply the wants of my
Crown; for the wants of the Crown and the Grievances of the Subject have bin
always used to go hand in hand in my Parlements. And now, that my neighbor
Princes (specially they of France and Spain) have of late years enhanc'd the
revenue Royal, at least to the third part more than it was, it were a
disp^ragement to me, that my King should not bear up in equal proportion* and
point of Greatness this way, considering that he has more of the Royal Stem
to maintain, than any of his Progenitors ever h^d. Lastly, that they may settle
a way to regulate all exorbitant fancies of novelists, in the exercise of holy
Religion: It being an undeni^ble m^xime, that where there is no obedience,
subordination, and restrictive Laws to curb the change^ble humors and
extravagancies of men's brains there can be no Pe^ce or Piety: if the fire be
not kept within the tunnell of the Chimney, and that some be appointed to sweep
down the Soot with a high hand (which may be done otherwise than by shooting up
of Muskets) the whole House will be in d^nger of burning.

Oh me, I feel the pangs of death assail me, let some good body go toll the
bell; And as one of my Kings, ( Will. Rufus) the night before he was slain in
New-forrest, for the expi^tion of his fathers Sacrilege, did dream that a
cold wind did pass through his bowels, so me thinks, I feel a b^eake cold
Northern blast blowing upon me, which I fe^r will make an end of me: It is a
miracle if I escape, it is only the high hand of Providence can preserve me. If I
and my Monarchy miscarry, I desire that my Epitaph may be written (in regard I
know him to have bin a long time not only sensible, but a sharer with me in
point of suffering) by my dearly beloved Child

James Howell.

To the discerning Reader.
HE that with a well-weigh'd judgment observes the passions of this last
Discourse, must needs conclude, that the Author (besides his own hard condition
of two years close impri^sonment) has a deep sense of the common calamities of
this hi^ Country in general, which makes him break out into such patheti^
expressions. And because he might do it with more freedom, an^ less
presumption, he makes England her self to breath out hi^ disordered passions.
We know a Mother has a prerogative by a^ uncontrollable Edict of nature to
speak home unto her children, and sometimes in a chiding round way (though with
tears in her eyes) to give them advice: The same does England in this discourse
but with all the tenderness and indifferency that may be to bot^ parties now
in Arms. Therefore the Author humbly hopes tha^ no exception, much less any
offense, will be taken at Her complaints, or Counsel.

Mollia commotum frangunt documenta furorem
Prove. FINIS.
I. H.


