Mercurius Hibernicus: OR, A Discourse of the late Insurrection in IRELAND,
displaying, 1. The true causes of it (till now not so fully discovered.) 2. The
course that was taken to suppress it. 3. The reasons that drew on a Cessation
of Arms, and other compliances since.


AS ALSO Touching those Auxiliaries which are transported thence to serve in
the present WAR.



-- Patremque Mercurium blandae quis negat esse Lyrae. Printed at Bristoll,
1644.

Mercurius Hibernicus, His Advertisement to the wel-temperd READER.
THere is a mongrell race of Mercuries lately sprung up, but I claim no
acquaintance with them, much less any Kindred. They have commonly but one weeks
time for their conception and birth; and then are they but like those Ephemeran
creatures, which Pliny speaks of, that are borne in the morning, grow up till
noon, and perish the same night: I hope to be longer lived then so, because I
was longer a getting, there was more time and matter went to my Generation.

There is a Tale how the true Mercury indeed, descended once in a disguise, to
see how he was esteemed on earth; and entering one day into a Painters shop, he
found there diverse Pictures of Apollo, Jupiter, Mars, with others, and spying
his own hanging in a corner hard by he asked what the price of that Pourtrait
might be, The Painter answered, that if he bought any of the rest, he would
give him that into the bargain for nothing: Mercury hereupon shaking his white
Caducean, flung out in indignation, and flew up to Heaven. Should Mercury
chance to descend now from his sphere* I think he would be much more offended
to find himself personated by every petty impertinent Pamphleter; yet I believe
he would not take it ill that Aulicus assumes his shape, nor that the Harp, who
owes her first invention to him, should be made now his crest.

To my honorable Friend Master E. P.
SIR,
IF You please to cast your eyes upon the following Discourse, I believe it
will afford you some satisfaction, and enlighten you more in the Irish
affairs. The alleagiance I owe to Truth, was the Midwife that brought it
forth, and I make bold to make choice of you for my Gossip, because I am

Your true Servant Philerenus.

Mercurius Hibernicus.
THere is not any thing since these wars begun, whereof there has been more
advantage made, to traduce and blemish His Majesty's actions, to alienate and
imbitter the affections of his people, to incite them to arms, and enharden
them in the quarrel, than of the Irish affairs; whether one cast his eyes
upon the beginning and procedure of that war (which some by a most monstrous
impudence would patronize upon their Majesty's) or upon the late Cessation, and
the transport of Auxiliaries since from thence. There are some that in broken
pieces have written of all three, but not in one entire discourse, as this is:
nor has any hitherto hit upon those reasons and inferences that shall be
displayed herein.

But he who adventures to judge of affairs of State, specially of traverses of
war, as of Pacifications, of Truces, Suspensions of Arms, Parlies, and such
like, must well observe the quality of the times, the success and circumstance
of matters past, the posture and pressure of things present (and upon the
Place) the inducement or enforcement of causes, the gaining of time, the
necessity of preventing greater mischiefs (whereunto true policy prometheus
like has always an eye) with other advantages. The late Cessation of Arms in
Ireland was an affair of this nature; a true Act of State, and of as high a
consequence as could be: Which Cessation is now become the common Subject of
every man's discourse, or rather the discourse of every common Subject all the
three Kingdoms over: And not only the subject of their discourse, but of
their censure also; nor of their censure only, but of their reproach and
obloquy. For the World is come now to that pass, that the Foot must judge the
Head, the very Cobbler must pry into the Cabinet Counsels of his King; nay, the
Distaffe is ready ever and anon to arraigne the Scepter; Spinstresses are
become States-women, and every peasan turned politician; such a fond irregular
humor reigns generally of late years amongst the English Nation.

Now the Design of this small discourse, though the Subject require a far
greater volume, is, to vindicate His Majesty's most pious intentions in
condescending to this late suspension of Arms in His Kingdom of Ireland; and
to make it appear to any rational ingenious capacity, (not pre-occupied or
purblinded with passion) that there was more of honor and necessity, more of
prudence and piety in the said Cessation, than there was either in the
Pacification or Peace that was made with the Scot.

But to proceed herein the more methodically, I will lay down, first,

The real and true radical causes of the late two-yeers Irish Insurrection.

Secondly, the course His Majesty used to suppress it.

Lastly, those indispensable impulsive reasons and invincible necessity which
enforced His Majesty to condescend to a Cessation.

Touching the grounds of the said Insurrection, we may remember when His
Majesty out of a pious design (as His late Majesty also had) to settle an
Uniformity of serving God in all his three Kingdoms, sent our Liturgy to his
Subjects of Scotland; some of that Nation made such an advantage hereof, that
though it was a thing only recommended, not commanded or pressed upon them,
and so called in suddenly again by a most gracious Proclamation, accompanied
with a general pardon: Yet they would not rest there, but they would take the
opportunity hereby to demolish Bishops, and the whole Hierarchy of the Church
(which was no grievance at all till then) To which end, they put themselves in
actual Arms, and obtained at last what they listed; which they had not dared
to have done, had they not been sure to have as good friends in England as they
had in Scotland (as Lesley himself confessed to Sir William Berkley at
Newcastle) for some of the chiefest Inconformists here, had not only
intelligence with them, but had been of their Cabinet-counsels in moulding the
Plot: though some would east this war upon the French Cardinal, to vindicate
the invasio^ we made upon his Masters dominions in the Iste of Rets; as also
for some adva^tage the English use to do the Spaniard in transporting his
Treasure to Dunkerk, with other offices. Others would cast it upon the Jesuit,
that he should project it first, to force His Majesty to have recourse to his
Roman Catholic Subjects for aid, that so they might, by such Supererogatory
service ingratiate themselves the more into his favor.

The Irish hearing how well their next Neighbors had sped by way of Arms, it
filled them full of thoughts and apprehensio^s of fear and jealousy, that the
Scot would prove more powerful hereby, and consequently more able to do them
hurt, and to attempt ways to restrain them of that connivency, which they were
allowed in point of Religion: Now there is no Nation upon earth that the Irish
hate in that perfection, and with a greater Antipathy, than the Scot, or from
whom they conceive greater danger: For whereas they have an old prophecy
amongst them, which one shall hear up and down in every mouth, That the day
will come when the Irish shall weep upon English men's graves, They fear that
this prophecy will be verified and fulfilled in the Scot, above any other
Nation.

Moreover, the Irish entered into consideration, that They also had sundry
grievances and grounds of complaint, both touching their estates and
consciences, which they pretended to be far greater than those of the Scots.
For they fell to think, that if the Scot was suffered to introduce a new
Religion, it was reason they should not be so pinched in the exercise of their
old, which they glory never to have altered. And for temporal matters (wherein
the Scot had no grievance at all to speak of) the new plantations which had
been lately afoot, to be made in Conaught and other places; the concealed lands
and defective titles which were daily found out; the new customs which were
imposed, and the incapacity they had to any preferment or office in Church and
State (with other things) they co^ceived these to be grievances of a far
greater nature, and that deserved redress much more than any the Scot had. To
this end, they sent over Commissioners to attend this Parliament in England,
with certain Propositions, but those Commissioners were dismissed hence with a
short and unsavory answer, which bred worse blood in the Nation than was
formerly gathered; and this, with that leading case of the Scot, may be said to
be the first incitements that made them rise.

In the course of humane actions, we daily find it to be a true rule, Exempla
movent, Examples move, and make strong impressions upon the fancy; precepts are
not so powerful as precedents. The said example of Scotland, wrought
wonderfully upon the imagination of the Irish, and filled them (as I touched
before) with thoughts of emulation, that They deserved altogether to have as
good usage as the Scot, their Country being far more beneficial, and
consequently, more importing the English Nation. But these were but confused
imperfect notions, which began to receive more vigor and form after the death
of the Earl of Strafford, who had kept them under so exact an obedience,
though some censure him to have screwed up the strings of the Harp too high;
insomuch that the taking off of the Earl of Straffords head, may be said to be
the second incitement to the heads of that insurrection to stir.

Add hereunto, that the Irish understanding with what acrimony the Roman
Catholics in England were proceeded against since the sitting of our
Parliament, and what further designs were afoot against them, and not only
against them, but for ranversing the Protestant Religion it self, as it is now
practiced (which some shallow-braind Scismaticks do throw into the same scales
with Popery.) They thought it was high time for them to forecast what should
become of Them, and how they should be handled in point of conscience, when a
new Deputy of the Parliaments election ( approbation at least) should come
over. Therefore they fell to consult of some means of timely prevention: And
this was another motive (and it was a shrewd one) which pusht on the Irish to
take up Arms.

Lastly, that Army of 8000. men, which the Earl of Strafford had raised to be
transported to England for suppressing the Scot, being by the advice of our
Parliament here, disbanded; the Country was annoyed by some of those straggling
Soldiers, as not one in twenty of the Irish, will from the sword to the spade,
or from the pike to the plough again. Therefore the two Marquesses that were
Ambassadors here, then for Spain, having propounded to have some numbers of
those disbanded forces, for the service of their Master; His Majesty by the
mature advice of his privy Counsel, to occur the mischiefs that might arise
to his Kingdom of Ireland by those loose casheered Soldiers, yielded to the
Ambassadors motion, who sent notice here of to Spain accordingly, and so
provided shipping for their transport, and impressed money to advance the
business; but as they were in the heat of that work, His Majesty being then in
Scotland, there was a sudde^ stop made of those promised troops, who had
depended long upon the Spaniards service, as the Spaniard had done on theirs.

And this was the last, though not the least fatal cause of that horrid
insurrection: All which particulars well considered, it had been no hard matter
to have been a Prophet, and standing upon the top of Holy-Head, to have
foreseen those black clouds engendring in the Irish air, which broke out
afterward into such fearful tempests of blood.

Out of these premises, it is easy for any common understanding, not
transported with passion and private interest, to draw this conclusion. That
They who complied with the Scot in his insurrection; They who dismissed the
Irish Commissioners with such a short unpolitick answer, They who took off the
Earl of Straffords head, and delayed afterward the dispatching of the Earl
of Leicester; They who hindered those disbanded troops in Ireland to go for
Spain, may be justly said to have bin the true causes of the late insurrection
of the Irish; and consequently, it is easy to know upon the account of whose
souls must be laid the blood of those hundred and odd thousands poor
Christians, who perished in that war; so that had it been possible to have
brought over their bodies unputrified to England, and to have cast them at the
doors, and in the presence of some men I believe they would have gushed out
afresh into blood, for discovery of the true murderers.

The grounds of this insurrection being thus discovered, let us examine what
means His Majesty used for the suppression of it. He made his address
presently to his great Counsel, the English Parliament then assembled, which
Queen Elizabeth and her progenitors did seldom use to do, but only to their
Privy Counsel in such cases, who had the discussing and transacting of all
foreign affairs; for in mannaging matters of State, specially those of war,
which must be carried with all the secrecy that may be, Trop grand nombre, est
encombre, as the Frenchman says, too great a number of Counselors may be an
incumber, and expose their results and resolutions to discovery and other
disadvantages, whereas in military proceedings the work should be afoot before
the Counsels be blazed abroad. Well, His Majesty transmitted this business to
the Parliament of England, who totally undertaking it, and wedding as it were
the quarrel (as I remember they did that of the Palatinate a little before by
solemn vote; the like was done by the Parliament of Scotland also, by a
public joint Declaration, which in regard there came nothing of it, tended
little to the honor of either Nation abroad) His Majesty gave his royal
assent to any Propositions or acts for raising of men, money and arms to
perform the work. But hereby no man is so simple as to think His Majesty
should absolutely give over his own personal care and protection of that his
Kingdom, it being a Rule, That a King can no more desert the protection of his
own people, then they their subjection to him. In all his Declarations there
was nothing that he endeard and inculcated more often, and with greater
aggravation and earnestness unto them, then the care of his poor Subjects
their fellow-protestants in Ireland: Nay, he resented their condition so f^rre,
and took the business so to heart, that he offered to pass over in person for
their relief: And who can deny but this was a magnanimous and King-like
resolution? Which the Scots by public act of Counsel, did highly approve of,
and declared it to be an argument of care and courage in His Majesty. And
questionless it had done infinite good in the opinion of them that have felt
the pulse of the Irish people, who are daily ore-heard to groan, how they have
bin any time these 400. years under the English. Crown, and yet never saw but
two of their Kings all the while upon Irish ground, though there be but a salt
ditch of a few hours sail to pass over. And much more welcome should His
Majesty, now regnant, be amongst them, who, by general tradition, They
confess and hold to come on the paternall side from Fergus (by legal and
lineall descent) who was an Irish Prince, and after King of Scotland, whereas
the title of all our former Kings and Queens was stumbled at always by the
vulger. His Majesty finding that this royal proffer of engaging his own
person, was rejected with a kind of scorn, coucht in smooth language, though
the m^ine business concerned himself nearest, and indeed solely himself,
that Kingdom being his own hereditary Right. Understanding also, what base
sinister use there was made of this insurrection by some traiterous malevolent
persons, who, to cast aspersions upon His Majesty, and to poison the hearts of
his people, besides public infamous reports, counterfeited certain
commissions in His Majesty's name to authorize the business, as if he were
privy to it, though I dare pawn my soul His (or Her Majesty) knew no more of it
then the great Mogor did. Finding also that the Commissioners employed hence
for the managing and composing matters in that Kingdom, though nominated by
the Parliament, and by their recommendation authorized by His Majesty, did not
observe their instructions, and yet were connived at. Understanding also, what
an inhumane design there was between them and the Scot, in lieu of suppressing
an insurrection to eradicat and extinguish a whole Nation to make booty of
their l^nds, (which hopes the London Adventurers did hug, and began to divide
the Bears skin before he was taken, as His Majesty told them) an attempt the
Spaniard not any other Christian State ever intended against the worst of
Savages; The conceit whereof infused such a desperate courage, eagerness and
valor into the Irish, that it made them turn necessity into a kind of virtue.

Moreover, His Majesty taking notice that those royal Subsidies, with other
vast contributions whereunto he had given way, with the sums of particular
Adventurers (amongst whom some Aliens ( Hollanders) were taken in, besides the
Scot, to share the Country) were misapplyed, being visibly employed, rather to
feed and English Rebellion then to suppress an Irish: Nay, understanding that
those charitable collections which were made for the relief of those
distressed Protestants, who being stripped of all their livelihood in Ireland,
were forced to fly over to England, were converted to other uses, and the
Charity not dispensed according to the Givers intention. Hearing also that
those 5000. men which had been levied and assigned to go under the Lord
Wharton, the Lord of Kerry, Sir Faithful Fortescue and others were diverted
from going to the west of Ireland, and employed to make up the Earl of Essex
Army: And having notice besides that the Earl of Warwick had stayed certain
ships going thither with supplies, and that there was an attempt to send for
over to England some of those Scottish Forces which were in Vlster, without his
privity. Lastly, His Majesty finding himself unfitted, and indeed disabled to
reach those his distressed Subjects, his own royal arm* all his navall
strength, revenues and magazines being out of his hands; and having as hard a
game to play still with the Scot, and as pernicious a fire to quench in
England, as any of his Progenitors ever had: Receiving intelligence also daily
from his Protestant Nobility and Gentry thence, in what a desperate case the
whole Kingdom stood, together with the report of the Committee that attended
His Majesty from them expressly for that service, who amongst other deplorable
passages in their petition, represented, That all means by which comfort and
life should be conveyed unto that gasping Kingdom, seemed to be totally
obstructed, and that unless timely relief were afforded, His loyal Subjects
there must yield their fortunes for a prey, their lives for a sacrifice, and
their Religion for a scorn to the merciless Rebels.

His Majesty (as it was high time for him) taking into his Princely thoughts
those woeful complaints and cries of his poor Subjects, condescended at last
to appoint some persons of honor to hear what the Irish could say for
themselves, as they had often petitioned; and God forbid but the King of
Ireland should receive his Subjects petitions, as well as the King of Scotland.
But His Majesty being unsatisfied with what they propounded then, the Lord
Marquess of Ormond marched with co^siderable Forces against them, and though
he came off with honor, yet no relief at all coming thither for many months
after from the Parliament here, who had undertaken the business, and had
received all the sums and subsidies, with other unknown contributions to that
end, matters grew daily worse and worse. To sum up all, His Majesty receiving
express and positive advice from his Lord Justices and Counsel of State
there, that the whole Kingdom was upon point of utter perdition, which was
co-intimated the same time to the Parliament here, by a special letter to the
Speaker; I say His Majesty finding that he had neither power of himself, it
being transmitted to others; and that those Trustees did misapply that power
and trust he had invested in them (for the time) to make good their undertaking
for preservation of that his fruitful Kingdom; being impelled by all these
forcible reasons, His Majesty sent a commission to the Lord Marquess of Ormond
his Lieutenant General (a most known sincere Protestant) to hearken to a
treaty according to their petition; and if any thing was amiss in that treaty
in point of honor (as it shall appear by comparing it with others, there was
none) we know whom to thank. For out of these premises also, does result this
second conclusion. That they who misapplied those moneys, and mis-imployed
those men which were levied with His Majesty's royal assent for the reduction
of Ireland: They who set afoot that most sanguinary design of extirpating, at
least of enslaving a whole ancient Nation, who were planted there by the hand
of Providence from the beginning: They who hindered His Majesty's transfretation
thither to take cognizance of his own affairs and expose the countenance of His
own royal person for composing of things: They, They may be said to be the
true causes of that unavoidable necessity (and as the heathen Poet sings, The
Gods themselves cannot resist Necessity) which enforced His Majesty to
capitulate with the Irish, and assent to a Cessation.

It was the saying of one of the bravest Roman Emperors, and it was often used
by Henry the Great of France, Her Majesty's Father, That he had rather save the
life of one loyal Subject then kill a hundred Enemies: It may well be thought
that one of the prevalentst inducements that moved His Majesty (besides those
formerly mentioned) to condescend to this Irish Cessation, was a sense he had
of the effusion of his own poor Subjects blood, the hazard of the utter
extirpation of the Protestants there, and a total irrecoverable loss of that
Kingdom, as was advertised both in the petition of the Protestants themselves,
the relation of the Committee employed thither to that purpose, and the
express letters of the Lord Justices and Counsel there.

To prove now, that this Cessation of Arms in Ireland was more honorable and
fuller of Piety, Prudence and Necessity, then either the Pacification or Peace
with the Scot. I hope, these few ensuing arguments (above diverse others which
cannot be inserted here, in regard of the fore intended brevity of this
Discourse) will serve the turn.

1. Imprimis, When the Pacification was made with Scotland, His Majesty was
there personally present, attended on by the flower of His English Nobility,
Gentry and Servants, and the enemy was hard by ready to face Him. At the
concluding of the Irish Cessation, His Majesty was not there personally
present, but it was agitated and agreed on by his Commissioner, and it has
been held always less dishonorable for a King to capitulate in this kind
with his own Subjects by his Deputy, then in his own person, for the further
off he is, the less reflects upon him.

2. Upon the Pacification and Peace with Scotland, there was an Amnestia, a
general pardon, and an abolition of all by-passed offenses published, there
were honors and offices conferred upon the chiefest sticklers in the War. At
the Cessation in Ireland there was no such thing.

3. When the Pacification and Peace was made with the Scots, there was money
given unto Them, as it is too well known. But upon the settling of this
Cessation, the Irish gave His Majesty a considerable sum as an argument of
their submission and gratitude, besides the maintenance of some of his
Garrisons in the interim; and so much partly in point of honor.

4. At the concluding of the Pacification and Peace with Scotland, there was a
vigorous fresh, unfoiled English Army afoot, and in perfect equipage; there
wanted neither Ammunition, Arms, Money, Clothes, Victuals or any thing that
might put heart into the Soldier and elevate his spirits. But the Protestant
Army in Ireland had not any of all these in any competent proportion, but were
ready to perish, though there had been no other enemy then hunger and cold: And
this implies a far greater necessity for the said Cessation.

5. In Ireland there was imminent danger of an instant loss of the whole
Kingdom, and consequently, the utter subversion of the Protestant Religion
there, as was certified both to King and Parliament by sundry letters and
petitions which stand upon record: There was no such danger in the affairs of
Scotland, either in respect of Religion or Kingdom; therefore there was more
piety shown in preserving the one, and prudence in preserving the other in
Ireland, by plucking both (as it were) out of the very jaws of destruction by
the said Cessation.

We know that in the Medley of mundane casualties, of two evils, the least is
to be chosen, and a small inconvenience is to be borne withal, to prevent a
greater.

If one make research into the French Story, he will find, that many kinds of
Pacifications and Suspensions of Arms were covenanted twixt that King and some
of his Subjects, trenching far more upon regal dignity then this in Ireland.
The Spaniard was forced to declare the Hollanders Freestates, before they could
be brought to treat of a truce: And now the Catalans screw him up almost to as
high conditions. But what need I rove abroad so far? It is well known, nor is
it out of the memory of man, that in Ireland it self there have been
Cessations, all circumstances well weighed, more prejudicial to Majesty then
this.

But that which I hear murmured at most as the effect of this Cessation, is
the transport of some of those Soldiers to England for recruting His Majesty's
Armies, though the greatest number of them be perfect and rigid Protestants,
and were those whom our Parliament it self employed against the Irish. But put
case they were all Papists, must His Majesty therefore be held a Favourer of
popery? The late King of France might have been said as well to have been a
Favourer of Protestants, because in all his wars he employed Them most of any
in places of greatest trust, against the House of Austria; whereas all the
World knows, that he perfectly hated them in the general, and one of the
reaches of policy he had, was to spend and waste them in the wars. Was it
ever known but a Sovereign Prince might use the bodies and strength of his
own naturall-born Subjects, and Liege men for his own defense? When His person
has been sought and aimed at in open field by small and great shot, and all
other Engines of hostility and violence: When he is in danger to be surprised
or besieged in that place where he keeps his Court: When all the flowers of his
Crown (his royal prerogatives which are descended upon him from so many
successive progenitors) are like to be plucked off and trampled under foot:
When there is a visible plot to alter and overturn that Religion he was born,
baptized and bred in: When he is in danger to be forced to infringe that solemn
Sacramental Oath he took at his Coronation to maintain the said Religion, with
the Rights and Rites of the holy Anglican Church, which some brainsick
Scismaticks would transform to a Kirk and her Discipline, to some chimericall
form of government they know not what. Francis the first, and other Christian
Princes, made use of the Turk upon less occasions; and if one may make use of
a Horse, or any other bruit animal, or any inanimat Engine or Instrument for
his own defense against man, much more may man be used against man, much more
may one rational Creature be usd against another though for destructive ends
in a good cause, specially when they are commanded by a Sovereign head, which
is the maine thing that goes to justify a war. Now touching the Roman
Catholics, whether English, Welsh, Irish, or Scottish, which repair to His
Majesty's armies either for service or security, He looks not upon them as
Papists, but as his Subjects, not upon their Religion, but their alleagiance,
and in that quality he entertaines them: Nor can the Papist be denied the
Character of a good Subject, all the while he conformes himself to the Laws
in general, and to those laws also that are particularly enacted against him,
and so keeps himself within the bounds of his civil obedience: As long as he
continues so, he may challenge protection from his Prince by way of right, and
if his Prince by some accident be not in case to protect him, he is to give him
leave to defend himself the best he can, for the law of nature allows every
one to defend himself, and there is no positive law of man can annull the law
of nature. Now if the Subject may thus claim protection from his Prince, it
follows, the Prince by way of reciprocation may require assistance, service
and supplies from the Subject upon all public occasions, as to suppress at
this time a new race of Recusants, which have done more hurt then ever the old
did, and are like to prove more dangerous to His Crown and regal Authority
then any foreign enemy.

But whosoever will truly observe the genious, and trace the actions of this
fatal Faction which now swayes with that boundless, exorbitant, arbitrary and
Antinomian power, will find, that it is one of their prime pieces of policy, to
traduce and falsify any thing that is not conducible to their own ends: Yet
what comes from Them must be so magisteriall, it must be so unquestionably and
incontroulably true and lawful, that it must be believed with an implicit
faith, as proceeding from an in-erring Oracle (as if these Zealots were above
the common condition of mankind, to whom error is as heriditary as any other
infirmity) though the thing it self encroach never so grossly both upon the
common liberty, the states and souls of men. But if any thing bear the stamp
of royal Authority, be it never so just and tending to peace and the public
good, yea, though it be indifferent to either side, it is presently
countermanded, cried down, and stifled; or it is calumniated and aspersed with
obloquies, false glosses and misprisions; and this is become now the common
Theme wherewith their Pulpits ring.

Which makes me think, that these upstart politicians have not long to reign;
for, as the common Proverb says, Fraud and frost end foul, and are short
lived, so that policy, those Counsels which are grounded upon scandals,
reproaches and lies, will quickly moulder and totter away, and bring their
Authors at last to deserved infamy and shame, and make them find a Tomb in
their own ruins. Add hereunto as further badges of their nature, that black
irreconcilable malice and desire of revenge which rages in them, the
averseness they have to any sweetness of Conformity and Union, the violent
thirst they have of blood, which makes me think on that distique of Prudentius,
who seemed to be a Prophet as well as Poet (a true Vates) in displaying the
humors of these fiery Dogmatists, this all-confounding faction which now has
the vogue, to the punishment, I will not say yet, the perdition of this poor
Island.

Sic mores produnt animum, and mihi credit, junctus
Semper cum falso est dogmate coedis amor.
Thus in English: Manners betray the mind, and credit me,
There Is always thirst of blood with Heresy.


FINIS.

