Of PROVERBS or ADAGES.
THe Peeples voice, the Voice of God we call,
And what are Proverbs but the peeples voice?
Coined first, and current made by common choice,
Then sure they must have Weight and Truth withal.
They are a public Heritage entayld
On every Nation, or like Hireloomes nayld,
Which pass from Sire to Son, and so from Son
Down to the Granchild till the world be done;
They are Free-Denisons by long Descent,
Without the grace of Prince or Parliament,
The truest Commoners, and Inmate guests,
We fetch them from the Nurse and Mothers breasts;
They can prescription plead against King or Crown,
And need no Affidavit but their own.
We thought it then well worth the pains, and cost,
To muster up these Ancients in one Host,
Which here like furbishd medalls we present
To all that breath in Christendom and Kent.
J. H.

PAPOIIOGPAPHIA. PROVERBS, OR, OLD SAID SAVVES and ADAGES, IN English (or the
Saxon Tongue) Italian, French and Spanish whereunto the British, for their great
Antiquity, and weight are added.

Which PROVERBS are Either MORAL, relating to good life; PHYSICAL, relating to
Diet, and Health; TOPICAL, relating to particular places; TEMPORAL, relating to
seasons; or or IRONICAL, relating to Raillery, and Mirth, etc.


Collected by I. H. Esqr.

Senesco, non segnesco.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. 1659.

To the Glorious I WILL OF GREAT BRITAIN (...).
REnowned Albion, Nature's choice Delight,
Neptune's chief Care, and Arsenall of Might,
Which in thy Watery Orb do sparkling lie
As Cinthia shines in the Cerulean Sky;
Or as the Tortoise in her circling shell
Do live secure within thy Rocky Cell
A World within thy self, fit to defend
Thine own, and fit no further to extend,
Yet with thy winged Coursers do give law
Unto the Ocean, and his Surges awe,
The Baltic waves, and Hyperborean,
The vast Atlantic, Euxin, Indian,
The Adriatic, Tyrrhen, Hellespont,
The White, the Black, the Redd all Seas are wont
To do Thee homage, and rich tributes bring
Unto thy Thames by way of offering,
Which makes Civilians hold that thy Sea-bounds
Reach to the shoares of all thy Neighbors round;
To thee, Triumphant I WILL, I do address
This work of oil and toil, be Patroness
Of thy own Tongue, which here 'twixt Columns strong
Throughout a massy fabric all along
Goes in the van of Europe's noblest Toungs,
Though they want somewhat of Her nerfs and lungs.
TO MY HIGHEST HONORED LORD, MOUNTAGUE, Earl of LINDZEY, Lord Great Chamberlain
of England, etc. at GRIMSTHORP.
My Lord,
I Have heard the English Tongue often traduced abroad, that, whereas the wit
and wisdom of a Nation is much discernd in their Proverbiall Speeches, The
English is more barren in this kind then other Languages; To take off this
Aspersion, and rectify the Opinion of the world herein, was one of the main
Motifs that induced me to impose this (no easy) task upon my self of
Collecting and publishing these English Proverbs, or old Sayed-Sawes and
Adages, which I dare say, have as much Wit, Significance and Salt in them as
any of the other Languages that follow. Some of them may be said to be as old
as Paul's Steeple; And we live in those destructive fatal Times, that are like
to verify a very ancient Proverb of that stately Temple (the greatest Ornament
London ever had) viz. Paul's cannot always stand, alluding to the lubricity of
all sublunary things.

It Is confessed that other Languages are fuller of Them, specially the Italian,
whereof Signior Florio (who deserved so much of the English Nation, by his
Dialogs and Dictionary, (specially this last which is more complete) has
published about six thousand, and diverse of them are allowed to be bald being
so old.

Now touching the Patronage of these Ancient Free denisons, and Franklins of
England (for so Proverbs may be called,) It may, under favor, well become your
Lordship, in regard you make one of the most Eminent part of the Nation, if one
look upon your numerous and Noble Family, whereof the late Addition of your
son, James, Lord Norris, that hopeful bud of Honor, is none of the least.

But, my Lord, besides the premises, there was another main reason did prompt me
to this Dedicatory address, which was, that late Posterity (for Proverbs are
long-lived) as well as the present Age, may find it upon Record, how much I was
your servant for so many Noble Favors of sundry kinds, so that I may say you do
herein as in all things else, truly Patrizare with my Lord your Father, in
whose Favor I had the happiness to live many years, that Noble Hero, who
having received some mortal wounds upon the true Stage of Honor, as he
commanded in chief a Royal Army, you did preserve him for the time (though
with the apparent hazard of your life and liberty) from the fury of the firing
Enemy.

So with my hearty prayers to Heaven for an affluence of all Felicities upon
you and yours, most humbly desiring to live still in your good Opinion and
Favor, (which I account one of the greatest contentments of my life) I rest,

My Highest Honored Lord, Your obedient, and ever obliged servant, while JAM
HOWELL.

To the true PHILOLOGER, Touching the English (or Saxon) with the three Sororian
Toungs, French, Italian and Spanish; Of their Originalls, their Growth, their
Changes, Interpolations and present Consistence, etc.
WHatsoever is comprehended within the vast volumes of Nature, or paprehended
by Human Understanding, may be divided to Things, to Words; This small
Division, though it consist but of two Monosyllables, is adaequat to the whole
Univers, and extends to whatsoever has Existence or Essence within
Trismegistus Circle, nor does it terminat there, but it mounts up to the
Empyrean Heven, to the Celestial Hierarchy, nay, it reaches to Chymeras, and
such Idaeas that have no other subsistence but only in the Imagination;

The first, viz. Things by mediation of Accidents are the object of Sense, the
second, viz. Words by the mediation of Sense are the objects of the Intellect,
for if we give credit to the Philosopher, Nihil est in Intellectu, quod non
prius fuit sub Sensu: Words may be said to be the mere Cretures of the Mind,
they are the purest emanations of the Soul, her Interpreters, her chiefest
Agents, and Engines to knock down falsehood, and assert Truth, By them she uses
to make her sallies abroad, and show Nature the difference that is twixt Brute
Animals and the Rational Creture, who has the sole prerogative of cutting the
air into Articulat sounds, by Them we suck in all knowledge, for as Syllables
are made of Letters, Words of Syllables, and Speech of Words, So Speech turns
to Notions, Notions to Knowledge, and Knowledge to Speculation, which is pabulum
animae, the food and Nectar of the Soul, Now, these Speculations in the cells
of the brain without utterance of speech, are like rich wines barell'd up
without bung or vent.

Moreover, observable it is, that, as after the Creation one of the chiefest
benedictions which it pleased God to confer upon Man, was a faculty to impose
words, and call all cretures by their names, which were Signatures at first of
their Natures, (nor only so but some words have whole Histories in them) So
after the great work of Redemption, the prime and most miraculous Blessing
which dropped down from Heven upon the holy Apostles was the gift of speaking
many languages for the propagation of that soul-saving Knowledge of Christian
Faith; Yet, though we read that the speaking of many Toungs was a benedicton in
the New Testament, we read as well that it proved a malediction in the Old,
when the swelling extravagant fancies of man thinking to have made mortar and
stone to have touched Heven, this foolish towering presumption was battered down
by a multiplicity, and confusion of Toungs, which has proved a kind of curse
ever since, for how much would it add to the happiness of Mankind in point of
attaining real Knowledge, as also for mutual Society, Negotiation and
Commerce, nay, to the advantage of Religion it self, if there were but one
Language spoken upon both the Hemispheres of the Earth as was at first, for
then that time we spend now in learning of Words, which are but air, might be
employed in Realities.

At the beginning, as Antiquaries tell us, that multiplicity of Toungs
increased from one to seventy, but now it may be well said, and said within
compass, that they are multiplied to seventy times seventy, if we take in all
Dialects, and Sub-dialects, whereof Asia long since did so abound, that of
those two and twenty Toungs which Mithridates King of Pontus is so much famed
to have spoken, most of them were Dialects, and that upon no great tract of
Earth, for 'twas not the fourth part of Asia. But in the Newfound World in
America, 'ts wonderful what is reported; for in that vast Continent, which is
thought to be of as large expansion as the other three, Observing Travelers
have related, That one cannot cross a Mountain, Wood or River of any bigness,
but the Inhabitants on both sides have a differing Dialect, and Idiom of Speech.

Touching Europe, Glottographers tell us (as you shall find it more amply in a
Book called Epistolae Hoelianae) that she has eleven Original, Independent,
and Mother-Toungs, whereof the Teutonic or High Dutch, and the Latin are two;
The English or Saxon (for there is no other name for it in Welsh and Irish to this
day) is a Dialect, or rather a Sub-dialect of the first; The Italian, Spanish,
and French Toungs are Dialects of the latter, which may be expressd in these
Hexameters. Anglica Teutonicae Proles comptissima Linguae:
Gallica Lingua nihil nisi Linguae squama Latinae;
Lingua Hispana nihil nisi Linguae squama Latinae;
Itala Lingua nihil nisi Linguae squama Latinae.
Let not these three noble Languages take it for a disparagement that this word
Squama is applied unto them, for the Chemist will tell them that squama is the
flower of Metalls as well as the parings, etc. The Englishman is High Dutch
capapie from top to toe go to the parts of his body inward and outward,
together with his coverings and clothes; he is Dutch in drinking, in eating, at
bed and at board, by sea also and by land when he steers a ship or drives the
plough, In his nombers, in the days of the week, in his kindred, in the Church
and holy things he is Dutch, etc. But in Hawking, in Hunting, in Heraldry, in
Fencing, in Riding, in Painting, in Dancing, in Music, in Aires he is all
French; Insomuch that it cannot be denied but if the English Tongue should repay
unto the Dutch, and French all she ows, she would prove a stark Bankrupt, and be
as bare as Esops Crow. Nor is it any derogation for the English language to be
descended of the High Dutch, or Teutonic, which is so ancient a Maternall
Tongue, that Becanus thinks it was the Language of Paradis, and the Italian did
merrily twitt him in that opinion when he said, that it was the Tongue wherein
Adam was cast out thence, being a rough and Cartalaginous or boany Speech in
regard of the collision of so many Consonants, that if a man were to be worded
to death, or stoned to death by words, the High Dutch (or Pole) were the
fittest; Some draw the pedigree thus, the English came of the Saxon, the Saxon
of the Dutch, the Dutch of the Slavonick, the Slavonick of the Persian, the
Persian of the Caldaic, and the Caldaic of the Hebrew.

So much touching the Original, now, touching the growth and changes of the
English Tongue from time to time, I shall take the Dominicall prayer for my
instance as it was spoken nine hundred years ago, as that sagacious, and
sedulous Antiquary Mr. Cambden has it, which prayer ran then as follows, and
is here compared verbatim with the present English.

Uren fader thic arth in heofnas, (Our Father which art Heaven) sic gehalgud
thin noma (be hallowed thy name) to comes thin Ric, (come thy Kingdom) sic
thin willa sue is in heofnas, and in eortho, (be thy will so as in Heaven, and
in Earth) Uren hlaf ofer wirtlic sell us to daeg, (our loaf superstantiall give
us to day.) And forgef us scylda urna, (And forgive us our debts) sue we
forgefan scyldgum urum (as we forgive debts ours) And no inlead usith in
costnung (and not lead us into temptation) Ah gefrig urich from ifle (but
deliver us from Evil.)

This was found among the records of Eadfride Bishop of Lindiffarne or the Holy
Island, translated afterward to Durham, and it was in the year 700. before the
Holy Scriptures were divided to Chapters, for Stephen Langton Archbishop of
Canterbury did that first, and Robert Stephen long after did subdivide them
into verses; but about two hundred years after the Lords prayer ran thus; Thu
ure fader the eart heofenum, si thin nama gehalgod, cum thin ric, gewarth thin
willa on eorthan swu swa on heofenum, syle us to degrees um dethanglican hlaf (or
daily bread) And forgif us ure gyltas (trespasses) swa we forgifath urun
gyltendun, (our trespassers) And ne led the us on costnung (temptation) Ac alys
us from yfle, si it swa (so be it.)

About 160. years after, in the reign of Henry the second the Dominical prayer
was thus, as it was sent by Adrian the fourth (who was an Englishman born,
whose name was Breckspeare as I take it) and it ran in Rhyme because the Common
people might retain it the better.

Ure fader in Heaven rich
Thy name be halyed ever lich,
Thou bring us thy michell bliss,
Als hit in heaven y do,
Evar in earth been it also.
That holy bread that lasts aye,
Thou send it ous this ilke day,
Forgive ous all that we have done,
As we forgivet uch other mon,
Ne let us fall into no founding,
Ac shield ous fro the foul thing.
AMEN.
About two hundred years after, in the Reign of Richard the Second, it came to
be thus, according to the Translation of Wickliffe; Our fader that art in
Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom com to, be thy will done so in Heaven
as in earth, gif to us this day our bread over other substance, and forgive us
our dettes as we forgeven our detters, and leed us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil, Amen. In this Translation we find that there are some
French words crepd in, as dettis, detters, temptation, deliver.

Touching the refinings, interpolation and enrichments which the English Tongue
has receavd from time to time, it is to be considered that Languages as well
as other notions of the mind use to proceed to a perfection by certain degrees;
The Latin Tongue remaind in a kind of barbarism nere upon 500. years till
Caesar, Cicero, Salust and others did refine her, and brought her to that
purity we now read her in; So did her daughters the Italian, French and Spanish
till the first was refined by Dante, petrarca with Boccace (his scholar,) and
Ariosto; The French began to be polishd in the reign of Philip de Valois, Marot
did something under Francis the First, but Ronsard under Henry the Second did
more then both. Now the English came to that perfection, and fullnes that she
is now arrivd unto, by adopting to herself the choicest, best sounding, and
significanst words of other languages, which in tract of time were enfranchizd,
and made free denizons as it were of England by a kind of Naturalization, But
she has more of the French then of any other because of the Norman Conquest,
Insomuch that for the speaking of eloquent English it is a great advantage to
understand French, whence she has her gentilest words, which was the ground of
the old proverb Jack would be a gentleman could he speak French; Therefore
though the Root of the English language be Dutch, yet she may be said to have
bin inoculated afterward upon a French stock, and she thrive so well that she
did reingraffe upon diverse words, as chiefly upon chief, faulty upon fault,
precisenes upon precise, (which are not found in French) with a great number
more; but some Critiques observe that she takes the liberty to altar sometimes
the sense of the words which she borrows; as she uses crank for being lively
and well, whereas it is sick in Dutch, she uses bid to require or command,
whereas in Dutch it is to pray or entreat, she uses Rogue for a rascal etc.
whereas in French it is used for a bragger or highminded man; she uses nice for
unwilling or averse, whereas it is Idle in French with diverse besides; Moreover
they tax her that she wants single words for sundry things which she expresses
by way of paraphrase, as an old man, a woman with child, a looking glass, a
piece of bread and butter, etc for which there are single words in other
toungs, yet for some things she has differing proper words which others want,
as the Italian and Spaniards have no toes but fingars on their feet, nor can
all France, Italy, or Spain find a word for a smock though they all three love
it well enough. Nor does the English language enfranchize French words only,
but diverse choice expressive words from the Italian, and Spaniard with others,
Insomuch that she may be said to be Dutch embrodered with French and other
toungs, or she may be said to be like one that garhers sweet flowers out of
diverse banks, and beds to make a nosegay; But it is a thing that gravells all
Antiquaries how so many Greek words should be found in the English tongue, being
the same both for sense and signification, as (...), rain, (...) I call, (...)
grass, (...) a door, (...) foul, (...) whole, (...) new, (...) to kiss with a
great many more: The probablest reason that may be given for this, is that the
Greek being a great mercantile tongue, and the most spacious for trading in
times passd of any on earth, some of that Nation for traffic sake migh come
here or to Saxony, And not many ages since there was a Colony of Grecians in
Marseilles in France and another in Calabria in Italy. By these applications
and borrowings of choice exotic words the English may be said to be one of the
most copious languages on earth, nor in point of native eloquence as for
Allegories, Tropes, Agnominations, Metaphors and the constant poursuit of them
does she yield to any, as also for soundnes and strength of poetical fancyes,
so strong, that the soft melting phrases of other toungs are too weak to gird
them about.

Concerning the Original of the French-toung it is taken pro confesso by all,
that she is sprung of the Latin while Rome kept three and twenty legions of
Roman soldiers many Ages within her bowels, who with the Country may be said
to have conquered the language also which was called the old Celtique, and is
thought to be the same that the remnant of the old Britains now speak in Wales;
Touching the Changes which the French Tongue has receivd, there be diverse
Instances producd in my Epistle to the Reder before Cotgraves Dictionary; she
has diverse Dialects as the Gascon, Picard, Provensall, that of Iersey,
Guernsey, and low Normandy, that of Liege, and the Walloon who calls it Romand,
as the Spaniard calls his Romance; and considering the ayrie and volatile humor
of that Nation it is to be wondered that their language did receive no more
changes, there having bin so many external causes that concurrd thereunto, as
the continuance and coalition of the English so long among them, the voyages
that six of their Kings made to the Holy Land, the wars, and weddings, with
their Neighbors and the great company of Strangers that kept still in the
Queens Court; But at this time the French is arrivd to a great pitch of
perfection, purity and sweetness; There was a contest not long ago which spoke
the best French, the Kings Court, the University, or the Lawyers, and the
Courtier carried it, the other two savouring the one of Pedantery, the other of
Chicanery or Sophistry.

Touching the Italian tongue she may be called the topbranch or eldest daughter
of the Latin, and she resembles her mother more then the other two, which made
King James say that the Italian was nothing else but the Dative and Ablative
Cases of the Latin; she is held the smoothest, the civillst, and charmingst
vulgar Tongue of Europe; For the first, she has not one word that ends with a
consonant throughout the whole body of the language, unless it be some small
monosyllable praepositions and conjunctions, which makes Her the more fluent,
and smooth, this made the German, for retorting of a geere which was cast upon
the roughnes of his Tongue, by being that wherein Adam was thrust out of
Paradis, to say, that the Devil had tempted Eva before in Italian, and he went
further that he thought all the playsterers at the building of the Tower of
Babel were Italians: The Italian may be also called the Courtliest language of
Christendom, or the Imperial Caesarean language, for by the Golden Bull he is
not capable to be Emperor unless he has knowledge of the Italian tongue.

Touching the changes and Dialects of the Italian Tongue there is no Language has
more, and this may be imputed to the several sorts of governments, and
soverain princes which are up and down the Country, as the Greek dialects were
ascribed to the diversity of so many Islands; In Italy there is the Roman or
Court-dialect, the Toscan or Florentine, the Venetian, the Milanese, the
Piemontese, that of Bologna, the Parmazan, the Luquese, the Napolitan, the
Genovese, the Calabrian, etc. whereof the two last are the most harsh, and
degenerat. In Calabria they will say queddo cauaddo for quello cavallo, fog,
mog for fuoco, moglie, the languages of Sardinia, Sicily, and Corsica may be
said likewise to be Italian Dialects, but the prime and purest Italian is
Lingua Toscana in bocca Romana.

Concerning the Spanish, Romance, or the Castillian language it may be said to
be nothing else but Latin inlayed with Morisco (and some few old Gothic words)
For the Moors kept there nere upon 700. years, a fair time to corrupt a
language; There is no Speech wherein the tongue and the text do more agree, none
that is freest from Apostrophes which may be called the thrumbs of a language;
she is also an open, and masculin high lofty language, so high that she may be
said to go upon stilts, she is also a wary, and pawsing long-^^ngd language,
delighting in leasurly prolation, and long words, she bestows five syllables
upon a ^att calling him muncielago, a (...) has six despavilad^ra, a gransire
is tartarabu^l^; Now, whereas the Italian and French endeavor daily to go
further off from the Latin, the Spaniard makes it his ambition to make a nearer
approach unto Her, and if the Morisco words were garbled out she would be nothing
but Latin, which may be called mundus and mundanus sermo for her large extent,
and neatnes; And there may be Instances made both in prose and verse that will
be pure congruous latin (which cannot be don in Italian and Spanish, much less
in French) as I have showed in my Instructions for foreign Travel.

Touching the changes and variety of Dialects in the Spanish Tongue, the
Las^ternian or Portuguez is the chiefest, there is then the Gallego, the
Andaluz, the Biscainer and the Battueco, a new Pagan Nation discoverd of late
years in the very center of Spain among the Mountains nere Toledo, which two
last have another very ancient language of their own that has no more affinity
with the Spanish then the British has with the English, and it is thought to be
the Original language of Cantabria or Spain; But the prime Castilian Dialect
is that of Toledo (as that of Siena is in Italy, and the Aurelian or that of
Orleans in France) And if there be any debate or doubt about the true sense of
any Spanish word a Toledano is to be the expounder, and Judge thereof; Touching
the Kingdoms of Valencia and Catalonia, their toungs may be said to be more
properly Dialects of the Gascon.

Now, concerning this large, and long-spund Piece of Industry, the main
division of it is into three parts, whereof every one has bulk, and matter
enough to make a considerable distinct Volume of it self; The first is a
fower-toungd Dictionary, where the English does head the French, Italian and
Spanish the three noblest languages of Europe, and they all four come without
any interruption of Etymologies, or Proverbs (which are also here in Tomes by
themselfs) immediately one after the other, and this will prove a great
advantage to Memory in regard of the affinity and consonance they have one with
another in thousands of words, as to dispute (in English) disputare (in
Italian) disputer (in French) disputar (in Spanish) to contend, contendere,
contendre, contender; to establish, stabilire, establir, establecer; a school,
scuola, escole, escuela, with multitudes more, which coming so immediately one
after the other will be a great help to the retention of memory, and to carry
away all the four with more ease.

Nor will the Reder here be sent twice upon one arrand as other Dictionaries
use to send him, putting him to a double labor, If you look for a badger, he
will not turn you to seek a brock, nor from a brock to a gray, nor vice versa,
when you would desire what is Spanish, Italian, or French for thorn back he will
not make you go a fishing for s^ate or ray; If you would know what is French, etc.
for a blister, he will not turn you to a wheale, push or pimple, but every word
though it has many Synonymas will satisfy you by it self, and not make you
tumble the leafs so often for one thing which will put one to an Impatience.

The second Volume is a large Nomenclature of the peculiar and proper terms in
all the four languages belonging to several Arts, to the most generous sort
of Recreations, to all professions both liberal, and manual from the Engineer
to the Moustrapmaker, from the Merchant Adventurer to the crier of matches;
Here you have in all the four toungs, the terms of Heraldry, of Horsmanship,
of Hunting, of Hawking, of War, the terms of Chemistry, of Architecture, of
Navigation, not a Cable, or rope in a ship but you have it here, you shall find
here all the Knighthoods and Religious Orders of Christendom, with 50.
several distinct sections, a work most useful for all that pretend to
knowledge, curiosity and true eloquence, specially for Orators and Divines which
use to illustrat things by familiar comparisons, and similes, for the prime
part of eloquence is to give all things their proper terms.

The third Volume is of the choicest proverbs in all the said Toungs,
consisting of diverse complete Tomes, and the English translated into the other
three, with diverse familiar Letters in every one consisting all of proverbiall
speeches after a new mode. There is also a particular Tome of the British, or
old Cambrian Proverbs which the Author thought fit to annex for their great
Antiquity and weight; And among these proverbs there are many hundred in each
tongue that never knew Press before; Lastly there are five hundred new sayings,
which with the revolution of time may serve for Proverbs to after ages: Let the
Judicious Reder observe besides, that in this new Lexicon and Nomenclature there
be very many recent words in all the four languages which were never inserted
in Dictionary before, It is now above forty years since Florio, Cotgrave, and
Minshew compild theirs, but there be diverse words got into those languages
since; Touching the English, what a number of new words have got into her of
late years which will be found here; as stumming of wine, clover grass,
regalos, treatment, mobby, punch, perino, (Carribby Islands drink) picaro,
peccadillio, pantaloon, vogue, Quakers, Seekers, Levellers, Trepanners,
piqueering, plundring, storming, Excise, etc. and others which got in during
the reign of the Long Parliament.

All these things being well considered, and weighed in the balance of an
unbiassd Judgment, I may promise to my self that this treble Volume will be
judgd a work that will conduce much to the public Good, (which is the white I
aymd at all the while) as also to the honor of the Nation, and of the English
tongue for three respects. First, because she is put into the front of the
civillst languages of Christendom, and as it were incorporated with them;
Secondly, because it will be an occasion hereby to accreditat her the more, and
make her expand, and spread further abroad by mixing with these spacious
languages; Thirdly, because it will take off those aspersions whcih uses to be
cast upon Her, that whereas the Genius, and wit of a Nation is much discernd in
their proverbiall speeches, the English tongue is dry and defective in this
particular, and those Proverbs she has are but flat and empty. The
contemplation of these particulars did much heighten the spirits of the Author,
and lighten the burden of so tedious and tough a task all the way.

The Printer to the severest sort of Reders.
IN regard of the absence sometimes of the Author to supervise, and for want of
able Correctors in so many diffring languages under this Insulary Region cut
off fom the rest of mankind, there will be some erratas of the Press found up
and down in this first Impression: But it is to be hoped that the Generous and
discreet Reder, without stumbling at every straw, or making mountains of
molehills, will pass by such light faults, and go still on to the full sense
of the thing without any descanting overcriticall humor; For it is a Rule full of
good Morality that is to be observd in the reding of books, Agnoscendum quod
been, ignoscendum quod secus, acknowledge what is good, excuse what is otherwise.

L'Imprimeur au Lecteur Critique.
EN l'absence quelques fois de L'Antheur pour en avoir la surintendance, and a
fault de Correcteurs assez adroits en tant de Langues soubs ce Climat Insulaire
retrenche du rest du monde, Il n'y aur a pas suiet de s'estonner, si quelques
errates de l'Imprimerie, se soyent glissez en ceste premiere Edition; Mais il
est a esperer, que le lecteur genereux, and discret, sans broncher a chaque
paille, ou en faysant collines de taupineries, ne s'arretera pas a tells petis
obstacles, mais qu'il passera rondement plus outre jusques au sens entier de la
matiere sans se render trop Critique: Car cest'une Reigle pleine de bonne
moralite qu'on devroit observer in la lecture de Livers, Agnoscendum quod been,
ignoscendum quod secus, Il faut reconoitre ce qui est bien, and excuser ce
qu'est autrement.

Lo Stampatore al Lectore Giudicioso.
NEll' assensa dell' Autore qualche volte per haverne la so prantendenza, and
mancandoci anco Correttori as^ai sapevoli in tanti linguaggii sotto questo
Clima Insulario troncato dal resto del mondo non ci'e da meravigilare si
qualchi errati della stampa si trouvino in questa primiera Editione, Ma, e da
sperare, ch'il Lettore generoso, and sagace, senza intopparsi a ogni paglia, o
facendo montagne de talpinerie, passara sempre piu auanti fin' al sentimento
intiero d'ogni materia, senza rendersi troppo curioso, o critico; perch, nella
lettura de libri, ci'e una regola piena de buona moralita, Agnoscendum quod
been, ignoscendum quod secus.

El Imprimidor al Letor prudente.
EN el ausencia del Author algunas vezes por aver la sobreintendencia de la
Obra, y por falta de Corregidores harto platicos en tantos lenguajes debaxo de
este Clima Insular tajado del resto del Mundo, No aura de que espantarse si
algunos yerros de la Imprimeria se topen en esta primera Edicion; Mas
esperancas ay, que el Letor generoso, y juyzioso sin tromp carse a cada paja,
passara siempre mas adelante hasta el sentido entero de la cosa, sin hazerse
Critico, o Curioso en demasiae, porque en la lectura de libros ay una regla
Uena de buena moralidad, que se deve observar, Agnoscendum quod been,
ignoscendum quod secus.

POEMS by the AUTHOR, Touching the Association of the English-Toung, with the
French, Italian, and Spanish, etc.
FRance, Italy and Spain, ye sisters three
Whose Toungs are branches of the Latian tree,
To perfect your odd Number, be not shy
To take a Fourth to your society,
That high Teutonick Dialect which bold
Hengistus with his Saxons brought of old
Among the Britains, when by Knife and Sword
He first of England did create the Word;
Nor is it a small advantage to admit
So Male a speech to mix with you, and knitt,
Who by her Consonants and tougher strains
Will bring more Arteries among your soft veins,
For of all toungs Dutch has most nerves and bones,
Except the Pole, who hurles his words like stones.
Some feign that when our Protoplastick sire
Lost Paradis by Heavens provoked ire,
He in Italian tempted was in French
He fell a begging pardon, but from thence
He was thrust out in the high Teuton Tongue,
Whence English (though much polishd since) is sprung.
This Book is then an inlaid piece of Art,
English the knots which strengthen every part,
Four Languages are here together fixed,
Our Lemsters Ore with Naples silk is mixed,
The Loire, the Po, the Thames and Tagus glide
All in one bed, and kiss each others side,
The Alps, and Pyrenoean mountains meet,
The Rose and Flower de luce hang in one street:
Nay, Spain and Red-cap't France a League here strike, 1658*
If 'twixt their Kings and Crowns there were the like,
Poor Europe should not bleed so fast, and call
Turbands at last unto her Funeral.
OF PROVERBS, OR OLD SAYED-SAVVES and ADAGES, Which go hereunto annexed.
THe Peeples voice the Voice of God we call,
nd what are Proverbs but the Peeples voice?
Coined first, and current made by common choice;
Then sure, they must have weight and Truth withal;
They are a public Heritage entayld
On every Nation, or like Hirelomes nayld,
Which pass from Sire to Son, and so from Son
Down to the Granchild till the world be don.
They are Free-denisons by long descent,
Without the Grace of Prince or Parliament;
The truest Commoners and Inmate Guests,
We fetch them from the Nurse, and Mothers breasts,
They can prescription plead against King or Crown,
And need no Affidavit but their own.
We thought it then well worth the pains and cost
To muster up these Ancients in one Host,
Which here like furbishd medalls we present
To all that breath in Christendom and Kent.
OF WORDS, AND LANGUAGES; POEMA Gnomicum, Consisting most of SENTENCES in
Order To this Lexicon Tetraglotton.
WORDS are the Souls Ambassadors, who go
Abroad upon her errands too and fro;
They are the sole expounders of the mind,
And correspondence keep 'twixt all Mankind;
They are those Airy keys that open, and wrest
Sometimes the locks and hinges of the breast,
By them the Heart makes sallies, wit and sense
Belong to them, they are the Quintessence
Of those Ide'as, which the thoughts distill
And so calcine, then melt again, until
They drop forth into Accents, in whom lies
The salt of Fancy, and all Faculties.
The world was framed by the Eternal Word,
Who to each Creture did a name afford,
And such an union made twixt words and things,
That every name a nature with it brings;
Words do involve the deepest Mysteries,
By them the Jew into his Caball pries,
The Chymick says in stones, in herbs, in words,
Nature for every thing a cure affoords;
Nay, some have found the Glorious Stars to be
But letters set in an Orthography,
The Fate of Kings and Empires to foretell,
And all things else below could we them spell;
That Gran-Distinction between Man and Brute,
We may to Language chiefly attribute,
The Lion roares, the Elephant does bray,
The Bull does Bellow, and the Horse does Neigh,
Man speaks, it is only Man can words create,
And cut the Air to sounds articulate
By Natures special Charter; Nay speech can
Make a shrewd discrepance 'twixt Man and Man,
It does the Gentleman from Clown discover,
And from a Fool the Grave Philosopher,
As Solon said to one (in judgment weak)
I thought thee wise until I heard thee speak:
For words in Man, bear the most Critic part,
We speak by Nature, but speak well by Art;
And as good Bells we judge of by the sound,
So discreet Men by words well-plac'd are found,
Therefore it may be called no vain pretense,
When among the rest the Tongue would be a sense,
The Toung's the Rudder which man's Body guides
While on this worlds tempestuous Seas he rides:
Words are the life of Knowledge, they set Free,
And bring forth Truth by way of Midwifry,
The activ'st Cretures of the teeming brain,
The Judges who the inward man arraign,
Reasons chief Engine and Artillery
To batter Error, and make falsehood fly,
The Canons of the mind, who sometimes bounce
Nothing but war, then peace again pronounce;
The Rabbis say, such is the strength of words,
That they make deeper wounds then spears or swords:
This Book may be then called a Magazin
Of Arms and words, it keeps and does combine
Four Toungs, it is like a frame on diverse wheels,
One follows still the other at the heels,
The smooth Italian, and the nimble Frank,
The long-lung'd Spanish march all in a rank,
The English head's them, ^o commands the Van,
And reason good in this Meridian,
But Spain brings up the Rear, because we know
Her Counsels are so long, and pace so slow.
J. H.

TO THE KNOVVINGEST KIND OF PHILOLOGERS.
PRoverbs may not improperly be called the Philosophy of the Common Peeple, or,
according to Aristotle, the truest Relics of old Philosophy, whereunto he
adds another remarkable Saying, That as no man is so rich who might be able to
spend equally with the Peeple, so none is so wise as the Peeple in general;
for vox Populi Vox Dei the voice of the People is the Voice of God, voz de
Pleu, voz de Deu, as the Gascon has it, for it must needs be true what every
one says.

Now all Proverbs consist most commonly of Caution, and Counsel, of
Directions, and Document, for the regulating of Humane life; wherein as there
is much Wit, so there is oftentimes a great deal of Weight wrapped up in a
little. The chief Ingredients that go to make a true Proverb, being Sense,
shortness and Salt; This may be the reason that induced the gretest of
Sophies, and wisest of Kings, to Characterize his Inspirations and Precepts
with the Title of Proverbs; For it may be said, that as the Peripatetic in his
Acroamatiques, the Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics, and the Rabbis in their
Caball involve the choicest of their Knowledge (though obscurely) so it may be
said, that in Proverbs there is much wisdom couched up in a concise quaint
way, and that with a kind of quickness, familiarity and mirth, and sometimes
twixt jest and earnest.

Plato in his Dialogs called Pythagoras, makes Socrates maintain; that Proverbs
are the Antientst Philosophy; Add hereunto, that among the Ancients, Proverbs
carried a great sway with them in point of proof toward the Assertion of
Right, and Vindication of Truth; That famous Plea twixt the Athenians and
Megarenses about Salamina, was determined by an old Proverb of Solon's: It Is
also very remarkable in the Annalls of Italy, how the Gibelins attempting to
demolish Flo^ence, were diverted by two old Proverbs, which Farinata de gli
Uberti produced: In our Common Law there are some Proverbs that carry a kind of
Authority with them, as that which began in Henry the Fourths time, He that
bulls the Cow must keep the Calf; In Kent they have one touching Gavelkind, The
Father to the bough, the son to the plough; As also, A Solo ad Coelum, viz.
That one may build as high as he will upon his own Freehold. There is another,
Possession is eleven points of the Law; There are others, as, When Gabriel
blows his horn this question will be decided; There are two more that come
near to the Nature of Proverbs, The King can do no wrong, The King cannot die;
(but by the fatality of the Times, these last be now grown out of date;) There
is also among the Heralds, Color upon color is false Heraldrie, etc.

Moreover, some Proverbs are of so rich, and recondit a sense, that like silk
wown'd up upon a small bottom, they may be drawn out into a large webb; As in
Salamanca one framed a weighty discourse of an hour long out of this Proverb,
Da Dios alas a la hormiga para que se pierda mas ayna; God gives wings unto the
Ant that she may destroy herself the sooner, alluding to Riches and ambition --
Tolluntur in altum
Vt lapsu graviore cadant --


That inspired Instrument of saving Faith, Saint Paul, makes use of diverse
Proverbs (we know well) for matter of Edification; for a significant, and sapid
succinct Proverb makes a firmer Impression, it sticks unto, and works upon the
Intellectuals oftentimes more then a whole Oration, or long-lungd Sermon:
Moreover, Proverbs may be said to serve as Perl, or other pre^ious stones for
the Embrodering of a Speech, or as sinews to strengthen i^, and enforce a
belief upon the Auditor; for as the Italian has it, Proverbio non falla,
there is a kind of infallibility in Proverbs, for it must needs be true what
every one says (as was pointed before); And it is better to be spoken of ill by
one before All, then by All before one.

This made Erasmus of Roterodam, and Doctor Herman Nunnez the Spaniard, who was
called the Phoenix of his Time in all kind of Literature, after they had waded
through all the severest Sciences, to become Paroemiographers, or Collectors of
vulgar Proverbs in their old age; Touching the latter, after he had been Reader
of the Greek Tongue (the prime Philosophical Language) as also of Rhetoric and
other graver Studies in Salamanca, and had writ many Glosses upon Seneca,
Pomponius Mela, and Pliny, yet at last, like Cato, who fell to learn Greek at
fourscore years of age, He applied himself to the study of Proverbs; Nay, to go
a stepp higher, Don Innigo de Lopez, a Grande of Spain, and Marquis of
Sentellana, being chief of the Family of the Mendozas, made it his study at
last to purge and publish the Common Spanish Ref^ans, or Proverbs, which will
be found in this Volume.

Lastly, Proverbs may be called the truest Franklins or Freeholders of a
Country; They have no other parent but the peeple, being Traditionall Sayings,
Precepts and Memorandums, handed over as it were from Father to Son, from
Mother to Daughter, from Nurses to Children time out of mind, and will be so as
long as sermocination lasts among men; And though in point of Generation they
are a kind of Natural Children, and of an unknown birth, yet are they no
by-blowes or bastards, but legitimated by Prescription and long Tract of
Ancestriall Time; so that, that Topicall Axiom may be verified of them more,
then of any other Knowledge, viz. Bonum quo communius eo melius.

Now let the squeamish Reder take this Rule along with him, that Proverbs being
Proleticall, and free familiar Country sayings do assume the Liberty to be
sometimes in plain, downright, and homely terms, with wanton natural
Expressions, that with their Salt some of them carry a kind of Salacity (which
are very frequent in Gower, Chaucer, Skeleton, Io. Heywood and others) yet they
cannot be taxd of beastlines, or bawdry.

To conclude, touching the Method of perusing these Proverbs or Adages, (for
Varro is for that word) with benefit, the Reder shall do well to have his
Leger-Book about him when he falls upon Them, to Register therein such that
Quadrat with his Conceit and Genius, for a Proverb is a very slippery thing,
and soon slides out of the Memory, which by that means may be made more Tenable.

A LETTER OF ADVICE, Consisting all of PROVERBS, (Running in one congruous and
concurrent Sense) to one that was toward Marriage.
Sir,
ALthough I am none of those that love to have an Oar in every ones Boat, Or
such a busy body as deserves to be hitt in the teeth, that I should keep my
breath to cool my pottage, yet, you and I having eaten a peck of salt together,
and having a hint that you are upon a business that will either make you or
mar you, for a man's best Fortune, or his worst's a Wife, I would wish you to
look before you leap, and make more then two words to a bargain.

It Is true, that Marriages are made in Heaven, it is also true that Marriage and
hanging goes by Destiny; But if you are disposed to marry, marry a shrew
rather then a sheep, for a Fool is fulsome, yet ye run a risk also in the
other, for a shrew may so tie your nose to the Grindstone, that the gray Mare
will prove the better Horse; Besides, there is another old said Saw, that
every one knows how to tame a shrew but he who has her; If it be your Fortune
to meet with such a one, she may chance put you to the charge of buying a long
spoon, for he must have a long spoon who will eat with the Devil.

Moreover, if you needs must marry, do not fetch your wife from Dunmow, for so
you may bring home two sides of a Sow, Nor from Westminster, for he who goes
to Westminster for a Wife, to Paul's for a Man, and to Smithfield for a Horse,
may have a Jade to his Horse, a Knave to his Man, and a Wagg-tail to his Wife.

But if you needs must marry, let her rather be little then bigg* for of two
evils the least is to be chosen; yet there is another hazard in that also, for
a little pott is soon hott, and so she will be little and loud, if you give her
an Inch she will take an Ell, she will always have a Rowland for your Oliver,
and two words for one, such a Wife though she be as tender as a Parsons Lemman,
yet she may prove a Wolf in a Lambs skinn, Instead of a Rose you will have a
Burr; If you meet with such a one, you may be put to answer as he was who
having a damnable scold to his Wife, and being asked by Sir Tho* Badger, who
recommended her unto him? he said an old Courtier Sir; What Courtier? said
Sir Tho. 'Twas the Devil Sir.

Furthermore, take heed of too hansome a Wife, for then she is likely not to be
all your own, and so she may bring you to your Horn-book again, or rather make
you Horn-madd, and then you have brought your Hoggs to a fair Market.

But by all means, be wary of too costly and lavishing a Wife, for so you may
quickly turn a Noble to nine-pence, and come home by broken Cross, she will in
a short time make hunger to dropp out at your nose, she will thwitten a
Mill-post to a pudding-prick, the Goose will drink as deep as the Gander, and
then, When all is gone and nothing left, what avails the Dagger with the
dudgeon heft? The Wolf will be then still at your door, and the black Ox will
tread on your toe, your Neighbors will make mowes at you, and say, you are as
wise as Walthams Calf, who went nine miles to suck a Bull, and came home more
thirsty then when he went.

You must also be wary how you marry one that has cast her Rider, lest you
fall into a Quagmire wherein another was lost, I mean a Widow, for so you will
be subject to have a Deaths head putt often in your Dish; Touching the
Complexion of your Wife, the Spaniard holds black to be the wholsomest, for
He has a Proverb, Muger negra trementina en ella, A black woman has
Turpentine in her; The Frenchman is for the broun, When he says, Fille
brunette, gaye and net, A broun Less is gay and cleanly, But they both will
tell you, that touching a red-haird and bearded woman, salute them a hundred
paces off.

Lastly, take heed by all means of doting so far upon any one Female, as to
marry her for mere Affection; It Is true, that one hair of a woman will draw
more then a hundred yoke of Oxen, yet mere Affection is but blind Reason, and
there are more Mayds then Malkin; It Is true, that in love there is no lack, yet
it is as true, that nothing has no savor, and there must be Suet as well as
Oatmeal to make a Pudding; In this Case it is better to buy a quart of Milk by
the penny then keep a Cow, and to follow the Italian Proverb, videlicet,
Commend the Sea, but keep thy self ashore, Commend the Hills, but keep thy self
on the Plains, Commend a wedded Life, but keep thy self a Bachelor; According
to another wise Proverb, He who marries does well, but he who marries not,
does better; Whereunto alludeth a third, That next to a single Life the married
is best; I will Conclude with that of the Italian, Honest men use to marry, but
Wise men not.

When you read this, I know you will be apt to say, that a Fools Bolt is soon
shot, or cry out, Wit whither will thou? yet, though I am none of the seven
Sages, I can look as far into a Millstone as another, and you know that the
stander by sees more then the Gamester.

What I write is the Language of a Friend, and could I steed you herein, I
would do it with as good a will as ever I came from School, for I am Yours as
much as any Wife can be, or rather, that I may conclude with the old Roman
Proverb, I am Yours, Usque ad Aras,

Yours to the Altar, J. H.

PROVERBS, OR OLD SAYED-SAVVES, AND ADAGES IN THE ENGLISH TONGUE.
THe Grace of God is worth a Fair.

The Parish Priest forgot that he was ever a Clark; This is meant of proud
starters up.

It Is wit to pick a lock, and steal a horse, but it is wisdom to let him alone.

The Kings cheese goes half away in parings; viz. among so many Officers.

Happy is he who knows his follies in his youth.

Speak the Truth and shame the Devil.

He who could know what would be dear,
Need be a Merchant but once in a year.
Three ills come from the North, a cold Wind, a shrinking Cloth, and a
dissembling man.

God send^ a cursed cow short horns.

He has brought a Mill-post to a pudding-prick; This is meant of a great
unthrift.

Keep your breath to cool your pottage; Spoken to a busy pratler.

To steal a Goose, and give the giblets in alms.

Who waits for dead men's shoes may go a good while barefoot.

Love thy neighbor, yet pull not down thy hedge.

Who tells a ly to save his credit, wipes his nose on his sleeve to save his
napkin.

The first Chapter of fools is, to hold themselves wise.

Drink in the morning staring,
Then all the day be sparing.
Some are wise, and some are otherwise.

To loose a sheep for sparing a halperth of tarr.

A thousand pounds, and a bottle of hay, is all one thing at doomsday.

Play, women, and wine, undo men laughing.

An humble-Bee in a Cow-turd thinks himself a king.

A man will rather hurt his body, then displease his palate.

Lend thy horse for a long journey, thou may have him return with his skinn.

There Is no fool to the old fool.

So we get the clink, we will bear with the stink.

He gave his wife a Recumbentibus; viz. He swadled her soundly.

He who pays last, pays but once.

The dog who hunts foulest, hitts at most faults.

Here will he a good fire anon, said the Fox when he pist on the Ice.

A Nurse spoil's a huswife; viz. Because she is more daintily fed, and more
idle all the while.

It Is good sometimes to hold a candle to the Devil.

A dog in a dublett, bitch in a baskett.

An Ape's an Ape, A Varlett's a Varlett,
Though they be cladd in silk, or scarlett.
A man, is a man, if he have but a hose on his head.

Give a thief rope enough and he will hang himself.

One hand in the purse, and two in the dish.

It may serve with an Onion; Spoken ironically.

Madam Parnell, crack the Nutt, and eat the kernel.

He strutteth like a Crow in a gutter.

The fairer the Hostess, the fouler the reckoning.

After meat comes mustard.

Hungry dogs love dirty puddings.

After rain comes fair weather.

Fancy may bo^lt bran, and think it flower.

He is, pattring, the Devils Paternoster; viz he grumbles or mutters.

One pair of heels sometimes is worth two pair of hands.

Here is talk of the Turk, and the Pope, but it is my next neighbor does me
the hurt.

The Friar preached against stealing, when he had a pudding in his sleeve.

Sorrow is good for nothing but for sin.

Who Bulls the Cow, must keep the Calf; A Law-Proverb.

The man of God is better for having his bows and arrows about him.

Old Mares lust after new cruppers.

One of the four and twenty qualities of a knave, is to stay long at his arrand.

Three may keep Counsel if two be away.

To throw the helve after the hatchet; To be in despair.

Who goes worse shodd then the shooe-makers wife?

The Tongue breaks bone, though it self have none.

You are never well full or fasting.

Half an acre is good land.

The gray mare is the better horse; viz. When a wife wears the breeches.

He is well seen in horseflesh, for he has lain with a Pa^sons wife.

Pride feels no cold.

As the Catt licks mustard.

Go to Law with a beggar, thou shall get a lowse.

He has sneezed thrice, turn him out of the Hospital.

Wishers and woulders, were never good Householders.

Make hay while the Sun shines; viz. Let not slipp your opportunity.

Jack would be a Gentleman, could he speak French.

Put a stool in the Sun, when one knave rises another comes; viz. To places of
preferment.

When Gabriel blows his horn, then this question will be decided.

You would leap over the style, before you come near it.

The greatest Clerks are not always the wisest men.

Children are a certain care, and an uncertain comfort.

To stumble at a straw, and leap over a block.

Whett brings no let; viz. When a mower whets his sith.

Every one as he likes quoth the good man when he kissed his Cow.

As the bell tinketh, so the fool thinks.

If the bed could tell all it knows, it would putt many to the blush.

To cast up all old scores and driblets,
Set the Hares ^oot to the Goose giblets.
When the belly is full, the bones would be at rest.

Over boots, over shoes.

A muffled Cat no good Mous-hunter.

Light gain makes a heavy purse.

He teaches ill who teaches all.

A Diurnal-maker, is the sub-amner to an Historian.

Every one can tame a shrew, but he who has her.

A fool and his money are soon parted.

He who swears when he is at play, may challenge his damnation by way of
purchase.

Soldiers in Peace, are lik^ Chimneyes in Summer.

All covet, all loose.

He will have an Oar in every man's boat.

A Shipp under sail, a man in complete armor, a Woman with a great belly, are
three of the hansomest sights; whereunto the Spaniard adds two more; viz. A
Bishop in a Pulpit, and a theif on the gallows.

Even reckoning makes long friends.

The Devil run through thee booted and spurred, with a sith on his back;
Sedgley curse in Staffordshire.

I know best where my shoe pincheth.

Change of Pasture makes fat calves,

Change of Women make lean knaves.

When he should work every finger is a thumb.

The Catt would eat fish, but she would not wett her feet.

Better is the last smile, then the first laughter.

He must have a long spoon who will eat with the Devil.

Love and Peas-pottage will make their way; viz. The one breaks the heart, the
other the belly.

When the Mare has a balld face, the Filly will have a blaze.

It Is an evil Procession, where the Devil holds the candle.

As plain as Dunstable highway.

When the Cat's away, the Mouse may play.

He that is afraid of every fart, must go far to to piss.

He loves sheeps flesh well, that wetts his bread in the wool.

I have a Goose to pluck with you; viz. I have something to complain of.

Fire and Water are good servants, but they are bad masters.

The Catt winked, when both her eyes were out.

If P. be sick, and B. be dead,
Then go thy way C. and beg thy bread.
I Will warrant you for an Egg at Easter.

The Fox preyes furthest from home.

A hungry horse makes a clean manger; viz. He eats all his Oats.

You may drive a Top over a tylde house as soon.

They stick together like burrs.

As madd as a March-hare.

The blind eats many a fly.

It Is sooner said then done.

Bolster or pillow, be it whose will for me.

Better it be done, then wish it had bin done

As good undone as do it too soon.

As soon goes the Lamb-skin to the market, as the old Ewes.

It Is a bad sack that will abide no clowting.

An ill stake stands longest.

Proffered service stinks.

Better to have then wish.

Itch and ease can no man please.

He cannot see the Wood for Trees, viz. He is a blockhead.

Snow is white, and lies in the dike,

And every man letts it ly;

Pepper is black, and has a good smack,

And every man does it buy.

Change is no robbery.

He that is angry without a cause, must be pleased without amends.

Tread on a worm, and it will turn against you.

Too much of one thing, is good for nothing.

Wit whither will thou?

A dandiprat, a hopp on my thumb, a demilance, viz. A little man.

He has got the better end of the staff.

Who medleth with all things, may go and shoe Goslings.

As merry as Cup and Can, as merry as Tinkers, as mice in malt.

A scald head's soon broken.

As just as Iermans lips; Spoken in derision.

Of little meddling comes great ease.

Who puts variance twixt man and wife, goes twixt bark and tree.

They agree like two Catts in a gutter.

As nice as a Nuns hen.

As meet as a Sow for a saddle.

A new broom sweeps clean.

Spare to speak, spare to speed.

Seldom seen soon forgotten.

A little Pott, is soon hott; Meant of little men soon choleric.

As angry as a Wasp.

As merry as a Crickett.

Every cock is proud on his own dunghill

A ragg'd colt, may make a good horse.

It Is easy to cry Ule at other men's costs.

He would fain fly, but he wants feathers.

All this wind shakes no corn.

Let every Cuckold wear his own horns;

His heart fell down to his hose.

Children and fools tell truth.

I know him as well as the beggar knows his dish.

To help a lame Dog over a style; viz. To help one at a pinch.

He is high in the instepp, viz. proved.

I had him straight in the wind; viz. smelt him out.

All is fish that comes to his nett.

Hunger drops down at his nose.

He will not part with the parings of his nails.

A gauld horse is good enough for a scabby squire.

A man may break his neck as soon as his fast in his house.

Backan quoth Mortimer to his Sow.

Nothing down, nothing up.

Ka me, ka thee, viz. one good turn asks another.

I may put my winnings in my Eye, and see never the worse.

You are none of the Hastings.

To steal a Goose, and stick a feather.

He is as rich as a new-shorn sheep.

I suck not this out of my fingers ends.

By right or wrong, by hook or crook.

As good play for naught, as work for naught.

Patience is a Flower that grows not in every garden.

To take a hair of the same dog; viz. To be drunk again the next day.

Many kinsfolks and few friends.

Every one basteth the fatt hogg, while the lean one burns; viz. He that has
shall have more.

Cheer up man, God is still where he was..

Who can sing so merry a note,
As he that cannot change a grote?
Be not too bold with your biggers, or betters.

Where nothing is, the King must loose his right.

There is no more hold to be taken of his word then of an Eel by the tail.

One tale is good till the other be told.

The first point of hawking, is hold fast.

I Will warrant you for an Egg at Easter.

Who sends a fool upon an errand, must go himself after.

Who has once the fame to be an early riser, may sleep till noon.

What is worse then ill luck?

Yes, pissing a bed.

A thinn meadow is soon mowed.

He who perishes in needless danger, is the devils martyr.

Truth has a good face, but ill clothes.

Put a Miller, a Tailor, and a Weaver in a bagg and shake them, the first who
comes out will be a thief.

A turd in your teeth, that is no false Latin.

It is ill awaking of a sleeping Lion.

It Is best fishing in troubled waters.

Hasty peeple will never make good Middwifes.

It Is good Christning of a man's own child first.

He that goes out with often loss,
At last comes home by weeping cross.
The Crow thinks her own bird fairest.

A mere Scholar, a mere Ass.

A fatt commodity has no fellow.

You give me chalk for cheese.

A young man old, makes an old man young.

Beggars should be no choosers.

Children and fools tell truth.

You have let leap a Whiting, viz. you have let slip an opportunity.

Two hands in a dish, but one in a purse.

Poor folks must be glad of Pottage.

Every one cannot have a nose like a shooing-horn.

Two to one is odd^ at football.

Gip quoth Gilbert when his Mare farted.

Every Pease will have its veaze, and a Bean fifteen

Trick for trick, and a stone in thy foot besides, quoth one pulling out a
stone out of his Mares hoof, when she bit him upon the back, and he her upon
the buttock.

He looks like a Bull that has beshit the Fair.

A woman's knee, and dogs snout are always cold.

If you will not when you may, when you will, you shall have nay.

He speaks like a Mouse in a cheese.

He that does kiss and do no more, may kiss behind, and not before.

The weakest goes still to the wall.

My Horse pisseth Whey,

My Man pisseth Ambar,

My Horse is for my Way,

My Man is for my Chamber.

Early to bed, and early to rise,
Makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise.
There runs more water by the Mill, then the Miller knows of.

You are a hot-shot indeed; A speech spoken in a slighting derision.

He follows me like a tantony pigg.

You tell your chickins before they be hatched.

You leap over the style before you come to it.

Let every sack stand upon its own bottom.

Life is sweet, though it always sweat.

Soon todd, soon with God, A Northern Proverb when a child has teeth too soon.

A thing there was, and done it was, and wise was he that hid it,

Let no man know who knows it not, Not do so no more that did it. Of one who
mistook his neighbors wife for his own.

We must creep before we can go.

Put thy wish in one fist, and shire in the the other, and try which will be
filled soonest.

Do not say go, but gaw, viz. go thy self along.

Love me little, and love me long.

I took her for a Rose, but she proved a Burr.

We fished all night, and caught a Frogg.

She thinks her farthing as good silver as another.

A little horse is soon curried.

Some are early up, yet nere the near.

Store is no sore.

In the dark all Catts are gray.

You must not look a given horse in the mouth.

It Is yet but honey moon with them, viz. The first month of the marriage.

Better to be happy then wise.

Wit is never good till it be bought.

There must be more then four legs a bed to keep a household.

Self do, self have.

Cut thy coat after thy cloth.

Unminded, unmoned.

Coll under canstick, he can play with both hands.

Better unborn then untaught.

Leave is light.

I proud, and thou proud, who shall carry out the asnes?

He will hold with the Hare, and run with the Hound.

Better to stand by one shiting, then by one chipping.

Wit is best when it is bought.

Use makes mastery.

When the belly is full, the bones would be at rest.

The burnt child dreads the fire.

She will ly as fast, as a Dog will lick a dish.

Have among you blind harpers.

The more the merrier, the fewer the better cheer.

Better come at the end of a Feast, then the beginning of a fray.

Better to be an old man's derling, then a young man's werling.

Crack me that Nutt, quoth Bumsted.

Hew not too high, lest the chipps fall into the eye.

There is difference 'twixt staring and stark madd.

When the Fox preaches, beware the Gees.

You make me scratch where it itcheth not.

There is no butter will stick to my bread.

It Is ill healing of an old sore.

Do well and have well.

What, must I tell you a tale, and find you ears?

It Is an ill wind that blows no body good.

This wind shakes no corn.

All the sart is fallen into the fire, spoken when a business miscarries.

There are more ways to the wood then one, viz. more means to compass a
business then one.

I Will get the horse or loose the saddle.

To stop two gaps with one bush, to give two hitts with one stone.

I give an inch, and you take an ell.

Would you both eat your cake, and have your cake?

You can have no more of the Fox then his skin.

Every man for himself, and God for us all.

You harp too long on this string.

Short shooting loses the game.

All covet, all loose.

You cannot see green cheese, but your teeth must water.

You would over the style ere you come at it.

Long standing, and poor offering, makes poor Priests.

It Is a sorry Ass that will not bear his own burden.

A clowdy morn may turn to a clear afternoon.

I think you have pissed on a nettle, viz. you are froward.

You have hit the nail on the head, viz. you are in the right.

As good never a whitt as never the better.

In neither barrel better herring.

Enough is as good as a feast.

Lord, take me as I Am, not as I was. A saying of the penitent.

It Is good sleeping in a whole skin.

She mends as sower ale does in summer.

Small pitchers have wide ears.

He setts cock on the hoop, viz. He is prodigal.

When he should work, each finger is a thumb. Spoken of a lazy fellow.

Better spare at the brim, then at the bottom.

He goes out of Gods blessing to the warm Sun, viz. from good to worse.

They are so great one with another, that the one cannot piss but the the other
must let a fart.

The shoe will hold with the sole.

Better to be unmannerly then troublesome.

He that is bound must obey.

You have spun a fair thread, you have brought your hogs to a fair market.
Spoken in derision when a business has sped ill.

Near is my petticoat, but nearer is my smock.

As flat as a flounder.

There is a padd in the straw.

Spik and span new, viz. From Spica an ear of Corn, and the spawn of a fresh
fish.

As sure as louse in bosom.

Nothing down, nothing up.

A good Jack makes a good Gill.

In love is no lack.

An inch breaks no square.

The hasty man never wants woe.

Wedding and hanging go by destiny.

Better give then take.

Butter is gold in the morning, silver at noon, and lead at night.

In space comes grace.

It Is ill waking of a sleepy dog.

It happens in an hour, that happens not in seven years.

He holds my nose to the grindstone.

To set up a candle before the devil.

I am made or marred.

Of sufferance comes ease.

A Lords heart, and a beggars purse.

His heart is at his heel.

A cunning knave needs no broker.

What Is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh.

I can see as far into a millstone as another.

God is no botcher.

Thy capp has more ease then thy head.

A new broom sweeps clean.

Make not two sorrows of one.

His hand is still on his halfpenny.

Good walking with horse in hand.

He has turned his tipper.

No receivers, no thieves.

Beggars may sing before thieves.

Thou beggest at the wrong door.

The black Ox never trod on thy foot, viz. Thou wast never in want.

He runs far, that never returns.

To buy a pigg in a poke.

Hungry flies bite sore.

This is to cast Perls before swine.

In at the tone ear, and out at the the other.

The further we go, the further behind.

Take heart of grace.

As mad as a March-hare.

Harp no more on that string.

He casts a sheeps eye at her.

Who is more deaf then he that will not hear?

Have but few friends, though much acquaintance.

It Is a good horse that never stumbles.

He may mend, but not grow worse.

I cannot hear on that side.

To set a good face on the matter.

That which will be a sharp thorn pricks betime^: This is meant of the
disposition of children.

One nail drives out another.

Light burden far heavy.

A tale of a tubb, Catt to her kind.

A Catt may look on a King.

Thou may be in my Paternoster, but shall never come into my Creed.

There goes the hare away.

Loosers have leave to speak.

Further then the wall we cannot go.

A man far from his good is nigh his harm.

How many miles to Cuntington Maid? If you light my Lord, and kiss my tail, you
are at the towns end.

That which is one man's meat, is another man's poison.

Who would please all, and himself too, undertakes what he cannot do.

Smooth Language grates not the tongue.

You may put in your eye what you get by it.

Children are a certain care, and uncertain comfort.

Give a thing, and take a thing, that is the Devils gold-ring.

Ask my fellow whether I am a thief.

He that is hanged in a Crabb tree, will never love Verjuyce.

Possession is eleven points of the Law.

He has not yet sowed all his wild oats.

There is no cake, but there is the like of the same make.

Swell quoth the Parson to his prick, when he lay with his Maid.

They agree like bells, they want but hanging up.

He was hanged who left his drink behind him; A thief being pursued to an
Alehouse, left suddenly his drink behind, and so was discovered and hanged.

Every one cannot have a nose like a shooing-horn.

His eyes are bigger then his belly.

To loose a Goose, and get a fether.

As scabby as a Cuckoo, as lean as a Hern.

There is no deceit in a brimmer.

Brave man at arms, but weak to Balthazar.

What, shall we starve in a Cooks-shop, and a shoulder of mutton by?

Sweet heart and bagg pudding.

Threatened folks live long.

He has a good voice to beg Bacon.

Eat less, and drink less, and buy a knife at Michael-mass.

As plain to be seen as the nose on your face.

Can you not be content to feed well, but you must cry roast-meat?

To put a good face on an ill game.

You count your chickins before they be hatched.

One does the scathe, and another has the scorn.

He has swallowed a Spider, viz. He has played the bankrupt.

Fall edge, fall blade, whatsoever happen.

He who does an old wife wedd,

Must eat a cold apple as he goes to bed; This relates to the flatulence of the
apple which causes Erection.

You will make me believe that the Moon is made of green cheese.

One pair of heels is worth two pair of hands.

Coy Mayds lead Apes in Hell.

You are as wise as the men of Gotham, who went to build a wall about the wood
to keep out the Cuckoo.

The more have the worse speed.

His horses head is swollen so bigg, that he cannot come out of the stable, viz.
He owes the hostler so much.

This Tobacco grew under the King of Spains window, and the Queen pissed upon
it.

Our Fathers which were wondrous wise,
Did wash their throats, before they washed their eyes.
With as good a will as ever I came from school.

Who is killed by a Canon-bullet was cursed in his Mothers belly.

When thou do hear a toul or knell,
Then think upon thy passing-bel.
As busy as a Hen with ten Chickins.

A Crabb of the Wood, is sauce very good, for a Crabb of the Sea;

The wood of a Crabb, is good for a Drabb that will not her Husband obey.

Paul's will not always stand.

The third of November the Duke of Vandosm was under water,
The fourth of November the Queen was delivered of a daughter,
The fifth of November we were like to have a great slaughter,
And the sixth of November was the next day after.
Who wears black, must carry a brush at his back.

John would wipe his nose if he had it.

Shitten-come-shites is the beginning of love.

His nose will abide no jest; he has taken a pett, or Pepper in the nose.

You would make me believe that an Asses ears are made of horns.

Drift is as bad as unth^ift.

Full of courtesy full of craft.

His hair grows through his hood.

He who will thrive, must rise at five;

He who has thriven, may sleep till seven;
Who will not thrive at all, may sleep till eleven.
A drunken C. has no Porter.

Debt is better then death.

Last make fast, viz. shut the door.

If every fool should weat a babble, fuel would be dear.

A fit night to steal away a fair Lady, viz. A clear Moonshine.

Every one a fool or a Physician to himself after thirty.

To buy a pigg in a poke.

God sends meat, the devil sends us Cooks.

The more she weeps the less she will piss.

Where the Turks horse does once tread the grass never grows.

A good conscience a continual Feast.

The greatest wealth is contentment with a little.

Prayer brings down the first blessing, and Praise the second.

You are he that did eat the pudding and the bagg.

Money makes the gray Mare to go.

He is my neighbor who grinds at my mill.

Stick a sprigg of Nettle in her arse and send her for a token to the devil.

A woman's advice is best at a dead lift.

Better children cry, then old men.

In every Country the Sun rises in the morning.

The brain that sowes not corn plants thistles, viz. If there be not good
thoughts, there are bad.

He who has no ill fortune is cloyd with good.

Do what thou oughtst, and come what can come.

Think of ease, but work on.

It is more painful to do nothing then something.

Good is good, but better carries it.

Good cheap is dear, for it tempts a man to buy what he needs not.

The absent party is still faulty.

A married man turns his staff into a stake, viz. He has not so much liberty.

Truth and Oil are ever above.

Prayer and provender never hinder journey.

Water, fire, and war, quickly make room.

The eye and holy things can bear no jeasting.

Thou art wise enough, if thou can keep thee warm.

As wise as Walthams calf, who went nine miles to suck a Bull, and came home as
dry as he went.

Light come light go.

Unknown, unkist.

There is God in the almery.

The devil's in the Orologe.

The best is behind.

The worst is behind.

A wonder lasts but nine days.

Rubb a gald horse on the back and he will winch.

A good beginning has a good ending.

To stumble at a straw, and leap over a block.

The shoe will hold with the sole.

I have hanged up my hatchet and escaped my self.

An old knave is no babe.

Thy face is shorn against the wool.

Thou art one of them to whom God bad ho.

The weakest goes to the walls.

I will set all at six and seven.

A scabby horse is good enough for a scabby squire.

When ale is in, wit is out.

Poor men have no souls.

Time and Tide stays for no man.

Better steal a horse then stand by and look on.

A woman has nine lives, and a cat so many.

He will say the Crow is white.

You give me a Pigg of my own Sow.

Change is no robbery.

I laughed in my sleeve.

I seek for a thing wife, that I would not find.

He has thy head under his girdle.

He shoots wide of the mark.

He is a Merchant without ware or money.

Tongue breaks bones.

Time is tickel.

He casts beyond the Moon.

'Backare quoth Mortimer to his Sow.

It Is but a flea-biting.

Wine wears no breeches.

He that medleth with all things may shoe the Gosling.

The plain fashion is best.

Who comes last, let him make fast.

He will kill a man for a mess of mustard.

Of two ills choose the least.

Forberance is no quittance.

Misreckoning is no payment.

I will take it falth in the sneaf where ever it fall.

He is Jack out of Office.

Let the Cat wink, and the Mouse runs.

Say nay and take it.

I will say naught but mum.

His tongue runs before his wit.

Own is own, and home is home.

She has spun a fair thread.

They may laugh that win.

He plays best who wins.

Let this wind blow over.

I have seen as far come as nigh.

The keys hang not at one man's girdle.

A good coming in, is all in all with a widow.

A bow long bent at last waxes weak.

A broken sleeve holds the arm back.

A Cat may look upon a King.

A carrion kite will never be a good hawk

A dog has his day.

A dog will bark ere he bite.

A fools bolt is soon shot.

A friend is not so soon gotten as lost.

A friend is never known till a man have need.

A good man can do no more harm then a sheep.

A good tale ill told in the telling is marred.

A good wife makes a good husband.

A good neighbor, a good good morrow.

A grunting horse and a groaning wife never fail their Riders.

A hard beginning has a good ending.

A hard-fought field, where no man escapes unkilld.

A hasty man never wants woe.

A honey tongue, a heart of gall.

A leg of a Lark is better then the whole body of a Kyte.

A friend in Court is worth a penny in purse.

After meat comes mustard.

As long lives a merry man as a sadd.

A long harvest of a little Corn.

A low hedge is easily leaped over.

A man is not so soon healed as hurt.

A Man, far from his good, is nigh his harm.

A man may buy Gold too dear.

A man may well bring a horse to the water, but he cannot make him drink
without he will.

A mouse in time may bite in two a Cable.

A piece of a Kid is worth two of a Cat.

A sorry dog that is not worth the whistling after.

As proud comes behind as goes before.

A proud horse that will not bear his own provender.

A pound of care will not pay an ounce of debt.

A scald head is soon broken.

A swine over-fat, is the cause of his own bane.

A traveller may ly with authority.

A wonder lasts but nine days.

After black clouds clear weather.

After a storm comes a calm.

After dinner sit a while,
After supper walk a mile.
All is not gold that glisters.

All is well that ends well.

An ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers.

An inch breaks no square.

An inch in a Miss, is as bad as an ell.

An unbidden guest knows not where to sit.

As a man is friended so the Law is ended.

As deep drinks the Goose, as the Gander.

As good to play for naught as work for naught.

As I brew, so must I drink.

Batchelors wives and Maidens children be well taught.

Be it better be it worse, go you after him that bears the purse.

Believe well, and have well,

Better be envied then pitied.

Better tooth out then always ache.

Better fed then taught.

Better half a loaf then no bread.

Better late then never.

Better leave then lack.

Better sit still then rise and fall.

Better spare at brim, then at bottom.

Better to be happy then wise.

Better to bow then break.

Better to rule, then be ruled by the rout.

Better unborn then untaught.

Better a bad excuse then none at all.

Beware of had I wist.

Black will take no other hue.

Blind men should not judge of colors.

Bought wit is best.

By wisdom peace, by peace plenty.

Burnt child dreads the fire.

Cat after kind.

Christmas come's but once a year, and when it come's there is good cheer.

Close sits my shirt, but closer my skin.

Clowdy mornings turn to fair evenings.

Cut your coat after your cloth.

Dear bought and far fett, are dainties for Ladies.

Dinners cannot be long where dainties want.

Do well and have well.

Enough is as good as a feast.

Ever drunk ever dry.

Even reckoning makes long friends.

Every man basteth the fat hog.

Every man cannot hit the nail on the head.

Every man for himself and God for us all.

Every one after his fashion.

Evil gotten goods never proves well.

Evil gotten evil spent.

Fast bind, fast find.

Fair words make fools fain.

Eair words hurt not the mouth.

Few words to the wise, suffice.

Fish is cast away that is cast into dry pools.

First come first served.

Folly it is to spurn against a prick.

Foul water as soon as fair will quench hot fire.

Foul in the cradle, fair in the saddle.

Fools with fair words are pleased.

Frost and fraud have always foul ends.

Give an inch, and you will take an ell.

God never sends mouth, but he sends meat.

God sends cold after cloth.

God sends fools fortune.

Good words cost naught.

Good riding at two Ankers men have told,

For if the one fail, the other may hold.

Good to be merry and wise.

Great boast small roast.

Great barkers are no biters.

Half warned, half armed.

Happy man, happy dole.

Have makes wast.

He can ill pipe that lacks his upper lip.

He laugheth that wins.

He may ill run that cannot go.

He must needs swim that is held up by the chin.

He runs far that never returns again.

He that comes last must make all fast.

He that comes last to the pot soonest wroth.

He that fears every grass must not piss in the meddow.

He that has an ill name is half hanged.

He that has plenty of good shall have more.

He that has but a little, he shall have less,
And he that has right naught, right naught shall possess.
He that is borne to be hanged shall never be drowned.

He that strikes with the sword shall be beaten with the scabbard.

He that will not when he may, when he would he shall have nay.

He that winketh with the one eye and looks with the other,

I will not trust him though he were my brother.

He that plays more then he sees, forfeiteth his eyes to the King.

He is proper that has proper conditions.

He that worst may must hold the candle.

He that reckons without his Host, must reckon twice.

Hold fast when you have it.

Hope well and have well.

Hot Love soon cold.

How can the Fool amble when the horse and Mare trot?

Hunger makes hard beans sweet.

Hunger pierces stone-walls.

Hunger is the best sauce.

If every one mend one, all shall be mended.

Ill gotten ill spent.

Ill putting a sword in a mad man's hand.

Ill weeds grow fast.

In Love no lack.

In trust is Treason.

It chances in an hour that happens not once in seven year.

It is a bad cloth that will take no color.

It is a foul bird that defiles his own nest.

It is an ill wind that blows no man good.

It is a good horse that never stumbleth.

It is better kiss a knave then to be troubled with him.

It is better to be a shrew then a sheep.

It is easier to descend then ascend.

It is good fishing in troubled water.

It is good to beware by other men's harms.

It is good to be merry and wise,

It is good sleeping in a whole skin.

It is good to have a hatch before the door.

It is hard halting before a cripple.

It is hard to wive and thrive both in a year.

It is hard striving against the stream.

It is an ill coming to the end of a feast and beginning of a fray.

It is ill fishing before the net.

It is ill healing of an old sore.

It is merry in Hall, when beards wagg all.

It is merry when Tinkers meet.

It is not all butter that the Cow shites.

It must needs be true what every man says.

It pricketh betimes that will be a good thorn.

It is not good to have an Oar in every man's boat.

It will not out of the flesh, that is bred in the bone.

It is a rare thing to do good.

Is every man born to be rich?

In the end, things will mend.

Knowledge is a great blessing.

Kindness will creep where it cannot go.

Leave is light.

Like will to like.

Little said soon amended.

Little do you know what I think.

Look ere you leap.

Look not too high, lest a chip fall in thine eye.

Love comes in at the window, and goes out at the door.

Love is blind.

Love me little, and love me long.

Love me, love my Dog.

Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier.

Like master, like man.

Look not a given Horse in the mouth.

Many hands make light work.

Many cannot see wood from trees.

Mock not quoth Mumford, when his wife called him Cuckold.

Many kiss the Child for the Nurses sake.

Many a little makes a mickle.

More mayds then Mawkin.

Many small make a great.

Many words will not fill a bushel.

Many men many minds.

Measure is a merry mean.

Might overcomes right.

More afraid then hurt.

Need has no Law.

Need makes the old wife trott.

Never pleasure without repentance.

No man loves his fetters, be they made of gold.

No man ought to look a given horse in the mouth.

No woman seeks another in the Oven, which has not before been there.

Nothing has no savor.

No man lives without a fault.

Nothing is impossible to a willing heart.

Nothing venture nothing have.

Of a good beginning comes a good end.

Of a ragg'd Colt comes a good Horse.

Of little meddling comes great ease.

Of sufferance comes ease.

One ill weed marreth a whole pot of pottage.

One ill word asks another.

One shrewd turn follows another.

One fool makes many fools.

One thing well done, is twice done.

Out of sight out of mind.

Over shoes over boots.

One beats the Bush, another catches the Birds.

Poor and proud, fie, fie.

Pride goes before, and shame follows after.

Pride will have a fall.

Proffered service stinketh.

Prove thy friend ere thou have need.

Patience is a Virtue.

Puff not against the wind.

Patience perforce, is medicin for a mad dog.

Reckoners without their host, must reckon twice.

Rome was not built in one day.

Reason rules all things.

Righteous things will prosper.

Saying and doing are two things.

Seldom comes the better.

Seldom seen is soon forgotten.

Self do self have.

Shame take him that shame thinks.

Shameful craving must have shameful nay.

Set a beggar a hors-back, and he will gallop.

Small pitchers have wide ears.

So many heads, so many wits.

Soft fire makes sweet malt.

Salt seasons all things.

Somewat is better then nothing.

Soon gotten, soon spent.

Soon hot, soon cold.

Soon ripe, soon rotten.

So long goes the pot to the water, that at length it comes home broken.

Spare to speak, spare to speed.

Speak fair and think what you will.

Spend and God will send.

Store is no sore.

Struggle not against the stream.

Such a father such a son.

Such beginning such end.

Such lips such lettice.

Such welcome such farewell.

Such Carpenters such chips.

Sweet meat will have sour sauce.

Take time when time comes, lest time steal away.

Take heed is a good reed.

Tales of Robin Hood are good for fools.

That one will not another will.

That the eye sees not, the heart rueth not.

That penny is well spent that saves a groat.

The beggar may sing before the thief.

The best Cart may overthrow.

The best is best cheap.

The blind lead the blind, they will stumble.

The Cat knows whose lips she licketh well enough.

The fewer the better fare.

The Fox fares well when he is cursed.

The greatest talkers are the least doers.

The greatest Clarks be not the wisest men.

The more the merrier.

The malt-man comes on monday.

The greatest Crabs be not all the best.

The highest tree has the greatest fall.

The young Cock croweth as the old hears.

The keys hang not all at one man's girdle.

The longer East, the shorter West.

The longest day has an end.

The low stake stands long.

The eye-servant is never good for his Master.

The more thy years, the nigher thy grave.

The Nightingall sings clear.

The Parish Priest forgets that ever he has been Holy Water Clark.

The Tide keeps its course.

There is difference between staring and stark blind.

There is falsehood in fellowship.

Think well of all men.

They must hunger in frost that will not work in heat.

They that are bound must obey.

They that be in Hell ween there is no other Heaven.

Threatened folks live long.

Time lost we cannot win.

Time stays for no man.

Too much of one thing is good for nothing.

Tread a worm on the tail, and she will turn again.

The penny in pocket is a good companion.

Truth shameth the Devil.

Two eyes can see more then one.

Two false knaves need no Broker.

Two Apples in my hand, and the third in my mouth.

Two heads are better then one.

Talk not too much on State Affairs.

Two may keep counsel when one is away.

What is a workman without his tools?

What the heart thinks, the tongue speaks.

When the head aketh all the body is the worse.

When the pigg is proferd hold up the poke.

When theives fall out, true folks come to their own.

VVelcome death quoth the Ratt, when the trapp fell down.

When thy neighbors house does burn be careful of thine own.

We will do any thing that we may dance all.

Will. the Piper has broke his pipes.

Who has an ill name is half hanged.

Vhere nothing is a little does ease.

Where saddles lack, better ride on a padd, then on a horses bare back.

Where naught is to wend wit, wise men flee the clogs.

Where men are well used, they will frequent there.

Where wine is not common, commons must be sent.

Without hope the heart would break.

Who lacks a stock, his gain is not worth a chipp.

Who meddleth in all things,

May shoe the Goslings.

Who so deaf as he that will not hear?

Who weddeth ere he be wise, shill die ere he thrive.

Will. will have Wilt, though Will woe winn.

VVinn gold, and wear gold.

Wit is never good till it be bought.

Who that may not as they would, must will as they may.

Ill gotten, ill spent.

Enough is as stood as a feast.

The Goose drinks as deep as the Gander.

The masters footsteps fatten the soil.

He has enough to keep the Wolf from the door; viz. Hunger.

Better are many meals then one merry one.

You may scratch where it itcheth not.

He shakes as an Aspen-leaf.

The grief of the head is the grief of griefs.

A piece of Kid is worth two of a Catt.

There Is no butter will stick on my bread.

It Is ill healing of an old sore.

He cannot see the wood for trees.

His lust is as young as his limbs are old.

As coy as Crokers mare.

It would make a horse break his halter.

A new broom sweepeth clean.

Every thing is worse for the wearing.

As cold as a key.

As hott as a Toast.

I fear neither King nor Keysar.

Better to be King of a Molehill, then a Keysars slave.

VVinn it and wear it.

A man's best fortune, or his worst's a wife.

His tongue outrunneth his wit.

To marry a young Maid to an old man, is to cover a new house with old straw.

Hab or nab, I Will have her.

Who has much pease may put the more in the pott.

As bald as a Coott.

As sure as Check.

Foolish pity mars the City.

Spare the rodd, spill the child.

After dinner sit a while,
After supper walk a mile.
A Sergeant is the Spawn of some decayed shopkeeper.

As lean as a Rake.

To play least in sight.

To walk by Owle-light, viz. To fear arresting.

A fool is fulsome.

Long and lazy, little and loud,

Fatt and fulsome, pretty and proud; in point of women.

As melancholy as a Colliers horse.

As melancholy as a gibb'd Catt.

His wit goes a wool-gathering.

Wit whither will thou?

The difference twixt the poor man and the rich, is that the one walks to
get meat for his stomach, the other to get a stomach to his meat.

Are you there with your Bears?

As welcome as water into ones shoes.

As welcome as Flowers in May.

A whipp for a fool, and a rodd for a School,

Is always in good season.

Answer,

A halter and a rope, for him that will be Pope,

Without all right and reason.

Twixt Card. Woolsey, and W. Summers.

Wife and children, anvil of charges.

She holds her tail awry.

God grant your early rising do you no harm; Spoken jeeringly.

Soldiers in peace are like Chimneys in Summer.

His eye is bigger then his belly.

A white loaf and a hard cheese never shames the Master.

A good pawn never shame^ the Master.

VVare wapps quoth Will. Day.

All Is fish that comes into his nett.

Your Geese are all Swans.

You shall have a flapp with a Fox tail.

It Is good walking with horse in hand.

As good a Maid as her Mother.

Tittle tattle, give the Goos more hay.

No smoke without fire.

Much would have more.

Many women, many words,
Many geese many turds.
As merry as forty beggars.

With as good a will as ever I came from School.

Twixt two stools the tail goes down.

Better sit still, then rise up and fall.

I Will christen my own child first.

Charity begins at home.

Long lookd for comes at last.

The more have the worse speed.

True blew will never stain.

You will not believe one bald, except you see his brain.

One cannot catch a Fly when he will.

Nine Eggs a penny and eight addle.

As fine as fippence, as neat as nine pence.

As good without as never the nere.

To break ones head and gve him a plaster.

Harm watch, harm catch.

As a man's friended so the Law's ended.

Peace and catch a mouse.

Claw me, and I Will claw thee.

I Will have none of your flat milk.

One Swallow does not make a Summer.

One Woodcock does not make a winter.

It Is Midsummer Moon with you; viz. You are madd.

My Catt has no such ears.

A pudding has two ends, but a fool has none.

A silent woman better then a double-toung'd man.

Silence the best ornament of a woman.

You must not let your mouse-trapp smell of cheese.

If your Plow be jogging, you may have meat for your horses.

You dance in a nett, and you think no body sees you.

A pint of Wine to a Vintner is but as a Pipping to a Coster-monge^.

He is sick of the Lombard fever.

News, news, the skin of your arse will make a new pair of shoes.

Kiss my arse for a week of fair weather.

You will make honey of a doggs-turd.

Take heed of lighting at both ends.

Wheresoever you see your kindred, make much of your friends.

Words are but sands, but it is money buys lands.

The peniless man may sing before the thief.

What again quoth Palmer.

He that buys the Cow must keep the Calf.

As sure as cheque; viz. Exchequer.

One good turn asks another.

There is no striving against the stream.

A man without reason, is a beast in season.

There Is no venom to that of the tongue.

It Is clear gain that remains by honest gettings.

There Is none poor, but such as God hates.

I Will take no leave of you, quoth the Baker to the Pillory.

A little house well filled, and a little wife well willed, and a little field
well tilled, are great Riches.

Wars are sweet to them who know them not.

It Is ill playing with edged tools.

A good Recorder sets all in order.

As good never a whit as never the better.

Good Ale is meat, drink and cloth.

It Is wisdom sometimes to run with the Hare, and hold with Hound.

When Fern grows redd then Milk is good with bread.

Farewell and be hanged that is twice God be with you.

Good night Nicholas, the Moon is in the Flockbedd.

Stark dead be thy comfort.

The wit of you, and the wool of an old dog, will make a piece of
lincy-woolsie.

To skin a stone for a penny, and break a knife of twelvepence.

No have to hang true men.

As right as a Rams horn.

A turd in his teeth that owes no money.

It Is ill gathering of stones where the Sea is bottomless.

The Devil and John of Cumber.

An itch is worse then a smart.

If that be so, I Will give you leave to make a whistle of my arse.

Spare not to spend, but spare to go thither.

Bragg is a good dog.

Happy is the child whose father goes to the Devil.

Every day in the week one shower of rain, and on Sunday twain; A Proverb in
many shires of England.

Usurers purses and woments plackets are never satisfied.

How good wits do jump!

A hot May makes a fatt Churchyard.

Take a Hare without a muse, and a Knave without an excuse, and hang them up.

Ready money will away.

Every thing must leak, quoth the Wren when she pi^s'd into the Sea.

A cold May and a windy, makes a full Barn, and a findy.

A pox on that quoth Gill to her hole.

There you let slip a Whiting; viz. An opportunity.

When has the Goose most feathers on her back? when the Gander is a topp of
her,

The Fox had a wound he knew not where,
He looked in his arse and found it there.
Of all the fishes in the Sea, give me a naked woman.

Fly brass, the Cobblers nose in the Tinkers arse.

That Is even a goodly dish of Birds.

Dabb quoth Dawkins, when he hit his wife in the arse with a pound of butter.

Good fish, but all the craft is in the catching.

Nippence, no pence, half a groat wanting two pench.

You cannot fare well, but you must cry roast-meat.

You are as welcome as water in ones shoes.

As lazy as he who laid down his wallet to let a fart.

He brings meat in his mouth.

April snowers bring forth May flowers.

Ianivir freez the pott by the fire.

February fill dike,

Either with black or white;

He will fill it ere he go,

If it be but with a fould of straw.

Fair and soft goes far.

Children and fools tell truth.

Pease-Pottage and tawny,

Never made good medley.

The proof of a pudding is in the eating.

A Gentleman without money, is like a Pudding without suet.

An old serving-man, a young beggar.

Who is born under a three-peny Planett, will never be worth a groat.

It Is ill gaping before an Oven.

Out of the drying pan into the fire. viz. From bad to worse.

Out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun.

Butter's good for any thing, but to stopp an Oven, or seal a Letter.

He will not give his head for the washing.

There Is difference twixt staring and stark madd.

You come a day after the Fair.

Manners make a man, quoth William of Wickham.

Any tooth good Barber.

I love it as an Ape loves a whipp.

He will shave a whetstone.

He will not loose the droppings of his nose.

Give a child while he will crave,
And a dog while his tail will wave,
You shall have a fair dog, and a foul child.

I have a Goose to pluck with you.

You measure every one by your own yard.

Women in State Affairs, are like Munkies in Glasshopps.

For one good turn another will itch,
Claw my elbow and I Will scratch your brich.
Let not the Shoemaker go beyond his Last.

You putt the saddle on the wrong horse.

All is is not gold that glisters.

There Is not a turd to choose.

That will be when the Devil is blind.

There Is reason in ros^ing of Eggs.

I Will not creep in her arse to bake in her oven.

Catt to her kind.

It Is a sorry dog that is not worth the whisling after.

You put the cart before the horse.

This is to sell a pigg in a poke.

One tale is good till the other be told.

My elbow itches, I must change my bedfellow.

It Is an evil battle where the Devil carries the colors.

They that love most are least set by.

A light Christmas, a heavy sheaf.

I would it were in again with the hedg-hogg after it; viz. A fart.

Give a man Fortune, and throw him into the Sea.

All work and no play, makes Jack a dull boy.

A red beard, and a black head,
Catch him with a good trick, and take him dead.
I have other Eggs to fry.

The King and Pope, the Lion and the Wolf; A Proverb used in King John's time,
in regard of the great exactions.

The Ratt, the Catt, and Lovell the dog,

Do rule all England under a hogg; A Proverb used in Richard the Third's time.

If you are angry, turn the buckle of your girdle behind you.

Make hay while the Sun shines.

Hinckeson-Down welly wrought,

Is worth London Town dearly bought; A Cornish Proverb, because of rich tin
Mines there.

You are like to come by weeping cross.

O Master Vier, we cannot pay you your rent, for we had no grace of God this
year;

No shipwreck upon our coast; A saying of the Cornish.

Well fare nothing once a year.

He builds Castles in the Air.

It Is good to be merry and wise.

Forewarnd, half armd.

Like to like quoth the Devil to the Collier.

The Father to the Bough, The Son to the Plow.

A Kentish Proverb meant of Gavelkind.

In Rain and Sunshine, Cuckolds go to Heaven.

He that can get a quart of milk for a penny, need not keep a Cow.

A cunning Knave needs no Broker.

Strand on the Green, thirteen Houses, fourteen Cuckolds, and never a house
between; For the father and the son lay in one house.

Who goes to Law with your Ladyship, takes a wrong Sow by the ear.

Fly brass, thy father's a Tinker.

He that wrastleth with a turd shall be beshitt fall he over or under.

What Is that? It is a layer for my Ladies arse, lick you the the other thing;
Norfolk.

Grass and hay, we are all mortal.

Where fell the Parson? betwixt the whore your mothers legs; A jeere to those
below London bridge.

He must have a long spoon that eats with the Devil.

In the dark, Joan is as good as my Lady.

Little said, and soon amended.

He is a wise child that knows his own father.

Better a clout then the arse out.

When the Sky falls we shall catch Larks.

Look high and fall into a Cow-turd.

Who follows Truth too close at the heels, she may chance dash out his teeth.

To swallow an Ox, and be choked with the tail.

The Devil shites upon a great heap; viz. Of money.

Wide quoth Walley, when he thrust his pintle into the bedstraw.

As good steal the horse as look over the hedge.

Without herb- John, no good pottage.

Let the dog worry the hogg.

Fight dog fight Bear, the Devil part them.

Every one is not born a Poet.

He that groaps in the dark, finds that which he would not.

He that kisseth his wife in the marketplace shall have many teachers.

Far fetched and dear bought is meat for Ladies.

A young Saint, an old Devil.

The old Catt slapps more then the Kittling.

Drink after an Egg, as after an Ox.

Too much money makes one madd.

When thieves fall out, true men come to their own.

A good candle-holder proves a good gamester.

It Is ill halting before a cripple.

I can look into a Mil-stone as far as another.

He is like the Devil, always in mischief.

When might overcomes right, the weakest goes to the wall.

There Is never a promise made, but its either broken or kept.

He who dies of threats, must be rung to Church by farts.

There Is more ways to the wood then one.

A fatt commodity has no fellow.

No cut to unkindness.

Once a Knave and ever a knave.

A pox on these true jests.

Ask my brother whether I am a thief.

The Lion not so fierce as he is painted.

Words cut more then swords.

It Is good to help a lame dog over the style.

Words are wind, but blows are unkind.

You will never make a Satin purse of a Sowes ear.

He is all honey, or all turd.

Every light is not the Sun.

Trimm tramm, like master like man.

You two are finger and thumb.

Youth and white paper takes any impression.

When Adam delv'd and Eve span,

Who was then a Gentleman?

Up starts a churl that gathered good,

From whence did spring his noble blood.

If you swear you will catch no fish.

If the Sky fall we shall have Larks; But who will catch them?

A great cry and little wool, quoth the Devil when he sheard the hogg.

It Is pity fair weather should do any hurt.

If it rain on St. Swithins day, expect twill do so forty days after more or
less.

Never a barrel better Herring.

Gramercy forty pence, Jack Noble's dead.

He that eats the Kings Goose, shall be choked with the feathets.

A living dog is better then a dead Lion.

Better be a Cock for a day, then a Hen for a year.

Prate is prate, but it is the Duck that lays the Eggs.

Better have it, then hear of it.

Little difference twixt a feast and a belly-ful.

He that has money in his purse cannot want a head for his shoulders.

Well horse, winter will come.

He found him napping as Moss found his mare.

Better half a loaf then no bread.

He runs far that never returns.

When you ride a young Colt, see your saddle be well girt.

Who kills a man when he is drunk, shall be hanged when he is sober.

What do you roming so up and down?

I fishd long and caught a Frogg.

There are more then four legs in a bed that belong to man and wife.

Money is welcome, though it come in a shitten clout.

Kindness will creep where it cannot go.

One may live and learn, and be hanged and forget all.

Such a reason pist my Goose.

As hungry as a Church-mouse.

I will not set at my heart what I should set at my heel.

A broken Apothecary, a new Doctor.

A hungry man, an angry man.

He looks as if he had sold all and took nothing for it.

He deserves not the sweet that will not taste of the sour.

As good as ever water wet.

One scabd sheep spoils the whole flock.

He that never drank was never athirst.

There Is a pudding in the fire, and my part lies thereinna.

He speaks like a mouse in a Cheese.

It comes by John Long the Carrier; viz. Never.

Fly, and you will catch the Swallow.

He was bredd at Hoggs-Norton.

You have fisht fair and caught a frogg.

Two hungry meals make the third a glutton.

To take a hair of the same dog; viz. To be drunk with the same drink again.

It Is not worth an Egg-shel.

By hook or crook; viz. By right or wrong.

The worst can fall, is but a denial.

There Is neither pot broke, nor water spilt; viz. No hurt done.

A liar had need of a good memory.

Tell me it snowes.

One may break his neck in his house as soon as his fast.

I Will look into his water hereafter.

It Is to cast water into the Thames.

To help a lame dog over the style.

She swelld like a Toad.

I had him in the wind, and smelt him straight.

All your Geese are Swans.

He is as free of his gift, as a poor man is of his eye.

One may get a fart from a dead horse, as soon as a farthing from him.

He is high in the instepp, he stands a tiptoe.

He is hide-bound, he is an Hungarian.

It Is lost that is unsought.

He has many knacks in his budget.

Gramercy horse.

This is to turn the Catt in the pan.

Have among you blind harpers.

Such lips such Lettice.

You see the mote in my eye, but cannot see the beam in your own.

To strain at a Gnatt and swallow a Camel.

To stumble at a straw and jump over a style.

Will you have better bread then is made of Wheat?

Best is best cheap.

Feed sparingly, and defy the Physician.

Blurt Mr. Constable; spoken in derision.

Better half a loaf then none at all.

Pride feels no cold.

Provender pricks him.

Poverty parts friends.

As an Owl in an Ivy-bush.

Farewell Frost.

He knows well enough what side his bread is butterd upon.

Oxford knifes, and London wives.

Who goes to Westminster for a Wife, to Paul's for a Man, and to Smithfield for
a Horse, may meet with a whore, a knave, and a jade.

Grayes Inn for walks, Lincolns Inn for a wall, The inner Temple for a Garden,
and the middle for a Hall.

Donmow Bacon, and Doncaster daggers.

Monmouth caps, and Lemsters wool.

Derby Ale, and London Beer.

When all is gone and nothing left,
What avails the dagger with the dudgeon heft?
So you told me; Spoken ironically.

Like a cursed Cow that gives a paile of milk, and then kicks it down.

Butter is in the Cows horns one a year.

Like Banbury Tinkers, who in stopping one hole, make two.

That which is got into the bone will never out of the flesh.

Happy is the eye, that dwells twixr the Severn and the Wye.

What Is better then the Beer that is made of Malt?

What Is sweeter then the C. hipphalt?

There is no fishing to the Sea, nor service to the King.

A Northern sawing saw;

Doll, Dick, and Davie,

Look well to thy Paternoster, and thy Avie;

And if thy soul desires to speed,
Look also well unto thy Creed;
For take it from me,
That he or she
Deserves to be
Well belted in a bridle,

Who leaves her werk
To play the Clerk,
And descant on the Bible.

Bate me an ace, quoth Bolton.

Mark Snelling anon.

Find me a true man Trent Northward, and I will find you an honest whore.

It works like soap in a Sowes tail.

Where the hedge is lowest, all men do go over; viz. The poor is oppressed.

Words are but wind,

But blows are unkind.

I must not hang all my bells upon one horse; viz. Give all away to one son.

You dream of a dry Summer.

He will live as long as old Russe of Pottern, who lived till all the world was
weary of him.

It Is an ill wind that blows no body any good.

Grease a fat Sow in the tail, she will shite in your fist.

He has the better end of the staff.

As good never a whit, as never the better.

He has thwittend a Mill-post to a thwittle.

You cannot see a green Goose, but your teeth must warer.

To come in pudding-time.

Short-shooting loses the game.

Long standing and small offering makes poor Priests.

Would you eat your cake, and have your cake?

A tale of Robin Hood.

A tale of Tom Thumb.

You may lend your arse, and shite thorough your ribbs.

Let him set up shop on Goodwins sands.

If it were not for hope the heart would break.

Must I tell you a tale, and find you ears?

There was no more water then the ship drew.

He has not a penny to bless him.

He looks like a Bull that has beshit the fair.

It Is easy to cry Ule at other men's cost.

He has a flea in his ear.

He would fain flee, but he wants feathers.

She is naught I warrant her.

When you have told your cards you will find you have gaind but little.

Who has a scold has sorrow to his sopps.

It Is the fairest flower in your garden.

He has played wily beguile with me.

Mum is Counsel; viz. Silence.

A Merchant of Eel-skins.

In three words she is at the roof of the house.

In trust is treason.

It Is folly to spurn against pricks.

Better sit still, then rise and fall.

To make havoc, and set cock on the hoop.

It Is folly to strive against the stream.

An honest plain man without pleets.

No fire witbout smoke.

Fields have eyes, and woods have ears.

Out of sight, out of mind.

I love his little finger more then thy whole body.

His tongue is like a Lambs tail, or the clack of a Mill.

You harp still on one string.

I know him as well as the begga^ knows his dish.

Catch that catch may.

The weaker goes to the pot.

As meet as a Sow to bear a saddle.

When bale is hekst, boot is next.

To pick a pockt, is the way to Newgate.

Fast bind, fast find.

The bird is flown.

Better to have, then to wish.

The loath stake stands long.

Strike while the iron is hot.

He waits for Moonshine in the water.

Who never climbd never fell.

He comes with his five Eggs a penny.

Once a whore, and ever a whore.

Provide for the worst, the best will save it self.

Who shall tie the bell about the cats neck?

Folly to spurn against the wall.

Use makes mastery.

Be as be may, is no banning.

Tossed from post to pillory.

Poverty parts fellowshipp.

The beggar is never out of his way.

God is where he was.

I have the bent of his bow.

All the fatt is in the fire.

She thinks her farthing good silver.

He shall sink in his own sin.

She is as tender as a Parsons Leman.

A man's spirits being very dull,

Are easily raised by Cunny-wooll.

The Devil danceth in a woman's placket.

A drunken man seldom catches harm.

There is no mischief in the world done,

But that a woman is always one.

Women's words are but wind.

Tell a tale to a Mare and she will let a fart.

He will ly as fast as a nagg will trott.

His provender pricks him.

Weddings are made in Heaven.

Of two evils the least is to be chosen.

As they brew, so let them bake.

As the bell tinketh, the fool thinks.

Take time when time comes.

Time and Tide will stay no man's leisure.

Four farthings and a thimble,

Will make a Tailors pocket jingle.

Whipp says the Tailor, whir says the shears,

Take a true Tailor and cut off his ears.

A Miller, a Man, a Thief and a Cuckold.

He a Man? he a Mouse.

If you will not, another will.

I Will sit on your skirts.

You beg breeches of a bare-ars'd man.

Who goes worse shod then the shooemakers wife,

And worse cladd, then the Tailors wife?

He goes as a Bear to the stake.

If Fortune favor, I may have her, for I go about her;

If Fortune fail, you may kiss her tail, and go without her.

An unbidden guest must bring his stool with him.

When drink's in the witt's out.

He is a fool, and ever shall,

That writes his name upon the wall.

Children and fools speak truth.

You gape for Gudgeons.

Cast an old shoe after him.

The rough nett is not the best catcher of Birds.

Fire in one hand, and water in the other.

He blows hot and cold.

You tell tales out of School.

He plays with a staff of two ends.

He may be got by an Apple, and lost by a Nutt.

Come up to my shoulder, and shite in my neck.

Leave these flimflams and be earnest.

To stand to his promise is to hold an Eel by the tail.

He is neither fish, nor flesh, nor good red herring.

Lovers live by love, as Larks do by Leaks.

She looks as if butter would not melt in her mouth.

A Wolf in a Lambs skin.

As quiet as a Lamb.

As innocent as a Dove.

As fierce as a Lion.

As outrageous as a Bull.

He is a fool that kisseth the Maid, when he may kiss the Mistress.

Love me little, love me long.

You shall have as much favor as at Billinsgate for a box on the ear.

Well begun is half done.

God send you more wit, and me more money.

We burn daylight.

A Goshawk scorns to beat a Bunting.

We are all in the same predicament.

He blusheth like a black dog.

He will go to Law for a straw.

The dosnell dawcock comes dropping in among the Doctors.

His tongue runs at random.

Such a reason pist my Goose.

You speak like a Pothecary, viz. Ignorantly.

He was ore shoes at first stepp.

So the butcher looked for his knife when it was in his mouth.

Rancor sticks long by the ribs.

When sorrow's asleep wake it not.

Many strokes fell down strong Oaks.

The hindmost hound may catch the hare.

The business mendeth as sour Ale in Summer.

I care as little for it, as a Goose-turd for the Thames.

Spend and be free, but make no waste.

She is as quiet as a wasp in ones nose.

A Scotch mist wetteth an Englishman to the skin.

He knows not a B. from a battledoor.

You are a right Englishman, you cannot tell when you are well.

As like him as if he had been spitt out of his mouth.

The Vicar of fools is his ghostly father.

You seek a brack where the hedge is whole.

Who commends himself, wants good neighbors.

You will make a horn as soon of an Apes tail.

Lack of looking makes Cobwebbs in a boys tail.

Go meddle with your old shoes.

To leave boys play, and go to blow point.

I am not like a dog that comes at every ones whisling.

You putt a silly soul to be a keeper for the devils good grace.

He carries all his wardrobe about him.

Strike home when the iron's hot.

It melts like butter in a Sowes arse.

He is mealy-mouthed, he will creep into your bosom.

There goes but a pair of shears betwixt them.

He spoke of a Fox, but when all came to all, it was but a Fernbrake.

Teach your Grany to groap her Goose.

I know what I do when I drink.

Catt after kind.

A Hare and a Mare go one year; viz. Nine the one, and three the other.

Too much learning makes men madd.

A clout is better then a hole.

Sweet meats will have sower sauce.

A young serving-man an old beggar.

Words cut deeper then swords.

Manners make a man, quoth William of Wickham; Who had been Bishop of
Winchester.

A liccorish tongue, a lecherous tail.

He has played the Jack with me; viz. He has not dealt well.

Saint Matthias, both leaf and grass.

David and Chad sow good and bad; viz. The first and second of March.

'Twill make you scratch, where it does not itch.

Let May come early or come late,

Yet it will make the Cow to quake.

I think thou wast born at Hoggs-Norton, where piggs play upon the Organs.

If fro^t in March, there will be some in May.

Better fedd then taught.

If dreams and wishes had been true, there had been found a Maid since the
Virgin Mary to make a Nunn of.

There Is no more pity to be taken of a woman weeping then of a Goose going
barefoot.

Some have the happ, and others stick in the gapp.

You must not go, but gawe.

Give losers leave to speak.

If I be hanged I Will choose my gallows.

A smiling boy seldom good servant.

The Devil is good to some body.

To a red man read thy read,
With a brown man break thy bread;
At a pale man draw thy knife,
From a black man keep thy wife.
Give me the Maid that went to bed to her Master to keep him warm; A Proverb in
Beverley.

Were not for hope, the heart would break.

Fiddlers fare, meat, drink, and money.

As warm as Wool.

As cold as Charity.

As comfortable as Matrimony.

Colchester Oysters, Salzey Cockles, Rye Herrings, Severn Salmon.

Let every Sack stand upon its own bottom.

Happy man be thy dole.

Even reckoning makes long friends.

At Christmas great loafs, at Easter clean souls, and at Whitsontide new
clothes.

When Christ falls in our Ladies lapp,
Then let England look for a clapp.
When the Cuckoo sits on a dry thorn,
Sell thy Cow, and sow thy Corn.
It Is a good body, she wants but a new pair of sleeves.

It Is safe riding in a good Haven.

What? must I tell you a tale, and find you ears too?

I Will go no more on your sleevelesse errands.

Nothing have nothing crave.

Kissing goes by favor.

You beg a breech of a bare-arsed man.

God help the rich, the poor can beg.

The rough nett not best to catch Birds.

He speaks as if he would creep into ones mouth.

He is neither fish, nor flesh, nor good red Herring.

For all your Kindred, make much of your Friends.

Better fedd then taught.

A young Saint, an old Devil.

Little knows the fatt Sow what the lean thinks.

Leave her on a ley, and let the Devil flitt her; A Lincolnshire Proverb
spoken of a scolding wife; viz. Tie her to a Plow-ridge, and let the Devil
remove her to a better Pasture.

Cold weather, and crafty knaves, come from the North.

A little House well filled,
A little Land well tilled,
And a little Wife well willed, make one happy.

She looks as if Butter would nor melt in her mouth.

We have fished all night and caught a Frogg.

He is not worthy to carry gutts to a Bear,

He has more in his little finger then the other has in all his whole body.

The more the merrier, the fewer the better cheer.

Penny wise and pound foolish.

A Knight of Cales, and a Gentleman of Wales,

And a Squire of the North Country;

A Yeo^an of Kent, with his yearly rent,

Will buy them together three.

Fiddlers fare, meat, drink and money.

The Nun of Sion with the Friar of Shean,

Went under the water to play the queen.

After a Collar comes a halter, quoth the Tanner of Tamworth, when Henry the
Fourth called for a collar to make him a Squire.

My friend keep money in thy purse; It Is one of Solomon's Proverbs said one;
another answering that he thought 'twas not there, if it be not, replied Kitt
Lancaster, it should have been, for it is as good as any he has.

Provide for the worst, the best will save it self.

The tapp's a thief.

He cannot say boe to a Goose.

Cobblers and Tinkers are the best Ale-drinkers.

Winters thunder and Summers flood,

Never boded Englishman good.

He has brought a noble to nine pence.

Who marries a widow has a deaths head often in his dish.

Keep thy shopp, and thy shopp will keep thee.

Let Uterpendragon do what he can,
Eden will run the same way it ran;
A River in Westmerland, which Uterpendragon thought to bring about Pendragon
Castle.

He gives twice that gives in a trice.

Good words without deeds,
Are rushes and reeds.
Little avails wealth, where there is no health.

To day a Man, to morrow none.

Good wits commonly jump.

A Man of gladness, seldom falls into madness.

Make ab or warp of the business as soon as you can; A metaphor taken from
weavers.

The Devil wipeth his arse with the poor man's pride.

I Will quickly make a shaft or a bolt of it.

Who draws his sword against his Prince, must throw away the scabbard.

The rath sower never borrows of the late.

Salisbury Plain, is seldom without a thief or twain.

The furthest way about is the nearest way home.

It Is ill spurring a free horse.

It is pity to part three things, the Lawyer and his Client, the Physician and
his Patient, and a pot of good Ale and a toast.

Stolen goods seem sweet, but take heed of after-clapps.

Crush the Cocatrice in the shell.

Use makes mastery.

His tongue is like a Lambs tail, or the clack of a Mill.

Possession is eleven points of the Law.

Diversity of humors breeds tumors.

He that bulls the Cow, must keep the Calf; A Proverb used in the Common Law of
England.

Pater Noster built Churches, and Our Father pulled them down.

It Is but one Doctors Opinion.

At latter Lammas when men shear their Calves.

I have got it ore the left shoulder.

The higher the tree the sweeter the plumb,
The better the shoe, the blacker the thumb.
If it be not true, here is my elbow.

The case is altered quoth Ploydon; A Lawyer of that name, who being asked by a
n^ighbour of his what remedy there was in Law against same hoggs that
trespassed his ground, he answered, he might have very good remedy; but the
other replying, that they were his hoggs, nay then, the case is altered said
Ploydon.

In three words she is at the roof of the house.

I love his little finger more then thy whole body.

Go teach your Grandam to sard; A Nottingham Proverb.

Ungitt, unblessed.

What, shall we starve in a Cooks shopp, and a shoulder of mutton by?

All is well when the Mistress smiles.

Coats change with Countries.

Stretching and yawning leads to bed.

Home is home, though never so homely.

Search not too curiously lest you find trouble.

He who will an old wife wedd,
Let him eat a cold apple when he goes to bed.
You will never make a good whistle on a piggs tail.

To robb Peter to pay Paul.

Let every Peddler carry his own burden.

It Is the fairest flower in your garden.

Mum is Counsel; viz. Silence.

Let every tubb stand upon his own bottom.

Speak the truth and shame the Devil.

Be it for better or for worse,
Follow him that bears the purse.
As sure as a Juglers box.

He speaks like a mouse in a cheese.

As white as the driven snow.

Who goes a borrowing goes a sorrowing.

Change is no robbery.

You teach your father how to get children.

You are come in pudding-time, viz. Seasonably.

I cry you mercy, I took you for a joint stool.

VVo robs a Scholar robs twenty men.

He bears the bell.

As learned as Doctor Doddipoll.

There I caught a knave in a purse-nett.

It smells of elbow-grease.

Let me spitt in thy mouth.

He carries two faces under one hood.

Better belly burst then good drink lost.

Sorrow is good for nothing but sin.

The second blow makes the fray.

Every one has a fool in his sleeve.

Better a fool then a knave.

As they brew, so let them bake.

He smiles like a Brewers horse.

Of two evils the least is to be chosen.

The difference twixt the poor man and the rich, is, that the one walks to
get meat for his stomach, the other to get a stomach to his meat.

Wear the inside of thy stockins outward to scare the witches.

A black shoe makes a merry heart.

He who has eaten of a Bear-pye, will always smell of the Garden.

Su^ton wall, and Kenchester Hill,

Are able to buy London were it to sell.

Wit whither will thou?

Ill gotten, ill spent.

Enough is as good as a feast.

Love me little love me long.

VVin Gold and wear it.

Who that may not as they would, must will as they may.

His cake is become dough, or his nose is put out of joint.

The Devil and John of Cumberland.

As plain as a Pike-staff.

As rough as a Tinkers budgett.

As clear as the Sun at noontide.

Two words to a bargain.

Friends must part quoth Luce, when her legs were laid open.

A fatt soil good for the Bider, bad for the Rider.

He that shiteth more then he eats is in danger of bursting.

Then we shall have it quoth Iudy when her smock was up.

Cleanly quoth Catch^ole when he wiped his arse with his elbow.

He who but once a good name getts,
May piss a bed, and say he sweats.
When all is gone and nothing left,
What avails the dagger with the dudgeon heft?
A Jaylors conscience and his fetters made both of one mettle.

Who swears when he plays at Dice,

May challenge his damnation by way of purchase.

Wife and children are bills of charges.

The wholsomest way to get a good stomach is to walk on thy own ground.

Many great men so ignorant, that they know not their own fathers.

Money is that which Art has turned up trump.

An Usurer is one that tormenteth men for their good Conditions; viz. The
Conditions of their Bonds.

A Prisoner, though a shopkeeper cannot call himself a Freeman.

An Usurer is one that puts his money to the unnatural Act of Generation,
and the Scrivener is his Bawd.

It Is better to be stung by a Nettle, then pricked by a Rose; viz. To be wronged
by a foe, then a friend.

You may as soon hold water in a Sive.

Make not thy tail broader then thy wings; viz. Keep not too many attendants.

A true friend should be like a Privy, open in time of necessity.

A cutt-purse is a sure trade, for he has ready money when his work is done.

Though the old man cannot live long, yet the young man may die quickly.

Who weddeth ere he be wise, shall die ere he thrive.

Make not thy friend too cheap to thee, nor thy self too dear to him.

Where wine is not common, commons must be sent.

Without hope the heart would break.

Barbers are Correctors of capital crimes.

A Drunkard is doubly divorced from himself, for when he is got sober, he is
scarce his own man, and being in drink, he comes short by many degrees.

The furthest way about is sometimes the nearest way home.

Haberdehoy, half a man and half a boy.

The greatest Clerks are not always the learned men.

There is no fishing to the Sea, nor service to the Kings.

As sure as Check.

A Friend in Court, is better then a penny in purse.

Plain dealing is a jewel, and he that uses it shall die a beggar.

Give a shoulder of mutton to a sick horse.

It Is ill healing of an old sore.

Well fare nothing once a year; For then he is not subject to plundring.

Seldom comes a better; Meant of wife or Governments.

As weak as Water.

As strong as Mustard.

As bitter as Gall.

Two heads are better then one.

A Cow may catch a Hare.

Talk not too much of State Affairs.

If dreams and wishes were true, there would hardly be found a Maid in all the
Nunneries of Christendom.

She is loose in the hilts; viz. A wagg-tail or light woman.

Bauds and Attorneyes like andyrons, the one holds the sticks, the other their
Clients till they consume.

Who expounds Scripture upon his own warrant, lays together hot brands with
his fingers.

A covetous man like a dog in a wheel, that roasteth meat for others.

Soldiers are good Antiquaries in keeping the old fashion, for the first bed
was the bare ground.

The Bragger pisseth more then he drinks.

Two may keep counsel when one is away.

He that has many friends eats too much salt with his meat.

Patience perforce, is a medicin for a mad horse.

Speak fair and think what you will.

He must rise betimes that will cozen the Devil.

Spend and God will send; viz. A bagg, and a wallet.

Puff not against the wind.

The wind blows where it lists.

Shame take him that shame thinks.

He looks like a Hogg in armor.

The wholesomest meat is at another man's cost.

Shameful craving must have shameful nay.

When the wind is in the East,
It is good for neither Man nor Beast.
It will not out of the flesh, that is bred in the bone.

Prove thy friend ere thou have need.

Of sufferance comes ease.

Understanding and Reason cannot conclude out of mood and figure.

The Cock crows, but the Hen goes.

Need makes the old wife trott.

He capers like a fly in a tar-box.

Never pleasure without repentance.

Youth and Age will not agree.

No man loves his fetters, be they made of gold.

A strumpet with child, like one pricked in a hedge, and cannot tell which thorn
it was.

As loud as a horn,
And as sharp as a thorn.
Of little meddling comes great ease.

Through Peace comes Plenty.

Riches like muck which stinks in a heap, But spread abroad, makes the Earth
fruitful.

A rich Citizens daughter marrying a Noble man, is like a black-pudding, the
one brings blood, the other sewitt.

A new Office, like a new Garment,

Strait at first putting on.

Love like a wife and child.

Riches are but the baggage of Fortune.

Men fear death as children do to go to the dark.

Stay a little that we may make an end the sooner.

Many can pack the cards, yet cannot play well; viz. Witty men seldom wise.

Choose thy Friends like thy Books, few, but choice.

There Is a Devil in every berry of the Grape; A Turkish Proverb.

A lie stands on one leg, but Truth upon two; A Jewish Proverb.

Shoot the second shaft, and perhaps thou may find again the first.

Who goes to School to himself, may find a fool to his master.

Change is no robbery.

Knaves and whores go by the clock.

The most essential part of a wise man is, not to open all the boxes of his
breast.

Pains is the price, that God putterh upon all things.

Let him chomp upon the bitt, and think on it.

Proverbs used at Dice, very frequent among the Western Innkeepers.
TWelve quoth Twatt when it rung noon.

Am's ace, Ambling Annes, and trotting Joan.

Size deux; Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos?

Sice cinque, When a Queen shites, she needs must stink.

Quatre tray, Katherine Gray.

Tray deux ace, Passage comes apace.

Two sixes, Black is my hole quoth Nan Bentley.

Four and five, Whom Fortune favors he will thrive.

Cinque tray, Some stood, and some ran away.

Two fives, Two thiefs besides the caster.

Six four, We shall be all merry within this hour.

Six three, Six Trees will make two pair of Gallows.

Cinque tray, Some fought, and some run away.

Foul in the craddle, clean in the saddle.

Serve God in thy Calling, it is better then praying; viz. This is meant of
foolish impertinent Zelotts.

The fairest Rose ends in a hep; viz. all beauties perish.

Honor bought is Temporal Simony.

What Is well done is ever done.

The holy man of God will be better with his bows and arrows about him; An
Irish Prverb.

VVave a wife with no fault, and take one with two; A British Proverb.

Topicall and Temporal PROVERBS, RELATING To particular Places, Seasons, and
Persons put together.
Let Uter Pendragon do what he can,
Eden will run the same way she ran;
A River in Westmerland, which Uter Pendragon thought to bring about Pendragon
Castle, but could not force nature; Naturam expellas furca licet.

Wotten under Wever, where God was never; A black squalid place near Moreland
in Staffordshire.

In April, Doves-flood, is worth a Kings good; A River in Staffordshire.

You may sip up the Severn, and swallow Mavern as soon; meant of
impossibilities.

Scarborough warning; viz. Not till danger knock at the door, as it once
happened there from the French.

Archdeacon Pratt would eat no fatt,

His wife would eat no lean;

Twixt Archdeacon Pratt, and Joan his wife,

The meat was eat up clean.

Rain, rain go to Spain,

Fair weather come again.

At Witson poke Monday, when peeple shear hogs; viz. Never.

Like Banbury Tinkers, who in stopping one hole, make two; Meant of those that
mar a business in mending it.

Barnaby bright, the longest day and shortest night.

Backare, quoth Mortimer to his sow.

There be more Mayds in the world then Malkin.

As old as Pendle Hill; In Lancashire where the witches use to be.

From Hull, Hell, and Hallifax, good Lord deliver us.

As wise as VValthams Calf, who went nine miles to suck a Bull, and came back
more thirsty then when he went.

Joan in the dark is as good as my Lady.

A man in words and not in deeds,
Is like a Garden full of weeds.
Badger-like, one leg shorter then another.

They scold like so many butter-whores, or Oyster-women at Billinsgate.

In time of prosperity friends will be plenty,
In time of adversity not one amongst twenty.
The Dutchman drinks pure wine in the morning, at noon wine without water, in
the evening as it comes from the Butt.

Nick would wipe his nose if he had one.

Some places of Kent have health and no wealth, some wealth and no health, some
health and wealth, some have neither health nor wealth.

A Burford bait; viz. When one sipps or drinks but part, they still fill his
cupp until he drinks all.

Drink off your drink and steal no Lambs.

As crafty as a Kendale Fox.

They thrive as New-Colledge Students, who are golden Scholars, silver
Batchelors, and leaden Masters.

As fierce as a Lion of Cotshwold; viz. A sheep.

Go digg at Mavorn hill; Spoken of one whose wife wears the breeches.

God sends meat and the Devil sends Cooks.

After meat comes mustard.

Hunger is the best sauce.

Cato never laughed but once, and that was when he saw an Ass eat Thistles;
being laden with gold.

Go ride upon Saint Leonards saddle; A speech used to be spoken to a barren
woman; this saddle was kept at Bromley (in Essex.)

VVebley Ale, Medley Bells, Lemster Ore; three things in Herefordshire, which
are the best in that kind.

An Ague in the Spring, is Physic for a King.

A bushel of March dust, is worth a Kings ransom.

As plain as the nose of a man's face.

Easter so longed for is gone in a day.

Winter thunder is Summers wonder.

After a storm comes a calm.

VVide quoth Bolton when his bolt flew backward.

He shoots well that hitts the mark.

Bait me an ace quoth Bolton.

Sutton wall, and Kenchister, are able to buy London were it to sell; Two
fruitful places in Herefordshire.

The Devil and John of Cumber.

Blessed be Saint Stephen, there is no fast at his Even; Because it is Christmas
night.

In Lincolnshire, the Sow shites soap, the Cow shites fire; For they wash with
the one, and make fire with the other.

Every thing has an end, and a pudding has two.

It would vex a Dog to see a pudding creep.

The vale of Holmesdale, never won, nor never shall; Holmesdale is near Rigat
in Surrey.

Little England beyond Wales; Pembrokeshire more then half inhabited by the
English.

Lemster wool, and Monmouth capps.

Find me an honest man Trent Northward, and I will find you an honest whore.

Solomon was a wise man, and Sampson was a strong man, yet neither of them
could pay money before they had it.

Lay thy hand on thy heart, and speak the truth.

Look behind thee, and consider what thou wast.

Let God be true, and all men liars.

Do as you would be done unto.

A cold May and a windy, makes a fat barn and findy.

Manners make a man, quoth William of Wickeham.

A soft fire makes sweet malt.

You may know his meaning by his gaping.

Soldiers and travelers may lie by authority.

The smoke of Charren; A Proverb relating to a wife who had beat her husband,
and he going out weeping, said it was for the smoke that his eyes watered.

He that has it and will not keep it,

He that wants it and will not seek it,

He that drinks and is not dry,

Shall want money as well as I.

If one knew how good it were

To eat a hen in Ianivere,

He would not leave one in the flock,
For to be trodden by the Cock.
Of all the Fish in the Sea, Herring is the King.

The Nun of Sion, with the Friar of Shean,

Went under water to play the Queen.

If Skiddaw wears a capp,

Scruffel wots full well of that; viz. If it be cloudy. Skiddaw, and Scruffel
are in Cumberland, and Anandell.

Skiddaw, Lauellin, and Casticand, are the highest hills in all England; All in
Cumberland.

A Sheriff had he bin, and a Contour,

Was no where such a Vavasour; An old said saw of that Family.

The jowl of a Salmon, the tail of a Tench;
The back of a Herring, the belly of a VVench.
Were I near my Castle of Bungey,
Upon the River of VVavenley,
I would ne care for the King of Cockeney.
Hugh Bigod in Henry the seconds time; these places are in Suffolk.

It shall be done when the King comes to VVogan, a little Village; viz. An
impossibility.

Cheshire chief of men, Lancashire for fair women.

Judas might have repented before he could have found a tree to have hanged
himself upon, had he betrayed Christ in Scotland.

Essex Calves, Kentish Long-tails, Yorkshire Tikes, Norfolk Bumkins.

Who fetches a wife from Dunmow,

Carries home two sides of a Sow.

Madame Parnell, crack the nut and eat the kernel; This alludes to labor.

When Gabriel blows his horn, then this question will be decided; viz. Never.

As plain as Dunstable Highway.

I Will warrant thee for an Egg at Easter.

Brave man at arms, but weak to Balthazar.

You are as wise as the men of Gotham, who went to build a wall about the Wood
to keep out the Cuckoo.

This Tohacco grew under the King of Spains window, and the Queen pissed upon it.

Paul's will not always stand.

Where the Great Turks horse once treads, the grass will never grow.

As just as Iermans lips.

Gipp quoth Gilbert when his mare farted.

Coll under candlestick, he can play with both hands.

Crack me that nutt quoth Bumsted.

Cold weather and crafty knaves come from the North.

At Christmas great loafs, at Easter clean souls, and at Whitsontide new
clothes.

Bricklesey Oysters, Selzey Cockles, Rye Herrings, Severn Sammon.

I care as little for it as a Goose-turd does for the Thames.

You are a right Englishman, you know not when you are well.

David and Chad sow good or bad.

Saint Matthias both leaf and grass.

I think she was bred at Hoggsnorton, where piggs play on the Organs.

Mock not quoth Mumford when his wife called him Cuckold.

Oxford knifes, London wives.

Dunmow bacon, Doncaster daggers.

Happy is the eye, that dwells twixt Severn and the Wye.

A Scott's mist wetteth an Englishman to the skin.

Every one cannot dwell at Rotheras; A delicate seat of the Bodmans in
Herefordshire.

He will live as long as old Russe of Pottern, who lived till all the world was
weary of him.

Grayes Inn for walks, Lincoln's Inn for a wall,

The Inner Temple for a Garden, and the Middle for a Hall.

Hinkeson Down welly wrought, is worth London town dearly bought; because of
the Tinn-mines.

Strand on the Green, thirteen houses, fourteen Cuckolds, and never a house
between; For the father and son lay in one house.

Dabb quoth Dawkins when he hitt his wife on the arse with a pound of butter.

Three ills come from the North, a cold wind, a sleazy cloth, and a crafty man.

SOME OF OLD JOHN HEIVVOODS RHIMES, Which run for the most part in PROVERBS and
ADAGES of old Fern years.
Touching Marriage and against too much haste that way.
THe best or worst thing to Man for this Life,
Is good or ill choosing his good or ill Wife;
Some things that provoke young men to wedd in haste,
Show after wedding, that haste makes waste.
When time has turned white sugar to white salt,
Then such folk see, soft fire makes sweet malt.
And that deliberation does Men assist
Before they wedd, to beware of had I wist:
And then their timely wedding does soon appear
That they were early up but nere the near;
For when their hasty heat's a little controlled
Then perceive they well, hott love's soon cold,
And when hasty wittlesse mirth is mated we will,
Good to be merry and wise, they think and feel.
Have in wedding some man thinks his own avail
When it proves at last a rod for his own tail.
In less things then weddings have shows have man's foe.
So that the hasty Man never wants woe.
And though some seem wifes for you be never so fit,
Yet let not harmfull have so far outrun your wit,
For in all or most things we wish at need
In our carriage oft-times, the more haste the less speed:
Thus by these Lessons you may learn good cheap,
In wedding, and in all things else to look ere you leap.
A young Man's Answer.
HE that will not when he may,
When he would he shall have nay.
I am proferr'd fair, then have must provoke
When the Pigg is profer'd to hold up the poke;
When the Sun shines make hay, which is to say,
Take time when time comes, lest time steal away,
And one good Lesson to this purpose I pike
From the Smiths forge, when the iron's hott strike.
The sure Seaman sees, the tide tarrieth no man,
Delay in the Lover, is death to the woman.
Time is tickle, and out of sight out of mind,
Then catch and hold while thou may, fast bind, fast find.
Blame me not to have for fear mine eye be blerde,
And thereby the fatt clean flitt from my bearde;
Where wooers hopp in and out long time may bring
Him that hoppeth best at last to have the ring,
I hopping without for a ring of Rush.
And while I at length debate, and beat the bush,
There shall stepp in other men, and catch the Burds,
Which I by long time lost in many vain wurds.
Between fear and hope, sloth may me confound,
While twixt two stools the tail goes to the ground;
By this since we see sloth must breed a stab,
I Will venture my fortune, and come hab or nab,
And I hope that none shall my fortune condole,
Come what come will, happy man, happy dole;
We know right well wedding is Destiny,
And hanging likewise, we cannot them fly.
Thus all your Proverbs inveighing against have,
Be answered with Proverbs plain, and promptly placed,
The Complaint of one who had a Shrow to his Wife.
OH, what choice may compare to the Devils life
Like his, that has chosen a Devil for his wife,
Namely, such an old Witch, such a mackabroyne
As ever more like a Hogg hangs the groyne
On her Husband, except he be her slave,
And follow all Fancies that she would have!
But the Proverb's true, there is no good accord,
Where every man would be a Lord.
Before I was wedded, and since, I made reckning
To make my wife bow at every beckning,
Batchlers boast how they will teach their wifes good,
But many a man speaks of Robin Hood
That never shot in his bow; but now I begin to gather,
Every one can rule a shrew save he who has her.
It is said of old, an old dog biteth sore,
But the old Bitch biteth sorer, and more.
But this is not all, she has another bliss,
She will lie as fast as a dog will lick a dish,
She is of truth as false as God is true.
She Is damnably jealous, for if she chance view
Me kissing my Maids alone but in sport
That takes she in earnest after Bedlams sort.
The Cow is wood, Her tongue runs on Pattens,
If it be morn we have a pair of Mattens,
If it be Evening Even-song, not Latin nor Greek,
But English, and like that as in Easter week,
She begins first with a cry a leysone
To which she ring'th a peal, or larom, such a one
As folks ring the Bees with basins, the world run'th on wheels,
But except her Maid show a fair pair of heels
She haleth her by the boyrope till her brains ache.
And bring I home a dish good cheer to make,
What Is this says she? good meat say I, for you,
God a mercy horse, a pigg of my own Sow;
And commonly if I eat with her either flesh or fish,
I have a dead man's head cast into my dish;
She is as wholesome a morsel for a man's corse
As a shoulder of mutton is for a sick horse,
The devil with his dam, has more rest in Hell,
At every one of her teeth there hangs a great bell.
A small thing amiss late I did epsy
Which to make her mend by a jest merrily
I said but this, tantivet Wife your nose dropps,
So it may fall I will eat no browesse sopps
This day, but two days after this came in ure
I had sorrow to my sopps enough be sure,
This has been her humor long and evermore
Now, it is ill healing of an old sore.
For the Proverb says many years agone,
It will nere out of the flesh that is bred in the bone.
If any Husband but I were handled thus
They would give her many a recumbentibus;
But as well as I you know the saying, I think
The more you stir a turd, the worse it will stink.
ENGLISH PROVERBS, Rendered into FRENCH, ITALIAN, and SPANISH; Proverbes Anglois
traduits en Francois, Italien, and Espagnol; Proverbi Inglesi tradotti in
Italiano, Francese, and Spagnuolo; Refranes Ingleses traduzidos en Castellano,
Frances, y Italiano.

To the knowing Reder.
Some there are who reproach the English, that in regard the Genius and Wit of a
Nation is much discernd in their common, Proverbiall Speeches, The English
Language is more barren and meager in this Particular then others: To take off
this Aspersion, and rectify the World herein, I have thought it worth the
pains to publish both in French, Italian and Spanish, these ensuing English
Proverbs, wherein the impartial Reder will find as much Salt, Significancy and
true Sense, as in the Proverbs of any other Language.

Au Lecteur des-interesse.
IL y en a qui reprochent a l'Anglois, que, veu que le Genie, and lesprit d'une
Nation se discern grandement par ses mots and dictons Proverbiaux, l'Angloise
se trouue plus maigre, and sterile en ce particulier, que les autres Langues;
pour desabuser le monde touchant cela a este le principal motif qui in'a induit
d'exposer au public ces Proverbes Anglois ensuyvans, dans lesquels le Lecteur
desinteresse trouuera autant du sell, and du sens qu' en ceux d'aucun autre
Langage quelqu' qu'il soit.

Al Lettore disinteressato.
VI sono Alcuni chi rinfacciano l'Inglese, che, poi ch' il Genio, and la
prudenza de vna Natione si scuopre assai nelli lor motti Proverbiali, La Lingua
Inglesa e piu sterile in questo particolare che l^altre; per disingannar' il
Mondo tocante questo, ho volsuto esporre alla luce publica cosi ben in
Italiano, com' in Francese, and Spagnuolo, gli Proverbi Inglesi che seguono, ne
I quali il Lettore disinteressato trouvara tanto sale, and sentimento ch' in
quelli d'alcun aliro Linguaggio.

Al Letor desinteressado.
ALgunos ay qui derogan de l' Yngles, que pues, que el Genio, y prudencia de
vna Nation se descubre mucho en sus Refranes, y dichos Proverbiales, La Ynglesa
es mas esteril en este particular che las otras Lenguas; por defenganar el
Mundo tocante esto, ha sido mi desinio de sacar a luz publica en Castellano,
como en Frances y Italiano estos Refranes Ingleses que siguen, en los quales el
Letor desenteri essado hallara tanto sal, y agudeza que en os de qualquier otro
Lenguaje.

ENGLSIH PROVERBS, Rendered into FRENCH, ITALIAN and SPANISH; Proverbes Anglois
traduits en Francois, Italien, and Espagnol; Proverbi Inglesi tradotti in
Italiano, Francese, and Spagnuolo; Proverbios Ingleses traduzidos en
Castellano, Frances, y Italiano.

THe grace of God is worth a Fair. La Grace de Dieu vaut vne Foire. La Gratia
d' Iddio val' vna Fiera. La Gracia de Dios vale una Feria.

It Is wit to pick a lock and steal a horse, but it is wisdom to let him
alone. C'est Finesse de crocheter vne serrure, and derober un cheval, mais
ce'st Sagesse de s'en abstenir. E sotilezza di grimaldellar' vna serratura, and
furar' un cavallo, ma, e saviezza de lasciarli la. Sotileza es, de ganzuar vna
cerradura, and hurtar un cauallo, mas labiduria es de dexarlo estar.

The Kings cheese goes half away in parings. Le formage du Roy va plus de la
moitie en rongneures. Il formaggio del Re va via piu della meta in cortez^e. El
queso del Rey va mas de la mitad en cortezas. i. enter les officiales.

Happy is he who knows his follies in his youth. Il est bien heureux qui
conoit ses folies en sa ieunesse. Egli e felice assaji chi conosce le sue
pazzie nella gioventu. Dichoso es, quien conoce sus locuras en la mocedad.

Speak the truth and shame the Devil. Dis la verite, and affronteras le Diable.
Dir' il vero, and affronterai il Diavolo. Digas la verdad, y afrenteras el
Demonio.

He who could know what would be dear, need be a Merchant but once in a year.
Si on scauroit ce quese rencheretoit, n'auroit besoin d'estre Marchand plus
d'vne fois l'annee. Se si potesse saper' che si'ncarirebbe, bastarebbe esser'
Mercante vna quel volta nell' anno. Si se supiera che cosa se encare ceria
bastaria ser Mercader vna vez en el an^o.

Keep your broth to cool your pottage. Gardez l'halaine pour refroidir vostre
souppe. Guardate il fiato per raffreddar vostra minestra. Guardad el aliento
por enfriar vuestro caldo.

Who waits for deadmens shoes, may go a goodwhile barefoot. Qui attend les
souliers des morts, pourra aller bien long temps les pieds nuds. Chi aspetta le
scarpe de Morti potra andar assaj tempo scalzo. Quien aguarda los capatos de
muertos podra yr harto tiempo descalzo.

Love thy neighbor, yet pull not down thy hedge. Aim ton voisin ce neantmoins
n'abbas pas ton hay. Amar' il tuo vicino ma non disfaila tua siep^. Ama tu
vezino, pero no deshagas tu seto.

A Nurse spoils a good huswife. Nourice gaste bonne mesnagere. Balia guasta
buona messara. Ser Ama, echa a perder buena Casera.

Give a thief rope enough and he will hang himself. Donnez cord assez au
larron, and il se pendra soy mesme. Dar' corda assaj al ladrone, and egli
impiccara se stesso. Dad harta soga al ladron, y ahorcarsi ha si mesmo.

Here will be a good fire anon quoth the Fox when he pist in the snow. Il y
aura icy bon feu tantost, dit le Renard, quand il pissoit dans la neige. Ci
sara buon fuoco subito disse il Volpe quando pisciava ^olla neve. Aura luego
buena lumbre, dixo el raposo, quando meava en la nieve.

Who pays last, pays but once. Qui pay le dernier ne pay qu^vne fois. Chi
paga l' vltimo no paga ch'vna volta. Quien paga postrero, no paga mas d'vna vez.

Lend thy Horse for a long journey, thou may have him again with his skinn.
Priest ton cheval pour un long voyage, il t'en retournera avec sa peau. Prestar
il tuo cavallo per un viaggio lungo, and egli ne ritornera colla pelle. Dexa tu
cavalgadura por un largo viaie, and ti sara buelto con su pelleio.

To loose a sheep for a halfperth of tar; Laisser perdre un brebis pour deux
liards de goderon. Lasciar' perderse vna pecora per un carlino de pegola. Echar
a perder vna oveia por media placa de pega.

A thousand pounds, and a bottle of hay, will be one thing at Doomsday; Monceau
do'r, and boteau du foin ce seront la mesme chose au dernier jour. Massa d'oro
and mucchio di fieno sara la medema cosa al D^ de Guidicio. Massa de oro, and
almiar de heno, la mesma cosa sera en el dia de Juyzio.

The faire^ the Hostess the ^ouler the reckning. Belle hotesse laid escot,
Bella hostiera brutto conto. Linda huespeda, escote feo.

Fancy may bolt Bran, and think it Flour. La fantasy pourra bluter du son,
and l'imaginer farine. La Fantasia potra buratar crusca, and pensarla farina.
La Fantasia podra cernir afrecho, y imaginarlo harina.

One pair of heels is worth two pair of hands. Un pair de iambes valent deux
couples de bras. Un paro de garetti vale due pari de mani. Un par de piernas
vale dos pares de manos.

Here is talk of the Turk and the Pope, but it is my next neighbor that does
me the hurt. On parle tant du Turc, and du Pape, mais cest mon voisin qui me
fait le dommage. Parlano assai del Turco, and del Papa, ma il mio vicino e quel
chi mi fa il danno. Hablan tanto del Turco, y del Papa, mas, mi vezino es el
qui me haze el dan^o.

Sorrow is good for nothing but for sin. Tristezza non val mente si no per il
peccato. Tristezza no vale nada sino por el pecado.

The man of God is better by having his bows and arrows about him. L'homme de
Dieu est plus asseure ayant son arc and fleches sur le dos. L'huomo d'Iddio e
piu sicuro havendo son arco, and freccie adosso. El hombre de dios es mas
seguro teniendo su arco y flechas acuestas.

Who goes worse shod then the shooemakers wife? Qui e plus mal chausse que la
femme du Cordonnier? Chi anda peggio calzato che la moglie del scarpaio? Quien
va peor calcado que la muger del capatero?

Half an Acre is good land. Demi arpent est bonne terre. Mezza biolca e buona
terra, Media yugada buena tierra es.

Pride feels no cold. La superbe ne sent pas le froid, Superbia no sent
freddo. La soberuia no siente frio.

Go to Law with a beggar, thou may catch a louse; Playdes contre un gueux,
and gaigneras un poulx. Chi litiga con pitoco guadagnera un pidecchio. Qui
pleytea con mendigo medrara un pio^o.

Make hay while the Sun shines. Recuelle ton foin pendant que le soleil luit.
Raccoglier' il tuo fieno fin a tanto ch'il Sol splendesca. Recoje tu heno
mientras que el Sol luziere.

Put a stool in the Sun, when one knave rises another comes. Mets un scabeau
au soleil quand un fol s'y leve, un autre vient. Metter' un scanno nel sole
quando un pazzo se leva un altro viene. Metas vna sedia en el Sol, quandovn
loco se levanta otro viene.

As the bell tinketh, so the fool thinks. Comme la cloche son, le fol
song. Come la campana suona il pazzo pensa. Como la campana suena el loco
piensa.

When Gabriel blows his horn this business will be decided. Quand Gabriel
son sa trompette c'est affair s 'uvider^. Quando Gabriel suonara la sua
tromba questo si determinara. Quando Gabriel suena su trompeta este negocio
quedara resuelto.

Children are a certain care, and uncertain comfort. Les enfans sont soins
certains, and comforts incertains. Franciulli sogni certi comforti incerti.
Hijos cuydados ciertos, consuelos; inciertos.

To stumble at a straw and leap over a block. Broncher contre vne paille, and
sauter par dessus un poutre. Inciam parse contra vna paglia, and balzar' di
sopra un tronco. Tropiecar contra vna paia, y saltar sobre un trunco.

Every one as he likes, quoth the good man when he kissed his Cow. Chacun selon
son humeur, dit le bon homme quand il baisoit sa vache; Ogniuno al suo gusto
disse il buon huomo quando baciava la sua vacca. Cada uno a su gusto, dixo el
buen hombre besando su vaca.

Soldiers in peace are like chimneyes in Summer. Soldats en temps de la paix
comme chimence es en l'este. Soldati in tempo di pace come camini da fuoco
nella state. Soldados en tiempo pazes, como chimeneas en el estio.

If the bed would tell all it knows it would put many to the blush. Si le lict
disoit tout ce qu'il scait il feroit plusieurs rougir. Se il letto direbbe
tutto che sa farebbe molti rosseggiarsi. Se la cama descubriesse todo lo que
sabe haria muchos berme jecerse.

When the belly is full the bones would be at rest. Quand la pance est pleine,
les os voudroyent bien se repo^er. Quando la pancia e piena gli ossi vogliono
riposo. Quando la barriga esta llena los huessos dessean reposo.

He teaches ill, who teaches all. Enseigne mal, qui enseigne tout. Mal'
insegna, chi insegna tutto. Ensen^a mal qui ensen^a todo.

Every one can tame a shrew; but he who has her. Chacun scait dompter vn'
harenguere fors celuy qui l'a pour femme. Ogniuno sa domar' vna ciarlona
eccetto coluy chi la tiene. Cada vno sabe domar vna parlera fuera el quien la
tiene por muger.

A Fool and his money are soon parted. Le fol, and son argent sont bien tossed
separez. Il pazzo, and 'l suo danaro son^ presto separati. El bouo, y su dinero
son luego apartados.

He will have an Oar in every ones Boat. Il veut auoir vogue en chasque b^teau.
Vuol auer' ramo in ogni barca. Quiere aver ramo en cada barca.

Change of Pasture makes fat Calves. Changement de pasture fait gras veaux.
Cambiamento de pascolo fa vi^elli grassi. Remuda de pasturage haze bizerros
gordos.

Better is the last smile, then the first laughter. Le dernier soubris vaut
plus que le premier ris. L'ultimo ghigno val' piu che la primiera risata. El
postrer sonriso mejor es qua la primera riza.

When he should work, all his fingers are thumbs. Quand il devroit trauailler
chasque doit devient pouce. Quando deve travagliare, ogni dito diventa pollice.
Quando ha de trabajar cada dedo es pulgar.

He must have a long spoon who will eat with the devil. Qui veut manger avec le
diable il luy faut avoir le cueiller long. Chi vuol' mangiar col diavolo
bisogna hauer'cucciaio lungo. Quien quiere comer con el diablo es menester que
tenga cuchara larga.

As good eat the flesh as the broth where the devil was boyld in. Autant vaut
il manger la Chair, que le potage auquel le diable fut bouilli. L'istessa cosa
e de mangiar' la carne chi'l brodo nell' qua'l il diauolo fu bollito. Tanto
vale comer la carne que el caldo do el diablo fue bullido.

A hungry horse makes a clean manger. Cheval affame rend la creche net^e. Il
cauallo affamato fa presepio netto. Cauallo hambriento haze el pesebre limpio.

Time and Tide stays for no man. Le temps, and la maree n'attend person. Il
tempo and 'l flusso non aspetano. El tiempo, y la marea no esperano al Rey.

As good steal a horse as stand by and look on. Autant vaut il derober un
cheval que d'estre aupres du larron. Tanto val' furar' un cavallo que mirar'
appresso. Tanto vale hur^ar un cavallo que de mirar cerquita.

Fire and water are good servants, but ill masters. Le feu, and l'eau sont bons
serviteurs, mauvais Maistres. Il fuoco, and l'acqua buoni servitori cattiui
patroni. El fuego, y el agua son buenos servidores, ruynes Amos.

A man's best Fortune, or his worst's a Wife. Le plus gran malheur, ou bonheur
de l'homme est vne femme. La maggior' seventura, o ventura de l' huomo e la
moglie. La mayor dicha, o defdicha del hombre es la muger.

Who has pease enough may put the more in the pott. Qui a quan^ite de cices
pourr', en mettre assez au pot. Chi ha abondanza de ceci potra metter' assaj
nella pentola. Qui a garvancos en abundancia, podra echar harto en la olla.

The penny is good that saves a groat. Le denier est bon qui sauve un soubs. Il
dinaro e buono che salvara un soldo. La placa es buena que salva un real.

Try thy friend before thou have need of him. Esprouvez ^on amy devant que tu
en a^ezbesoin. Provar' l'amico inanzi che ne hai bisognio. Prueva el amigo
antes que ayas menester.

I beat the bush, and another catches the Hare. Cest moy qui bat le buisson
and un autre prend la lievre. Io batto lo spino and altro piglia la leppro. Jo
bate el espinal y otro coge el lebru no.

For all your kindred make much of your friends. Quoy que vous ayez assez de
Parens cherissez vos amiss. Anchor che voj habbiate assaj parenti carezzate g^i
amici. Aunque tengays ha^tos parientes, acariciad los amigos.

You dance in a nett, and you think no body sees you. Tu dances dans un file
and penses que person ne te voit. Tu ballai en vna rete, and pensai che
nissuno te vede. Tu baylas en vna red y piensas que nadie te vee.

Silence the best Ornament of a woman. Silence le plus bell' Ornement de femme.
Silentio il maggior' Ornamento de donna. Silentio il mayor Ornamiento de muger.

To break ones head and give him a plaster. Casser la test, and puis luy
donner un emplastre, Romper' la testa, and poi dar' un implastra. Quebrantar la
cabeca, y despues darvn emplastro.

You will not believe one bald, unless you see his brain. Vous ne croirez pas
qu'on est chauve, sans voir son cerveau. Non crederete che sia caluo, senza
veder' il cervello. No creyreis que sea caluo sin ver el seso.

I Will Christen my own child first. Je feray baptizer mon enfant premier. Faro
battizar' il mio fanciullo primiero. Hare bautizar mi nin^o primero.

With as good a will as ever I came from from school. Avec tant de volonte que
ie revins de l'ecole: Di tanta buona voglia comm' io ritornai dalla scuola. De
tan buena voluntad que yo bolui de la escuela.

Your Geese are all Swans. Toutes vos oyes son cignes. Tutte l'ocche vostre
sono Cigni. Todas sus gansas son cisnes.

Wife and children are bills of charges. Femme and enfans sont billets de
despens. Moglie and fanciulli sono polizze de spese. Muger y nin^os son cedulas
de ga^tos.

As welcome as flowers in May. Aussy bien venu comme fleurs en May. Tanto ben
venuto come fiori in Maggio. Tan bien venido como Flores en Mayo.

Kindness will creep where it cannot go. Amor grimpera ou il ne peut marcher.
Amor' strascinara dove non puo caminare. Amor trepara do no puede caminar.

Money is welcome though it come in a shitten clowtt. Argent est bien venu
anchor qu'il so^t dans un torch^^. Danaro e ben venuto anchor che sia dentr^ ^e
un cocone. Bien venga el dinero aunque sea en un trapo.

We fishd all night and catchd a frogg. Nous avons peche tout le long de la
nuit, and pris vne granouille. Pescammo tutta la notte, and habbiamo colto un
ranocchio. Hemos pescado toda la noche and cogido vna rana.

Who kills a man being drunk shall be hanged for him when he is sober. Qui tue
un homme estant yure, sera pendu quand il est sobre. Chi amazza un huomo
essendo ubbriaco sara impiccato essendo sobrio. Quien mata un hombre siendo
borracho, sara ahorcado sobrio.

When you ride a young Colt, see your saddle be well girt. Quand vous montez un
poulain ayez bonnes sangles. Quando montate un poledro bisogna aver buone
cingie. Quando subes a un potro es menester aver buenas cinchas.

He runs far that never returns. Il court bien loin qui ne revient jamais.
Corre ben lontano chi may ritorna. Corre bien lexo; qui nunca buelue.

Better half a loaf then none at all. Demi pain vaut mieux que rien du tout.
Piu val' mezzo pan que niente. Mas vale medio pan que no nada.

It Is pity fair weather should do any hurt. C'est pity que le beau temps face
dommage. E pieta chi'l bel^' tempo faccia alcun danno. Es lastima que el lindo
tiempo haga algun dan^o.

When Adam delv'd and Eve span, who was then a Gentleman? Quand Adam beschoit,
and Eve filbiot qui estoit noble alors? Quando Adamo vangava, and Eva filava
chi ^era nobile alhora? Quando Adam acadoneuva, y Eva hilava, qui en era
entonces hidalgo?

He is all honey, or all turd. Il est tout miel ou merde. Egli e tutto miele o
merda. El es todo miel o mierda.

Ask my brother whether I am a thief. Demandes a mon friar si ie suislarron.
Domandar' al mio fratello se io son' ladro. Preguntad a mi hermano se yo soy
ladron.

Once a knave and ever a knave. Vne fois coquin, and tousiours Coquin. Vna
volta forfante, and sempre forfante. Vna vez vellaco y siempre vellaco.

There Is more ways to the wood then one. Il y a plus d'un sentier au bois. C'e
piu d'uno sentiero al bosco. Mas ay de vna senda al bosque.

When thiefs fall out true men may come by their goods. Quand les latrons
s'entrebattent les honestes gens parviendront a leur biens. Quando gli ladri
contrastant' gli huomini da been riscuo ranno lor beni. Quando ladrones
contienden los hombres de bien cobraran su hazienda.

The Devil shites upon the Usurers heaps. Le Diable Foire sur les monceaux de
l' Usurier. Il Diavolo caga sopra le bisacce del' Usuraio. El Diablo caga sobre
las talegas del Logrero.

To swallow an Ox and be choakd with the tail. Aualler un baeuf, and
s'estrangler avec la queue. Tranguggiar' un bue, and strangolarsi con la coda.
Tragar un buey y ahogarse con el rabo.

In the dark Joan is as good as my Lady. De nuit Jeanne est aussy belle que
Madame. Di notte Francisca e cosi bella che Madonna; De noche Juana es tan
linda que mi sen^ora.

He is a wise Child that knows his own Father. C'est un sage Enfant qui conoit
son vray pere. Saggio fanciullo e, chi conosce il suo vero padre. Es prudente
nin^o qui conoce su verdadero padre.

Who follows Truth too close at the heels, she may dash out his teeth. Qui
talonne la verite trop pres pourra auoir les dents brizez. Chi segue la verita
troppo presso potra hauer' gli denti spezzati. Qui sigue la verdad muy cerquita
podra aver los dientes quebrados.

He that can get a quart of milk for a penny needs not keep a Cow. Qui peut
auoir un lot du lait pour deux liards, n'a pas besoin de garder vne vache. Chi
puo'l hauer' pentola di latte per un ^oldo non ha bisogna di guardar' vna
vacca. Quien puede comprar un puchero de leche por un quartil, no ha menester
guardar una vaca.

Butter is good for any thing but to stop an Oven. Le beurre est bon pour
toutes chooses, fors que de boucher un four. Burro e buono per qualunche cosa ma
non da serrar' un forno. Manteca es buena por qualquier cosa, mas, no por
atapar un horno.

Children and fools tell truth. Enfans, and fols disent la verite. Fanciulli,
and pazzi dicono lu verita. Locos y nin^os, dizen la verdad.

The Goose has more feathers upon her back when the Gander tr^ads her. L'oison
a les plus plumes sur les dos quand le iars la coure. L'occa ha le piu piume
adosso quando lochone la copre. Lazgan a a las mas plumas acuestas quando el
ganco la cubre.

Foolish pity marrs the City. Folle pity gaste la Citte. Pazza pieta guasta
la Citta. Loca piedad echa a perder la ciudad.

He cannot see the wood for trees. Il ne peut voir le bois pour arbres. Non puo
veder' il hosco per gli arbori. No puede ver el bosque por los arboles.

He that is bound must obey. Qui est oblige doit obeir. Chi e obligato-bisogna
ubbedire. Quien queda obligado deve obedecer.

A Catt has nine lives and a Woman ten. Les chats ont neuf vies, and les
Femmes en ont dix. Gatti hanno nove vite, le done dieci. Gatos tienen nuene
vidas, las mugeres diez.

You give me a Pigg of my own Sow. Vous me donnez un cochon de ma truye. Voi mi
date^porchetto della mia troia. Das me lechon de mi propia puerca.

Change is no robbery. Change n'est pas vol. Cambio non e furto. Trueque no es
robo.

A fools bolt is soon shot. La fleche du fol est bien tossed decoche. La freccia
del pazzo e ben tosto scoccata. La flecha del loco luego se deballesta.

Better spare at the brim then at the bottom. Il vaut mi^ux epargne^ au board
qu' au fond. Meglio e sparagnar' all' orlo ch' al fondo. Mas vale ahorrar al
board que no al hondo.

After dinner sit a while, after supper walk a mile. Apres disner repose un
peu, apres souper proumene vne mill. Doppo pranso riposar' un poco, doppo cena
passeggiar' un miglio. Despues de aya^tar reposad un poco, despues de cenar
passead vna milla.

A fat Sow causes her own bane. Truye grass cause sa ruin. Troia grassa
cagiona la sua ruina. Puerca gorda acarrea su propia ruina.

A man may bring a horse to the water, but he cannot make him drink. On pourr^
bien amener un cheval a la riuere, mais il ne le peut forcer a boire. Ben si
puo menar' un cavallo a l'acqua, ma non si puo forzarli a bear. Bien se puede
traer un cavallo al rio pero nadie podra forcarle a bever.

A leg of a Lark is better then the whole body of a Kite. Vne cuisse
d'alouette vaut plus que le corpse entier d'un ecoufle. Coscia di lodola val'
piu che tutto il corpo del nibbio. Muslo de la calandria vale mas que todo el
cuerpo de un milan.

It must needs be true what every one says. Il faut bien qu'il soit vray ce
que tout le monde dit. Bisogna che sia vero quel che tutti dicono. Es menester
que sea verdadero lo que cada vno dize.

It is good sleeping in a whole skin. Il fait bon dormir en vne peau entiere.
Fa ben' dormir' in vna pelle intiera. Haze bien dormir en un pelleio entero.

It Is an ill wind that blows no body good. Ce'st un mauvais ven qui n'est bon
pour quelqun. E cattivo vento chi non e buono per qualchuno. Es ruyn viento que
no es beueno por algunos.

He that strikes with the sword may be beaten with the scabbard. Celui qui
frappe avec la lame pourra estre batu avec le fourreau. Chi ferisce colla lama
potra esser buttuto col fodero. Quien da con la hoja podra serbatido con la
vayna.

Every man for himself and God for us all. Chacun pour soy mesme, and Dieu pour
tous. Ogni uno per si medesimo, and Dio per tutti. Cada vno por si mesmo, y
Dios por todos.

To quench a fire, one may use foul water as well as fresh. Pour esteindre un
embrasement on pourra se servir d'eau sale comme de la net. Per stringuera'
un incendio potrete adoperar' aqua sporc come la netta. Por apagar un incendio
podras valerte de aqua suzia como de la limpia.

Frost and fraud end foul. La glace, and la fraud finissent salement. Il
ghiaccio, and la frode finiscono bruttamente. El yelo y el engan^o fenecen
suziamente.

He that has got an il name is half hanged. Qui a mauvais renom est demi pendu.
Chi ha mala fama, e mezzo impiccato. Quien tiene mala fama esta medio ahorcado.

The shoe will hold with the sole. Le Soulier tiendra avec la semelle. La
scarpa terra con la sola. El capato tiendra con la suela.

Butter is gold in the morning, silver at noon, and lead at night. Le beurre
est or au matin, argent a midy, and plomb au soir. Butiro la mattina oro,
argento a mezzo di, and piombo la sera. Manteca la man^ana es oro, plata a
medio dia, plomo la a tarde.

A new broom sweeps clean. Un balay neuf netroye bien. Vna scopa nuova spazza
been. Un barradero nuevo escoba bien*

Good going a foot with horse in hand. Il fait bon marchera pied amenant un
cheval par la bride. Fa buono andar' a piede me nando un cavallo. Haze bien yr
a pie teniendo un cavallo por la brida.

His eyes are bigger then his belly. Ses yeux sont plus grands que la pance.
Gli occhi sono maggiori della pancia. Los ojos son mayores que la barriga.

You may put inn your eye what you get by it. Vous pourrez mettre dans l'oeil
ce que vous en gaignerez. Potrete metter' nel occhio cio che ne guadg narete.
Podreys meter en el ojo lo que medrareys.

He who would please all and himself too, undertakes to do more then he can do.
Celuy qui voudroit complaire a tous and a soymesme aussy, entreprend ce quil ne
peut pas fair. Chi votrebbe compiacer' tutti and si medesimo traprende troppo.
Qui querria agradar todos, y a si mesmo, emprende demasiado.

He may mend but not grow worse. Il pourra meilleurer non pas empirer. Potra
miglio rarsi, non impeggiorare. Podra meiorar, empeorarse no.

Grease a fatt Sow in the arse she will shite in your fist. Oignez vne truie
grass a cul' elle foirera en ton poing. Vnger' vna troia grassa en il culo,
ella cagara nel tuo pugno. Vnta vna puerca gorda an el culo, y cagara en tu
pun^o.

If it were not for hope the heart would break. S'il n'estoit pour l'esperance
le coeur se casseroit. Si no saria per speranza il cuore si spezzarebbe. No
fuera por esperanca el coracon se quesi brantaria.

Like a cursed Cow that gives a pail of milk and then kickes it down. Comme
meschante vache qui done un lot du lait, and puis le renverse la seille. Come
vna vacca trista, chi da un bigonzo di latte, and poi lo ravescia. Como vna
vaca traviessa qui da vna serrada de leche, y despues la trastor na.

Usurers purses and women's plackets are never satisfied. Les bourses des
Avaricieux, and les brayettes de Femmes sont insatiables. Le borse del avaro,
and le braghette de done son, insatiabli. Las bolsas del avariento, y las
braguetas de mugeres son insaciables.

Happy is the Child whose father goes to the Devil. Le fills est heureux du quel
le pere va au Diable. Venturoso e il figlio il padre dell quale va all Inferno.
Dichoso es el hijo cuyo padre va al Infierno.

I Will take no leave of you, quoth the Baker to the pillory. Je ne prendray pas
conge de vous dit le boulenger au pilori. No te dico Adio disse ill Fornaio
alla berlina. No me despido de ti dixo el panadero a la argolla del rollo.

Maidens above twenty lead Apes in hell. Pucelles de vint ans conduisent les
singes en enfer. Vergini de venti anni menano scimie nell' Inferno. Virgins de
veynte an^os traen ximias en el Infierno.

A thing well done is twice done. Chose bien faite, and faite deux fois. Cosa
ben fatta, e fatta due volte. Cosa bien hecha esta hecha dos vezes.

A smiling boy seldom good servant. Garcon qui trop sourit n'est gueres bon
valet. Ragazzo chi toppo se ne ride rade volte buon servitore. Muchacho qui
sonreye mucho pocas vezes buen servidor.

When thy neighbors house is on fire by its light thou may see thine own
danger. Quand la maison de ton voisin s'embrase, par la lumiere du feu pou^ras
voir ton danger. Quando la casa vicina s'abbruccia per il lume del fuoco potrai
veder' il tuo pericolo. Quando la casa de tu vezino abrasa por la lumbre del
fuego veras tu peligro.

A ragged Colt may make a good Horse. Poulain haillonneux fait bon cheval.
Poledro strazzoso fa buon cavallo. Potro handrajoso haze buen cavallo.

A cutt-purse the surest trade, for he has ready money when his work is done.
Coupeur de bourses a un mestier asseure car il a argent comprant pour son o
uure. Taglia borse ha buon mestiero perch egli ha donaro canta^o per il suo
travaglio. Cortabolsas a buen officio porque tiene dinero contado por su
trabajo.

A young Saint, an old Devil. Jeune Saint, vieux Diable. Giovane Santo, Diavolo
vecchio. Santon moco, Diablo viejo.

Two heads are better then one. Deux testes valent plus qu'vne. Due test
vagliano piu che vna sola. Dos cabecas valen mas que no vna.

Good cheap is dear, for it tempts one to buy what he needs not. Bon merche
devient par fois cher, car il nous fait acheter ce que nous n'en avons pas
besoin. Buon mercato diuenta qualche volta caro, per che ce ne fa comprar'
quello che non fa di bosogno. Barato a vezes viene a ser caro, porche haze
mercar lo que no es menester.

Riches are the baggage of Fortune. Les richesses ne sont autre chose que le
bagage de la Fortune. Ricchezze sono le bagaglie della Fortuna. Las riquezas
son bagajes de la Fortuna.

I love his little finger more then thy whole body. I'ayme son petit doit plus
que tout ton corpse. Voglio piu il suo nigolo che tutt' il tuo corpo. Quiero mas
su menique que todo tu cuerpo.

Prayers bring down the first blessing, and Praises the second. La priere fait
descendre la premiere benediction, la louange la second. Le preghiere fan'
discender' la primiera benedictione, le lodi la secunda. La plegaria haze de
cender la primera benedicion, loor la segunda.

Better children should cry then old men. Il vaut mieux que les Enfans
pleurent, que les viellards. E meglio che gli fanciulli pianghino che gli
vecchi. Meior es que los nin^os lloren que los viejos.

A bushel of March-dust is worth a Kings ransom. Un muy de la poussiere de
Mars vaut la rancon d'vn Roy. Un meggio di polve di Marzo val' i l rescato d^
un Re. Un cahyz del polvo de Marco vale el rescate de un Rey.

Better to be a shrew then a sheep. Il vaut mieux estre harengere que brebis.
Piu val' esser' ciarlona que pecora. Mas vale ser parlera que oveja.

You count your chickens before they be hatchd. Vous contes vos poulsins devant
qu'ils soyent couvez. Voj contate gli pulcini inanzi che siano covati. Cuentas
tus pollos antes que esten cobijados.

You will make me believe that the Moon is made of green cheese. Vous me ferez
a croire que la Lune soit fait de fourmage nouveua. Mi farete ereder' che la
Luna sia fatta di formaggio nuovo. Me haras creer que la Luna sea hecha de
queso nuevo.

John would wipe his nose if he had one. Jean voudroit bien essuyer son nez sil
en avoit un. Giovanni vorrebbe ben asciugar' ill naso se ne havesse vno. Juan
querria limpiar el naso si lo tuciesse.

You will make me believe that an Asses ears are made of horns. Vous me ferez a
croire que les oreilles de l'Asne soyent faites de corn. Mi farete ^reder' che
l'orecchie de l'Asino siano fat di corno. Me hareys creer que las orejas del
Asno sean de cuerno.

Rubb a galld horse on the back, and he will winch. Frottez un Cheval galleux
audos il* regimbera. Fregar' un Cavallo rognoso, and dara calci. Fregad un
Cavallo samoso, y tirara coces.

Truth and Oil swim always above. La verite and l'huyle nagent tousiours par
dessus. La Verita and L'oglio natano sempre di sopra. La verdad y el azeyte
nadan siempre encima.

In every Country the Sun rises still in the morning. En chasque pais le
soleil se leve au matin. In ogni paese Sol il si leva la mattina. En cada
tierra el sol se le vanta la man^ana.

He is my neighbor that grinds in my mill. Celvy est mon voisin qui mout en
mon moulin. Colui e mio vicino chi macina nel mio molino. Mi vezino es qui
machuca en mi molino.

God sends us meat, the Devil sends us cooks. Dieu nous envoye le viande, and
le Diable le cuisinier. Iddio ci da le viuande, and il Diavolo il cuoco. Dios
nos embia la comida, y el Diablo el cozinero.

Every one is a Fool or a Physician after thirty. Chacun est fol, ou Medicin
apres trent' ans. Ogni uno e pazzo o Medico doppo trent' anni. Cada uno es
necio o Medico despues de treynta an^os.

As soon comes a Lamb-skin to the market, as the Ewes. Aussy tossed vient la peau
de l'agneau au March que celle de brebis. Si tosto viene la pelle dell'
agnello al Mercato che quella della pecora. Tan amenudo viene el pellejo dell
cordero a la placa que de la oueja.

You give me chalk for cheese. Vous me donnez de la craye pour fourmage. Mi
date creta per casio. Me days greda por queso.

The Crow thinks her own birds the fairest. Le Corbeau pense que ses poussins
sont les plus beaux. Il corvo pensa ch'i suoi pulcini sieno gli piu belli. El
cuervo piensa que sus pollos son los mas lindos.

Putt a Miller, a Tailor, and a Weaver into one bagg and shake them, the first
that comes out will be a thief. Mets un tailleur, un tisserand, and un munier
dans un sac, and secovez les bien, and le premier qui en sortira sera larron.
Metter' un sartor', un tessitore, and un molinaio dentro de un sacco, and il
primiero chi vscira sara ^e ladro. Eches en un saco un sastre, un Texedor, and
un molniero, y el primero qui saldra sera in ladron.

A little pott soon hott. Un petit pot est bien tossed echauffe. Picciola pentola
si scalda presto. Olla chiquita se calienta luego.

This wind shakes no Corn. Ce vent ne vanne point le ble. Questo vento no
cribra la biada. Este air no avielda el grano.

Who intermeddleth twixt Man and Wife goes twixt the bark and the Tree. Qui
s'entremesle des affairs de Mary and Femme, se met enter l'arbre and lescorce.
Chi si tramette fra marito and moglie anda fra la scorza, and l'albero. Quien
se mescla enter marido y muger, se pone enter el arbol y la corteza.

He has got the better end of the staff. Il a gaigne le meilleur bout du
baston. Ha colto il miglior' capo del bastone. Ha cogido el mejor cabo del palo.

It is better to have then to wish. Il vaut mieux iouir que suhaiter. E meglio
posseder che desiare. Meior es posseer que dessear.

All is fish that comes into his nett. Tout est poisson qui enter en son file.
Tutto e pesce che viene nella sua rete. Todo es piece que en sured en^tra.

Patience is a Flower that grows not in every Garden. La Patience n'est pas
fleur qui croit en chasque iardin. Patienza non e fiore chi cresce in ogni
giardino. Paciencia no es flor que crece en cada huerto.

As good play for nothing, as work for nothing. Il vaut autant iouer pour neant
que travailler pour neant. Tanto val' giocar' per niente che travagliar' per
niente. Tanto vale juegar por nada que trabaiar por no nada.

I suck not this out of my fingers ends. Ie ne succe cecy de bouts de mes
doits. Non succhio questo delle punte de miei diti. Non chupo esto de los cabos
de mis dedos.

A young man old makes the old man young. Jeune vieil rend le vieil jeune.
Giovane vecchio fa vecchio giovane. Moco vieio haze el vieio moco.

Two hands in a dish, but one in the pocket. Deux mains dans le plat, and vn'
en la bourse. Due mani nel piatto, and vna nella tasca. Dos manos en el plato y
una en la bolsa.

A woman's knee and a dogs snowt are always cold. Le genovil de Femme, and le
museau du chien sont ^ousiours froids. Il ginocchio di donna and grugno di can
sempre freddi. La rodillade muger, y nariz de perro siempre frios.

He that does kiss and do no more, may kiss behind and not before. Qui
baise, and ne fait plus, qu'il baisir par dereiere. Chi bacia, and non fa
altro, bascij di dietro. Qui besa, y no haze mas que bese atras.

There Is more water passes by the Mill then the Miller knows. Il y a plus
d'eau qui coule au moulin, que le meunier ne scait. Ci'e piu d'acqua chi passa
per il molino ch'il mugnaio sa. Mas agua corre por el molino que el molinero
sabe.

Putt thy wish in one fist, and shite in the other, and try which will be
filled soonest. Mets ton souhait en un poing, and foires dans l'autre, and
veras qui se remplira plus tossed. Metter' tuo desio in un pugno and cagar' nell'
altro, and vedrai chi sara piu tosto pieno. Metas tu desseo en un pun^o y
cagues en el otro, y veras el qual sera mas presto lleno.

The furthest way about is sometimes the nearest way home. Le chemin d'alentour
est quelques fois le plus court. Il camino intorno e qualche volta il piu
corto. El camino enderredor es a vezes el mas corto.

When the good Wife drinks to the Husband all is well in the House. Quand la
bonne Femme fait brindis a son Mary tout va bien en la maison. Quando la moglie
fa brindesi al marito tutta va ben' in casa. Quand la muger haze brindis a su
marido todo va bien en casa.

I took her for a Rose, but she proved a Burr. Je la pris pour vne Rose mais
elle devint chardon. Io la pigliai per Rosa, ma diventiva cardone. To mavala
por Rosa, mas devenia cardo.

I think she has pist on a nettle. Je pense qu'elle a piss sur vn' ortie.
Pensoch'habbia pisci-^to sopra vna ortica. Pienso que ha meado sobre vna
hortiga.

Go teach your Granham to grope a Goose. Va ten enseigner la vielle a foviller
un oison. Andar' insegnare la vecchia a palpar' vn' occa. Andad ensen^ar la
vieja a palpar vna gansa.

Go teach your father to get children. Va t'en enseigner ton pere a fair
d'Enfans. Andar' insegnar' il tuo padre a far' figliuoli. Andad ensen^ar tu
padre a hazer hijos.

A young servingman an old beggar. Jeune valet vieil caymand. Servo giovane
pitoco vecchio. Criado moco, mendigo viejo.

Honor bought, temporal simony. Honneur achete est simonie Temporelle. Honor
comprato e simonia Temporale. Honor comprado es simonia seglar.

Serve God in thy calling, it is better then praying. Sers Dieu en ton mestier,
il vaut plus que la priere. Servir, Iddio nella tua Vacatione e meglio que
preghiere. Servid a dios en tu officio, es mejor que plegarias.

The Crow thinks her own birds the fairest. Le Corbeau pense que ses poussin^
sont les plus beaux. Il corvo pensa ch'i suoi pulcini sieno gli piu belli. El
cuervo piensa que sus pollos son los mas lindos.

You give me chalk for cheese. Vous me donnez de la craye pour fourmage. Mi
date creta per casio. Me days greda por queso.

The bragger, pisseth more then he drinks. Le venturpisse plus qu'il ne boit.
Il vantatore piscia piu che beve. El vana glorioso mea mas que no beve.

A great noise and little woll, quoth the Devil when he sheard the Hogg.
Beaucoup de bruit, and peu de lain, dit le Diable quand il ecorchoir le
pourceau. Assaj strepito and poca lana disse il Diavolo quando scorticava il
Porco. Mucho ruydo y poca lana, dixo el Diablo desollando el puerco.

Many can pack the cards, yet cannot play well. Il y a qui scavent mesler les
carts finement, toutes fois ils ne sont pas bons ioueurs. Vi sono chi sanno
mescolar' le carte, tutta via non sanno gio car' been. Ay qui saben mesclar los
naypes, toda via no saben iuegar bien.

Stay a little and we shall make an end the sooner. Attendez un peu, and nous
finirons plus tossed. Aspettate un poco and finiremo piu presto. Esperad un poco,
y acabaremos mas presto.

There Is a Devil in every berry of the Grape. Ill y a un Diable dans chasque
grappe de la vigne. Ci'e un Diavolo in ogni grappo della vigna. Ay un Diablo en
cadarazimo de la vua.

A lie stands on one leg, and truth on two. Le mensonge se soustient sur vne
jambe, la verite sur deux. La buggia si sostiene sopra vna gamba, la verita
sopra due. La mentira se apoya sobre vna pierna, la verdad sobre dos.

Choose thy Friends like thy Books, few but choice. Choisissez vos amiss comme
vos livers, peu, mais qu'ils sovent d'elite. Sciolier' gli amici come gli
Libri, pochi, ma che sieno scelti. Escoge tus amigos como tus Libros, pocos,
pero que sean buenos.

Who is more deaf then he that will not hear? Qui est plus sourd que celuy qui
ne veut ecouter? Chi e piu sordo che coluy chi non vuol ascoltare? Quien es mas
tiniente de oydo que qui no quire escuchar'.

Men fear death as children do to go in the dark. Les hommes craignent la mort
comme les Enfans les tenebres. Gli huomini temono la morte come gli fanciulli
la scurita. Los hombres temen la muerte como los nin^os las tinieblas.

Soon ripe soon rotten. Tossed meur, tossed pourri. Tosto maturo* tosto marcio.
Presto maduro, presto podrido.

Riches like muck which stinks in a heap, but scatterd fructifieth the earth.
Les richesses sont comme la fiente qui put en un monceau, mais estant esparse
fructify la terre. Richezze come letame chi puzza in un mucchio, ma essendo
sparso fructifica la Terra. Riquezas como el estiercol que hiede amontanado,
pero esparcido fructifica la Tierra.

No man loves fetters though made of Gold. Person n'ayme les ceps quoy qu'ils
soyent d'or. Nissuno ama ceppi anchor' che sieno d'oro. Nadie quiere grillos
aunque fean de oro.

Who has too many friends eats too much salt. Qui a plusieurs amiss mange trop
du sell. Chi a molti amici mangia troppo sale. Quien tiene muchos amigos come
sal en demasia.

He must rise betimes who will cosen the Devil. Il faut qu'il se leve de bon
matin qui veut tromper le Diable. Bisogna che si levi di buon hora chi v^ol'
ingannar' il Diavolo. Es menester que se levante temprano quien quiere engan^ar
el demonio.

A covetous man like a dog in a wheel that roasts meat for others. L'Usurier
come chien dans vne ro^e qui rostit la viande pout autruy. L'avaro come can in
ruota chi arrostisce vivande per altri. El pelon como perro en rueda qui assa
carne por otros.

Who Expounds holy Scripture upon his own warrant, puts hot brands together
with his fingers. Qui interpret l'ecriture saint selon sa seule fantasy
ramasse charbons ardens avec se doits. Chi interpreta la santa sorittura
secondo la sua fantasiae coglie carboni ardenti colli diti. Quien expone las
sagradas escrituras segun su fantasia propia coge carbones ardientes con sus
dedos.

Bawds, and Attorneys like Andyrons, the one holds the wood, the other their
Clyents till they consume. Les Advocats and maquereaux sont comme les chenets
les vns supportent le bois, and les autres leurs Clients jusqu'a tant quils
soient consumez. Gli Auvocati, and gli Ruffiani son, comme alari del fuoco, chi
apoggiano il legno fin a tanto che se ne consumi. Abogados y Alcahueres son
como los morillos los vnos apoyan la madera, y los otros sus pleyteantes hasta
consumirse.

Give a shoulder of mutton to a dead horse. C'est donner vn' epaule du mouton a
un cheval malade. Questo e dar vna spalla di castrato a un cavallo ammalato.
Esto es dar vna espalda de carnero a un cavallo enfiermo.

No fool to the old fool. Il n'y a tell fol, comme le vieil fol. Non cie' pazzo
simile al pazzo vecchio. No ay necio como el necio viejo.

One fool makes many. Un fol en fait plusieurs. Un sciocco ne fa molti altri.
Un loco haze muchos mas.

A Scotts mist wetteth an Englishman to the skin. Les brovillars d'escosse
mouilleront l'Anglois jusques a la peau. Vna nebbia escosseza bagnara l'
Inglese fin alla pelle. Niebla escoceza mojara un Yngles hasta pellejo.

Where the Turks horse once treads, the grass will never grow again. Ou le
cheval du Turc plant le pied, l'herbe n'y recroitra iamais. Dove il cavallo
Turchesco pianta il suo piede l'herba ne recrescera may. Donde el cavallo del
Turco planta su pie las yervas no recreceran iamas.

Cold weather and crafty knaves come from the North. Le froid, and les fins
compagnons viennent du nort. Il fredao, and gli furbi vengono dal norte. El
frio, y los finos compan^eros vienen del norte.

You are a right Englishman, you cannot tell when you are well. Vous estes vray
Anglois, vous ne scavez pas quand vous estes a vostre ayse. Egli e vero Inglese
non sa quando sta been. Es verdadero Yngles no sabe' quando esta bueno.

One should take no more pity on a woman weeping, then to see a Goose go
barefoot. On ne devroit plus resentir les lar^es de femme que de voir un oison
aller pieds nuds. Non si doverebbe ri^entire piu le lagrine de done che de
veder vn' ooca andar scalza. No fe devria resentir mas las lagrimas de mugeres,
que de voit vna ganca yr descalca.

A Christmas great loafs, at Easter clean souls, at Whitsontide new clothes. A
Noel grans pains, a Pasque ames nets, a Penteco^e nouveaux habits. Al Natale
pani grandi, a pascua Anime net, a Pentecosta vestiti nuovi. A la Navidad
panes grandes, a las Pascuas almas limpias, a Pente costa vestidos nuevos.

Solomon was a wiseman, and Sampson was a strong man, yet neither of them could
pay money till they had it. Solomon estoit sage and Samson estoit bien fort,
toutes fois ni l'un ni l'autre pouvoient payer argent devant que de l'avoir.
Solomone era saggio and Sansone era forte, tutta via ne l'vno ne l'altro poteva
pagar' danaro inanzich d'haverlo. Solomon era savio, and Sanson era fuerte,
toda via ni el vno ni el otro podia pagar dinero antes de tenerlo.

That which is bred in the bone will never out of the flesh. Ce qu'est nourri
dans les o^ ne sortira jamais horse de la chair. Quel ch'e nodrito dentro gli
ossi, non uscira may della carne. Lo que se cria dentro los hues^o^ no saldra
iamas de la carne.

Patience perforce is medicine for a mad horse. Patience par force est remede
pour un cheval enrage. Patienza per forza e rimedio per un cavallo arrabiato.
Paciencia por fuerca es remedio por un cavallo arrabiado.

A friend in Court is better then a penny in purs^, Amy'en la Cour vaut plus
qu'argent en bourse. Amico nella corte val piu que bezzi in borsa. Amigo en
palacio vale mas que dinero en bolsa.

Make not thy tail broader then thy wings. Ne fais pas ton train plus large que
tes ailes. Non far' la tua codapiu la^ga que le ale. No hagas tu rabo mas largo
que las alas.

He that has the name to be an early riser may sleep till noon. Celuy qui a la
renommee d'estre matineux pourra dormi^ jusques a midy. Colui chi ha la fama d'
esser mattinoso potra dormir' fin' a mezzo giorno. Qui a la La fama de ser
Madrugador podra dormir hasta medio dia.

A young Maid married to an old Man is like a new house thatchd with old straw.
Jeune fille mariee a un vieillard est come maison novelle couverte de chaulme
vieil. Vna giovanne maritata con un vicchione e come casa nuova coperta di
strame vecchio. Moca casada con anciano es como casa nueva cubierta de rastrojo
viejo.

Find me an honest man Trent Northward, and I will find you an honest whore.
Donnez moy un honest' homme de la la Trente, and je vous donneray vne honest
garce. Dammi un huomo da been di la la Trenta and jo vj daro vna puttana
honesta. De me un hombre de bien de la la Trenta y yo te' dare vna puta honrada.

The stander by sees often more then the Gamester. Le spectateur voit souuentes
fois plus que le Joueur. Il spettatore vede ben souvente piu ch' il Giocatore.
El que esta mirando cerca, vee muchas vezes mas que el Jugador.

Who has married a widow, has a deaths head put often in his dish. Qui
espouse vne vefue aura un rest de mort iettee quelques fois en son plat. Chi
sposa vna vedoa, hauera vna testa di morto gettato ben souvente nell' suo
piatto. Quien casa con biuda tendra cabeca de muerto echada a vezes en su plato.

The colerique man never wants woe. L' homme colerique n'est iamais sans envy.
L'huomo Colerico may senza fastidio. El hombre Enojadizo nunca sin enfado.

Penny in pocket is a good companion. Argent en poche bon compagnon. Danaro in
tasca e buon compagno. El Dinero es buen compan^ero.

Youth and white p^pertake any Impression. La Ieunesse, and papier blanc
prennent toutes impressions. Charta bianca, and la gioventu pigliano qualunque
impressione. Papel blanco y mocedad toman qualquier impression.

Barbers are Correctors of Capital crimes. Barbiers son correcteurs de crimes
capitaux. Barbieri sono corregitori de crimi capitali. Los Barveros son
corregidores de crimines capitales.

The second blow makes the fray. Le second mornifle fait la noise. Il colpo
secondo fa la rissa. El bofeton segundo haze la renzilla.

A Client twixt his Attorney and Counselor, is like a Goose twixt two Foxes.
Le playdeur enter le procureur, and L'Auocat est comme un oison enter deux
renards. Il piatitore fra'l procuratore, and l'auocato e come vn'occa fra due
Volpi. El pleytista enter el procurador, y el Abogado es, como un ganso enter
dos raposos.

Where the hedge is low every one gets over. Ou la hay est basse tout le monde
pass. Dove la siepe e bassa ogniuno passa. Adonde el seto es baxo todos passan.

A child may have too much of his mothers blessing. L'enfant pourra auoir trop
de la benediction de sa mere. Il fanciullo potra hauer' troppo della
benedictione nella madre. El nin^o podra aver la benedicion de su madre en
demasia.

He is now too old to learn his Accidence. Il est trop vieil pour apprender sa
Grammarie. E troppo vecchio per imparar' la sua Grammatica. Es muy viejo por
aprender su Gramatica.

With all thy knowledge know thy self. Avec tout ton scavoir cognois toy mesme.
Con tutta la tua scienza conoscer' te stesso. Con todo tu saber conoce ti mesmo.

The Devil makes his Christmas pies of Clerks fingers and Lawyers toungs. Le
Diable fait son paste ne noel de doits de Notaires, and de Langues d'Avocats.
Il Diavolo fa pasticcij per il Natale de dita de Notari a delle Lingue d'
Avocati. El Diablo haze pasteles por la Navidad de dedos de Notarios, y de
Lenguas de Abogados.

They agree like harp and harrow. Ils s'entr'acordent comme la harp, and la
harce. Traccordono come l'harpa and l'arpico. Conciertan como la harpa, y el
rastrillo.

Eggs and a nutt, one may buy of a slutt. Des oeufs, and des noix on pourra
acheter n'une saloppe. Vuovi and noci se potranno comprar' d'vna sporca. Huevos
y nuezes se pueden comprar de una puerca.

To forget a wrong is the greatest revenge. Oublier un injure est la plus
grande revenche. Dimenticar' un torto e la maggor' vendetia. Oluidar un agravio
es la mayor venganca.

Maidens ought to be seen and not heard. Filles devroient estre veues plus qu'
ouyes. Figlie debbono esser' vedute piu ch'vdite. Mocas deven ser vistas mas
que oydas.

G^d never sends mouths but he sends them meat. Dieu ne done bouches sans
dequoy manger. Iddio non da bocche senza di che mangiare. Dios no da bocas sin
de que comer.

Wives must be had, be they good or bad. Il faut avoir femmes soyent else
mauvaises ou bonnes. Bisogna hauer' Moglie sieno buone o cattive. Es menester
mugeres sean buenas o malas.

Weigh not what thou give, but what is given thee. Ne peses pas ce que tu
donnes, mais ce que t'est done. Non pesar' cio che tu daj, ma cio che t'e
dato. No peses lo que das, mas lo te es dado.

To stopp two gapps with one bush. Boucher deux trous d'un buisson. Serrar' due
buchi con un sterpo. Atapar dos horados con un espinal.

The Devil wipes his arse with the poor man's pride. Le Diable essuye le cul
avec l'orgueil du gueux. Il Diavolo asciuga il culo con la superbia del pouero.
El Diablo limpia el culo con la so veruia del pobre.

Look not too high, least something fall into thy eye. Ne mires trop haut, de
peur que quelque chose ne te tomb en l'oeil. Non mirar' troppo alto, de paura
che qualch^ cosa non ti caschi nell' occhio. No mires muy alto de miedo que
algo no te cayga en el ojo.

Vox Populi vox dicta Dei est, Proverbia quid sunt?
Sunt Populi voces, Ergo Divina loquuntur.
PROVERBES d'elite, et DICTONS Communs, ou vieux QUOLIBETS, En la Langue
FRANCOISE, Don't plusieurs vont GLOSSEZ.

Some choice PROVERBS, and common SAYINGS, or old ADAGES in the FRENCH TOVNG:
With Glosses upon diverse of them; Which PROVERBS are Partly MORAL, relating to
good life; Partly PHYSICAL, relating to Diet, and Health: Partly TOPICAL,
relating to particular places; Partly TEMPORAL, relating to seasons; Partly
IRONICAL, relating to Drollery, and Mirth, etc.


AU TRES-ACCOMPLI SEIGNEUR, LE SEIGNEUR WILLOUGHBY, D' ERSBY, etc.

PERSONNAGE, QUI, OVTRE LES TRES-EXCELLENTES PERFECTIONS DON'T IL EST DOVE,
S'EST RENDU GRAN MAITRE DE LA LANGUE FRANCOISE.

LETTRE COMPOSEE DE PROVERBES, Lesquels vont tres-tous, Enchainez a un sens
congru, envoyee a un Gentilhomme, Qui se mettoit en train pour aller en France.
MONSIEUR,
APres avoir jette l'oeil sur la present qui va toute farcie de Proverbes, de
Dictons, and de vieux Quolibets, don't quelques uns s'usoient du temps de hauts
bonnets quand on muchoit a la manche, vous direz, par avanture, que l'Autheur
ayt quelques tintouins, ou grillons en la test, qu'il ait de sable Mouvant, ou
du Mercure, ou plustost un quartier de la Lune en la cervelle; Mais Vous qui
avez la cabo che si bien timbree en passerez un autre jugement.

Le bruit court, que vous avez dessein de voyager, and tracasser le monde pour
quelque temps, and particulierement de fair, le tour de France, sil vous estes
fiche en tell resolution permettez un vieux routier qui est madre es affairs
du monde ayant piss en beaucoup de neiges, qui scait bien son entregent, and
plus que son pain manger, de vous donner un mot d' advis touchant le Genie de
ce pays la.

Quant a la conversation, vous y trouverez des gens y gens; vous y trouverez
autant de testes, tant de sentimens, and plus souvent en France qu'en aucun'
autre Region, ou la plus part du peuple semble avoir mange de la biche blanch,
ou de la vache enragee, Estant impatient de la paix, jusques a tant qu'l ait
repare les bresches de la guerre; Mais par tout, il faut prendre les gens comm'
else sont, and le temps comm' il est: sur tout observez ces trois
monosyllabes, Oy, voy, and tais si tu veux vivre en paix, car il vaut mieux
glisser du pied que de la Langue, and l'Espagnol vous dit, En bouche serree les
mouches n'y entrent pas: soubs ce bovillant Climat vous rencontrerez quelques
fois de bravaches, de mangeurs de charrettes ferrees, qui faisans le Roland
portent mine de tuer six de la chandelle, and saize avec le chandelier; Ils
vous feront accroire que vesses sont Lanternes, and les estoilles papillotes;
soyez modere, and discret parmi tells gens, mais nullement craintif, and
lasche, poutce que celuy qui se fait brebis le loup le mange; Et le peuple
voysin qui boutonne le pourpoint du bas en haut, vous dira, que les Francois a
la premiere bouffee sont plus qu'hommes, mais depuis moins que femmes.

Vous y trouverez mesmement de Je unes desbauches qui mangent leur bled en
herb, and bruslent la chandelle par les doux bouts, Il vont coiffez en
l'opinion qu'on ne scauroit estre gentilhomme parfa't sans avoir fait cinq
voyages en Suerie, car en France (comme part tout) a la quenoville le plus f^rt
s'agenouille; Gardez vous bien des camerades de ceste calibie la; Ce neantmoins
traitez les debonnairement, car, Belles paroles n'ecorchent par la Langue; En
tout cas ne prestez pas vostre argent, car au prester cousin-germain, au render
fills de put^in, Et vous y trouverez aussy (comm'en en Angleterre) Qui priest a
l'amy perd au double: Ce neantmoius, A celuy qui a son paste au four, on pourra
bien prester un torteau.

Outre tout cecy, donnez vous guard de ne vous opiniatrer, and debatre des
matieres de la Religion, mais laissez le Monstier on il est, pource que par
trop debattre la verite se perd, especiallemen es points de la Foy, vous y
trouverex assez de gens de ceste farine la, qui seront prompts a sauter du coq
a l'asne, and de treille en paisleux.

Le pays, and le peuple de France sont addonnez a toutes sorts de
gaillardises, and divertissements, vous y trouverez des bons garcons, des
Rogiers de bons temps, qui seront joyeux comm' Esmerillons, ou rats en paille;
Vous ne deuriez pas estre d'un humeur si Saturnin, and sombre, que de ne
jovializer par fois avec eux, and avec le bon vin chasser le soin and le
chagrin, Car un' once d'alegresse vaut cens livres de melancholy; s'il vous y
avez envy d'entretenir un Laquay, vous y en trouverez a foison; mais gardez
bien de n'en choisir un qui est trop officieux, car c'est un valet du diable
qui faict plus qu'on ne luy command.

Quant a la sante, and les reiglements pour la diete, qui est la chose plus
principale, car qui n'a sante n'a rien, vous ferez bien en ce pays vineux de
marier la cave, and le puits; Toutes fois a morceau restif esperon de bon vin;
mais le vin bois comme Roy, and l'eau comme taureau; Au matin bois le vin
blanc, le rouge an soir; pour fair bon sang, observez aussy, qu'apres la poire
ou le vin, ou le prestre; on dit que Boeuf sale faict trouver le vin sans
chandelle; Ajoustez a cecy que si tu veux engraisser promptement, mangez avec
faim, bois a loisir, and lentement.

Touchant les mangeailles, salade bien lavee, and salee, peu de vinaigre, and
bien huylee; Des potirons, ou champignons les meilleurs ne valent rien; Faim
faict dinner, and passetemps souper; veau mal cuit, and poulets cruds font
cimitieres bossus; Cest un repas pour le Diable ou il n'y a point du sell;
Fourmage est sain qui vient de chiche main; Des femmes, and des poissons le
milieu est le meilleur; Un oeuf n'est rien, deux font gran bien, trois c'est
assez, quatre c'est tort, cinq c'est la mort.

Touchant l exercice, pourmenez jusques a tant que la sang paroisse es jove's,
non pas que la sueur roupie de nez; Au matin verse les monts, au soir verse les
fonts; Quant au sommeil, and le repos de nuit, il y a un 'observation, que six
heures dort l'ecolier, sept le Voyager, huit le Vigneron, and neuf, en demand
le Poltron; Il y a un'autre Regle, que lever a six, manger a dix, souper a six,
coucher a dix, font viure l'homme dix fois dix: En conclusion, tenez chauds les
pieds, and la test, au demeurant vivez en best.

Touchant les occurrences du temps il y en a diverses sorts de relations, mais
ce'st ne'st pas Evangile, tout ce qu'on dit par la ville, mais on le dit pour
chose asseuree que Dunquerque (ce nid d'Harpyes) commence a Parlementer, and
vous scavez, que la Ville qui parle, and la fille qu' escoute, l'un se rend,
l'autre se fou -- A bon entendeur, ne faut que demi mot.

Ce'st tout ce que j'ay a vous dire pour le present, pource is veux couper le
fill de mon dire, car courts folies sont les meilleures, en vous priant de ne
prendre pas en mauvaise part ces drolleries, pource qu'elles procedent de
vostre ancien serviteur, and amy, and il n'y a meilleur miroir que le vieil
amy; Durant vostre absence, s'il y a aucune chose imaginable, en quoy vous vous
puissiez servir de moy, j'employeray verd, and sec, je mettray tous mes cinq
sens pour vous render obeissance, car je suis du fin fond de mon coeur

Le vostre I. H.

A LETTER COMPOSED OF FRENCH PROVERBS, Concurring all to one congruous sense,
and sent to a Gentleman that was going to travel abroad, And dedicated To the
most accomplished Lord, ROBERT Lord WILLOUGHBY of Ersby, etc.
A personage, Who, besides other excellent perfections, is Great Master of the
French Language.
SIR,
WHen you have cast an eye upon this Letter which goes stuffed with all
Proverbs, old Motts, and Adages, whereof some were used in the time of high
bonnets, when men used to wipe their noses on their sleeves, for want of a
napkin, you will judge perhaps, that the Author has some strange freaks, or
quinombroms in his noddle, that he has quicksands, or Mercury, or rather one
quarter of the Moon in his pericranium; But you Sir, that have a head so well
timbred, will, I presume, pass another judgment.

The report is rife, that you have a design to travel, and range abroad for
some time, and particularly to make the turn of France: If you are fixed in
such a resolution, I pray give leave to an old soker, one that is well salted
in the world, and knows more then how to eat his bread, one that has pissed
in many Snowes, to give you some few Mots of advice touching the Genius of that
Country.

For matter of conversation, you shall find there, more then any where else, as
many heads, so many several humors, and caprichios, as if most of the people
had eaten of the white Hind, or of the mad Cow (being impatient of peace any
longer then they are recovering the ruins of the former war:) But every where,
you must take the people as they be, and the season as it is: Above all,
observe this short worded Rule, Hear, see, and hold thy peace, if thou will
live in peace; for a slip of the toe is better then that of the tongue, and the
Spaniard will tell you that when the mouth is shut the flies cannot enter.

Under that Ayrie clime, you shall rancounter sometimes with rambling
bragadochians, or devourers of iron carts, who will make a show as if they
would kill six with the candle, and sixteen with the candlestick; they will
make you believe that the Stars are but Spangles, and that Bladders are
Lanterns: Among such blades be moderate, and discreet, but by no means
fearful, or pusillanimous, for he that makes himself a Sheep, the Wolf will
devour him, and that Nation which button their dublets upward, will tell you,
that the French at first puff is more then a man, and afterward less then a
woman.

You shall meet also there with debosh'd youngsters, who use to eat their Corn
in the green blade, and to burn their candles at both ends; It Is a maxim
amongst them, that one cannot be a complete Gentleman, until he has been five
times in Cornelius tub; For there, the stoutest of them will kneel to the
distaff: Take heed of companions of that gang, yet treat them with civil
Language, for fair words never blister the tongue: By all means lend them no
money, for when you lend you are a cousin-german, but when you demand it again,
you are the son of a whore; you shall verify it there as well as in England,
who lends to his friend exposes himself to a double hazard, viz. the loss
of friend and money: ye^ notwithstanding, one may safely lend a Cake to one
that has a Pastie in the Oven.

Mor^over, be careful not to show your self such a Bigot, or babe of grace as
to raise disputes of matters of Religion, but leave the Minster where it is,
and oftentimes in too much debate Truth is lost, especially in matters of
Religion; You shall meet with many there of this cavilling humor, that will
ever and anou leap from the Cock to the Ass, or from the Arbor among the
stakes.

The Country and people of France are given to all kind of jollities, and
divertisements, There you shall meet with boon companions, the Rogers of the
good time, who will be as merry as Crickets, or Mice in malt: You must not be
of such a dull Saturnin humor, as not to jovialize sometimes with such, and
with a cup of good liquor to chase away all care, and cumber, for one ounce of
mirth, is better then a whole pound of melancholy.

If you have a mind to entertain a Lacquay, you shall find enough in that
Country, but take heed of choosing one who is too Officieux, for he is a
Lacquay for the Devil who does more then he is commanded.

For matters of health, and order of diet, which is the principal main thing,
for who has not health, has nothing, you shall do well in that wine Country
to marry the Celler, and the Cistern, yet a jadish bitt will require a good
cup of wine; But drink wine like a King, and water like a Bull; In the morning
white wine is good, Claret at night to breed good blood; Observe also that
after Pear, the Wine, or Priest ( viz. to confess thee,) salt Beef they say,
will make one find out the wine without a candle: Add hereunto, that if thou will batten, and be quickly fat, eat with hunger, and drink leisurely and slow.

Concerning thy Food, take notice, that thy Sallet must be well washed, and
salted, a little Vinegar, but well oyled; We dine to drive away hunger, we sup
to pass away the time; Veal ill roasted, and rawish Poullets, they say, make
the Churchyard full of hillocks: It is a repast for the Devil, where there is
no salt: Take notice, that the cheese is wholesome which comes from a misers
hand: Of Fish, and Women the middle part is best; Touching mushrumps, the best
are worth nothing; One Egg is nothing, two do some good, three is enough, four
do hurt, five is death.

Touching exercise, walk till blood appear in thy cheeks, not until sweat drop
down at thy nose: In the morning seek the Mount, in the evening the Fount:
Concerning sleep the chief repose of Nature, there is a saying, that the
Scholar sleeps six hours, the Traveller seven, eight the Vigneron, and nine
every Poltron: There is another rule, to rise at six, to dine at ten, to sup at
six, and bed at ten, will make one live ten times ten: To conclude, observe
this general caution, keep thy head, and feet warm, and for the rest thou may
live like a beast (who never eats nor drinks to excess.)

Touching the occurrences of the present times, there be various reports of
things, but all is not Gospel that is spoken up and down the Town; yet they say
for certain, that Dunkerk (that neast af Harpies, and birds of English prey)
begins to parley, and you know that the Town which parlie's, and the Woman
which listneth, are half got, half a word to the wise.

It Is all that I have to say unto you at present, therefore I will draw this
thread no longer, for short follies are the best: And I doubt not but you will
take these kind of Drolleries in good part, because they come from an ancient
friend of yours, and you know there is not a truer looking-glass then an old
friend.

During your absence, if there be any thing imaginable wherein I may steed you,
I will employ green and dry, I will set my five senses on work to serve you;
for I am from the center of my heart

Yours, J. H.

Proverbes, Refrains, ou Quolibets en la Langue Francoise.
Proverbes Moraux.
QUI fert Dieu il a bon Maistre.

Quand tout pechez sont vieux, Avarice est encore jeune.

En petite Maison Dieu a gran part.

Pour devenir tossed rich il faut tourner le dos a Dieu.

Il a chie en un chapeau, and puis se'n va couvert, viz. il a couche avec une
femme, and puis l' a marie.

Par trop debattre la Verite se perd.

Apres besogne faicte, le fol barguigne.

L'hoste, and le poisson, passez trois jours, puent.

Craindre ce qu' on peut vaincre, est un bas courage.

Le mort na point amy, le malade, and l' absent, qu' un demi.

Il est tossed trompe, qui mal ne pense.

Qui a le bruit de matineux peut dormir jusques a midy.

Vous me ferez croire que les estoilles sont papillottes.

La farine du diable se'n va moitie en son.

Il n' y a de plus sage Abbe, que celuy qui a este moine.

Il a mange son bled en herb; cecy sentend d' un prodigue heritier.

Caeur content, and manteau sur l'epaule.

Il n'est pas gentilhomme parfait, qui n' a fait cinque voyages a Soris, viz.
Suerie.

Qui priest a l'amy perd au double, viz. l' argent and l' amy.

La paix, est la Feste de tous saints, and se guard en Paradis.

Laissez le Monstier ou il est, viz. ne to entremesle point de disputes de
religion.

Gaster une chandelle, pour trover un epingle.

C' est un valet du diable, qui fait plus qu' on luy comande.

Avec le temps l' on meure les neffles.

Il n' est horloge plus just que le ventre.

Celuy est bien mon Oncle qui le ventre me comble.

Mere piteuse, fille rigneuse.

Le porc a tout bon en soy, fors la merde.

Beauty sans bonte est comme le vin evente.

Ils s'entre accordent comme les horloges de Londres.

Chacun a son tour, mot du Duc de Guyse qui fut tue a Blois.

Il est marque a l' A, is est fort honest' homme, il est bon tout a fait.

Qui fait nopces and maison, il met le sien en abandon.

Il comence bien a mourir, qui abandonne son desir.

Chien qui abaye ne mord pas.

Abbe and Convent ce n' est qu' un, mais la bourse est en diverse lieux.

Des abeilles ils deviennent frelons.

Chose accoustumee n'est pas troy prise.

Achete maison faite, femme a fair.

Le Rich disne quand il veut, le pauvre quand il peut.

Qui ne s'avanture, n' a cheval ni mule.

Venrre affame n' a point d'oreilles.

A la quenoville le fol s' agenoville.

A force du vit le monde croit.

Qui aim Bertrand, aim son chien.

Qui bien aim bien chastie.

Qui va, il lesche, qui repose, il seiche.

Bien part de sa place, qui son amy y laisse.

Il n' y a meilleur miroir que le vieil amy.

Amor and Seigneurie ne tiendrent jamais compagnie

Amor fait beaucoup, mais l' argent fair tout.

L'amour, la tousse, and la galle ne se peuvent celer.

Amor fait rage, mais l'argent fait marriage.

Aussi bien sont amourettes, soubs bureau que soubs brunettes.

Vit de vint ans, and cun de quinze.

Contre la mort il n'y a null appel.

L'arbre ne tomb pas du premier coup.

Pour un poil Martin perdit son asne.

Qui a maratre, a le diable en atre.

Ma chemise blanch, baise mon cul tous les dimanches.

Il a mis en ^n doit, un anneau trop estroit.

Un borgne est roy au pais des aveugles.

Avarice rompt le sac, and la besace.

Aviourdhuy Tresorier, demain tres arriere.

Aviourdhuy marie, demain marry.

Render de l' avoine pour foin, viz. remercier au double.

Mieux vaut un tenez, que deux fois vous l' aurez.

Si tu veux conoitre un vilain, baillez luy la baguette en main.

Gran bandon, gran larron.

En cent ans civiere, en cent ans banniere.

Il n'est banquet que d' homme chiche.

Ore le Pape est devenu Francois, and Jesu Christ devenu Anglois; Cela se
disoit quandle siege Papal estoit en Avignon, and que les Anglois tenoient plus
de la moitie de France.

Le coeur fait l'oevure, non pas le grands jours.

Craindre ce qu' on peut vaincre, est un bas courage.

La moitie du monde ne scait comme l'autre vit.

Les debtes engardent l' homme de dormir trop.

Les deliberations sont en nostre main, and les evenements Dieu en ordonne.

L'on ne peut empescher qu'a Dieu l' on ne se dedie.

De demain a demain le temps s'en va bien loin.

A folle demand, il ne faut point de reponce.

Heureux celuy qui ne desire point ce qu'il n'a pas.

Le trou trop sovent ouvert sous le nez, fait porter souliers deschirez.

Il n'y a bouclier qui puisse resister a l'encontre du de^tin.

Qui many ses propres affairs, ne soville point les main^.

Il luy est avis que les alouettes luy tomberont toutes roties au bec.

Celuy n' est pas esloigne d' amendment lequel reconoit sa fault.

Le vray amy mieux que chevance.

Il faut aymer l' amy and hayr son vice.

N' avoir point d' amiss, est pire que d' avoir des ennemis.

A null ne peut estre amy, qui de soy mesme est ennemy.

Il a l' appetit ouvert, comme la bourse d' un avocat.

Si tossed que l' arbre est tomb chacun se rue dessus.

Argent receu, les bras rompus, viz. le travail cesse.

Fient de chien, and marc d' argent, seront tout un au jour du jugement.

Un amoureux fait tousiours quelque chose du folatre.

Chante a l' asne, il te fera des pets.

Le pauvre qui done au rich, demand.

Six heures dort l' escolier, sept le voyager, huit le vigneron, neuf en
demand le poltron.

Mal va la nef sans avirons.

La guerre fait les larrons, and la paix les meine au gibet.

Qui priest non r' a, and s' il r' a non tossed, si tossed non tout, si tout non
tell, si tell non gre, or te guard donc de prester.

Au prester Cousin Germain, and au render fills de putain.

Qui n' a point de miel en sa cruche, qu' il ayt en sa buche.

On se sovule bien de manger tartes.

J' ay pay tous mes Anglois, viz. me cranciers.

Le vin n' a point de chaussure.

Sont les Regiments de Monsieur Brovillon, trois tambours, and deux soldats.

Au plus fort la besace, viz. la force emporte tout.

Il est plus ayse de se tirer de la rive que de fond.

Langage de hauts bonnets, viz. vieux, and horse de usage.

Il parle Baragouin, c' est a dire il parle un langage qui n' est pas
intelligible.

Il a chie en un chappeau, and puis s' en va couvert; cecy se dit, d' un qui a
couche avec une femme, and l'espouse apres.

Ell' est faite a maschecoulis le haut defend le bas, viz. elle a la mine
laid, and le corpse de bonne taille.

Les paroles du soir ne resemblent a celles du matin.

Qui a bon voisin a bon matin.

Chanter Magnificat a matines.

Estre en la paille jusques au ventre, viz. estre en grande prosperity.

La Verole a tous ses apennages, viz. toutes sorts de saletez.

Il faut prendre le temps com' il est, and les gens com' ils sont.

Amasser la disme de l' ail; cest' a dire, estre blen batu.

Coiffer la Rolline, dechausser Be^trand, c' est estre yure;

Fair le Roland, viz. le brava^he.

Il n' est chance qui n' est return.

On est plus tenu a sa peau, qu' a sa chemise.

Dieu done biens, and boeufs mais c' est ne pas par la corn.

On voit plus de vieux yurognes, que de vieux medicines.

Il n'est tresor que de vivre a son aise.

Un' once de fortune vaut mieux qu' un livre de sagesse*

Mieux vaut estre oyseau du bois que de cage.

Aviourdhuy Cuissi^r, demain cass^.

La langue n'a point d'os, and casse poitrine and dos.

Quand la fille pese un auque, on luy peut mettre la cauque.

Cercher noises, pour noisettes.

Cercher cinq pies en un Mouton.

Cercher midy a dix heures.

De l'arbre de messoi^, manche de cemoir.

Plus pres est la chair, que la chemise.

Il n'est chance, qui ne return.

Il en tuera dixe de la chandelle and vint du chandelier.

Il n' y a si petit Saint qui ne desire sa chandelle.

A la chandelle cheure semble damoiselle.

Je f^rai que vous ne pisserez plus roid.

Qui n' a Chapon soit content de pain and d'oignon.

Qui seem les chardons recueille des espines.

Compagnon plaisant, vaut en chemim chariot branlant.

Il n'est chasse, que de vieux levriers.

Tomber de la fiebre en chaud mal.

Qui trop se haste, en beau chemin se fourvoye.

A l' aise march a pied, qui meine cheval par la bride.

Il a pour chasque trou sa cheville.

Tandis que le chien chie, le loup s' en va.

Il ne choisit pas qui emprunte.

Mieux vaut un poing de bonne vie, que plein muy de Clergy.

Je vous tireray les verse du nez.

Ostez un vilain du gibet, il vous y mettra.

Qui premier naist, premier paist.

Truye sterile, serviteur desloial, poule sans ^^ufs chooses inutiles.

Son habit ^eroit peu^ au voleur.

IN y mettray tous mes cinq sens.

J'employeroy verd and sec.

Mal soupe qui tout disne.

Les rogneures du temps.

Tossed atrappe est le souris, qui n' a pour giste qu' un pertuis.

Le froid est si aspre qu' il me fait battre le tambour avec les dents.

Aviourdhuy en terre, demain enterre.

Parole jettee va par tout a la volee.

Homme de deux visages n' agree en ville ni Villages.

Perdre la volee pour le bond.

Au vis le vice.

On ne scauroit fair d' une buse, un esprevier.

Il a oste a Saint Pierre pour donner a Saint Pal.

Chien eschaude craint l' eau froide.

Le dernier ferme la port, ou la laisse ouverte.

Si le ciel tomboit, les cailles seroyent prises.

Quel Maistre tell valet.

Il n'y a sauce que d' appe^i^.

Pres de l' eglise loin de Dieu.

Il ne faut pas elocher devant un boiteux.

Tant souvent va le pot a l' eau, que l' anse y demeure.

Mettre la charrue devant les boeufs.

Il a une face a deux visages.

Qui aim Jean aim a fon chien.

Qui trop empoigne rien n' estraind.

Le Roy perd la rent ou il n' y a que prendre.

Il n' y a si bon cheval qui ne bronche.

Homme rouge, and femme ba^bue, de cinquante pas les salve.

Je trouveray autant de chevilles, que trouvez pane de trous.

De corsaire a corsaire n' y pend que barriques rompues.

Il a beau mentir qui vient de loin.

Apres besogne faite repos, and denier.

Baston port paix quand, and soy.

Quand beau vient sur beau perd sa beauty.

Qui vient est beau, qui apporte est plus beau.

Beauty and folly vont souvent de compagnie.

Deniers avancent bediers.

Apprins au ber dure jusques au ver.

Null ne fait si bien besogne, que celuy a qui elle est.

Les biens de la fortune passent comme la lune.

Ville que parle, and femme qu' ecoute, l'une se rend, l'autre se fou-

Qui bien est, ne se bouge.

Bien a en sa maison qui de ses voisins est aim.

Aviourdhuy en chere, demain en biere.

C'est un cheval aux quatre pieds blancs.

Retirer son epingle du jeu.

Quiter un boeuf pour mangerun oeuf.

Une fois n'est past coustume.

Verse Dieu c'est le meilleur.

Coudre la peau du renard, a celle du lion, c' est a dire joindre la finesse
avec la force.

Il n'est si bon qu' aussi bon ne soit.

Enter la bouche, and le cueillier, souvent avient gran destourbier.

Il a la conscience large comme la manche d' un cordelier.

Tomber de la poile aux braises.

Farine du Diable n' est que bran.

Qui se fait brebis le loup le mange.

Qui a bruit de Matinois peut dormir jusques a midy.

Brusler la chandelle par les deux bouts.

Clocher devant les boiteux.

Belle chere, and coeur arriere.

Qui n' a coeur, ait jambes.

Un fol fait tousiours le comencement.

Qui bien aim tard oublie.

Tout y va par compere, and commere.

Chose trop veue mesprisee.

Bon bastard c' est d' avanture, meschant c' est la nature.

A conseil de fols cloche de bois.

Assez gaigne qui malheur perd.

Argent contant port medicine.

Bonne renommee vaut plus que ceinture doree.

Assez a, qui se content.

A la continue l' eau cave la pierre.

Mieux vaut l' ombre d' un sage, veillard, que le bouclier d' un jeune Couard.

Il vaut mieux estre Cocu, que Coquin.

On turn le rosti en nos maisons, nous avons la fum^e, and les autres la
viande.

Qui se couche avec les chiens se leve avec des puces.

Mieux vaut Couard, que trop hardi.

Coup de langue, bless plus que coup de lance.

Chascun est sage apres le coup.

Fille qui prend, se vend; Fille qui done s' abandonne.

Femme bonne vaut une Couronne.

De cuir d' autruy large courroye.

Trop grater cuit, trop parler nuit.

Grass cuisnie maigre Testament; contre les Prodigues.

Tell terre, tell cruche.

Enter deux selles le cul en terre.

Qui ne chastie culot ne chastie culasse.

De la panse vient la danse.

Fais ce que tu dois, avienne ce que pourra.

Il est tossed deceu, qui mal ne pense.

Vos finesses sont cousues de fill blanc, else sont trop apparentes.

Chasque demain apporte son pain.

Assez demand, qui se plaint.

Assez demand qui bien serr.

Il ne demeure pas trop qui vient a la fin.

Fair de l'argent avec les dents.

Tell a du pain qui n' a point de dents.

Le dernier le loup le mange, cecy s' entend de paresseux, and lasches.

Qui plus despend que ne pourchasse, il ne luy faut une besace.

Secret de deux, secret de dieux.

La fa^ine du Diable s' en va moitie en son.

Ton fills repeu, and mal vestu; Ta fille vestue, and mal repeue.

Ne croire a Dieu que sur bons gages.

Pour un point Martin perdit son asne.

Oblier Dieu parmi tous les saints.

Dieu done biens and baeuf mais ce n' est pas par la corn.

Il est bien fin, la cousture de ses chausses est derriere.

A pere, a maistre, and Dieu tout puissant, null ne peut render l' equivalent.

A toil ourdie Dieu mande le fill.

Il ne perd rien, qui Dieu ne perd.

A propos comme le Magnificat a Matins.

La ou Dieu veut, il pleut.

En peu d' heure, Dieu labeure.

Qui a beaucoup d'amys n' en a point.

Diligence pass Science, and la fortune toutes les deux.

Du dire au fait il y a un gran trait.

Tout vray n' est pas bon a dire.

Courtoisie tardive est descourtoise.

Mettre le doibt enter le bois, and l' escorce.

Femme se plaind, femme se deult, femme est malade quand elle veut.

Qui e^t loin du plat, est pres de son dommage.

Le diable estoit alors en son grammaire.

Il a un quartier de la lune en la test.

Assez dort qui rien ne fair.

De femme qui se farde, done toy bien guard.

Femme, argent and vin, ont lour bien, and leur venim.

Femme sage l'ornement de son mesnage.

Il n'est si bon que femme n' assotte.

Homme de paille, vaut une femme d' or.

Il n' est pas tousiours feste, ou prim temps.

Amor de femme feu d'estoupe; qui n'est pas de duree.

A la fin scaura on qui a mange le lard.

Fille aymant silence, est douee de grand' science.

Fille brunette gaye, and net.

Ce que est venu par la fleute, s'en return par le tabourin.

Fols sont sages quand ils se taisent.

Mieux vaut un' once de fortune, qu' une livre de sagesse.

Il ne peut estre ensemble au four, and au moulin.

Si la fortune me tourmente, l'esperance me content

Sur perit comencement on fait grande fusee.

Le fuseau doit suyvre le gorreau.

Le petit gain emplit la bourse.

Mieux vaut un bon gardeur, qu'un bon gaigneur.

Celuy qui est sur les espaules du geant voit plus loin que celuy qui le port.

Il y a gens, and gens, viz. hommes de diverse humeurs

Tant de gens, tant de guises.

Chascun a son gibbier, viz. selon son naturel.

Il n' y a cheval si bien far qui ne glisse.

Attendre le gland, jusques a tant qu'il tomb.

A goupil endormy rien ne tomb en sa gueule.

Gourmandise tue plus de gens que l'espee tranchant

Goutte a goutte la mer s' egoute.

Goutte a goutte on emplit la Cuve.

Null grain sans paille, null or sans escume.

Vin de grain, plus doux que de la press.

Il n' est si gran jour qui ne vienne a vespre.

En seurete dort qui n' a que perdre.

Renard qui dort la matinee, n'a pas la langue emplumee.

Ce qu' on done luit, ce qu' on mange puit.

Tout est perdu ce qu' on done au fol.

Qui fait credos charge son dos.

Bonnes paroles n' ecorchent pas la langue.

Le drap and les ciseaux luy sont donnez.

Bon droit a bon mestier d' aid.

Assez boit qui a dueil, viz. des larmes.

Pour durer il faut endurer.

Qui veut prendre un oyseau qu'il ne l'effarouche.

L'oyseau gazoville selon qu'il est embecque.

Qui scait mestier, a rent.

Soleil qui luysarne au matin, femme qui parle latin, enfant nourry du vin ne
viennent point a bonne fin.

Il peut hardiment hurter a la port qui bonnes nouvelles apporte.

Il n' est null petit ennemy, viz. on ne doit mespriser quel qu'en^emy qui soit.

Il n'est orgueil que de poor enrichi.

Qui s'acquite, s'enrichit, viz. qui pay ses debtes.

A bon entendeur ne faut que demi mot.

Le souris qui n' a qu' une entree est incontinent happee.

Envieux meurent, mais l' envy jamais.

Qui fol envoye, fol attend.

Se mettre en rang d' oignon, and ne valoir un eschalotte.

On ne peut fair d' hibou bon esparuier.

Tout estat est viande aux verse; viz. nous sommes tres touts mortels.

On le fait croire que les estoilles son papillottes.

Tout ce que tonne ne nous estonne.

Tell s' excuse, qui s'accuse.

La faim chasse le loup horse du bois.

Ne prens point un aveugle pour ta guide, ni fol pour Conseiller.

Qui peu se prise, Dieu l'advise, viz. les modestes.

On cognoit le diable a ses griffes.

Qui veut tenir net maison, il n' y faut poule ni pigeon.

En pont, en planche, en riviere valet devant, Maistre derriere.

L'oeil du maistre engraisse le cheval.

Qui mal entend, mal respond.

Mal pense qui ne repense.

Mal fait, qui ne parfait.

Le mort n' a point amy le malade n' a qu' un den^y.

Malheur ne vient jamais seul.

Il luy torche le nez en sa manche.

A main lavee Dieu mande la repeue.

Il a mange de la biche blanch, viz. il est ledger.

Bonne best s'echauffe en mangeant.

A homme hardy fortune tend la main.

Qui mange l' oye du roy il en chie la plume cent ans apres.

On n'a jamais bon march, de mauvaise merchandise

Se fair marchand de poisson la vieille de Pasques.

Bonne merchandise, trouve tousiours son marchand.

Si tous les fols portoient Marotte, on ne scait pas de quel bois on se
chaufferoit.

Se coiffer de folles opinions.

Il n'est cheval qui n' ayt son mehaing.

Courts folies sont les meilleures.

Songs sont mensonges.

Petit homme abat bien gran chesne.

Mieux vaut en paix un oeuf qu'en guerre un boeuf.

Bon guet chasse malaventure.

L' habit ne fait pas le moine.

Il est pour qui est de Dieu abandonne.

Couper l' herb soubs les pies.

Parez herisson il semblera baron.

Le renard est devenu hermit.

Toutes heures ne sont pas meures.

Les hommes donnent aux femmes ce qu'ils n' ont pas.

De meschant homme bon Roy.

Un mestier requiert tout son homme.

Qui vit a comte, vit a honte.

Meschante parole jettee, va par tout a la volee.

Il a coiffe la Rolline.

Amor se nourrit de jeune chair.

Jeune en sa croissance, a le loup en la pance.

Innocence port avec soy sa defense.

Nous achetons tout fors le jour and la nuit.

Un jour juge de l' autre, and le dernier juge de tous.

Longue langue, court main; cecy s'entend des compliments.

Pour laver les mains, on n' en vend pas sa terre.

Il ne regard plus loin que le bout de son nez.

Fair le loup plus gran qu'il n'est.

Il tient le loup par les oreilles.

A petite achoison le loup prend le mouton.

A paroles lourdes, oreilles sourdes.

De meschante vie bonnes loix.

Garder la lune des louts.

Bonne est la maille qui sauve la denier.

C' est ne pas Evangile ce qu' on dit parmi la ville.

Qui n' a patience n' a rien.

De mauvais payeur foin, ou paille.

Quand tous pechez sont vieux l' avarice est encore jeune.

Le teigneux n' arine pas le peigne.

Dieu scait qui est bon pelerin.

En fin les regnards se trouvent chez le pelletier.

Asseurement chante qui n' a que perdre.

Il faut perdre un veron, pour prendre un savmon.

Il ne perd rien qui ne perd Dieu.

Qui perd le sien perd le sens.

Qui priest a l' amy perd au double.

Il est plus ayse de tirer un pet d' un asne mort.

Chantez a l' asne il vous fera de pets.

Mieux vaut glisser du pied que de la langue.

Mieux vaut un pied que deux eschasses.

Il voudroit trouver cinq pieds en un mouton.

Il a dechausse Bertrand.

D' une pierre donner deux coups.

Perdre pigeon pour un grain d' orge.

Mieux vaut plier que rompre.

Acheter chat en poche.

Tout vient au point qui peut attendre.

Oignez vilain, il vous poindra.

Discouvrir S. Pierre pour couvrir S. Paul.

Il n' est pas si fol qu'il en port l' habit.

Il n' a plus de scavoir que ce qu' il en faut pour sa portee.

Un clou pousse l' autre.

Contre fortune null ne peut.

Vieil oyseau ne se prend a rets.

Belle promise fol lie.

Enter promettre and donner doit on marier sa fille.

Femme sage l' ornement de son mesnage.

A la quenoville Hercule s'agenoville.

Jamais Francois fut recreu a bien fair.

Ces sont les pires bourdes que les vrayes.

Qui du sien done, Dieu redonne.

Qui bon vin boit il se repose.

La mort n' espargne ni Roy ny Roc.

Le beau soulier devient en fin savate.

Il est plus fol, qui a fol sens demand.

Null n' a trop de sens, and d' argent.

En seurete dort qui n' a que perdre.

De gran dessein une souris.

Le trou trop ouvert soubs le nez fait porter souliers dechirez.

Prendre des lievres a tabourin.

Le sage fait guet au temps.

A laver la test d' un asne on ne perd que le temps and la lexive.

Qui choppe, and ne tomb ajouste a ses pas.

Il ne se tord pas qui va le gran chemin.

Amor, toux, and fumee, en secret ne font demeuree.

De gran train a l' estrain.

Il faut mieux trebucher une fois que tousiours chanceler.

Il a pour chasque trou une cheville.

Cest' argent qu' argent vaut.

Vent au visage rend un homme sage.

Toute chair n' est pas Venaison, n' y Faysan.

Vie n' est pas seur heritage.

Il n' est vie que d' estre contenr.

Or, amy and vin vieux, sont prisez en tous lieux.

Si tu veux conoistre Vilain baille luy la baguette en main.

Le boeuf sale fait trouver le vin sans chandelle.

C' est la Cour du Roy Petaud, chacun y est mai^re.

Le sage va tousiours la sonde en main.

Il faut loger le bidet.

Vous regimbez contre l' esguillon.

Qui se couche avec les chiens, se leve avec des puces.

Qui tout me done, tout me nie.

Nid tissu oyseau envole.

A tous oyseaux leurs nids sont beaux.

Nulle noix sans coque, null oeuf sans coquille.

Ouvrage de comun, ouvrage de null.

Cercher a tondre sur un oeuf.

S' il tu te trouves sans chapon, soit content de pain, and d' oignon.

Il bat le buisson sans prendre l'oisillon.

En petites boites met on les bons onguens.

Null or sans escume, ni femme sans tache.

Or est qui or vaut.

Autant de testes, autant de sentimens.

Un asne ne peut porter deux orgueilleux.

Asne d' Arcadie broute chardons quoy que charge d' or.

Oy, voy, and te tais si tu veux vivre en paix.

Peu a peu le loup mange l'o^^.

Il luy estoit advis que les alouettes luy tomberoient toutes rosties au bec.

Fair a Dieu gerbe de paille.

De tout s'avise, a qui pain faut.

Sauter de treille en paisseaux, de coq a l' asne.

Peu, and paix don de Dieu.

Il a les yeux plus grands que la pance.

Rouge visage, and gross pance ne son signs de penitence.

C' est folly de beer contre un four.

Adieu paniers, vendanges sont faites.

Pardonne tous, a toy point.

Assez parens, assez tourmens.

Qui a mal aux dents, ha mauvais parens.

Mal sert qui ne parsert, viz. qui n' est constant.

Qui veut bien parler, doit bien pourpenser.

Qui ne parle, n' err.

Le paresseux aim bien besogne faite.

Si souhaits fussent vrays pasteroux fussent roys.

A celuy qui a son paste au four, on peut donner de son tourteau.

C' est folly de fair son medecin son heritier.

Celuy peut hardiment nager a qui l' on foustient le menton.

Mere piteuse, fait la fille rogneuse.

Bon bastard c' est avanture, mais meschant c' est de nature.

Il ne pas en seurete, a qui ne mescheut onques.

Mettre la faucille en la moisson d' autruy.

Fair bonne mine au mauvais jeu.

Trop achete le miel qui sur espines le leche.

Se moque, qui cloque, viz. qui cloche.

Plein poing de bonne vie vaut mieux, q' un muid de science.

Le monde va tousiours a l' empire.

Fie de l' avarice, c' est un vilain vice.

Apres grand' montee grande vallee.

Au serviteur le morceau d' honneur.

Le mortier sent, tousiours les aulx.

Va ou tu veux, meurs ou tu dois.

Le bien mal acquis, s' en va comme il est venu.

Aussi bien meurt veau, comme vache, le hardi comme le lasche.

C'est folly de fair un maillet de son poing.

On s' avise tard en mourant.

Allez au four ou au moulin pour entendre nouvelles.

C' est la maistresse roue, qui turn le moulin.

Il faut laisser l' enfant morveux, plus tossed que luy arracher le nez.

Avoir de moucherons en la test.

A petire a choison le loup prend le mouton.

Pierre qui se remue n' accueille point de mousse.

Estre au pied du mur sans eschelle.

Homme mutin, brusque roussin, flascon du vin prennent tossed fin.

Il a piss en beaucoup de neiges.

Necessite est la moitie de raison.

Necessite fait trotter la vieille.

Naistre tout coiffe.

Nourriture pass nature.

La mort n' espargne ni Roy ni roc.

Proverbes Physiques, ou touchans la sante.
EN mangeant l'appetit vient.

Femme, argent, and vin ont leur bien, and leur venin.

Assez y a, si trop n' y a.

Table sans sell bouche sans salive.

Fille brunette est de nature gaye and net.

L' odeur de Camphre chastre l' homme.

Amor se nourrit de jeune chair.

Cheval courant, sepulcher ouvert.

Les maladies viennent a cheval, and s' en retournent a pied.

Qui mal enfourne tire les pains cornus.

Tenez chaud le pied and la test, au demeurant vivez en best.

La gout en la hanche, la fille en la pance.

Au matin verse les monts, au soir verse les fonts.

Faillit est chose human, se repentir divine, perseverer diabolique.

Fourmage est bon quand il y en a peu.

Fourmage est sain que ^ient de chiche main.

Les fols font la feste, and les sages la mangent.

Fie de manteau, quand il fait beau.

A la gout le medecin ne voit goutte.

S' il tu veux engraisser promptement, manges avec faim, bois a loisir, and
lentement.

A l' an soixante and douze, temps est qu' on se house.

Apres la feste, on gratte la test.

Vin sur lait, c' est mon souhait.

Lait sur vin, est venin.

Homme matineux sain and soigneux.

Faim fait diner, passetemps souper.

Les maux terminans en ique font au medecin la nique.

Servez vous du jeune barbier, mais du vieil medecin.

De nouveau medecin Cimitiere bossu.

A morceau restif, esperon du vin.

Feu, feues, argent and bois sont bons en tous mois.

Chair de Mouton manger de glouton.

Un oeuf n' est rien, deux font gran bien, trois c' est assez, quarte cest'
tort, cinq c' est la mort.

Qui ne fait comme fair l' oye, n' ha de sa vie longue joye.

Apres la poire le vin ou le prestre.

Veau mal cuit, and poulets cruds, font les cimitieres bossus.

Qui n' a sante n' a rien.

Qui a la ^ante est rich, and ne le scait pas.

Qui vin ne boit apres salade, est en danger d' estre malade.

C'e^t un banquet du Diable, ou il n' y a point du sell.

Le gourmans, font leurs fosses avec leurs dents.

A la trogne conoit on l' yvrogne.

Il ressemble la mule du Pape, il ne boit qu' a ses heures.

Il n' est horologe plus just que le ventre.

Pour ron brevu^ge mary's la cave, and le puits.

Le Fourrier de la lune a marque le logis.

De femmes, and des poissons le milieu vaut le mieux.

Au matin boy le vin blanc, le rouge au soir pour fair bon sang.

Une pillule fromentine, une dragme sermentine, and la balle d' une geline, est
une bonne medecin.

Il vaut mieux tomber enter les mains d' un medecin heureux, que d' un medecin
scavant.

Cens escus de melancholy ne payeront pas un liard de debtes.

Vieux Chirurgiens, and jeunes medecins font les Cimitieres bossus.

Ce que le sobre retient en sa pensee, l' yvrogne a en sa bouche.

Bois le vin comme Roy, bois l' eau comme taureau.

Boire de l' eau, manger de pierres, coucher dehors il n'en faut demander conge
a person.

Il faut plustost prendre guard avec qui tu bois, and manges, qu' a ce que tu
manges and bois.

Qui tout mange le soir, le lendemain ronge son pain noir.

Le vin, est le laict de vieillards.

Vin vieux, amy vieux, and or vieux sont amez en tous lieux.

Salade bien lavee, and salee, peu de Vinaigre, and bien huylee.

Qui veut vivre sain, disne peu, and soupe moins.

Lever a six, manger a dix; souper a six, coucher a dix, font vivre l'homme dix
fois dix.

De tous poissons fors que la tanche, prenez le dos, laissez ^e ventre.

Qui couche avec la soif, se leve avec la sante.

Des Champignons les meilleures n' en valent rien.

Proverbes, ou Drolleries, and Dictons plaisans.
AL' advocat le pied en main, c' est a dire avec quelque present.

Longuement proceder, est a l'advocat vendanger.

Il ne bat plus que d' une aile.

Il a amasse le disme de l'ail.

Amor de garse and saut de chien ne dure si l'on ne dit tien.

Amor de putain, feu d' estoupe.

Il luy rendit le nez aussi plat que d'une andoville.

De Jeune Angelot, vieux Diable.

Au prester Ange, au render Diable.

Apprenti de san Crespin, viz. un Cordormier.

Vous bridez le cheval par la queve.

Il saute du coq a l' asne, viz. il fait digressions.

Il en est plus assotte, qu'un fol de sa marotte.

Qui fol envoye, fol attend.

Gras comm' un porc a l' auge gras, comm' un glivon.

Il ne perdra pas l' avoine a fault de brailler.

La place de niais, le plus haut bout de la table.

Il se retira avec tant du nez.

De B carre a B mol.

Bachelier en busche.

La grange est pres des bateurs.

Il a mange de la biche blanch.

Pennache de boeuf.

Il est clerc jusques aux dents, il a mange son Breviarie.

Courage de brebis, le nez en terre.

Il dit ses brimborions, viz. il va grommolant.

Evesque dor, cross de bois, cross de or, evesque de bois.

Un Espagnol sans Jesuit est comme perdrix sans son orange.

Medecin d' eau douce.

Marchand d' allumettes, ou Marchand de merde en gros.

Fourni d' entendement comme un oison de creste.

Le mutin Anglois, le bravache Escossois, le fin Italien, le fol Francois, le
poultron Romain, le larron de Gascogne, l' Espagnol superbe, l' Aleman yvrogne.

Dictons playsans and propres a la langue Francoise.
A Conseil de fols cloche de bois.

Le poil folet, la premiere barbe de homme.

C' est le cheval aux quatre pieds blancs.

C'est un cheval de trompette, viz. il est hardi.

Il parle a cheval, viz. il ha l' avantage.

Il luy accommoda bien sa rob.

C' est la maison de Robin de la Vallee, ou il n'y a ne pot au feu, ni escuelle
lavee.

Je luy baillerry Guy contre Robert.

La Rose en fin devient un gratecul.

Je n'y voy ni grain ni goutte.

Goutte a goutte la mer s' egoutte.

Celuy gouverne bien mal le miel, qui n' en taste.

Joyeux comme fourmis en grain.

Fourrer la main du Juge.

Fourrage der corbeaux, viz. un belitre.

Aujourdhuy Facteur, demain Fracteur.

Qui a peur des fueilles ne doit aller au bois.

Porter de fueilles au bois, ou verres a Venise.

S' aller frotter le cul au panicaut.

Il a les yeux plus grands que la pance.

Il l' a mis a deviner.

J' ay beaucoup a detoviller.

Fair le diable de vauvert.

Je suis au dessus du vent contre.

Il est crotte en Archidiacre.

Tout tremblant enter cuir, and chair.

Qui ne chastie culot, ne charie culasse.

Mal poise, qui ne contre poise.

Je suis fait tout a rebours de vous.

C' est un papelard tout a faict.

Encore n' a pas failli, qui a ruer.

Fair de son Raminagrobis.

Fair le renard, fair le Roland.

Il a bien de clinquans, il est farci d'escus.

Il a dequoy, il a bien vaillant.

Il y va de cul, and de test comme la corneille qui abat les noix.

Enfans and fols sont Divins.

Apres trois jours on s' ennuye de femme, d' host, and de pluye.

Guy, guy mon mignon, trop enquerre n'est pas bon.

Son pere estoit nattier, il entend le festu.

Entrez, entrez nos chiens sont liez.

Il n'est pas echappe qui son lien train.

En la terre des aveugles, le borgne est Roy.

La langue peut faillir, mais l'escriture ne peut mentir.

Il a beau se taire de l' escot qui rien n'en pay.

Il n' y a point de plus beau revenu que l' espargne.

L'este sen va, mais un' autre annee la rameine.

Il ne pass pas tour les jours de tells estourneaux.

Qui s'accuse premier, s' excuse.

Il faut que la faim soit bien grande quand le loups se mangent l' un l' autre.

Apres le fait ne vaut souhait.

Il ne faut qu' une mousche luy pass par devant les nez pour le fascher.

Les fautes les plus courts sont les meilleures.

La femme, and l' oeuf un seul maistre veut.

Femme ne doit toucher a b b b b de l'homme, viz. bourse, bonnet, barbe,
brayette.

Femme qui ses levres mord, femme qui son alleure tord, se mesle du mestier ord.

La pire des chooses du monde c'est la femme encores qu' elle soit bonne.

La femme de bien n'a ny yeux, ni oreilles.

A femme sotte null ne s'y frotte.

A tout' heure, chien piss, and femme pleure.

La femme est bien malade, quand elle ne se peut tenir sur le dos.

Il y a tousiours quelque fer qui loche.

Nous voyons bien un festu en l' oeil de voisin, mais non pas la poutre dans le
nostre.

Il fait de sa fille deux gendres.

Il y a du lard en luy.

Jetter le froc aux orties^

Il n'a pas este encore leurre.

Il vous fera croire que les lievres pondent.

Voila ou gist le lieure.

Il avoit sa lippee du butin.

I'en suis loge la.

Il ne scait de quel bois fair fleche.

Il est en son lourdaut.

Il na pas bien assis ses lunettes.

Je me suis madre en cest, affair plus que vous.

Il scait plus que son pain manger.

Ceste fleche n'est pas sortie de mon carquios.

L' affair va a quatre roues.

Marchand d'allumettes, ou marchand de merde en gros.

Elle a son Marquis.

Il luy en fit porter la marotte.

Robin a trouve Marion.

Marier la cave, and le puits.

Il te frotteray a double carillon.

Il a memoire de lapin.

Il a de mercure en la test.

Il ne se lassent prendre sans mitaines.

Il a dequoy.

Bailler mornifles sur le leures du roy.

Fair la move aux harengiers.

C'est un mouton de Berri, il est marque sur le nez.

Baueux comm' un pot de moustarde.

Apres le cerf la biere, apres le sanglier le mire.

Le diable l'a chei en volant, un meschant.

Il se retira auce un pied de nez.

Gresler sur le persil, viz. tyrannizer.

Le nez aussy plat comme un andouille.

Tu es en tes gogues, viz. gagliard.

Il a rogne les ongles a l'e stude.

Il est de bas or, il craint la touch.

Opiniastre comme l^ mule d'un Abbe.

Employer verd and sec.

A un autre chien auec cet 'os.

On norroit Dieu tonner.

Il dit le paternostre a l'envers.

Sifflant en paume ie me rendray a vous.

Je scay bien sur quel pied il cloche.

Il a bien sonce le poignet, il a bien rempli ses poches.

L' heur vous en veut.

Coment se portent vos petits populos.

Il en pelera la prune, viz. il s'en repentira.

Il n'est pas de mon qualibre.

Je l'ay rendu quinaud.

Il est en quinte de fair cela.

Un vieux quolibet ou adage.

Cela luy a bien rabiasse le menton.

Il se recognoit a la langue Latin.

Mal de Saint Quentin, viz, la toux.

Il ne luy a laisse rif ny raf.

Il ne saucera son pain en ma souppe.

IN y mettray tous mes cinq sens.

Il scait fair un teston de six soubs.

Cerveau bien timbre.

Chicaneur, ou tricoteur de procez.

Monsieur de t^iquenisques.

Il a mange de la vache enragee.

Il y va de vostre honneur.

Gross test and prim col, c'est sign d'un fol.

Employer verd and sec, viz. fair tout son pouvoir.

Que veut le roy ce veut la loy.

Il ne vaut pas un zest. viz. rieu.

Vous allez a l'entour du pot, viz. vous faires des ambages.

Reprenons nostre cheure par la barbe; viz, recomencons.

Fourni de fill and d'aiguille, viz. estre bien pourveu and prepare.

Il vole d'haute aile; viz. il est ambitieux.

A la volee viz. temerairement.

Cela me rebouche fort an coeur.

Ventre de veloux, rob de bureau.

Il viennent des paroles au poil.

Qui tout convoite tout perd.

Monsieur de foin, and foarre.

Trencher les mot, viz. parler exactement.

A celuy qui a fa paste au four on peut donner de son torteau.

Assez parens, assez tourmens.

Si je ne fait cela qu'on me tonde.

Chacun tire a son profit.

Il a beaucoup de tintouins en la test.

Vin de comeres; viz. doux vins.

De fonds en comble; viz. entierement.

Compere de oribus, viz. un parasit.

C'est un merchand qui prend largent sans conter ou peser.

Cela me vient fort a contrecoeur.

Je vous pay en monnoye de cordelier: viz. en prieres and remerciements.

Je ne scay a quel Saint prier: viz. a le remedier.

Couche enter l'enclume, and le marteau. viz, enter deux dangers.

Il ha les deux bouts de la courroye.

Crotte en Archediacre.

Cecy est d'un autre cuuee viz. autre goust.

Elle scait assez de la vieille dance.

Le de est deja ietre; viz, il est determine.

Prendre la lune a belles dents.

Il a bien dequoy. viz, il a bien de moyens.

Il est sur le board de la fosse.

Deschausser Bertrand.

Derober la bosse a Saint Roc.

Vous allez au devant par de^riere.

Les tesmoins du mary.

I'ay beaucoup a detoviller: viz, un affair malaise.

Le monde est toutdetrave, viz, confus.

Cest un val du D, cest a dire cest un valet du diable qui fait plus que l'on
luy comande.

Il n'est, si diable, quil est noir.

Docteur de quandoque, ou Lourdant

Docteur en gaye science.

Vous avez mis le doit dessus, viz. vous avezacertene.

Se pensans signer, il donna du doit dans l'oetil.

Mettre de l'eau dedans leur vin, viz. refroidir le courage.

Fol eccentrique, viz. opiniastre.

S'embarquer sans biscuit, viz. sans avoir dequoy.

Il en payera la folle enchere.

Il en cuyda bien enfiler son aiguille.

Enfoncer le poignet, viz. corrompre.

Encamber sur les marches d'autruy.

Il entend le numero, viz. il est fin.

Coucher a l'ensiegne de l'estoile, viz. dehors.

Ils sont bien ensemble, viz. il s'entrecordent.

On ne trouve ni tric ni trac.

Il scair bien son entregent. viz. il est prudent and accort.

J'ay assez a fair environ les mains, viz. fort a fair.

Je le vous envoyeray par le borgne.

Fair escran contre le vent sur les Alps.

Vous chassez apres les mouches.

Joyeux comm' un esmerillon.

Gentilhomme frais esmoulu.

Essime comm' un haranc soret.

Estans onner le mensonge d'un roseau.

Esonne comm' un fondeur des cloches.

Fair les diable de vauvert.

Fair le guet au temps, videlicet, bien l'observer.

Ell' a fait un faux bond, videlicet, ell' a paillarde.

Ferrer les cigales, videlicet, fair des impertinences.

Mangeur de charrettes ferrees, viz. un vaingloreux.

Il nest, ni figue ni raisin.

Cest unce chose fort estrange, de coucher dans une grange.

Avoir le bec gele, viz. estre muet.

Plus malheureux que le bois don't on fait le gibbet.

Cecy n'est pas de mon gibbier.

Joyeux comme souris en grain.

Chapon de haute graisse, viz. bien paissu.

Il a beaucoup de grillons en la test.

Parent du Gillot le songeur, viz. un lourdaut.

Haut a la main, viz. resolu, and vaillant.

Pris enter la hay, and le bled, viz. pris oportunement.

Par les hypocondres de tous les diables.

Cracher un Jacobin, videlicet un gros crachat.

Donner le croc en jambe, videlicet, prevenir.

A bander* and racler, a droit ou a travers.

Plus joyeux que rats en paille.

Prendre un Lion par les jubes, viz. attenter chose dangereuse.

Il a rette de bon lait, viz. il a este bien esleve.

Cest un Language du temps de hauts bonnets.

Il a langue de Tripiere, viz. c'est un tricheur.

Vous me ferez croire que vessies sont Lanternes.

Cest un cagueraffe, ou pobre caguemaille.

Le champ vous est demeure.

Il a pris campos, viz. il s'est echappe.

Il fut rendu bien camus, viz. etourdi.

Elle a son Cardinal, viz. le menstrue.

Cardinal en Greve, viz. un decapite.

Je te frotteray a double carillon.

Bran de Judas, ou les lentilles.

Je laisse la carte blanch a vous.

Il a la cassade, viz. il est trompe.

Il a perdu sa ceinture, viz. il a fait le banqueroute.

Vous chassez apres les mouches.

Vous faites de chasteaux en Castille.

Jetter le chat aux iambes, viz. charger un autre.

Enter chien est loup, viz. fort tard.

Contes de la cicogne, viz. begauderies.

Il a un muid de clergy en la test.

Ie scay bien de quel pied il cloche.

Gras comme un cochon, un gliron.

Il est ne tout coiffe, viz. rich.

Jetter la manche apres la coignee.

Collation de moine, viz. bonne chere.

Il est fourni de fill, and d'aiguille, viz. il a tout qu' est necessaire.

De quelque cost que le bast vire.

Ventru plein basta, fort grossier.

Baston d' Adam, viz. le membre viril.

Je vien de la encore tout batant.

Il faut mener le ba^eau d'une autre sort.

Il bat le tambour avec les dents.

Habits de beat, ongles de chat.

Il ne scait de quel bois fair sa flesche.

La faim chasse le loups horse du bois.

Du temps de hauts bonnets, quand on muchoit sur la manche.

Tarte Bourbonoisse, viz. un marais.

Il est au bout de son breviarie.

Reprenons nos brisees, ou la cheure par la barbe.

Je n' iray pas sur vos brisees.

Il pense briser le fer aux dents.

Tenu secret come cabale, viz. cachement.

Il a la caboche bien tymbree.

Il est mis en sa cahotte.

Il se baigne en ces nouvelles.

Enter Beaucaire and Tarascon ne pais brebis ni mouton.

Trois Espagnols sont quatre Diables en France.

Qui m'aura perdu ne m'aille cercher en Escosse.

Il est de Chasteaudun, viz. Il est precipite en jugement.

Chevalier errant du Royaume de logres.

Le sang Francois ne peut mentir a son Prince.

Prendre Paris, pour Corbeil, viz. une Montagne pour une fourmilliere.

L' Aleman a lesprit au doibs, viz. il est bon Artizan.

Le Norman vendange avec la gaul; viz. il bat les pommes pour en fair du
cidre.

Il a pass le pont de Gournay, viz. ce'st un effronte.

Fait Cardinal en Greve, viz. estre decapite.

Fair le guet a Monfaulcon, viz. estre pendu and estrangle.

Boucon de Lombard, viz. du poison.

Patience de Lombard, viz. une grande patience.

Quand le Francois dort le Diable le berce; ce Proverb s'use parmy les Flamens.

Qui fit Normand, fit truand; diton de reproach.

Querelle d' Aleman, viz. parmy les pots.

Pi^toles de Sancerre, viz. les tondes ou frondes.

Les secours des Venetiens, trois jours apres la bataille.

Chevalier de Cornouaille, viz. un Cocu.

Angers basse ville, hauts Clochers.

Rich putains, pouvres Ecoliers.

Quand on voit un Picard sans bavarie, and un Normand sans flaterie, le bon
temps viendra.

Armanson, mauvaise riviete, bon poisson.

Paris sans pair, Rouen sans nom.

Il est saoul comme un Anglois.

A Montmartre il y a plus de putains que de vache^ que, s'il n'y avoit tant de
Nonains, il y auroit plus de vaches que de putains.

Il n'y a si bon Chartier en Beausse qui quelque fois ny verse.

Jamais cheval ny homme,
S'amenda pour aller a Rome.
Angleterre bonne terre, male gent.

Il y a plus de Montmartre a Paris, que de Paris a Montmartre: cecy s'entend de
plastre de Paris, qui vient de Montmartre.

Il n'y a si pauvre village, ou ne soit feste un jour en l'an.

Les Liegois se ventent d' avoir trois chooses; du pain meilleur que du pain, du
fer plus dur que fer, du feu plus chaud que le feu.

Il ressemble les Suisses, il est a qui plus luy done.

C'est le Chasteau de Montargis, beau de loin de pres rien.

Lourd comm' un Aleman, ou un paste de chevilles.

Gasconner, viz. fair le larron.

I'ay pay tous mes Anglois. viz. tous mes creanciers. Le Roy Iean estant
prisonnier en Angletterre il y eut une grande imposition mise sur le peuple
pour payer sa rancon, d'ou vint ce Proverb.

Rigueur de Toulouse, humanite de Bourdeaux, misericorde de Rouen, justice de
Paris.

Il est de Chasteaudun, il entend a deny mot.

Angleterre, le Paradis de femmes, le Purgatoire de valets, l'enfer des chevaux.

Le Francois ny parle comm' il pense, ny fait comm' il parle, ny chante comm'
il compose.

Il s'ntrecordent comme les horloges de Londres.

Resolu comme Pihourt en ses heteroclites, c'est a scavoi^ quand un ignorant,
parleentre les gens scavants.

Vous ^e loger chez. Guilloe le songeur.

Le man An enter en n^geant.

Si ^'hyvet estoit outre la me^ si viendra-il St. Nicolas parler.

Celuy peut nager hardiment, a qui on cient le menton.

A la San Martin on boit le bon vin.

Quand il tonne en Mars, nous pouvons dire helas.

Annee seiche n'apouv^it pas son Maistre.

Rouge vespre and brun Matin cela est joy pour pelerin.

Annee epigeuse, annee fructueuse.

A Noel au perron, a Pasques au tison.

Quand le choux pass le cep le vigneron meurt de soif.

Au temps de moisson dames chambrieres son.

A la saint Pierre l'hyver s'en va, ou il reserre.

A la Saint Vincent si l'hyver s'engrine si l'attends.

Januier and Fevriet comblent, ou vuident le grenier.

Qui a la fiebre au mois de May, Le rest de l'an vit sain and gay.

Decembre estoit anciennement un mois, mais il est maintenant un' annee.

Mars aride, Fevrier neigeux, Auril humide, May rousineux, presage de l'an ens
plantureux.

Proverbes Temporaux, referans aux Saisons.
UN mois avaunt, and apres Noel, l'hyver se montre le plus cruel.

En Hyver au feu, en Este au bois, and au ieu.

Januier frileux, Fevrier fievereux, Mars poudreux, Auril pluvieux, May venteux
denotent l'an planteureux.

Une hirondelle n'amene pas le printemps.

A la Saint Barnabe le faulx au pre.

Avec la paille and le temps, se meurissent les neffles, and les glands.

Au commencement, ou a la fin, Mars a poison, ou venin.

A la Saint Valentin, le printemps est voisin.

A la Saint Martin l'hyver est en chemin.

A la Saint Luce, le jour croist du saut d'une puce.

Le saumon, and le sermon, en Caresme ont leur saison.

Aujourdhuy Fevrier, demain Chandelier, qui est tousiours au deuxisme de
Fevrier.

Autres Dictons, and Mots Proverbiaux propres a la Langue Francoise.
QUe gibet, que diable veut dire cela?

Il le plant la pour reverdir.

Payer la tart de sa nativite.

Fair d'un Diable deux; fair Montagne d'une fourmilliere.

Fair le guet a Montfaucon.

Fair le grobis, fair le groin.

Fair le mitou, viz. l'hipocrite, ou bigot.

Son Kalendrier est rubrique.

Fair le move aux harangiers, viz. estre pilorie.

Il luy torcha le nez de sa manche.

Tell fait la fault qu' un autre boir.

Fair quinquenelle, viz. le banqueroutier.

Qui bien fera bien trouvera.

Assez dort qui rien ne fait.

Table d'Abbe, table du Cardinal.

Abbreure d'un opinion, ou croyance.

Il luy passa la plain par le bec.

Il l'a accoutre a la tigresque.

Tell cuide venger la fault qui l'accroi^.

Il le fait fort accroire.

Il n'y a point d'acquest en luy.

Selon que les affairs s'addonnent.

Person de tres-bonne address.

Au sceu, and adveu de tour le monde.

Je vous advoue en cela.

Il in'est d'avis, il me semble.

Il ne faut estre loup, ny en affubler la peau.

Fair beaucoup d'agiois.

Il va d'aguet en ses affairs.

Il n'est vie que d'estre bien aise.

Chapeau fair a l'Albanoise.

Alleguer son alibi, viz. s'excuser.

I'eu l'allee pour le venir.

Vous allez a l'entour du pot.

Au fort, au pis aller.

Aller au saffran, fair banqueroute.

On ne scait pour qui on amasse.

Il est de Lorry, ou le batu pay l'amende.

Amor de grands ombre de buisson, qui pass bien tossed.

En amor est sottise, and sens.

Il n'est que les premieres amors.

Il y a bien de l'anguille sous roche.

Vous aller rompre l'anguille a genovil.

Je te crains aussy peu que les neiges d'enten.

A pens, de guet a pens.

Souliers a l'apostolique.

Il est de nostre appartenance.

A peine endure mal, qui n' a la appris.

Cest'la famille d'Archimbaut, plus y en a and pis vaut.

Il l'a fait vuider les arcons.

D'argent, and sens jamais trop.

Contre la nuit s'arment les limacons.

L'homme qui a de l'art possede sa part.

Je croy q'uil y aura icy del'asne.

Demander de la lain a l'asne.

D'un petit aiguillon poind on un gros asnon.

Assez boit qui a dueil.

Il a le coeur assis en bonne part.

Je le feray bien gaigner son avoine.

J'ay beau attendre.

Avoir, ou bien trouver son compte.

Avoir bouche a la Cour.

Il a bon bec, ou il a le bec gele.

Tout a este a autruy, and sera d'autruy.

Il se baigne en ces nouvelles.

Il luy a baille belle.

Il m a baille febres a my croi^.

Je n' en iray du banc au feu.

Ventru a plein bast, fort gros y gras.

Tant que l'ame me bastera au corpse.

Fair le voyage de Baviere.

Mon petit bedaud, mon petit mignon, mon petit bedon.

Payer son beiaune, c'est a dire droit de novices.

Prendre le baeufle par le museau.

Eschauffons nous au feu de Dieu, cest a scavoir, au soleil.

Il ne s'y print pas de bon biais.

S'embarquer sans breuuage.

Cela ne se fera a l'espee blanch cest a scavoir sans sang.

Prendre enter la hay, and le bled.

Je cognoy bien de quel bois il s'echauffe.

Bon gaignage fait bon potage.

Il ne si bon qu' aussy bon ne soit.

Bonne est la maille qui sauve le denier.

Se mettre a l'ombre de bouchons.

Il s'enyure de sa propre bouteille.

Je suis en bransle, viz. irresolu.

Je luy bailleray Bris contre Robert.

Rob d'argent, broad de merde.

Qui suit le broust.

Je le garderay secret comme cabale.

Il fut rendu bien camus.

Le coeur me tremble dans la capsule.

Fol a vin cinq carats.

Quiter sa ceinture; cest a scavoir, se fair banqueroute.

Il a la ce^uelle a double rebras.

Toute chair n'est pas Venaison.

Donner le fardeau selon le chameau.

Aller au Change, viz. a un' autre femme.

Celuy a bon gage du chat qui en tient la peau.

Chevalier errant du royaume de Logres.

Estre bien en conche, on en bonne conche.

Je ne scay quelle piece coudre a cecy.

Il ne craind ny les, ny les viz tondus.

Qui fait credos charge son dos.

Parler a grosses dents.

Le dernier le loup le mange.

Vous allez au devant par derriere.

D'ieu done froid selon le drap.

Prendre la volte de Paris.

Perdre la volee pour le bond.

Je n' en ay eu ny vent ny voix.

Tu auras miserere jusques aux vitulos.

Il m'a monstre visage du bois.

Au vis le vice.

Il n'est vie que de Coquins.

Il nous a done de bien verdes.

De bonne terre bon tupin.

Tell tue qui ne pense que blesser.

Il entend autant que truye en espices.

Je vous grupperay au truc.

Il est bien trove de la Foire.

Troussez vostre verre du vin.

Il y a plus de trompeurs; que de trompes.

Il luy donna au travers du nez.

Une science requiert tout son homme.

Titer son espingle du ieu.

Il est bien heureux, qui se mesle seulement de ses affairs.

Enter tells tell deviendras.

Null soulas humain sans helas.

Je l'envoyeray bien grater le cul au soleil.

Il n'est pas en seurete a qui ne mescheut onques.

Il a le sang aux ongles.

Jouer a la ronfle.

Je m'y suis bien rompu la test.

Ce n'est plus rien que de moy.

Fiancailles cheuavchent en selle, and repentailles en croupe.

Je te rengourmeray bien le groin.

Il se recognoit a la langue Francoise.

Et puis qu'en sera-il? qu'en deviendra il?

Il n'ya rien a rembouser tout est a boire.

Il luy faudroit fendre les pieds, and l'envoyer paistre comme une pecore.

C'est fait de moy, je suis ruin tout a fait, sans resource.

Tant que Tige fait souche, elle ne branche jamais; Cecy se'ntend de la
succession hereditaire, de a la couronne de France.

Explications morales d'aucuns Proverbes en la Langue Francoise.
Le morier sent tousiours les aulx. CE Proverb est propre a celuy le quel
estant une fois entache de quelque vice, en retient tousiours les marquis, and
ne peut dissimuler son inclination a iceluy, tout ainsi qu'un mortier dans le
quel on a pile des aulx ne se peut tant laver qu'il n'en retienne ^ousiours
l'odeur.

Tousiours souvient Robin a ses flustres. Ce Proverb est prins d'un certain
drol de Paris nomme Robin, and se dit quand quelq'un importunement, and sans
propos fait mention de quelque chose que luy est propre, n'ayant autre chose en
la bouche.

Les cousteaux de Iean Colot l'un vaut l'autre. Ce Proverb prit son origin en
la ville de Troy en Champagne ou viuvot ce Jean Colot qui estoit un artizan,
and bon compagnon qui portoit ordinariment pendue a sa ceinture une gain dans
laquelle y avoit trois ou quatre couteaux tous de peu de valeur, tarez de
quelque defaut, l'un ayant la point rompue, l'autre estoit ebreche au
taillant, l'autre estoit rebouche, l'autre ne coupoit point du tout; and de ce
fut fait ce proverb lequel se dit proprement de toutes chooses ou il n'y a pas
gran choix, and mesmes de persons qui valent aussi peu l'un que l'autre.

Qui a le bruit de se lever abonn'heure, peut bien dormir la grass matinee.
Par ces mots nous sommes enseignez que bien souvent la bonne opinion, and
jugement que l'on fait dez persons, est fondee sur le bruit and dire du comun
plus que sur laverite mesme, de sort quela repuracion surmonte le fait propre,
and se voit assez de gens que le comuntient pour sages, doctes, vaillans and
ornez de beaucoup d'autres vertus, qui n'ont rien de tout cela si on les
regard de pres.

Pour un poil Martin perdit son Asne. Un nommeMartin ayant perdu son Asne a la
foire, il atriva que l'on en trouva un autre qui estoit aussi perdu, de sort
que le Juge du village estoit d' opinion qu'on rendist a ce Martin l'asne qui
avoit este trouve, mais celuy qui l'avoit en sa possession pria le Juge de
demander a Martin de quel poil estoit son asne, lequel ayant respondu que son
asne estoit tout gris, fut deboute de sa demand d'autant qu'on trouva un poil
noir en sa queve.

Estre en la paille jusques au ventre. Ce Proverb est pris de chevaux, auquels
le meilleur traitement qu'ils puissent recevoir (outre le foin, and l'avoine)
est, qu'ils ayent ample, and profonde lictiere; Et par cetre similitude il se
peut dire de ceux lequels ont a leur souhait toutes chooses necessaries a une
vie opulente and heureuse.

Qui parle du Loup on en voit la queve. L'usage de ce Proverb est, quand aucun
survient a l'improviste lors qu'on tient propos de luy.

C'est le ventre de ma mere. Cecy est dit, quand quelq'un se repent d'avoir
este en tell place, ou estant echappe de quelque danger, il prend resolution
de n'y jamais retourner, tout ainsi que l'enfant estant sorti du ventre de sa
mere jamais plus n'y rentre.

Il n'est si grand jour qui ne vienne a vespre. Par ce Proverb nous sommes
appris que toutes chooses de ce monde viennent en fin a decadence, comme il
n'est point du jour si long qui n'ayt son soir.

Il a du nez. Quand on veut donner les los a quelq'un d'estre bien avise,
accort, entendu, and prevoyant de loin tous accidens, pour ne se laisser
surprendre, on dit cet' homme a du nez; Et ceste similitude est prise de la
sagacite, and aigu odorat des chiens de chasse, lequel, au sentiment du nez, la
test bassee contre terre, decovurent, and suyvent tous les tours and
entortillements des bestes qu'ils pourchassent.

Il a autant de nez. Cela se dit quand quelq'un ayant entrepris de fair
quelque chose, manquant d'en venir a bout, demeure confus, and tout honteux.

Estre au nid de la Pie. Quand quelq'un est monte au plus haut degree de sa
Fortune, on use communement de ce Proverb: Car le natural de la Pie est, de
fair son nid sur les plus hauts arbres qu'elle peut choisir.

Rompre l'andouille a genouil. La nature differente des chooses port que les
unes se manient d'une sort, les autres d'une autre; Les uns se peuvent rompre
sur le genuoil ou autrement comme sont les esclats de bois sec, and deliez; Les
autres requierent le couteau, and ferrements pour estre mises en deux pieces,
comme l'ozier verd and tout autre bois flexible quand il est encore verd; De
cette facon sont les andouilles, lequelles ne se peuvent rompre, mais il faut
les couper au couteau; Ce Proverb donc apprend, qu'en toutes nos actions nons
ne pouvons parvenir a ce que nous pretendons, si ce n'est par les moyens a ce
convenables.

Laisses ton Enfant morveux, plutot que luy arracher le nez. Ce di^e nous
apprend que ceux qui ont de persons a governer tellement inveterez, and
endurcis en aucunes complexions, and mauvaises coutumes desquelles on les
voudtoit bien retirer, and n'est pas possible de le fair entierement, doivent
plutot tascher d'en corriger le plus, and en laisser le moins qu'ils pou^ront,
que par les vouloir trop presser, les depiter, and rebuter du tout; Ceste
similitude est prise des petits Enfans qui estans ordinairement morveux, on les
arracheroit plutot le nez, que de le garder du tout, qu'ils n'ayent tousiours
quelque roupie pendante sur leurs leures.

Fair a Dieu jarbe de fouarre. L'on scait que de tout temps il a este ordonne
de payer au Seigneur le disme, cest' a scauoir la dixieme party que l'homme
recueille de fruits de la terre; Ce droit estoit tellement sacrosaint que
chacun en toute verite laissoit sur le champ ce qui etoit du dit disme; Or, Il
aduint qu'aucuns prophanes faisant aussy peu de difficulte de tromper Dieu
comme les hommes faisoyent tout expres certaines jarbes equelles il n'y avoit
point de grain, and de cela payoyent leur dismes; Ce qui a done lieu a ce
Proverb le quel se peut appliquer a toute person de mauvaise conscience,
soit envers Dieu, soit envers les hommes comme sont tells gens.

Homme de Porc and de Boeuf. Par ces mots on veut signifier un homme grossier,
mal apprins, incivil, and mal honneste, tells que sont ordinairement ceux de
plus vil, and bas degree d'entre le peuple, don't la nourriture ordinaire est du
lard, and du boeuf.

Ietter le manche apres la coignee. Ce Proverb prit l'origine d'un pavure
Boscheron. lequel ay^nt rompu, ou autrement perdu le fer de la coignee, par un
despit jetta le manche apres; A cest' exemple nous est enseigne quand quelque
perte nous advient, de retenir nostre corroux, and ne la vouloir fair plus
grande par nostre propre fault, en perdant par despit le rest qui nous peut
encor servir.

Maille a maille se fait le haubergeon. Haubergeon estoit de temps pass une
facon d'armeure meure qui se faisoit du tell' etoffe don't nous faisons cottes
de mailles; ces mailles sont petits annelets de fer, ou d'acier s'embrassans,
and tenants, l'un l'autre pour enfair 'un habillement; and pource qu'a bastir
cest'ouvrage compose de tant de petites pieces, il y va beaucoup de temps and
de patience, ce Proverb nous ensign qu'il n'est rien qu'on ne puisse parfaire
par le menu, and petit a petit, si on y veut mettre l'estude.

Il n'st chasse que de vieux chiens. Ce Proverb vise aux jeunes gens, qui ne
sont si capables d'aucune function que ce soit, comme les aagez quien ont
acquis l'experience.

Aller aux meures sans crocher. Le meurier est un arbre qui es^end ses rameaux
loin du tronc, and sont fort aisez a rompre, qui fait que ceux qui en veulent
cueiller le fruit se servent d'un crochet pour tirer les branches; cela nous
ensign de ne point s'acheminer a aucune entreprise, sans estre pourveu, and
garni de ce qui la peut faciliter.

Fair un trou a la nuit. Si aucun part de quelque lieu a la derobee sans que
person en sache rien, and mesmes lors qu'on l'eut le moins soupconne, on use
de ce Proverbs, Il a fait un trou a la nuit.

A Goupil endormi rien ne tomb, en la gueule. Ce Proverb nous apprend que
pour s'entre renir au monde ill ne suffit pas d'estre sage, and scauant, mais
il faut employer le soin, and la diligence, en mettant la main a la besongne;
Cela est pris du renard, lequel encore q'uil soit tenu enter les autres bestes
pour l'un des plus cauteuleuses pour sa nourriture, neantmoins sil demeuroit
tousiours dormant en son terrier, aucune viande n'entreroit jamais en son
ventre.

Resolu comme Pihourt en ses heteroclites. C'est a dire, quand un ignorant est
trop prompt de parler parmi les gens scavant. Ce Pihourt estoit un Masson de la
ville de Renes, d'ou vin le proverb.

I'ay pay tous mes Anglois, c'est a scavior tous mes Creanciers. Ce Proverb
prenoit son origin du temps de Roy Jean quand il estoit prisonner en
Angleterre, car alois ^our sarancon, il y avoit de tailles extraordinaires, and
diverses sorts d'Impositions generales mises sur le peuple, qui duroient long
temps pour satisfaire les Anglois, de sort que Anglois, and Creancier vinrent
a estre synonymes.

Ore le Pape est devenu Francois, and Jesus Christ Anglois. Ces mots s'usoient
comme Proverb, quand le Pontife Romain tenoit le Siege papal en Auignon, and
que les Anglois prosperoient tant en France ocupants plus de la moitie du
Royaume.

Proverbs, or old said Sawes and Adages in the French Languages.
Moral Proverbs.
WHo serves God has a good Master.

When all sins grow old, covetousness grows younger.

God has a great share in a little house.

To become quickly rich one must turn his back to God.

He has shit in a hat, and then clapped it on his head, viz. he has lain with
a woman, and then made her his wife.

In too much dispute truth is lost.

When the business is done, the fool makes his bargain.

A guest and fish stink in three days.

To fear that which may be overcome, is a sign of a white liver.

The dead has no friend, the sick and absent but half a one.

He is soon deceived, that thinks no hurt.

Who has once the fame of an early riser, may sleep till noon.

You will make me believe that the stars are but spangles.

The Devils flower turns half to bran.

He is the wisest Abbot, who has bee^ Friar before, viz. he is best
experienced.

He has eaten his corn in the blade; spoken of a young unthrift.

A contented heart, and a cloak on the shoulders.

He is no complete gentleman who has not made five voyages to Swetland, viz.
to Cornelius tub.

Who lends a friend, is like to lose double, viz. both money and friend.

Peace is the Festival of all Saints, and is kept in Paradise.

Leave the Minster where it is, viz. do not meddle with Church Matters.

To burn a whole candle to find a pin.

He is the Devils boy who does more then he is commanded.

With time Medlers grow ripe.

There Is no clock truer then the belly.

He is my true Uncle who fills my belly.

A gentle mother, a scabby child.

The hog has all things good in him except his dung.

Beauty without goodness is like faded wine.

They agree together as the clocks of London.

Every one must have his turn, viz. must dye; the motto of the Duke of Guyse
who was killed at Blois.

He is a right man, a man of worth; from the best sort of coin is marked with A.

Who makes marriages and builds houses, quickly wastes himself.

He well begins to dye, who from his own desires does fly.

A barking dog seldom bites.

The Abbot and the Convent are but one thing, but their purse is in many places.

From Bees they become Drones.

A thing used cannot be prized too much.

A house ready made, a wife to be made.

The rich man dines when he pleases, the poor man when he can.

Nothing venture, nothing have.

A hunger-starved belly has no ears.

The fool falls down before the distaff.

The world increases by the strength of the yard.

Love me, love my dog.

Who loves well, corrects well.

Who goes, licks, who lies still, dryes up.

He parts well with his place who leaves his friend there.

There is not so clear a mirror as an old friend.

Love and Lordship never kept fellowship.

Love may do much, but money more.

Love, Cough, and Itch cannot be concealed.

Love causes rage, but money makes the marriage.

There is love under a fustian petticoat as well as under a silk fardingall.

A Prick of 20. a C. of fifteen.

There Is no appeal from death.

The tree falls not down at the first stroke.

Martin lost his Ass by laying he was all white, whereas there was one black
hair found in his tail; this alludes to rash wagers.

Who has a stepmother, has a Devil in a woman's shape.

My white shirt kisseth my tail every Sunday.

He has put too narrow a ring on his finger, viz. he has tied himself to too
hard a task.

The pur-blind is King in the blind men's Country.

Covetousness breaks both sack and bag.

To day a Treasurer, to morrow a Bankrupt.

Married to day, and marred to morrow.

To give oats for hay, viz. to over-requite a kindness.

Once take, is better then twice you shall have.

If thou will know a true Clown, give him the staff of authority.

Much liberty, many thieves.

In a hundred years a wheel-barrow may be a banner.

There Is no feast to the misers feast.

Now is the Pope become French, and Jesus Christ English; A saying when the
Pope came to Avignon, at which time the English prosper'd much in France.

It Is the heart that does the business, not the length of time.

To fear that which may be overcome, shows a white liver.

Half the world does not know how the other lives.

Debts keep a man from sleeping too much.

Deliberations are in our hands, but God orders the success.

No man can stop ones way from going to God.

From morning to morning time goes a long journey.

An idle question needs no answer.

He is happy who does not desire that which he has not.

The opening too often the hole under the nose, makes one have tattered hose.

There Is no fence against the strokes of fortune.

Who manageth his own business berayes not his hands.

He thinks that roasted Larks will fall into his mouth; spoken of a sluggard.

He is not far from amendment, who confesses his fault.

A true friend better then a rich Farm.

One must love his friend, but hate his faults.

Not to have a friend is worse then to have an enemy.

He can hardly be a true friend to another, who is an enemy to himself.

His stomach is insatiable as a Lawyers purse.

When a tree is down every one runs upon it.

The wages had, the arms are broken, viz. labor cease.

A Ducket, and a Dogs turd will be the same thing at the day of judgment.

Who is in love does always something of a fool.

Sing to an Ass, and he will give you a fart.

When a poor man gives any thing to the rich, he begs.

The Scholar sleeps six hours, seven the traveller, eight the labourer, nine
the sluggard.

The Boat goes but ill without Oars.

War makes thieves, and Peace brings them to the gallows.

Who lends, has it not again; if he has it, yet not so soon; if soon, not
all; if all, not from the same; if from the same, not so willingly; therefore
spare to lend.

In lending my Cousin German, in repaying the son of a whore.

Who has no honey in his pot, let him have it in his mouth.

A man may be weary in eating tarts.

I have paid all my English, viz. my creditors.

Wine wears no breeches, viz. wine shows what a man is.

They are the Regiments of Monsieur Brovillon, three drums, and two soldiers;
spoken ironically.

The strongest carries away the bag.

It Is more easy to draw away from the bank then the bottom of a river.

Old obsolete Language spoken in the time when high bonnets were worn.

He speaks gibberish, whereas Baraguin is a British word, and signifies white
bread.

He has shit in his hat, and then claps it on his head; which is meant of one
who has lain with a woman, and marries her afterward.

She is built as a watchtower, where there are grates to let down great
stones, the top defends the lower parts; It Is meant of a woman that has an
ill-favored face, and a handsome body.

The morning words agree not with those of the evening.

Who has a good neighbor has a good morrow.

To sing Magnificat in the morning; which should be at Vespers.

To be in the straw up to the belly, viz. to be in great prosperity.

The Pox has all its due, viz. all kind of foulness.

Take the time as it is, and the people as they are.

To gather the tithes of garlic, viz. to be well beaten.

To be fox'd or drunk.

To brag, or play the bragadocio.

There Is no chance but what is before.

Near is my petticoat, but nearer is my smock.

God gives blessings, and beefs, but not by the horns, viz. with danger.

There are more old good fellows, then old Physicians.

To live at ease is the greatest treasure.

An ounce of fortune is worth a pound of wisdom.

Better to be a bird of the wood then a cage-bird.

To day brave, to morrow in the grave.

The tongue has no bones, yet it breaks the back and breast.

When a girl weighs a Goose, she must have a tent.

To make a great noise for nutshels.

To seek five feet in a Mutton.

To seek noon at nine.

A mill-post to a thwittle.

The flesh is nearer then the shirt.

There Is not a chance but comes again.

He will kill ten with the candle, and twenty with the candlestick.

The least Saint desire's his candle.

By Owl-light a Goat looks like a Lady.

He take a course that you shall piss strong no more.

Who has no Capon, let him be content with bread and onion.

Who sowes thistles gathers prickles.

A pleasant companion is better then a chariot.

There Is no hunting but with old hounds.

To fall from the drying pan to the fire.

Who hasteneth too much, may go astray in a fair way.

He walks at his ease, who leads a horse.

He has a button for every hole, viz. an excuse for every thing.

While the Dog shites, the Wolf scapes.

Borrowers must be no choosers.

One handful of a good life is better then a bushel of Preaching.

I Will draw out the worms at your nose.

Save a thief from the gallows, he will put you there.

First born; first fed.

A barren Sow, a knavish servant, and a hen without eggs, are three
unprofitable things.

His clothes would scare a thief, viz. being so bare that the thread might be
seen, to put him in mind of the halter.

I will do my utmost, I will employ all my five senses in the business.

I will employ green and dry, I will do my best endeavors.

He sups ill who eats all at dinner.

The parings of time.

That Mouse is soon caught who has but one hole.

It Is such an extreme cold that it makes me beat the tabour with my teeth.

To day above ground, to morrow under.

A word once out flies every where abroad.

A double-fac'd man is liked of neither in town or Country.

To lose time, to stay too long for the bound.

His fault may be read in his forehead.

You will never make a good Hawk of a Buzzard.

He has taken from Saint Peter to pay Saint Paul.

A burnt Dog fears cold water.

Who comes last let him make fast.

If Heaven would fall we should catch Larks.

Like master like man.

There Is no sauce to appetite.

Near the Church, far from God.

You must not halt before a cripple.

The pitcher goes so often to the water that he leaves the handle behind.

To put the Cart before the Oxen.

Two faces under one hood.

Who loves John, loves his dog.

Who grapples too much, takes hold of nothing.

The King must lose his rent where nothing's to be had.

There Is no horse so good but he will stumble.

A red man, and a bearded woman salute them a hundred paces off.

I Will find as many pins as you shall find holes, viz. as many excuses.

'Twixt Pirat and Pirat there is nothing found but cracked casks.

Who come's from far may safely lie.

When the days work is done, rest and money.

The club brings law with it.

Fair upon fair fairness loses its beauty.

Who comes is fair, who brings is fairer.

Beauty and folly go commonly together.

Money advances Meacocks.

What Is learnt in youth does last to the grave.

None does ones business better then himself.

The goods of fortune pass with the Moon.

The woman which hearkens, and the town which treats, the one will yield, the
other will do.

Who is at ease let him not stir.

He has enough at home who is loved by his neighbors.

To day at good cheer, to morrow on the biere.

He is a horse with four white feet, viz. he is unlucky.

To draw his pin out of the stake, viz. to disingage himself of a business.

To leave an Ox to eat an Egg.

Once is no custom.

The best way is toward God.

To sow a fox tail to the Lions skin, viz. to join cunning with strength.

He Is not so good, but there may be as good.

'Twixt the cup and the lip a mischance may happen.

His conscience is as large as the sleeve of a Cordelier Friar.

To fall from the pan to the fire.

The Devils flower is but bran.

Who makes himself a Sheep, the Wolf devours him.

Who has the fame of an early riser may sleep till noon.

He burns his candle at both ends, viz. a great unthrift.

To halt before a cripple.

A good face, but a poor heart.

Who wants a heart, let him have good legs.

The fool ends always at the beginning.

Who loves well is long a forgetting.

All goes by favor and acquaintance.

An object seen too often grows contemptible.

If a Bastard be good, it is by chance, if bad, it is by nature.

For woodcocks counsels wooden bells.

He gains enough who scapes a mischance.

Ready money brings physic.

A good name is worth more then a gold girdle.

He has enough who is content.

In time the spout makes the stone hollow.

The shadow of a wise old man is more safe then the target of the young gallant.

Better be a Cuckold then a Knave.

The roast is turned in our houses, we have the stomach, and others the meat.

Who lies with dogs, rises with fleas about him.

Better be a Coward then Foolhardy.

The tongue hurts more then the lance.

Every one is wise after the blow.

The maid which takes, sells her self, the maid which gives, forsakes her self.

A good wife worth a Crown.

A large thong of another man's leather.

Too much scratching frets, too much prating hurts.

A fat Kitchen, a lean Testament; this is meant of Prodigals.

Like earth, like pitcher.

'Twixt two stools the tail falls to the ground.

He that corrects not youth, controlls not age.

The dance comes from a full panch.

Do what thou ought, let come what will come.

He is easily deceived who thinks no hurt.

Your tricks are sowed with white thread, they are too apparent.

Every morn brings its own bread.

Who complains, asks enough.

Who serves well, asks enough.

He stays not long who comes at last.

To make money with his teeth, viz. by parsimony.

They have most bread who have least teeth.

The Wolf devours the last; meant of the lazy.

Who spends more then he gets needs no budget.

The secret of two, the secret of Gods.

The Devils meal turns more then half to bran.

Thy son well fed, and ill clothed, but thy daughter well clothed, and ill fed;
a rule in breeding children.

Not to trust God but upon good pawn.

For one point Saint Martin lost his ass, viz. his Convent called Asellus, for
this Verse, Porta patens esto, nulli claudaris honesto.

To forget God among so many Saints.

God gives goods and cattle, but not by the horn.

He is a cunning Jack, the seam of his breeches is backward.

To Father, and Schoolmaster, and God Almighty we cannot be too thankful.

God provides thread for the work begun.

He loses nothing that loses not God.

As proper as the Magnificat in the morning.

It rains there where God pleases.

God works in a short time.

Who has many friends, has none at all.

Diligence goes beyond Science, and good fortune beyond both.

There Is a good distance 'twixt the word and the deed.

All truths are not good to be told.

A slow courtesy is a discourtesie.

To put ones finger 'twixt the rind and the tree.

Women complain, women do grieve, women are sickly when they please.

Who is far from the dish, is near his own loss.

The Devil was then in his Primmer.

He carries a quarter of the Moon in his noddle, viz. he is mad.

He sleeps enough who does nothing.

Take heed of a painted woman.

Women, wealth and wine have their good and their venom.

A wise woman, the ornament of the house.

There Is none so wise, but women may besot him.

A man of straw worth a woman of gold.

It Is not always holy day, nor Springtide.

A woman's love like fire of flax, which is of no durance.

At the end 'twill be known who did eat the bacon.

A maid silent, shows wisdom.

A brown maid gay and neat.

That which came by the Pipe, goes away by the Tabor.

Fools are wise when they hold their peace.

An ounce of fortune is more worth then a pound of learning.

He cannot be at once at the Mill and the Bakers.

If fortune me torments, yet hope does me content.

A small beginning makes a great web.

The wife must follow the husband.

Light gain makes a heavy purse.

It Is more to spare then to gain.

He who is upon the Giants shoulders sees more then he who carries him.

There be men of all conditions and humors.

As many Nations, so many Fashions.

Every one to what he is fit for.

Let a horse be never so well shod, he may slide.

To stay for the acorns till they fall.

Nothing falls into the throat of a sleeping Fox.

Gluttony kills more then the sword.

By little and little the Sea is drained.

Drop after drop fills the tub.

No grain without stubble, no gold without dross.

Wine from the grape is better then that of the press.

No day so long but will have his evening.

He sleeps safely who has nothing to lose.

The Fox who sleeps in the morning has not his tongue feathered.

That which is given shines, that which is eaten stinks.

All Is lost that is given to a fool.

He who borrowe^h much lades his back.

Fair words blister not the tongue.

He has both the cloth and cizzars given him, viz. full power.

A good cause has need of help.

Sorrow has drink enough, viz. tears.

To last and dure, one must endure.

Who will take a bird, he must not scare him.

The bird sings according as he is beaked.

Who has a trade, has rent.

A Sun glittering in the morning, a Latin woman, and a child nursed with wine,
seldom come to a good end.

Who brings good news may knock boldly.

There Is no enemy little, viz. we must not undervalue any foe.

There Is no such pride as from a beggar grown rich.

He who pays his debts grows rich.

Half a word to a good understander.

The mouse who has but one hole is quickly caught.

Envious men may dye, but envy never.

Who sends a fool, must expect a fool.

To rank himself among onions, being but a small scalon.

Of an Owl one can never make good hawk.

Every state is worms meat, viz. we are all mortal.

They make him believe that the stars are but spangles.

All that thunders does not astonish.

Who accuses himself, excuses himself.

Hunger drives the Wolf out of the wood.

Take not a blind man for thy guide, nor a fool for thy Counselor.

God directs him who despises himself, viz. the modest man.

The Devil is known by his claws.

Who will keep his house clean, must have neither poultry nor pigeon.

Over a bridge, a plank, or river, the servant before, the master after.

The masters eye fattens the horse.

He answers ill who understands ill.

He thinks ill who thinks not twice.

He does ill, who does not all, viz. who does not perfect his work.

The dead has no friend, the sick but half a one.

One cross never comes single.

He wiped his nose in his own sleeve.

To washed hands God sends increase.

He is giddy or shuttle headed.

A good beast gets heat in eating.

Fortune reaches her hand to a bold man.

He who eats the Kings Goose may shite out the feathers a hundred years after.

Bad ware is never too cheap.

To make himself a Merchant of fish on Easters eve.

Good ware will never want a chapman.

If all fools hables were of wood, there would be but a small store.

To coif himself with foolish opinions.

There Is no horse without some bruise or fault.

Short follies are the best.

Dreams are dotages or lies.

A little man can fell a great Oak.

An egg in peace is better then a beef in war.

Good heed chaceth away misfortune.

The froc makes not the Monk.

He is truly poor whom God forsakes.

To cut the grass under ones feet.

Trim up a hedgehog and he will look like a Lord.

The fox is turned hermit.

All hours are not ripe, viz. seasonable.

Men give women milk, though they have none themselves, viz. milk.

A bad man may be a good King.

One trade requires one whole man.

Who lives on the score, lives in shame.

An ill report quickly flies abroad.

He is got drunk.

Love feeds on young flesh.

A growing youth has a wolf in his belly.

Innocence carries her own defense about her.

All things may be bought except day and night.

One day judges another, and the last is judge of all.

A long tongue, a short hand; meant of complements.

For washing his hands one never sells lands.

He sees no farther then the end of his nose.

To make the wolf fiercer then he is.

He has the wolf by the ears.

A small matter makes the wolf take the sheep.

To bad language closed ears.

Good laws come from lewd lives.

To keep the Moon from wolfs.

It Is a good farthing that gains a penny.

All is not Gospel that is spoken up and down the town.

Who has not patience wants all things.

From an ill debtor take hay or straw.

When all sins become old, covetousness grows younger.

The scabby head loves not the comb.

God knows who is the good pilgrim.

At last the Foxes meet at the Furriers shop.

He may safely sing who has nothing to lose.

You may well lose a Menow to take a Salmon.

He loses nothing who loses not God.

Who loses his right loses his reason.

Who lends to a friend loses double.

It Is easier to draw a fart from a dead ass.

Sing to an ass and he will fart at you.

Better stumble with the foot then the tongue.

One foot is better then two stilts.

He would find more then four feet in a Mutton.

He is drunk.

To give two blows with one stone.

To lose a Mutton for a little tar, or a Pigeon for a grain of rye.

Better bow then break.

To buy a cat in a poke.

All succeeds well to him who has patience.

Anoint a clown, and he will prick you.

To rob Peter to pay Paul.

He is not yet such a fool that he wears the fools coat.

He has no more wit then will serve his turn.

One nail thrusts out the other.

There is no banding against Fortune.

An old bird is not caught by nets.

Fair promises bind, fools.

'Twixt promising and giving, one should marry his daughter.

A wise woman is the ornament of her house.

The strongest men kneel to the distaff.

A true French man was never weary of well doing.

True jests are the worst.

Who gives of his own, God gives it him back again.

Who drinks good wine gets ease.

Death spares not Court nor Cottage.

The finest shoo comes at last to be out at the heel.

He is more fool that demands sense of a fool.

One cannot have too much sense or money.

He sleeps securely who has nothing to lose.

A grand design becomes a mouse.

The hole too open under the nose, breeds ragged shoes and tattered hose.

To take a hare with a tabor.

The wise man observes his time.

To wash an Asses head, one does but lose soap and time.

Who stumbles and falls not, goes the faster.

He goes not wrong who goes the highway.

Love, cough, and smoke, cannot be hid in a poke.

To fall into the straw from a great train.

Better to stumble once then be always shaking.

He has a button for every hole.

That Is money which is money-worth.

Wind in the face, viz. adversity makes one wise.

All flesh is neither Venison nor Feasant.

Life here is no sure inheritance.

There is no life to contentment.

Gold, a friend, and wine, the older the better.

If you will discover a clown, give him a staff and a gown.

Salt beef finds the way to the wine without a candle.

Like King Petauds Court, where every one is master.

The wise man goes always with the plummet in his hand.

We must make a shift though with a little.

You kick against pricks.

Who sleeps among dogs, rises up with fleas.

Who offers me all, denies me all.

The nest made, the bird flown.

To every bird his nest is fairest.

No nuts without rinds, no egg without his shell.

The work of the Common is no man's work.

To seek something to be shorn off an egg, viz. to be over-critical.

If thou have no capon, content thy self with bread and onion,

He beats the bush* but cannot take the bird.

The best ointments are put in little boxes.

No gold without dross, nor woman without some fault.

It Is gold which is worth gold.

As many heads so many opinions.

One Ass cannot carry two proud men.

Like the Arcadian Ass, who eats thistles though laden with gold; meant of the
covetous miser.

Hear, see, and hold thy peace, if thou will live in peace.

By degrees the Wolf eats up the Goose.

He thought that roasted Larks would have fallen into his mouth; spoken of the
sluggard.

To make God a sheaf of straw.

Who wants bread, wants all things.

To leap, or digress from one thing to another.

Peace with a little, the gift of God.

There be eyes bigger then the belly.

A red nose, and a great panch is no sign of repentance.

He Is a fool who yawns before an oven.

Farewell panniers, the vintage is ended.

Pardon all except thy self.

Many kindred, much trouble.

Who has sore teeth, has ill neighbors.

He serves ill, who serve's not thoroughly.

Who will speak well, must think well before,

Who speaks not, err's not.

The lazy loves business already done.

If wishes were true, Cobblers had been Kings.

Who has a pie in the oven, one may lend him a piece of cake.

He is a fool that makes his Physician his heir.

He may boldly swim who is held up by the chin.

Too pitiful a mother makes a scabby child.

A Bastard is good by chance, bad by nature.

He is not safe who never had a mishap.

To put his sickle in another harvest.

To put a good face on a bad matter.

He comes too dear by honey, who licks it off thorns.

He mocks another who halts himself.

A handful of good life is better then a bushel of learning.

The world goes always from bad to worse.

Fie on avarice, it is a base vice.

A high climbing, a great coming down.

To the servant the bit of good manners, viz. the last bit.

The mortar will smell of the Garlic.

Go where thou will, dye where thou ought.

Goods ill gotten go away as they come.

The calf dies as well as the cow, the Captain as well as the coward.

He Is a fool who makes a hammer of his fist.

It Is late advice one takes when he is a dying.

If you will learn news, you must go to the oven or the mill.

It Is the master-wheel that turns the mill.

Rather let the child's nose be snotty then cut it off.

To have humble bees in his head.

A small cause will serve for the wolf to take the sheep.

A rolling stone gathers no moss.

To be at the foot of the wall without a ladder.

A forward horse, a quarrelling man, and a flask of wine are of no long
continuance.

He has pissed in many snowes, he has suffered much.

Necessity is half Reason.

Need makes the old wife trot.

Born to good means.

Nurture passes nature.

Death spares neither King nor Cobbler.

Physical Proverbs, concerning Diet, and Health.
ONe bit draws on another.

Money, Wine, and Women, have their good and their poison.

There Is enough, if there be not too much.

A table without salt, a mouth without spittle.

A brown lass is naturally merry, and neat.

The smell of Camphyre gelds a man.

Love is fed with young flesh.

A running horse, an open grave.

Sicknesses come on horseback, go away afoot, viz. slowly.

Who puts not his bread aright in the oven, draws forth crooked loaves.

Keep warm your head and feet, for the rest live like a beast.

Pain in the hanche, a girl in the panch, or the womb of a woman with child.

In the morning to the hills, in the evening to the rills, or fountains.

To err is humane, to repent is divine, to persevere is Diabolical.

Cheese is good when there is but little.

Cheese is good that comes from a niggard.

Fools make Feasts, and wise men eat them.

Fie upon a cloak when it is fair weather.

The Physician is blind at the Gout.

If thou will be quickly fat, eat with hunger, and drink slowly, and at leisure.

At seventy two it is time to go warm.

After a Feast one scratches his head.

Wine upon milk is good.

Milk upon wine hurts the blood.

An early riser is healthy and careful.

Hunger makes us dine, and pleasure makes us to sup.

Diseases ending in ik shame the Physician, as Paralytik, Hydropik, etc.

Make use of a young Chyrurgeon, but an old Physician.

A young Physician makes the Churchyard hilly, viz. full of graves.

A hard bit must have a spur of wine.

Fi^e, Beans, Silver, and Wood, in every month are good.

Mutton is the food of a glutton.

One egg is as nothing, two do much good, three is enough, four are too many,
five bring death.

He who does not like the Goose, shall not joy long in his life, viz. who
drinks not well.

After Pears, the Priest or Wine.

Raw Veal and Pullets make the Churchyard full of graves.

Who has not health, enjoyes nothing.

He who has health is rich, and knows it not.

Who after sallet drinks not wine, is in danger to be sick*

It is the Devils Feast where there is no salt.

The Gluttons dig their own graves with their teeth.

A drunkard is known by his snout.

He is like the Popes mule, he drinks but at his set hours.

There Is no clock truer then the belly.

For thy drink marry the cellar with the cystern.

The Harbenger of the Moon has marked the lodging, viz. when a woman has her
flowers.

Of women, and fish, the middle is best.

In the morning drink white, and Claret at night, to make good blood.

A wheaten pill, a dram of the grape, and the ball of a hen, is good physic,
viz. bread, wine, and an egg.

It Is better to fall under the hands of a lucky then a knowing Physician.

A hundred crowns of melancholy will not pay a half pennyworth of debt.

Old Chyrurgeons, and young Physicians make the Churchyards swell.

That which the sober man keeps in his thoughts, the drunkard has in his mouth.

Drink wine like a King (sparingly) drink water like an Ox.

To drink water, eat stones, and lie abroad, any one may do it without leave.

Be more careful with whom you eat and drink, then what you eat and drink.

Who eats all at supper, may gnaw a brown crust the next morning.

Wine is the old man's milk.

Old wine, an old friend, and old gold are beloved in all places.

Let a sallet be well washed and salted, little vinegar, and well oiled.

Who will live in health, let him eat little at dinner, and less at supper.

To rise at six, and dine at ten; to sup at six, and go to bed at ten, will
make a man live ten times ten.

Of all fish except the tench, take the back, and leave the belly.

Who goes to bed athirst, rises in health.

The best of Mushrumps are worth nothing.

Proverbs, or Pleasant Sayings.
GO to your Lawyer with feet in hand; meaning some present of poultry.

A long Plea is the Harvest of the Lawyer.

He beats but with one wing, viz. his courage is abated.

He has gathered the tithe of Garlic, viz. he has smarted.

The frisking of a Dog, and love of a Punk, does not last unless you feed them.

The love of a queen like fire of flax.

He made his nose as flat as a flook, viz. he cozened him.

A young Saint, an old Devil.

A Saint in borrowing, a Devil in repaying.

A Shoemaker Saint Crispins prentice.

You bridle the horse by the tail, viz. you go the wrong way to work.

He leaps from the ^ock to the ass, viz. he goes from the matter.

He is more besotted then a fool with his babble.

Who sends a fool, must expect a fool.

As fat as a hog in a sty, as fat as a dormouse.

He will not lose his oats for want of brawling.

The upper end of the table, the ninny's place.

He went away with so much nose, viz. he was mightily jeered.

To shift from one matter to another.

A logger-head.

The barn is near the threshens, viz. the Nunnery is near the Friars.

He has eaten of the white hind, viz. he is a shittle head.

A bulls plume, viz. a pair of horns.

He is a Clerk to the very teeth, he has eaten his Breviary.

Courage of sheep; nose to the earth.

He stands muttering, viz. grumbling.

The time was, that the Bishop was gold, and Crozier the wood, now clean
contrary.

A Spaniard without a Jesuit is like a Partridge without his orange.

A pedling Merchant, or a Merchant of Eelskins.

He is furnished with wit, as a Goose is with a crest.

The mutinous English, the bragging Scotch man, the foolish French, the
cowardly Roman, the Gascon a thief, the Spaniard proud, the Dutch a drunkard.

Peculiar French Sayings.
TO a council of fools, a wooden bell.

The first dowle upon the lip or chin.

He is the horse of four white feet, viz. he promises fair, but performs
nothing.

He is a trumpet horse, viz. he is a stout man.

He speaks on horseback, viz. he has the advantage of me.

He trussed his coat, or hanged him soundly.

It Is like Robins house in the Vale, where there is neither pot on the fire, nor
clean dish withal.

I Will give him a Rowland for his Oliver.

The Rose at last becomes a hep, viz. beauty fades.

I see not a jot, nothing at all.

By little and little the Sea is drained.

He is a sorry cook that licks not his own fingers.

As merry as ants in a haggard.

To grease the hand, or bribe the Judge.

A Crackrope, a slipstring, a rogue.

To day a Banker, to morrow a Bankrupt.

Who fears the wagging of leaves, let him not go to the wood.

To bring leaves to the wood, or glasses to Venice.

To spend time loosely, and lazily.

His eyes are bigger then his belly.

He has put him to his wits end.

I have a hard task, an intricate business.

To keep a mighty, a horrible stir.

I have the advantage of him.

He is daggled with dirt up to the tail.

Trembling all over, to the very heart.

Who corrects not his son being a child, 'twill be too late to do it afterward.

He valueth prosperity best, who provides for adversity.

I am of a clean contrary opinion to yours.

He is a rank hypocrite, a very dissembler.

He has not yet lost, who has once to throw more.

To counterfeit an affected gravity.

To slink away cunningly, to swagger.

He has clinquans, or money enough.

He is well to pass, he is rich enough.

His head and tail go on in the business, as the Crow when she would crack a
nut.

Children and fools tell truth.

A woman, a guest, and rain are wearisome after three days.

Here you have it, never ask whence it comes.

His father was a Mat-maker, he understands well the festraw.

Come in, come in, our dogs are tied up.

He has not broke prison who drags his train after him.

In the country of the blind, the one-ey'd is King.

The tongue may fail, but the letter cannot lie.

Who pays nothing, needs not question the reckoning.

Parsimony is the best revenue.

Sommer's gone, but the next year brings him again.

Such starlings do not pass every day, viz. such fair occasions.

Who accuses himself first, excuses himself.

The hunger must be great when the wolfs eat one another.

When a thing is done, wishes are too late.

There needs not but a fly to pass by his nose to make him angry.

The lesser the fault the better.

A wife, and an egg but one master.

The woman ought not to meddle with her husbands purse, his beard, his bonnet,
his codpisse.

The woman that bites her lips, and wambles in her pace, is bent upon some foul
business.

The worst thing in the world is a woman, though she be good.

An honest woman has neither eyes nor ears.

Let no man meddle with a foolish woman.

A dog pisseth, and a woman weeps at any time.

The woman must be very sick that cannot lie on her back.

There Is always some iron or other that shakes, viz. there is something or
other to complain of.

We see a mote in our neighbors eye, but not the beam in our own.

He makes two sons in law with one daughter, viz. he promises much.

He has good matter in him:

To throw the froc among the nettles, i. e. to apostatize.

He has not been yet broke.

He will make you believe that Hares lay eggs.

There the Hare lies.

He has share of the booty.

I am of that opinion.

He knows not of what wood to make his arrow.

He is in a scurvy humor.

He has not well set on his spectacles.

I am better versed in this business then you.

He is a cunning fellow.

That arrow came not out of my quiver.

The business goes on roundly, it goes upon four wheels.

A Merchant of bables.

She has her flowe^s.

He made him carry the fools babble.

Robin has found his mate.

To marry the cellar and the cystern, viz. to mingle wine with water.

I will handle thee to some purpose.

He has no more memory then a Rabbet.

He is shuttle-headed.

They will not be caught without mittains.

He is rich.

To clip the Kings coin.

To stand on the Pillory.

He is marked like a Berry Mutton, who has always some scurf upon the nose,
because the sheep there feed on time, not that they are marked with red oker.

As snotty as a mustard pot.

After Dear-hunting the Cossin, after the Bore the Surgeon.

The Devil shit him down flying.

He went away with a nose foot long, viz. he was jeered out of countenance.

To hail on the parsley, viz. to tyrannize.

A nose as flat as a flock.

Thou art in a merry mood, merrily disposed.

He has pared all his nails at study.

He is of a base metal, he fears the touch.

As headstrong as an Abbots mule.

To use green and dry, viz. to do his utmost.

I pray give another dog this bone.

Such a noise that one could not hear God thunder.

He curses, he says the Lords Prayer backward.

I Will be with you in a trice.

I know his faults, or upon what foot he halts.

He has well feathered his nest, or made up his mouth.

Fortune favors you.

How do all your little ones?

He will pay dearly for it, or he will repent it.

He is not of my mould.

I have put him to a nonplus.

He is in the humor to do it.

An old threedbare proverb.

That has made him stoop low enough.

He is well seen in Latin.

Saint Quintens disease, viz. the cough.

He left him not a rag.

He shall not eat in my dish.

I will do all possible endeavor.

He is so good a husband that he can make a tester of eighteen pence.

A well furnished brain.

A promoter or common pettifogger.

A gentleman of straw.

He is well broken in the world.

Your credit lies at the stake.

A great head, and thin neck is a sign of a fool.

To endeavor a business with might and maine.

That which the King wills the Law wills.

He is not worth the film of a wallnut.

You go about the pot, you use too many circumlocutions.

Lets take again the goat by the beard, viz, lets begin again.

Furnished with needle and thread, viz. to be ready for the business.

He soars upon a high wing, viz. he is ambitious.

Rashly or precipitately.

That goes much against my stomach.

A velvet belly, and coarse clothes.

They come from words to blows.

All covet all lose; meant of misers.

A gallant of straw, or a Knight of cockleshells.

To speak exactly or curiously well.

You may lend a piece of your cake to one that has one of his own in the oven.

Many kindred, many cares and troubles.

If I do not that let me be baked.

Every one seeks his own interest.

He has many gingles in his brain.

Gossiping or sweet wine, as Hypocras.

Utterly, from the very bottom to the top.

A fawnning companion or parasit.

A Merchant who takes money without weighing, or telling it, viz. a thief.

It is much against my desire and will.

I will pay you in the Cordeliers coin, viz. with thanks and prayers.

I know not what Saint to pray unto, viz. how to remedy it.

Put twixt the anvill and the hammer, viz. twixt two dangers.

He has got the thoung at both ends.

Daggled like an Archdeacon.

This is of another kind or taste.

She knows enough of the old dance.

The chance is already cast, viz. the thing is resolved.

To take the moon with his teeth.

He is well to pass, viz. he is rich

He is upon the brink of his grave.

To be drunk

To steal the pox from Saint Roc.

You go the clean contrary way.

The genitories off the husband.

I have a difficult or crabbed business.

The world is quite off the hinges.

It Is one of the Devils journeymen who does more then he is commanded.

He is not such a devil as he looks.

A Dunsticall Doctor, an Ignoramus.

You have hit the nail on the head.

Thinking to cross himself, he thrust his finger into his eye.

To throw water into ones wine, viz. to abate his courage.

An excentrick cros-graind fool.

To embarke without biscuit, viz. to go about a business rashly.

He will dearly repent and pay for it.

He thought to thread his needle hereby.

To greaze in the fist, or give bribes.

To encroach upon another right.

He is a cunning crafty companion.

To lie at the sign of the star, viz. abroad.

They are well agreed, and at a good pass.

One finds not any thing at all.

He has well studied men, he knows how to carry himself.

I have as much business to do as I can turn my hands unto.

I will send it by John Long the carrier.

To make a skreen against the wind on the Alps.

You hunt after flies, you trifle away time.

As merry as a Merlin.

A gentleman of the new mold.

As lean as a rake, or a shotten herring.

To prop a lie upon a reed.

As dull and stupid as a Bel-founder.

To keep a foul horrible coyl.

To observe time and opportunity.

She made a false bound, viz. she has played the whore.

To shoe goselings, or do impertinencies.

A devovrer of iron Carts, viz. a bragger.

He is neither Fig nor Raison.

It Is a thing very strange to sleep within a grange, spoken in drollery.

To be toungue-tied, or frozen-tongued.

More unlucky then the wood which makes the gibbet.

This is not belonging to my trade.

As merry as Mice in malt.

A fat Capon, a Capon high fed.

He has many whimses in his head.

A dull fellow, a kinsman to Gillor the dreamer.

Stout and valiant of his hands.

Taken napping twixt the hedge and the corn.

By the Devils flanks and bowels.

To spit out a collop or a Iacobin.

To give one a trip, or prevent and hinder him.

By hook or by crook, by right or wrong.

More merry then rats in straw, or mice in malt.

To take a Lion by his jawe, viz. to attempt a dangerous task

He is well bred, or he has sucked good milk.

It Is the Language of Uterpendragon.

He is a very wrangler, he has a tripe-womans tongue.

You will make me believe that bladders are lanterns.

He is a poor sordid miser, or snudge.

You are Conqueror, the field is yours.

He is run away, he has taken Campos.

He was put quite out of countenance.

She has her Cardinal, viz. her monthly flowers.

One beheaded, or made a Cardinal on Tower hill.

I will beat thee like a stock fish.

The morpheyes in the face Judas bran.

You may do what you please, I give a blank.

He is cousened, or he has swallowed a gudgeon.

He is become a bankrupt, he has given up his girdle.

You hunt after flies, you trifle away time.

You build Castles in the air, or in Castile.

To lay the fault on another, to throw the cat at another legs.

Twilight, when one cannot discern a dog from a wolf.

Frivolous tales of a cock and a bull.

He is very learned, or devout.

I know well what aileth him, upon what foot he halteth.

As fat as a pig, or a dormouse.

He is born with his head coiff'd, viz. rich.

To throw the helve after the hatchet.

A Monks collation, viz. good cheer.

He is furnished with needle and thread, viz. he has all things fit for the
business.

Howsoever matters go or stand.

Swagbellied, gorbellied, or bigbellied.

A man's yard, called Adams club.

I come newly, freshly thence.

You must steer your course some other way.

He beats the tabor with his teeth for cold.

A wolf in a sheep skin, viz. an hypocrite.

He is in a quandare, he knows not of what wood to make his shaft.

Hunger drives the wolf out of the wood.

In the times of yore, when men wiped their noses on the sleeve instead of a
handkercher.

A Bourbon tart, or a quagmire or Irish tart.

He is at the end of his prayers.

Let us begin again, let us take again the goat by the beard.

I will not take your way.

He thinks to bruise iron `with his teeth.

Kept as close as the Jewish Cabal.

He has a good brain, he is no fool.

He is buried, he is laid in his hutch.

He battens with this good news.

Between Baucair and Tarascon feed neither sheep nor mutton.

Three Spaniards are four Devils in France.

If I am missing, never seek me in Scotland.

He is rash in judgment, he is of Chasteaudun.

One of King Arthurs knights, or a knight errant.

French blood cannot be false to his Prince.

To take a Mountain for a Mole-hil, to take Paris for a Corbeil.

The Germane has his spirit at his fingers ends, because he is a good
Artificer.

The Norman vintageth with a pole; viz. by beating down apples to make syder of.

He is ashamed of nothing, for he has passed Gournay bridge.

To be beheaded, or made a Cardinal at Tower hill, viz. beheaded.

To be hanged, to be sentinel at Montfaulcon.

An Italian fig, a Lombard bit or poison.

The patience of a Lombard, or a Milanois.

When the Frenchman sleeps the Devil rocks him: A Proverb the Flemmins have of
the French, who is always plotting some ill against him.

Who made a Norman, made a truant.

A Pot-quarrel or Dutch fray.

The pistols of Sancerre, viz. sling to hurl stones.

Untimely or unseasonable help three days after the battle.

A Cornish Knight, viz. a Cuckold.

Angers a low town and high steeple,

Rich Whores and poor Scholars.

When a Picard is without drive^ing, and a Norman without flattering, the world
will mend.

Arma^son, a bad river but good fish.

Paris without a parallel, Rouan beyond a name.

He is as full fed as an Englishman.

At Montmartre there be more whores then kine, but if there were not there so
many Nuns, there would be more kine then whores.

There is no Car-man so good in Beauce but he is sometime overthrown.

Nere horse or man did mend,
That unto Rome did wend.
England's a good Country, but ill people.

There is more of Montmartre in Paris, then of Paris in Montmartre: Alluding to
the plaster of Paris, whereof the bes^ is had from Montmartre.

There is no Village so poor, but it has a feast once a year.

They of Liege do brag to have three things; to have bread better then bre^d,
to have iron harder then iron, to have fire hotter then fire.

He is like the Suisse, who are his who gives most.

It is the castle of Montargis, fair afar off, and nothing near.

As dull as a Dutchman, or a pie of petitoes.

To Gasconize, viz. to play the thief.

I have paid all my English, viz. all my creditors: This Proverb t^ok its rise
when John the French King was prisoner in England, for whose ransom a long
lasting contribution was laid upon the people.

The rigor of Toulouse, the humanity of Bourdeaux, the mercy of Rouen, the
justice of Paris.

He is of Chasteaudun, he understands at half a word.

England the Paradise of women, the Purgatory of servants, and the Hell of
horses.

The French neither speaks as he thinks, nor acts as he speaks, nor sings as he
pricks.

They agree like London clocks, viz, not at all.

Resolu^e as Pihourt in his heteroclites, viz. when an ignorant person speaks
among learned men.

You put me to my dumps, or my wits end.

The ill year comes in swimming, viz. with too much rain.

If winter did beyond Sea pass, yet would it come to find Saint Nicholas.

That person may boldly swim, who is holden up by the chin.

At saint Martin we drink the good wine.

When it thunders in March, we may cry, alas.

A dry year never beggars the Master.

An evening red, and morning gray, makes the Pilgrim to sing wellady.

A snowie year, a fruitful year.

At Christmas to the Sun, at Easter to the fire.

When the cabage grows above the stock, the Vineyard-man dies of thirst.

In harvest time Ladies are Chamber-maids.

At Saint Peter's, Winter departs, or grows stronger.

If the weather be sharp at Saint Vincenrs day look for more Winter.

January, and February, do fill or empty the granary.

Who has an ague in May, lives all the year after both healthy and gay.

December was of old a month, but now it is a year because it ends it.

A dry March, a snowy February, a moist April, and a dry May, presage a good
year.

Temporal Proverbes relating to the Seasons.
A Month before, and after Christmas winter shows it self the most cruel.

To the Fire in Winter, to the Fields and Woods in Summer.

A cold January, a feverish February, a dusty March, a weeping April, a windy
May, presage a good year and gay.

One swallow alone brings not in the spring.

At saint Barnabe the sith in the meadow.

With time and straw, medlers and acorns grow ripe.

Mars has his poison about the beginning or ending.

To saint Valentine the spring is a neighbor.

At saint Martins winter is in his way.

At saint Lucies the day grows the skip of a flea.

Salmons and sermons have their seasons in Lent.

February to day, and Candlemass tomorrow; because Candlemas is always the
second of February.

Other Proverbial sayings, and Expressions peculiar to the French Tongue.
WHat a pox, what a devil means that?

He left him there to cool his fingers, to pick strawes.

To pay the tart of his birthday.

To make of one Devil two, to make a Mountain of an Anthill.

To lie sentinel a^ Tyburn.

To grow proud, to pow^, or grumble.

To play the Hypocrite, or babe of grace.

Her Calender is rubrickd, viz. she has the flowers.

To make mowes at the apple-women, viz. to stand in the pillorie.

He wiped his nose with his own sleeve, viz. he cousened him neatly.

He does the fault though another drinks it up.

To break, to swallow a spider, or play the bankrupt.

Who does well, is sure to find well.

He sleeps enough, who does nothing.

An Abbots table, viz. plentiful.

Waterd, or strongly possessed with an opinion.

He cheated, he cousened him grossly.

He has thwackd him soundly.

In extenuating his fault, he has doubled it.

He has a great conceit of himself.

There Is nothing to be got by dealing with him.

According as things will permit.

A pragmatical, and discreet man.

To the knowledge and sight of all the world.

I approve of your carriage in that.

Me thinks, it seems to me.

You must not be a wolf, nor seem to be so.

To be superstitious.

He goes on very warily in his business.

He only lives, who lives contented.

A hat made like a sugar loaf.

To excuse, or clear himself.

I had my pains for my labor.

You use too many circumstances.

Let the business go as bad as it will.

To swallow a spider, to break.

Men know not who shall spend their gettings.

He is a Lorriman, where the party beaten pays the fine.

The love of great men, but the shadow of bushes, which will soon pass.

In love there is both foolishness, and wit.

There is no love like to the first.

There is a padd in the straw.

You go the clean contrary way to work.

I fear thee as little as the snow of the last year.

Wittingly, or of set purpose.

Sandals or wooden shoes.

He is a bird of our feather.

He is more sensile of ill, who has felt none before.

Like the family of Archimbaut, the more in number, the worse.

He has unsadled, or overthrown him.

A man cannot have too much wit or money.

Snailes a^me against the night, when they stretch out their horns.

He that has a good trade will have his share.

I believe there will be some foolish ado here.

You will have an ass to bear wool.

A little prick may make a great ass to go.

He has drink enough who has grief.

He is an upright well natured man.

I will make him trudge for it.

I stay indeed to much purpose.

To get well by the business.

To have diet at Court.

He has words at will, or he is tongue-tied: the contrary.

All has been another, and will be another.

He battens with this good news.

He has fair and mannerly cousned him.

He has cousned me, he has given me beans half ripe.

I will not stir an inch in the business.

A swagbellied, gorbellied, full pauncht fellow.

Whilst I have breath in my body.

To travel, and get the pox.

My pretty little mopp, my little bully.

To pay for his matriculation.

To have a difficult business to do.

Lets go warm our selves at Gods fire, viz. at the Sun.

He went not the right way to work.

To undertake a business without the proper means.

That cannot be performed with a white sword, viz. without bloody noses.

He was taken napping, betwixt the Hedge, and the Corn.

I know well enough what helps he has.

Good gains make good pottage.

He is not so good but there may be as good.

That half penny is good that saves a penny.

To get into a tippling house or tavern.

He is drunk of his own bottle, viz. he is too well conceited of himself.

He is brangling, he is not resolved.

I will give him a Rowland for his Oliver, as good as he brings.

A good Book, but filthy Commentaries.

A smel-feast, a trencher-friend.

I will keep it very secret and close as the Cabal.

He was graveld or put to a nonplus.

My heart trembles within my breast.

A fool of five and twenty carats, an egregious fool.

To give up his girdle, viz. to be a bankrupt.

A stupid, dull, dunstical fellow.

All flesh is not Venison.

Not to put a burden that one cannot bear.

To go to the Change, viz. to another woman besides his wife.

He has a good pawn of the Cat, that has her skin.

One of the Knights of King Arthurs round table.

He is well clothed, he is well covered.

I know not how to remedy this.

He fears nor King nor Kesar.

Who lends often loses at last.

To c^ide one soundly.

'The wolf devours the last, meant of the slothful.

You go clean came, the clean contrary way.

God sends nothing above our patience.

To go toward Paris, or Paris-ward.

To let slip an opportunity.

I heard nothing at all of it.

Thou shall be soundly whipped.

He clapped the door against me.

Every ones fault is writ in his forehead.

There Is no such life as that of the gypsies.

He has guld us egregiously.

A good earth must make a good pipkin.

He kills sometimes who thinks but to wound.

He has as much judgment as a Sow has of spices.

I shall take you napping.

He has made a good market.

Wind up your bottoms, and drink your cup.

There are more cheaters then trompets.

He gave him a flirt, he played with his nose.

One trade requires a whole man.

To disingage himself of a business.

He is a happy man who has nothing to do, but with his own business.

Among such compagnons such thou will become.

There is no Earthly pleasure but is accompagnied with pain.

He turn him loose, to lowse himself at the Sun.

He is not safe who never had a cross.

He is resolute, he is bent upon it.

To play at hand-ruff, viz. to snore.

I have plodded extremely upon the business.

I am utterly, altogether undone.

Marriage rides upon the saddle, and Repentance on the crupper.

I will hold thee close to it.

He makes profession to speak French.

And then what will follow, what will become of it?

Spoken jeastingly of a fart let in company.

Cleave his feet, and send him abroad to feed among sheep.

I am spoiled, I am utterly undone without resource, or ever being able to rise.

As long as the stock bears stemmes, it never brancheth, viz. as long as there
be heirs of an elder Prince of the blood, the second brother or his heirs can
never inherit in France.

A moral Explication of some Proverbs in the French Language.
The mortar smells always of the Garlic. THis Proverb is proper to him who
being once foul'd with some vice, bears still some marks of it, nor can he
dissemble his inclination thereunto; As a mortar, wherein Garlic has been
pestelled in, cannot be so washed, but that it will still retain some smell
thereof.

Robins mind runs always on his pipes. This Proverb is taken from a Droll
called Robin who lived in Paris, and is meant of one who impertinently makes
mention of something that his fancy runs upon, having nothing else in his
mouth.

John Colots knifes, one is no better then the other. This Proverb grew up
first in the town of Troy in Champany, where this John Colot lived, who was an
Artizan, and a good fellow, and had commonly at his girdle a sheath, wherein
there were three or four knives, all of little value, and having some fault or
other, as one having the point broke, the other hacked on the edge, the other
blunted, the other did not cut at all; And hence did arise this Proverb, which
is properly spoken of things, whereof there is no great choice, as also of men
that are of little value.

Who has once the report to be an early riser, may sleep till noon. We are
taught by these words, that often times the good opinion and judgment which we
have of some persons are grounded more upon common report then upon Truth it
self, in so much that the reputation is more then the thing it self; And it
is found that there are many whom the vulgar cry up to be wise, learned, and
valiant, and adorned with other Virtues, yet they have nothing of all these
three if one should pry narrowly unto them.

For one Hair Martin lost his Ass. One called Martin having lost his Ass in
the Fair, it happened that another was found which had been also lost, the
Judge of the place was of that opinion that that Ass should be restored to
Martin, but he who had him in his possession, desired the Judge to ask Martin
of what color his Ass was, who having answered, that he was all gray, he was
put by his claim, because there was a black hair found in the Asse's tail.

To be in straw up to the belly. This Proverb is borrowed from horses, to whom
the best usage they can have (besides oats and hey) is to give them good store
of fresh straw for their Litter; And by this similitude, it may be spoken of
those that are at their ease, and have all things to their hearts desire.

As he spoke of the Wolf he sees his tail. The use of this Proverb is, when one
comes unexspectedly to to a place where he is spoken of.

It Is my mothers belly. This Proverb is spoken of one, who having escaped some
danger in a place, resolves never to return thither, like the child who being
come out of his mothers womb with much pain and danger, never enters there
again.

There is no day so long but has his evening. By this Proverb we are taught,
that all things in this world come to an end, as there is no day ever so long,
but has its declination.

He has a nose. When one is commended to be well advised, sagacious, prudent,
and soreseeing afar off all accidents whereby he might be surprised, we say
that that man has a nose: And this similitude is taken from the sagacitie, and
acute sent of hunting dogs, who by the smell of the nose, their heads being
toward the earth discover and follow all the turns of those beasts which they
pursue.

He has so much nose. This Proverb is spoken, when one undertaking a business,
miscarrieth in bringing it about, therefore he rests confused and ashamed.

To be in the Pi'es nest. Use is made of this Proverb, when one is mounted up
to the highest degree of his fortune; For the nature of the Pie is, to build
her nest upon the highest trees that she can choose.

To break a pudding on the knee. The different nature of things require that
some be managed one way, and some another; There are some things that may be
broken on the knee, as sticks of dry wood; There are other things that require
the knife, or hatchet, as green osiers, and all other wood while it is sappy,
and green; Of this kind are puddings which cannot be broken properly, but with
a knife; Now Now, this Proverb teaches, that in all our actions we cannot
arrive to that which we pretend, but by such means that are proper thereunto.

Rather let the Child be snottie then pluck off his nose. This Proverb teaches
that they who have those to govern who are habituated, and hardened in some
customs, from which one would withdraw and wean them, and it being unpossible
to do it altogether, one should endeavor to correct the greatest part and
leave alone the lesser by pressing them too much; This similitude is taken from
little children, who being commonly snotty, one might as well pluck off their
noses, as keep them altogether, but they must have some small ropes of s^ot
hanging on their lips.

To leave God a sheaf of straw. It is well known, that from all times it was
ordained to pay dimes or tithes unto the Lord, which was the tenth part of our
earthly increase; This was kept so holy, that every one used to leave upon the
field the tenth sheaf: Now, it happened that some profane persons made of
purpose some kind of sheaves wherein there were no grains, wherewith they
paid their tithes: Which gave occasion to this Proverb, and it may be applied
to any person of an ill Conscience, whether toward God, or man, whereof there
were never more then now adays, (thank the long Parliament.)

A man of Pork, and Beef. By these words is meant a gross fellow ill taught,
and uncivil, such as they commonly are who are of a low degree, whose ordinary
food is Bacon and Beef.

To throw the helve after the hatchet. This Proverb took its beginning from a
poor wood-cleaver, who having broken the iron head of his hatchet foolishly
threw the helve after it in despite: Hereby we are admonished, that when some
small loss is befallen us, we should suppress our choler, and not make the
loss bigger.

By link and link the coat of male is made at last. A Haubergeon in times past
was a kind of armor, which was made of the same stuff as we now make our coats
of male which use to be made of small rings of iron, or (...), ^^^sping one
another; and in regard that to make such a coat composed of so many small
pieces, there must be much time and patience used this Proverb tells us that
there is nothing but by little and little may be perfected by study and labor.

There is no hunting but with old dogs. This Proverb aims at young men, who
cannnot be so capable of any Function as the aged, who have gained experience,
and studied men.

To go gather Mulberries without a crook. The Mulberry is a tree which
stretches her branches far from the trunk, and they are easy to be broken;
wherefore they who go to gather the fruit thereof, carry with them a kind of
crook to draw the branches: This teaches us not to go about any business,
without being provided with that which is necessary to expedite it.

He has made a hole in the night. If any get away from a place by stealth
without any bodies privity, specially when he is least suspected, they use this
Proverb, He has made a hole in the night.

A sleeping Fox has nothing falls into his mouth. This Proverb teaches us,
that to entertain our selves in this world, it is not enough to be wise, and
learned, but we must employ our care and diligence in having a hand upon the
work: the Proverb is taken from the Fox, (...) although he be held the
cunningest of creatures, if he should keep^ still sleeping in his earth, hole
or terrier, he should never have any meat enter into his belly.

As resolute as Pihourt in his heteroclits. The meaning of this is, when an
ignorant buzzard is too ready to speak in a learned assembly; this Pihourt was
a Mason of the City of Renes in Britany, whence sprung the Proverb.

I have paid all my English, viz. all my Creditors. This Proverb had its
beginning in the reign of John (the French King) when he was prisoner in
England, at which time for his ransom, there were diverse tallies, and other
general Impositions laid upon the people, which lasted a long time to satisfy
the English; Insomuch that English, and Creditor came to be synonymas.

Now the Pope is become French, and Jesus Christ English. These words were used
as a Proverb, when the Pope came to keep his See in Auignon, and that the
English prospered so much in France, that they possessed more then half the
Kingdom.

PROVERBI Gli piu scelti nella LINGUA ITALIANA De I quali alicuni andano
GLOSSATI; CON LETTRE COMPOSTE TUTTE DE PROVERBI.

ITALIAN PROVERBS OF THE CHOICEST SORT, Whereof diverse are Gloss'd, and
comented upon.

Which PROVERBS are Partly MORAL, relating to good life; Partly PHYSICAL,
relating to Diet, and Health; Partly TOPICAL, relating to particular places;
Partly TEMPORAL, relating to seasons; Partly IRONICAL, relating to Drollery,
and Mirth, etc.


AL MOLTO ILLUSTRE, and GENEROSISSIMO PERSONAGGIO, Don GUILHELMO PASTON,
CAVAGLIERE DORATO, and BARONETTO; Il quale, Havendo traghettato il Nilo al gran
Cayro, and d' Egitto, trascorso la maggior' part dell' Imperio Turchesco
(oltra Le Regioni piu nobili de L'EUROPA;)

Fra altre isquisitissime perfettioni che rapportava seco,
Si rese Padrone assoluto della Lingua Italiana, etc.
TO THE HONORABLE, and MOST GENEROUS PERSONAGE, Sir WILLIAM PASTON KNIGHT, and
BARONET; Who, Having traversed most of the Noble Regions of Europe, and gone up
the Nile to the Gran Cayro, and invaded most of the Dominions of the Ottoman
EMPIRE,

Besides other most exquisit perfections which returned with him,
He made himself Great Master of the Italian Tongue, etc.
LETTERA composta de PROVERBI, i quali Vanno tutti incatinati a far' un
sentimento intiero, and Congruo; Mandata A un Gentilhuomo ch'era su'l punto de
viaggiare, and andarsi a Italia.
Signore mio affectionatissimo,
DIcono communemente che l'acqua corrente e piu chiara che la cheta, and che
quella del stagno e assai piu torbida che la passagiera, and quella del
ruscello; cosi gli spiriti di loro che andano per il mondo and s'applicano allo
studio degli huomini divengono piu sottili, chiari ed acuti; Parimente fra gli
vegetabili s'osserva, chegli migliori porri sono quelli che si traspiantano;
Per tanto io lodo grandemente il pensiere che voi hauete di voler' trappassare
gli Alpi, e scender poi l'Apennino la schiena d'Italia; Ma siate auverito che
per andar' saluo per il mondo, and principalmente in Italia, dove vi sono tante
test, tempeste, and feste, bisogna auer' l'occhio di falcone (per veder'
lontano) orecchie d'asino, viso di simia (per compiacer' tutti) lingua de
montinbanco spalle di camelo (da portar' qualunche cosa,) bocca di porco (da
mangiar' tutto) gambe di ceruo per schifar' il pericolo; In Italia voi
trouarete assai Marioli, piu doppij che la cepolla per tanto guardate vi ben
been del gioco, (nel quale gli Italiani si dilattano troppo) per che il gioco e
un tarlo che rode fin' a losso; Havendo passato piemonte traghettarete quel
delicatissimo fiume del Po perch gli pioppi del Po ligriman' a^bra, tuttavia
Il pa non sarebbe po se l'Adda, and Tesin non vi metesseroco'. Essendo intruto
la Lombardia, voi vederete Milan' la Grande, tanto per la sua forza, quanto per
la sua ampiezza donde nacque quel Proverbio, Milan puo far, Milan puo dire, ma
non puo far' dell' acqua vino; Guardate ui ben in quei contorni de boccon
lombardo, cio e d'un fico Italiano. Di l^ intrarete nell Dominio Veneto, and
fra l'altre nobili Citta Vicenza e degna d'esser' salutata, perch dicono che
Venetia non ha tanti Gondolieri, quanti Vicenza ha conti, and Cavalieri; Dila
v'incaminarete a Padoua la sede principal' d' Hippocrat. and di la a Venetia
dove si puo vedere l'impossibile, nell 'Impossibile; la potrete salutare la
Sposa di Nettuno anchor ch'alcuni (gli anni a dietro) la chiamino la concubina
del Turco; gli Veneti. nonsono cosi facili a compiacere, perch dicono che ui
sono quatro difficili cose, cuocer' un vuouo, far' al can'vn letto, insegna^'
un Florentino, and servir' un Venetiano; Farete ben di visitare l'Arsenale, una
delle Grandezze del mondo per la sua forza; donde nacque il detto commune, che
tutto l'Arsenale de Venetia non basta armar la paura; In Venetia guardate ui
ben delle done, perch Il sesso donnesco e dannoso; Le Cortesane di quel lago
si stimano le piu belle del mondo, secondo il detto, pan Padouan, vin Visintin,
tripe Trevisane, puttane Venetiane, de donde nacque un altro, Venetia, Venetia,
chi non te vede non te preggia chi t'ha t^oppo veduto te dispreggia; Essendo
sotollato dalla Virgin Citta, per che fra tutte l'altre citta d' Italia, la
Venetia si chiama la Virgin citta, per non aver may stato rapita dal nemico,
and v'ene una profetia che continuora Vergine fin a tanto ch'il suo marito
l'abandoni, cio e il mare. Havendo dico detto adio a Venetia, farete ben di
visitar Toscana, ma essendo la, siate auvereito che chi ha da far con Tosco,
non bisogna esse^' losco; oslervate donque queste due regole, chi non si fida,
non vien ingannato, and che chi ha il lupo per compagno, porti il can' sotto il
mantello. La, voi vederete Fierenze la bella, si bella, che si dice che sia una
citta da veder' solamente le Feste, de dove nacque un altro decto, se Fierenze
havesse un porto de Pisa farebbe un horto, and de Liuorno un escritoio, and de
Luca un cacatoio; Dipoi, Siena e degna d'esser sa. tata ancho^' che dicano, che
Siena quatro cose piena, Torri, campane, Bardassi, puttaen; guardate vi di non
comprar' panno in Siena* perch panno Sanese si rompe prima chesi met adosso;
Farete ben di visitar Luca che si chiama casetta de api, per la sua industria;
Di la u'incaminarete a Genoa la superba, dove gli mariti ingravidano lor moglie
cento miglia lontano, dove ancho si dice che ui sono montagne senza legno, mar
senza pesce, done senza vergogna, and huomini senza conscienza; Poi farete ben
di visitar' lo stato ecclesiastico come. Bologna la grassa, dove si legano le
vigne con salsiccie; Di la potrete pigliar la strada Romana, and, non ci'e cosa
piu pesta che la strada di Roma, Dicono che chi va a Roma and porta buon
borsetto diuenta Abbate, o Vescovo di bott^, niente di manco ci'e vn' altro
Proverbio che u'informa, che in Roma, chi seguita le fortune li fuggono et chi
non l'aspetta le vengono; ma osseruisi ben che la Corte Romana non vuol pecora
senza lana; Di la havendo veduto (non fututo come disse il Tedesco secondo il
fuo accento) il Papa et tutti gli Cardinali potrete a bell agio passar a Napoli
la Gentile, tutta via, un Paradiso habitato da diavoli se si da feed al detto
comune; oltra di questo dicono ch'il Napolitano e largo di bocca, and stretto
di mano; de sort che spesse volte la, tal mano si bacia che si vorrebbe veder
mozza; In quella delicatissima citta si troua che un' pelo di donna tira piu
che cento carra de boui, Per preuenir questo, bisogna allontanarui dal dinanzi
delle moglie, di dietro delle mule, et da tutti li lati di monachi; non importa
molto che si veda la Calabria terra de tarantole, perch si dice che guai a
quel paese dove ci'e un Calabrese, se ui sta un anno, apporta ruina, et danno;
terra sterile, tutta via piena de nobili, de sort chi si viddero tree Marquesi
sopra un albero mangiando fichi: Per tutto dove si passa bisogna haver bezzi in
borsa, perch un cavalier' la senza danaro e muro senza croce da tutti
scompisciato; conviene ancho star'all erta et ardito, perch in quelpaese chi
pecora sifa il lupo li man gia, li meneranno per il naso come un bufalo; Fra
altre cose Italia abonda de Vescovi (ma alcuni assai poueri) secondo quel
Proverbio Nationale, i conti d'Alemagna, i don di Spagna, i Monsieurs de
Francia, i minori fratelli d' Inglitarra, i nobili di Scotia, Vescovi d'
Italia, fanno una pouera compagnia; l' Italia e la scuola di prudenza, perch
dicono che gli Todeschi sono saggij nel fatto, gli Francesi doppo il fatto, and
gli Italiani innanzi il fatto; Tuttavia l' Italiano e gran Dormiglione conform
a quel motto, le nationi Smaltiscono di versamente la lor melancholia, ^l
Todesco la beue, il Francese la canta, lo Spagnuolo piagne, l' Italiano la
dorme. Fra altre cose potrete osseruar' a Napoli et Milano, che affetto portano
alli Spagnuoli, et Francesi, dove l'uno e l'altro dice; Amo tanto lo Spagnuolo,
che mi contentarei di vederlo impiccato con budelli Francesi. Per trarr' il
filo di questa lettera al fine ho Speranza che doppo questo viaggio non si
verificara in voi quel detto, Inglese Italimato e un diavolo incarnato; ni
manco, che sarete del numero di quelli chi vanno messeri, et tornano seri; Non
posso piu, perch un negotio m'e subito sopravenuto, che mi ministrara piu da
fare ch'a un forno Inglese la mattina del Natale, solamente dico che se, mentre
che voi mancate qua, io ui posso valere in alcuna cosa, faro quel che potro per
servirui, et un poco meno per poterui durare; Cosi, allo Lombardo, senza
lechetto delle ceremony rimango.

Il vostro da senno J. H.

A LETTER COMPOSED OF ITALIAN PROVERBS Concurring All in one congruous sense,
and sent to a Gentleman, that was upon point of crossing the Alps to ITALY.
SIR,
THey say commonly that Running waters are the cleerest, and those of the Brook
far more then they of a standing Bog; In like manner the Spirits of those who
travel up and down the world, and by their motions apply themselves to the
study of Men, become thereby more clear, acute, and subtle. It is also
observed among Vegetables, that (according to the Proverb) the best oignons are
those which are transplanted; Therefore I highly approve of the resolution you
have to cross the Alps, and afterward the Apennin hill, the chinebone of
Italy. But take along with you these rules, that he who traverseth the world,
specially Italy, must have the eye of a Faulcon (to see danger affar off,) the
ears of an Ass, the face of an Ape, the tongue of a Mountibank, the back of a
Camel (to bear any thing) the mouth of a Hog (to eat any thing) the legs of a
Stagg, to fly from all mischiefs.

In Italy you shall meet with many cunning Rooks that have more doublings in
them then a Cabage; Therefore take heed of associating with such, specially to
fall a gaming (whereunto the Italians are extraordinarily addicted) for they
say that gaming does gnaw one to the very bone. Having gone through Piemont,
you will come to the most delicate River of Po, where the very trees weep
Ambar, yet Po would not be Po, unless Adda and Tesin did not come into her.

Being entered Lombardy, you shall see Milan the Great, so called as well for
her strength, as for her bigness, whence sprung the Proverb, Milan can talk,
and Milan can do, yet she cannot turn water into wine; In those quarters take
head of a Lombard bit, viz. an Italian figg. Thence you will pass to the
Venetian Dominions, and among other the Noble City of Vicenza deserves to be
saluted, for they say that Vienza has more Counts and Cavaliers, then Venice
has Gondolleers: Thence you may direct your course to Padua, called the chief
residence of Hippocrates, and thence to Venice, where they say one may see an
impossibility in an impossibility; there you may kiss Neptunes spouse, for
Venice is called so, though some would have her to be a Concubine to the Turk:
The Venetians they say are hard to be pleased, if the Proverb be true that
there are four difficult things, viz. To make a bed for a Dog, to roast an
Egg well, to teach a Florentine, and serve a Venetian; Being there, you shall
do well to visit the Arsenal, one of the Grandezas of the world for its
strength, whence sprung the saying, that the whole Arsenal of Venice is not
able to arm a Coward; In that melting City, take heed of Females, for a woman
may be a woe to a man; The Courtezans of that Lake, are cried up for the
fairest in the world, according to the Proverb, Vienza wine, Treviso tripes,
Padua bread, and Venice whores; whence sprung another, Venice, O Venice, none
thee unseen can prize, but who has seen too much will thee despise.

Being glutted with the Virgin City, for among the rest of the Cities of
Italy, Venice is called so, because she was never ravished by any Enemy, and
there is a Prophecy that she shall continue a Virgin for ever, until her
husband forsake her, which is the Sea, having I say bad Venice farewell, you
shall do well to visit Tuscany, but take this caution with you, that he who
has to deal with a Tuscan must have both his eyes about him; Observe therefore
these two Proverbial rules, Who does not trust shall not be coosened, and that
he who has a Wolf for his companion must carry a Dog under his cloak; There
you shall behold the fair City of Florence, so fair, that they say she is fit
to be seen only on Holidays, whence sprung another saying, That if Florence
had a Sea Port, she would make a Hortyard of Pisa, a Counting House of Ligorn,
and a shitt-house of Luca. Siena is worth the saluting, although the saying be,
that Siena is full of four things, viz. Churches and Towers, Ingles and Whores,
but take heed of buying any cloth there; for they say, that Siena cloth tears
before it is worn; It will not be amiss, being there, to give Luca a visit,
that Hive of Bees, called so for their industry; Thence you may steer your
course to Genoa, where Husbands gets their Wives with child a hundred miles off;
where also, they say, there are Mountains without Wood, Sea without Fish, Men
without Conscience, and Women without shame.

Afterward, you shall do well to visit the Ecclesiastical state, as Bologna
the fatt, where it is said, they use to tie their Vines with Sausages; Thence
you may take the road toward Rome, and never was any thing so worn out as the
way to Rome: They say, that he who goes to Rome, and carries a good purse,
becomes a Bishop or an Abbot; yet there is another saying, which tells us, that
in Rome Fortune flies from them who follow her, and seeks after them who fly
from her, yet you must take notice, that the Court of Rome will not take the
sheep without her Fleece; Thence you may direct your course to Naples the
Gentle, though some call her a Paradise inhabited by devils; Take notice that
the Napolitan has a large mouth, but a narrow purse; In so much that there
they often kiss the hands which they wish were cut off; In that Syrenian City
it is found that one hair of a woman can draw more then a hundred yoaks of Oxen;
To prevent this, observe the cautious Proverb, take heed of going before Women,
behind a Mule, or any side of a Friar. It matters not much whether you see
Calabria or no, the Territory of the Tarantolas, it being a sad barren Country,
yet abounding with Nobles, In so much that sometimes three Marquesses may be
seen eating Figgs upon one tree to drive away hunger. But wheresoever you pass
be sure to have money in your purse, for they say in Italy, that a Gentleman
without money is like a wall without a Cross that every one pisseth against;
You must also be spritefull and bold, for in that Country, he who makes himself
a sheep the wolf will devour him, and a simpleton will be led along like a
Bufalo by the nose.

Among other things Italy abounds with Bishops, (though some of them be but
poor) according to that National Proverb, The Counts of Germany, the Dons of
Spain, the Mounsieurs of France, the Cadets of England, the Nobles of Scotland,
the Bishops of Italy make a poor company; Italy is the School of Prudence, for
there is a saying, that whereas the French is wise after the Fact, the Dutch
and English in the Fact, the Italian is wise before, yet he is a great sleeper,
for whereas the German drinks away his melancholy, the Frenchman sings it away,
the Spaniard sighs it away, the Italian sleeps it away.

Among other things, you may observe in Naples and Milan the affection that the
peeple bear to the Spanish, and French, where both the one and the other use to
say, that they would be content to see all the Spaniards in Italy hung up with
Frenchmens gutts; whence you way judge who is best beloved.

But to wind up the thread of this coorse letter; I hope, that after your
return, it will not be verified of you, that an Englishman Italionat is a
Devil Incarnat, much less that you will be of the number of those who go out
Masters, and come back Clarks in the point of Knowledge.

I can extend my self no further now, for there is a sudden accident has
surprised me, that will hold me more busy then an English Furnace on Christmas
day morning; Only I say, that if I may steed you in any thing while you are
absent, I will do what I can to serve you, and something less that I may last
yours the longer: So, after the Lombard fashion without any clawing of
Complements, I remain

Yours in earnest I. H.

Proverbi morali nella Lingua Italiana.
GLi huomini da been si maritano, gli sauij no.

Inglese Italianato, e un Diavolo incarnato.

Una oncia d'alegrezza vale una libra di melanconia.

L'Astrologia e vera, ma non si trova l'Astrologo.

I peccati, and I debiti son sempre piu di quel che si creed.

Ha piu da fare che i forni di Natale in Inghilterra.

Piu sa il Mato in casa sua, ch'il savio in casa d'altrui.

Quel che non sa fingere l'amico, non e fiero nemico.

E' meglio haver' hoggi un vuovo, che domani una gallina.

Chi digiuna, and altro ben nonfa, sparagna il pan', and al Inferno va.

Beata quella casa che da vecchio sa.

Troppo s'arrischia, chi del proprio giudicio s'assicura.

Chi ha il Lupo per compagno, porti il cane sotto il mantello.

Piu tosto tardi, che in fretta.

Assai pampani, poca vua; viz. assai parole, pochi fatti.

La prima part del pazzo e tenersi savio.

Un male, and un Frate rare voltesoli.

Multifan' conscienza di sputar in chiesa, and poi cacan su l'altare.

La moscha chi punge la Tartaruga si rompe il becco.

La necessita, e infidel Guardiana della castita.

L'anima di poche, il corpo di molte cose ha bisogno.

Meglio e magro accordo, che grassa sentenza.

Mentre che il Lupo caca, la pecora scampa.

Nel marito prudenza, nella moglie patienza.

Non e tutto butyro che fa la vacca.

Il mondo e fatto a scale, chi le scende, and chi le sale.

Il sparagno, e il primo guadagno.

Se la cosa s'havesse a fare due volte, l'asino sarebbe nostro.

Tardi torno Orlando.

Voi mi farete credere che le lucciole son lantern.

Al frigger' se ne avuedranno.

Al Carnovale si vede chi ha la Gallina grassa.

Quel che fa tanto il savio il piu delle volte viene a cader' del asino.

In bocca serrata non entro maj. mosca.

Chi non s'arrischia, non guadagna.

Chi vuol del pesce, bisogna che s'ammolli le brache.

Ventura haver poco senno basta.

Accasca in un punto quel che non accasca in cento anni.

E' meglio crederlo, che provarlo.

La forza caca adosso la ragione.

Cavallo corrente sepultura viva.

Se jo ho le corna in seno, non me le voglio metter', in capo.

Chi guarda a ogni penna non fa may letto.

Chi ha poca vergogna tutto il mondo e suo.

A l'arca aperta il santo pecca.

Lega l'asino dove vuol il padrone.

Dio mi guardi da oste nuovo, and puttana vecchia.

Tal mano si lava che si vorrebbe veder mozza.

Jo levai la lepre, and un altro la prese.

Se non vuoi che si sappia, nolo fare.

Il male non sta sempre dove si pone.

Il mondo e tondo, and doppo la notte viene il giorno.

A chi increscer stare pongasi a sedere.

So ben quanti pani fanno una coppia, and quante paia fanno tree buoi.

Egli e mala cosa l'esser cattivo, ma gl'e peggiore l'essere conosciuto.

Presto maturo, presto marzo.

Massara piena tosto fa la cena.

S'el Sol mi splende, non curo la Luna.

Niente non vuol sale.

L'habito and il riso manifestano l'huomo.

Non ha sal in zucca.

Si lascia menar per il naso come un Buffalo.

Gli amici legano la borsa con un filo di ragnatelo.

Chi ha l'amor nel petto, ha lo sprone a i fianchi.

Ti vuol il been, come vuol all cipolle il cane.

Porta teco se vuoi viver' meco.

Egli e piu misero che non era Mida, che si scaldava all fumo della merda.

Tanto e mio, quanto godo, and do per dio.

Chi confessa destino niega Iddio.

Si jo cascassi in dietro, mi romperei il naso, son tanto disgratiato.

Chi ha il neo sopra la centura, ha gran ventura.

Chi nasce bella, nasce maritata.

A ogni grolla piaccion i suoi grollatini.

Chi ti vede di di, non ti cercara di notte.

E buon rimedio contra la lusuria.

E' piu bugiardo d'un Epitasio.

Primo porco, ultimo cane.

La porta di dietro e quella che rubba la casa.

Cavallo, and cavalla cavalgalo in su la spalla, asino and mulo cavalcalo in
su'b culo.

Chi per altri sta, paga per se.

Il prometter' e la vigilia del dare.

Beata colei che di vecchio pazzo sinnamora.

Quando tu puoi haver del ben, totene.

Casa mia, mamma mia.

Chi mangia lepre ride set giorni.

Vuo senza sale, non fa ben ni male.

Chi da presto raddoppia il dono.

I danari son tondi, and ruzzolano.

Proverbio non falla, misura non cala, superbia non dura.

L'asino chiha fame, mangia d'ogni strame.

Jo ho le voci, and altri hanno le noci.

I pisto^i, and i molinari sono gli ultimi a morirsi di fame.

Faro quel che potro, and un poco manco per poterui durare.

Chi non vuol affaticarsi in questo mondo non ci nasca.

Chi ha figliyoli tutti j bocconi non sono suoi.

Cosa fatta per forza non vale una scorza.

Chi risponde presto, sa poco.

Chi paga inanzi, e seruito in dietro.

Chi belletta il viso, al culo pensa.

Penso ripenso cosi divengo pazzo, come l'huomo si fa dallo sputo d'un cazzo.

Il male per libra viene, va via per once.

La piu trista routa del carro cigola il piu.

Abondanza genera fastidio, and scarsita apetito.

Le puttane piangono con un occhio, le maritate con due, le monache con quatro.

L'huomo fin cinque e porco.

Maggior' fretta minor atto.

Allontanarti dal dinanzi delle done de dietra delle mide and da tutti i lati
de' monachi.

Saper' esser pazzo a tempo e sav^ezza.

Chi per altrui s'obliga entra per lo largo, and esce per lo stretto.

Egli ha po^o di quel ch'il bue ne ha troppo, i. cervello.

A mal mortale ne medico ne medicina vale.

A chi la riesce ben, e tenuto savio.

A casa mia non entrarai se teco non porterai.

A governar pazzia ci vuol senno.

A ciascun passo nasce un pensiere.

Assai ben balla a chi Fortuna suona.

A cader va chi troppo alto sale.

Ancor il been quando e soverchio spiace.

Chi frequenta la cucina sent di fumo.

E' meglio sdruciolare co' piede che con la lingua.

Chi a l'honor manca d'un momento non ripare may in anni cento.

Lauda il mare and tienti alla terra,

Lauda il monte, and tienti al pian,

Lauda la moglie, and tienti donzello.

Chi da vinti non e, chi da trenta non sa, chi da quarenta non ha, ne maj sara,
ne maj sapra, ne maj havera.

Quando sei incudine ubedisci al martello.

Siedi, and gambetta, che vedrai tua vendetta.

Il gioco e un tarlo che rode fin su l'osso.

Assai parole, pochi fatti Ingannano j sauij anche mati.

Non gittar may tanto con le mani, chi ij costretto ac darlo cernando puoi co'
piedi.

Poverta non e vitio, ma solo incommodita.

Assai sa chi sa, se tacer sa.

Amaro e il dono che toglie la liberta

Assai comanda chi ubedisce al savio.

Nulla nuova, buona nuova.

Assai domanda chi ben serve, and tace.

Al infelice may riesce il disegno.

Amor infanga i giovani, and annega i vecchi.

Al bugiardo non si creed la verita.

Allegrezza di cuore fa bella pelatura di viso.

Amor vuol feed, and feed firmezza.

Al torre imprestito sei cugin germano, ma al render figlio di puttana.

Al bugiardo gioua esser sagace, se vuol far creder, il suo dir verace.

A Donna non si fa maggior dispetto, che quando vecchia o brutta le vien detto.

A chi ti vuol male, venga Donna, processo, o Urinale.

Andar col cembalo in columbaia.

A me pare una coglioneria lasciar di se memoria a l'hosteria.

A mal passo l'honore.

Ad ogni cosa fuor ch'a la morte, troua remedio l'huomo forte.

Arbor spesso trapiantaro may di frutti e caricato.

A l'acqua cede il sasso.

Amore col suo strale percuote ogni mortale.

Biasimar Prencipi e pericolo, il lodargli buggia.

Beata quella casa che da vecchio sa.

Assiduita genera facilita.

Ac attivo cane corto legame.

A orgoglio non manca cordoglio.

Amico di bocca non vale una stoppa.

A ffibbia quella.

Arrischiar un vou per quadagnat un bou.

Beni di Fortuna passano come la Luna.

Occus, poccus, chi nasce matto, non guarisce maj.

Ogni cosa e meglio che moglie.

Ogni dieci anni l'uno ha bisogno del' altro.

Ogni donna and vacca, ha qualche tacca.

Ogni uno s'affatica, il povero in cercare, Il rico in conservare, il virtuoso
in imparare.

Piu caca un bue, che cento mosche.

Per altri, non per se suona la campana.

Pesta giusto, and vendi caro.

Pigliam' prima l'orso, and poi vendiamo la pelle.

Per durare, bisogna indurare.

Per troppo dibarter la verita si perde.

Per picciola cagion', il Lupo tuole il monton.

Il diavolo alla porta chiusa volta le spalle.

Il pensier' have buone gambe.

Il diavolo puo tentare, ma non precipitare.

Tal man si bascia che si vorrebbe mozza.

Tanto e Mercante chi perde, che chi guadagna.

Tree forfanti fan una forca.

Terra negra fa pan biancho.

Tutte le nationi diversamente smaltiscono il dolor.

Tal nutre il Corvo che gli cavera poi gli occhi.

Tosto si mostra il pazzo, and lo sterco.

Tosa la pecora, and non la scorticare.

Tavola senza sale bocca senza saliva.

Trista e quella casa dove il patron non porta braghe.

Tree taceranno se due non vi sono.

Troppo disputare la verita fa errare.

Tanto erra chi creed tutti sogni esser fallaci, quanto gli creed esser veraci.

Tra gli amici guardimi Iddio, che fra nemici mi guardero Jo.

D'agnello, porco, cimia and leone, tiene il vino la complessione.

Non si tosto si fa un templo a Dio, come il Diavolo ci fabrica una capella
appresso.

Voj uscite de gangheri.

Fo la vita di michelazzo, mangio, and beuo, and vado a solazzo.

Una man lava l'altra, and ambedue il viso.

Ubidisci al Re gius^o, and l'iniquo

Un a sella non s adatta ad uno dosso solo.

Un par d'orecchie seccan cento Lingue.

Un huomo di paglia val' una donna doro*

Vera prosperit^, e non haver necessita.

Vento al visaggio rende l'huomo saggio.

Va dove vuoi, mori dove devi.

Un male and un frate rare volte soli.

Una spada, tien l'altra nel fodra.

Villano non e chi in villa esta, ma villan, e chi villainy fa.

Chi vive a speranza, magra fa la danza.

Chi dona and toglie, gli viene la biscia al cu^re.

Qui promette, and non attend, in Inferno si distende.

Cavallo rognoso non si cura d'essere strigliato.

Cio che si usa, non ha scusa.

Chi si marita fa been, e chi no fa meglio.

Chi schernisce il zoppo dee esser dritto.

Chi non si fida, non viene ingannato.

Chi to moglier, to pensier.

Cuor ^orte rompe cattiva sort.

Chi non ha danari in borsa, habbi miel' in bocca.

Compagnia d'uno compagnia de nissuno, Compagnia di due compagnia di Dio,
compagnia di tree compagnia di Re, compagnia di quatro compagnia di Diavolo.

Render agresto per prugnole.

Piu tosto ^i satolla il ventre, che l'occhio.

Senza danaro Georgio non canta.

Quando la gatta no c^e, i sorgi trescano.

Quand il fromenro e ne campi, e di Dio, and de' Sancti.

Quando superbia galoppa, la poverta e in groppa.

Quanto piu si ruga, tanto piu spuzza il' stronzo.

Amor vuol quatro cose, savio, solo, solecito, secreto.

Quel che manda il cielo, forza e che si togla.

Quando il cieco porta la bandiera, guaj a que gli chi vengono di dietro.

Parole di bocca, and pietra gittata chi le riaspetta ^^rde giornata.

Piu felice ch 'il can de becchaio, o gallo del mugnaio.

Piu pesto che la strada Romea.

Piu pro fa il pan sciutto a casa sua, che l'arosto fuori.

Piu tosto mendicante che ignorante.

Piu vale l'ingegno, che forza and legno.

Processo, taverna, and urinale, mandan l'huomo a Hospidale.

Parole di Angelotto, and fatti di Diavoletto.

Piu tosto Moro che mandorlo.

Pecora mansueta d'ogni agnello e tettata.

Luy non ha ossi in bocca.

Lui e piu doppio ch'una cipolla.

La fame la piu gran machina per espugnar la superbia.

La mosca che punge la Tartaruga si rompe il becco.

Ligami le mani, and pie, and mettimi fra mie.

Lui ha sangue sotto l'onghie.

Le buone parole ongono, le cattive pungono.

Molti san' tutto, and di se stessi nulla.

Mentre dorme l'auaro sueglia il ladro.

Meglio e ubbedire che sanctificare.

Mangia a tuo modo, ma vesti a quel d'altruy.

Molte cose e meglio crederle che probarle.

Meglio e un bicchier de vino che tutto il Tevere.

Molti parlan d' Orlando chi non viddero maj il suo brando.

Mal pensa, chi non contra pensa.

Muso di Porco, gambe di cervo, scniena di Asino, ha bisogno il viandante.

La Mula che ride, la moglie che soghigna, quella ti tira, and questa ti
graffigna.

Mal cena, chi tutto desina.

Consumo me stesso per seruir altri.

Ninguno nasce Maestro.

Non e sciolto, chi si strascina la catena dietro.

Non manchiam a noi medesimi, poi faccia il cielo.

Non lo fare se non vuoj che si sappia.

Non si puo insieme bear and fischiare.

Non e tempo da giocar a schacci quando la casa bruscia.

Non e saggio chi non sa essere pazzo.

Nurritura passa natura.

Chi paga inanzi il tratto troua il lavor' mal fatto.

Chi aspetta^ puol' ha cio che vuol.

Chi e savio di giorno non e pazzo di notte.

Chi' da Dio e visitato, da Dio e amato.

Chi ha tempo, non aspetti il tempo.

Chi ha paura d'ogni ortica, non pisci in herba.

Chi lascia andar la sua moglie ad ogni festa, and bear il suo cavallo ad ogni
fontana, dal suo cavallo havera una rozza, and dalla sua moglie una puttana.

Con fiorino, latino, and buon ronci in ogni paese si trova camino.

Chi d'altri vuol aver compassione, non ponga se stesso in oblivione.

Chi si marita per amore, di notte ha piacer, di giorno dolor.

Cinque hoar dorme il viandante, set il studiante, otto il mercatante, and
undeci ogni forrante.

Cavalier, senza entrata, e muro senza crocelda tutti scompisciato.

Chi si loda s'imbroda.

Ciascuno e figliolo delle sue opere.

Chi danari presta due cose perde.

Con l'Evangelio, si diventa Heretico.

Chi parla semina, chi tace raccoglie.

Cambiar il trotto per l'ambiatura.

Contra duo non la potrebbe Orlando.

Danari fanno Cavaglieri da vaccari.

Dar la farnia al diavolo, and la semola a Dio.

Di padre santelotto figlio diavolotto.

Due visi sotto una berretta.

Fammi Indouino and io ti faro ricco.

Grande e grassa mi faccia Dio, che bella and bianca mi faro io.

Iddio al fin ci giunge quando pensiamo essergli piu lontano.

Maj si fa cosa ben in fetta fuor che fuggir la peste.

Pensa and poi fa.

Si le done fossero d'argento non varrebbono un quatrino perch non starebbono
al martello.

Se la madre non fosse may stata nel forno, non iui cercarebbe la figlia.

Sela donna fosse picciola com' e buona la minima foglia le farebbe una vest,
and una corona.

E'tanto Auarone che scorticarebbe un pedocchio per venderne la pelle.

Il sesso Donnesco e dannoso.

Chi perde moglie, and un quatrino ha gran perdita del quatrino.

La puttana e come il carbone, o bruscia, o tigne.

Vorebbe mangiar la focaccia, and trovar la in tasca.

Studio baston di bombace.

Been detto sia quel male chivien solo.

Il mal Francese si guarisce ch'una volta in poi.

Cazzo bandito non porta lanterna.

Insegnando s'impara.

Hanno ligato il budel insieme.

Chi ha la testa di cera non vadi al sole.

Amaro e quel donativo che ti rende della liberta privo.

Gatto inguantato non piglia sorci.

Ogni uno tira l'acqua al suo molino.

Done, preti and polli non son mais atolli

Sassa che rotola non fa muffa.

Da matto attizato, da uno che leg un libro solo, da villan riffatto, da
Recipe de Medici, da etcetera de notari guardici dio.

I Will tignoso non ama'l pettine.

L'huomo propone, ma Dio dispone.

Sopra Dio non esignore, sopra sal non c'e sapore, sopra Negro non c'e color.

Donna danno.

Al primo colpo non cade l'arbore.

L'Ambasciadore non porta pena.

Quel che vien de ruffa raffa,

Se ne va de buffa in baffa.

Batte il ferro mentre e caldo.

Al cane ch'invecchia la volpe gli piscia adosso.

E'stretto in cintola.

Favella senza barbozzale.

Chi pecora si fa, il lupo se lo mangia.

Cader della padella nella brace.

Col tempo and con la paglia si maturano le nes pole.

Parole femine fatti maschi.

Alegramente, il diayolo e motto si ben, ma il figlivolo vive.

Il piu duro passo, e quello della soglia.

Chi nasce pazzo non guarisce may.

Il Lupo cangia il pelo, ma non il vezzo.

Non si puo pigliar pesci senza immolarsi.

Chi vi piano va sano.

Chi va piano, va lontano and vasano.

Quatrino ni risparmiato, due volete guadagnato.

Ogni ritto ha il suo rovescio.

Al buon vino non bisogna frasca.

Domandar l'ehe s'il ha buon vino.

Chi s'ajuta, Iddio l'ajuta.

Cui Dio vuol male, gli toglie il senno.

La spada di la su, non cala in fretta.

Scherza co' fanri, and lasci a star i santi.

Non si puo bear, and zuffolare.

Tu metti il carro innanzi a j buoi.

Non vorrej esser solo in Paradiso.

Habbiamo mangiato il pan de putti.

Pietra, and parola tratta non puo tornar indietro.

L'Indugio piglia vizio.

Bisogno fa buon fante.

Chi due Lepre caccia, una non piglia, and l'altra lascia.

Piu tosto invidia, che compassione.

I panni rifanno le stanghe, ouero vesti una colonna la par una donna.

In fin che ci e fiatto, ci es peranza.

Dove il dente duole, la lingua vi corre.

Chi l' a per narura fin alla fossa dura.

L'Asino che ha fame mangia d'ogni strame.

Di qua a la, dio sa quel che sara.

Chi se la fa, fagliela.

Hoggi in figura, and diman in sepoltura.

La ne da a i cani, ne all gatte.

E'ricco che non ha de debiti.

Ha paura delle mosche.

Lasciar fare il Mestiero a chi sa.

A ogni cosa e re medio fuor ch'alla morte.

Chi va prima al mulin macina.

A ogni grolla paion belli i suo grollatini.

Stuzzicar il vespaio.

Dinanzi il precipitio, and di dietro i lupi.

Chi non ha cuore, habbi gambe.

Le buone parole acconciano i mali fatti.

Da del tuo al Diavolo, and man da lo via.

Chi tutto vuole nulla ha, o de rabbia muore.

E' ui si legano le vigne con salciccie.

L'avaro non fa niente been, se non quando tira le calze.

Qualche volta sonacchia il buon Homero.

Tu vuoj insegnare a rampicar all gatte.

Pietra mossa non fa muschio.

Poco and spesso empie il borsetto.

Essere tra l'incude, e'l martello.

Il mondo va a la riversa.

Sei pie de terra e guaglion tutti.

Chi parla troppo, falla spesso.

Che de l'altrui prende, la sua liberta vende.

Mi conoscerai, quando non m'hauraj.

Quel e tuo nemico ch' e di tuo officio.

E' piu guaj che allegrezza.

Chi fa non falla.

Raccomandare uno di buon inchiostro.

Non ha buon tempo se non j matti.

Ben venga chi ben porta.

In tempo de carestia pan veccioso.

Felice chi impara a spese d'altri.

Domanda pur assaj che non manca poi a calare.

Quando egli arde in vicinanza, porta l'acqua a tua casa.

Bisogna che 'l bugiardo, habbia buona memoria.

Chi di gallina nasce, convien che ruspi.

Veggo il meglio, and al peggior m'appiglio.

Piaga antivedata men duole.

L'e^tremo dell' allegrezza ocupa il pianto.

Non pianse maj uno che non ridesse un altro.

Havete dato in brocca.

A casa de poltroni e ogni di festa.

Le ricchezze de Foccheri.

Tutti disegni non riescono.

Non metter la falce ne l'altrui biade.

Il di loda la sera, and la vita il fine.

Met ci ancor voi la vostra manno.

IN travagli tirano giu l'huomo.

Egli e a l'oglio santo.

Farse che vai, usa che troui.

Chi lascia la via vecchia per la nuova, spesse volte ingannato si ritroua.

A i ricchi non mancano parenti.

Chi troppo la capra munge, ne fa venir' il sangue.

Chi vive a minuto fa le spese a suoi, and a gli altri.

Di quella misura che misuraraj, misurato tu saraj.

La speranza e il pan de miseri.

Chi pratica col Lupo impara a urlare.

Non e ingannato se non che si fida.

L'occhio del patron ingrassa il cavallo.

Il buon pastore tosa, non iscortica le peccore.

Amico di buon di.

Dove parla l'oro, ogni lingua, e mutola.

Jo ho le voci, gli altri hanno le noci.

Dispicca l'impiccato, che t'impicchera poi.

Chi non puo far come vuole, faccia come puo.

Tanto e misero l'huomo quant' ei si riputa.

Pigliar due columbi a una fava.

La morte fura i migliori and lascia star i rei.

Ad ogni uccello suo nido, e bello.

Ogni Tigre porta amor alla sua tana.

Il far il letto al cane, e gran fatica.

E' ancor un poco dell' oglio nella Lume.

Nonsi puo cavar rana dal pantano.

Uso converte natura.

Non ha tetto ne letto.

Ogni simile appetisce il suo simile.

Nelle cose importanti bisogna andare col pie di piombo.

Il satollo non creed al digiuno.

Le cose rare care, l'abondanza genera fastidio.

I signori hanno il cingolo rosso.

Cavar un chiodo, e piantar una cavicchia.

Godi l'amico to, col vezzo so.

E'tanto Invidioso che cavarebbe un occhio a se per cavarne due al compagno.

Guarda che tu non trovi quel che non vai cercando.

Meglio e esser capo di lucerto la, che coda di Dragone.

Non ho quasi il fiato che sia mio.

Fa larghe corregge del cuoio d'altrui.

Miele in bocca, el rasoio alla cintola.

Sedendo and riposandosi l'anima diventa piu savia.

E' meglio esser uccel' di bosco che di gabbia.

L'amicitia si deve sdrucire, non stracciare.

Vale piu una oncia di sort, che una libra di senno.

Duro con duro non fe may buon muro.

Assaj presto fa, che si fa been.

Che giova dar di cozzo al fato?

Chi e facile a credere si troua spesso ingannato.

A giouane soldato vecchio cavallo.

A cane scottato l'acqua fredda par calda.

A chi ti puo torre cio che hai, dagli cio che ti chiede.

A chi compra bisogna haver cent' occhi, a chi ne vende basta uno.

A buona derrata pensavi su.

A parole lord orecchie sorde.

A cose troppo alte non si piglia mira.

A tutto si e riparo chi lo sa trovare.

A donare, and tenere, ingegno bisogna havere.

Acarezza vecchio matto, se vuoi ricco fa^ti in un tratto.

Al canto l'uccello, al parlar il cervello.

Alla corte del Re ogniuno laccia per se.

Amico de stranuti.

Amor, la rogna, la rosse non si ponno nascondere.

Amico dognimo, amico de nissuno.

Andar dove ne Papa ne Imperatore puo mandar Ambasciatore.

Artegiano che non mente non h^ mestier fra la gente.

Assaj comanda chi ubbedisce al saggio.

Aspetar' and non venir, esser' in letto and non dormir', ben servir and non
gradir', son tree cose da morir'.

Ben tardi venuto per niente e tenuro.

Bella donna, and vest tagliuzzata sempre troua qualche uncino.

La lettera aspetti il messo, and non il messo la lettera.

Buon e sapere mestier per servirsene quando fa mestier.

Can vecchio non baia indarno.

Campane chiamano gli altri, ma maj andano a missa.

Cento carra di pensieri non pagano un' oncia di debiti.

Chi divide il miele con l'orso ha la menor part.

Chi piscia contra il vento si bagna la camiscia.

Chi ha tutto in un luoco, l'ha tutto nel fuoco.

Chi suo secreto dice, servo si fa.

Chi nasce bella, nasce maritata.

Chi digiuna, and altro ben non fa, sparagna il pane, and al inferno va.

Chi piglia Leone in assentia, teme la talpa in presentia.

Chi non si fida non vien ingannaro.

Chi vuol guardar la festa digiuni la vigilia.

Chi vive nella Corte muore s'ul pagliao.

Chi paga inanzi tratto, troua il lavo mal fatto.

Chi ha spirito di Poesia merita ogni compagnia.

Chi non ^uol render fa mal a prender'.

Chi aspettar puol, ha cio che vuol.

Chi e savio di giorno, non e pazzo di notte.

Chi fa l'ingiuria, e il misero, and non che la riceve.

Chi fa li fatti suoi non imbratta le mani.

Chi ben dona ben vende, se non e villano chi prende.

Chi mal intend peggio responde.

Chi paga i suoi debiti fa capitale.

Chi mi vuol ben mi fa aorro sire, chi mal inbianchire.

Chi offend non perdo na may.

Con ogni uno fa un patto, con te dostesso fane quatro.

Chi vuol Quaresma corta, faccia debiti da pagar a pasqua.

Chi ha Art per tutto ha part.

Che vende a credenza, spazza robba assaj, perde gli amici, danari non ha maj.

Chi non ha matti, proveri puttanne, fra parenti, e nato di lampo di tuono.

Chi dorme grossa mattinata, va mendicando la giornata.

Che ne puo la gatta, se la massara e matta.

Ciascuno e figliuolo delle sue opere.

Compagno allegro per camino, serve per roncino.

Cosi tosto muore il capretto come la capra.

Da gli amici mi guardi Iddio, da gli nemici mi guardaro io.

Da recipe de medici, etcaetera de Notari guardimi Iddio.

Dal detto al fatto ci e un gran tratto.

D'acqua torbida non si fa buon specchio.

Delle ingiurie il remedio, e liu scordarsi.

Donna specchiante poco filante.

Donna chi prende presto si rende.

Donna baciata mezzo guadagnata.

Donna brutta e mal di stomacho, donna bella mal di testa.

Dono molto aspetato, e venduto non donato.

Dove non entra il capo mettervi la coda.

E' come un ancora sempre nell' acqua and non nata maj.

E' meglio ricusare and fare, che prometter and non fare.

E' meglio pagar' and poco havere, chi moltohavere, and sempre dovere.

E' ricco che non ha debiti.

Mangia foglia, and caca seta.

Fa been a te and Tuoj, and poi a gli altri se tu puoi.

Far come fa la scimia che leva le castagne del fuoco con la zampa del gato.

Dove non sono gatti, j toppi ballano.

Andar alla gatta pel lardo.

Fedele, forte, brutta sia la massaia.

Fortezza che vien a parlamento, vien a rendirsi.

Folle e la pecora che al lupo si confessa.

Ha buon giuditio che del proprio non si fida.

Ha dato del cul in terra.

Hoggi non si da a ^reta, diman si.

Huomo solitario o bestia o Angelo.

I salici sono deboli, and pur ligano altre legna.

Il vin nel fiasco non cava la sete del capo.

Il barbier non si contenta del peco.

Il Diavolo a porta chiu^ a volta le spalle.

Il prometter' e la vigilia del dare.

Il gioco e paragon del huomo.

Il veder' e facile, ma il preveder e difficile.

Il tignoso non ama il pettine.

Il buon pagatore, del altrui borsa e signore.

Il troppo guasta, il poco non basta.

In bocca del discreto il publico e secreto.

Inanzi il maritare, habbi l'abitare.

La carra no arroscisse.

La diligenza e la madre de la buona sort.

La guerra fa i ladri, and la pace gli impicca.

La maravigilia e figlia la del l' ignoranza.

La robba non e di chi la fa, ma di chi la good.

La stoppa lontan dal fuoco, and la gioventu dal gioco.

L'arco rompe se sta troppo teso.

Le feste sono belle a casa d'altri.

L'insegna del hosteria altri alloggia, e sta essa alla pioggia.

L'innocenza porta la protettione seco.

Mercanzia non vuol ne amici ne parenti.

Misura tree volre, and taglia una.

Ne tu^to che sai, o puoi, o hai, non voler dire may.

Ne occhi in lettera, ne mano in tasca, ne orecchi in secreti d'altrui.

Ne la moglie, ne il vino, ne il cavallo non si vuol lodare.

Nel assentia del signore si conosce il servitore.

Non far ma medico tuo herede.

Non bisogna imbarcarsi senza biscotto.

Non gettar il tuo tanto per le mani, che tu lo vadi poi cercando co' piedi.

Non resta may carne in beccaria per trista ch'ella sia.

Vuo far vendetta del tuo nemico? governati been.

Vender l'uccello in su la frosca.

Soccorso non venne may tardi.

Volendo far quel che non puoi, s'interviene quel che non vuoi.

Buona insalata e principio d'una cattiva cena.

Una man frica l'altra and amendue la testa.

Picciol' donporta spesso gran guiderdon.

L'haver oro e un timore, il non haver un dolor.

E' ben venuto chi vien gobbo.

Vedendo uno conosci mezzo, udendolo parlar il conosci tutto.

Val piu una berretta che cento coffie.

Che giova dar di cozzi al Fato?

Villano non e chi in villa sta, ma villano e chi villainy fa.

Virtu della bocca sana cio che tocca.

Secondo i beni sia la dispensa, il savio lo creed, Il pazzo non ci pensa.

Se il giovane sapesse, and il vecchio potesse, non e cosa che non ci facesse.

Se cascasse indietro romperebbe il naso.

Savie all' impensata, alla pensara pazze son le done.

Saviamente governa chi fugge la taberna.

Solo Idio e senza peccato.

Render ben per male e carita, mal per been crudelta, mal per male vendetta,
ben per been giustitia.

Riserua il colpo maestro.

Amor de purana, and vin de fiasco la mattina buona, la sera guasto.

Quel che schernisces il zoppo devi andar dritto.

Quel che ha un pie in bordello, ha l'altro nello spedale.

Quanto piu s'aspetta, piu nuoce la vendetta.

Quando la guerra Comincia, s'apre l'inferno.

Poca robba, poco pensiero.

Piu vede un occhio del patron, che quatro de servitori.

Piu tira un pelo di codonna che cento carra de buoi.

Perdona a tutti, ma niente a te.

Per andar salvo per lo mundo bisogna haver' occhio di falcone, orecchie di
Asino, viso di Scimia, parole de Mercanti, spalle di Camelo, bocca di Porco,
gambe de Cervo.

Balzan di quatro, cavallo da mato, balzan de tree, cavallo da Re, Balzan da uno
no le daro a nissuno.

Con ogni uno patto, con amico fare quatro.

Sa fat peso d'ogni lana.

Pigliar due colombi a una fava.

Chi cerca briga, la trouara a sua posta.

Chi vive a speranza muor' cacando.

So quanti pani fanno una coppia.

Quelche ha da essere, convien che sia.

Che sara, sa ra.

Egli e mala cosa l'esser cattivo, ma glie peggiore l'essere conosciuto.

Gli migliori porri sono quelli che si traspiantano.

Non ho paura de brutti volti, che son nato in Carnevale.

Non son uso a portar in groppa.

Non val levar a buon hora, bisogna buona fortuna.

Onor di bocca assai giov^, and poco costa.

Ogni femina e casta, se non ha chi la caccia.

Odi, vede, tace, se vuoi viver' in pace.

Pasqua tanto desiata, in un giorno e passata.

Patienza, Tempo, and danari accommodano il tutto.

Seminar aghi, per coglier ferro.

Proverbi Temporali tocante la Stagione.
E' Come il sole di Marzo, che muove, and non risolue.

Sotto acqua fame, sotto neve pane.

Aprilone, Aprilone, tu non mi farai metter giu il pellicione.

A san Tome tanto e cresciuto il di, quanto il gallo alza il pie.

Sera rossa, and negro mattino allegra il pelegrino.

A san Michelo il calot va nel cielo.

A san Martin si vest il giouane and il vecchio.

A san Martino becci il buon vino, and lascia andar l'acqua ol molino.

Quando la state il gallo beue che subito pioua creder' si deve.

La neve per otto di madre de la terra da indi in poi matrigna.

Come Marzo s'auvicina tutti gli humor isi risentano.

Poca uva assai vin, poco pan manco pan.

Oliva, castagna, and ghianda d' Agosto ne dimanda.

Gennaio fa il peccato, and Maggio n'e incolpato.

Anno di neve, anno di beue.

Tree acque d' Agosto con buona stagione vaglion' gli buoi, and il carro del Re
Salomone.

Proverbii Fisici tocante la Sanita.
FOrmaggio non guasta sapore.

Giaci la notte, senti la mattina, sta dritto di mezzo di, la sera camina.

I vecchi chi scherzano con le giouani, accarezzano la morte.

Il pesce guasta l'lacqua, la carne la concia.

Lauda moglie and tienti donzello.

Lo badagliar non vuol mentir, o che egli ha sanno che vorra dormir o ch'egli
ha qualche cosa che non dir.

Quando una donna si stende becco fututo chi non intend.

Maj fu fiume grande che non v'entrasse acqua torbida.

Meglio e dar la lana che la pecora.

Meglio e dar un soldo, che prestarne vinti.

Meglio e pericolar un tratto che estar sempre in timore.

Nella gotta il medico non vede gotta.

Pan mentre dura, ma vino a misura.

Pan d'un di, vouvo d'un hora, vin d'un anno, pesce di dieu, donna di quindeci,
amico di cent'ci anni.

Sanita senza danari, e mezza malaria.

Piscia chiaro, and fa le fiche al medico.

Il bell vestir sono negro, nuovo, netto.

Quando il vecchio non vuol bevere, nell' altro mondo va lo vedere.

Porco d'un mese, and oce di tree, e un varo mangiar da Re.

Pome, pere, and noce guastano la voce.

Pesce, oglio, and amico vecchio.

Pesce al sole, and carne a l'ombra.

Poco cibo and nissun a fanno.

Sta sanita del corpo fanno, fra il letto e'l lettuccio.

Febbre quartana amazza j vecchi and j giovani risana.

Vi sono pia vecchi ubbriachi, che medici vecchi.

Un buon pasto, un cattivo, and un mezzano, mantien' l'huomo sano.

Vendi la tonica per com^rar la Betonica.

Vitello, polastro, and pesce crudo ingrassano j Cimitieri.

Vino dentro, sernno fuori.

Vino al mezzo, oglio di sopra, and miele di sotto.

Chi vuol' ^tar fan', pisci come il can.

Vecchia gallina ingrassa la cucina.

Un vuovo e nulla, due una frulla, tree un che, quatro un atto, cinque un
tratto, and sei sono la morte.

Un gallo basta a dieci galline, ma non dieci huomini ad una donna.

Gallina vecchia fa buon brodo.

Una volta l anno cavati sangue, una volta il mese entra nel bagno, una volta
la semana lavati la testa, una volta il giorno bascia la tua donna.

Giugnio, Iuglio, Agosto, donna non ti conosco.

Cacio cieco, pan con occhi, vino che salti alli occhi.

Sano come pesee, o campana.

Piscia chiaro, and incacane al medico.

A tavola non bisogna haver vergogna.

A buon hora in pescaria, and tardi in beccaria.

Asciuto il piede, calda la testa, and del resto vive da bestia*

Barbier giovane, medico vecchio.

Aria di finestra, colpo di balestra.

Chi va a letto senza cena, tutta notte si dimena.

Di giorno quanto vuoi, di notte quanto puoi.

Di buona terra to la vigna, di buona razza to la figlia.

E' meglio pascer' febbre che debolezza.

Ei fa beneficio a quei che sono da ca del Diavolo, and de i suoi non fa conto
niuno*

Tu mi leggi per cose nuove, le mie compositioni.

Tu sei l'ottavo sapiente, il terzo Catone.

Tu vai cercando miglior pan che di fromento.

Egli ha pisciato in piu d'una neve.

E' piu lungo che un Dante.

Diventa di papa vescovo.

Tu vuoj votar il mare con un cucchiaro.

Donna che si liscia, vuol fat altro che la piscia.

E' come la castagna bella di fuori, and dentro la magagna.

Tu comniciai a scorticare dalla coda.

Puzza da ruffiano.

Tu sei doppio come le cipolle.

Voi mi date pan per focaccia.

Puoi pisciar in letto, and dir che sei sudato.

Ha mangiato del culo della gallina.

Il lupo d'esser frate ha voglia ardentee mentre e infermo, ma sano si pen^e.

Il gallo e l'orivolo della villa.

Il primo anno che l'huomo S'ammoglia, o s'ammala o s'indebita.

Di fuori Argo, in casa talpa.

Muro bianco carta de matti.

Met pur su legna, chi in ogno modo la cenere val danari.

Tu sei piu matto che un granchio che porta il cervello nella tasca.

Dove sono done and ocche non vi son parole poche.

Rimaner con vno palmo di naso.

Le cortesane piangon con un occhio, le maritate con due, and le monache con
quatro.

Due Guglielmi, and un Piero fan un pazz' intero.

Buon di Dante, di donde vieni, quanto erto el fango? Risp. Di Roma, final cul,
buon di, buon anno.

Tu sei fuor del solco, fuor della carriera.

Come il can dell' ortolano che non mangia de cavoli, and non ne lasciar
mangiar altri.

Il papari menan l'oche a bear.

Il giorno di san Nimbo, giouedi de tree fusi.

Scapucciare al primo passo.

Gli ho messo una pulce nell' orecchio.

Egli pagara a tree doppi.

Non ti stimo un bagattino.

Non ha sale in zucca.

Tu non sai ne bu ne bas.

Tu se fuor de gangheri.

Scorticarebbe un pedocchio per venderne la pelle.

Tu misuri gli altri co'l tuo passetto.

Maj dici il vero se non quando non se n'accorge.

Ha piantato un porro per una cipolla.

Questo e il punto disse Lippotoppo.

Tu hai intra preso a menar l'orso a Modena.

Cercar funghi in Arno.

Gigante de Tivoli che burtaua j ceci con le pertiche.

Arco Soriano che tira a gli amici and a nemici.

Ei gli par d'esser il Poeta di Modena.

Non andrei a Scotia s'io v'havessi lasciato un occhio.

Nato nella Falterona and fragli Alpi.

Come quel Perugino, che subito cha gli fu rotto il capo corse a casa per la
celata.

Pan Padouan, vin Vicintin, tripe Trevisane, puttane Venetiane.

Se Firenze havesse un porto, de Pisa farebbe un horto, and de Livorno un
Escritoio, and de Luca un cacatoio.

Napoli un paradiso habitato da Diavoli.

Chiva a Roma and porta buon borsetto, diuenta Abbate, o vescovo di botto.

Chi lingua ha, a Roma va.

In Roma chi segue le fortune le fuggono, chi non l'aspetta le vengono.

Con le labbra parlouana i Greci, and con il petto gli Romani.

Corte Romana non vuol pecora senza lana.

I Tedeschi hanno l'ingegno nelle mani.

Venetia, Venetia, chi non te vede non ti preggia.
Chi t'ha troppo veduto te despreggia.
Vorrei esser' in Guimea dove rompono le bracchia a chi parla di lavorare.

Le Monache di Genoa tornano dal bagno, and poi dimandano licentia dalla
Badessa.

Roma la santa, Milan la grande.

Le Nationi smaltiscono diversamente il lor dolor; Il Tidesco lo beve; Il
Francese lo canta; Lo Spagnuolo piagne; L' Italiano il dorme.

Napolitano largo di bocca, stretto di mano.

Provar' can in Puglia.

Tutti vogano alla galiotta.

Guelfo son io, and Ghibellin m'i appello.

Panno Sanese che si rompe prima che si metta adosso.

Come i quadri di Fiandra, belli da lunghi, brutti d'appresso.

Siena di sei cose piena, Torti, Campane, Puttane, Becchi, Scolari, Roffiane.

Napoli la gentile, Venetia la signorile.

Bologna la grassa, Padova la passa.

Venetia la ricca, Genoa la superba.

Lingua Toscana in bocca Romana.

Gli Genouosi ingravidano lor moglie cento miglia lontano.

In Genoa vi sono Montagne senza legno, mar senza pesce, Done senza vergogno,
and huomini senza conscienza.

In Italia ui sono troppo test, troppo feste, troppo tempeste.

Guai a quel paese, dove ci e un Calabrese, se vi sta un anno porta rouina, and
danno.

I Don di Spagna, Conti d' Alemagna, i Monsieurs di Francia, i vescovi d'
Italia, i Cavaglieri di Napoli, i lordi d' Scotia, i minori fratelli d'
Inghilterra, i nobili di Ungheria, fanno una povera compagnia.

Un Milanese, and un Mantouano se ne vergogna rebbe.

Andar senza barca in Cornovaglia.

Gli Italiani saggii inanzi il fatto, Tedeschi nel fatto, gli Fra^cesi doppo il
fatto.

Facciamo alla Lombarda che dove si cena si dorme.

Di tree cose il Florentino fa una frulla, d'adio, mi raccomando, vuoi tu nulla?

Chi va a Bologna catta febbte, o rogna.

Fatta a Ferrara, e temperata a Piombino.

Donna Graeca, vin Graeco, vento Graeco.

L' Insulano giamai habbi per compagno.

Amessina si trovano assaj pulci, polvore, puttane.

I Guidaei in pasqua, j Mori in nozze, j Christiani in piatire consumano il
loro bein.

Inglize Italionato, e un diavolo incarnaro.

Roma gi^ capo, hor coda del mundo.

Amo tanto lo Spagnnolo che me contentarei vederlo impiccato con gli budelli
del Francese.

Dove stanno Tedeschi, non vogliono star Italiani.

E' grassa come una Puglia.

Milan puo far', Milan puo dire, ma non puo far' d'acqua vino.

Piu pazzi che quei da Zago chi davan' del letame al Campanile perch crescesse.

Pazzo, come quel Perugiano, che sabito che gli fu rotto il capo, corse a casa
per la celata.

Amici di Tanan chi mostrano j sassi a chi lor domanda pan.

E' come donna da Castle Cerino, bella da lungo, and brutta da vicino.

E' piu stretto in cintura che qual si voglia Spagniolo.

Il Bergamasco ha il parlar grosso, and l'ingegnosottile

Non ha Venet^a tanti gandolieri, quanti Vicenza Conti, and Cavalieri.

Facciamo come que di, Prato; i lasciamo piovere.

Il Francese non dice come pensa, non leg come scrive, non canta come nota.

E' torto come la via de Bergamo.

Il Po non sarebbe Po, se Adda and Tesin non vi mettessero co.

Gli pioppi de Po largiman, Ambra.

Chi ha da far con Tosco, non bisogna esset' losco.

Spositioni, and gloss d'alcuni Proverbi particolari.
Il cacio fa romper le scarpette, and ingrossare la Lingua. QUesto si dice a
fanciulli, acchioche non mangino troppo di formaggio.

Vino da un orecchio. Vuol dire, que quando bevete un buon vino, voi dite
Buono, chinando un oreccchio; Quando non ui garba, gli rimenate tutti due.

Eravi un mulinaccio. Questo Proverbio e accommodato a chi dice qualche buggia,
and non la puo soltentare; Uno contava d'aversi rotto in mare, and a nuoto
esser scampato in uno luogo deserto dove non era nulla da mangiare, Dimandato
come facesti tu? disse, que 'havea mangiato un Tedesco, and cottolo su i
carboni, and dimandato, donde havesti il fuoco? disse, che sempre portava seco
il focile, and ogni pietra e focaia, and pur dimandato al fin onde havesti le
legne, soggiunse subito, Quivi era un mulianio guasto; e cacasangue li venga.

Da Verona a Vicenza miglia trenta, da Vicenza a Verona trenta dua; questo
s'intende delle disese, and ascese.

La mosca chi punge la tartaruga rompe al fin il beco. Questo vuol' dire che
chi contrasta co'l piu potente, e peggiorato al fine.

Ella aspetta tor' marito. Si dice d'una ch' a lunghe l'ugna.

Egli ha ^atlivi vicini. Questo si'ntende d'uno che loda se stesso.

Egli non ha freddo a i piedi. Si dice di coloro che dal bisogno non sono
astretti a vender le lor merci manco di quel che vagliono, and possono
sostentarle fin che venghi, che si levi per giusto Prezzo, and e tratro, da
coloro che alcuna volta per aver freddo a i piedi le danno via per quel che
possono per andar' a scaldarsi.

Non si fa mantello per un acqua sola. Questo vuol dire, che non si fa un amico
per servirsene una sol volta.

Egli par d'esser il Caca di Reggio. Una si fatta storia si racconta di questo
Caca, I Gibellini di Reggio erano molto possenti, and tra gli altri vi havea
uno Chiamato il Caca da Reggio, and ancora per ischerne del nome di luy si fa
mentione in motti; Quel Caca era grande come Gigante, and di maravigliosa
forza, and con una mazza di ferro in mano nullo s'ardia appressare che no
l'abbatesse o morro o guasto

Nissun divento may povero per far elemosyna. Perch chi dona a poveri impresta
a dio.

Primo Porco, ultimo Cane. Perch de Porci i primi che nascono sono i migliori,
and de' Cani gli ultimi.

Le siepi non hanno occhi, ma orecchie. Auvisa che si guardi come si parla,
quando s'e in luogo dove altri non veduto possa udire.

Dio mi guardi da Mula che faccia hin, da Borea, and da Garbin, da donna che
sappia Latin. Da donna chi pretend saper' troppo.

Dio mi guardi da chi non ha denti. Cio e de un nemico soave and lusinghiere.

Chi contra al cielo gitta pietra in capo gli ritorna. Cio e, chi resist la
volunta d'Iddio, le cose luy succedono di mal in peggio.

Voi volete che io vada star a Mantova. Viz. Voi volete chio' fallisca, perch
a Mantova varino la maggiore part de Mercatanti che falliscono.

Egli si sta fra il le^to e'l lettuccio. i. Non troppo been, tratto da i
convalescenti che per la de bo lezza ora s'ul letto, ora s'ul lettuccio si
gettano.

Chi per altrui promette entra per lo largo, and esce per lostretto. Questo e
tratto dal corno chi ha due buchi uno stretto l'altro largo.

E' va piu d'un Asino biancho al mulino. Questo s'usa quando alcuno pensa che
qualche cosa sia sua, per esser' simile alla sua.

Al Leone sta been la quartana. Vuol dire, all' huomo feroce and superbo sono
utili le infermita.

Tu m'hai rotto, o schiacciato il vouo in boca. Diciamo, quando essendo noi per
dire qualche cosa, un'altro lo dice prima di noi.

Ho piu da fare che i forni di Natale in Londra. Vuol dire chio sono
occupatissimo.

D'agnello, di Porco, di Scimia, di Leone tiene il vino la complessione. Cio e
che in vino veritas, quando uno e ubbriaco, si scopre la sua dispositione.

Pochi principi si salvono. La ragione e perch ve ne siano pochi, come fu
predicato inanzi il Duca di Savoya.

Moral Proverbs in the Italian Tongue.
HOnest men use to marry, but wise men not.

An Englishman Italianate is a Devil incarnate.

An ounce of mirth is better then a pound of melancholy.

Astrology is true, but where is the Astrologer?

Our sins and our debts are always more then we take them to be.

He has more business then English Ovens at Christmas.

The fool knows more of his own house, then a wiseman of another.

He who cannot counterfeit a friend, is no dangerous enemy.

It Is better to have an egg to day, then a 'hen to morrow.

Who fasts and does no good thing else, spares his bread, and goes to hell.

That house is happy which smells of an old man.

He ventures too much, who relies soly upon his own judgment.

Who has a wolf for his companion, let him carry a dog under his cloak.

Rather late, then do a thing in have.

Leafs enough, but few Grapes; viz. many words and few deeds.

The first chapter of fools is to hold themselves wise.

A misfortune, and a Friar seldom go alone.

Many make a conscience to spit in the Chruch who shite after upon the Altar.

The fly which pricks at the Tortoise breaks her beak at last.

Necessity is an ill guardian of chastity.

The soul has need of few things, the body of many.

A lean agreement is better th^n a fat sentence.

While the wolf shites, the sheep escapes.

Prudence in the husband, and Patience in the wife.

It is not all butter that comes from the cow.

The world is like a ladder, one goes up, the other down.

Sparing is the first gain.

If the thing had been to be done twice, the Ass had been our own.

Orlando came too late.

You will make me believe that gloworms are lanterns.

You will find it in the frying, viz. upon trial.

At Shrovetide it will be known who has the fat hen.

He who vaunts himself to be wisest, comes to fall down his ass most commonly.

When the mouth is shut the flies will not get in.

Nothing venture, nothing have.

Who will have fish, must wet his breeches.

Little wit will serve to have good fortune.

That falls out ofttimes in a moment, which happens not in an age.

It Is better believe then try it.

Force shites upon reasons back.

A galloping horse; a living grave.

If I have the horns in my breast, I will not put them on my head.

He who looks to every feather never makes bed.

Who has little shame all the world's his own.

The Saint sinne's at an open chest.

Tie the Ass where your master will have you.

From a new host, and an old whore the Lord deliver me.

A hand is sometimes washed, that one would see rotted.

I started the Hare, and another took her.

If thou will not have it known do it not.

The wrong is not always there where it is laid.

The world's round, and after night comes day.

Who is weary of standing let him sit.

I know well how many loafs make a couple, and how many pair three oxen make.

It Is an ill thing to be a knave, but a worse thing to be known so.

Soon ripe soon rotten.

In a full house supper is quickly made ready.

If the Sun shines on me what care I for the Moon.

Nothing needs no salt.

Clothes and laughter discover the man.

He has no wit in his noddle.

He suffers himself to be led by the nose like a Buffalo.

Friends do ty the purse with a cob-web thread.

Who has love in his breast, has a spur in his flank.

He loves thee as well as a dog loves Onions.

If thou will live with me, bring something with thee.

He is more miserable then Mida, who warmed himself at the smoke of a turd.

That Is mine which I enjoy, and give for God.

Who grants Destiny denies God.

If I fell backward, I should break my nose, I am so unlucky.

Who has a mole over his waste has great luck.

Who is born fair, is born married.

Every creature thinks her own fair.

Who sees thee by day, will not seek thee by night.

She is a remedy against lust.

He is a greater liar then an Epitaph.

The first pig, the last puppy is best.

It Is the back door that robs the house.

Ride a horse or a mare toward the shoulders, an ass or a ^ule toward the
tail.

Who stands for another, pays for himself.

A promise is the yeeve of the gift.

She is happy who falls in love with an old fool.

When thou can get good, take it.

My house is my dugg.

Who eats a Hare, laughs seven days after.

An egg without salt does neither good nor hurt.

He that gives quickly doubles the gift.

Money is round, and so quickly trills away.

A Proverb deceives not, measure grows not less, and pride does not last.

A hungry ass will eat any straw.

I bear the noise, but others have the nuts.

Bakers and millers are the last that die of a dearth.

I will do all I can, but little less, that I may last to serve you.

He who will not take pains in this world, let him not come into it.

Who has children, his loaf is not all his own.

A thing done by force is not worth a nutshel.

who answers suddenly, knows little.

Who pays before, is served behind.

Wh paints her face thinks on her tail.

I think and think again, so I become a fool, how man is made of the spittle of
a tool.

Mischances come by pounds, and go away by ounces.

The worst wheel of the cart makes most noise.

Abundance engenders loathing, and scarcity an appetite.

Curtesans weep with one eye, married women with two, Nuns with four.

A man is a kind of pig till five.

The more have, the worse speed.

Withdraw thy self from before a woman, from behind a mule, and from all sides
of a monk.

It is wisdom to play the fool sometimes.

Who is bound for another, goes in at the wide hole of the horn, and comes out
at the small.

He has too little of that whereof the bull has too much, viz. brain.

Neither physic, nor Physician can avail against a mortal diseas

Who thrives well is accounted wise.

Thou shall not come into my house if thou bring nothing.

There is wisdom required to govern foolishness.

A new thought at every step.

He danceth well who has Fortune to pipe unto him..

Who climbs too high goes to fall.

Too much of good is distasteful.

Who frequents the kitchen smells of smoke.

It is better to slip with the feet then with the tongue.

Who suffers in his good name but a moment, cannot recover it in a hundred
year.

Commend the sea, but keep thee shore,

Commend the hills, but keep thee on the plain,

Commend a wife, but keep thy self a bachelor.

Who is not something at twenty, nor knows not at thirty, nor has not at
forty, He never will be, nor will he ever know, nor will ever have any thing.

When thou art an anvil obey the hammer.

Sit still awhile, and thou shall see thy revenge.

Gaming is a vermin that gnawes to the bone.

Many words, and few deeds deceive wise men and foo's.

Cast not away with thy hands that what thou must seek for afwards with thy
feet.

Poverty is no vice, but an incommodity.

He knows enough, who knows and holds his peace.

It is a bitter gift that takes away ones liberty.

He commands enough who obeyes the wise.

The best news is no news.

He asks enough who serves well and says nothing.

To the unfortunate nothing succeds well.

Lust dirtieth young men, and drowns the old.

A liar is not believed when he tells truth.

A merry heart makes a good countenance.

Love requires faith, and faith firmness.

My dear Cousin in borrowing, and the son of a whore in repaying.

It behooves a fool to be wise, if he will make his words true.

You cannot spite a woman more, then to call her old, or illfavoured.

To him who loves thee not, wish him a scould, a process, or an urinal.

To go to a pigeon house with a taber.

It is a simple thing to leave a memory for one in his Inn*

In an ill passage honor thy companion, viz. let him go first.

A stout man finds remedy for any thing except death.

A Tree often transplanted bears not much fruit.

The stone yields to the water.

Love with his dart hits all men to the heart.

It Is danger to blame Princes, and flattery to praise them.

That house is happy which smells of an old man.

Assiduity makes all things easy.

A short slip for a cursed dog.

Pride never wants woe.

A mou^h-friend not worth a mite.

Crack me that nut.

Venture an egg for an ox.

The goods of Fortune pass away like the Moon.

Who is born a fool is never cured.

Every thing is better then a wife.

Every ten years one has some use of another.

Every woman and cow have some blemish.

Every one has something to do; The poor to get, The rich to keep, the
virtuous to learn.

An Ox shites more then a hundred flies.

The bell tolls for others, not for it self.

Give just weight, and sell dear.

Letts take the Bear first, and then letts sell the skin.

To dure, we must endure.

By too many controversies truth is lost.

A small cause makes the Wolf take the Lamb.

The Devil turns his back at a gate shut up.

The thought has good legs.

The Devil may tempt, but not break ones neck.

Some do kiss the hand they wish were cut off.

He is as well a Merchant who loses, as he that gains.

Three rogues make a gallows.

A black soil makes white bread.

All Nations have differing digestions of grief.

Some do nourish a Crow that will peck out their eyes.

A fool and a turd are soon smelt.

Shear thy sheep, but do not slay her.

A table without salt, a mouth without spittle.

That is a pitiful house where the goodman wears not the breeches.

The third would keep secret, if there were not two more in company.

Too much dispute makes truth to depart.

He erreth as much who holds all dreams to be true, as he who holds there
is none.

God preserve me among my friends, for among my enemies I will defend my self.

Wine has the complexion of a lamb, a hogg, an ape, and a Lion.

No sooner is a Church built for God, but the Devil erects a Chapel for
himself hard by.

You go from the matter.

I lead the life of little mick, I eat, I drink, and take my pleasure.

One hand washes another, and both the face.

Obey the King, whether just or injust.

There be more backs then one for a saddle to fit.

One pair of ears dry up a hundred tongues.

A man of straw is worth a woman of gold.

It Is true prosperity to have no adversity.

Wind in the visage makes one sage: viz. adversity.

Go where thou will, but die at home.

A misfortune and a Friar seldom go alone.

One sword keeps another in the scabbard.

He is not a clown who holds the plough, but he who does clownish things.

He who lives in hope does dance in a hoope, viz. in a narrow scope.

Who gives and takes, a Serpent comes at his heart.

Who promises and performs not may he stretch in Hell.

A galled horse loves not to be curried.

That which is in use has no excuse.

Who marries does well, who marries not, does better.

Who jeers the lame ought to go straight himself.

Who does not trust shall not be deceived.

Who takes a wife, takes care.

A stout heart breaks through ill luck.

Who has not money in his purse, let him have honey in his mouth.

The company of one is no company at all, the company of two is the company of
God, the company of three is the company of a King, the company of four is
company of the Devil.

To do disservice for a courtesy.

The belly is sooner satisfied then the eye.

Without money George sings not.

The mice are merry where there is no cat.

When the corn is in the field it is Gods and the Saints.

While pride gallops, poverty rides behind on the crupper.

The more a turd is stirred, the more it stinks.

Love requires four things, to be wise, to be alone, to be careful and secret.

That which heaven sends we cannot avoid.

When the blind carries the banner, woe to them who come behind.

A word once out, and a stone flung, he labors in vain who seeks them again.

More happy then a butchers dog, or the millers cock.

More worn then the way to Rome.

Dry bread is better at home, then roast meat abroad.

Better be a beggar then ignorant.

Wit prevails more then force or wood.

Law, the Tavern, and an Urinall, send a man to the Hospital.

The words of an Angel, the deeds of a Devil.

Rather a Moore then no body.

A mild sheep is sucked by every lamb.

He has no bones in his mouth, he is a smooth-toungd fellow.

He is more doubled then an ^ignion: spoken of a cunning fellow

Hunger the best Engine to batter down pride.

The fly which pricks at the Tortoise breaks her beak.

'Tie my hands and feet, and throw me among mine.

He has blood under his nails, he is stout.

Good words do anoint, but bad do prick.

Many pretend to know all, and know not themselves at all.

While the miser sleeps, the thief wake's.

Obedience is better then sacrifice.

Eat after thy own fashion, but cloth thy self as others do.

It Is better to believe many things then to go prove them.

A glass of wine is better then all the Tyber.

Many speak of Orlando who never saw his sword.

He thinks ill that does not think the contrary.

A Traveller must have the snout of a Hog, the legs of a Deer, and the back of
an Ass.

The Mule that laughs, and the woman that fleers, the first will overthrow
thee, ehe other will scratch thee.

He sups ill that eats all at dinner.

I spend my self to serve others, viz. a candle.

No man is born a Master in any trade.

He is not freed, who drags his chain after him.

Lets not be wanting to our selves, then let Heaven work.

Do not do it, if thou will not have it known.

One cannot drink, and whistle at once.

It Is no time to play at chess when the house is on fire.

He is not wise, that knows not how to be a fool.

Nurture overcomes nature.

Who pays before hand has his work ill done.

Who can have patience has what he will.

Who is wise in the day, can be no fool in the night.

Who is beloved by God, is visited by God.

Who has time, let him not stay for time.

Who fears every nettle, let him not piss upon the grass.

Who letteh his wife go to every feast, and his horse to drink at all waters,
will have a jade to the one, and a whore to the other.

With money, Latin, and a good nag, one may find a way in every country.

Who will have compassion of others, let him not forget himself.

Who marries for love has pleasant nights, but sorrowful days.

The Traveller sleeps five hours, the Student seven, the Merchant eight, and
the knave eleven.

A gentleman without money is like a wall without a cross; pissed at by every
body.

Who commends himself, berayes himself.

Every one is the son of his own work.

Who lends money, loses two things; viz. friend and mo^y.

The Gospel makes Heretics.

Who speaks sowes, who holds his peace gathers.

To change the trot for the amble.

Orlando himself cannot deal with two.

Money makes Cowheards Cavaliers.

To give the flower to the devil, and offer the bran to God.

The father a saint the son a devil.

Two faces under one hood.

Make me a Prophet, and I will make thee rich.

God make me tall and fat, and I will make my self white and fair.

God comes at last, when we think he is furthest off.

There can be nothing done well in haste, but to fly from the Plague.

Think and then do.

If women were silver, they were not worth a farthing, for they would not bear
the hammer.

If the mother had not been at the bakers, she would not seek her daughter
there.

If a woman were as little as she is good, a pescod would make her a cap and a
hood.

He is such a miser, that he would flay a louse to sell the skin.

The femal sex is hurtful.

Who loses a wife and a penny, has a great loss of the penny.

A punk is like a coal, it burns or smuts.

He would eat his cake, and find his cake in his pocket.

Study a cotton staff, viz. it consumes one softly.

Blessed be that cross which comes alone.

The French disease is cured but once at a time.

A standing prick carries no lantern.

We learn by teaching.

They have tied the tripe together, viz. they are married.

Who has a head of wax let him not go to the sun.

That gift is bitter which deprives one of his liberty.

A muffed cat takes no mice.

Every one draws water to his own mill.

Women, priests and poultry have never enough.

A rolling stone gathers no moss.

From an angry fool, from one that reads but one book, from an upstart Squire,
from the Physicians recipe, and the Scrivenors etcaetera, the Lord deliver us.

A scabby pate loves not the comb.

Man purposes, God disposes.

Above God there is no Lord, above salt there is no savor, above black there is
no color.

Woman is the woe of man.

The tree falls not at the first stroke.

An Ambassador is not punishable.

Ill gotten goods thrive not.

Beat the iron while it is hot.

The Wolf pisseth upon the back of an old dog.

He is straight in the waste.

Free speech without restraint.

Who makes himself a sheep, the wolf will eat him up.

To fall from the frying pan into the fire.

With time and straw Medlars grow ripe.

Words are women, deeds are men.

Lets be merry, the devil is dead, I, but his son is still living.

The hardest step is that over the threshold, viz. the beginning.

Who is born a fool is never cured.

The wolf changes his hair, but not his humor.

One cannot take fish without wetting.

Who goes soft, goes safe.

Who goes soft and fair, goes far and safe.

A penny saved is twice gained.

Every straight thing has its turning.

Good wine needs no bush.

Ask the Vintner whether he has good wine.

God helps him, who helps himself.

God infatuats those whom he does not love.

Divine vengeance comes not in have.

Jest with boys, and leave the saints alone.

One cannot drink and whissle at one time.

Thou puttst the cart before the oxen.

I would not be alone in Paradise.

We have already eaten our boys cakes.

A word spoke, and a stone hurled cannot be called back.

Delay breeds danger.

Want makes a good lackey.

Who traceth two hares at once, takes not the one, and lets the other go.

Be rather envied, then pitied.

A post looks well in good clothes, and a milke-maid is as fair as a Madame.

While there is breath, there is some hope.

Where the tooth pains, the tongue is commonly upon it.

What one has by nature it goes with him to his grave.

The hungry Ass eats any straw.

God knows what may happen from hence thither.

Do as you are done unto.

To day above ground, to morrow under.

Neither dog nor cat can get any thing there.

He is rich who is not in debt.

He fears the flies.

Leave every Craftsman his own trade.

There is remedy for all things except against death.

Who is first at the mill let him grind.

Every bird thinks his own chickins fairest.

To anger a wasp.

A precipice before, and a wolf behind, viz. twixt two dangers.

Who has no heart, let him have legs.

Fair words make some amends for ill deeds.

Give something of thine own to the Devil, and turn him away.

Who covets all has nothing, or dies mad.

In that country they bind Vines with sausages.

The miser does nothing well, but when he kicketh up his heels.

Good old Homer dote's sometimes.

Thou will teach cats to creep.

A rolling stone gathers no moss.

Little and often fills the purse.

To be twixt the hammer and the anvil.

The world goes clean came.

Six feet of earth make all men equal.

Who speaks often, is often mistaken.

Who takes a courtesy of another sels him his liberty.

Thou will know me better when thou have me not.

He is thy enemy who is of thy profession.

There are more groans then gladness.

Who does do deceives not.

To recommend one with good ink.

Fools have the best times.

He is welcome who brings something.

In time of dearth make shift with moldy bread.

He is happy who learns at another man's cost.

Ask enough, and there will be enough to abate.

When there is fire in the neighborhood, bring water to thy own house.

A liar must have a good memory.

Who comes of a hen, must do like a hen.

I see the best but follow the worst.

A mischief foreseen grieves less.

At the fag end of mirth there lies melancholy.

One never wept but another laughed.

You have hit the nail on the head.

In the sluggards bouse every day is festival.

As rich as the Foukers, who were Dutch Merchants.

All designs take not.

Put not thy sickle in another man's corn.

The Day commends the Evening, and a good Life ones Death.

Put also your hand thereunto.

Crosses draw one upwards.

It Is holy Oil.

Follow the fashion of the Country thou go in.

Who leaves the old way for the new, is oftentimes cousened.

Rich men can want no kindred.

Who milketh his Goat too much, may draw blood.

Who buyeth by the penny, finds not only himself, but others.

The same measure thou give to others, thou shall have thy self.

Hope is the poor man's bread.

Who keeps company with the woolf will learn to howl.

There Is none deceived but he who trusts.

The masters eye fa^neth the horse.

The good Shepherd sheareth, he does not slay his sheep.

A friend who gives only good morrow.

Where gold speaks, every tongue is dumb.

I have the fame, and others have the nuts.

Take down a thief from the gallows, and he will hang thee after.

Who cannot do as he would, let him do as he can.

A man is unhappy according as he thinks himself to be.

To take two pigeons with one bean.

Death takes away the innocent, and leaves the guilty.

Every bird thinks his own nest the fairest.

Every Tygre loves his own brood.

He has something to do who makes a bed for a dog.

There is yet some Oil left in the Lamp.

You cannot draw the frog from his ditch.

Custom converteth nature.

He has neither bed nor roof.

Like to like.

In matters of weight go on with leaden feet.

Who has dined well, believes not him who is hungry.

Rare things are dear, plenty brings distaste.

Lords wear the red gird'es, viz. are happy.

To take out a nail, and strike in a pin.

Bear with the hum^r of thy friend.

Such an envious wretch, that he would pluck out one of his own eyes to take
out both his neighbors.

Take heed you find not that which you do not seek.

Better to be the head of a mouse then the tail of a Lion.

I am scarce master of my own breath.

He cuts large thongs of another man's leather.

He has honey in his mouth, and the razor at his girdle.

By ease and rest the soul becomes wiser.

Better to be a bird of the wood then of the cage.

Friendship should be unsowed, and not ripped.

An ounce of fortune is worth a pound of wisdom.

Hard and hard makes no good wall.

What Is well done, is done soon enough.

What boots it to kick at the fates?

Who believes lightly, is deceived easily.

An old horse to a young soldier.

Cold water seems hot to a scalded dog.

Who can take from thee what thou have, give him what he asks*

A hundred eyes for the buyer, and one is enough for the seller.

Think well upon it when thou art offered a good pen^iworth.

Deaf ears to dirty speeches.

One can take no aim at things too high.

There is fence for all things if one could find it out.

To give and keep, there is need of wit.

Humor a silly old man if thou will be suddenly rich.

The bird by his note, the man is known by his words.

In the Court let every one shift for himself.

A friend to pray for sneezers.

The itch, a cough, and love cannot be hid.

Every ones's friend, is friend to none.

To go whither Pope nor Emperor can send an Ambassador, viz. to stool.

The Tradesman who does not lie has no trade among men.

He commands enough who obeyes the wise.

To stand waiting and not to come, to lie a bed and not to sleep, to serve well
and not to please, are three things as bad as death.

A good turn too late is as much as nothing.

A fair woman and a slashed garment find always some nail in the way.

Let the letter stay for the Post, and not the Post for the letter.

It Is good to have some trade to serve at a pinch.

An old dog barks not in vain.

The bells call others to Mass, though they never go themselves.

A hundred cart-load of thoughts cannot pay an ounce of debt.

Who divides honey with the Bear has the least part.

Who pisseth against the wind wets his shirt.

Who has all in one place, has all in the fire.

Who discovers his secret makes himself a slave.

Who is born fair, is born married.

Who fasts and does no good also spares his bread, and goes to hell.

Who takes a Lion absent, fears a mouse present.

Who trusts not, is not cousend.

Who will well observe the festival, let him fast the yeeve before.

Who lives at Court dies upon straw.

Who pays before hand has his work ill done.

Who has the spirit of Poetry is fit for all company.

Who will not restore does ill to take.

Who can have patience, has what he will.

Who is wise in the day time, cannot be a fool at night.

He who does the wrong is the unhappy, and not he who receives it.

Who does his own business foule's not his fingers.

Who bestows well sells well, if he be not a clown that takes it.

Who understands ill, answers worse.

Who pays his debts makes up his principal.

Who wishes me well makes me blush, but I grow pale at my ill wishers.

Who offends does never forgive.

Make one bargain with every body, but make four with thy self.

Who desires a short Lent, let him make a debt to be paid at Easter.

Who has a trade, may through all waters wade.

Who sells upon trust brusheth many clothes, loses friends, and never has
money.

VVo has neither fools nor beggars, or whores among his kindred, was born of a
stroke of thunder

Who sleeps all the morning, may beg all the day after.

It is not the cats fault, if the Mistress of the house be a fool.

Every one is son of his own works.

A merry companion is as good as an ambling horse.

The Kid may die as soon as the Goat.

God guard me from my friends, for I shall guard my self from my enemies.

From the Recipe of Physicians, and the etcaetera of Notaries the Lord deliver
me.

There Is a great difference twixt the word and the deed.

Troubled waters will never make a good looking-glass.

The best remedy against injuries, is to forget them.

A woman that looks too much in a glass was never good spinstress.

A woman kissed is half won.

An illfavored woman is a pain to the stomach, a fair one to the head.

A gift long looked for is sold, not given.

Where the head cannot enter the tail may.

He is like an anchor, which though always in the water, yet never drinks.

It Is better to deny and do, then to promise, and not to do.

It Is better to pay and have little, then have much, and to be in debt.

He is rich who has no debt.

He eats leafs, and shites silk*

Do well to thy self and thine, then to others if thou can.

Like the Ape that takes the Chestnuts out of the fire with the cats paw.

When there are no cats the mice dance.

To go to the ^at for bacon.

Let thy maidservant be faithful, strong and homely.

A Fort which begins to parley is half got.

It Is a foolish sheep that makes the wolf her Confessor.

He has a good judgment who trusts not to his own.

He is a bankerupt; whose punishment in Italy is to sit bare on a stone in the
market place.

You cannot go here upon the score to day, to morrow you may.

A solitary man is either a beast or an Angel.

Willows are weak yet they tie strong wood.

Wine in the bottle quenches not thirst.

It is not the cut hair that will content the barber.

The Devil turns his back at a door shut.

The promise is the yeeve of the gift.

Gaming is the touchstone ^f man,

To see is easy, it is hard to foresee.

The scabby head loves not the comb.

A good paymaster is Lord of another man's purse.

Too much spoils, too little does not satisfy.

In a discreet man's mouth a public thing is private.

Have a mansion before thou marry.

A letter does not blush.

Diligence is the mother of good luck.

War makes thieves, and Peace hangs them.

Admiration is the daughter of Ignorance.

Wealth is not his who has it, but his who enjoyes it.

Keep flax far from the fire, and youth from gaming.

The bow breaks that's too hard bent.

It Is good feasting at other men's houses.

The sign of an Inn lodges others, and keeps it self in the rain.

Innocence carries her protection with her.

Merchandise will neither friends or kindred.

Measure thrice what thou buyest, and cut it once.

Never tell all thou know, thou can, or have.

Nor Eye in a letter, nor hand in a purse, nor ears in the secrets of another.

Nor wife, nor wine, nor horse ought to be praised.

A servant is known in the absence of his master.

Never make thy Physician thy heir.

Do not imbark without biscuit.

Do not cast away with thy hands, what thou may seek after with thy feet.

Flesh never rest in the shambles be it never so bad.

Will thou be revenged of thy enemy? carry thy self well.

To sell the bird upon the branch.

Help never comes too late.

Seeking to do what thou can not, there will happen what thou would not.

A good sallet is the beginning of an ill supper.

One hand rubs another, and both do rub the head.

A small gift brings often a great reward.

To have gold brings fear, to have none brings grief.

He is welcome who comes well laden.

By seeing one thou know him half, by hearing him speak thou know him all.

One cap is more worth then a hundred coifs.

What boots it to give kicks at fate?

He is no clown that drives the plough, but he who does clownish things.

The virtue of the mouth heals what it touches.

Let thy expenses be according to thy means, the wise man knows it, the fool
thinks not of it.

If the young man knew, and the old man could, there is nothing but would be
done.

Such a rechless thing, that if he fell bakward he would break his nose.

Upon a sudden women are wise, and fools afterward.

He governs himself well, who shuns the tavern.

God is sole without sin.

To render good for evil is Charity, evil for good cruelty, ill for ill
revenge, good for good justice.

Reserve thy Masterpiece.

The love of a punk, and the wine of a flask fresh in the morn, and flatt at
night.

Let him go right who mocketh the lame.

Who has one foot in a baudy house, has the other in the Hospital.

The longer it is a coming the sorer is the judgment.

When war begins Hell opens.

Little wealth little care.

One eye of the Master sees more then four of servants.

A hair of a woman draws more then a hundred yoke of Oxen.

Forgive all, but thy self never.

To tr^aerse the world safely, one must have the eye of a Faulcon, the ears of
an Ass, the countenance of an Ape, the tongue of a Mountibank, the shoulders of
a Camel, the mouth of a Hogg, and the feet of a Hind.

A four white-foot horse is a horse for a fool, a three white-foot horse is a
horse for a King, and if he has but one I Will give him to none.

Make thy bargain more cautiously with thy friend then a stranger.

He can make weight of every lock of wool.

To take two Pigeons with one bean.

Who seeks strife shall find it at home.

Who lives by hope dies farting.

I know how many loafs make a couple.

That which must be it is fitting it should come.

That which will be, will be.

It Is an ill thing to be bad, but it is worse to be known so.

The best oignions are those which are transplanted.

I am not afraid of ill faces, for I was born at Shrovetide, viz. when there
was so many whifflers.

I am not used to carry double.

It Is bootles to rise betimes, unless one has good fortune.

The honor one does with the mouth avails much and costs little.

Every woman is chaste, unless she be hunted after.

To live content, hear, see, and be silent.

Easter so wished for long, passes away in one day.

Patience, time and money accommodate all things.

Like the men of Gotham, who sowed needles, hoping they would grow to bars of
iron.

Temporal Proverbs touching the Seasons.
LIke March Sun, which heats but does not melt.

Dearth under water, bread under snow.

April, April, thou shall not make me cast off my wascot.

At Saint Thomas the day is lengthened a cock-stride.

An Evening red, and a morning gray, presages are of a fair day.

At Michaelmas hot weather goes to heaven.

Young and old must go warm at Martlemas.

At Saint Martins drink wine, and let the water run by the mill.

When the Cock drinks in summer, it will rain a little after.

The snow for eight days is a mother to the earth, but after a stepmother.

As Mars hastneth all the humors feel it.

Few grapes and wine enough, a little corn little bread.

In August neither ask for Olive, Chestnut nor Acorns.

January commits the fault, and May bears the blame.

A year of snow, a year of plenty.

Three seasonable showers in August, are worth king Salomons Chariot and horses.

Physical Proverbs touching Health.
CHeese marrs no taste.

Lie along at night, sit in the morning, stand up at noon, and walk in the
Evening.

Old men who play with young maids, embrace death.

Fish spoils water, flesh mends it.

Commend a wife, but keep thy self a bachelor.

Who gapes would either go to sleep, or do a thing which he dare's not tell.

When a woman does yawn and stretch, who understands not her meaning is a silly
wretch.

Never was there great river but puddle water went into it.

Better give the wool then the sheep.

Better give a penny then lend twenty.

Better to pass a danger once then be always in fear.

To the gout all Physicians are blind.

Bread as long as it last, but wine by measure.

Bread of one day, an egg of one hour, wine of one year, fish of ten, a woman
of fifteen, and a friend of a hundred.

Health without money is half a sickness.

Piss clear, and a fig for the Physician.

Black, new, and neat is the way to go brave.

When the old man will not drink, go to see him in the other world.

A hog of a month, a goose of three, are food for a King.

Apples, pears, and nuts spoil the voice.

O^d fish, old oil, and an old friend.

Fish in the Sun, and flesh in the shade.

A little meat and less grief cause mirth.

He is twixt the bed and the couch, viz. in a mending way.

A quartan Ague kills the old, and cures the young.

There be more old drunkards then old Physicians.

A good, a bad, and one indifferent meal maintains health.

Sell thy coat to buy Betony.

Veal, poultry, and raw fish do fatten the Churchyard.

Wine within, and wit without.

Wine in the middle, oil obove, and honey beneath.

Who will keep himself in health, let him piss like a dog; viz. often.

An old hen fattens the kitchen.

One egg is nothing, two a little better then nothing, three are something,
five are too many, and six kill.

One cock serves ten hens, but ten men not one woman.

An old hen makes good broth.

Once a year let blood, once a month bath, once a week wash thy head, ( i. be
trimd,) and once a day kiss thy wife.

June, July and August, wife, I know thee not.

Blind cheese, bread with eyes, wine that leaps into your eyes.

As sound as a fish, or a bell.

Piss clear, and shite upon the Physicians head.

Be not bashful at table.

Go betimes to the Fishmarket, and late to the shambles.

Keep thy feet dry, and thy head warm, and for the rest, live like a beast;
viz. temperately.

A young Barber, and an old Physician.

Window wind like the hit of a crossbow.

Who goes supperless to bed museth most part of the night.

Sleep by day as much as thou will, and at night as much as thou can.

Plant thy Vine in a good soil, and take a wife of a good race.

It Is better feed a fever then feebleness.

He does kindness to those who are beyond the Devil, and makes no account of
his own kindred.

You read unto me my own compositions as news.

Thou art the eighth wiseman, and the third Cato.

Thou will have better bread then is made of wheat.

He has pissed in more then in one snow.

He is longer then Dante.

He is become a Bishop from a Pope.

Thou will empty the sea with a spoon.

A woman who paints will do more then piss.

She is like a chestnut, fair without, and rottten within.

Thou beginst to slay at the tail.

He smells of musk, viz. of a ruffian.

Thou have as many doublings as a cabage.

You give me bread for cake.

You may piss a bed, and say you sweated.

He is full of talk, it being the custom in Italy to give the greatest talker
the rump of the hen.

The wolf being sick wished to be a Friar, but being well he repented of it.

The cock is the country man's clock.

The first year a man is married, either he falls sick, or into debt.

An Argos abroad, and a mole at home.

A white wall is the paper of fools.

Put on wood enough, for the ashes will yield money.

Thou art a greater fool then the Crab, who carries his brains in his pocket.

Where there are women and geese, there wants no noise.

To be foully bafled.

The Courtesan weeps with one eye, the wife with two, and the Nun with four.

Two Williams and one Peter make a perfect fool.

Good morrow Dante, whence come thou, how high is the dirt? Answer, From
Rome, up to the tail, a good day, and a good year to you.

Thou art out of the furrow, thou art beside the way.

As the Gardners dog, who would not eat cabage himself, nor suffer others to do
it.

The goslings lead the geese to water.

The feast of Saint Nimbo three days before doomesday.

To stumble at the first step.

I put a flea in his ear.

He shall pay at three doblons.

I care not a farthing for thee.

He has little salt in his skull.

Thou know nothing.

You are off the hinges.

He would flay a louse to sell the skin.

You measure other by your own pace.

He never speaks truth but when he never thinks on it.

He has planted leeks for oignons.

This is the point quoth Lippotop, a kind of buffoon.

Thou have undertaken to lead the Bear to Modena.

To seek for Mushrumps in Arno.

The Giant of Tivoli, who did beat down pease with a pole.

Like the bow of Soria, who shot at friend and enemy.

He takes upon him to be the Poet of Modena.

I would not go to Scotland to fetch again one of my eyes.

Born among rocks, hard-hearted.

As he of Perugia, who when his head was broke, ran home for his helmet.

Padoua bread, Vicenza wine, Treviso tripes, and Venice courtesans.

If Florence had a port, she would make a garden of Pisa, a counting house of
Ligorn, and a jaques of Luca.

Naples is a Paradise inhabited by Devils.

Who goes to Rome, and carries a good purse, becomes an Abbot or Bishop.

Who has a good tongue let him go to Rome.

In Rome preferments seek them that seek them not, and fly from them that seek
them.

The Greeks spoke with lips, and the Romans with their breasts.

The Court of Rome will not take the sheep without the wool.

The Germans have their wits at their fingers ends, viz. good Artificers.

Venice, Venice, none Thee unseen can prize,
Who has seen thee too much will thee despise.
I would be in Guimea where they have their arms broke who speak of working.

The Nuns of Genoa return from the bath, and then ask leave of the Abadess.

Rome the holy, Milan the great.

Nations do diversely digest their grief; The Dutch drink it away, the French
sings it away, the Spaniard groans it away, and the Italian sleeps it away.

The Napolitan has a large mouth, but a narrow hand.

To try a dog in Puglia.

All row in the Gally.

I am a Guelphian, and call my self a Gibelin, he that gives most shall have
me.

Like Siena cloth which breaks before it is worn.

As Flanders Landskips, fair a far off, and course hard by.

Siena full of four things, of Towers and Bells, of whores and Cuckolds, of
Scholars and Panders.

Naples the gentile, Venice the ladylike.

Bologna the fat, and Padova more then that.

Venice the rich, Genoa the proud.

The Toscan tongue sounds best in a Roman mouth.

The men of Genoa get their wives with child a hundred miles distant.

In Genoa, there are Mountains without wood, Sea without Fish, Women without
shame, and Men without Consciences.

In Italy there are too many heads, viz. politicians, too many holy days, and
too many tempests.

Woe be to that Country where there is a Calabrese, if he stay there a year, he
brings nothing but ruin and mischief.

The Dons of Spain, the Graves of Germany, the Monsieurs of France, the Bishops
of Italy, the Cavaliers of Naples, the Lerds of Scotland, the younger brothers
of England, the Nobles of Hungary, make but a poor company.

A Milanese, or Montouan would blush at this.

To go to Cornwall without a boat.

The Italians are wise before the fact, the Germans in the fact, the French
after the fact.

Lets do as in Lombardy, where one sups he sleeps.

The Florentine makes nothing of three things, of Adieu, farewell, do you want
any thing?

Who goes to Bolonia, will meet with the fever or the itch.

Made at Ferrara, and molded at Piombino.

A Greek woman, Greek wine, and Greek wind may I find.

Never make an Ilander thy companion.

Messina has store of fleas, dust and whores.

The Jews in Passovers, The Moors in weddings, the Christians in Law suits
consume their wealth.

An Englishman Italianated, is a devil incarnate.

Rome was the head, but now it is the tail of the world.

I love a Spaniard so well, that I could be contented to see him hanged with a
Frenchmans guts.

Where Dutchmen are, Italians will not likely be; viz. to drink too much.

The names of all the Wits, or Ingenious men in most of the Cities of Italy, as
they of the Academie de Beaux Esprits in Paris are called Academiciens.
LIncei, Fantastici, Humoristi, di Roma. Intronati di Siena^ Otiosi di Bologna.
Addormentati di Genoa. Ricoverati, and Orditi di Padoa. Olympici di Vicenza.
Innominati di Parma. Invaghiti di Mantova. Affidati di Pavia. Offuscati di
Cesene. Caliginosi d'Ancona. Adagiati di Rimini. Assorhiti di Citta di
Castello. Insensati di Perousa. Catenati di Macerata. Ostinati di Viterbo.
Immobili d'Alexandria. Occulti di Bresia. Perseveranti di Treviso. Oscari di
Luca. Raffrontati di Ferma.


It Is a Country as far as Apulia.

Milan can do, Milan can speak, but she cannot turn water into wine.

More foolish then they of Zago, who dung'd the foot of the Steeple to make it
grow higher.

As very a fool as that Perugian, who as soon as his head was broke, ran home
for a helmet.

Friends of Tanan, who show stones to him that ask them bread.

She is like a woman of Castle Cerino, fair afar off, and foul near hand.

He is streighter in the waste then any Spaniard, viz. more covetous.

They of Bergamo have a gross speech, but subtle wits.

Venice has not so many gondoliers, as Vicenza h^th Earls, and Cavaliers.

Lets do as they of Prato; lets let it rain.

The Frenchman neither says what he thinks, n^r reads as he writes, nor sings
as he pricks.

As crooked as the way of Bergamo.

Po would not be Po, if Adda, and Tesin did not join also.

The poplars of Po weep Ambar.

Who has to deal with a Florentine must have both his eyes about him.

Expositions, and glosses upon some particular Italian Proverbs.
Cheese teareth the shoes, and makes the tongue fatt. THese two Proverbs use
to be spoken to children, that they should not eat too much cheese.

Wine of the one ear. By this is meant, that when ye drink good wine, you use
to say Good, bowing one ear, but when it is naught, you shake both ears.

There was an old Mill there. This Proverb is applied to those who tell a lie,
and cannot maintain it; As one who related that having suffered shipwreck, he
escaped by swimming into a Desert where there was nothing to eat; being asked,
how he could live, he said, that he fed upon a Dutchman, being broyled upon the
coals; and being asked, where he found the fire, he said, that he carried a
tinder-box with him; At last, being asked where he found wood, he replied
presently, that there was a decayed Mill there; And may the Cackrel take him.

From Verona to Vicenza there are thirty miles, from Vicenza to Verona thirty
two; this is meant of ascents and descents, as twixt Highgate and London.

The fly which pricks at the Tortoise, breaks at last her beak. This is meant
of that who does contend with a stronger then himself, gets the worst at last.

She is in hopes to marry. This is understood of one that has long nails.

It seems he has ill neighbors. This is meant of one that prayseth himself
too much.

He has no cold at his feet. This is understood of those which sometimes are
constrained to sell their commodities at a lower rate then they are worth,
because that having cold in their feet, they may go warm themselves at the
fire, and so vice versa.

A cloak is not made for one shower of rain. This is meant of a friend that is
made to do more then one pleasure.

He thinks himself to be Caca of Reggio. This is meant of a Braggadocian or
vain glorious man, for when the Gibelines of Reggio were very powerful, there
was one Caca that was a tall Giant-like man, who carried always a great bar
of iron, wherewith he had killed diverse of the Guelphies, who were then enemies
to them of Reggio in that great long civil war that happened in Italy.

A man does never grew the poorer by giving alms. Because alms are lent to
God, who is a good play master.

The first Hog, and the last Dog. This is meant that the first pig of a Sow,
and the last puppy of a Bitch is the best.

Hedges have no eyes, but they have ears. This Proverb gives caution, that we
should be wary what to speak, and in whose presence.

God deliver me from a winching Mule, from the bleak North Wind, and from a
Latin woman. Viz. From a woman that pretends to be too wise.

God deliver me from him who has no teeth. Viz. From a smooth-tounged, and
flattering enemy.

Who hurleth stones at Heaven, they fall upon his head. Viz. Who resists the
good will of God, his businesses go from bad to worse.

You will have me go to dwell at Montova. Viz. You will have me swallow a
Spider, and play the Bankrapt, and so go dwell at Mantova, the refuge of
bankrupts.

He is betwixt the bed and the couch. That is, he is ill disposed; for when men
are not well, they sometimes use to lie on their beds, sometimes on their
couches.

Who engages for another, enters at the large hole, and comes out at the
straight. A caveat not to enter into bonds for another.

There goes more then one white Ass to the mill. This is used when one takes
a thing to be his, because it is like his.

The quartan ague does well with the Lion. Viz. Some crosses, and fits of
sicknesses do well with a strong or proud man.

Thou have cracked the egg in my mouth. This is meant of those that thinking to
speak of a business another speaks before.

I have more business then London Fornaces at Christmas. Viz. I have more to
do then I can turn my hands unto.

Wine has the complexion of a Lamb, a Hogg, an Ape, and a Lion. Viz. When one
is drunk, then his humor, and natural disposition is discovered.

Few Princes go to heaven. Because there are but few of them, as it was
preached before the Duke of Savoy, who is Prince of Piemont.

LETTERA PIACEUOLE, Composta de PROVERBI, Dell' ARSICCIO Academico Intronato,
in Siena. A PLEASANT LETTER, Composed all of PROVERBS, BY ARSICCIO One of the
VVitts of Siena.
Gentilissima SIGNIORA,
HOr chio sono al sicuro, mi voglio pur cavar questa maschera, and non intendo
piu far lo sciocco; Sorella mia, voi ui sete ingannata a credere, che quello
Arsiccio che faceva il balordo fosse buono, Egli era piu falso, piu latino, and
piu malitioso ch'il Diavolo del Inferno; E se been faceva la gatta di Masino,
egli haveua il pane in mano, el rasoio alla cintola, and come colui cha ha
fatto d'ogni lana un peso, accennava a coppe, and dava danari cercando s'ha
esse potuto pigliar duo colombi a una faua; Ma la sort volse che altri si levo
prima di luy: perch l'huomo propone, and Dio dispone; Egli si penso d'andare a
pascere, and ando ad orare, and pero disse ben coluy, i sogni non son very, and
disegni non riescono, and chi mal pensa, mal dispensa, and altri disse, mal
habbia and disse been, per che e giusto chi chi cerca briga la trovi a sua
posta, and chi potendo stare cade tra via, s'ei si rompe il collo a suo danno
sia.

Ma il male non sta sempre dove si pena, che il mondo e tondo, and doppo la
notte viene il giorno; Et come si dice ogni tempo viene a chi lo puo aspettare;
and a chi rincresce pongali a sedere; Cosi faro io, ne mi spavento di quel che
si dice, che chi vive a speranza, muor cacando, chio ho prisciatio sopra neve,
and so hoggimai quanti pani fanno una coppia, and quanti paia fanno tree buoi,
and conosco benissimo un bue fra cento person, and per dir meglio, conosco j
miei buoi, ne mi credo ingannare, che come sapete, piu sa il matto in casa sua
ch'il savio in quella d'altri, e basta.

Ma potreste dire, tardi torno Orlando, Jo vi rispondo che il been non fu may
tardi, and pero anchorche la pietra sia caduta nel pozzo, and ch^io vegga che
gli e un zappa in acqua, o come dicono gettar le fave al muro, and non si puo
scorzare il popone; Ci bisogna poi ch'habbiamo tocato il culo alla cicala
ch'ella canti, and se been egli e un stuzzicare il formicaio, and un attizzare
il fuoco e' non importa, quel che h^ da esse convien che sia, and chi nasce
mato non guarisce may, Jo sono oca, and oca convien ch'io muoia, Et se been fo
il cane dell' ^ortolano patienza; voi sapete che chi si contenta, good; and io
godo poiche la casa bruccia and io mi scaldero ^ur le mani; and se io duro
nelle scartate mio danno, il e peggio che morire: Costoro dicono che il mutar
costume, e'l sopportare le corna per forza e ad pari di mori^e. Et pero mi
delibero di's borrare un tratto, and dir come il co^so se coglie, coglie se non
sparge, and a chi toca, tocchi; A me basta mostrare che non son'io quel che ha
dato al cane, and poi che ho cattivi vicini bisogna ch'io ni loda da me stesso,
se been dicono che chi loda s imbroda. Basta ch'io possa dir per voj mo^ij o
viddi che mi pianse, and veggio per prova che l'alegrezze di questo mondo duran
poco, and che tutto quello che riluce non e o^o. Egli e mala cosa l'esser
cattivo, ma glie peggiore l'essere conosciuto.

Jo confesso chio presi un granchio, and se non fu con due boche dicalo chi lo
sa; M^ che profitta tauuedersi doppo'l fatto, o tardar pentirsi al capezzale;
Chi ha tempo, non aspettitempo, and pigli il been quando viene, che il mondo e
fatto a scale chile scende, and chi le sale; Et l'hore non tornano a dietro che
se la cosa s'havesse a fare due volte, l'asino sarebbe nostro; Ma voi sapete,
come si dice, meglio e rauuederci una volta che non maj, perch il peggior de
tutti peccati e l'ostinatione.

Vengo dunque a far come colui che perduti i baoi serra la stalla, and so
ch'egli e un gittare il manico dietro alla pala; pur lo faccio accio che non
crediate ch'io dorma al fuoco, o me ne vada preso alla grida, chio non son
hoggimai il fancuillo di mona Cimbella, and Mostreroui che voi mi potrete ben
l'forzare, ma non ingannare, che i gattuchi h^nno aperto gli occhi, ne voglia
che si possa dire che mi sia stata venduta la lepre in sacco, ne fatto credere
che le lucciole siano lantern, ch'io non ho mangiato travergole, and non si
pensi nissuno di farmi Calandrino, ne farmi comprar la gatta per lepre, ch'ei
s'ingannerabbe di grosso, perch quando il lor diavolo nacque, il mio andava
alla banca, and, singannano a partito a pensar disaperne tanto essi
dormendoquanto io vegghiando, ma al frigger' se ne auuedranno; Al carnevale si
conosce chi ha la gallina grassa, questi chi fanno tanto il savio il piu delle
volte vengon' a cader del lor asino, o darsi de la scure nel piede. Jo ho
sempre veduto che chi piu ne h^ piu ne imbratta, and chi Asino e and cervio
esser si creed fa la zuppa nel paniere.

Ma non e ben sempre dire il tutto, anzi dicono ch'gli e meglio mangiare quel
che altri ha, che dir quel che altri sa, perch in bocca serrata non entro may
mosca, and la lingua non ha osso ma fa romper' il dosso, perch chi troppo
parla, spesso falla, and per cio dicono, che e saviezza pa^lar poco, and
ascoltar assaj, and di qui nacque quel Proverbio un par d'orecchie seccano
cento lingue, and io ho udito sempre pentir i piu d'aver ciarlato che d'aver
tacciuto; Anchor che si dica che chi non parla Dio non l'ode, and pero dicono
molti di il fatto tuo, and lascia far al diavolo, and io confesso che si perde
molto esser stolto, and chi non s'arrischia non guadagna, and chi vuol del
pesce bisogna che s'ammolli le brache.

Ma a me e sempre intervenuto come al can d'esopo, perch anchor chio habbia
rotto il scilinguagriolo la fortuna m'e stata sempre fi contraria che sempre ho
dato sotto le buche, and trovo veri^simo quel che si canta: Ventura aver che
poco senno basta: Ma io non feci may bucata, che non piovesse, and credetti ben
che piovesse, ma non che diluviasse, Tutta via non vien un male che non venga
per been, chi sa, solo Dio sa il tutto and accasca in un punto que che non
accasca in cento anni, and pero io ben mi comforto, che se been le pere mature
cadono in bocca aporci, non epero che chi opera been talhora non venga
rimunerato, and che colui che mal vive non mucia, ma le non mi voglio gettar
fra i morti, che Dio dice Ajutati, chio t'auitaro, and veggo che chi vive
verzica, and chi pecora fa il lupo sela mangia.

Jo son ben sciocco ma non tanto quanto voi mi fate, and se voi non me lo cre
let, mettetimi, il dito in bocca, and vederete se io son terreno da porci
vigna, and da piantar carotte, and se io vi riusciro meglio a pane che a
farina. Voi direte forse non voglio provare che alla prova si scortica l'asino,
and molte cose son meglio crederle che provarle; and io non mi voglio pigliar'
gli impacci del Treccia, a chi duol il dente se lo cavi, che io non voglio che
i peti d'altri rompino le mie brache. Dico che sete savia, and che gli e meglio
imparare all spese d'altri, and io che vengo dalla fossa so che cosa e il
morto; cosi havesse fatto io che non mi sarei gittato adosso, and ne li occhi
agresto, and detto mi che il credere, and il peuere ing^nn^ le done, and i
cani: ne mi sarebbe bussate le banche dietro; Ma se io feci male me ne gratto
gli occhi and si puo di^ per me, che ch^ semplicemente pecca semplicemente va
all' inferno, and certo io confesso chio fui colto al boccone come i ranocchi,
ma di qui a cent' anni tanto varra il lino quanto la stoppa, and chi havera
mangiato il pesce cachera le lische, and se been il peccato sara vecchio la
penitenza sara nuova. Hora il Loperchio rompe il coperchio, and la forza caca
adosso la ragione; Bisogna quando altri e incudine soffrire, and quando
martello percuotere, che gio^are and perdere lo sa far ogni uno and bisogna tal
volta pena patire per bella parere, and se io h^ le corna in seno non me le
voglio metter' in ca* o, fallo celato e mezzo per donato, and cercar d'aspettar
il tempo, che cagna frettolosa fa i cagnuoli ciechi; si dice ancora che non si
fece may nulla ben in fretta, salvo che il fuggire la peste, and per ciovoglio
lasciar passar tree pani per coppia, perch io ho sentito dire che chi guarda a
ogni penna non fa m^i letto, tanto piu chio ho da fare con gente strascinata da
cani, and che sa dove il diavolo tien la coda, and come dicono ha portato le
naccare and e passato da pinton di maniera che il mio carlino non varra cinque
foldi, altre che voi sapete che chi ha poca vergogna tutto il mondo e suo.

Voi direte forse, Arsiccio, il cane chi vuol morder non abbaia, e dove
bisognano i fatti le parole sono d'avanzo farebbe meglio che tu ti arrecassi la
mano al petto, and ti recordassi che tu non hai pero il fill rosso per voler
esse^ figlio della matrigna, and n'hai fat le tue parti, and saj che si dice,
qua l'asino che da in parete il colpo che da lo riceve: Ti lamenti de gamba
sana, and ti si potrebbe di^e, che non sai ricevere li scherzi, and che asmo
bian^o ti va al molino, and non sai quel che te ne fanno, and miri la brusca
d'altri, and non vedi la tua trave, come se non sapessimo che sei stato l'asino
nel pignataio, and hai fatto d'ogni herba fascio come falce fenaia, and quando
t'e venuto been hai' arato con l'asino, and col bue, and sei andato con li
zoccholi per lasciuto a tuo piacere, hora ti pat miracolo che i granchi vadino
a traverso, and bravi a credenza: Non sai tu chi ha bocca vuol mangiare, and
che la comodita fa l'uhomo ladro and dicono a l'arca aperta il savio pecca, and
che il mal pertuso non vuol fine.

Tu vai a zonzo per il mondo, ne ti recordi che chi va al mercato perde il lato
and chi non torna di corto puo dire d'esser morto; su vuoi una leg per te,
and un altra per gli altri come se non sapessi che ogni grillo g^illa a se, and
og^iuno tira l'acqua al suo molino; and chi prende diletto di far frode, and
lascia la via vecchia per la nuova, and vuol torre a Mattonar' il mare, and
insegnar' a volar' a gli asini, o menare l'osso a Modena si perde tempo, e
parole, and j passi; si che se tu ti sei disposto a volar' senza ale and facevi
fondamento inaria, lamentati di te; su sai che la salsa non e fatta per gli
asini, and anchor che la girlanda costi un quatrino la non sta been a ogniuno,
and chi troppo presume, and troppo alto sale fa maggior caduta. Tu ti lamenti
che le tue bugie non son credute, and in tanto non vuoi credere a gli altri la
verita; Anzi io ui rispondo ch'io sono in cattivo stato per troppo credere, and
per lasciarmi menar per il naso come le bufale, and come colui chi non bavecca
piu malitia ch'una colomba, stava a bocca asperta com'i passerotti quando mi
davi ad intendere che la luna stava sopra il cielo del forno. In fine che
ognuno se'l becca, and quello e'l tuo nemico che e di tuo ufficio, and chi
offend non perdona may, and un pensa ghiotto l'altro il taverniere and tra
corsale and corsale non si perde se non i barili vuoti, ne fu may un si tristo
che non si trovasse un peggior di lui, perch ogni dritto ha il suo roversio;
and pero mi son risolto esser sempre fidele, perch io non voglio che mi sia
fatto far' il latino a cavallo; perch per dir il vero l'huomo e impiccato; and
dicono ch'egli e il vero quel che dispiace.

Faro dunque l'intronato, and parlero per Proverbi comuni, and come i chi
canta, and trova, perch e mal sordo quel che non vuol udire; and e mal bussare
a forniconi di sorbo, che fanno o^ecchi di mercatanti, and si lasciare
gracchiare, and dicono tu dirai, and io faro; and io mison accorto che questo
pigliar le mosche in aria, e un voler 'esser la favola de Commune, and e come
voler entrar in un pettine di set che eta cava, and quatro met, and e
meglio accordarsi con la volonta del maggiore, and legate l'asino dove vuol il
padrone, and non voler' andar su per le cime de gli alter, che chi fa la casa
in piazza, un dice che e alta, and alto ch'ella e bassa, and quel che pone il
suo culo in consiglio, l'uno dice bianco, l'altro vermiglio, and benche dicono
voce di popolo voce di Dio, nientedimeno voi sapete che non e bestia piu pazza
di quella del popolo, in acqua piu grossa che quella di maccheroni, and pero io
mi guardo di due cose, l'una da segnati da dio, l'altra d'aque chete, come
ancho da host nuovo, and putana vecchia; Jo ho trovato che ognun conta della
fiera com' egli ando con essa, and che talhora per un brutto viso si perde una
buona compagnia, che porco pigro non mangio may pera mazza; Tanto e il been che
non giovo, quanto il male che non nuoce, and chi non vuol ballare non vada al
ballo, perch poi sete dentro bisogna ballare, non fare come il mocicone del'
Arsiccio che si lascio fuggire j pesci cotti di mano.

O sciocco, come ti sta been ogni male, va datti in un monte di lolla, and non
comparire piu fra la gente e possibile che tu che fai il Gigante, and vuoi
darnorma a gli altri ti sia lasciato stiacciare le noci in capo, and menar' in
caperuccia di questa sort? Rispondo, che chi fai come puo non fa may been, and
che contra due non la potrebbe anche Orlando, and se io stetti cheto, and non
mi dolsi feci perch non mi fosse detto sempre la piu trista ruota del carro e
quella che gracida, and che ha da fare la luna con i granchi, intrometendo ui
io dove non bisognava, and era per certo che non si direbbe di me viene l'asino
di montagna, and caccia il cavallo di stalla; Et pero io stava come il prete
della poca offerta, che per piu non poter l'huomo si lascia cadere; Ma non e
chio non vedessi il mio male, perch al tutto e orbo chi non vede il sole.
Pure, come videte che la pala guarda la vigna; Jo volsi piu tofto che si
dicesse che fuggi il tale, che qui fu morto il tale, tenendo speranza in quel
che si dice, siedi and gambetta and vedrai tua vendetta; Ma chi ha la prima non
ne va may netto, quel imboccarsi per man d'altri, e un non atollarsi may.

Jo vorrei veder un tratto s'io potessi cavar la muffa di questo vino, perch
questo giocar il pe^riera, and voi sapete chi'o so che chi ti fa piu carezze
che non suole, non va a buon camino, perch o tradire, o ingannarti vuole. Quel
servir de pediglio cantar been, and ruspar male e un art del diavolo; Ma chi
ha cotto il culo co ceci come io, e basta, elle non sono cose da stare al
martello, chio ho udito dir piu d'una volta che le galline si pigliano con
belle, belle, and non con scioia, scioia, and che tal mano si bacia che si
vorebbe veder mozza, and che non e ingannato se non che si fida. Jo non intendo
di rubbar'il porco per dar i piedi per limosina, ne manco far com' il zolla chi
daua due pecore nere per una bianca, per cioche io so che l'amore e cieco, and
pazzo, and pero dice ch'io piangero per noci, and essi per aglio, and m'accorgo
ch'ogni bell giuco rinercresce, and ben spesso si piglia delle volpi; Pur credi
che a cane chi lecca cenere e mal fidarli la farina, and e come porre il lupo
pet pecotaio, and andar' alla gatta pe'l lardo; Jo fuggi ben il ranno caldo,
and dubito un tempo di non me dar' in un trent' uno, temendo di non esser fatto
morire di tisico. Ma chi scappa da un punro scappa di cento, and non e in tutto
savio colui chi non sa bisognando esser pazzo, and pero feci l'intronato, and
volli prima perder il dono che la mano; Jo mi sento fin qua zuffolar gli
orecchi, and parmi videre questa tua canta favola Arsiccio, non vo^rei che
metessi il pulce ne gli orecchi altrui in questa maniera; Jo ti cognosco meglio
cha la madre che ti fece, tu ti vorresti metter' il cervello a partito, and ti
riuscira quello che non ti pensi, perch tu sai che chi altri tribula se non
posa, and che ti si potrebbe dire come la padella al paiuolo ognun facci i
fatti suoi. Tu ti lasci imbrogliare, and poi t'ardiri, and ti maraccigli del
pont' a Tressa, and non sai che maggior miracolo fu il baleno, and che l'amore,
and le latosse non si possono celare; Tu hai l'essempio inanzi alla buona
derrata pensavi su, and credi che non sono tutti huomini chi pisciano al muro.

Ma non intendo andar' a caccia de grilli a esser lungo tempo fastidioso, se mi
scriverete farete il debito vostro, ed io ui rispondero come l'asino che raglia
dandovi per ogni pane tree foggacie, dischiarando ui questo mio ghiribezzo con
altri termini piu chiari. Di Milano dove io meno la vita di michelazzo, mangio,
and beuo, and vado a solazzo; Essendo al comando tutto di V. S. la quale N. S.
feliciti, del mese de gli asini,

Quel che tanto ama voi quanto amate voi medesima, L'ARSICCIO Intronato.

REFRANES, O PROVERBIOS EN ROMANCE, o la Lengua Castellana; A los quales se han
anadido algunos Portuguezes, Catalanes, y Gallegos, etc.

De los quales muchos andan GLOSSADOS.

PROVERBS, OR ADAGES in the SPANISH TOVNG, Whereunto there are added diverse,
in Portuguez, Catalan, and Gallego; With GLOSSES upon the darkest of them.

Which PROVERBS are Partly MORAL, relating to good life; Partly PHYSICAL,
relating to Diet, and Health; Partly TOPICAL, relating to particular places;
Partly TEMPORAL, relating to seasons; Partly IRONICAL, relating to Drollery,
and Mirth.


Carta Compuesta de REFRANES, Concurrientes todos a la conservacion de la salud
humana; A Don LVYS DIVES, que Dios guarde mas de mil ann^os, Con salud, y
honras correspondientes a sus Heroicas prendas, y merecimientos.
SIendo la Salud la mas preciosa Joya de quantas la Natura tiene en su retrete,
Yo le encomiendo tres Doctores para mantenerla, es a saber, el Doctor Dieta, el
Doctor Reposo, y el Doctor Gozo.

Tocante el postrero, bien se sabe por experiencia, (que es aquel gran espeio
de sabiduria) que una onca de alegria vale mas que cien quintales de
melancolia; pesadumbres no pagan deudas, el cuydado en demasia roe hasta el
tuetano, Coracon contento es gran talento, que puede dezir, Alegramente, el
diablo es muerto, y el Italiano dize, poco cibo, and men affanno, sanita del
corpo fanno, tambien dize, grave cura non ti punga, and sara tua vitae lunga.

Tocante el segundo Doctor que mira al govierno del cuerpo, es mucha verdad,
que poca fatiga es gran salud, Bueno es passear hasta que se vea la sangre en
le mexilla, no el sudor en la frente, por lo que toca al suen^o, que es el Rey
de Reposo, Duerme el dia quando quieres, y la noche quanto puedes; la noche
noche, y el dia dia, y viviras con alegria; Mas, quien quiere bien dormir que
compre la cama de un deudor; Allende de esto, come poco, y cena mas, duerme en
alto y viviras; pero sobre la sombra del nogal, no te pongas a acostar; Mas
desto, bueno es madrugar, porque quien el diablo ha d'engan^ar, de manan^a se
ha de levantar; tambien tenga cuenta de yr por la manan^a a la pescaria, y la
tarde a la carniceria, porque piece y huesped luego hieden; Tocante la cobertura
del cuerpo, si quieres vivir sano, haz te viejo temprano, no dexes los
pelliscos hasta que vengan los Galileos; buena regla es, que yo ande caliente y
riase la gente; Otra ay mas particular, enxuto el pie, caliente la cabeca por
el resto vive como bestia; escuche tambien lo que dize el Romano, Vesti caldo,
mangia poco, bevi assai, and vivirai. Por lo que toca las parts del cuerpo,
aduiertase, que los oios (siendo malos) se han de curar con el codo; Los
dientes no piden in mucho cuydado, in demasiado descuydo, quando te dolieren
las tripas hazlo saber al culo, me claro, y higa para el medico; An^adese a
esto, si meares de color de florin, echa el medico para ruyn, toda via quien
mea, y no pee, va a la corte, y el Rey no vee; sepase tambien que a la gota, el
medico no vee gota; Tocante el casamiento, el dicho del Marquis de Mirabel, se
ha de observar, el qual siendo preguntado como vivia tantos an^os, (porque
tenia mas de ochenta) respondio, Caseme tarde, y embiude me temprano; si
quieres hembra escoie la negra, porque la muger negra trementina en ella,
tambien el Frances dize, Fille brunette, gaye, and net; pero, muger roxa y
barbuda de cien passos lass aluda; mas de esto, muger, anade, y cabra mala cosa
siendo magra; Observese tambien este cumplimiento, Junio, Julio, y Agosto,
Sen^ora mia, no os conosco.

Tocante el Doctor Dieta que predomina mucho sobre la salud, es Regla general,
quien mucho come poco come; El Italiano dize bisogna far tree pasti per star
sano, un buono, un cattivo, ed un mazzano; Quien come bien, y beve bien, hazelo
que deve; pero, a buen comer, o a mal comer ties vezes haz de bever; Por lo que
toca a la bevanda, Bevase Agua como un buey, y Vino como Rey; El Agua tiene
tres excellentes virtudes; ni enferma, ni Adeuda, ni Embiuda; toda via, Agua
fria, y pan caliente nunca hizieron buen vientre; Siempre al higo Agua, y a la
pera vino; Tambien a bocado haron espolado de vino; pero vino trasnochado no
vale un cornado; Dixo la leche al vino, bien vengays amigo; Regla es muy
saludable, Quien quisiere vivir sano, coma poco, y cene temprano. Tocante los
manjares, Cabrito de un mes, y rezental de tres; un huevo escaseza, dos
gentileza, tres Valentia, quatro vellaqueria; dizese, que si el Villano
supiesse el sabor de la gallina en el Henero, no dexaria ninguna en el pollero;
Escojase siempre leche de cabra, manteca de vaca, y queso de oueja, pero, el
queso que vien de corta mano es el mas sano; A los mocos esta permitido de
comer mas que a los otros, porque se dize, que el moco creciente, ha el lobo en
el vientre: Por esto se dize, que quien hurta la cena al viejo, no le haze
agravio; porque quien no cena, no ha menester Avicena; otros dizen, que mas
mato la cena, que no sano Avicena; De suerte que si tienes gana de morir, come
carnero assado, y echate a dormir: An^adese a esto, que si quieres comida mala,
come la liebre assada: Quien en Mayo come sardina, en Agosto caga la Espina; Et
quien come caracoles en Abril apareje cera, y pavil; todavia quando llueve, y
haze sol, coie el caracol. No ay caldo como el cumo guijarro, pero ni olla sin
tocino, ni sermon sin Agostino. Tocante las frutas y legumbres, observese, que
pan reziente, y vuas, a las mocas pone mudas, y a las viejas quita las arrugas;
Azeytuna oro es una, dos plata, tercera mara; Quieres buen bocado, el niespolo
despen^ado; Pera que dizir Rodrigo no vale un higo, otros dizen, la muger, y la
pera, la que calla es buena; pero el Frances tiene una buena caucion tocante
esta fruta, viz. Apres la poire, ou le vin, ou le prest^e; Mas, sobre Melon
vino follon: Con todo sea sal porque el Frances, dize, cest un banquet du
diable, ou il n'y a point du sell. Tocante el Hinoio, y la ruda ay dos refranes
muy notables, es a saber, Quien hinojo vee, y no coje, diablo es, que no
hombre; el otro, si supiesse la muger la virtud de la ruda, la buscaria de
noche a la luna.

Observando est as Reglas se podria vivir tanto quanto un Elefante qui es de la
mas larga vida de quantos animales ay, segun aquel Refran gradual, Un seto dura
tres an^os, un perro tres setos, tres perros un cavallo, tres cavallos un
hombre, tres hombres un ciervo, tres ciervos un Elefante. No soy por mas, si
no, que desseandole en conclucion salud y gozo, y casa con un corral y pozo,
quedo de todas mis Entranas su criado mayor, porque, Quisiere annque soy chico,
set en serville Gigante

I. H.

A LETTER COMPOSED OF SPANISH PROVERBS, Concurring all in one congruous sense,
and conducing to the preservation of Humane Health.
To the Heroique Knight, Sir LEWIS DIVES, whom God preserve with health and
long life, etc.
SIR,
HEalth being the most precious jewel that Nature has in her Cabinet, I
recommend unto you three Doctors for the maintenance thereof, viz. Doctor Diet,
Doctor Quiet, Doctor Merry-man. Touching the last, it is well known by
Experience, which is the great Looking-glass of Wisdom, that an ounce of
Mirth is more worth then a hundred weight of Melancholy; Sorrow quits no score,
and too much care eats to the very marrow: A heart content is a great talent,
which may say, Alegramente, the Devil is dead; And as the Italian says, A
little meat, and less grief make a healthful body. Touching the second Doctor,
which concerns the government of the body, it is a great truth, that a little
labor is much health; it is good to walk till blood appear in the cheeks, and
not sweat on the brow. Touching Sleep, who is the King of Repose, sleep in the
day when thou will, and in the night as much as thou can; make night of
night, and day of day, then thou may sing welladay: But he who desires to
sleep soundly, let him buy the boulster of one who died in debt. Moreover, dine
with little, and sup with less, sleep high, and thou will live long; But take
heed of sleeping on the shadow of a Wallnut-tree: Besides, it is good to rise
early, for he who will cousen the Devil must rise betimes: Go also early to the
Fish-market, and late to the Shambles, for Fish and Guests quickly stink.
Concerning thy clothes, or coverings of thy body, if thou will live healthful,
make thy self an old man betimes, leave not thy furs till the Galileans come, (
viz. till Ascension day, when that Scripture is read.) It is a good rule, let
me go warm, and let the world laugh at me. There Is another rule, keep thy feet
dry, and thy head hot, and for the rest live like a beast, ( viz. eat and drink
no more then will suffice nature.) Concerning the parts of the body, take
notice that the eyes being not well are to be cured with the elbow, ( viz. thou
must not finger them.) The teeth require not much care, nor too much neglect;
when thy tripes ache, make it known to thy tail, piss clear, and a fig for the
Physician: Whereunto may be added, that if thy urine be a bright yellow, shake
off thy Doctor; yet we say, who pisseth and lets not a fart, goes to the Court
and see's not the King. Know also that touching the Gout the Physician is
blind. Touching Marriage, the saying of the Marquess of M. is observable, who
being asked how he came to live so many fair years (for he was above fourscore)
he answered, I married late, and I was a widdower betimes; If thou desire a
woman, choose a black one, for in a black woman there is turpentine; whereunto
the French man alludes, when he says, the brown less is gay and cleanly: But
for a red hair'd, or bearded woman, salute them a hundred paces off.

Touching Doctor Diet, who predominates much over humane health, it is a general
rule, that he who eats much eats but little. The Italian says, that to
preserve health, one must make three meals a day, one good, one bad, and
another midling one; who eats well, and drinks well, does what he ought to do;
but whether you dine well or ill, be sure to drink thrice. Touching drink,
drink water like an ox, and wine like King; Water has three excellent
virtues, for it neither makes one sick, nor puts one in debt, nor makes a
widower; yet cold water and hot bread never made good belly: After the fig
water, and after the pear wine; a jadish bit also requires a spur of wine, but
wine that stood all night is not worth a rush. The milk told the wine, welcome
friend; It is a wholesome precept, who will live healthful, let him dine
sparingly, and sup betimes. Touching flesh, a Kid of a month, and a Lamb of
three are best; for Eggs, one is scarceness, two are gentleness, three valor,
and four are knavery. They say that if the Countryman knew the goodness of a
hen in January, he would not leave one in his roost-house: Goats milk, Cow
butter, and Sheeps cheese are best, but that cheese is best which comes from a
misers hand: Young men are allowed to eat more then others, for a growing youth
has a woolf in his belly; therefore it is said, who from an old man steals his
supper, does him no wrong, because he who does not sup has no need of the
Physician; Therefore if thou have a mind to dye, eat roasted mutton at night,
and go to sleep: Hereunto may be added, if thou desire ill food, eat a roasted
hare. He who eats Pilchers in May, shites out the bones in August: And he who
eats mushrumps in April, let him provide week and wax, viz. let him prepare for
his burial; yet when it rains in a Sunshine, gather thy mushrumps. There is no
broth like that of the juice of Flint, ( viz. of water that flows thence) But
let not the pot of pottage be without bacon, nor a Sermon without Saint
Austine. Touching fruit and garden-herbs, observe that new bread and grapes
paint young maids, and takes away wrinkle from old folks. One olive is gold,
two silver, three brass; If you will have a good bit, eat a peeled Medlar. The
Pear which cries Rodrigo is not worth a rush. Others say, that the woman and
the Pear which is silent are the best. But the French man has a good caution
touching this fruit, viz. Apres la poire, ou le vin ou le prestre, after Pear
the wine or the Priest (to confess you before death.) But after melon wine is a
felon; let there be salt withal, for the French man will tell you again, it is
a banquet for the Devil where there is no salt. Touching Fennel and Rue, there
be two notable Proverbs, viz. that he who sees Fennel, and does not gather it,
he is a Devil and no man; the other is, that if the good woman did know the
virtue of Rue, she would look for it in the night at Moonshine.

By observing these rules one might by the strength and complaceney of Nature
arrive to the age of an Elephant, whom the Naturalists observe to live longest
of any Terrestrial creature; according to that gradual Proverb of lives, viz. A
hedge does last three years, a dog three hedges, a horse three dogs, a man
three horses, a Stag three men, an Elephant three Stags. No more now, but that
wishing you all health and gladness, I rest from my very bowels, your greatest
servant, for although I am but little, I would be a Giant to serve you.

J. H.

Refranes, o Proverbios Morales tendientes a las costumbres, y a la buena Vida,
etc.
COn todo el Mundo guerra,
Y paz con Ingalatierra;
La primera muger es Matrimonio, la segunda compania, la tercera Heregia.

La cruz en les pechos, y el Diablo en los hechos.

Mejor es huevo oy, que pollo Man^ana.

Mas vale pun^ado de natural, que almocada de ciencia.

Poco a poco, hila la vieja el copo.

Deve algo para Pascua, y hazerte ha corta la Quaresma.

Pleyto y Urinal. Llevan el hombre al Hospital.

Quien no miente, No viene de buena gente.

No ay generation, do no ay o puta o ladron.

De oio de Ramera, y buelta de dado guarte.

El huesped, y el piece a tres dias hiede.

El dar limosna nunca la bolsa mengua.

De rabo de puerco nunca buen virote.

Antes moral que Almendro.

Hombre Narigudo pocas vezes Cornudo.

Un seto dura tres annos, un perro tres settos, tres perros un cavallo, tres
cavallos un hombre, tres hombres un ciervo, tres ciervos un Elefante.

Quin poco sabe presto lo reza.

No me curo de los Santos que mean.

Quien dinero tiene, alcanca lo que quiere.

Quien posa debaxo de hoia, dos vezes se moia.

Quien al cielo escupe, en la cara le cae.

Quando estuvieres con tu muger vientre con vientre, no le digas quanto te
viniere a la mente.

Quando Dios no quiere, el Santo no puede.

Quando todos dizen que eres Asno, rebuzna.

Quando la mala Fortuna se duerme nadie la despierte.

Quien trabaia, tiene alhaja.

Quien compra y vende, lo que gasta no siente.

Ni por colloio, in por conseio no delates tu venceio.

Ni yerua en el trigo, ni sospecha en el amigo.

El coracon manda las carnes.

Hagase el milagro, y hagalo Mahoma.

Ni un dedo haze mano, ni una golondrina verano

Ni moco, pariente, ni rogado, no lo tomes por tu criado.

Ni tan vieja que amule, ni tan moca que retoce.

De mula que haze hin, y muger que habla latin guarte.

Ni moca adevina, in muger ladina.

Ni los oios en las cartas, ni las manos en las arcas

En bo ca cerrada, no entra mosca.

Mudanca de tiempos, bordon de necios.

Menea la cola el can no por ti, Eno por el pan.

Mas tiran tetas, que exes, y car^itas.

Mas vale verguenca en cara, que manzilla en coracon.

Mal de muchos, gozo es.

Mas vale prenda en arca, que fiador en la placa.

Madre, y hija visten una cami^a.

Mas tiran nalgas en lecho, que bueys en barvecho.

Mas vale ser necio que porfiado.

Por esso es hombre Cornudo porque dos pueden mas que uno.

No ay tal hechizo como buen servicio.

En la boca del discreto, lo publico es secreto.

No son todos hombres que mean a la pared.

No es todo vero, lo que suena el pandero.

No se haze la boda de hongos, sino de bollos redondos.

Todos los dedos no son y guales.

No ay tal doctrina como la de la hormiga.

Quien ha officio, ha beneficio.

No es pobre el que tiene poco, mas el que codicia mucho.

Nuestro gozo en el pozo.

No ay mal tan lastimero, como no tener dinero.

Por do quiera ay tres leguas de mal quebranto.

No puede mas faltar que Marco en Quaresma.

^n alma sola ni canta, nil lora.

No ay casa do no aya su chiticalla.

Haz bien, y no cates a quien.

Palabras y plumas el viento las tumba.

Duelo ageno de ^elo cuelga.

Palabra de boca, ^iedra de honda.

Quando vino el orinal, muerto era Iuan Pasqual.

Quien mea y no pee, va a la Corte, y no vee al el Rey.

Quien quisiere muger hermosa el Sabado la escoja y no el Domingo.

Il sabio muda consejo, il necio no.

Sabe un punto mas que el Diablo.

El dia que te casas, o te sanas, o te matas.

Toma se el hombre por la barba, y la muger por el hilo.

Rogamos a Dios por Santos, mas no por tantos.

Secreto de dos sabe lo Dios, secreto de tres toda Res.

Viene Dios a vernos sin campanilia.

El pie en la cuna, la mano en la rueca.

Ni trigo de vega, ni len^a de solumbrio.

Harto es ciego, quien no vee por tela de cedaco.

La Gente pone, y Dios dispone.

Cobrate buena fama, y echate a dormir.

Las palabras buenas son, si assi es el coracon.

Quien canta sus males espanta.

Mejor es, dexar a la muerte al enemigo, que pedir en la vida al amigo.

Buena es la tardanza que haze el camino seguro.

Bien vengas mal, si vienes solo.

Casa cumplida, en la otra vida.

Cayosele el pan en la miel.

Ce^o, ensen^o, de mal hijo haze bueno.

Con lo que Pedro adolece, Sancho sana.

Como canta el Abad, assi responde el Sacristan.

Con^ra Fortuna no vale Art ninguna.

Mucha conversacion acarrea meno precio.

Con un mucho y des poquitos se hazen los hombres buenos.

Perdida es la lexia en la cabeca del asno.

Cortesia de boca mucho vale y poco cuesta.

Con el oio y la fe no me burlare.

Con lo que sana el higado, enferma el baco.

Pregona vino, y vende vinagre.

Da Dios alas a la hormiga, para que se pierda mas ayna.

Del ocio, nace negocio.

Tiene cara de dos hazes.

De piel agena larga correa.

Despues de descalabrado, untar el casco.

Mas vale un toma, que dos te dare.

De potro sarnoso cavallo hermoso.

Dexemos padres y abuelos, y por nosotros seamos buenos.

De moco recongador nunca buen labor.

De espacio piensa, y obra a priessa.

De cornada de ansaron guarde Dios mi coracon.

De buenas intenciones esta lleno el infierno.

Dichoso el varon que escarmienta en cabeca agena y en la suya non.

Dixo la sarten alla caldera tirte alla cul negro.

Dieu consiente mas no siempre.

Dizen mas mal de el que Mahoma del tocino.

Dios nos de con que iamos, mas no de hijos bovos.

Di a tu amigo tu secreto, y tenerte ha el pie en el pescueco.

Do fueres, haras como vieres.

Donde vieios no andan cueruos no graznan.

Duele me el colodrillo, y untanme el tovillo.

Echar el mango tras el destral.

El alquazil y el Sol por do quiera son.

El perdon sobra donde el yerro falta.

El corcobado no vee su corcoba, y vee la de su compan^ero.

El mal del oio curarle con el codo.

El pie del duen^o estiercol es para la heredad.

En lo que estamos benedicamos.

En casa del herrero cuchillo mangorrero.

Escape del trueno, y de en el relampago.

En la boca del discreto lo publico es secreto.

Esse es mi amigo qui muele en mi molinillo.

Dotrina buena, escarmentarse en cabeca agena.

Galgo que muchas liebres levanta miguna mata.

Gloria vana florece, y no grana.

Gota a gota la mar se apoca.

Goza tu de poco, mientras busca mas el loco.

Grano a grano bastece la hormiga su granero.

Haz para mi, y aprende para ti.

Huelgo me un poco, mas hilo mi copo.

Huyendo del toro, cayme en el arroyo.

La muger, y el vino sacan al hombre de tino.

Las entran^as, y arquetas a los amigos abiertas.

La telaran^na suelta al rato, y la mosca apan^a.

De la mar el sal, de la muger el mal.

Por la pija del Papa que es carne santa.

Despues que pari, nunca mi vientre henchi.

Dezir y hazer no comen a una mesa.

De hombre necio a vezes buen consejo.

De persona callada arriedra tu posada.

El hombre es el fuego, la muger la estopa, viene el Diablo y sopla.

Al comer sudar, al hazer temblar.

El dinero, haze un hombre entero.

Quien de miedo se murio de cagaiones le hizieron la sepultura.

El melon y la muger, malos son de conocer.

Gesto de oro, cabellosde plata, y oios d'escarlata.

Hombre apercebido medio combatido.

Hombre que madruga de algo tiene cura.

Enter hermanos no metas tus manos.

La Gente pone, Dios dispone.

Las tripas esten llenas, que ellas llevan las piernas.

La cabra de mi vezina, mas leche da que no la mia.

Ama y seras amado, assi podras hazer lo que no haras desamado.

A muger casta la pobreza le haze y hazer feeza.

El tocino de Parayso, para el casado que no arrepiso.

Casar y compadrar, cada qual con su y gual.

Hombre vieio cada dia un duelo nuevo.

Un cabello haze sombra.

Vender miel al colmenero.

Venga el bien, y venga por do quifiere.

Judio, ni puerco no metas en tu huerto.

Las tocas de beata, y un^as de gata.

La oveja locana dixo a la cabra, da me lana.

La vida passada haze la vejez pesada.

La verdad como el olio siempre nada en somo.

La muger loca por la lista compra la toca.

La muger del ciego no ha menester afeyte.

Moca de la placa la pucerta barrida, la casa cagada.

La culpa del asno echan la a la aluarda.

La mucha conversacion a carrea menos precio.

La muger artera, el marido por delantera.

La necessidad haze la vieja trotar, y el coxo saltar

Al bien pagados nunca duele prenda.

Libro cerrado no saca letrado.

A muertos, y a ydos no ay amigos.

Los dineros, hazen duen^os.

Oy ensilla, manan^a se va.

Los dichos en nos lo hechos en Dios.

Los que tienen muger muchos ojos han menester

Lo que has de hazer haz, y no digas cras.

Lo que no acaece en un an^o, acaece en un instante.

Lo que se usa, no se escusa.

La demasia rompe la talega.

Lo que saben tres, saben toda Res.

Los muertos abren los ojos a los vivos.

Lo peor del pleytos es, que de uno nacen ciento.

Lo ordenado en el cielo forcoso se ha de cumplir en el suelo.

Lo que se haze a la boda, no se haze hora toda.

Cada una tiene su alma en su palma.

La mancana podrida pierde a su compania.

Langosta haze la tripa angosta.

La muger, y el melon huelense por el pecon.

La muger y el vino sacan al hombre del tino.

Blanda respuesta la ira quiebra.

Verdad es verde.

La mentira no tiene pies.

Mejor es huevo oy, que pollo man^an^a.

Palabras buenas sonjonetes.

La mentira tiene las piernas cortas.

Levantar la liebre para que otro la jaco.

El pobre como el hogal apedreado de todos.

Palabras hembras, son hechos machos.

Mejor doblar que quebrar.

Llegate a los buenos, e seras uno dellos.

Desseo humano jamas encumbrado.

Atame manos y pies, y meteme enter los mios.

De burlas, ni de veras con tu sen^or no partas peras.

Mas vale descozer, que romper.

Mas hiere mala palabra, que espada a hilada.

Mas vale prenda en arca, que fiador en la placa.

Mas vale humo de mi casa que fuego de la agena.

Mal me quieren mis comadres porque les digo les verdades.

Mas vale rodear que ahojar.

Mal vale soltero andar, que mal casar.

Mas vale pun^ado de natural, que almocada de ciencia.

Martillar en hierro frio.

Mas caga un buey que cien golondrinas.

Mas vale tarde que nunca.

Malo es pecar, diabolico perseverar.

Mas apaga buena palabra, que caldera de agua.

Mal aviendo, y bien esperando, morirme he triste, y no se quando.

Si mucho las pintas, y las regalas de buenas hijas haras malas.

Muger alvendera, mas no ventanera.

Tanto quiso el Diablo a su hijo, que le quebro el ojo.

Trasegalla porque no sepa a la madre.

Ventura ayas hijo, que poco saber te basta.

Quien hijos tiene, razon es que allegue.

Quien hijos tiene al lado, no muere ahitado.

Quien quisiere ser gran viejo, comencelo presto.

Al hombre osada la Fortuna le da la mano.

Al buey por el cuerno, y al hombre por el vierbo.

Dios le de casa de robre, taca de plata, y olla de cobre.

Don sin dinerono es Don, si no donayre.

Dadivas quebrantan pen^as.

Quien tiene hijas, y ovejas nunca le faltan quexas.

Mas valen dos camisones que uno.

Al ni^o, y al mulo en el culo.

A muger parida, y tela urdida nunca le falta guarida.

Cria un cuervo sacarte ha el ojo.

Con hombre interessal no pongas tu caudal.

Con buen trage se encubre ruyn lineage.

Da me la honesta, y darte la he compuesta.

Da me pega sin mancha, y dar te he moca sin tacha.

Mas vale guardar que pedir.

Mas tiran tetas que sogas can^amen^as.

Madre piadosa hija merdosa.

Mas vale tuerta, que ciega.

Mal de muchos, gozo es.

Mas cerca esta la rodilla, que la pantorilla.

Mas vale acostarse sin cena, que levantarse con deuda.

Mete la mano en tu seno, no diras de hado ageno.

Mejor es embidia, que manzilla.

Mejor es uno que nuestro.

Mientras mas moros, mas ganancica.

Missa ni cevada no estoruan jornada.

Mientras anda el yugo ande el huso.

Mientras en mi casa me esto y, Rey me soy.

Mi fe, nuestra ama, con mal va esta trama.

Mira adelante no cayras atras.

Moca galana calabaca vana.

Moco bien criado ni de si habla, ni calla preguntado.

Mucho sabe el Cornudo, pero mas el que pone los cuernos.

Mondo redondo, quien no sabe nadar vase al hondo.

Muchos besan manos que querrian ver coradas.

Mucho vale, y poco cuesta, a mal hablar buena respuesta.

Muger se quexa, muger se duele, muger enferma quando quiere.

Bien cotre la liebre, mejor el galgo pues la prende.

Mudanca de tiempos bordon de necios.

Nace en la huerta lo que no sembra el hortalano.

No me agrada puerta que a muchas llaves haze.

No compres Cavallo rabeador.

Nacen alas a la hormiga para que se pierda mas ayna.

No quiero cochino con sonaja.

Necios y porfiados enriquecen los letrados.

La necessidad haze a la vieja trotar.

Necjo nao sin lastre.

Ni de amigo reconciliado, ni de manjar dos vezes guisado.

Ni ausente sin culpa, ni present sin disculpa.

Ni compres mula coxa, ni cases puta pensando de curarlas.

Ni de lagtimas de Puta, ni de fieros de Rufian.

Ni mesa sin pan, ni exercito sin Capitan.

Ni boda ^^n tamborino, ni olla ^n tocino.

Ni trigo de valle, ni trigo de solombrio.

Ni do y, ni tomo como Judio en Sabado.

Ni a la muge que llora, ni al perro que mea.

Ni mi era, ni civera, trille quien qui^ere en ella.

Ni comas mucho queso, ni de moco esperes seso.

Ni Pollos sin tocino, ni Sermon sin Agostino.

Ni te abates por pobreza, nite ensalces por riqueza.

Ni^a, vin^a, peral y havar malas cosas de guardar.

Ni Mula sin raca, ni muger sin tacha.

Ni con cada mal al Fi^^co, ni con cada rin^a al letrado, ni con cada sed al
jarro.

Ni un dedo haze mano, ni una golondrina verano.

Ni sobre Dios sen^or, ni sobre negro ay color.

No falte voluntad, que no faltara lugar.

No dexes los pellejos hasta que vengan los Galileos.

No ay tal hechizo, como el buen servicio.

No es tan bravo el Leon como le pintan.

No te entremetas en lo que no te aran^e hazer.

No ay peor burla que la verdadera.

No ay peor sordo que el que no quiere oyr.

No ay ataio, ^in traba^o.

No se haze la boda de hongos, sino he Ducados redondos.

No se toman truchas a bragas enxutas.

No ay mejor espeio que el amigo viejo.

No ay mejor cirujano que el bien a cuchillado.

No ^arte, no seras engan^ado.

Ne ay razon como la del baston.

No me pesa que mi hijo ^ierda, se no que desquitarse quiera.

No es todo oro lo que reluze.

No es bien huyr en cancos.

No ay mejor maestra que la necessidad y pobreca.

No ay mal, que el tiempo no alivie su tormento.

No puede ser mas negro el cuervo que sus alas.

No pidas al olmo la pera porque no la lleva.

No ay testigo como buen trago de vino.

No ay mejor bocado que el hu^tado.

No te hagas mandador, donde no fueres sen^or.

No hables sin ser preguntado, y seras estimado.

No hiere Dios con dos manos, que a la mar hizo puertos, y a los nos vados.

No ay cerradura si es de oro la ganzua.

No seays hornera si teneys la cabeca de manteca.

Nuevo Rey, nueva Ley.

No ay bien sin trabajo.

Obra de comun obra de migun.

Cada uno ^or si, y Dios por todos.

Ofrecer mucho, especie es de negar.

O^os ay que de lagan^as se enamoran.

Oveia que b^la bocado pierde.

Palabras y lumas el viento las tumba.

Panadera eras antes, aunque ahora traes guantes.

Papel y tinta dineros cuesta.

Part Nicolas para si lo mas.

Palabra y piedra suelta no tiene buelta.

Palabras de Santo, y un^as de gato.

Palacio gran consancio.

Pan y vino andan carmino, y no el moco garrido.

Pan con ojos, y queso sin ojos.

Habla poco, escucha mucho, y no erraras.

Para cada domingo no ay un par de orejas.

Pereza no lava cabeca, y si la lava no la peyna.

Perro ladrador nunca buen mordedor.

Pereza llave de pobreza.

Pera, durazno, y melon el vino puro quieren.

Pecados viejos penitencia nueva.

Pesa justo, y vendi caro.

Pedir sobrado por salir con lo mediano.

Perdido ha la rucia los saltos.

Matar moros en pared.

Piedra movediza, nunca el moho la cobija.

Piensa el ladron que todos son de su condition.

Pleyto y orinal, en casa de quien quisieres mal.

Mas borracho que una sopa, una espongia.

Por hazer bien a otto destruyome mi todo.

Por conservar amistad pared en medio.

Poca ropa, y buen talante.

Por sol que haga, no dexes tu capa en casa.

Por codicia de florin no te cases con ruyn.

Por dinero bayla el perro.

Porfiar, mas no apostar.

Por monte no vayas tras otro.

Ponte buen nombre ysabel, y casarte has bien.

Por tu Ley, por tu Rey, por tu Gray, y por lo tuyo moriras.

Al puerco gordo untatle en el rabo.

A la mala costumbre quebrarle la pierna.

Al que mal haze nunca le falta achaque.

El fin final servir a Dios, y no hazer mal.

Al marido amalo como amigo, y temelo como enemigo.

Al cabo del an^o mas come el muerto que el sano

Allende o aquende mire con quien ande.

Alcanca quien no cansa.

A la muerte no ay casa fuerte.

A la ^ar, es negar, y tarde dar.

Amigo de todos, y de ninguno todo es uno.

Amor de puta, y fuego d'estopa, viento del culo todo es uno.

A manos lavadas Dios les da que coman.

Ande me yo caliente, y riase la gente.

A otro perro con este huesto.

A provechate de viejo, y valdra tu voto en consejo.

A perro viejo nunca cuz cuz.

A quien dizes poridad, a esse tu das la libertad.

A quien te da el Capon, dale la pierna y el alon.

Ara hondo, y cogeras pan en abondo.

Aunque la mentira escuresca la verdad, no la puede apagar.

Al acreedor mejor memoria, que al deudor.

Air vaquero, oy Cavallero.

Amar es bueno, mejor ser amado.

Castiga el bueno, mejora, el ruyn empeora.

Barba remojada, medio rapada.

Bever, y perder Asnos.

Bien hab^ar, y mal hazer, cedacillo de cerner.

Bien canta Marta, despues de harta.

Mal parece la moca locana, cabe la barba cana.

Escritura, buena memoria.

Esto seria bridar un bezerro.

Bueno en uno, en dos mejor, malo en tres, y en quatro peor.

Buey viejo sulco derecho.

Buscays cinco pies al gato, y no tiene sino quatro.

Buena Pascua de Dios a Pedro que nunca mi hizo malo, ny bueno.

A pressurosa demanda espaciosa respuesta.

Magra olla, y gordo Testamento.

Cacarear, y no poner huevo.

Cada qual en su corral dessea caudal.

Cada ollero su olla alaba.

Cantarillo que va muy a la fuente, ally dexa el a sa, o la frente.

A cada paxarillo agrada su nidillo.

Cada Gallo en su muladar.

Canta el Gallo, responde la gallina, amarga la casa do no ay harina.

Caro cuesta el arrepentir.

Cada oveja, con su pareja.

Cada qual hable en lo que sabe.

Casa tu hija quando pudieres, y tu hijo quando quisieres.

Casarte has hombre cuytado, y tomaras cuydado.

Cavallo que buela, no quiere espuela.

Cavallo rucio rodado antes muerto que cansado.

Cae en la cueva el que otro a ella lleva.

Tal para tal, Maria para Iuan.

Toma casa con hogar, y muger que sepa hilar.

Todas las aves con sus pares.

La puerta trasera es la que destruye la casa.

Tras Cornudo san^udo.

Triste es la casa donde la gallina canta, y el Gallo calla.

Es petrus in cunctis.

Amor de min^a agua en cestilla.

No quiero perro en mi casa con cencerro.

A casa de tu tia, mas no cada dia.

A casa de tu hermano, no yras cada serano.

Al buen varon tierras agenas le patria son.

Unos son Moneys, y ottos Calonges.

Amistad de yerno Sol de Invierno.

A padre ganador, hijo despendedor.

A padre guardador, hijo gastador.

Bendita sea la puerta por do sale la muger muerta.

El savio muda consejo, el loco persevera.

Costumbres, y dineros hazen hijos Cavalleros.

Con mal la casa anda, do la rueca a la espada manda.

Casa de padre, vina de abuelo, Olivar de tartarabuelo.

Obedece tu padre natural, y mas el espiritual.

Hijo eres, padre seras, como hizieres tal auras.

Dixo me mi madre que porfiando no apostasse.

El hijo del Asno dos veres rozna el dia.

Don Lope ni es vinagre ni arrope.

Hijo tardano, huerfano temprano.

Mas cerca estan mis dientes que mis parientes.

Madre piadosa cria hija merdosa.

No yerra quien a los suyos semeja.

Parto largo, hija al cabo.

Queso ciego, y pan con oios quitan a mis hijos los enojos.

Quien tiene mal diente, tiene mal patiente.

Quien bien me haze, esse es mi compadre.

Quien cria nieto, cria mal redruejo.

Sobre padre no ay compadre.

Pobreza, no es vileza, si no inconveniencia.

Abaxanse los adarves, y alcanse los muladare^.

A boda, ni a baptismo no vayas sin ser llamado.

A bestia loca recuero modorro.

A buen entendedor, breve hablador.

Abeja, y oveja, y piedra que rabeja, y pendola tras oreja dessea a su hijo la
vieja.

El conejo ydo, y consejo venido.

A chico pasterete, chico manjarete.

A cabo de cien an^os todo seremos salvos.

Dos paxaros en una espiga hazen mala liga.

A do sacan, y no pon, presto llegan all hondon.

La tarde loa el dia, y el fin la vida.

Aficion ciega razon.

A fuerca de villano hierro en medio.

Quien a la postre viene primero llora.

Agua coge con harnero quien se cree de ligero.

La jaula hecha, picaca muerta.

Agora que tengo oveja y borrigo, todos dizen en hora buena esteys Pedro.

A gran subida, gran descendida.

Al buen consejo no se halla precio.

El desagra decimiento seca la fuente de piedad.

Al Medico, Confessor y letrado no le trayas Engan^ado.

A la vasija nueva dura el resabio.

El Asno muerto la cevada al rabo.

Al enemigo que huye puente de plata.

Al bien buscallo, y al mal esperallo.

Al viejo nunca le falta que contar, ni al Sol, ni al hogar.

Alquimia provada tener renta, y no gastar nada.

A los an^os mil buelve la liebre a su cubil.

Al hombre bueno no le busques abolengo.

No ay cosa mala en Espan^o, si no la que habla.

Cu, cu, guarda no lo seas tu.

Con un mucho, y dos poquitos se hazen los ricos.

Compres cadena, buelves dinero en moneda.

Con mala persona el remedio de poner tierra en medio.

Con Latin, rocin y florin andaras el mundo.

Cobre buena fama y echate a dormir.

Compan^ia de uno compan^ia de ninguno, compan^ia de dos compan^ia de Dios,
compan^ia de tres compan^ia es, compan^ia de quatro compan^ia del Diablo.

Colorado y negro colores del Infierno.

Como no rin^e tu amo? porque no es casado.

Cortesia de boca mucho vale y poca costa.

Consejo de quien te quiere, aunque te paresca mal, escrivele.

Colerico sanguino, borracho fino.

Cien sastres, cien molineros, y cien texedores son trecientos ladrones.

El que dos liebres caca, a vezes toma la una, y muchas vezes ninguna.

El vicio de la natura dura hasta la sepultura.

Aquel loar devemos cuyo pan comemos.

Del dicho al fecho ay gran trecho.

Dadivas quebrantan pen^as.

De quien me fio, Dios me guarde, de quien no me fio me guardare yo.

Del ayrado un poco te desuja, del calandriz toda tu vida.

De chica centella gran hoguera.

De hambre pocos vi morir, de mucho comer cien mil.

Del piel agena larga correa.

Del fuego te guardaras, del ladron no podras.

De los colores la grana, de las frutas la mancana.

De luengas vias, luengas mentiras.

Despues de vendimias cestos.

De la mala muger te guarde, y de la buena no fies nada.

De rabo de puerco nunca buen virote.

Despues de descalabrado untarle el casco.

De puerta cerrada el Diablo se torna.

El vientre lleno si quiera de heno.

Del viejo el consejo.

De buen servidor vendras a ser sen^or.

Del mal lo menos.

Despues de caca hecha, dexalda.

Mas vale un toma, que dos te dare.

Quando Dios quiere, en sereno llueve.

De loco Juez breve sentencia.

Deve algo para Pascua, y hazer te se ha corta la Quaresma.

Do van anto^os van los ojos.

Dime con quien vas, y dezirte he quien eres.

Do fueres, haz como vieres.

Duele me el colodrillo, y untanme el tovillo.

Del Arado saca el buen Soldado.

Fuese por lana, y bolvio tresquilado.

El que tiene tejado de vidrio, no tire piedras al de su vezino.

El que paga lo que deve lo que queda es suyo.

El dar limosna nunca la bolsa mengua.

El que tarda recauda.

El mal entra a bracadas, y sale a pulgaradas.

Quien gasta mas que gana, fuerca es que se planga.

Quien no se aventura, ni vaya a la mar, ni ande en mula.

Quien mucho abraca poco aprieta.

Quien antes nace, antes pace.

Quien no oye razon no haze razon.

Quien no pone, y siempre saca, suelo halla.

Quien bien hila, larga trae la camisa.

Quien en todo su muger contenta, Cornudo animal presto diventa.

Quien estropieca, y no cae, a su passo an^ade.

Quien enferma y sana, romeria es que anda.

Quien malas man^as ha, tarde o nunca las perdera.

Quien todo lo quis^ere, todo lo pierde.

Quien hermanos disparte, a vezes lleva la peor part

Quien a buen arbol se arrima, buena sombra le cobija.

Quien es Cornudo, y lo consiente, sea Cornudo para siempre.

Quien de los suyos se alexa, Dios le dexa.

Quien a treynta no tiene seso, y a quarenta no es rico, rapalde del libro.

Quien solo come su gallo, solo ensille su cavallo.

Quien burla al burlador, cien dias ha de perdon.

Quien tiene pie en el Altar, come pan sin amassar.

Quien tiempo tiene, y tiempo atiende, tiempo viene que se arrepiente.

Quien a la postre viene, primero llora.

Quien en una piedra dos vezes tropieca, merece que se quiebre la cabeca.

Quien haze, aplaze.

Quien de presto se determina, de tarde se arrepiente

Quien ha oficio, ha beneficio.

Quien una vez hurta, fiel nunca.

Quien te haze fiesta que no suele hazer, o te quiere engan^ar, o te ha
menester.

Quien da lo suyo antes de morir, aparejese a bien sufrir.

Quien abrojos siembra, espinas coge.

Quien quisiere medrar, o viva en pie de sierra o en puerto de mar.

Quien no ha cayre, no ha donayre.

Quien fia, o promete, en deuda se mete.

Quien no tiene dinero venda la bolsa, y el esquero.

Quien la fama ha perdida, muerto anda en la vida.

Quien huelga mucho, no medra.

Quien deve a Pedro, y paga a Andres, que pague otra vez.

Quien siembra abrojos, no ande descalco.

Quien a mi hijo quita el moco, a mi besa en el rostro.

Quien no sabe de mal, no sabe de bien.

Quien es tu enemigo? hombre de tu oficio.

Quien cree de ligero, agua coge en harnero.

Quien uno castiga, ciento hostiga.

Quien pregunta, no yerra.

Quien se muda, Dios le ayuda.

Quien va al molino y no madruga, los otros muelen, y el se espulga.

El que bien esta, no se mueva.

Quien sirve a hombre malo, siembra en la placa.

Quien se ensen^a, su mal ensancha.

Quien dineros ha de cobrar, muchas bueltas ha de dar.

Quien no tuviere que hazer, arm navio, o tome muger.

Quien calla, consiente.

Rey por natura, y Papa por ventura.

Reniego del amigo que cubre con sus alas, y muerde con el pico.

Reniego de grillos, aunque sean de oro.

Regalado como gato de tripera.

Rin^en las comadres, descubrense las poridades.

Sal vertida nunca bien cogida.

Sacar un pie del lodo, y meter el otro.

Santa Lucia mengua la noche, y crece el dia.

Sancha, Sancha beves el vino, y dizes que mancha.

Salir de lodacales, y entrar en cenagales.

Salada bien salada poco vinagre, y bien a zeytada.

San Iuan el verde no es cada dia.

No ay mal que no ve nga por bien.

Servicio no es herencia.

Secreto de dos sabelo Dios, secreto de tres toda res.

Si quieres tener buena fama, no te tome el Sol en la cama.

Sen^al de mala bestia sudar tras la oreja.

Si quieres tener buen moco, antes que le nazca el boco.

Si quieres que haga por ti haz por mi.

Si la natura sen^ala, o es muy buena o muy mala.

Si bien me quieres Iuan, tus obras me lo diran.

Si de alguno re quieres vengar, has de callar.

Sigue razon, aunque a unos agrade, a otros non.

Si no llegais al punto, no comereys del unto.

Si el grande fuesse valiente, y el chico paciente, y el bermejo leal, todo el
mundo seria ygual.

Si l^ lengua erro, el coracon no.

Sigue el bien, si quieres ser alguien.

Si quiere, ser bien servido, servete tu mismo.

Si quieres holgura sufre amargura.

Si no como queremos, passamos como podemos.

Si quieres ver quanto vale un ducado, buscalo prestado.

Son^o el ciego que via, y vino lo que querria.

Sobre dinero no ay compan^ero.

So el sayal, ay al.

Suelas y vino andan camino.

Sufra quien penas tiene, que tras un tiempo otro viene.

Tiempo, ni hora, no se ata con soga.

Todo ha lugar, a quien lo sabe manear.

Topado ha Sancho con su rocin.

Topanse los hombres, mas no los cumbres.

Todos somos hijos de Adam, si no que nos differencia la seda.

Todos, somos locos, los unos y los otros.

Cada uno a su guisa y el asno a la antigua.

Ve do vas, como vieres assi haz.

Un cabello haze sombra en el suelo.

Cornudo soys marido, muger, y quien os lo dixo?

Cu, cu, guarda que no seas tu.

A la muger ventanera, tuerce le el cuello si la quieres buena.

El hombre bueno, no sube en lecho ageno.

El pie en la cuna, la mano en la rueca, y cria tu hijuela.

El Asno, y la Muger a palos se han de vencer.

El marido antes con un ojo, che con un hijo.

En casa del mesquino, mas manda la muger.

Enamorose el Ruyn de las trencas del mandil.

Guay del huso, quando la barba no anda de suso.

Hermosa es por cierto, la que es hermosa de su cuerpo.

Es menester la comida, assi mas la honra.

A la muger brava, dalle la soga larga.

La muger del ciego para quien se afeyta?

La biuda rica con un ojo llora, con el otra repica.

El que tiene hermosa muger, mas de dos ojos ha menester.

La muger buena, hecho del marido.

Mas vale ser Cornudo que no lo sepa ninguno, que sin serlo, pensarlo todo el
mundo.

Mas vale vieja con dineros, que moca con galas.

Muchos Componedores, cohonden la novia.

Muestra me tu muger, dezirte he que marido tiene.

Ni tan vieja que amule, ni tan moca que retoce.

Ni por buey, ni por vaca, no tomes muger maniaca.

Ni de nin^o te ayuda, ni te cases con biuda.

Ni cavalgues en potro, ni tu muger alabes a otro.

Ni boda sin canto, ni mortuario sin llanto.

No compres Asno de Recuero, ni te cases con hija de mesonero.

Por codicia del florin, no te cases con ruyn.

Mi marido ha ydo al mar, chirlos mirlos a buscar.

La muger y la vin^a el hombre la haze garrida.

Quien es Cornudo y calla, en el coracon trae la ascua

Marido tras del lar dolor de hijar.

Quien no alca un alfiler, no quiere bien a su muger.

Guardose de mosca y comio una aran^a.

Gran trencado, y chico recaudo.

Al que yo bien quiera la muger se le muera.

Habla poco y bien, tenerte han por alguien.

Hablar sin pensar es tirar sin encarar.

Haz bien, y no cates a quien.

Haz lo que el frail dize, y no lo que haze.

Harto pide, quien bien sirue.

Donde ay estiercol y loco, luego parece.

Hombre que madruga, de algo tiene cura.

Honra, y provecho no caben en un saco.

Huyr, y correr, no es todo uno.

Hurtar el puerco, y dar los pies por Dios.

Husada menuda a su duen^o ayuda.

Huesped nuevo, baraja en casa.

Huelga el trigo so la nieve, como el viejo so la pele.

Huelgo me un poco, mas hilo mi copo.

Huevos mil manjares.

Yo acoto el matorral, y otro toma los paxaros.

Voy do el Papa, y el Emperador no pueden embiar Embaxador.

El lobo, y la vulpeja son de una conceja.

El pez que busca el anzuelo, busca su duelo.

El que a su enemigo popa, a sus manos muere.

El ojo del amo engorda el cavallo.

Frail que pide por Dios pide por dos.

Esto es hazer seto de espinas con manos desnudas.

Haga tu hijo heredero, no tu despensero.

En tierra seca el agua salobre es buena.

En la casa del official, assoma la hambre, mas no osa entrar.

En el agua turbia haze buen pescar.

En hora mala nace, quien mala fama cobra.

En este mundo mesquino, quando ay para pan, no ay para vino.

En arca abierta, el justo peca.

En casa del tahur, poco dura el alegria.

En luengo camino paja pesa.

En casa llena presto se guisa la cena.

Bastardos o del todo buenos, o del todo maluados.

Guay al hijo, cuyo padre va a parayso.

Esso se haze, lo que a Dios plaze.

Hazes buena harina, y no toques bozina.

Guarte de puta que dexa la bolsa enxuta.

Guarte de las ocasiones, y guardarte Dios ha de los pecados.

Guay de la muerte, que no toma present.

Grano no hincha arnero, mas ayuda a su compan^ero.

Gran plazer no escotar, y bien comer..

Quiere mi padre Mun^oz, lo que no quiere Dios.

Quien yerra, y se eminenda, a Dios se encomienda.

Quien se guarda, Dios le guarda.

Quien vive bien, a nadie ha menester.

Quando a nuestra Sen^ora oyeres nombrar, no pidas si has de ayunar.

Su alma en su palma.

Tras este mundo otro verna.

Tanto es Pedro de Dios, que no le medra Dios.

Todo es nada deste mundo, si no se endereca al segundo.

Quien no entra en la mar, no sabe a Dios rogar.

Antes que cases, mira lo que hazes.

Antes de casar, ten casa en que morar.

Ala muger quinzeta, hombre de treynta.

Mala noche, y parir hija.

Quien bien quiere a Beltran, quiere bien a su can.

Allegadora de la ceniza, y desparramadora de la harina.

A cada ollaza su cobertaraca.

Bien o mal, casado me han.

Casar, casar, suena bien, y sabe mal.

Casar, y compadrar, cada qual con su ygual.

Con buen vezino casaras tu hija, y vendras tu vino.

Casaras, y amansaras.

De bovos y bovas, se hin chen las bodas.

Humo, gotera, y muger parlera echan el hombre de su casa fuera.

El que es enemigo de la novia, como dira bien del novio.

El ciervo muda cada an^o su penacho, y tu marido cada dia.

Dios me guarde de moca adevina, y de muger ladina.

De air por horado y de amigo reconciliado guarde me Dios.

De medico moco y barbero viejo cata te.

De madrastra, el nombre le basta.

El Diablo le haze la cama al logrero.

Por la boca se escalienta el homo.

Fiar de Dios sobre buena prenda.

Guarde te Dios de Hecho es.

El rosario en el cuello, y el Diablo en el cuerpo.

La oracion breve sube al Cielo.

Mucho en el suelo, poco en el Cielo.

Por esso te hago, porque me hagas, que no eres Dios que me valgas.

Poridad de dos, poridad de Dios, poridad de tres de todo es.

Quando Dios quiere, con todos vientos llueve.

A Dios rogando, y con el maco dando.

Con minerva ande tu mano.

A quien Dios quiere bien, la perra le pare lechones.

A muger casta, Dios le basta.

A quien Dios quiere bien la hormiga le va a buscar.

Aquel es rico, que esta bien con Dios.

A tuerto o a derecho ayude Dios a n^ro consejo.

A buen recaudo vengo.

Dame recaudo para comer.

Poner a recaudo.

Embiar un recaudo.

Dame recaudo para escrevir.

Dar recaudo.

Da Dios higos a quien no tien muelas.

De hora a hora Dios mejora.

Dios me de marido rico, si quiera sea borrico.

De cornada de ansaron guarde Dios mi coracon.

Dios te de salud y gozo, y casa con un corral, y pozo.

Dios me decontienda con quien me contienda.

Dios de savenga, quien nos mantenga.

Dios consiente, mas no siempre.

Del agua mansa me guarde Dios que de la brava yo me guardare.

Caldo de tripas bien te repicas?

Venga el bien, y venga do quisiere.

La biuda rica, casa fica.

La liebre y la puta, cabe la senda la busca.

Judio, paga lo que deves, que lo que yo te deuo cuenta es que tenemos.

Ve embiado, ven llamado.

Yo me era polvo, vino agua, y hizo me lodo.

Por mucho pan nunca mal an^o.

Por mucho madrugar no amanece mas ayna.

Por nuevas no peneys, hazerse han viejas, y saber las heys.

Poca hazienda, poco cuydado.

Poco por mil, preso por mil y quinientos.

Por ningun tempero no dexes el camino real por el sendero.

Toma el primer consejo de tu muger, el segundo no.

Preguntaldo a Mun^oz, que miente mas que dos.

Puerta abierta, al Santo tenta.

Pusieron la Cruz, porque no le meassen.

Quando la bestiageme, carga, y no teme.

Quando el Diablo reza, engan^arte quiere.

Quando el Diablo viniere a tu puerta, y te pidiere las mangas, cortalas, y da
se las.

Qual la comp ana, tal la badajada.

Quando fueres yunque, sufre come yunque, quando maco hiere como maco.

Quando estuvieres con tu muger vientre con vientre, nole digas quanto te
viniere a la mente.

Quando Dios no quiere, el Santo no puede.

Quando no dan los campos, no han los Santos.

Quando el hierro esta encendido, entonces ha de ser batido.

Qual el tiempo tal el tiento.

Quando vieres la barva de tu vezino pelar, echa la tuya a remojar.

Quanto sabes no diras, quanto vees no juzgaras, y viviras en paz.

Quando el Pilota promete missas, y cera, con mal anda la galera.

Qual el Rey, tal la gray.

Quando la rana tuviere pelo, tu seras bueno.

Mejot doblar que quebrar.

Querria mihijo agudo, mas no reagudo.

Quieres comprar mulo sin boca y culo.

Que hazes mosquita? aramos.

Que aprovecha candil sin mecha?

Quien tarde se levanta, todo el dia trota.

Quien todo lo da todo lo niega.

Quien dize mal de la yegua, esse la merca.

Quien casa por amores, malos dias, y buenas noches.

Quien bien oye, bien responde.

Quieres que te siga el can, da le pan.

Quien puede ser libre, no se cautive.

Quien bien ama tarde oluida.

Quien de paja tiene la halda, temor tiene al fuego.

Quien guarda, halla.

Quien trata en lana, oro mana.

Quien no osa aventurar, no pass la mar.

Quien al Asno alaba tal hijo le nasca.

Quien fia el dinero, pierde dinero y el vezero.

Quien come y canta, de locura se levanta.

Quien deve ciento, y tiene ciento y uno, no ha miedo alguno, quien tiene
ciento, y uno, y deve cienro, y dos; encomiendo le a Dios.

Quien con perros se echa, con pulgas se levanta.

Quien lexos se va a casar o va engan^ado, o va a engan^ar.

Quien paga sus deudas se hara rico.

Boca fresca, pie caliente.

Quien la muerte agena espera, a larga soga tira.

Quando amigo pide, no ay manan^a.

Si cada necio traeria palo, faltaria len^a.

Por lavar los manos, no se venden heredades.

Escuche a la razon, o se hara escuchar.

Quien bien vive harto letradoes.

No te burles con el ojo, ni la Religion.

Quien tarda, acaba.

En boca cerrada no entran moscas.

Un grano no hinche el saco, mas ayuda a sus compan^eros.

Honra y provecho no caben en un Saco.

Lo mas que la muger mira en el espejo, lo menos mira a su casa.

Case biuda antes que each luto.

Por oyr missa, y dar cevada, nunca se perdio jornada.

Muchos besan las Manos que quier^ian ver cortadas.

Mundo redondo, quien no sabe nadar por fuerca ha deyr al hondo.

No es tan fiero el Leon como le pintan.

No es pobre quien tie^e poco, mas quien dessea mucho.

No te accompan^es con malos, porque acrecentera el numero.

Quien limpia las narizes del nin^o, besa la madre en la mexilla.

Quien vive de esperanca, bayla sin musica.

Quien cuenta nuevas a su muger, es rezien casado.

Quien aprende un officio, gana una herencia.

Dadivas entran sin taladro.

El Musico trae tienda en la garganta.

El palo del viejo, pestillo de la puerta de muer^o.

Guarte del buey adelante, del cavallo a tras, y del frail a todas parts.

Cosa mas facil es de hazer algo, que no nada.

Cada uno lleva un loco en la manga.

Religion, fama, el ojo, son cosas muy tiernas.

Quien lama su cuchillo, dara poco al servidor.

Mas vale nariz mocosa, que ninguna.

Quien trae buenas nuevas podra hurtar reziamente a la puerta.

Quien tiene compassion de otro, acuerdase de si mismo

Gran dote cama de renzillas.

Tres mugeres, y un ganso hazen un mercado.

Si las cosas se pudiessen hazer do^ vezes, todos setian savios.

La cosa mas facil del mundo, es enga^ar a si mismo.

Quien a su enemigo popa enter sus manos muere.

Quien es Cornudo y calla, en el coracon trae una asqua.

Por esso es uno Cornudo, por que dos pueden mas que uno.

La muger, y la cereza se aseytan por su mal.

Dile que es hermosa, y tornar se ha loca.

Haveys dado en el hito.

Padre viejo, y manga rota, no es deshonra.

Dixo me mi madre que porfiasse, mas que no apostasse.

Ciento de un vientre, y cada uno de su mente.

Alla me lleve Dios a morar, do un huevo vale un real.

No seria Fortuna, si fuesse sempre una.

El Prodigo tiene amigos quanto come con testigos.

Al fin se rind Fortuna, si el trabajo l'importuna.

El trabajo gana palma, y quita el orin del alma.

No puede el hijo de Adam, sin trabajo comer pan.

Yo se lo que se, mas desso callarme he.

Zorilla tagarnillera, hazese muerta por asir la presa.

Una aguia para la bolsa, y dos para la boca.

Uno tiene la fama, y otro lleva la lana.

Uno fue, que nunca erro.

Virtudes vencen sen^ales.

Una vez engan^an al prudente dos al innocente.

Vieja che bayla mucho poluo levanta.

Vino de peras, ni lo bevas ni lo des a quien bien quieras.

Venid piando, y bolueras cantando.

Vende en casa, y compra en feria si quieres salir de lazeria.

Treynta Moneys, y un Abad, no pueden hazer cagat un Asno contra su voluntad.

Tres a uno metenle la paia en el culo.

Todo pescado es flema, y todo iuego apostem^.

Tienes en casa el muero, y vas a llorar el ageno.

Tahur, tahur el nombre dize hurta fur.

Tanto pan como un pulgar, torna el alma a su lugar.

Suelas y vino, andan camino.

So^lando brasas se saca llama, y de malas palabras pendencia.

Si bien me quiere Iuan, sus obras me lo diran.

Si quieres dar palos, a tu muger, pide la al Sol a bever.

Si quieres holganca, sufre amargura.

Si quieres enfermar, lavate la cabeca, y vete a echar.

Si quieres cedo engordar, come con hambre, y beve a vagar.

Si quieres saber quanto vale un ducado buscalo prestado.

Si quieres tener buen moco, ten le antes que le nasca el boco.

Si el necio no fuesse al mercado, no se venderia lo malo.

Rogar al Santo hasta passar el tranco.

Quien con mal anda, o se quiebra el pie o la canca.

Quien no parece, perece.

Quieres dezir al necio lo que es? di le bestia de dos pies.

Quien no halla mala hada, de la buena se enfada.

Quien no tiene miel en la orca tenga lo en la boca.

Quien promete, en deuda se mete.

Quien abrojos siembra, espinas coge.

Quien no ha cayre, no ha donayre.

Quien bien quiere, de lexos vee.

Quien solo come su Gallo, solo ensille su Cavallo.

Si esta pella a la pared no pega, a lo menos dexara sen^al.

Un solo golpe no derriba el roble.

Uno, y ninguno todo es uno.

Un cuchillo mesmo me corta el pan y el dedo.

Uso saca maestro.

Yo que me callo piedras apa^o.

Honra sin provecho anillo en el dedo.

El hombre cree, y el Alma dud^.

Antes que escrivas recibas, antes que des escrivas.

Los dientes no quieren ny mucho descuydo, ni demasiado cuydado.

El dia de la boda, no ay muger hermosa.

De bovos y bovas se hinchen las bodas.

Asno que entra en dehesa agena, buelve cargado de len^a.

Hombre palabrimuger, guarde me dios del.

Heredad blanca, simiente negra, cinco bueyes a una reja.

Hombre bermejo, y hembra barbuda, tres leguas lexos la saluda.

Ara hondo, cogeras pan en abondo.

A tu hijo buen nombre y officio.

A todo ay man^a sino a la muerte.

Bever a codo alcado hasta ver las armas del mal logrado.

Refranes Donosos, y Satyricos.
NO ay peor Abad, que el que Monge ha estado.

Pato, Ganso y Ansaron tres cosas suenan, y una son.

Por las haldas del Vicario, sube el Diablo al campanario.

Quien prende el aguila por la cola, y muger por la palabra no tiene nada.

Quien dixo Rodrigo dixo ruydo.

Cierra la puerta que la olla va fuera.

Sin Clerigo y Palomar ternas limpio tu hogar.

Somos Gallegos, y no nos entendemos.

Viejo es Pedro para cabrero.

Quan bovito seria Pedro si se lavasse?

Como el Asno de San Antolin, cada dia mas ruyn*

Proverbios Donosos.
DIos me dio un huevo, y esse dio me lo guero.

Dos a uno tornar me quiero grullo.

N^ ay hombre debaxo del Sol,
Como el Italiano, y el Espan^ol.
Respuesta. Dizes la verdad y tienes razon,
El uno es Puto, el otro Ladron.
La hazienda de Clerigo entra por la puerta, y sale por el humero.

Muera Marta, y muera harta.

Tomo las calcas de Villadiego, y puso tierra en medio.

De la mala muger te guarda, y de la buena no fies nada.

Refranes dionosos y plazenteros.
NUnca vi de cosas menos que de Abriles y Obispos buenos.

Abad de Carcuela comistees la olla, pedis la cacuela.

A Clerigo hecho de frail no le fies tu comadre.

La hazienda de Clerigo da la Dios, y quita la el Demonio.

Camino de Roma ni mula coxa, ni bolsa floxa.

Dios es el quesana, y el medico lleva la plata.

Dos Iuanes, y un Pedro hazen un Asno entero.

El Abad, y el gorrion dos malas aves son.

El Asno de San Ladorin, cada dia mas ruyn.

La hazienda de Abad cantando viene, y chifflando va.

Los locos hazen los vanquetes, y los sabios los comen.

Lo que no lleva Christo, lleva el fisco.

Manjar de Burguillo a la man^ana ravanos, y a la noche higos.

Martin cada dia mas ruyn.

Medicos di Valencia luengas faldas y poca ciencia.

Mi comadre Marimenga siempre a pedir venga.

Moco missero, Abad Vallero, y frail Cortes, reniego de todos tres.

Ni de frail, ni de monja no esperes recebir nada.

Ni Perro, ni Negro, ni Moco Gallego.

Ni mula mohina, ni moca Marina, ni poyo a la puerta ni Abad porvezino.

Ni fies muger de Frail, ni barages con Alcayde.

Ni Frail por amigo, ni Clerigo por vezino.

Proverbios Temporales referiendo a las sazones.
ABriles, y Condes los mas son traydores.

Abril y Mayo llaves del an^o.

Abril frio mucho pan, y poco vino.

A cada puerco su San Martin.

A dias tres de Abril el Cuclillo ha de venir, si no viniere a ocho o es preso,
o morto.

Agua de marco peor que la mancha en el pan^o.

Agosto, y vendimia no es cada dia.

Agua de Agosto acafran, miel, y musto.

Agua de Mayo pan para todo el an^o.

An^o de nieves an^o de bienes.

Arreboles de Aragon a la noche con aguas son.

Aurora ruvia, o viento o pluvia.

Cada casa en su tiempo, y navos en Adviento.

Cerco de Luna nunca hinche l^guna, cerco del Sol moja el Pastor.

Dize Mayo a Abril, aunque te pese, me he de reyr.

Dezimbre dezembrina hiere como Culebrina.

Elada barbuda, nieve anuncia.

El dia de San Barnabe dixo el Sol aqui estare.

El viento, y el Varon no es bueno de Aragon.

Enero haze elar la vieja en el lecho, y el agua en puchero.

En Abril aguas mil.

Junio, Julio y Agosto Sen^ora no soy vuestro.

La neblina del agua es madrina.

Luna con cerco agua trae en el pico.

Luna en creciente cuernos a Orient, Luna en menguante cuernos adelante.

Mal vale un agua enter Abril y Mayo que los bueyes, y el carro.

Marco ventoso, Abril llovioso hacen el Mayo hermoso.

Abril ventoso, Marco llovioso del buen colmenar hazen astroso.

Ni creas en Juvierno claro, ni en Vereno nublado.

Nieblas en alto, aguas en baxo.

Quando ay nieblas en Hontejas, apareja tus tejas.

Quando la sierra de mosca se toca toda la villa haze una sopa.

Quando en Verano es Invierno, y en Invierno Verano nunca buen a^o.

Quando Aroca tiene caperuca coge la vela, y vere a Rastelo.

Quando llueve en Agosto, llueve miel o mosto.

Quando menguare la Luna no siembres cosa alguna.

Quando florece el melicoton, el dia y la noche de un tenor son.

Quando el durazno esta en la flor, dia y noche estan de un tenor.

Quando brora la higuera requiere tu compan^era.

Quando llueve llueve, quando nieva nieva, quando haze vien^to haze mal tiempo.

Quando Guara tiene capa, y Moncayo chapiron, buen an^o para Castilla, y mejor
por Aragon.

Sol madruguero no dura dia entero.

Sol rojo agua al ojo.

Sol de Marco apega como pelmazo.

Sol puesto, obrero suelto.

Tiempo tras tiempo, y aguas tras viento.

Viento solano agua en la mano.

Arreboles a l'oriente agua amaneciente.

Yemas de Abril pocas al barril.

Un mes antes, y otro despues de navidad, es invierno de verdad.

Santa, Lucia, mengua la noche, y crece el dia.

Refranes o Proverbios Fisicos tocante la salud.
QUien no cena, no ha menester Avicena.

Anade, Muger, Cabra, mala cosa siendo magra.

De man^ana a la pescaria, y la tarde a la carniceria.

Agua fria, y pan caliente, nunca hizieron buen vientre.

Agua al higo, y a la pera vino.

Agua tiene tres cofas, ni enferma, ni embeoda, ni adeuda.

Compra la cama de deudor, y dormiras a sue^o suelto.

Alla va el mal, do comen el huevo sin sal.

Quien hurta la cena al viejo, no le haze agravio.

Anguilla Empanada, y Lamprea escavechada.

Azeytuna oro es una, dos plata, tercera mara.

Calenturas Oton^ales, o muy luengas, o mortales.

Cabrito de un mes, rezental de tres.

Calenturas de Mayo, salud para todo el an^o.

Bien cuenta la madre, mejor el infant.

Has la noche noche, y el dia dia, y viviras con alegria.

Hijo tardano, huerfano temprano.

La muger negra trementina en ella.

Los pies secos, la boca humeda.

Lexos de ciudad, lexos de salud.

Man^ana al monte, la tarde a la fuente.

Mas mato la cena, que no sano Avicena.

Come poco, y cena mas, duerme en alto y viviras.

Despues de piece, mala la leche.

El Salmon, y el Sermon en la Quaresma tienen sazoo.

Dixo la leche al vino, bien seays venido amigo.

Donde mea la oveja bien semeja.

Vino an^ejo, y amigo viejo.

Quien viejo engorda, dos mocedades goza.

Case tu hija, y piece fresco, gastale presto.

El moco dormiendo sana, y el viejo se acaba.

Agua sobre miel, sabe mal, y haze bien.

Pan caliente mucho en la mano y poco en el vientre.

El queso es sano que da el avaro.

El agua sin color, olor y sabor, y ha la de ver el Sol.

Haz la puerta al solano, y viviras sano.

Vino trasnochado, no vale un cornado.

Que yo me claro, y higa al Medico.

Mejor es desseo, que hastio.

Moco creciente lobo en el vientre.

Monte y rio de me Dios por mi vezino.

Mocas Davera quien os dio tan ruynes dientes? agua fria, y castan^as calientes.

Ni bevas de laguna, ni comas mas de una azeytuna.

Pan a hastura, y vino a mejura.

Pan reziente, y vuas, a las mocas pone mudas, y a las viejas quita las arrugas.

Pan de air, carne de oy, vino de antan^o salud para todo el a^o.

Por Quartanas no doblan campanas.

Poca fatiga es gran salud.

Quando te dolieren las tripas, haz lo saber al culo.

Quando ovieres gana de comer come de la nalgada, y dexa la hijada.

Turmas de Varon.

Quando un hombre mea las botas, no es bueno para las bodas.

Quando comieres pan reziente, no bevas de la fuente.

Quando meares de color de florin, echa el Medico para ruyn.

Quando llueve, y haze Sol coge el caracol.

Quando el enfiermo caga rulo higa para el Boticario.

Quando el baco crece, el cuerpo enmagrece.

El que en Mayo no merenda, con los muertos se encomienda.

Quien mea y no pee, no haze lo que deve.

Quien bien come, y bien beve, haze lo que deve.

Quien come caracoles en Abril apareje cera y pavil.

Quien hinojo vee, y no coge, Diablo es que no hombre.

Quieres ver a tu marido muerto, da le vercas en Agosto.

El que mucho come, poco come.

A buen comer, o mal comer tres vezes bever.

A bocado haron espolada de vino.

Aguja calumbrienta no entratas en mi hercamienta.

Quien no cansa, alcanca.

A manos lavadas Dios les da que coman.

Andeme yo caliente, y riase la gente.

A torrezno de tocino buen golpe de vino.

El agua como buey, y vino como Rey.

Un huevo escaseza, dos gentileza, tres valentia, quatro vellaqueria.

Si el villano supiesse el sabor de la Gallina en el enero, no dexaria ninguna
en el pollero.

Quieres buen bocado? el niespero despestan^ado.

Quien se echa sin cena, toda la noche devanea.

Queso de ovejas, leche de cabras, manteca de vacas.

No dexes los pellejos hasta que vengan los Galiloos, quiere dezir hasta el
diade Ascension.

No ay tal caldo como el cumo guijarro.

No me echeis agua en el vino que andan gusarapas por el rio.

Pera que dize Rodrigo no vale un higo.

Vino de peras ni lo bevas, ni lo des a quien bien quieras.

Las enfermades del ojo, se han de curar con el codo.

Quien el Diablo ha de engan^ar de manan^a ha de madrugar.

Quien no halla mala hada, de la buena se enfada.

Quien comio la carne que roya el huesso.

Quien en lo llano estropieca que hara en la sierras.

Quien en tiempo huye, en tiempo acude.

Quien quisiere vivir sano, coma poco, y cena temprano.

Ruynes comidas, y grandes almuerzos, chicas cabecas y luengos pescuecos.

Si quieres comida mala, come la liebre assada.

Si quieres vivir sano, haz te viejo temprano.

Si supiesse la muger la virtud de la ruda la buscaria la noche a la Luna.

Si quisieres enfermar lava le cabeca, y vete a echar.

Sobre la sombra del nogal no te pongas a acostar.

Sobre brevas, no bevas.

Sobre el Melon, vino follon.

Tienes gana de morir, cena carnero assado, y echate a dormir.

La olla sin verdura no tiene gracia ni hartura.

Quien en Mayo come la sardina, en Agosto caga la espina.

Proverbios particulares, que apurtan a ciertos Lugares.
MEdicos de Valencia, largas faldas, y poca ciencia.

A juezes Galicianos, con los pies en las manos.

Al Iudio dalde un palmo, tomara quatro.

Gallego pedidor, Castellano tenedor.

Al Iudio dalde el huevo, y pediros ha la Gallina.

Canizar, y Villarejo, gran campana, y ruyn consejo.

Del Andaluz, guarda tu capuz.

Cuenca de cabecas, y Valencia de piernas.

Del Toledano, guarte tarde, y temprano.

Cuchillo Pamplones, capato Baldres, amigo Burgales, guarde me Dios de todos
lo^ tres.

El Portugues se crio de pedo de un Judio.

Fuero de Aragon, buen servicio mal galardon.

Antes puto que Gallego.

Cerden^a o mata, o Empren^a.

En las Asturias tres meses d' Invierno, y tres d' Infierno.

Hable Burgos, que por Toledo hablare yo.

Apprendiz de Portugal no sabe coser, y quiere cortar.

En casa del Moro no hables Algaravia.

Quien lengua ha a Roma va.

Camino de Santiago tanto anda el coxo como el sano.

Como el ansar de Cantipalos que falio al hombre.

Mula de Losa, el que la cria no la goza.

Mucho pan tiene Castilla, que no lo tiene, passa lazeria.

Repollo Murciano, Nabo Bejarano.

Negar que Negaras, que en Aragon estas.

Ni piedra redona, ni gente de Girona.

Ni buen capato de Valdres, ni buen amigo Salamanques.

Ni hombre Cordoves, ni cuchillo Pamplones, in moco Burgales, ni capato de
Baldres.

En un hora no se gano camora.

Palencia la necia, quien te oye tedesprecia.

Quando fueres por Pancoruo, ponte la capa en el hombro.

Quando passares por Torote, echa una piedra en tu capote, y pagarte ha el
escote.

Quien fuere a Andaluzia ande de noche y verma el dia.

Quien es Conde y dessea ser Duque, metase frail en Guadalupe.

Quien a Roma va, dineros llevara.

Quien no ha visto Lisboa, no ha visto cosa boa.

Quien ruyn es en su Villa, ruyn es en Sevilla.

Rincon por rincon, Calatayud en Aragon.

Roma, Roma la que a los locos doma, y a los cuerdos no perdona.

Salamanca a unos sanas a atror manca.

Si Castilla fuera vaca, Rioia fuera la rin^ovada.

Vega por Vega de Hita a Talavera.

Vin^a en Cuenca, y Muger fuerte, y pleyto en Huete.

Vizcayno necio, tarazon de en medio.

Quieres Conocer a Catalan, mea, y meara.

A quien dios quiere bien, en Sevilla le da a comer.

Tres Espan^oles, dos Christianos como dios, y el tercero santo como el Papa;

Tres Portugueses, dos medio Christianos, el otro Judio.

Tres Italianos, dos Bugerones, el otro Ateista;

Tres Tudescos, dos Borrachos, el otro Hereje;

Tres Ingleses, dos ladrones, el tercero rebelde.

Daroca la loca, cerco grande, y villa poca.

Medicos de Valencia largas faldas, y poca ciencia.

Ea, ea, que Burgos no es aldea.

Duero tiene la fama, y Pisverga lleva el agua.

Aranda del Duero, para mi la quiero.

Dos Adevinos ay en Segura, una experiencia, y el otro cordura.

En Salamanca mas vale un maravedi, que una blanca.

Dios te de vin^a en Cuenca.

Ebro traydor, naces en Castilla y riegas a Aragon.

El Rey fue viejo a Toro, y bolvio moco.

Espan^a escura, Vendaval por natura.

Asnillo de Caracena, mientras mas andava mas ruyn era.

En Navadijos poco pan, y muchos hijos.

Galizia es la huerta, y Ponferrada la puerta.

Sevilla como crebejos de baxedrez tantos prietos, quantos blancos.

Harto era Castilla de chico rincon quando Amaya era cabeca, y Hitero Monton.

Locoya lleva el agua, y Xarama tiene la fama.

Junio, Julio, Agosto, y Carthagena los mejores puertos

Lo que dessea Alagon, no le venga a Aragon.

Les perros de Zorita pocos, y mal avenidos.

Mete en tu granja el Gallego, y hazerse te ha tu Heredero.

Lo que quiere Escamilla, no lo de Dios a Castillae.

Lo que quiere Ocan^a, no lo de Dios a la Mancha.

Lo que quiere Hinojosos, no lo vean nuestros ojos.

Los potricos de Buitrago, que siempre van desmedrando.

Los perros de Zorita no teniendo a quien morder, uno a otro muerden.

Mocos de Cuenca, y potros de Carboneras hasta las eras.

Mundo mundillo, nacer en Granada, morir en Bustillo.

Mundo mundillo nacer en Xerez, morir en Portillo.

Refranes Portugueses.
A As vezes ruyn gadela roy boa correa.

A aden, moller, and a cabra, he ma cousa semdo magra.

Bolsa vazia faz o home sesudo, mas tarde.

A fin louva a vida, and a tarde louva el Dia.

Aiamos salud e paz, e logo teremos assaz.

Alem ou aquem, veias siempre con quem.

A limgo longa he sinal de mao costa.

A moller and a ovella concedo a corrella.

A muyta costesia he especia dengano.

Amor, foguo, and toss a seu dono descubre.

Amores de Freyra, flores do medoeira cedo ven and pouco duraom.

Moller fermoso, vin^a e figueral, muy malas son de guadar.

Mouro que naon podes aver forrao por tu alma.

A o bom daras, and do mao te asastaras.

Mays val divida vella que pecado novo.

A on ny a, no ni call cercar.

A pedra and a palabra naom se recolle depois de deitada.

Meu sono solto, meu enemigo mosto.

Assi he dura cousa o a doudo calar, como a o sesudo mal falar.

Millar he un possaro que tenno na mao, que dous que van volando.

As Romerias e a as bodas vam as sandias todas.

Naom quero bacoro con chucallo.

Barriga quente pe durment.

Mellor he o meu que o nuestro.

Castigo de vella nunca fez mella.

Ho homen cree, and alma duvida.

Cacara sem dentes dos mortos faz viventes.

Naom fiar de caon que manqueia.

Can de can vello, y potro de potrelo.

Judio per la Mercaduria, y frade per la hypocresia.

Conciencia de Portalegre qui vende gato por liebre.

Comadre andareja naom vo a part que vos naom veia.

Falaon le en allos responde en bugallos.

La va la ligoa omde do o dente.

Ida de Jan Gomez que foy na sela veo nos alfories.

Refranes Gallegos.
A Fazendo do crego da a Deus, and levala a o demo.

A maa vezin^a da a agulla sin lin^a.

Amor sa molt, argent fa tot Satalan.

Assi esta el pages enter dos Advocats, como el pagel enter dos gats.

Jado de noviella, y potro de yegua viella.

Jornada de Mar no he de tayxar.

Refranes Catalanes.
MIllor es de figue que factig.

En Juliol ni dona ni caracol.

El hon del mal que ha paor dexo mor.

Quen ten cops bell nol call mantel.

Quien gran dia se lleva tot lo dia trota.

La voz de pleu, vos de Deu.

Mes va pa exut ab amor, que gallines ab temor.

Explicacion de algunos Refranes Sennalados en Romance.
ALla me lleve Dios a morar, do un huevo vale un real. Quiere dezir a una
tierra dinerosa y rica, donde ay harto reales, que incitan los hombres al
trabajo.

A quien Dios quiere bien, la perra le pare lechones: Quiere dezir, a quien
Dios quiere bien todo se le buelue en bien, y allende de sus esperancas.

A quien Dios quiere bien, la hormiga le va a buscar: Dizese, porque adonde va
la hormiga ay trigo en abundancia.

De cornada de ansaron guarde Dios mi coracon: Quiere dezir, de las escrituras
de los letrados que traen pleytos.

Del agua mansa me guarde Dios, que de la braua yo me guardare. Quiere dezir,
de amigo simulador me guarde Dios, que yo me guardare bien de mi enemigo.

Qual era Dios para Mercader? Porque sabe lo venidero, como la sazon del an^o,
y quando aura tempestades, etc.

Quiere mi padere Mun^oz lo que no quiere Dios. Entiende se de una hija que su
padre queria casar contra su voluntad.

Rogamos a Dios por Santos, mas no por tantos. Palabras son del Labrador, y se
entienden de los Disantos, y las fiestas de las quales ay muchas en el an^.

Viene Dios a vernos sin campanilla: Quiere dezir sin ruydo, o quando estamos
con salud: El Venir con campanilla es, quando va el santissimo sacramento a
visitar un enfiermo.

Muchos componedores cohonden la novia; Por que do ay muchos pareceres suele
aver desorden.

Quien quisiere muger hermosa, el sabado la escoja, que no el Domingo: Por que
entonces anda ataviada, y afeytada.

Si quieres dar palos a tu muger, pidele al sol a bever. Que por ser el agua
limpia, tomara en si de los atomos que trae el sol, que pareceran poluos.

Bezerilla mansa mama a su madre, y la agena: La glosa es, que los benevolos y
comedidos con todos hallan cabida.

Casa de padre, vin^a de Abuelo, Olivar de tartarabuelo: La glosa es, que la
casa sea fresca, la vin^a algo vieia, el Olivar an^eio, con estas tres cosas
podra un hombre traer una vida alegre.

Creatura de un an^o saca la leche del calca^o. Quiere dezir, que mama, y chupa
reziamente, siendo entonces algo fuerte.

Desque veo a mi Tia, muerome de azedia, desque no la veo muerome de desseo.
Applicase a la variedad de las voluntades, y animos de los hombres, y que la
ausencia suele aguzar la aficion.

Dixo me mi madre que porfiasse, mas que no apostasse. La glosa es muy clara
contra apostadores.

El hijo hatro, y rom^ido, la hija hambrienta y vestida. Buena regla es para el
govierno de casa, porque auiendo el hijo para ayudar a su padre en el trabajo,
ha de andar harto, y roto.

Don Lope, ni es miel, ni hiel, in vinagre, ni arrope. Se dize de los que son
de un natural frio, y indifferente.

Ganar al principio, es cebo para perder: Porque incitan un hombre de darse al
juego.

Enter hermano y hermano dos testigos, y un Notario. Para que nose rompa el
parentesco, y se forn e^ pleytos.

Madre y hija vesten una camisa: La glosilla es que la hija participa del
natural de su madre; Partus sequitur ventrem.

No me pesa que mi hijo pierda, si no que desquitarse quiera: Esto se entiende
de la costumbre al iuego, y de la porsia.

El padre a pulgadas, el hijo a bracadas. Quiere dezir, que el que gana la
hazienda con trabajo gastalo con tiento, como bazen muchos padres, y viene un
hijo gastador quien consume a bracadas lo que gano su padre y gasta a pulgadas.

Quien a mi hijo quita el moco, a mi besa en el rostro. Este refran se refiere
al amor grande que los padres tienen a sus hijos.

Al hombre vergoncoso el diablo le truxo al palacio. Este refran se refiere a
los cortesanos, en los quales verguenca demasiada, y pusilanimidad no es loable.

Al hombre bueno no le busquen abolengo. Este refran denota, que la virtud, y
la bondad es la mayor hidalguia.

La muger y la cereza, por su mal se afeyta: La muger, porque es requerida, la
cereza porque es comida.

Da dios almendras a quien no tiene muelas. Quiere dezir que riquezas, y mando
vienen algunas vezes a quien no sabe repartir, ni sabe governar.

Nacieron alas a la hormiga por su mal. Esto se puede aplicar a los hombres
pobres, alcancando riquezas de donde proceed sobervia, y ambicion, y
consequentemente su ruina.

El Infierno es lleno de buenas intenciones. Quiere dezir, que no ay pecador
por malo que sea, que no tenga intencion de meiorar la vida, mas la muerte le
sobreprende.

Mi padre fue se a acostar, y hallaron le muerto a la man^ana, no pidas la
razon, ceno carnero assado. Quie e dezir, quel el carnero de Espan^a siendo
gruesso, y fuerte, no se digere tan presto como el carnero de otras tierras.

Judios en Pascuas, Moros en bodas, Cristianos en pleytos, gastan sus dineros.
Esto se refiere a las costumbres de todos los tres.

En casa del Official assoma la hambre, mas no osa entrar. Porque esta siempre
trabajando, y en camino de ganar.

Los muertos abren los ojos a los vivos. Quiere dezir que las historias que
hablan de los hechos de hombres muertos, abren los ojos, y aconsejan a los
vivos.

En boca cerrada no entran moscas: Quiere dezir, que el hombre callado previene
muchas inconvenicias.

No quiero cochino con sonaja. Esto quiere dezir, que la merced que se haze con
ostentacion, y ruydo no es tan agradable.

Al primer impetu los Franceses son mas que hombres, y despues menos que
mugeres. Este proverbio se refiere a la ligereza, y inconstancia de la Nation
Francesa.

Hagas buena farina, y no toques bozina. Este Refran aconseja a cada uno de
complir con su obligacion, y hazer bien, sin vanagloriarse despues.

Buscays cinco pies al gato, y no tiene sino quatro. Este Refran se refiere a
los que son curiosos en demasia, y muy criticos.

Guarte de las occasion, y guardarte Dios ha del pecado. Este es un consejo
Espiritual muy excelente, y Sen^alado.

Madre vieja, y camisa rota, no es deshonra. Este proverbio nos amonesta, que
la viejez and la probreza no son deshonras.

Antes Moral que Almendro. Este Refran simbolica con la naturaleza del
Espan^ol, el qual es mas flematico, y tardio en sus acciones que otras
Naciones: Como el Moral enter los arboles, el qual brota muy tarde, pero no,
hasta que el aspereza del Invierno sea passada; por esto a quel arbol es
Simbolo de sabiduria, como el Almendro que brota presto, es simbolo de
temeridad; lo qual induzio el Author de la Floresta de Dodona de Paragonar el
Espan^ol al Moral.

Moral Proverbs, or Adages conducing to Manners, and to good Life, etc.
WIth all the World have War,
But with England do not jar.
The first Wife is Matrimony, the second Company, the third is Heresy.

He carries the Cross on his breast, and the Devil in his actions.

An Egg is better to day, then a Pullet to morrow.

A handful of Nature is better then an armful of Science.

By little and little the old Woman spinnes the bundle of flax.

Owe money at Easter, and Lent will seem short to thee.

A suit in Law, and an Vrinal, bring a man to the Hospital.

Who never lies comes not of good Kindred.

There Is no family but there is a Whore or a Knave of it.

From the glances of a Drab, and the turn of a Die, take heed.

Guests and Fish stink in three days.

Giving of Alms never lightens the Purse.

One can never make a straight Arrow of a Sowes tail.

Be rather a Mulberry then an Almond-tree. viz. Be rather slow then hasty.

A long-nos'd man seldom a Cuckold.

A Hedge lasts three years, a Dog outlasts three Hedges, a Horse three Dogs, a
Man three Horses, a Stag three Men, an Elephant outlives three Stags.

Who knows little tells it quickly.

I care not for Saints that piss.

Who has money has what he will.

Who shelters himself under leaves is twice wet.

Who spits at Heaven, his spettle falls on his face. Understood of blasphemers.

When thou art with thy wife belly to belly, yet do not tell her all things
thou know.

When it pleases not God, the Saint can do little.

When all tell thee thou art an Ass, it is time for thee to bray.

When ill Fortune lies asleep, let none awake her.

Who labors can want no household stuff.

Who buys and sells feels not what he spends.

Neither for company nor for counsel lose thy own hold.

Nor weeds in thy corn, nor scruples in thy friend.

The heart bears up the body.

Let the miracle be done, though Mahomet do it.

One finger makes no hand, nor one swallow a summer.

Neither take too young a boy, nor kinsman, nor one that is entreated for thy
servant.

Nor so old that she eats with a wryed mouth, nor so young as to be a wanton.

Take heed of a winching mule, and a Latin woman.

Nor a prophesying Maid, nor a learned Wife.

Nor eyes in letter, nor hands in chests.

When the mouth is shut, the flies cannot enter.

Change of weather the discourse of fools.

The Dog wags his tail not for thee, but for the bread.

Duggs draw more then Axietrees or Wheels.

A blush in the face is better then a blot in the heart.

Grief of many turns to pleasure.

A pawn in Chest is better then a pledge in the Market.

Mother and daughter wears one smock, viz. they are of one nature.

Buttocks abed draw more then Bulls in a fallow.

Better be a fool then obstinate.

Therefore a man is a Cuckold, because two can do more then one.

There is not such an enchantment as good service.

In the mouth of the wise a public report is a secret.

They are not all men that piss at the wall.

All is not true that the Tabour sounds.

Marriage is not made of Mushromes, but of good round Cakes.

All the fingers are not of one length, viz. all men are not equal.

There Is no such Doctrine as that of the Ant.

Who has a trade has a benefice.

He is not poor that has little, but he that covets much.

All the fat is fallen into the fire.

There Is nothing so bad as to want money.

Wheresoere thou go there is three leagues of ill way.

He is as sure as March in Lent.

A body alone neither sings nor weeps.

There Is no house but has something not to be spoken of.

Do good, there is no matter to whom.

Words and feathers are tossed by the air.

Grief for others hangs by a hair.

The word of the mouth, like the stone of a sling.

When the Urinal came, John Pasqual was dead.

Who pisseth and does not fart, goes to the Court, and sees not the King.

Who will have a hansome wife, let him choose her upon Saturday, and not upon
Sunday, viz. when she is in her fine clothes.

The wise man changes counsel, the fool not.

He knows one point more then the Devil; spoken of a cunning fellow.

The day thou do marry, thou do cure or kill thy self.

A man is taken by the beard, and a woman by the thread.

Let Us pray to God by Saints, but not by so many.

The secret of one God knows, the secret of three the whole Country.

God comes to visit us without a Bell, viz. without noise.

The foot on the Cradle, and the hand on the Distaff; a sign of a good Houswife.

Nor corn that grows in a valley, nor wood that grows in the shade.

He is blind enough who sees not through the holes of a Sive.

Men purpose, but God does dispose.

Get once a good name, and sleep at leisure.

The words are good if the heart be so.

Who sings scares away his sorrows.

It Is better to leave to an enemy at ones death, then to beg of a friend in
ones life.

That delay is good which makes the way the safer.

Welcome cross, if thou come alone,

A complete house; in the other world.

His bread fell into the honey-pot, viz. he got by the mischance.

A frown and instruction makes a good child of an ill.

That which makes Peter sick, makes Sancho well.

As the Abbot sings, the Sexton answers.

There Is no fence against fortune.

Too much familiarity breeds contempt.

One much and two little make men rich.

Soap is lost on the head of an Ass.

A courtesy of the mouth is worth much, and costs but little.

I will not jest with my eye nor with my faith.

That which cures the lungs, hurts the spleen.

He cries wine, and sells vinegar.

God gives wings to the Ant that she may perish the sooner; spoken of ambition
and honor.

From idleness business is bred, i. trouble.

He has two looks, but one face.

A large thong of another man's leather.

To break ones head, and give him a plaster.

One Take is better then two promises.

A scabbed colt a good horse.

Let Us leave Fathers and Grandsires, and be good of our selves.

Never a good work of a grumbling servant.

Think leisurely, and work speedily.

God guard me from the stroke of a Gander, viz. from a goose-quill, or
Scriveners shop.

Hell is full of good intentions.

Happy is he that grows wise by other men's harms.

The Drying Pan told the Kettle, get thee hence thou black ars.

God consents, but not always.

They speak worse of him then Mahomet spoke of bacon.

God gives us whereat to laugh, but not at foolish Children.

Tell thy friend thy secret, and he will lay his foot on thy throat.

Wheresoever thou go do as thou see.

Where old men do not haunt, crows do not croke.

My noddle aches, and they anoint my ankle.

To hurl the Helve after the Hatchet.

The Sergeant and the Sun are every where.

Pardon is superfluous where no fault is committed.

The crumpshouldered sees not his bunch, yet he sees that of his companions.

Cure your sore eye with your elbow, viz. do not touch them.

The foot of the Master is as dung to the ground.

Let Us bless God in the state we are in.

In the Cutlers house an ill knife.

I escaped from the thunder and fell into the lightning, viz. from bad to worse.

In the wise man's mouth what is public is secret.

He is my friend who grindes in my mill.

It Is good Doctrine to be wise by other men's harms.

The Greyhound who starts many Hares kills none.

Vainglory does flourish, but bears no grain.

By drop and drop the Sea lesseneth.

Enjoy thou the little thou have, while the fool seeks for more.

By one grain after another the Ant fills his barn.

Do for me, learn for thy self.

I take some sport, but I finish my task.

To escape the Bull, I fell into the River.

Women and Wine make a man swarve from his judgment.

Thy bowels and chests must fly open to thy friend.

The cobweb lets go the Rat, and holds fast the Mouse.

Salt comes from the sea, and mischief from a woman.

By the Popes Prick which is holy flesh.

Since I brought forth children I never filled my belly.

Words and works eat not at one table.

Sometimes a fool gives good counsel.

From a silent person remove thy dwelling.

Man is the fire, woman the flax, the Devil the bellows.

To sweat at meat, and freeze at work.

Money makes the man complete.

Who died of fear, they made him a tomb of turd.

A melon and a woman are hard to be known.

A golden face, silver hair, and scarlet eyes.

Fore-warned fore-arm'd.

An early riser has care of something.

Meddle not with the quarrels of brothers.

Men propose, but God does dispose.

Let the tripes be full,, for they carry the legs.

My neighbors goat gives more milk then mine.

Love, and thou shall be loved, so thou may do that which thou can not do
being not beloved.

Poverty may make a chaste woman do foul things.

The bacon of Paradise for the married man that never repented.

Marry and gossip every one with his equal.

An old man a new grief every day.

The least hair makes a shadow.

To sell honey to him that has hives of his own.

Let good luck come, and let it come whence it will.

Put neither Jew nor Hog into thy garden.

She Is coif'd like a Saint, and nayl'd like a Cat.

The wanton Sheep said to the Goat, give me wool.

The life passed makes old age heavy.

Truth like oil swims always on the top.

The foolish woman by the list buys the cloth.

The blind man's wife needs no painting.

A wench on the marketplace has commonly the door swep'd, and the house
beshit.

They cast the fault of the Ass upon the Panniers.

Too much conversation breeds contempt.

The cunning wife makes the husband her apron.

Want makes the old wife to trot, and the cripple to caper.

A good play master is never sorry for his pawn.

A book shut brings not forth a Lawyer.

The absent and the dead have no friends.

Money makes Masters.

He sadleth to day, and goes to morrow.

Words are in us, deeds are in God.

Married men need many eyes.

What thou have to do, do it, and say not to morrow.

That which happens not in a year, falls out in an instant.

That which is used, cannot be excused.

Too much breaks the bag.

What three know, all the world knows.

The dead open the eyes of the living, viz. Books.

The worst of Lawsuits is, that of one there grow a hundred.

What Is ordained in Heaven must be done on Earth.

What Is done at a wedding must not be done every day.

Every one carries his Soul in the palm of his hand.

The rotten apple spoils his companion.

The Locusts make thin guts.

The Woman and the Melon smell them at the tail.

Wine and women keep men from musing.

A gentle answer breaks choler.

Truth is green.

A lie wants feet.

An Egg to day is better then a Hen to morrow.

Good words have a good sound.

A lie has short legs.

To start a hare for another to take.

The poor man like a Walnut-tree, all throw stones at him.

Words are women, deeds men.

Better bow then break.

Converse with the wise, and thou shall be one of them.

The desire of man never comes to the highest pitch.

Bind me hand and foot, and throw me among my kindred.

Divide not Pears with thy master in jest or earnest.

Better to unsow, then break, viz. to go too hastily to work.

An ill word hurts more then a sharp sword.

A pawn in the the chest is better then a pledge in the market.

The smoke of my own house is better then the fire of another.

My Gossips wish me ill because I tell them truth.

Better to go about, then fall into the ditch.

Better be still single then ill married.

A handful of natural wit is better then an armful of learning.

To hammer on cold Iron.

One Ox shites more then a hundred Swallows.

Better late then never.

It Is ill to sin, it is devilish to persevere.

A mild word quenches more then a whole cauldron of water.

Being ill, and hoping to be better, I must dye I know not when.

If you paint and cocker them too much, you will make bad daughters of good.

Rather a trotting wife then a gazing wife.

The Devil so loved his child, that he pulled out one of his eyes.

Put her to another vessel, because she may not smell of the mother.

Have luck enough, and a little learning will serve thy turn.

Who has children, it is reason he should gather.

Who has children, cannot die of a surfeit.

Who will be very old let him begin betimes to be so.

Fortune reaches her hand to a bold man.

Take a Bull by the horn, and a man by his word.

God send thee a house of Oak, a bowl of Silver, and a pot of Copper.

A Knight without money is no Knight, but a babble.

Gifts break through rocks.

Who has daughters and sheep, he can want no complaints.

Two shirts is better then one.

Correct thy Mule, and thy Child behind.

A Woman in the straw, and a Webb begun cannot want a place of refuge.

Breed up a Crow, and she will peck out thy eye.

Be not partner with a man engaged.

A clown may be hid by good clothes.

Give me her honest, and I will make her hansome.

Give a Pie of one color, and I will give you a Maid without a fault.

Better keep then ask.

The dugs draw more then cable ropes.

A pitiful Mother a shitten Child.

Rather bleared then blind.

The ill of many turns to delight.

My knee is nearer then the calf of my leg.

It Is wholsomer to go to bed without a supper, then rise in debt.

Put thy hand into thy own bosom, and never stand telling the fortune of
others.

Envy is better then pity.

Mine is better then ours.

The more Moors (viz. Slaves) the more gain.

Oats and Mass never retard a journey.

While the yoke goes, let the spindle wag.

While I am in my house I am a King.

Truly dame this gear goes ill.

Look before, thou will not fall backward.

A fine wench a frail gourd.

A youth well bred neither speaks of himself, nor holds his peace being asked.

The Cuckold knows much, but he knows more who gives him the horns.

The world goes round, who cannot swim must to the bottom.

Many do kiss hands which they would see cut off.

It much avails and costs little, to give a good answer to a bad word.

Women complain, women do groan, women grow sick when they please.

The Hare runs well, but the Dog that catches her better.

Fools talk of change of times.

Many things grow in the garden which were never sowed.

The door does not like me that has many keys.

Buy not a horse that wags his tail.

The Ant gets wings to destroy her self the sooner.

I care not for a pig with bells about his neck.

Fools and quarrellers enrich the Lawyers.

Want makes the old woman to trot.

A foolish ship that has no ballast.

Take heed of friends reconciled, and of meat twice boiled.

Nor the absent is without fault, nor the present without excuse.

Buy not a lame Mule, nor marry a Punk in hope to cure either.

Care not for the tears of a Whore, or the bravadoes of a Ruffian.

Nor table without bread, nor army without a Captain.

Nor wedding without a tabor, nor porredge without bacon.

Nor wheat that grows in valleys, or under a shade.

I neither give nor take, like a Jew on the Sabbath.

Trust not a woman that weeps, nor a dog that pisseth.

It Is neither my Mill nor B^rn, let who will thresh in it.

Neither eat too much cheese, nor expect wit from a boy.

Nor Hen without Bacon, nor Sermon without Saint Austin.

Neither be daunted by poverty, nor lifted up by riches.

A child, a Vineyard, and a Bean-garden are ill things to keep.

Nor mule without a race, nor woman without her blemish.

Go neither to the Physician upon every distemper, nor to the Lawyer upon every
brabble, nor to the pot upon every thirst.

One finger makes no hand, nor one swallow a summer.

Above God there is no Lord, nor above black any color.

If the will fail not, there will want no opportunity.

Leave not the skins till the Galileans come.

There Is not such an enchantment as good service.

The Lion is not so fierce as he is painted.

Meddle not with what does not belong unto thee.

The worst jest is the true jest.

There Is no deaf man like him that will not hear.

'There's no stop without trouble.

Marriages are not made of Mushromes, but of round Ducats.

You cannot take Trouts with dry breeches.

There is not so clear a mirror as an old friend.

There is not a better Surgeon then he who has been slashed.

Trust not and thou shall not be cousened.

There is no law like that of the club.

I grieve not that my son has lost his money, but that he will have a revenge.

All is not Gold that glisters.

It Is ill flying away on stilts.

There is not a better mistress then want and poverty.

There is no ill but time may ease the smart.

The Crow cannot be blacker then her wings.

Seek not Pears of an Elm.

A good carouse of wine is the best witness.

The stolen bit is the sweetest.

Where thou art not Lord command not.

Speak not till thou be asked, and thou shall be esteemed.

God strikes not with two hands, for he has made ports to the Sea, and fords
to the Rivers.

There is no lock but a golden key will open it.

Be not a Baker if thy head be made of butter.

New King new Laws.

No good is got without labor.

A work of the commons is n^ man's work.

Every one for himself, and God for all.

To offer much is a kind of denial.

There are eyes that fall in love with blearness.

A bleating sheep loses her bit.

Words and feathers the wind whirles them about.

You were a baker before, though now you wear gloves.

Paper and Ink cost money.

Nicholas divides most for himself.

A word spoken and a stone flung have no return.

The words of a Saint, and the paws of a cat.

The Court is cumbersome.

It Is Bread and Wine that makes the journey, and not the nimble youth.

Bread with eyes, cheese without eyes.

Speak little, hear much, and thou shall not err.

There is not a pair of ears for every Sunday.

Sloth washes not the head, and if it washes, it kembs it not.

A barking dog never good biter.

Idleness is the key of beggary.

Pear, Peach, and Melon require pure wine.

Old sins new repentance.

Give just weight and sell dear.

To ask much for to get the one half.

The gray Mule has lost her prancings.

To kill Moors on a wall.

A rouling stone gathers no moss.

The thief thinks that every one is of his gang.

An Urinal and a suit in Law in his house whom thou wishest not well.

More drunk then a sop, or sponge.

I consume my self to do others good. Spoken of the candle.

To preserve friendship let there be a wall between.

Little wealth, and a good will.

Though the Sun shines yet leave not thy cloak at home.

For wealth marry not with a lewd man.

The dog will dance for money.

Contest, but lay no wagers.

Go not behind at a hill.

Get a good name Isabel, and thou will marry well.

For thy Religion, for thy King, for thy Kindred, and for thine own, lay thy
life.

To grease a fat Sow in the tail.

Cut off the leg of an ill custom.

He who does ill, an excuse never fails him.

The main end of all is to serve God, and do no ill.

Love thy Husband as a friend, and fear him as an enemy.

At the years end the dead eats more then the living.

Whether here or there, look well with whom thou go.

He overtakes at last who tires not.

There is no fence against death.

To give slowly is as much as to deny.

A friend to all, and to no body, is all one.

The love of a Punk, the fire of flax, and the wind of the tail is one and the
same thnig.

God gives washed hands wherewith to eat.

Let me go warm, and let people laugh as long as they will.

Take another dog with this bone.

Be advised by the aged, and thy opinion will prevail in Council.

Old birds are not taken with chaff.

To whom thy secret thou do tell, to him thy freedom thou do sell.

He who gives thee a Capon, give him a leg and a wing.

Plow deep, thou shall have bread enough.

Though a lie may darken truth, it cannot extinguish it.

The Creditor has a better memory then the Debtor.

A Coward yesterday, a Cavaleer to day.

It Is good to love, it is better to be beloved.

Correct the good he will grow better; correct the bad he will grow worse.

A beard wetted is half razed.

To drink and lose the Asses.

To speak well, and do ill, is like a broken Sive.

Marta sings well when her belly is full.

A wanton wench looks illfavouredly near a gray beard.

Writing is the best memory.

This were to bridle a Calf.

A secret is good in one, better in two, ill in three, and worse in four.

The old Ox makes the streightest furrow.

Thou seek five feet in a Cat, and she has but four.

God give Peter a good Easter, for he never did me good or hurt.

To an hasty question a leisurely answer.

A thin pot, and fat Testament.

To keep a cackling and lay no Egg.

Every one desires wealth at his own home.

Every Potter commends his own pitchers.

The pot that goes often to the water comes home cracked at last.

Every bird is pleased with his own nest.

Every Cock crows on his own dunghill.

The Cock crows, the Hen answers, it is a sad house where there is no corn.

To repent does cost dear.

Every one with his equal.

Let every one speak in that which he knows.

Marry thy Daughter when thou may, and thy Son when thou please.

If thou desire care, marry a lewd fellow.

A forward Horse needs no Spur.

A dappled gray sooner dead then tired.

He falls in the pit he digs for others.

Like to like, and Nan for Nicholas.

A house with a chimney, and a wife with a spindle.

Like to like.

The back door is that which spoils the house.

After horns comes learning.

That is a sad house where the Hen crows, and the Cock is silent.

He is fit for any thing.

The love of a Child like water in a Pannier.

I like it not well to have a dog in my house with a bell.

Go to thy Aunts house, but not every day.

Go to thy Brothers house, but not every evening.

A wise man makes every Country his own.

Some are Monks, some Friars.

The love of a Son-in-law is like the winter Sun.

A gathering Father, a scattering Son.

A pinching Father, a prodigal Son.

That gate is happy through which a dead wife goes out.

The wise man changes counsel, the fool perseveres.

Money and good manners makes Cavalleers.

It goes ill with that house, where the spindle commands the sword.

Thy Fathers house, thy Grandfathers vineyard, and thy great Grandfathers
Olive Trees.

Obey thy Natural Father, but thy Spiritual more.

Thou art a Son, a Father thou will be, As thou do, so shall it be done unto
thee.

My Mother warned me I should lay no way-wagers in disputes.

The Asses son brayes twice a day.

Don Lope is neither vinegar nor wine.

A late Child an early Orphan.

Near is my petticoat, but nearer is my smock.

A tender Mother, a turdy Child.

He is not ugly who resembles his kindred.

A long Childbirth, and a Girl at last.

Blind Cheese and eyed Bread is best.

Who has a sore tooth has an ill neighbor.

He who does me good is my gossip.

Who breeds a Nephew breeds an ill plant.

Above father there is no Godfather.

Poverty is no baseness, but an inconvenience.

The battlements come down, and dunghills climb up; Iacks rise up, and
Gentlemen come down.

Neither go to a wedding nor christning unbid.

A foolish beast, a doltish driver.

To a good understander a short speaker.

A Sheep and a Be, a Stone which grinds, a Jewel in his ear, the old womand
wishes her Son.

Counsel after the Cunney is gone.

A small pitcher a small handle.

At a hundred years end we shall all be saved.

Two sparrows agree but ill at one ear of corn.

Where they take out and put nothing in, they quickly go to the bottom.

The evening commends the day, and death life.

Affection is blind reason.

Against the strength of a Clown put iron between, viz. A sword.

Who comes last laments first. Spoken of a younger brother.

Who believes slightly takes water into a sive.

The Cage made, the Pie dead.

Now that I have a Sheep and an Ass every one bids me good morrow.

A great ascent must have a great descent.

No value can be put upon good counsel.

Ingratitude dries up the fountain of piety.

Do not misinform thy Physician, thy Councellor or Lawyer.

A new vessel retains the first scent.

The Ass dead and Barley at his tail.

A silver bridge to a flying enemy.

Find out the good, and fear the bad.

The old man never wants stories at the fireside or the Sunshine.

It Is tried Alquimy to have rent and spend nothing.

At the end of 1000. years the Hare returns to her first form.

Never seek the Pedigree of a good man.

There Is not a bad thing in Spain but that which speaks.

Cu, Cu, take heed thou be not one.

With one much, and two small ones men grow rich.

Buy a chain thou do turn treasure into money.

Against an ill person the only remedy is to put earth betwixt thee and him.

With Latin, a good Nag, and Money, thou may travel the world.

Get a good name and go to sleep.

The company of one is the company of none, the company of two is the company
of God, the company of three is company, the company of four is the Devils
company.

Red and black the colors of Hell.

Why does not thy master chide? because he is not married.

The courtesy of the mouth avails much, and costs little.

The counsel of him who loves thee, though thou likest it not, yet write it
down.

Collerique Sanguin a pure drunkard.

A hundred Tailors, a hundred Millers, and a hundred Weavers make three hundred
Thieves.

He who hunts two Hares, he sometimes takes one, and sometimes none.

Natural vices last to the grave.

We ought to praise him who gives us bread.

There is a large distance betwixt the saying and the deed.

Gifts do burst rocks.

God guard me from whom I trust, for I shall guard my self from whom I trust not.

Depart a while from the collerick man, and all thy life from a silent man.

From a small spark a huge fire.

I saw few die of hunger, of eating much a hundred thousand.

A large thong of another man's leather.

Thou may keep thy self from the fire, but not from a thief.

Among colors Scarlet, among fruits the Apple.

From long ways, large lies.

Panniers after vintage.

Take heed of a lewd woman, and trust not a good one.

Of a Sows tail never good Arrow.

To break ones head and give him a plaster.

The Devil turns his back to a door that is shut.

A belly full, though it be of hay.

Take counsel of the aged.

From a good servant thou may become a master.

Of evils the least to be chosen.

When thou have made a turd leave it.

One Take is worth two I will give thee.

When God pleases it raines in fair weather.

A foolish Judge a short sentence.

Owe something against Easter, and Lent will seem short unto thee.

Where affection goes the eye goes.

Tell me with whom thou go, and I will tell thee who thou art.

Wheresoever thou art, do as thou see.

My neck aches, and they anoint my ankle.

Take the good Soldier from the plow.

He went for Wool, and he returned shorn.

Who has a glass roof of his own, let him not throw stones at his neighbors.

Who pays his debts, what is left is his own.

To give alms never makes the purse the lighter.

Who stays long does his business.

Mischief comes by else, and goes away by inches.

Who spends more then he gains, he must needs complain.

Who will not adventure, let him neither go to Sea nor on a Mule.

Who grasps too much, holds little.

First born first fed.

Who hears not reason does no reason.

Who still takes out, and puts not in, will quickly find a bottom.

Who spins well has a large smock.

Who humors his wife in every thing becomes quickly a Cuckold.

Who stumbles and falls not, goes faster.

Who has been si^k and does well must perform a pilgrimage.

Who has ill customs he seldom or never forgets them.

All covet all lose.

Who parts brothers comes by the worst.

Who gets under a good tree has a good shelter.

Who is a Cuckold and consents, let him be still a Cuckold for me.

Who parts from his friends parts from God.

Who at thirty has no wit, and is not rich at forty, raze his name out of the
book.

Who eats his Cock alone, let him saddle his horse himself.

He who out-^eers a jeerer has a hundred years of pardon.

Who has his foot at the Altar, eats bread without baking it.

Who has time and waits for time, the time will come he will repent.

Who comes last weeps first.

Who stumbles twice at one stone deserves to have a broken face.

Who performs, appoints well.

Who resolves rashly, repents leisurely.

WVho has a good trade, has a good office.

A thief once, a thief ever.

Who sooths thee more then ordinary has a purpose to cousen thee, or has
need of thee.

Who parts with his own before his death, let him provide for patience.

Who sowes thorns must meet with prickles.

Who desires to thrive let him live at the foot of a hill, or in a Seaport.

Who has no money has no grace.

Who trusts or promises does cast himself into debt.

Who has no ghelt let him sell both purse and budget.

Who has lost his good name, goes dead up and down.

Who sports too much gathers little.

Who owes unto Peter and pays Andrew, let him pay another time.

Who sowes thorns let him not go barefoot.

Who wipes my sons nose kisseth me in the face.

Who knows not ill, cannot judge of the good.

Who is thy greatest enemy? he who is of thy trade.

Who believes slightly takes up water in a Sive.

Who corrects one beats a hundred.

Who asks errs not.

Who changes his dwelling, God helps him.

Who goes to the Mill and rises not early, lets others grind while he is
lowsing himself.

Who finds himself well, let him not stir.

Who does a pleasure to a lewd man, sows in the Marketplace.

Who teaches himself, increases his ills.

Who will recover money must give many turns.

Who wants employment, let him freight a ship or marry.

Who holds his peace consents.

King by nature, Pope by venture.

I renounce that friend who shelters with his wings, and bites with his mouth.

I renounce fetters though they be of Gold.

She fares as well as a Tripe-womans Cat.

Gossips scold, the truth is told.

The salt oreturn'd never well taken up.

To take one foot out of the mire, and put in the other.

San Lucy bright, the shortest day and longest night.

Sancha drinks wine, and cries out it stains.

To fall from the dirt into a bog.

In a Sallet little vinegar and much oil.

Saint John the green is not every day seen.

There Is no ill but may turn to ones good.

Service is no inheritance.

A secret betwixt two safer then betwixt three.

If thou will get a good name, let not the Sun take thee in thy chamber.

An ill beast sweats behind the ear.

If thou will have a good servant, take him before his dowles be out.

Ca me, Ca thee.

The marks of nature are either very good or very bad.

If thou wishest me well John, thy deeds will show it.

If thou will be revenged say little.

Follow reason although thou please some and displease others.

If you come not in time, you shall not eat of the fat.

If the tall were valiant, the little man patient, and the red loyal, all the
world would be equal.

If the tongue erred, the heart did not.

If thou will thrive follow the good.

If thou will be well served, serve thy self.

If thou will enjoy the sweet, thou must taste of the sour.

If not as we will, as well as we may.

If thou will know the value of a Crown, borrow one.

The blind man dreamed that he did see, and his drea^ proved true.

There Is no companion like the penny.

There may be a subtle wit under a rough cloak.

Soles and wine go the journey.

Let him have patience who suffers, for one time succeeds another.

The hour and time you cannot tie with a string.

Every one has his opportunity if one knew how to manage it.

Sancho has met with his match.

Men meet, mountains never.

We are all Adams sons, silk only distinguishes us.

We are all fools some way or other.

Every one after the old fashion.

See whither thou go, and do as thou see.

The least hair has its shadow.

You are a Cuckold husband: who told you so wife?

Cu, Cu, take heed it be not thou.

A window-gazing wife, wring off her neck if thou will have her good.

The good man goes not into another bed.

Thy hand upon the spindle, and thy foot upon the cradle, so bring up thy
daughter.

The Ass and the froward Woman must have blows.

Rather have a husband with one eye, then with one son.

In the fools house the wife commands.

The fool fell in love with the lace of her Gorget.

The spindle is miserable when a beard is not above it.

She is truly fair who is so of her body.

Meat is needful, a good name more.

Give a scolding wife rope enough.

why does the blind man's wife paint her self?

The rich widow weeps with one eye, and casts glances with the other.

Who has a fair wife needs more then two eyes.

The good wife is made by the man.

Better to be a Cuckold and none know it, then to be none, and yet to be
thought so.

An old woman with money is better then a young one with beauty.

Too many Counselors confound the business.

Show me thy wife, and I will tell thee what a husband thou art.

Nor so old a wife as to play the Jade, nor so young as to kick.

Nor for Cow, nor for Ox, take a mad wife, or that has the Pox.

Neither marry with a widow, or seek help from a child.

Neither ride on a Colt, nor commend thy Wife.

Nor wedding without music, nor burial without mourning.

Nor buy an Ass of a Mulateer, nor marry the Daughter of an Host.

For money marry not an ill man.

My husband is gone a wool gathering.

It Is the man that makes the wife and the vineyard hansome.

Who is a Cuckold and conceals it, carries coals in his heart.

A husband behind the fire as bad as the mother, viz. the disease

Who takes not up a pin has no care of his wife.

In avoiding the Fly he swallowed the Spider.

A large train and light purse.

To whom I wish well let his wife dye.

Speak well and seldom, thou will be held for some body.

To speak without fore-thinking, is to shoot without aiming.

Do well, it matters not to whom.

Do what the Friar tells thee, not what he does.

Who serves well, asks enough.

Where there is a fool and a turd, they will quickly be known.

An early riser has care of something.

Honor and profit cannot hold in one bag.

To fly away and run is not one thing.

To steal a Pig and give the Pettitoes in alms.

A little spindle, a great help.

A new guest a trouble to the house.

The wheat is merry under the snow, as an old man under a blanket.

I ^m a little merry, but I do my business.

Eggs are as thousands of meats.

I beat the bush, another catches the birds.

I go where no Pope or Emperor can send their Ambassador. viz. To stool.

The Wolf and the Fox are of the same mind.

The fish who seeks the ^ook seeks his ruin.

Who dallies with his enemy dies betwixt his hands.

The Masters eye fatneth the horse.

The Friar who begs for God, begs for two.

This is to make a hedge of thorns with naked hands.

Make thy Son thy Heir, not thy Steward.

In a dry soil brackish water is good.

In the laborers house hunger looks in, but dares not enter.

Good fishing in troubled water.

He was born in an ill hour who gets an ill name.

In this wretched world when there is wine enough, there wants bread.

The just man may sin in an open chest.

In the gamesters house joy lasts but little.

A straw is heavy in a long journey.

In a full house supper is quickly ready.

Bastards are very good, or very bad.

Woe to the son, whose father to Heaven is gone.

That must be which pleases God.

Grind good corn, and never blow the horn.

Take heed of a Punk that leaves thy purse light.

Beware of the occasion, and God will save thee from the sin.

Death takes no bribe.

A grain fills not the sive, but it helps its companions.

A great pleasure to eat well and spend nothing.

My father Mun^oz desires what God does not.

Who erres and mends he recommends himself to God.

Who preserves himself, God preserves him.

Who lives well has no need of any.

When thou hear our Lady named, ask not whether thou must fast.

He has his soul in his fist.

After this world another will come.

Peter is so much Gods, that God gets him not.

All is nothing in this world, unless you direct it to the other.

Who goes not to sea knows not how to pray.

Before thou marry see what thou do.

Before thou marry have a house wherein to tarry.

A husband of thirty for a wife of fifteen.

An ill night, and yet a girl.

Who loves Beltran loves his dog.

She gathers ashes, and scatters corn.

Let every pot have its cover.

Well or ill they have married me.

Marry, marry, sounds well, and savours ill.

Marry and converse with your equal.

Marry thy daughter with a good neighbor, and thou will sell thy wine.

Marry, and thou will be tame enough.

Weddings have fools of all kind.

Smoke, a dropping gutter, and a scold, cast the good man out of his hold.

Who is an enemy to the Bride, how can he speak well of the Bridegroom?

The Stag casts his horns every year, and thy husband every day.

From a prognosticating Maid, and a Latin Wife, the Lord preserve me.

God guard me from the wind through a hole, and from a reconciled friend.

Beware of a young Physician, and an old Barber.

The name of a Stepmother is enough.

The Devil makes the Usurers bed.

The Oven is heated by the mouth.

To trust God upon a good pawn.

God keep thee from it is done.

Beads about his neck, and the Devil in his body.

A short prayer penetrates heaven.

Much on earth, little in heaven.

I do for thee, because thou may do for me, for thou art not God.

The secrecy of two is the secrecy of God, the secrecy of three is all men's
secrecy.

When God will, it raines with all winds.

Praying to God, and driving the plow, viz. prayer and labor will do well.

Let thy hand go to what thou art fit for.

Whom God does bless, his Bitch brings forth Piggs.

To a chaste woman God is sufficient.

Whom God does bless, the Ant seeks him out.

He is rich who is well with God.

By right or wrong God speed our Council.

I come very conveniently.

Give me some meat.

To lock up or keep safely.

To send a message.

Give me wherewith to write.

To give order.

It is to be noted, that this word Recaudo is a word of the largest extent in
all the Spanish tongue, for it signifies a Message by word or Letter, a
Present, a Commission, or any accommodation, Assurance or Security, Victual or
Provision for war, or any place else, and all things that a man needs, or is
provided of, for himself or his beast, etc.

God gives Beans to him who has no gums.

God betters us from hour to hour.

Let me have a rich Husband though he be an Ass.

From a fools bolt God deliver me.

God send thee joy and health, and a house with a Court and a Well.

God send me to do with him who understands me.

God put strife among those that maintain us, viz. Clients.

God consents, but not always.

From smooth water God deliver me, for I shall preserve my self from the rough.

Tripe porredge do thou brag? Against presumption.

Let good luck come, and let it come whence it will.

A rich widow a quiet house.

A Whore and a Hare, seek them near the high way.

Jew, pay what thou owe, for what I owe thee stands upon account.

Go when thou art sent, come when thou art called.

I was dust, there came water and made me dirt.

Much corn, never bad year.

For rising early the day breaks never the sooner.

For news never trouble thy self, thou shall know it time enough.

Little wealth little care.

Over shoes over boots.

By no means leave not the highway for a by-path.

Take thy wifes first counsel, not the second.

Ask Mun^oz, for he tells more lies then two.

An open gate tempts a Saint.

They set up a Cross because he should not piss in the place.

When the beast groans, load on and do not fear.

When the Devil is at his Beads he will cousen thee.

When the Devil comes to thy gate and shall beg thy sleeves, cut them off and
give them him.

Like bell like clapper.

When thou art an Anvil suffer like an Anvil, when thou art a Hammer strike
like a Hammer.

When thou art with thy wife belly to belly, do not tell her whatsoever comes
into thy mind.

The Saint can do nothing when God is not pleased.

If the fields will not, the Saints can have no tithes.

The Iron must be beaten while it is hot.

Keep touch with the time.

When thou see thy neighbors beard peel away, wet thine own.

Do not speak all thou know, do not judge all thou see, and thou shall
live in peace.

When the Pilot promises mass and wax, it goes ill with the Galley.

Like King, like people.

When the frog has hair thou will be good.

Better double then break.

I would have my son witty, but not over witty.

You would buy a Mule without a mouth or a tail.

Fly, what do thou? we plough. Meant of arrogant men.

What avails a candle without week?

Who rises late must trot all the day, viz. Because he is behind hand with his
business.

Who gives all, denies all.

Who speaks ill of the Mare buys her.

Who marries for love has good nights, but sorry days.

Who hearkens well, answers well.

If you will have the dog follow you, give him bread.

Who can be free, let him not make himself a captive.

Who loves well forgets late.

Who has his skirts of straw fears the fire.

Who spares, finds.

Who deals in wool distills gold.

Who dares not adventure, let him not pass the Sea.

Who commends the Ass, may he have such a son.

Who lends money loses a visitor.

Who eats and sings rises off foolishly.

Who has a hundred, and owes a hundred and one, need not fear; who has a
hundred and one, and owes one hundred and two, I recommend him to God.

Who lies with dogs rises up with fleas.

Who goes far to marry, either he goes to deceive, or to be deceived.

He that gets out of debt grows rich.

A cool mouth, and warm feet live long.

He pulls by a long rope who waits for another death.

When a friend asks, there is no to morrow.

If all fools had bables, we should want wood.

For washing his hands, none sells his lands.

Hearken to reason, or she will make her self to be heard.

Who lives well is learned enough.

Jest not with the eye, nor with Religion.

He that stays does his business.

Into a mouth shut, flies do not enter.

One grain fills not a sack, yet it helps his fellows.

Honor and profit lie not in one bag.

The more a woman looks in her glass, the less she looks to her house.

Marry a widow before she leaves mourning.

Prayers and provender hinder no journey.

Many kiss the hand whom they wish were cut off.

The world runs round, who cannot swim goes to the bottom.

The Lion is not so fierce as he is painted.

He is not poor who has little, but he that desires much.

Keep not ill company, lest you increase the number.

He that wipes the child's nose kisseth the mothers cheek.

Who lives in hopes danceth without music.

Who tells his wife news is but newly married.

Who learns a trade, a purchase has made.

Gifts enter every where without a winible.

The Musician keeps shop in his throat.

An old man's staff is the rapper of death's door.

Take heed of an Ox before, a Horse behind, and a Monk on all sides.

It Is more pains to do nothing then something.

Every one has a fool in his sleeve.

Religion, credit, and the eye, are tender things.

Who licks his knife, will give little to his servant.

Better a snotty nose, then none at all.

Who brings good news may knock boldly.

Who pities another, remembers himself.

A great Dowry is a bed full of brabbles.

Three women and a goose make a market.

If things were to be done twice, all would be wise.

The easiest thing in the world is for one to deceive himself.

Who dallies with his enemy, dies between his hands.

Who is a Cuckold and holds his peace, carries a hot coal in his heart.

Why is a man a Cuckold? because two can do more then one.

A Woman and a Cherry paint themselves for their hurt, viz. the one to be
tempted, the other to be eaten.

The way to make a woman a fool, is to commend her beauty.

You have hit the white.

An old Father and a broken Sleeve is no dishonor.

My mother told me that I should debate the business, but not bet.

A hundred out of one womb, and every one of a several mind.

God bring me to live there where an egg is worth six pence. i. To a Country
full of money.

There would be no Fortune, were she still the same.

The Prodigal has as many friends as eat at his table.

Fortune at last yields to the importunity of labor.

Labor gets the Laurel, and takes off the rust from the soul.

Adam's son cannot eat bread without labor.

I know what I know, but I will keep it to my self.

A cunning Fox that lies betwixt weeds, makes her self dead, that she may catch
the prize.

One needle for the purse, but two for the mouth, viz. To keep it close.

One has the credit another washes the wool.

He was but one that never erred.

Virtues overcome signs, viz. The influxes of the Stars.

The wise man is deceived but once, the simple twice.

The old woman when she danceth raises much dust.

The wine of Pears, nor drink it thy self, nor give it thy friend.

Come cackling, thou may return singing, viz. Go with some present of Poultry
to the Judge.

Sell at home, and buy in a fair, if thou will be rich.

Thirty Monks and an Abbot cannot make an Ass shite against his will.

Three to one may put a straw in ones arse.

All fish is phlegm, and all games imposthumes.

You have one dead in your house, and you go to mourn for another. i. every one
has grief enough of his own.

A gamester, a gamester, the name tells thee he is a thief.

A little gives contentment.

Soles and wine makes the body go.

From blowing coals there comes a flame, and from ill words a quarrel.

If John wishes me well, his works will show it.

If thou have a mind to beat thy wife, let her bring thee water to the
sunshine; for there thou may find some mote or other, that may be a ground
for a quarrel.

If thou will have pleasure, endure some pain.

If thou desire to be sick, wash thy head, and go to sleep.

If thou desire to be fat, eat with hunger, and drink leisurely.

If thou will know the value of a Crown, go and borrow one.

If thou will have a good servant, take him before he has dowle on his chin.

If fools did not go to the market, ill wares would never be sold.

To pray unto the Saint till the danger is past.

Who goes with ill company breaks his foot, or his hip-bone.

Who does not appear is perished.

Will thou tell the fool what he is? call him a two-footed beast.

Who meets not with some ill luck, takes a surfeit of the good.

Who has no honey in his cruce, let him have it in his mouth.

Who promises puts himself in debt.

Who sowes thistles, reaps prickles.

Who has no money has no grace. Cayre an old Spanish coin.

Who loves well sees afar off.

Who eats his Cock alone, let him saddle his horse alone.

If this dab does not stick to the wall, 'twill at least leave a mark.

One stroke fells not the Oak.

One, and none is all one.

The same knife cuts my bread and my finger.

Use makes mastery.

I that do hold my peace do gripe stones.

Honor without profit, like a ring on ones finger.

The man believes, the soul doubts.

Before thou write receive, and before thou give write.

The teeth require not much neglect, nor too much care.

There Is no woman fair on her wedding day.

Marriages are filled up with fools.

An Ass that gets into another man's ground comes back laden with wood, viz.
Knocks.

From a scolding man the Lord deliver me.

A white earth, black seed, and five Oxen to the plow-share.

A red man, and bearded woman salute them three leagues off.

Plow deep, thou will have bread enough.

Let thy son have a good name, and a good trade.

There Is fence against all things except against death.

To drink to the bottom to see the arms of the Goldsmith.

Satirical or Drolling Proverbs.
THe worse Abbot is made of him who has been a Monk. Goose, Gander, and
Gosling have three sounds, yet are but one thing.

By the skirts of the Vicar the Devil climes up to the Steeple.

Who takes an Eagle by the tail, and a woman at her word, holds nothing.

Who spoke Rodrigo, spoke of noise.

Shut the door, for the pot boyls over.

Without Priest and pigeon-house thou may keep thy house clean.

We are of Galicia, we do not understand one another.

Peter is too old to keep Goats.

What a pretty fellow would Peter be if he were washed?

As Saint Antlins Ass, every day worse and worse.

Ironical Proverbs.
GOd gave me but one Egg, and that was addle.

Two to one, I will turn a Crane, viz. I will fly away.

Beneath the Sun there is no such man,
As is the Spaniard and Italian.
Answer. Thou tell the truth, and reason have;
The first's a Thief, a Buggerer the last.
The Church-mans wealth comes in at the door, and goes out at the chimney.

Let Martha die, so she have her belly full.

He took Villadiegos Breeches, and put earth in the middle, viz. He fled.

Take heed of a^ ill woman, and do not trust a good one.

Drolleries, or merry Proverbs.
OF things I never saw least, then of good Aprils, and good Bishops.

Abbot of Carcuela having eaten the porredge, would have also the pot.

Trust not a Priest made of a Friar.

The Priests wealth is given by God, but taken away by the Devil.

The way to Rome must have neither a lame Mule, or light purse.

God is he who heals, but the Physician gets the silver.

Two John's and one Peter make one whole Ass.

The Abbot and the sparrow are two ill birds.

Like the Ass of Saint Ladorin, every day from bad to worse.

The Abbots wealth comes singing, and goes away whistling.

Fools makes feasts, and wise men eat them.

That which Christ has not, the Exchequer carries.

The diet of Burguillos, Radishes in the morning, and Figs at night.

Martin grows every day from bad to worse.

Physicians of Valencia, long coats and little knowledge.

My gossip Marimenga comes always to beg something.

A Boy given to Mass, an Abbot of Vallero, and a Court Friar, I renounce them
all three.

Never expect much from a Friar, or a Nun.

Nor Dog, or Neger, nor Boy from Galicia.

Nor a headstrong Mule, nor a Maid who has been at Sea, nor a Well at the
Door, or an Abbot for thy neighbor.

Trust not thy wife with a Friar, nor brabble with a Judge.

Nor a Friar for thy friend, nor a Priest for thy neighbor.

Temporal Proverbs, relating to the Weather.
APrils and Earls are traitors for the most part.

April and May the keys of the year.

A cold April, much bread, and little wine.

Every Hog has his Saint Martin.

The third of April the Cuckoo is to come, if he comes not the eighth day, he
is taken or dead.

March water is worse then a stain in cloth.

August and the Vintage is not every day.

August rain brings honey, wine, or saffron.

May water bread for the whole year.

A year of snow, a year of plenty.

Aragon clouds are water in the night.

A red morning, wind or rain,

Every thing in its season, and Turnips in Autumn.

The circle of the Moon never filled pond, the circle of the Sun wets the
Shepherd.

May tells April, although thou weepest, I will laugh.

December pierces like a Culverin.

Bearded frost, forerunner of snow.

On Saint Barnabies day the Sun said, here I will stand.

Neither the Winds, nor the men of Aragon are good.

January makes the pot freeze by the fire, and the old woman in her bed.

In April a thousand waters.

In June, July, and August, Lady excuse me you must --

The cloud is the mother of rain.

The Moon with a circle brings water in her beak.

The Moon increasing, her horns Eastward, in the wane, her horns before.

Betwixt April and May, if there be rain, it is more worth then Oxen and W^in.

A windy March, and a rainy April makes May beautiful.

A windy April and a rainy March makes the Hive unlucky.

Neither give credit to a clear Winter, or cloudy Spring.

Clouds above, water below.

When there are clouds in Hontejas mend thy roof.

When the rock is coiff'd with flies, the town beneath becomes a sop.

When there is a Spring in Winter, and a Winter in Spring, the year is never
good.

When Aroca wears a hood go to Rostelo.

When it rains in August, it rains wine or honey.

When the Moon is in the wane do not sow any thing.

When the Melicoton buds, the day and night are near the same.

When the Peach is in its flower, the day and night are in one tenor.

When the Figtree buds, find out thy Mistress.

When it snows it snows, when it rains it rains, when the wind blusters it is
ill weather.

When Guara has a cloak, and Moncayo a hood, a good year for Castile, and a
better for Aragon.

Too early a Sun lasts not a whole day.

A red Sun has water in his eye.

March Sun sticks like a lock of wool.

The Sun set, the workman freed.

Time after time, and water after wind.

An Eastern wind carries water in his hand.

Red clouds in the East, rain the next day.

April buds, few of them go to the barrel.

One month before Christmas, another after, is the true Winter.

Saint Lucy, the night shorteneth, and the day increases.

Physical Proverbs conducing to Health and Diet.
WHo does not sup, needs not Avicen, viz. The Physician.

A Duck, a Woman, and a Goat are ill things being lean.

Go to the Fish-market in the morning, to the Shambles in the evening.

Cold water and hot bread never made good belly.

Water after Figs, and Wine after Pears.

Water has three qualities, it brings neither sickness, debts, nor widow-hood.

Buy the Bolster of one in debt, and thou will sleep soundly.

There sickness comes where Eggs are eaten without salt.

Who steals the old man's supper does him no wrong.

An Eele in a pie, and in pickle the Lamprey.

One Olive is gold, two silver, three all brass.

Agues or Fevers in the Fall, all always long or mortal.

A Kid of one mouth, a Lamb of three.

An Ague in May, health for a year and a day.

The mother reckons well, but the child better.

Make night night, and day day, so thou may sing well-a-day.

A late Child quickly an Orphan.

In a black woman there is Turpentine.

Keep thy feet dry, thy mouth moist.

Far from City, far from health.

The morning to the mount, the evening to the fount.

Suppers killed more then Avicen ever cured.

Dine with little, sup with less, sleep high, and thou will live.

After fish milk do not wish.

Sammon and Sermon have their season in L^nt.

Milk said to Wine, Friend, thou art come in good time.

It Is good sowing where the sheep has piss't.

Old wine, and an old friend.

Who grows fat being old, has two youths.

Marry thy daughter, and eat fresh fish betimes.

The young man by sleep improves his health, and the old man impairs it.

Water upon honey tastes ill, but does well.

Hot bread, have much in thy hand, and little in thy belly.

That Cheese is wholesomest which comes from a Miser.

Let thy water have neither color, smell or savor, and let it see the Sun.

Let thy door be toward the East, and thou will live the better.

Wine over night is not worth a mite.

Let me piss clear, and a fig for the Physician.

Appetite is better then surfeit.

A growing youth has a wolf in his belly.

God give me a river and a hill for my neighbor.

Ye Maids of Davera who gave you bad teeth? cold Water and hot Chestnuts.

Drink not of a Pond, and eat but one Olive.

Bread enough, and Wine by measure.

New bread and grapes, paint Maids, and take away the old woman's wrinkles.

Yesterdayes bread, and this days flesh, wine of the year passed brings health.

For a Quartan Ague the bell seldom tolls.

Moderate labor is much health.

When thy belly aches, make it known to thy tail.

When thou have an appetite, eat of the Buttock, not of the Liver.

The Cods or Genitories.

When a man bepisseth his boots, he is not fit for marriage.

When thou eatest new bread take heed of the fountain.

When thy piss is of the florins color, a fig for the Physician.

When it rains and the Sun shines, gather snails.

When the Patient has the postern-door open, a far^ for the Apothecary.

When the Spleen swells, the body grows less.

He who breaks not his fast in May, let him recommend himself to the dead.

He who pisseth and does not fart, he does not do what he should.

Who eats well and drinks well does do his duty.

Who eats snails in April, let him provide for death.

Who sees fennel, and gathers it not, he is no man, but a Devil.

VVilt thou see thy Husband dead? give him cabage in August.

Who eats much eats little.

Whether you eat little or much, drink thrice.

To a Iady bit a spur of wine.

A rusty needle shall not come among my tools.

He obtains who tires not.

God sends meat to washed hands.

Let me go warm, and let the world laugh at me.

To a collop of bacon a good rouse of wine.

Drink water like an Ox, and wine like a King, viz. Sparingly.

One egg is niggardliness, two is gentleness, three is valor, the fourth is
knavery.

If the Countryman knew the goodness of a Hen in January, he would leave none
in the roost.

VVilt thou have a good bit? take a Medler the crown taken off.

Who goes to bed without some supper, has a light brain all the night.

Sheeps cheese, Goats milk, and Cow butter is the best.

Leave not thy wastcoat till the Galileans come, that is, till Ascension day,
when the Gospel of the men of Galilee, etc. is read.

There Is no such broth as the juice of flint, viz. That Is made of rock-water.

Pour no water in my wine, for there are worms that go up and down the River.

A Pear that cries Rodrigo is not worth a fig, viz. A stony Pear.

Neither drink Perry thy self, nor give it to any other that thou love.

Distempers of the eye are to be cured with the elbow, viz. They must not be
touched.

He must rise betimes who will cheat the Devil.

He who meets with no ill luck, is weary of good.

He who did eat the flesh, let him gnaw the bone.

He who stumbleth in the plain way, what will he do on a Rock?

He who flies away in time, comes timely home.

He who will live in health, let him dine moderatly, and sup betimes.

Bad dinners, and great break-fasts, small heads, and long necks.

If thou will eat what is ill, eat a roasted Hare.

If thou will live in health, make thy self old betimes.

If the good woman knew the virtue of Rhue, she would seek it by Moonshine.

If thou will be sick, wash thy head and go to sleep.

Under the VValnut-tree do not fall down and lie.

Upon new figs do not drink.

Upon Melon wine is a felon.

If thou desire to die eat roast Mutton, and sleep presently.

Pottage without herbs has neither goodness nor nourishment.

Who eats a pilchard in May, shites out the bones in August.

Topical Proverbs that aim at particular Places and Persons.
THe Physicians of Valentia have large skirts, but little knowledge.

To the Judges of Galicia go with feet in hand, viz. With some present of
Capons, etc.

Give the Jew an inch, and he will take an ell.

Galliegos are beggars, the Castillians are covetous.

Give a Jew an Egg, and he will beg of you the Hen.

Ganiazar and Villarejo, a great bell and bad counsel.

From an Andaluz take heed of thy cloak.

Cuenca ill for sore heads, and Valencia for sore legs.

From a Toledano take heed early and late.

From a Pamplona knife, a shoe of Baldres, and a friend of Burgos, the Lord
deliver me.

The Portugues was born of a Jews fart.

The custom of Aragon, for good service a bad reward.

Rather an Ingle then a Galliego.

Sardinia either kills, or makes thee well, viz. with a disease.

In Acturia there are three months of Winter, and three of Hell.

Let Burgos speak, for Toledo I Will speak my self, said Philip the second, to
decide a controversy which was 'twixt these two Towns, who should speak first
in Parliament.

A Portugal prentice that will cut, and yet he cannot sow.

Speak not Arabic in a Moor's house.

Who has a tongue goes to Rome.

Santiago way the lame goes as much as the sound, viz. alluding to the pilgrims
to be cured.

As valiant as the Gander of Cantipalos, who made show to set upon a man.

Like the Mules of Losa, he that breeds them enjoys them not.

Castile has bread enough, who has not must live in poverty.

Cabage of Murcia, and Turnips of Bejara.

Deny what thou will, thou art in Aragon.

Nor round stones, nor the people of Girona.

Neither good shoe in Valdres, nor good friend in Salamanca.

Neither a man of Cordova, nor a knife of Pamplona, nor a boy of Burges, or a
shoe of Baldres.

Camora was not got in an hour.

Palencia the fool who hears thee despises thee.

When thou go by Pancorue, put thy cloak on thy shoulder.

When thou go by Torote, carry a stone in thy cloak, and it will pay thy
reckoning.

Who goes to Andaluzia, let him sleep in the day, and go all night.

Who is an Earl, and would be a Duke, let him be a Friar in Guadalupe.

Who goes to Rome let him carry money.

Who has not seen Lisbon has not seen a fair thing.

Who is naught in his own Town, is also naught in Sevil.

Corner for corner, and Calatayud in Aragon.

Rome, Rome, who does tame fools, and pardons not the wise.

Salamanca cures some, and spoils others.

If Castile were a cow, Rioja would be the kidney.

Valley for Valley, from Hita to Talavera.

A Vineyard in Cuenca, a lusty wife, and a process in Huete.

Bricayner the fool, put a tarace between.

If thou will know a Catalan, piss, and he will piss for company.

Whom God does bless, he gives them a dwelling in Sevil.

Three Spaniards, two of them Christians, as God, and the third as holy as the
Pope,

Three Portegueses, two of them half Christians, and the third a Jew.

Three Italians, two of them Buggerers, the other an Atheist.

Three Dutch men, two of them drunkards, the other a heretic.

Three English men, two of them thieves, the third a rebel.

Daroca the fool, a great circuit, but a small town.

Valencia Physicians large skirts, and little learning.

On, on, for Burgos is no village.

Duero has the fame, but Pisverga has the water.

Aranda on Duero, I Will have for my self: a saying of Philip the second.

There are two Magicians in Segura, the one experience, the other wisdom.

In Salamanca a mite is better t^en a blanc, viz. a fair woman.

To be happy God send thee a Vineyard in Cuenca.

Ebro thou Traitor, who do spring in Castile, and waterest Aragon.

The King went old to Toro, and came back young: because the water and grapes
are so healthy.

Spain is dark, so is a South-west wind by nature.

The Ass of Caracena the more he went the worse he was.

In Navadijos little bread, and many children.

Galicia is a Garden, and Ponferrada is the gate.

Sevile is like a chess-board, she has as many black as white men, viz. Moors
and Christians.

Castile was little enough when Amaya was her head, and Hitero a Mount.

Locoya carries away the water, and Xarama boars the fame.

June, July, August, and Carthagena the best Ports of Spain.

That which is desired by Alagon, let it never come to Aragon.

Zorita dogs are few, but ill conditioned.

Put a Galliego but in thy barn, and he will make himself thy heir.

That which Escamilla does crave let Castilla never have, viz. too much drought.

That which Ocannia does crave let Mancha never have.

That which Hinojosos desires let our eyes never see.

Like Buitrago colts, that always grow less and less.

Like Zorita dogs, who having no other do bite one another.

The youths of Cuenca, and colts of Carboneras.

The world runs round, born in Granada, and dead in Bustillo.

The world runs round, to be born in Xerez, and dye in Portillo.

Portingal Proverbs.
SOmetimes an ill-favored bitch gnawes a good chord.

A duck, a woman, and a goat are ill things being lean.

An empty purse makes one wise, but too late.

The end commends life, and the evening the day.

Let Us have health and peace, and we shall quickly have enough.

Be it he or she look well with whom you converse.

A long tongue is a sign of a short hand.

The woman and the sheep let them go home betimes.

Too much courtesy a kind of cheat.

Love, Fire and Cough discover their matter.

The love of a Nun, and the flowers of the Almond-tree soon come and soon
depart.

A handsome wife, a vineyard and fig tree are hard to be kept.

The Mulberry which thou can not reach lay up for thy soul.

Give to the good, and depart from the bad.

An old debt is better then a new sin.

It Is to no purpose to seek where nothing's to be found.

The stone and the word returns not when once out.

My sleep is found my enemy being dead.

It Is as hard for a fool to be silent as for a wise man to speak foolishly.

I had rather have one sparrow in my hand then two in the wood.

Fools go to weddings and pilgrimages.

I do not desire a pig with a bell.

A hot belly, a sleeping foot.

Mine is better then ours.

An old woman's stroke breaks no bone.

The man believes, and the soul doubts.

The hen without teeth makes living men of the dead, viz. with her Eggs.

Trust not a lame dog.

A dog of an old dog, and a colt of a young horse.

A Jew for Merchandise, and a Friar for hypocrisy.

The conscience of Portulegre, which sells a cat for a hare.

A gadding wife is met every where.

They spoke to him in garlic, and he answers them in codshead.

There the tongue goes where the tooth aches.

John Gomez journey, who went with a saddle, and came back on a wallet.

Galliego Proverbs.
THE wealth of a Churchman God gives it, and the Devil takes it away.

The ill neighbor gives a needle without thread.

Love does much, but money does all.

The Countryman is 'twixt two Lawyers as a fish 'twixt two cats.

A calf of a young cow, and a colt of an old mare.

A Sea-Voyage cannot be limited to days.

Catalunian Proverbs.
APpetite is better then surfeit.

In July neither woman nor snail.

A man dies of the ill he fears.

He that has a handsome body needs no cloak.

Who rises late, trots all the day, because he is behind hand with business.

The voice of the people is the voice of God.

Dry bread is better with love, then a fat capon with fear.

The Explication of some Remarkable Proverbs in Spanish.
GOd bring me to dwell there where an egg is worth six pence, viz. to that
Country which is rich and full of treasure, which may incite men to labor.

Whom God loves, his bitch brings forth pigs, viz. whom God loves, all things
cooperate for his good, and beyond his expectation and hopes.

Whom God love's, the Ant goes to seek him out, viz. He will have plenty of
corn, where the Ants use to resort.

God deliver me from a Goose quill, viz. from Lawyers Bills, Suits in Law and a
scrivener's shop.

From still waters the Lord deliver me, for from rough waters I will defend my
self, viz. God deliver me from a glozing friend, for from an enemy I shall
defend my self.

What a rich Merchant would God be? Because he foreknows all things, as the
season of the year, and when there will be tempests, etc.

My father Munnioz desires that which God will not have. This Proverb is
understood of a Maid, whom her father would have married against her will.

Lets pray God by the Saints, but not by so many. They are the words of the
Husbandman, and must be understood of the Holidayes and Festivals, whereof
there is a great number in Spain.

God come's to see us without a Bell; that is, without any noise, or when we
are well: To come to see one with a Bell, is when the most holy Sacrament goes
to visit a sick body.

Many dressers discompose the Bride: Because where there is differing opinions,
there is disorder.

He who would marry a fair woman, let him choose her on Saturday, and not upon
Sunday: Because she goes then painted and decked.

If thou have a mind to beat thy wife, let her bring thee water to drink in the
Sunshine; and then the atoms of the Sun will seem motes in the water, and
make it look foul, so he may pick a quarrel with the wife.

A mild calf sucks his own dam, and another: The gloss is, that they who are of
a gentle, mild nature, will find entertainment in all places.

Thy fathers house, thy grandfathers Vineyard, and thy Olive trees thy great
grandfathers: The meaning is, an house of one descent, a Vineyard of two,
Olives of as many as thou will.

A creature of one year sucks milk out of the ankle. The meaning is, that he
sucks hard and strong, drawing the purest blood from all parts of the body.

While I look upon my Aunt, I dye of tediousness, while I see her not, I dye of
desire. This is applied to the variableness of men's minds and humors, and that
absence sets an edge upon affection.

My mother told me that I should be earnest, but lay no wagers. The gloss of
this Proverb is plain against layers of wagers.

Let thy son be well fed, and raggedly clothed, thy daughter less fed, but well
clothed. It Is a good rule for governing a house, because the son must help the
father in his labor.

Don Lopez is neither honey, nor gall, nor vinegar, nor malmsy wine. This
Proverb is meant of those that are of a cold and indifferent nature.

To win at the beginning is a bait to lose: Because it allures one to give
himself to gaming.

'Twixt brother and brother two witnesses and a Notary. For fear of suits in
Law, and breach of brotherly love.

The mother and the daughter wear but one smock. The gloss is, that the
daughter follows the belly, and is like her in disposition.

I am not sorry that my son loses at play, but that he will have a revenge.
It Is meant of those that are habituated to gaming, and obstinate.

The father by inches, the son by else. The meaning of this is, that he who
gets his living hardly, spends it sparingly, as some fathers do; then comes a
prodigal son, and spends by else what his father got and spent by inches.

Who wipes my sons nose, kisseth me in the face. This Proverb refers to the
great love which Fathers use to bear their children.

The Devil brought the bashful man to the Court. This has reference to
Courtiers, in whom too much modesty and bashfulnesse is not commendable.

Never enquire the pedigree of a good man. This proverb denotes that virtue and
goodness is the best coat of arms.

Women and cherries paint themselves for their own hurt: Because the first are
woed and courted, the other eaten.

God gives almonds to him who has no gums. The meaning is, that riches and
command come sometimes to such that know not how to make use of them.

The Ant got wings to her own destruction. This may be applied to mean men when
they come to too much riches; whence proceeds pride and ambition, and
consequently their ruin.

Hell is full of good intentions. This proverb signifies, that there is no
sinner how bad soever, but has an intention to better his life, although death
does surprise him.

My father went to bed, and was found dead the next morning, ask not the
reason, he supped on roasted mutton. The meaning is, that the Spanish mutton
being more gross and strong, is not digested so soon as the mutton of other
Countries.

The Jews in their Passeovers, the Moors in their Weddings, the Christians in
their Lawsuits, spend their estates. This relates to the customs of all three.

In the Arti^ans house hunger knocks at the door, but dares not enter: Because
he is always at work, and on the gaining hand.

The dead open living men's eyes, viz. History, which speaks of the actions of
dead men, opens the eyes, and directs the living.

When the mouth is shut flies will not enter. That is to say, the silent man
prevents many inconveniences.

I desire not a pig with a bell about his neck. The meaning is, that a
courtesy done with noise and ostentation is not so pleasing.

At the first assault the French are more then men, and afterward less then
women. This saying relates to the lightness and inconstancy of the French
Nation.

Grind good corn, and blow not the horn. This Proverb advises every one to
perform his duty, and to do good, but not to brag of it afterward.

You would have the ^at have five feet, and she has but four. This proverb
relates to men that are too curious, and over-critical, that nothing can please
them.

Preserve thy self from the occasion, and God will preserve thee from the sin.
This is a most excellent and singular spiritual Counsel.

An old mother, and a torn shirt is no dishonor. This proverb does admonish us
that old age and poverty are no dishonor or marks of baseness.

Rather a Mulberry then an Almond tree. This proverb does agree with the
complexion of the Spaniard, who is more slow and phlegmatic in his actions then
other Nations: As the Mulberry is amongst trees, who buds very late, and not
till the asperity of the cold weather be quite past; wherefore that tree is
taken for a Symbol of wisdom, as the Almond tree, that buds betimes, is of
rashness: which induced the Author of Dodona's Grove to compare the Spaniard
to the Mulberry tree.

Carta Embiada de un Galan a su Dama, en que por los mas usitados refranes le
da cuenta de cosas que en su ausencia le avian Sucedido; A Letter sent by a
Gallant to his Mistress, wherein he gives account of what fell out in her
absence, all in Proverbs, taken out of Blasco de Garay.
SENORA,
COmo quien habla de talanquera dare a vuestra merced cuenta de mi vida, y
porque en tal caso dizen que las paredes han oydos, le suplico no se sepa lo
que aqui dire, pues en la boca del discreto lo publico es secreto; y es que
oyendo algunas vezes dezir que a quien muda, Dios le ayuda, y otras, por el
contrario, que piedra movediza no cria moho; Vino me desseo de saber qual de
esto era verdad, considerando que valia mas aver, que saber; Assi acorde de
mudar de vida, y no estar, siempre como dizen, en calma, porque quien no haze
mas de otro, no vale mas de otro: Y fue tal la mudanza que pudieran dezir por
mi, quien bien tiene y mal escoje por mal que le Venga no se enoie. Al fin
viendo que perdia tiempo porque no me dexassen cantar mal y porfiar, o que me
preciava de andar como cuchillo de melonero, dex^ a quel camino, y torn me a
mi menester, Acordandome de lo que dize el Refran, Quien bien esta no se mude,
que por do quiera ay tres leguas de mal quebranto; Mas como quien adelante no
mira a tras se halla, mirando yo que un alma sola ni canta ni llora, y que una
golondrina no haze verano, pareciome que devia buscar compan^ia, puesto que a
la verdad, mas vale ser solo, que mal accompan^ado, porque dizen, Dime con
quien andas, y dezirre he quien eres, aunque es el mal, que el peor se tiene
por muy bueno, mas harto es ciego quien no vee por tela de cedaco: Con este
desseo que digo, madrugue un Dia que no deviera, y como vale mas al que Dios
ayuda, que al que mucho madruga, pues por mucho madrugar no amanece mas ayna,
tropece, y no adelante me camino con cierta moca que venia ladrada de los
perros, Mas como dizen, haz bien, y no cates a quien, puesto que por otra part
digan, que no es bueno cacar por monte traqueado, toda via acordeme de
abrigarme con essa aunque auia propuesto de ayunar, o comer trucha, mas la
necessidad no tiene ley; Empero por el bien suena, y el mal buela, no falto
quien lo supo (porque no ay cosa secreta) y me reprehendio, que quien ha buen
vezino ha buen maytino; Aunque toda via quise mas verguenca en cara que
manzilla en coracon; Y assi acorde de no mudar bissiesto por no parecer
perrillo de muchas bodas, y porque quica de rocin a ruyn; y porque tambien la
Sen^ora no dixesse, que el moco por no saber, y el viejo por no poder dexan las
cosas perder, o que se hazia encuentro feo, o que da Dios havas a quien no
tiene quixadas; De manera que sossegue mi coracon dissimulando con las gentes,
y haziendo del gato de Juan Hurtado porque las buenas callan; Yo como la moca
traya hambre de tres semanas, y picado el molino y el diente agudo, en topando
con la despensa, porque luego le entregue las llaves de la casa, quiso dalle
tanta priessa, que aunque dizen, camino de Santiago tanto anda el coxo como el
sano, mucho avia de madrugar quien la avia de alcancar, porque toda su tema
era, Muera Marta, y mueta harta, diziendo ni al gastador falta que gastar, ni
al endurador que endurar, y que vale mas un dia de plazer qui ciento de pesar.
Yo como vi que se desmandava dixe, a cavallo comedor cabestro corto; Aunque ya
venia tarde el gato a la longanica, porque estava la Se^ora muy apossessionada
en mi hazienda, y assi dizen mete mendigo en tu paiar, y hacer^e se ha tu
heredero; de suerte que fue necessario lo meior que hombre pudo tornar a coger
la hembra y quitarle el mando y el bando porque, como dizen. Vezo pon, vezo
quites; Despues de esto concerte me para no menester con un moco mio pensando
que le tenia hecho a mis man^as, avisandole que quando viesse que me pedia
alguna cosa, porque era romero hito saca catico atravessasse con un triumfo con
que el juego se les baratasse: Yo fue el moco con el gaytero de Arganda, porque
le davan uno para que comencasse, y diez porque acabasse; porque tomo la cosa
tan a pechos, que ya no era Sen^or de mi hazienda, ni podia dar nada a nadie
quando dezia, el harto, del ayuno no tiene cuydado ninguno; mal mira mi amo lo
que hemos menester a unos mucho, y a otro no nada, unos moneys, otros calonies;
Al freyr me lo dira para mi Santiguada, que algun dia mande tanto pedro como su
amo; Mas como a perro viejo nunca cuz cuz* yo como le entendia, respondiale,
oyr, ver y callar, que en la boca cerrada no entra mosca: Assi algunas vezes se
yua grun^endo diziendo enter dientes con mal va todo, a otro perto con este
huesso, mas cerca estan mis dientes que mis parientes: Quiero dexar este amo
que tanta sobervia tiene, y tomar asno que me lleve, y no cavallo qui me
derrueque, que mas vale ser cabeca de raton, que cola de leon; Yo quando vi
tantas consideraciones en un moco, y que se subia a mayotes, dixe, antes que
digas tanto pan come queso, esto^ tiros teneys? No lo echareys en saco roto; En
fin acordeme que dizen, que a las vezes lleva el hombre a su casa con que
llore, y que el necio por la pena es cuerdo, determine de despedirle
conformandome con el refran de las viejas, que dize, ni mula mohina, ni moca
marina, ni poyo a la puerta, ni Abad por vezino, ni moco pedro en casa, que
siempre lo he oydo dezir que de los enemigos los menos; Assi me determine, que
quise mas bien de lexos, que mal de cerca; Esto hize por me quedar a solas con
la ioya pensando que tenia trapillo con dineros porque dizen que quien guarda,
halla; Mas, como al fin se canta la gloria quando bolui a poner recaudo en mi
casa sin confiarme de nadie, porque duelo ageno de pelo cuelga soplo el viento
en mi cara, y pensando echarme a dormit, espulgo me el gato; porque como el
dormir, no quien priessa, quando yo estava mas a suen^o suelto echa otra
sardina, nuestro gozo en el pozo: Vase me la moca de casa, porque dadivas
quebrantan pen^as, mas quien tendra el candil al air? Quando yo me halle solo
no pude dezir, Compan^ia de dos, compan^ia de dios, si no bien vengas mal, si
vienes solo, pues en verdad que no fue por mi culpa; que harto le dezia, Hija
sey buena, y ella, madre he aqui un clavo, y le dezia que la muger, y la
gallina por andar se pierde mas ayna, y que la pierna quebrada, y en casa, y le
dezia que trabajasse, que quien ha officio, ha beneficio, y que no dixessen por
ella, andate por ay Maria sin toca, estate ay no hiles en oro de cestilla, Mas
ella hazia el caso de esto que el Rey de un labrador, yo a quebrarme la cabeca,
y ella buena que buena; Unas vezes callava, porque dizen que quien calla,
piedras a pan^a; Otras me respondian que quando la hormiga se ha de perder
nacenle las alas, diziendome, can^ar mal y porfiar, bien canta marta despues de
harta, porque quien canta sus males espanta, por do passa moia peor es hurgallo
no me lo digays mas que primero bevere, que me toque gran sabor es comer, y no
escotar, dezid lo que quisieredes, que al loco, y al toro dalle corro, que
siempre lo ohi dezir, que de los leales se hinchen los hospitales, y por aqui
quanto mandaredes, en fin como a dineros pagados bracos quebrados, y la codicia
rompe el saco, quando mas pensaua que la tenia convertida a essotra puerta que
esta no se abre, nadar, nadar, y ahogar a la orilla, mas quien da lo suyo antes
de su muerte, merece que le den con maco en la frente; por esto escarmienten
todos en mi, que bueno es escarmentar en cabeca agena, y en la confianca de las
gentes nadie de lo suyo a los parientes, especial en la cama porque no es todo
or^ que reluze; Mas si bien le fue tornese al regosto, que en verdad
acordandome de un consejo, que dize, la muger; la muger, and la Sardina de
rostros en la ceniza, y que la mesa, y la muger han de ser sojusgadas quando
mucho la via salir de madre, pegava con sus bienes y deziale assi se usa del
pan, y del palo, Aunque ella como buena sin aver miedo de dios, ni verguenca a
las gentes, acorde de poner tierra en medio y tomar las calcas de Villadiego;
porque mas vale salto de mata, que ruego de hombres buenos, y mas vale una
traspuesta, que dos assomadas: Y esto no para emendarse que no le passava por
pensamiento, si no para andarse a sus vicios, y como dizen de aquel en aquel,
que quien malas man^as ha en la cuna, o las pierde tarde, o nunca: De manera
que como hombre experimentado, y que sabe en que caen las cosas, porque no ay
meior cirviano que el bien acuchillado, podria con ella dar consejo a otros, y
dezir, De la mala muger te guarda, y de la buena no fies nada, aunque hablo en
perviyzio de muchas m^s por un ladron pierden otro el meson; Bien se que do ay
malo ay bueno, mas tambien se que por un bueno ay cien malos, que un Cavallero
sobre ciento, y un hombre sobre un cuento; Esta no se contentava con uno en
casa, y otro a la puerta, si no como dizen, Duero tiene la fama, y Pisverga
lleva el agua, ella lo tenia todo, y encubrialo yo por mi honra, mas
tresquilenme en consejo, y no lo sepan en mi casa: Pero siempre lo ohi dezir,
que no ay mal que no venga por bien; y assi fue, que desde alli a pocos dias se
me bolvio al pesebre rogando me que por amor de dio^, y por lo passado enter
los dos, y muy mas humilde y mansa que un cordero aunque despues de averse dado
un muy buen verde en el prado no pude rehusalla, assi por no provar condiciones
nuevas, como porque dos que se conocen de lexos se faludan, y tornela a mi
casa, diziendo, Dios me de contienda con quien me entienda; Desde a pocos dias
como in el Invidioso medro ni quien cabe el moro, atravessoseme otra dama,
porque donde una cabra va alli quieren yr todas: Yo por pagarme en la misma
moneda tome lo que me davan, y por desseo de cuecos meti el pie en un cantaro,
y huyendo del trueno di en el rayo, mas quien quisiera mula sin tacha que se
este sin ella; Acontecio que rin^eron dos comadres, y descubrieronse las
verdades, y todo me llovia en casa, y mal para el cantato, porque por
contentallas a entrambas, yo ponia, correo, y correas, y aun no me aprovechava,
que cada uno creya que endurava para dar a la otra, mas el pensar no es saber,
Que en verdad no avia cosa en mi casa no estuviesse mas escurrida que alcuza de
santero: Verdad es, que si yo mirara el refran de la vieia, que dize, quien
come, y dexa, dos vezis pone mesa, y que mas vale que sobre, que no que falte,
y dexar a la muerte al enemigo, que pedir en la vida al amigo, y guardar, que
no prestar, y no cobrar que quien presta, no cobra, y si cobra no todo, y si
todo, no tal, y si tal, enemigo mortal; no viniera mi bolso a tal estremo como
estava, porque no ay mal tan lastimero como no tener dinero; Estas dos damas a
porfia me venian a visitar, y a dezirme una mal de otra, porque no haze poco el
que echa su mal a otro; Yo otorgando con todas porque assi se ganan los amigos,
que si dezis la verdad quebraros ha la cabeca, una dezia, quien a la postre
viene primero llora, otra, quien espera, desespera, y ambas, bien ayuna quien
mal come; Mas porque no esperassen a comer en mi casa, siempre dezia, o que
avia comido, o que no querria comer, que hombre harto no es comedor; Decta
manera complia con ellas, ya combidando la una a bever, como los pollos de
Marta, que no han comido, y dan les agua, ya llevando la otra a passear, Assi
una por otra mal pen^^ ambas; Las quales como yuan entendiendo, dezian me
algunas vezes, a las que sabes mueras, gran tocado, y chico recaudo; Mas como
ya me hedian en casa, porque el pan quiere ser de ante dia, y el vino de an^o,
y dia, y la carne desse dia; no les dixe, que se fuessen, mas hizeles obras con
que lo hiziessen; Aunque otros las rogavan, y assi es, nos por lo ageno, y el
diablo por lo nuestro como los pieces de la red, que unos mueren per entrar, y
otros por salir; Hazia esto, porque via ya mi dan^o, y oxala antes fuera, pero
mas vale tarde que nunca, porque esso dizen tiempo tras tiempo, y agua tras
viento; Al fin acorde de apartar paiuelas viendo que valia mas hasta el tovillo
que no hasta el codrillo, con intencion de nunc a mas perro al molino, que ni
de estopa buena camisa, ni de puta buena amiga; Estando en este proposito
carcado de hierro, y cargado de miedo, determinado de no vivir mas de
emprestado sino como dizen ave de tuyo levantose un viento que de la mar salia
alcome las faldas de la mia camisa, y fue, que como que no ay cosa firm,
vinieron en discordia dos hermanas de buena fama, y aunque dizen, que enter
hermanos no metas tus manos, porque quien los disparte lleva la peor part, no
dexe de meterme enter ellas por ser personas honradas, tambien por provar
ventura, que a los osados ayuda la fortuna, y acaeciome con la una della que
por una vez que mis ojos alce dizen que la enamore, de manera que por ser yo
roxo como un cuervo antes cuez que yervas si no fuy del todo favorecido
alomenos tuue esperanca que se podria hazer algo aunque pudieran dezir por mi
hijo no tenemos, y nombre le ponemos; Verdad es que dizen, que lo que mucho se
dessea no se cree aunque se vea, mas toda via pienso lo que podria ser, puesto
que pensar no es saber, ni es siempre vero lo que suena el pandero, y con este
relampago no vivo seguro, aunque en fin mal esta el fuego cabe la estopa, y
esso es verde lo que el fuego no vee; A la verdad por meioria mi casa dexaria,
en especial hallandome en ausencia de quien pudiera pesarle, pues dizen los
ausentes por los presents porque mas vale paxaro en mano que bueytre volando;
Assi estoy apercebido para lo que viniere, porque hombre apercebido, medio
combatido, y porque no digan ya que ando como pedro por demas, y querria que
fuesse oy antes oy que man^ana, que no seria tan malo que con lo passado no
tuviesse hombre por bueno, que quien de mucho mal es duecho poco bien le
abasta, y como quiera mas valdria tuerto que ciego: Mas si los coracones no
sengan^an ello le hara sin dalle priessa que lo que esta de dios ello seviene;
no quiero pues mostrarme muy codicioso, porque no digan, a moco goloso higo a
dinero sino esperar con cordura, que quien ata corto, y hierra somero, va
Cavallero, y el que menosprecia la yegua esse la lleva; Enter tanto passare
cochura por hermosura la qual nunca se podra dezir de mi si no quando mucho,
tal te quiero crespa, y ella era tin^osa, aunque quien feo amo hermoso le
parece, que ojos ay que de lagan^as se enamoran. Desseoso estoy de entrar en
esta casa hecha, que buenes dineros son casa con pucheros, y por no andar de
bodegon en taverna, sino comer cabeca de olla, y por no tener quien mire por mi
regalo, que mientras mas yela, mas aprieta, y estoy ya cansado de andar
tentando vados de coca en colodra; pero dexemos esto, para quando nos veamos,
aunque no se si tender quexa de mi porque le he tantas vezes prometido de
bolverle a ver, y no lo he hecho, pero quien tras otro cavalga no ensilla,
quando quiere hase dilatado mi buelta, porque la gente pone, y Dios dispone;
Tername en possession de mentiroso, pero dezir y hazer no es para todos
hombres, mas quien viene no tarda; Y assi lo entiendo hazer muy presto,
plaziendo a Dios, el qual me lo dexe cumplir para tomar el parecer de v^estra
merced pues mas veen quatro ojos que no dos.

A Dios paredes hasta la buelta.
FINIS.
DIHAREBION CYMRAEG, VVedu ei cyfiethu in SAISONEG^

BRITISH, Or old CAMBRIAN PROVERBS, And CYMRAECAN ADAGES, Never Englished, (
and diverse never published) before.

Which PROVERBS are Partly MORAL, relating to good life; Partly PHYSICAL,
relating to Diet, and Health; Partly TOPICAL, relating to particular places;
Partly TEMPORAL, relating to seasons; Partly IRONICAL, relating to Drollery,
and Mirth, etc.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, (My most endeered LORD) RICHARD Earl of CARBERRY, etc.
AT His Palace in Golden-Grove.
My LORD,
HAving had the happiness to know your Person first at the Spanish Court (in
those glorious times, when our Prince of Wales did court his Mistress so
gallantly,) And looking upon that considerable Tract of Time, which has
intercurd since, I may claim the prerogative to be one of the ancientst
Servants you have; therefore I hope, it will not be held an Intrusion, that I
now make this public address unto your Lordship; Nor will any well-weigh'd
Reader find any Impertinence in this Dedicatory Address, if he regard the
quality of the Work, your Lordship being the brightest Star that is fixed in
the British Firmament, whence from your fair Orb in Golden-Grove you display
your Influences far and near, not only among those Hills, but to diverse places
also under the English Clime, who are witnesses of your Princely way of living,
and noble Hospitality.

Now, my Lord, the design of this new Piece si, to redeem from the Dungeons of
so long obscurity, and to furbish up as it were from the rust of time the
Cymraegan Proverbs, or Cambrian Adages, and old said Sawes, which were so
frequent among the Bards, Nay, some of them reach up unto, and were
contemporary with the Druids themselves, from whom they received their first
rise long before the Roman Eagles planted their talons in this Island; which
Druids being the Divines and Sages of those Times, (as the Magi, and
Philosophers were in other Countries) grew so famous all the World over, that
the Gauls, (now the French) with other Nations came hither by often
transfretations to be indoctrinated by Them: Whence some of the most Learned
Glottographers infer, that the British was the first Language of France also,
as well as of this Island, in regard they did mutually understand one another in
those times, which was long before the Latin or Greek came this side the Alps.

Lastly, my Lord, besides the two motives above mentioned, there was another
which wrought strongly upon me, and induced me to this Dedication, which was,
that I might exhibit to the World a public Evidence of my acknowledgements for
so many noble favors, And that hereby both the present Times may see how much
I am, and future Ages may find how much I was

London 4o Idus Martii, 1658. My truly Honored Lord, Your most humbly devoted
Servant and Compatriot, Jam. Howell

TO THE KNOVVING REDER.
IT is a clear and uncontrollable Truth, or rather an Historical Principle
among all Antiquaries both Domestic and Foreign, that the first Human Cretures
which Peepled this Island were the Britains, or old Cambrians; They are the
very Aborigines and like the Arcadians in Greece, may be said to be
contemporary with the Country it self: If the Nation be so ancient, surely
their Language must be coetaneous with them, for they were not born dumb. Now,
that Language was, and is still the Cymraecan Tongue, which is ranked by all
Glottographers among the fourteen Maternall, and independent vernacular
Languages of Europe; She has diverse Dialects, the first is the Cornubian or
Cornish; the second the Armorican, which the Inhabitants of Brittany do speak
in France, to which Country there were diverse Colonies transported hence: There
was also another Dialect of the Cymraecan Tongue among the Picts, a valiant
People, who, when the Romans had rushed here into the Center of the Country,
retired to the Northern parts, as Westmerland, Cumberland, Northumberland, the
Bishopric, and to some places beyond the Tweed, until the whole Nation of the
Scots orepowring them by multitudes, and orereaching them in craft, utterly
extinguished both Them, and their Language in those parts: Moreover, the Irish
was at first a Dialect of the British, receiving her Alphabet, and ogums from
Her, though afterward it recieved some changes and interpolations by other
Colonies which were introduced thither, as the last most Reverend Lord Primate
Usher, and that very worthy Knight Sir James Ware in his late learned work
called Antiquitates Hiberniae does acknowledge. Nay, some judicious observing
Navigators have found out lately a Dialect of the British Tongue in the West
Indies; whch may well be, for Master Hackluyt and other authentic Writers have
it upon Record, how not far from Mexico there was a Colony of Britains about
six hundred years since, where there remain yet diverse radical words (as I
have observed elsewhere) of the British Tongue, with a stone Epitaph; and the
Spaniards observed, that thereabouts the Cross was in great reverence, etc.

Now, this is a thing of special remark, that notwithstanding the various
Revolutions, with the entire changes of government, and turns of Fortune which
this Island received by so many differing-toung'd Nations, yet the British
Language could never be subdued, but boar up still, and stood firm to her
self; whereas the Romans who kept constant footing here above three hundred
years, were used to bring in their Language with the Lance as a mark of
Conquest; which thing they did all Italy over, and France, with the Cuntreyes
interjacent which are scattered among the Alps, where not a syllable of the
old Primitive Languages is left; It Is true, that in Spain the Biscayners have
retained their to this day, being Mountaneers as the present Britains are, and
twixt these two Peeple there is an extraordinary sympathy observed to be in
point of natural disposition in many things, specially in their great
Civilities, and Candidness toward strangers, as also in their gutturall
pronunciations: And as the Britain here, so the Biscainer in Spain is held the
antientest Inhabitant, and a pure incorrupt Peeple, having never mingled with
the Moors; wherefore when any of them is to receive the habit of Knighthood,
the'rs no scrutiny made into his extraction, whether he be a Gentleman, or
limpio de la sangre de los moros, free from Morisco blood, as uses to be done
before any other be admitted.

Now touching the version of these Cymraecan Proverbs into English, it must be
confessed that diverse of them lose much of their Primitive innate Elegance,
cadencies, and quickness of fancy; for the Cambrian Tongue is so dainty, and so
indulgent of her self, that as she will have none to pronounce her in the true
tone, but a Britain born, or he who has bin bred there very young, so she is
not easily made a turn-coat, or rendered into any other Language, but she loves
to lie upon her own lees without frelatations, or rackings to be powered into
other Vessels; In so much, that whereas all Translations commonly are like the
wrong side of a piece of Arras, (Every Language having some incommunicable
Idioms of her own) this comparison may hold more properly in the British then
in any other, for besides the ordinary cadencies of the rhyme (wherein the
English Poetry chiefly consists) the British meeter has a conceit almost in
every second word, which love to lick one another by agnomination: And this was
used to be the Genius of the old Italians also in former times, as appears in
that famous Epistle, which Circe the daughter of the Sun sent to Ulysses,
whereof I thought it not impertinent to insert here a few stanzas. 1.
Ulisse a lasso, o dolce Amor in moro,
Se porci parci qui armento hor monta,
In selua salvo a me piu caro coro.
2.
Ninfa non fu a Circe chente conta
Se bella ne sibilla o falli felli
Done o danni che Febe affranto affronta
3.
Fetonte si fe tanto ch a'rse, and corse
Su'l carro, cherra crudo che non creed
Di la dall' Alpi al po si scarso scorse.
This was just the Genius (and is still) of the British Bards in their Poetical
compositions, and it is the difficultst way of Versifying, for non satis est
verba in pedes cogere, and numeros observare, sed singula verba habent suos
concentus; It is not only sufficient to make words to go upon feet, and to
observe the number of them with riming cadencies at the end (wherein only
consists the Poetry of other Nations) but there is sweetness of consonancy in
every second word, which may be said to greet and kiss one another by mutual
concent. There could be Volumes of instances produced hereof in the British
Tongue, but this merry one shall serve here for all: A Cobbler having been at the
Alehouse, where he had spent all his money, and going home drunk, he stumbled
against the Cross in the Marketplace, where he slept all night upon one of the
stairs; and awaking in the morning, and rubbing his eyes he thought to see two
or three Crosses of one; but putting his hand in his pocket he had never a
cross left there, hereupon he broke suddenly into this condid, or stanza: And
digree iw gweled dwy groes
A sin in gridd heb un groes,
In gorfedd amhen ar gerig
In cydfwrw yr cwrw ar cig.


Thus in English.

Is It not a merry thing to see
One cross increase to two or three?
Yet I poor Cobbler cannot find
One cross in pocket left behind.
Most of these British Proverbs run thus, therefore they must needs lose much
of their grace in the version, as the best wines take wind by being poured from
one vessel to another.

Now, touching the collection, and marshalling of these Proverbs thus into one
file, and to teach them the English March, there were some very knowing
Gentlemen that did cooperate with me, viz. Mr. R. owen, Mr. W. Williams, and
Mr. R. Evans, a hopeful young Gentleman toward the Law, one whereof is of
South Wales, the other two of the North, where it is confessed, the purest
Dialect of the British Tongue is still preserved, and spoken, in regard there
has not bin so much mixture, and coalition with the English.

I. H.

A LETTER To the AUTHOR from a worthy Gentleman, who supplied him with some
British Proverbs.
My most learned Cuntreyman, and Noble Sir,
SInce you intend to teach the Age Wisdom, by compiling a Volume of Select
Proverbs out of all those Languages, that have taken up their Sation in your
capacious head; I hope you will make it appear that you are a Britain, and that
however our Nation has bin reproched of late years to have had no Religion
among their Hills, the World may know, they have had sense derived to them by
Tradition from their ancient Progenitors. Therefore you will be wanting to your
self, unless you do your own Mother-toung that honor, I may say, that Right,
as to take notice of her Proverbs, which for sharpness of Wit, for brevity of
Expression, for weight of Sense, and (in many of them) for sweetness of the
Cadency and Rhyme, may (to speak soberly) keep company with those that Italy,
France, or Spain affords. Behold here a few for taste, borrowed of Dr. Davies
of famous memory, whose unwearied Labors have brought forth a Grammar and a
Dictionary, to render the British Tongue, and himself immortal. It was not
possible (for me at least, who am Domi Peregrinus) to put them into English,
with their own conciseness, and significancy* there being hardly uny Language
under the Sun, that makes less use of Articles, and insignificant Ligaments of
Speech, then ours does, and that delivers more matter in fewer words; Nor shall
you ever see a Translation bear up exactly with the Original, much less in
Proverbs, where sense and stuff is crowded up into a narrow room, and Brevity
borders upon obscurity.

Have I need to Apologize for some few, that are homely, and may possibly
nauseate the more delicate or grave Reader? You know modern Languages all of
them have the like: This I dare pronounce for them, that not one offers to
clash with Piety, Virtue, or good Manners; that generally they show what men
ought to do, or what men use to do; and that the attentive Reader may certainly
learn here more then a little in re agibili, they are fetchd out of the bowels
of Experience, they are gray-haird, and so fit to teach Wisdom, so claim a
share in your perusal; and such of them as shall be found to bear weight in
your Balance, may be sent over to Posterity under your so wel-known Name,
among the choicest Adages of Europe. To make short, here they are, Let them
speak for themselves.

Eltham in Kent, Aug. 20. 1657. Your friend and servant Richard Owen.

To the highly honored James Howell, Esquire.
BRITISH, Or old CAMBRIAN PROVERBS, And CYMRAECAN ADAGES, Never Englished, (
and diverse never published) before.
HEb dduw hebddim, duw a digon.

Hwyra dial dial Duw,
Tosta dial dial Duw.
Tri pheth sanodd ei adnabod,

Dn, derwen, a diwrnod.

Pan darffo treiglo pob tree,

Da yw edrych tuag adre.

Gwin coch, mer much a mwg, tri gelyn y golwg.

Gyda'r ci y cerdd ei gynffon.

Mwy oedd y braw na'r briw.

Ny chwer hen gi a chenau.

Nyd yw hwyrach in y farthnad,

Groen ye oen na chroeu y ddafad.

O for ac o fynydd ac a waelod afonydd,
Y denfyn Duw dda it' dedwydd.
Nyd oes dogn, ar guardod.

Y March y well gyr d ac ni well y cau.

Digon amal digall hanner gair y Call.

Os cebydd y fydd y fo, te gell gwnaid oreu ac allo

Bonhedig o'i ddig y ddaw.

Gobaith any bydd fe dor y galon,

Etto gobaith etto gobaith.

Sais Sais y gach in ei bais,

Y Cymro glan y gach allan.

Cystall Howell a Heilin.

A acwyno heb achos; gwneler achos iddo.

Achwyn, rhag achwyn rhagddo.

Adwyog cae anhwsmon.

Adwyth diriad heb achos.

Addaw teg a wna yn^yd in llawen.

A ddycco 'r wy, a ddwg a fo mwy.

A fo ma^w, ni ymogelir.

A fo trechaf treisied; a fo gwunaf, gweidded.

A fynno glod, bid farw.

A fynno jechud, bid lawen.

Amcan y fydd gau bawb.

Am gwymp hen y chwardd jevange.

Aml bai, lle ni charer.

Angen a bryn ac a werth.

Anghyfarwydd a dirr ei din in chacu.

Ae ddiwedd y mae barnu.

Ar nid yw pwyll, pyd yw.

Ar ni ochelo 'r mwg, ni ochel ei ddrwg.

Ar ni o ddefo was, bid gwas iddo ei hun.

Ar ni phortho ei gath, porthed ei lygod.

Athro pawb in ei die.

Awydd a dyrrr ei wddf.

Bendith i'r hwch biau'r bloneg.

Blodau cyn Mayi, goreu na bai.

Bo tynna' fo'r llyinnyn, cyntaf y tyrr.

Breuddwyd gwrach wrth ei hewyllys.

Bwrw a'th unllaw, cais a'th ddwylaw.

CalanMaj mae cyfru'r hespyrniaid.

Caledach glue na maen.

Can car fydd i ddn, a chan esgar.

Casseg gloff, cloff ei hebol.

Cau tin wedi brammu.

Ca'r cywir in yr ing y gwelir.

Cennad hwyr, drwg ei neges.

Ci chwyrnog, halawg ei bais.

Ci a helio pob llwddn, ni bydd da ar yr un.

Cospi yr arth yngwydd y llew,

Cos tin taeog, efe a gach in die ddwrn.

Crd ar hen, angeu is dir.

Cyd boed hirddydd, dybydd ucher.

Cyd celer nawnos, ni chelir nawmis.

Cyfaill blaidd bugail diog.

Cystal ar draed a marchogaeth ffon.

Chwarae ac na friw, cellwair ac na chywillyddia.

Chwareued mab noeth, ni chw mab newynog.

Chwefror chwth neidr o i nth.

Chwerthin a wna ynfyd in boddi.

Dadleu mawr mynych, ac egni ar lygoden.

Da gweddai 'r ber ever golwyth.

Dangos y llo, ac na ddangos y llaeth.

Dau bryd newynog a wna'r trydidd in lwth.

Da yw Duw, a her yw bth.

Da yw 'r maen gyda 'r efengyl.

Dedwydd a gaiff draen in ei vwd.

Diffaith llyffant dan ia.

Digrif began bob edetyn ei lais.

Dirmygir ni welir.

Diwedd hen cadw defaid.

Dled ar bawb ei addewy.

Dod fenthyg i noeth, nis cai drannoeth.

Does dn, tra tawo.

Drwg bawl, ni safo flwyddin.

Drwg y ceidw diafol ei was.

Drwg gw'r Ford, nicherdder and unwaith.

Drwg yw dry gwas, gwaeth yw bod hebddaw.

Drwg yw'r peth, ni thal ei ofyn.

Drch i bawb ei gymmydog.

Drygwaith dwy waith y gwnair.

Duw a ran yr anwyd, fell y rann y dillad.

Dybydd rhew i lyffant.

Dygn yw adaw a garawr.

Ebril garw porchell marw.

Edwyn crch y llall.

Of a wr dn pan el, ac ni wr pan ddel.

Eil fam modrib dda.

Eiriawl a garawr hawddwaith.

Elas a gafas rybudd, ac ni las a'i cymmerth.

Er heddwch nac er rhyfel, gwenynen farw ni chasgl fell.

Esgud drygfab y anh arall.

Esmwgtha gwaith yw methu.

Fol pob tlawd.

Fo rhad gryglir, ac na fo rhag drwg arglwydd.

Gelyn yw i ddyn ei dda.

Glue a fydd llew hyd in llwyd.

Gochel y dafarn, na ochel talu.

Goganu 'r bwyd a'i fwytra.

Golwg pawb ar a garo.

Goreu peddester yw gau.

Gwae a dro o glun i glun, ac ni feddo beth ei hun.

Gwae a ddycco ei henwas ils.

Gwae a gar ni garer.

Gwae a gaffo ddrygaer in ieuange.

Gwae a wl ei Arglwydd beunydd.

Gwae'r mil, ni wl ei berchen.

Gwaeth waeth, fell mab gafr.

Gwae undyn, a wnel cant in drist.

Gwayth y nos y dydd a' i deng is.

Gwaith yscafn ymogelyd.

Gwell gwegil car nag wyneb estron.

Trech y gais nag y cei^w.

Torri gwyden a gordd.

Haws direwi rhew na dirywo rhyne.

O her nychdod angeu.

Nyd glue llew pan in llwyd.

Pyscotta mewn corlan.

O dra chynheldeb y lloscodd i gyddin.

Trech lwe na chwning.

Gwell un aderyn in llaw na dau in y coed.

Ascreu lan diogel y percheie.

Gwell friend mevn llys nag aur ar fys.

Nyd her aras da.

Angel penforr diafol tan pertan.

Ceisio ie fam in forcewyn.

Dala jwd a llelfed.

Mwy nar bwch yr odyn.

Gwell un ffal^wr na dau ym laddwr

Gwell un par o draed na dau bur o ddwylo.

Bwa gwan gwan ei berchen.

Arglwydd, gwan gwan ei was.

Trech gwlad nag Arglwydd.

Hawdd yw tynnu carrei o gron gwr arall.

Hael yw Howel ar ghost y wlad.

Chwarea hengi a cholwyn.

Y tafad y bar torri y benglog.

Haws yw burow na saethu.

Ny chred y moel nys gwelo ei ymhennydd.

Hawdd yw tynny gwaed e ben crach.

Clyst y car y clyw.

Trech y tin cont na rhaff.

Yfo began y ferth in ei chont y fydd gam y fam in ei chalon.

Her anelu her gachu.

Law menyw yw hogfan galen.

Abl i bawb a'i Bodlono.

Abl i bawa a'i gweinyddo.

Abl y bawb ei gydradd.

A achwyno heb achos, gweter achos iddo.

A arbetto y fych, arbetted ei gynnog.

Achos bycan y daw blinder.

Achos hebachos o hono.

Achos yr Byssen fodar y Barth.

Achub maes mawr a drygfarch.

Achwyn rhag achwyn rhagddo.

Adalb de dwydd in ddiddos.

Ad fyd pob her dristwch.

Adneu cyhyrin gangath.

Adneu began berchen.

Adwen Mab a'i slawch, agnyd Epwyn mab a'i Car.

Adwyog cae anhwsmon.

A ddyfo i dorth a'i die haish of a ddyfydd a wnel ei waith.

Addas i bawb ei gydradd.

Addaw fab, a ddaw jaen.

Addaw mawr a Rhodd fechan.

Addaw teg a wna ynfyd in llawen.

Adfed Angeu i hen.

Addug yr hydd yr llynn.

Addug yr hydd i maes manc.

Adduned herwr her nos.

A ddwg angeu nyd adfer.

A ddwg da drwg gyngor.

A ddycco y god, ymborthed o honey.

A ddycco r wy a ddwga fo mwy.

A ddiscer y fab ddydd sul, fe a'i, groy bydd ddydd llun.

Aed llew i gynnwrf cad Duw a'i differ.

A el i lys heb neges doed a'i neges gan^aw.

A el yr gwarae adawed ei goren gartref.

Aerwy cyn buch.

A esgynno in hwyr ebrwydd y disgyn.

Afiach pob trwmgalon.

A fiethus pob mammaeth.

A flafar pob Tawedog.

A flan dwglaw diowgswrth.

A flan genau anudonol.

Afled nais pob gwyllt.

A fo aml ei fara dan ganu aed i laetha.

A fo aml y fei bion, bid wag ei geluddion.

A fo aml y fell rhoed in eivwd.

A fo calted ynghyngagaws, dadleued ar bob achaws.

A fo da began Duw is dir.

A fo die gwilydd, a fydd di golled.

A fo diried ar for a fydd diried ar dir.

A fo ei fryd ar ddebed, ni wna dda cyn ei fynned.

A fo hew arched weddi.

A fo Hyborth hy wir fydd.

A fo Marw ni ymogelir.

A fo marw er ei fygwth a'i faw y cymmuner.

A fo nessaf ir eglwys fydd pellaf o ddiwrth baradwys.

A fo trechaf treisied.

A frad yw gwrthod.

A frad pob afraid.

Afrwydd pob dyrys.

A fu bencwd aeth in dincwd.

A fynno barch bid gadarn.

A fynno Duw derfyd.

A fynno glod bid farw.

A fynno gymmell bid glaf.

A fynno jechid bid lawen.

A stafas y carn, a gafas y llafn.

A gaffo ddyrnodd y Bore, hyd vcher ydd a ag of.

A gair Duw in vchaf.

A garo (rather) ni charo ei fam; Cared y Elldrewyn.

A garo ei gilydd, nid adnebydd ei gabl.

A garo yr iau cared ei wariace.

A garo ei gur cared ei chwegr.

A gasclet ar farch malen, dan ei dorr ydd a.

A gatwer a gair wrth raid.

A grea'r fran faur, a grea'r fran fechan (pohus) a gria ev.

A gwyn cwyn bychan, cwn mawr ddarogan.

A gwyn rhwy, ni ry gwyn fan.

A gyfodes, a golles ei le.

A gymmero ddysk cadwed.

Aluisen tam o garw.

A lygrwys Duw, a lygrwys dn.

Allan o olwg, allan o feddwl.

Allwedd calon Cwrwf da.

Amaerwy adnabod Ammynedd.

Amaerwr diriedi, drwg anian.

Amean a fydd began bawb.

Am caro i, cared fynghi.

Amgeleddy ci am y cwd halew.

Am gwynny heu y chwardd jeuange.

Amla'r cwrrwf tra hitler.

Amla'r mel tra hitler.

Aml fai lle ni charer.

Amlwg gwaed arfarch gwelw.

Amlwg gwaed o ben crach.

Ammharod pob annallu.

Amheuthun pob dieithr fwyd.

Ammau pob anwybod.

Ammod a Dyrr defod.

Ammraint pob tor defod.

Amser i fwyd, amser i olychwyd.

Amser sydd i bob peth.

Anafus pob drwg foesawg.

Anaf ynygiau angeu ynygwythi.

Aneglur cennad, yw cewydawd.

Aneirian pob diriaid.

Angall mal dall a dwyllir.

Angel pen ffordd a diawll pentan.

Angen a bair i henwrach duthio.

Angen a brn ag a werth.

Angen a dyrr ddeddf.

Angen a ddsg i hen redeg.

Anghariadus pob diriaid.

Anghenwg peb flewd.

Anghwbt pob Eisiaw.

Anghymmen pob fol.

Anghynnes pob oer.

Angheu a ddyfrys.

Anghew garw drud ai leirch.

Anghwanegid mefl mowr air.

Angyfarwydd a dyr i din in cachu.

Anhael pob cybydd.

An happus pob trwch.

An hyderus pob ofnog.

Anhydyn pob afrowiog.

A noddo Duw, ry noddir.

Annoeth llithrig ei dafod.

Annos die gi ag naddos gantho.

Annos ci i gell egored.

Anwadal pob ehud.

Anwydogch whannog y dou.

Anwyl began baub a gar.

A oddef ry dau.

A ogano a ogenir.

Araf dan a wna frag melus.

Araith does a drud ni ddygymmydd.

A ranno y liaws, rhanned in hy naws.

Ardd cd bch ardd cyn ni bch.

Ar ddiwedd y mae barnu.

Arglwydd agymmell.

Arglwydd biau a wrthotter.

Arglwyd pawb ar ei eiddo.

Arglwydd gwan gwae ei was.

Arian ar: brn ag a werth.

Ar ni allo trais, twylled.

Ar ni ochelo'r mwg, ni ochel ei ddrug.

Ar gwelleif y llas y weirglodd.

Ar nid yw pwyll, pd yw.

Ar ni oddefo was, bid was iddo ei hun.

Ar na phortho ei gath porshed ei lygod.

Ar na roddo a garo, ni chaiff a ddymuno.

Ar ni wano on ddraew, ny wan in gyppil.

Arofyw drug fugail.

Arwaesaf a ddifydd ddiffaith.

Arwaesaf i leidir ei fanag.

Arwydd drwg mwg in niffaith.

Arwydd and cig Bwch.

A sseth ni phlycco nid da.

Asglodin gwern ymhen y gath.

Asgre lan diogel ei pherchen.

Asgwrne yr hen, in yr angen.

Astyrus pob anaf.

Arfer gell i gi, mynnych yr a iddi.

Atgas direid-ddyn.

Atteb araf began ddysgedig.

Athro pawb in ei die.

Ahrod-waith o gen^^gen.

Aur pawb a whennych.

Awahanodd cnawd, gwahanodd ddolur.

Awchus arf a eillio,

Awgrym pawb nis gwybydd.

A wnel drwg arhoed y llall.

A wnel drwg ymogeled.

A wnel Duw dn ai barn.

A wnelir in Rhinant, fe ai gwybydd Cant.

Awdwt cerdd ai gwnel.

A wnel dda, da a ddyly.

A wnel mawr a ddewg rydd, fawr llw.

A wnel twyll, of a dwyllyr.

Awr ddrwg caffaeliad Falswr.

A yfo lawer, bid feddw.

Awydd a dyrr ei wddf.

Baiar wrach dorri ei chlun.

Bai ar farch dorri ei droed.

Balchder heb droed.

Balchder o bell.

Bara ag ymenyn yw un tammaid.

Barf nyd ardd ni chwardd y chlas.

Bas pan wahanner hynny.

Basaf dwfr in id lefair.

Be a bawd y ^gweid gwe.

Be caffai bawb a finnai ni byddai hiraethawg neb rhai.

Berwid calon llew.

Bellach Bellach fall chwedl y barcut.

Bendith i'r hwch biau'r blonneg.

Bid anian dedwydd.

Bid anniweir dife iriawg.

Bid anwadal Ehud.

Bed ddirieid dryganianus.

Bid Ehud drud er chwerthin.

Bid Eu^in Alltud.

Bid gyfa ran rybuchir.

Bid ha ha byddar.

Bid hy fagl gwyar ar onn,

Bid las lluarth.

Bid llawen yach.

Bid llawen meddw.

Bid nych cwyn claf.

Bid reuiad ymgyfarth.

Bid trist pob galarus.

Bid wagelawg lleidr.

Bid war Antur glue wrth awr.

Bid wastad wriag oi mynych warth.

Bid gwraig drwg oi mynych warth.

Bid wiw gwr heb fagwriaeth.

Bid wiw March a gnith gwellt.

Blaenger ymadrodd ffol.

Bling'or gath hyd y llosgwrne.

Blodeu cyn may, malpai na bai.

Bo amlaf fo'r bleiddiau gweithaf fydd i'r defaid.

Bob eilwers y rhed i Cwn.

Bod in her ynglaf, a marw eusys.

Bo hynnaf fo'r din, gwaethaf fyddy bwyll.

Boloch ofnawg fydd daw.

Bonned a dywys, dillada gynnwys.

Boreu brwynag, bradawg iair.

Boreu coch, a mawred gwraig.

Bo tynna fo'r llinyn cyntaf y fyrr.

Braith ui god a gynnyll.

Breuddwyd gwrach, wrth y hewyllys.

Brodyr pob cerddorion.

Buan barn pob ehud.

Budd cyn Tymp.

Bwrw a'th un llaw, cais a'th ddwylaw.

Bwrw cath i gyrhraul.

Bwrw dwfr am ben gwr marw.

Bwrw gwiddyf ar ol ir hwyaid.

Bwrw heli in y mor.

Bwyst lawn genaw callawr.

Bychan fydd mam y cynfyl.

Bychodedd mynialed.

Byddar a gaiff gyffelyb.

Byrr ddryganian, a wna her ofal.

Byrr ddydd ni dderfydd cyngor.

Byrr hoedlog digafog saint.

Cadarnach ywr edau in gyfrodedd nag in vngorn

Cafas da ni chafas drwg.

Cafas malu, caffad ei werth.

Cais farchog da dan draed ei farch.

Cays in y mwlwg.

Calan gauaf garw hin anhebig y gynnefin.

Caledach glue na maen.

Calon ni gynnyd cystydd.

Calon y sais wrth gymro.

Can rewydd ni bydd pell rhin.

Can car fydd(i) ddn, a chan, nescar.

Can wost began henaint.

Canhymdaith ci ei losgwrn.

Cant mwyn mab in y ty.

Canv heb gywydd.

Casbeth gwyr Rhufain.

Casbeth Owen Cyfeiliog.

Car cywyr, in yr yng y gwelir.

Cas din ymma, cas duw fry.

Cas fydd a orelittio.

Cas maharen mwyeri.

Cas yw'r wirionedd in lle ni charer.

Casseg gloff cloff ei hebol.

Cau tin gwedi brammu.

Cein mygir pob Newydd.

Ceisied asgre ei fam a gollo.

Ceisio diried in y dyddyn.

Ceisied pawb ddwr yw long.

Celfydd celed ei arfaeth.

Cell Arglwydd y weilgi.

Cenau in ei wall, a ga^t lem.

Cenmol gwraig Mowrdda.

Cennad fud, drud ai crettwy.

Cerddwys a rwymmwys.

Cerid chawer diried, cyn ni charer.

Ceugant yw Angeu.

Ci chwyrnog halawg i bais.

Ci a Helio bob llwdn nybydd da ar yr un.

Cennad hwyr drwg ei neges.

Clwm anghenog ar y geiniog.

Clwm eiddil much ellwng.

Clywyd Corn cyn y gwele^.

Coel can Hadain, (sive) hedyn.

Coes ynn lle Morddwyd.

Cof began bawb a gar.

Coffa die dduw pan elltrewyd.

Clof was diog.

Cogor iar in ydlam.

Colles die laeth cystal i'r fuwch.

Colles i glydwr a gyrchawdd ry yadwr.

Cosp ar ben jar.

Cospi yr Arth, yngwydd y llew.

Cos tin tagog efe a gach in die ddwrn.

Craff ci caledach asgwrne.

Craffach na'r Efail.

Crechwen yngenau ynfyd.

Crefydd jar with ei gylfin.

Crd ar hen, Angen is dir*

Crynnu fall y for wialen.

Cuall cleddyf byrr o wain.

Cu annair, wedi Praidd.

Cwymp ar galed lawr.

Cwywp y gwr in y Rhych.

Cwyn Bychod ceiliog in Aerwy.

Cyd boed da nid gwirdda.

Cyd boed does, diried is drud.

Cydboed her ddydd, dybydd vcher.

Cyd celer naw nos ny cheler naw mis.

Cyd fwtta a mab Arglwydd, ag na chyd chwarae.

Cyd gwichio'r fenn hi ai ddwg ei llwyth.

Cydlais y bawb alw'r ychen.

Cyd ysso cig march, bid argig ebol.

Cyfa ran rybychir.

Cyfareddion gwrach waeth waeth.

Cyfarwyddaf llaw lle dotto.

Cyfnewid a hael.

Cyfoed fydd da a deddwydd.

Cyfoethog i werthu tlawd i bryunu.

Cyfrin Pen a chalon.

Cyffes pob rwydd.

Cymmwythach, corrach, a symmach.

Cymmyrryd haearn hoedl dn.

Cyn ddyheued ag yssu o'r llygod yr cwlldwr.

Cyn ebrwydded in y farchnad, groen yr Oen a chroen y ddafad.

Cyn heusedd wedi Brewn.

Cyngor hen ni'th Attwg.

Cynnal taeog in ei die.

Cynnelw Cynnyn began gadechyn.

Cynt y llysg yr odyn na't yscubor.

Cyrchyd fryn a ddysgwilio.

Cystall ar dtaed a marchogaeth Fon.

Cystall y March ai adfarch werrh.

Cywala gwedow, gwraig unbeu.

Cywrys am fwyd, carant am ofyd.

Cyngor i am gwas in hen.

Chwannog trwch i drin.

Chwannog mab yw hynt, chawnnog adref a fo cynt.

Chwarae broch ynghod.

Chwarae ag na friw, cellwair ag na chwilyddia.

Chwarae hen gi a chenau.

Chwareu hwch a phorchell.

Chwareuid mab noeth ni chwery mab newynnog.

Chwareuys in awr nyd,

Chwarevys ym mlwyddyn.

Chwarddiad dwr dan ja.

Chwefror chwyth, neidr oi nyth.

Chweg medd, chwerw pan daler.

Chwegach bwyd cybydd.

Chwerddid bd, wrth a garer.

Chwerthin wna ynfyd in boddi.

Chweyrys gwawd o Annianawd.

Chwil began nos.

Da angen ar eiddiawg (i.) Taeawg.

Da daint rhag tafawd.

Dadleu gwedi Barn.

Dadleu mawr mynydd, ag engi ar lygoden.

Da gwaith Duw roi cyrn, byrrion yr fuwch a hwylio.

Da gweddai'r ber ir golwyth.

Da gwr Mal pawb.

Da hill ceirch, began gynnog drwg.

Danit y ci, wrth yr hwch.

Dala die d am a fo, a diofryd a ddarffo.

Dall fyddar pob trwch.

Dall pob Anghyfarwydd.

Damwain pob hely (alias) helynt.

Dangos dirieid y gwn.

Dangos die fys i falawg, ynteu ai heirch in gwble.

Dangos llwybr i gyfarwydd.

Dangos nef i bechadur.

Dangos y llo, ag na ddangos y llaeth.

Dau brd Newynnog a wna'r trydydd in llwth.

Dau waith a fydd began gywraint.

Da yw a saif, ag ni waner.

Da yw cof mab.

Da yw Duw, a her yw byth ai bwyll.

Da yw'r maen gydar Efengil.

Deddwyd, a gaiff draen in y vwd.

Dedwydd, a gar dalodwch.

Dedwydd dofydd, ai rhydd rhad.

Dedwydd i'rai gwl ai car.

Defwydd fawr, pob Anghywraint.

Deuparth clod, ymmhenlog.

Deuparth gwaith ei ddechreu.

Deuparth ffordd ei gwpbod.

Deuparth Fydd, ynghalon.

Deuparth Parch, yw arfer.

Deuparth Prd ymdrwssio.

Deuparth bonedd yw dsg.

Deuparth dsg yw hyder.

Deuparth taith ymbaratoj.

Deuparth ttef ei harferaw.

Deuparth cerdd ei gwrando.

Deuparth rhodd, yw ewyllys.

Dewin pob eiddig.

Dewis ai'r Jau ai'r fwyall.

Dewis or ddwy fachddu hwch.

Dewis pawb o'i giniaw.

Dieu gynnadl taeog o'i die.

Di bech fowyd gwyn ei fd.

Diengid gwan, erlid rhy gadarne.

Diffaith llyffant dan Ja.

Defferu Duw ddiawg.

Dig pawb rhag ai car os cawdd.

Digon da dewid gennad.

Digon Duw da in vnig.

Digon o g^wth a thelyn.

Digon yw digon o Figis.

Digon yw chwarae rhynawd.

Diglod pawb an hawddgar.

Digrif began bod ederyn y lais.

Digu pawb o Anadl y Pibydd.

Di gystydd deurudd dagrau.

Di hunnid a brydyddo.

Dillad a gynnwys.

Dyllyn jeuangc, carpiog heu.

Dyllyn in llaw heu fab.

Dinas a ddiffydd diffaith.

Dir yw gadael peth or dwfr heibio.

Diriaid a gabl ei oreu.

Direid a glud i ddedwydd o for ac o fynydd.

Diriadd ni hawd faidd heddwch.

Dirmigyr ni welir.

Dirwest odyn.

Disymmwth fydd dryglaw ammwyll.

Diwedd hen cadw defaid.

Di wyttach el fleiddan ei gennad ei hunan.

Diriaid a gaiff draen in ei vwd.

D^ed ar bawb ei addaw.

Dod die law ar die galon.

Dod fenthig i noeth nis cau drannoeth.

Does a dwyllyr deirgwaith ni, thwyllyr drud and vnwaith.

Does dn tra tawo.

Dogn sydd ar bob peth.

Dolurus calon ofalfawr.

Dyfyd dihirwaith aros.

Drud a dal dau cyfled.

Drud i ddala, does i estwng.

Drud ganu deulw.

Drwg a drefn wrth ei drwyddedawg.

Drwg llys ni atter and a wahodder.

Drwg pawb oi wybod.

Drwg pechod oi bell erlid.

Drwg wrth drannoeth.

Drwg un, drwg arall.

Drwg y ceidw diafel ei was.

Drwg yw'r drwg, a gwaeth yw'r gwaethaf.

Drwg yw'r Fordd, nacherddir and vnwaith.

Drwg yw drwg was gwaeth yw bod heddaw.

Drwg yw'r peth na thal ei ofyn.

Drwg yw'r swydd na thal ei gawsanethu.

Drych i bawb ei gymmydog.

Drygwaith dwy waith y gwnair.

Drythyll pob diriaid.

Drythill maen in llaw esgud.

Drythyllwrh drwg ei ddichwain.

Duw a birth i fusgrell.

Duw a fedd, dyu y lefair.

Duw a rannod, nef a gafodd.

Duw cadarne a farn pob yawn.

Dybydd show y llyffant.

Dycker ni weler ei rann.

Dyckyd ammwyll ei rann.

Dyckyd whant tros peiriant pwyll.

Dychyd Duw da^har o law.

Dyddaw drwg hanbyddyr gwell.

Dygas gwaith e^lyn (or) erlid.

Dygn Dn o garch^^.

Dygn yw adaw a garawr.

Dyly match, ny dyly ddim.

Dylyn hael onid el in gi.

Dynlluan in llaw henfab.

Dyrnod gwas her yw (i.) gas.

Dyrro lynn y ddoeth e fydd ddoethach.

Dryswys y garthen.

Dysg ddedwydd a gair, dysg ddiriaid a gwiail.

Dysgu gradd y henfarch.

Dywaid llafar, ni wypo.

Dywal dir, fydd ei olaith.

Dyweddi ownck, Galanas o bell.

Ebawl yr ebawl i Duw.

Ebrill garw, Porchell Marw.

Edifar cybydd am draul.

Eddewid gwragedd dau euriawg.

Edwyn crach y llall.

Edwyn hen gath lefrith.

Of a aeth hynny ar gyrne a ffiba^.

Of a daw haf i gi.

Of a fydd am y maidd, ar ni bu am y caws.

Of a wyr din pan el, ag ni wyr pan ddel.

Of a wyr gath, pa farf a lf.

Of y molyr pawb wrth ei waith.

E'fynnai'r gath Byscod and ni fynnai wlychy ei throed.

Egor die gwd pan gaech borchell.

Ehang yw'r bid (i.) bawb.

Ehegr fydd dryglaw i amnwyll.

Eil fam Modrib dda.

Eiriach law, nac eiriach droed.

Eiriol a garawr hawdd waith.

Eiriol nagarowr ni gyngain.

Either gallu nid oes dim.

Elas a gafa* rybydd, ac ni las ai cymmerth.

Elyd bryd in ol breuddwyd.

Elyd ci i gellegored.

Elid gwgraig in ol i enllib.

Elid llaw began droed.

Elid ryw, ar barth pa yw.

Elid un i gant, elid cant i un.

Elyd y scubor began ddrygdorth.

E^id y wrach ir freuan, er cigenau ei hnuan.

Enw heb ^enw.

Enw^ug meichiad oi foch.

Enwir, difenwir ei blant.

Ergyn llwfr* lliaws addoed.

Ergydyn llwyn cussul heb erchi.

Er heddwch nag er rhyfel, gwenynen farw ni chasgl fell.

Esgud drygfab in nhy arall.

Esmwythaf gwaith yw methi.

Ethyw corn heb ysgyfarn.

Ewyn dur, eddewid gwas.

Fiaidd ni charer.

Fol pob Tlawd.

Ford bell i wr o benllyn.

Fo^^d lan Faglan ydd air i nef.

Fordd lanfechan ydd ai y wennenen in ei phresseb.

Fo rhag drygdir, ac na Fo rhag drwg Arglwydd.

Gado gwraig ag vnfesl, ai chymryd a dwy.

Gado 'r nos waethaf in elaf.

Gair dannod yw am un a fethodd.

Gair drwg anianol, a lusg drwg in ei ol.

Gair gwraig, fall gwynt in faweidiau.

Gair gwraig gwueler.

Gair gwraig, mal gwynt y cychwyn.

Gair gwr O Gastell.

Began newydd, nyd pellfydd rhin.

Gelyn yw i ddn ei dda.

Gollwng drygwr i yscubor gwrda.

Genau mwyalch ac arch rlaidd.

Gennid rhybyched rhwng llaw a llawes.

Gennid ymws in nhy dduw.

Geuawg ni chaffo copmawd.

Glue a fydd llew hyd in llwyd.

Gnawd aelwyd ddiffydd in ddiffaith.

Gnawd aflwydd began ddiriaid.

Gnawd a fo di gu diofryd.

Gnawd annerch am Arall.

Gnawd anaf ar ddiried.

Gnawd ar eiddil ofalon.

Gnawd as tyrr began orchymnyn.

Gnawd buan o fain.

Gnawd buan o fras.

Gnawd cor^hawg o fain.

Gnawd cussyl dedwydd in ddoth.

Gnawd difrawd, ar blant enwir.

Gnawd digarad in llys.

Gnawd eddewid gwriag, gwaith ry phall.

Gnawd ffo ar fraeth.

Gnawd began rewydd rychwerthin.

Gnawd gorphwysfa lle bo croes.

Gnawd gwrath o fynnych gysswyn.

Gnawd gwedi llyn led fryddedd.

Gnawd gwin in llaw wledig.

Gnawd lledrad in ddiymgel.

Gnawd mab taer in filain.

Gnawd mann, ar rann cynnifiad.

Gnawd merydd ym puro.

Gnawd mynych Awn y fethdaith.

Gnawd o ben drythyll dra ha.

Gnawd o egin meithrin das,

Gnawd osper nas gwahodder.

Gnawd rhiau eu rhadau in wascarawg.

Gnawd rhygas, wedi rhyserch.

Gnawd serchog ym lyniad.

Gnawd synn syml anghyfiath.

Gnawd tawel in delaid.

Gnawd uch ben dedwydd diddos.

Gnawd wedi rhedeg ategwch.

Gnawd wedi Traha, Tramgvvydd.

Gnawd wedi traha trangc her.

Gnawd y cair colled o fraw.

Gnawd in el dryghin, hindda.

Gnawd in y bo cydwyr y bydd cyrch.

Gnawd in y bo dwfr y bydd brwyn.

Gochel dafarn, na ochel dalu.

Godrohid buw'ch oi phen.

Gofal din Duw a gweryd.

Goganu yt bwyd ai fwitta.

Gogy feirch pawb ar ni wypid.

Goleu freuddwyd a welir liw dydd.

Golwg Duw ar adyn.

Golwg din ar ai dyhudd.

Golwg pawb ar a garo.

Golwg serchog syber fydd.

Golwg in yd gwl, yd gar.

Golwg y perchen yw cynydd y da.

Gorddiwedid hwyr fuan.

Goreu camwrj, cedwid.

Goreu canwyll pwll (i.) ddn.

Goreu cloff, cloff Aradr.

Goreu cyngaws, gwas diog.

Goreu cyneddfau cadw moes.

Goreu defawd dajonj.

Goreu edifeiriwch, edifeiriwch gwerthy.

Goreu enw mi biau.

Goreu began fie mam ei lladd.

Gorew gwrthwyneb, gwrthwyneb cwys.

Gorew meddig, meddig enaid.

Goreu Newyn Newyn Arian.

Goreu Peddestr yw gau.

Goreu Rhann rhoddi cynnwys.

Goreu un tudded mantell.

Goreu ywr chwaereu, tra aller.

Gorlly Pen ci tra eler heibjo.

Gormes y taeawg ar ei gilidd.

Gormodd buw ar ebol.

Gormod Jaith yw twtt ar farch.

Gorug ei waith a fach y fachdaith.

Gwaddawd gwythlonedd gair blwng.

Cwae a ar hos o i giniau, o din dafad wedi glaw.

Gwae a dro o glun y glun ag ni feddo beth i hun.

Gwae a ddycco ei henwas ilys.

Gwae a fo ai fefl in ei fynewes.

Gwae a fynn melf er byrhod.

Gwae a gawdd Duw, n^ nys cred.

Gwae a gar, ac ni charer.

Gwae a gaffo ddrygair in jevange.

Gwae a wnel die i ddiawg.

Gwae a wl ei Arglwydd beuwydd.

Gwae ddigariad lls.

Gwaedlyd wrth faint die drachwedd.

Gwae Jevange a ei ddun Henaint.

Gwae'r mil ni wl y berchen.

Gwaethaf Anaf Anfoes.

Gwae ofervvr ychhynnhauaf.

Gvvaethaf Rhyfel, Rhyfel Teisban.

Gvvaethaf y stor o ferch.

Gvvaeth un Blaidd cloff, na dae Jach^

Gvvaeth vvaeth chwedl Wilmot.

Gvvaethvvaeth fell mab gafr.

Gvvaeth vvaeth y rhed y cwn.

Gvvae un din a vvnel cant in drst.

Gvvae wr a gaffo drygvvraig.

Gvvae t heb fab.

Gvvaith y nos y dydd y dangos.

Gvvala gvveddvv gwraig unben.

Gvvalt bonvvyn a gvvyn, estronion jawn.

Gvvan die bavvl in Hafren,

Hafren fydd hi fall gynt.

Gvvare gvveli ir.

Gvvare hen gi, a cholvvyn.

Gvvare mi trech.

Gvvartheg arall in Adnau, pyn bo chvveccaf ny bid tau.

Gvvareuid mab noeth, ni chvarae mab nevvynnog.

Gvvas da a ga if ei le.

Gvvas da Bronvvala ei Arglvvydd.

Gvvaith y gacon ymogelyd.

Gvvas i was y chvvibannvvr.

Gvvasgu'r haid cyn 'i cherdded:

(Vel) gwas gvvraidd cyn no'i gerdded.

Gwatwar y dydd am waith no^.

Gweddill mab Jaeh.

Gweddw creft, heb ei Dawne.

Gweddw Pwill, heb Ammynnedd.

Gweini Fawd hyd frawd is dir.

Gwelius nyd di ddolur.

Gweled dau beth ar un.

Gweled y glust ai lygad.

Gwell Corrawg na Chybydd.

Gwell egor na chynnwys.

Gwell am y Pared a dedwydd, nac am y Tan a dir^id.

Gwell Anghanawg mor, nag anghanawg Mynydd.

Gwell Aros o Alltudedd, nag Aros o fedd.

Gwell Bed na buchedd Anghenawl.

Gwell Benthig, nag Eisiaw.

Gwell bendith y tlawd, na Meistrolaeth y Cadarne.

Gwell bod in ben ar yr hyddod, nag in din ar y Jyrchod.

Gwell bodd pawb, nai anfodd.

Gwell bonnedd na taeogrwydd.

Gwell buarth hysp, nag un gwag.

Gwell byrhod ynghod na chod wag.

Gwell aros na mefl gerdded.

Gwell yw byrr eistedd, na byrr sefyll.

Gwell buw na marw.

Gwell cadw, nag olrhain.

Gwell cadw nodwydd, na colli'r cwltwr.

Gwell can muw ir cannyn, nag un muw i undyn.

Gwell car cell, na char pennill potius pell,

Gwell car in lls nag aur fs.

Gwell ceiniog na brawd.

Gwell cerdd o'i breiniaw.

Gwell ci a rodio na chi a eisteddo.

Gwell clutt, na thwll.

Gwell ceginiaeth, na brenhiniaerh.

Gwell creft, na golud.

Gwell cul cyfa, na byrr, anghyfa.

Gwell cybydd lle bo, na hael lle ni bo.

Gwell cyngor hen no'i faeddu (alias) Faddeu.

Gwell cynnyl, na chywraint.

Gwell cynnwys Cott nag un llidr.

Gwell chwarae nag y ymladd.

Gwell drygsaer na drygof.

Gwell Duw na dim.

Gwell Duw na drwg obaith.

Gwell Duw wrrh ei folawd.

Gwell Duw in gar na llu y ddaiar.

Gwell dwylo'r cigydd, na dwylo'r sebonydd.

Gwell die chymygwr, na gorchwliwr.

Gwell dyhudd na rhyssedda.

Gwell din drwg o'i gospi.

Gwell dynoliaeth na drych.

Gwell edrych ar ddyn in cachu, nag in cymmyny.

Gwell eidion gwerth nag un pryn.

Gwell eistedd ar y gwellt nag ar y llawr.

Gwell erlid Arglwydd, na i ragod.

Gwell began wraig a fo da genthi, nag a fo da iddi.

Gwell began hwyr na chan foreu.

Gwell gochell me fle na i ddial.

Gwell goddeu na gofal.

Gwell golaith na gofyd.

Gwell golud na chyssedd.

Gwell gorne gol^hi nag un glythni.

Gwell gwae fi, na gwae ni.

Gwill gwegil car, nag wyneb estron.

Gwell gwestai gwraig, nag un gwr.

Gwell gwichio'r colydd, na chochi yr ddeurydd.

Gwell gwr a ddaerh ymhen y flwyddyn na'r gwr ni ddaeth byth.

Gwell gwir na chelwydd.

Gwell gwr na gwyr.

Gwell gwr na'i rann.

Gwell gwr o'i berchi.

Gwell gwraig o'i chanmol.

Gwell hannar had, na hannar haf, or hauaf.

Gwell yw hen hawl, na hen alanas.

Gwell her bwyll, na Ttaha.

Gwell her weddwdod na drwg Briod.

Gwell iddaw a ddonier nag y fenhedder.

Gwell i ddyn y drwg a wyr, na'r drwg nys gwyr.

Gwell i'r gath and elid i hafotta.

Gwell i'r gwr aerh ar faneg i ytta, nag ar Fettan.

Gwell i wraig y Pyscodwr, nag i wraig y Gwynfydwr.

Gwell maen garw a'm Attalio, na maen llyfn a'mgollyngo.

Gwell mam godawg, na Thad rhieddawg.

Gwell marchwr gwerthu, nag un prynny.

Gwell marw na her nychdod.

Gwell marw na mynych ddifrod.

Gwell melf fod, na mefl gerdded.

Gwell migwrn o wr, na mynydd o wraig.

Gwell moes law, na moes fam.

Gwell nag, na dau eddewid.

Gwell nerth dwywrach nag vu.

Gwell Pen loyn in llaw, na hwyad in Awyr.

Gwell Pren Cyhuddiad, na din Cyhuddgar,

Gwell Pwyll nag Aur.

Gwell rhann ofn, na rhann Cariad.

Gwell peidiaw, nag ymddireidiaw.

Gwell rhy draws, na rhy druan.

Gwell synwyr na chyfoeth.

Gwell tewi na drwg ddywedyd.

Gwell teiliaw, na huriaw (al) heiliaw.

Gwell trwch, nag Arwyniad.

Gwell un Cynnhorthwy na dau ws.

Gwell un ceidwad na dau ymlyniad.

Gwell un Crywyn (al) croen, na dau fuddelw.

Gwell un dyrnod a'r ordd, na du a'r Morthwyl.

Gwell un gair ymlaen, na dau in ol.

Gwell in hwde, na dau addaw (al) ti gai.

Gwell well hyd Tarf, gweyth waeth hyd farw.

Gwell well pob Fynnedig.

Gwell ychydig began Rad, na llawer began afrad.

Gwell ynchysgod y gownen, nag heb ddim.

Gwell wyneb na gwaly.

Gwell y lle y Foes Wilmot, na'r lle y llas.

Gwell y llysg dau ettwyn nag un.

Gwell y tynn merch na Rhaff.

Gwell y wialen a Blycco, na'r honn a dorro.

Gwel yw'r dirwy, na'r Anrhaith,

Gwell yw'r March a fo in ei forddwid nag a fo'n ei breseb.

Gwerth fawr pob odidawg.

Gwerthu cig hwch a phrynnu cig much.

Gwirion pawb ar ei Air ei hun.

Gwiw Aur i ai dirper.

Gwna dda dros ddrwg vffern ni'th ddwg.

Gwnelid search saeth syberw.

Gneithr deuddrwg o'r uu.

Gwrach a fydd farw etto in Rhiw fabon.

Gwr ni'th gar ni'th gydfydd.

Gwr Pawb, in Haf.

Gwrthls i bob lls a fydd.

Gwrthod gwadd a mind i west.

Gwl yw hanes.

Gwynt a lf dda gwraig weddw.

Gwyw calon began hiraeth.

Gyrr fab ti a gai nag.

Gyrru bran y geisio tir.

Gyrru'r cn a gerddo.

Haeddu Annerch yw Caru.

Haeddu ar nith y Caccwn.

Hael Byrr llofiawg.

Hael ywain o bwrs y wlad.

Hael pob colledig ychenawg.

Haf hyd Calan, gauaf hyd fai.

Han bid gwaeth y ddrygcath O dorri ei Ewinedd.

Han bid gwell ci o farw y llall.

Han bydd ychwanneg y mor o byssodyn y dryw.

Hanes ty, hanes Coed.

Hanner y wledd, hoffedd yw.

Hap dduw, ddewryn.

Hardd pob newydd.

Haul in Jonuawr, ni mad welawr, Mawrth a chwefrawr ai dialawr.

Hawd Cymmod lle bo Cariad.

Hawdd cynny tan in hen Aelwyd.

Hawdd dyddio rhwng Falswr a chawnnog.

Hawd eiriawl ar a garer.

Hawdd nawdd y ngwascawd gorwydd.

Hawd peri y fingam wylo.

Hawd perri y fonheddig sorri.

Hawdd talu Fug y Fol.

Hawdd tynny gwaed o ben Crach.

Hawdd f a wl ei ^wely.

Hawdd clwyfo Claf.

Hawd yw digio, dig.

Hawdd yw dywedyd Pymtheg.

Hawdd Tynny Cleddyfbyrr o wain.

Haws dadleu o goed, nag o Gastell.

Haws dringo na disgyn.

Haws diwedid mynydd, na mined drosto.

Haws began hwyr, na chan foreu.

Haws gwneithr hebog o farcut, na marchog o daeog.

Haws llosgi ty nai adeilad.

Haws twyllo Baban, na twyllo gwrachan.

Hen bechod y wna Cywilidd newydd.

Hen hawdd gorfod arnaw.

Her Ammod nid a i dda (al) Annod.

Her chwedl anghenog.

Hiraeth am farw ni weryd.

Her eddewid i nag.

Her eisted i ogan al) diogi.

Her ei lygad a wrthgryf.

Her frydig, a yfo ei holldda.

Her fydd edau gwraig eiddil, (al) fusgrell.
Her fydd (i.) gybydd ei gabl.
Her gnif heb esgor, lludded.

Her grawn began newyn.

Her hun fael gwn in eglwys Ros.

Her ladrad y grog.

Her lyngeswriaeth y fawdd.

Her nychy Angeu.

Her pob aros.

Her saig a chi^lell aslen.

Her safyl i drwm.

Her weddwdod y fes^.

Her wynniaw y ^^irieidi.

Her y bydd blewyn in mind in nhin blaidd.

Her y bydd chwerw Alanas.

Her y bydd enderig ych dryg wr.

Her y byddyr in cnoi tamm^id cherw.

Her y bydd march in ebol bach.

Her y bydd y mud y'm horth y byddar.

Her yw'r m^b in y ceubren.

Hoedl Dn ni chas in y da.

Hoedl dn nyd gelyn ai Rhann.

H^ff y nmenyn trathan.

H^ff began Anghenog ^, goelio.

H^ff began bob ^dn ei lais.

H^ff began fadyn ei faw ei hun.

H^ff began ynfyd ei gnwppa.

Hoff tam mab ni charer.

Hwch o bob Heledd.

Hwyr waith anffynnedig.

Hwy cl^d na golud.

Hwyr y bid dn o'r dinieweddu.

Hwy clod na hoedl.

Hwyra dial, dial Duw.

Hydr gwr o gymmydogaeth.

Hydr ^ob co og ar i dom ei hun.

Hydr waed^, gwaedd wrth fro.

Hygar pawb wrrh y garo.

Hyd tra fych na fydd ofer.

Hyd in oed yr vndydd ydd a'r Grochan ar y ^an.

Hy P^wb ^r ei fabsant.

Hy Pawb in absen ofn.

Jach rydd, thyfedd pa gwyw.

Jawn ^hwedlawg m^b.

Yawn y bawb y gadwei hun.

Iro blonh^gen.

Iro t^n hwch a bloneg.

I'r pant y thed y dwr.

Lladd gwaed ai ddwylaw ac ai draed.

Llinio y gwadn, fell y bo'r troed.

Llais maen in oer ddwfr.

Llaw ddireid a ddidawl ei pherchen.

Llawen meichiad pan fo Gwynt.

Llaw frys llaw gywraint.

Llaw mab in llawes ei dad.

Llaw lan, diogel ei pherchen.

Llaw lliaws ar waith.

Llawer ^n a ddwg newyn ag er hynny gwraig a fynn.

Llawer am hawl, un a ddyly.

Ll^wer a weddill o feddwl chwannog.

Llawer car baw ymdeg.

Llawer gair in wynt a heibio,

Llawer gwr a wna cynnig drwg dros dda.

Llawer gwir drwg ei ddywedid.

Llawer dn mawrei eisiau, a eilw y gi gidag of.

Llawer or dwr a heibio'r rhod, heb wybod it melinydd.

Llawer rhwng Byw a digon.

Llawer teg drw ei ddefnydd.

Lawer hagr fydd.

Llawn i bobi golwyth.

Lleas pawb pan rydyngyr.

Lle bo dolur y bydd llaw.

Lle da i bawb, lle y carer.

Lledfryd lladd eigydymmaith.

Lled led Rydau.

Lleddid Mollt ni ddyfydd.

Lleilai lymmaid gauaf.

Lle ny bo dysg ni bydd dawn.

Lle'r ymgreynio'r March, y gedu beth oi flew.

Lles pawb pan feddyger.

Llettaf fydd y byswelyn o'i sathru.

Llewid bwyd ni bo beichiawg.

Llewid Cywestach.

Lliaws ei Anaf ni charer.

Llif in Afon, hinon fydd.

Llonn Colwyn ar arffed ei feistres.

Llonn fydd y llygodin, pyn fo't gath oddi garhef.

Llwfr lladd ei gydimaith.

Llwm o fann, a tham o dorth ni cheidw ei wyneb, is gwna gwarth.

Llwm tir ni phoro dafad.

Llwydog ag ynfyd ni ddygymidd*

Llwydd pob hen.

Llwyd yw'r farcnad.

Llwyth gwr ei gorwg.

Llyfyd y ci'r gwayw y brathyt ag of.

Llyad Duw ar Adneu.

Llygad cywranit ymhen Anghowraint.

Llymna fydd y gwayw o'i flaen.

Llymma'r onaes, llona'r ysgyfarnog.

Mab cof, gwr ath gof.

Mab heb ddysg, ty a lysg.

Maeddu'r dylluan wrth y maen.

Mae gwelion yr gwehinith.

Maen dros Jaen.

Magu whil^eryn ym mynwes.

May oer y wna yscubor gynnes.

Mal adain i walch.

Malaen a ddyly ei daith, (potius) y del in y daith.

Mal bwyd hely.

Mal ci a baw ar i ben.

Mal cogall gwraig fusgrel.

Mal cwn began gyfreion.

Mal dall in taflu ei Fonn.

Mal dau eurych.

Mal drygfon heddig, ai faich.

Mal aderyn ar y gaingc.

Mal dyrnod pen.

Mal eira Mawrth arbenmaen.

Mal Fonn Howell ap Goronwy.

Mal gwaith Emrys.

Mal gllwyth maer Ketti.

Mal llygad ymhen.

Mal llyn melin ar drai.

Mal llyfu mel o ddiar ddrain.

Mal mynn magod.

Mal raw ym miswail.

Mal Rhybudd hyd wemm.

Mal tynny Bach trwy goed.

Mal wy ar drosol.

Mal y bo'rdyn y bydd e^ lwdn.

Mal y cant y gwr.

Mal y ce^ych die fawl.

Mal y ci ar hwch.

Mal y ci pan llysg ei droed.

Mal y cwn am y much.

Mal ychenawg am y geiniawg.

Mal y gath am y Pyscod.

Mal y gwalch (potius) Gwallt, dros fin yr ellyn.

Mal y gwiddil am y yrry allan.

Mal y jar ai baw i mewn ai hwy allan.

Mal y llyn ar y maen.

Mal y llwyuog am yr ogfaeu.

Mal y llyffant dau yr og.

Mal y llygodeu dau Balf cath.

Mal y much amyfawydd.

Mal y Pysg am y dwfr.

Mal yr ab am ei cheneu.

Mal yr aran, am ei ddwygoes.

Mal yr eddi am y garfan.

Mal y Rhisg am y ben.

Mal yr hwch dan y fwyall.

Mal yr Hydd ar Blaidd.

Mal y saeth or llynin.

Mal y Tan in y Carth.

Mal y tan in yr aelwyd.

Mal y try'r ddor ar er cholyn a Try'r diog in ei welu.

Mam esgud, wna merch ddiog.

Mam vechan a ddifanw ei phlant.

Marchog a fydd wedi gwyb.

March a syrth o ddiar y pedwar carn.

March a wl yr yd, agny wlg cad.

March y ddiawg, ci i lwth.

Mawredig Pendefig Castle.

Mawrth a ladd, ebrill a fling.

Mawr yw torreth yr aflwydd.

Meddiant bychan, i ewyllys drwg.

Mefle yr gog ni lyfo ei law.

Mefle yr llygoden dn twll.

Mefl is gwawd o weddwdod her.

Mehefin haelawg, a wria medel ddwyreawg.

Mel ai gola.

Melina tlawd ei gwynos.

Melys lys pan losgo.

Melys gair da am y garer.

Melissa fydd y cig, po neffaf i'r asgwrn.

Melys moes etto.

Melys pan gaer, chwerw pan daler.

Mi adwen Iwrch er nas daliwf.

Mi a gawn a fai began fie mam ag ni chawn ai die gai yr llann.

Much ddysg nawdd mab hwyad.

Moes pob tud, in ei dud.

Moled pawb y rhd, mal y caffo.

Moliant gwedi marw.

Morw in jevangc, mab in arffed.

Mud Arynaig y lafar.

Mursen fyddo wr mal o wraig.

Mwy na Breuan din foel.

Mwy nag un ci, am cyfarthodd i.

Mwy nag y da'r Blaidd, nyd da ei ysgell.

Mwy nar afr er da^gos ei thin.

Mwy na'r bell dan yr humog.

Mwy ua'r cyfryw yr hwch.

Mwy na'r Rhygen in y rhych.

Mined ar gogr yr afon.

Mynych hebraid, bod ar wall.

Mynnych y'r Praidd bod ar wall, pan fo tywyssog yr enderig.

Mynych y daw drwg fugail.

Mynych y syrth mest o gesail.

Nag y'r wadn, hanbydd gwaeth.

Nag vntreu na dau, ni nawdd rhag angeu.

Na choll die hen ffordd, er die ffordd newydd.

Na chred fyth, ferch die chwegrwn.

Na ddata die d wrth gyngor die drwddedawg.

Na ddeffro'r ci a fo'n cysgu.

Naddiad die foch na ad in rhwy.

Na ddyfanw die beriglawr.

Na ddos (al) na ddrych a gwrth wrth y faint.

Na ddrygddyn, is gwell ci da.

Na fyd die elyn die gymydawg.

Na fyd die wraig die gyfrin.

Na tram oni'th wthier.

Na fydd frad fugail i'r ath gretto.

Na fydd oreisteddgar in ystafell.

Na fyd rhy fwythys lle galler die hepgor.

Na fynych gut llwfr.

Naill a^ llwynog, ai llwyn Rhedyn.

Namyn Duw nydoes un dewin.

Nattur yr hwch fydd in y Porchell.

Nawd maen hydwaelawd.

Na werth er Byrhodedd.

Na wrthod die batch pan cynhycier.

Neges Penddefig in Rhad.

Neffa fi bawb i nessaf.

Nes y mi fie nghrs na'm Pais.

Nes na choel.

Nes nes y llefain y'r dref.

Nes penelin nag arddwrne.

Neuadd pob diddos.

Neu fegaist ath ddirpwy.

Newydd bennyg, in henfon.

Newyd y Gwewyr.

Newid y Penweig.

Ni ad annoeth ei orfod.

Ni ad diriaid ei garu.

Ni eill neb namyn ei allu.

Ni ein dau fras in un sach.

Ni eing mewn llestr on'dei lonaid.

Ni elwyr Daw, hyd dranoeth.

Ni elwir Cwyrain ni chynnydd.

Ni elwyr in euog, onis geirydd.

Ni ellyr Cwbl o Angwbl.

Ni erchill enaid ni ddiwig.

Ni farn dn a charu hyd ymhen y flwyddyn.
Ni fawrd liolchir rho^d gymmell.

Ni faw^ha y neges, ni Ragwyl ei les.
Ni fawrhier tra oganer.

Ni fydd vchenaid hey i ddeigr.

Ni fynn drygwraig ddal ei chwd.

Ni fanno Duw ni lwydd.

Ni fynn y sant mor Caws.

Ni hena Ceudawd.

Ni hena ei ddige^d.

Ni hena hawl er i hoedi.

Ni hena Meddwl.

Ni ladd Cawad, mal y dygnnull.

Ni ladd i gyfaddeu.

Ni las cennad erioed (et)
Ni leddir Cennad.
Ni ludd Amraint Fawdd.

Ni ludd Bendith, ddiffaethwch.

Ni lwgt y da ar y llall.

Ni lwydda'r Bendith ni haedder.

Ni lwydda Cell, goreisteddwraig.

Ni lwydda golud a wader.

Ni lwydd gwenyn i geiliawg.

Ni lwydd hill Corph Anniweir.

Ni lwyddodd and a dramgwyddodd.

Ni mad newid, ni cheiff elw.

Ni much ddiail mefl merydd.

Ni much wna da dn segur.

Ni nawdd eing llyfrder rhag llaidd.

Ni nawddcaledi rhag bucho dedd.

Ni nawd difenwyr Cywraint.

Ni wnawd vchenaid rhag gwael.

Nid cynnefyn Cath a Cebystr.

Ni pharrha Cywydd namyn un flwyddyn.

Ni phell anrheg yr tlawd.

Ni phell digwydd Afal ag Afall.

Ni phella'r Ehegr neb tlaud.

Ni Pheru cig bras in wastad.

Ni phis bonheddig ei hun.

Ni phrinna gath mewn Fettan.

Ni ro^dir gwla y fud.

Ni rown erddo seren bren.

Ni rygelyr y dryglam.

Ni saif Gogan ar gadarn.

Ni sengis yr ch du ar die droed.

Ni thag namyn wy.

Ni thal dim Cennad.

Ni thal dim drwg ymread.

Ni thawdddleder ei haros.

Ni thelir gwyti tafod namyn i Arglwydd.

Ni Thelir saeth i Ebawl (potius) ni ddellir faeth eb awl.

Ni Thorres Arthur nawdd gwraig.

Ni throf in sy ammwlch potius Ammhwyl, or Arnwig.

Ni thf Egin ym marchnad.

Ni thynnaf ddraen o droed arall, ai doddi i am troed fie hun.

Ni thirr pen er diwedyd vndeg.

Ni thyrr llestr, ni bo llawn.

Ni welais lam rhwydd i Ewig.

Ni weles da in nh ei dad a Hoffes da in nh ei chwegrwn.

Ni wisg cain, ni wisg liain.

Ni wna'r llygoden ei nth in llosgwrne y gath.

Ni, wna'r mor waeth na boddi.

Ni welir eisiau'r Fynnon onid el in hesp.

Ni which ci er ei daro ag Asgwrn.

Ni wl diriaid arno fai.

Nyd a wl din ai Pyrth.

Ni wl dn dolar y llall.

Ni wyr dn, nid el oi d.

Ni wyr hawdd fod in hawdd, onid el hawd in Anh awdd.

Ni wyr ni welodd, ni feidr, ni ddysg.

Ni wyr pryderuys, prydero, ac nys prynno.

Ni wyr in llwyr, namin llyfr.

Ni wyr yr hwch lawn pa which y wag.

Ni wyr r jar nessaf ir Ceiliog.

Nid eath rhy her i goed.

Nid a Cosp ar ynfyd.

Nid a Cynnig Arglwydd i lawr.

Nid adchwelawg gair.

Nid adwna Duw a wnaeth.

Nida drwg fall y del.

Nid adwyth rheg ni haedder.

Nid a gait i adwedd.

Nid a gwayw in gronyn.

Nid Ammwys a wnel warth.

Nid angof Brodyrdde.

Nid anudon, ymchwelid ar y da.

Nid a Post a'r ynfyd, ar ynfyd y ddaw a'r y Post.

Nid a red a gaiff y budd.

Nid a ar for, nid ymlefair.

Nid ar redeg, y mad Aredig.

Nid swllt dan ddiebryd.

Nid benthig ni hanffo gwetll.

Nid bwrne nid baich.

Nid bwyd rhyfedd i dirieid.

Nid cau Fau ar lwynog.

Nid Cof began yr offeiriad ei fod in glochydd.

Nid Cyfothog and ai Cymmero

Nid cymnaint dleddyn ai drwst.

Nid cynnefin bran a chanu.

Nid Cyttun hun a haint.

Nid Cyweithas and Brawd.

Nid chwrae a fo erchill.

Nid chwarae, chwarae a tan, nag a dwr nag a Haiarn.

Nid da rhy o ddim.

Nid dedwydd ni ddy fo Bwyll.

Ni bwyd heb weddill.

Nid diswrth neb diog.

Nid diwyd heb nai.

Nid drwg Arglwydd namyn drwg was.

Nid drwg dim a wneler drwy gyngor.

Nid drygwr wrth ddryg-wraig.

Nid edrichyr in lligad March Rhodd.

Nid Eglur edrych in nhywyll al Towill.

Nid ei arfaeth a birth dn namyn ei dynged ai Herbyn.
Nid of a birth din ei debig.

Nid of a ddwg dn ei ddrwg Ammynedd.

Nid of a gaiff, pawb a fynn.

Nid of yw hwn y mis nis gwnn.

Nid eiddaw Duw a watter.

Nid eiddun dedwydd dyhedd.

Nid eilir hael ar ni bo.

Nid erchis bwyd and ei brofi.

Nid erchis yr hen Gyrys, onid a fai rhwng y newidiau.

Nid ergid ni chywirer.

Nid eris Maldraeth ar Owein.

Nid esmwyth ymgyflogi.

Nid gair, gair Alltud ar Gymro.

Nid gwaeth yr ymladd dig, na glue.

Nid gwradwydd gwell hau.

Nid gwely heb wraig.

Nid gwell dim na digon.

Nid gwell gormod na rhy fechan.

Nid gwell i'r Rhoddwr, nag ir lleidr.

Nid gwiw gwylder rhag eisiau.

Nid gwr namyn gwrth muni.

Nid hawdd blingo ag elestren.

Nid hawdd chwythy Tan, a blawd yngenau.

Nid hawdd deu ddaw or un ferch.

Nid hawdd lledratta ar lhidr.

Nid hawd tynny mer o bost.

Nid hawd di fenwi Cywraint.

Nid hawdd gwlana ar yr afr.

Nid Jach and a fo marw.

Nid Jangwr neb ar ferwyn.

Nid llafurus llaw gywraint.

Nid llai gwerth mefl, na gwerth Fawd.

Nid llywiawdr namyn Duw.

Nid mal aur da ydd a'r du.

Nid mawr in the gerid os Rhwy a erchid.

Nid mi, nid ri, llewadd Cigy Ci.
Nid moel gwr, in aros gwallt.

Nid mwy gwaith Cog na chanu.
Nid mynechdid Maerioni.

Nid mined a ddel eilwaith.

Nid neges heb farch.

Nid newid heb fach.

Nid oedd Hoff cyn ni ddifenwyd.

Nid ei gorph ydd ymre y gwybedyn.

Nid oes ar vffern and eisiau ei threfnu.

Nid oes Cambren and Camran.

Nid oes Cywilydd rhag gofid.

Nid oes gantho yr ewinedd i ymgrafy.

Nid oes gwl rhag Elusen.

Nid oes neb heb i fai.

Nid oes o ddim and fell y Cymerer.

Nid oes rhodduamyn o fodd.

Nid oes wad dros waesaf (or) waethaf.

Nid oes wyledd, rhag anforthedd.

Nid Prophwyd neb in ei wlad ei hun.

Nid rhaid dodi cloch am fwnwgl yr ynfyd.

Nid rhaid dangos dirieid y gwn.

Nid rhaid y ddedwyd and ei Eni.

Nid Tan heb eirias.

Nid tebig neb i Neast.

Nid sorri yt ar die Fam.

Nid treftad Anrhydedd Arglwydd.

Nid trymmach yblewyn llwyd na'r gwyn.

Nid twyll Twillo, twyllwr.

Nid un anian jach a Claf.

Nid un-naws gwyros a Gwern.

Nid vnfrd ynfyd a chall.

Nid wrth brd gerid gwragedd.

Nid wrth ei big y mae prynnu cyffylog.

Nid y bore y may Canmol diwrnod teg.

Nid y fam a ddiwaid ar bawb (or) am bawb.

Nid ydiw'r bd and by chydig.

Nid ymgais dirieid a da.

Nid in un didd adeiladwyd Rhyfain.

Nid ysgar anghenawg ag anhyfryd.

Nid ysgar dirieid ag anhyedd.

Nid ystyr cariad cywylidd.

Nid ymgar y llatteion.

Nid ymweis a fo parch.

Nid ystyn llaw ni rybuch calon.

Noswyl jar gwae ai Car.

Nuggiau began i Cawn.

Traethawd o Athronddysg Gymraeg.
Ni wyr, ni ddysg.

Ni ddysg, ni wrendu.

Ni wren i and Astud.

Nid Astud, and dedwydd.

Nid dedwydd, and a atto ei garu.

Ni ad i garu, and difilain.

Nid difilain, and vfydd.

Nid vfydd, and tawedog.

Nid twaedog, and goddefus.

Nid dioddefus and synwhyrol.

Nid sinhwyrol, ynd cydwybodus.

Nid Cydwybodus. and cowyr.

Nid Cowyr, and meddylgar.

Nid meddylgar, and serchog.

Nid serchog and Cerddgar.

Nid Cerddgar, and ymddiddangar.

Nyd ymddiddan, and am DDuw.

Treuthawd arall nid Anwiw ei ysterried.
Nid Cyngor, and Tad.

Nid gweddi, and Mam.

Nid ymgeledd, and chawer.

Nid Cadernid, and Brodyr.

Nid galluog, and Cefndyr.

Nid Cenedlog, and Cyfyrdyr.

Nid Hoiwder, and cleddyf.

Nid amddiffyn, and Tarian.

Nid hyder, and Bwa.

Nid brwydr, and Gwewyr.

Nid lldd, and dager.

Nid Ty, heb wr.

Nid Tan, heb gyff.

Nid gwely, heb wraig.

Nid ynfydrwydd, and Carriad.

Nid Tlodi, and clefyd.

Nid gwall synwyr, and ymrysson.

Nid Methiant, and musgrelli.

Nid Golineb, and Meddwdod.

Nid Doethineb, and Tewj.

Nid diogi, and syrthni.

Nid syrthni, and Pechod.

Nid Pechod, and Tentasiwn.

Nid Tlawd, and nas cymmer.

Nid Cyfoethog, and syber.

Nid gwressog, and yr haul.

Nid oer, and y lleuad.

Nid Amlder, and y ser.

Nid buan, and y gwynt.

Nid Moliannus, and Cy^tundeb.

Nid Cyfoeth, and Jechyd.

Nid yspail, and gwynt.

Nid prudd-der, and Marwolaeth.

Nid llawenydd, and nef.

Nid anhyfryd, and vffern.

Nid Hyfrydwch, and gyda Duw.

Nid Athrylith, and llawen.

Nid diddim, and trist.

Nid dedwydd, and diddrwg.

Nid diddrwg, oud di bechod.

Nid di bechod, and fanctaid.

Nid sanctaidd, and diwybod.

Nid diwybod, and di synwyr.

Nid Hudoliaeth, and Jeuencgtyd.

Nid yeuengctyd, and ennyd Awr.

Nid twill, and y bid.

Nid prudd-der, and Eisiau.

Nid Haelaethrwydd, heb ^digon.

Nid Am heuthun, llawer.

Nid somedigaeth, and gwraig.

Nid difyrrwch, and Milgi.

Nid llawenydd, and March.

Nid digrifwch, and gwalch.

Nid ofnog, and digasog.

Nid digasog, heb achos.

Nid dioddefgar, and does.

Nid does, a ymryslon.

Nid mwynder, and merch.

Nid Mapcar. and difilain.

Nid Milain and Taeog.

Nid Taeog, and Cerlyn.

Nid Cerlyn, and Afrowyog.

Nid afrowiog and Jangwr.

Nid Jangwr, and o Arferau.

Nid hawddgar, and difalch.

Nid difalch and trugarog.

Nid trugarog, and deddfol.

Nid Marchog heb Fonn.

Nid Peddestr, heb fwa.

Nid chwannog, and Mab.

Nid esgeulus, and gweinidog.

Nid Cywir, and Ci.

Nid melus and Pechod.

Nid chwerrw, and Pennid.

Nid ymdirried, and Cydymmaith,

Nid Hoffder, and Ertifedd.

Nid glan, and y Pysg.

Nid Cyfrinnach, and Rhwng dau.

Ni wyr, and a weles.

Nid yspys, and a ymofynno.

Nid Cyfarwydd, and a wypo.

Nid Call, and y garwo in y gof.

Nid dysg heb synwyr.

Nid gwen hieuthus, and Merch.

Nid Afiethus, and diofall.

Nid gwenwynig, and Cath.

Nid Fyrnig, and Ci.

Nid creulon, and Llew.

Nid Cyfrwys, and Eppa.

Nid dichellgar, and Llwynog.

Nid ystrywgar, and ysgyfarnog.

Nid Ethrylithgar, and bytheiad.

Nid diswrth, Byrrhwrto.

Nid Brwnt, and Fwlbert.

Nid moethus, and Bele.

Nid bowiog, and gwiwair.

Ni Esgud, and dyfrgi.

Nid Esmwyth, and Pathew.

Nid diffaith, and ystlym.

Nid Bonheddig, and Hd.

Nid Khwiog, and March.

Nid gwar, and chapter

Nid Taeog and Eidion.

Nid Rhadlawn, and dafad.

Nid llysseuinwraig, and Gafr.

Nid Tomlyd, and Bwch.

Nid teg, onid Paun.

Nid Rhyfygus, and Bronfraith.

Nid serchog, and Eos^

Nid Balch, and Alarch.

Nid Siw, and y By.

Nid Sionge, and y Dryw.

Nid Cyfannedd, and Ceiliog.

Nid Afradlon, and Jar.

Nid ynfyd, ondd Gwydd.

Nid gwrol, and Ceiliog du.

Nid mwynaidd, and Cog.

Nid llechiad and Cyffylog.

Nid anllad, and Aderyn y To.

Nid Musgrell, and ceiliagwydd.

Nid glwth, and Mulfran.

Nid Anferth, and Garan (al) Grur.

Nid Trais, and Tan.

Nid Rhwystyr, and dwr.

Nid ysgafn, and wybr.

Nid Trwm, and Dayar.

Nid diarswyd, and Arho's.

Nid dewr, and gwyr.

Nid Calonng, and a gyrcho.

Nid ofnog, and a Foo.

Nid llwfr, and a lecho.

Nid anfeidrol, and dim.

Nid dim, and Duw.

Ychawnneg or Cyffelib.
Nerth Eryr in ei gilfin.

Nerth Un icorn in ei gorne.

Nerth sarph in ei chloren.

Nerth hwrdd in ei ben.

Nerth Arth in y Breichiau.

Nerth Tarw in ei ddwfron.

Nerth Ci in ei ddanr.

Nerth Twrch in ei affach.

Nerth ysguthan in ei hadenudd.

Nerth Llew in ei gynffon.

Nerth gwraig in ei Thafod.

O Achos y Fammaeth a Cusenyr y mab.

O bob ceinmyged, Cyffes oreu.

O bob Fordd o'r Awyr ydd ymchwelo'r gwynt y daw glaw.

O bob Trwm, trymmaf henaint.

O bychydig y daw Llawer.

O bydd Llawen y bugail, Llawen Fydd y Tylwyrh.

O bydd neb in ol, bid y Bawaf.

O bydd which Bawd na sowdl.

O cheri di ny'th garo, collaist a geraist ynno.

Och wr and Aethan in wragedd.

O chyrradd fry, ni ddaw obry.

Odid a Ardd.

Odid a ddyrry Atteb.

Odid y gatwo ei wyneb o ei sywed

Odid Archoll heb waed.

Odid da di wara fun.

Oddid difro diwyd.

Odidawg a fo didwyll.

Odid din teg dianaf.

Odid Eddewid a ddel

Odid elw heb Antur.

Odid ar gant Cydyramaith.

O down ni, ni addown.

O down ni er pedwararddeg, ni ddown erpymtheg.

Oed y dn, ni chanlyn y da.

Oedd rhaid deall i alltud.

O Englyn ni ddaliaf Haid.

Oer pob pob gluyb.

Oer yw isgel i'r alanas.

O flewyn i flewyn ydd a'r Pen in foel.

O for ag o fynnydd, ac a waelod asonydd; y denfyn Duw dda i ddedwydd.
Offeren pawb in ei galon.

Oegfaenen yngeneu, henwch.

O gywyr deb y galon, a dywaid y gwirion.

O her ddyled, ni ddylyr ddim.

O hoenyn i hoenyn ydd a'r March in gwt

O lymmaid i lymmaid, y darfu'r Cawl.

O lladd y gath lygodyn ar frys hi ai hs ei hun.

O mynny nodi yr j wrch ti a fwri naid amgen.
Oni byddi cyfarwydd, cyfarch.

Oni byddi grf bydd gyfrwys.

Oni chefi gennin dwg fressych.

Oni heuir ni fedr.

Onid March is Casseg.

Or ddeuddrwg goreu'r lleiaf.

Os gwr Mawr Cawr, os gwr bychan Corr.

O Sul i Sul ar forwyn in wrach.

Pa ham y bydd Cul y Barcud? am ysglyfaid.

Pa ham y llf y Ci y Maen am nas gall ei yssw.

Pa le in y fuddai y mae'r Enwyn.

Pan bwyser arnad, tynn die draed attad.

Pau dywyso'r dall ddall arall y ddau a ddigwydd ir Pwll.

Pan dywysso'r enderig ei Braidd ni bydd da ir yscrubl y didd hwnnw.

Pan el lladron i ymgyhuddo y caiff cywyrriaid ei da.

Pan bo addoed ar y geifr, y bychod a ridi ir

Pan bo ingaf began ddn, ehengaf fydd began dduw.

Pan fo Culaf yr ch goreu, fydd yngwaith.

Pan fo Melierydd arben Malaria, y bydd Es^ud asgell gwippa.

Pan fo tecca'r chwhare goreu fydd peidio.

Pan gaer ni hi, ni cheir mi ha.

Pan lladdo duw, y llad in drwm.

Pan gysco pawb ar gylched, ni, chysg Duw pan ryd gwared.

Pan yrrer y gwyddel allan, infyd ydd heurir ei fod.
Pa waeth y dring^y gath, in el torri ei ewinedd.

Pawb a chennyrth Anrhydedd.

Pawb a drais ymhais ei dad.

Pawb a gnith eedor ynfyd.

Pawb ai chwedl gantho.

Pawb in llosgwrn ei henfon.

Pawb in y gorphen.

Pei diwettai tafawd a wypai geudawd, ni biddai gymmodawg neb rhai.
Pei y gath fyddai gartref, gwaeth fyddai ychwi.

Pen Carw ar ysgyfarnog.

Pen punt, a llosgwrn dimmai.

Pen saer pob perchennog.

Pen tros bawb lle ai Carer.

Perchi gwr er ei fawed.

Pettwn dewin, ni fwttawn furgyn.

Pilio wy cyn ei Rostio.

Pob Cadarne, gwan ei ddiwedd.

Pob cyffelib ymgais.

Pob darogan derfyd.

Pob dihareb gwir, pob coel celwydd.

Pob dryll ydd a'r aing in y pren.

Pob edn, aedwin ei gymmar.

Pob gwlad in ei Arfer.

Pob llwybr mewn Ceunant, yr un Fordd a redant.

Pob llwfr llemmittor arnaw.

Pob peth in ei amser.

Pob traha gorphen.

Po dyfna fo'r Mor, diogelaf fydd y llong.

Po hyna fo'r Cymro, ynfytta fydd.

Po hynaf fo'r d tebycca fydd y fd.

Po mwya fo'r drafod, mwy a fydd y go^fod.

Pay mwyaf fo'r brs mwya fydd y rhwystr.

Po mwya fo'r llanw, mwya fydd y trai

Pa tynna fo'r llinnin, Cyntaf y tyrr.

Pren ynchoed arall biau.

Prn hen. prn eilwaith.

Prn tra flingych.

Pwy bnnag sy heb wraig, sy heb ymrysson.

Pwll a ddyli padell.

Psgotta ymlaen y Rhwyd.

Rhag anwyd ni werid canwyll.

Rhag mynned un llog o'r ty.

Rhag newyn, nid oes wledd.

Rhagnythed Jar cyn dodwi.

Rhag trymfd ochyd ychenawg.

Rhaid y segur waith i wneithr.

Rhaid wtth amhwyll, Pwyll parhawd.

Rhaid iw croppian cyn cerdded.

Rhan druan Rhan draian.

Rhan Gorwydd o dad.

Rhan y gwas o eig i jar.

Rhannu rhwng y bol ar cefn.

Rhedid Car began orwaered.

Rhedid maen in i chaffo wastad.

Rhewydd pob rhyfeddawd.

Rheiddawg ychenawg ar Fo.

Rhin tri din cannyn ai cliw.

Rhodd ag adrodd rhod bachgen.

Rhodd fawr ac addaw fechan.

Rhodd Ifor ar ei gappen.

Rhodd gwr Erging.

Rhodd i hen nac adolwg.

Rhoi'r carr o flaen y March.

Rhoi'r ordd dan y celyn llwyn.

Rhuthr ci o griberdd.

Rhuthr Enderig ar Allt.

Rhuthr Mammaeth.

Rhwng y ddwy ystol ydd a'r din i lawr.

Rhwy fu rhy fychod gynnen.

Rhwydd ni bo dyrrys.

Rhybidd ofnawg, a dal y ci.

Rhybydd y ddedwydd.

Rhy brynnwys rhy Erchis.

Rhy buched baw gares.

Rhy buched dryg-fab ei fam.

Rhy din, a dyrr.

Rhy lawn a gyll.

Rhy vchel a syrth.

Rhy gas, ry welir.

Rhy foddawg, rhy fawr a wl.

Rhygas pob rhywir.

Rhygu pob rhy fychod.

Rhiw i fab Jwrch lammu.

Sef a ladd a gyhudd.

Sef a lwydd y fefl ei chelu.

Sef yw, Blaidd y bugail.

Says mlynedd a doroganyr dallu.

Siarad cymmynt a mab says gudyn.

Siccraf ywr siccraf.

Sieffrai pieu 'r troed, fieffrai pieu'r fwyall.

Siommi Duw, a Mynach marw.

Son am Awst, wiliau'r nadolig.

Sw^th pob diog.

Sychy trwyn y swch.

Symmydaw, addet rhag drwg.

Tabler i lyfau, Tafarn i chwedlau.

Tafawd a dorr asgwrn.

Tafawd aur ymhen dedwydd.

Tafawd gelyn ar dannedd, ni chydfain ar gwirionedd.

Talwys a ryfeichwys.

Tawedog tew ei ddrwg.

Tebig oedd twd i gyfrwy.

Tebig oedd Hwch i garegle.

Teg pob dianaf.

Teg pob Hardd.

Teg tan bob tymp.

Teirgwaith y dywaid mursen bendith dduw ^n y t.

Teir gwers merch rhewid.

Telittor gwedi Halawg-lw.

Terfyn Cywiraf cyngwystl.

Toll fawr a wna toll fechan.

Tra fo'r borfa in ryfu y bydd Marw 'r March.

Tta fo'r Ci in Maesa, ydd a'r ysgyfarnog yr Coed.

Trafferth ch hyd Echwydd (al) hwyrr.

Traha a threisio gweinion a ddifa'r Eti feddion.

Tra rhetto'r og rheded y freuan.

Tra rhettor og, rheded y ddraen glwyd.

Trech ammod, na gwir.

Trech anian nag addysg.

Trech Duw na drwg obaith.

Trech gwan Arglwyd, na chadarn was.

Trech tynged nag Arfaeth.

Trengid golud, ni threinge molud.

Trengis a fremnis (al) Frefwys.

Trickyd, Cyn ni wahodder.

Trickyd wrth Barch, ni thrig wrth gyfarwys.

Trist pob, galarus.

Troi o bobtu it berth.

Troi'r Gath in yr haul.

Trychni nyd haudd ei ochel.

Trydydd troed in hen yw Fonn.

Tw al gwhwa farch Benthig.

Twyl trwy ymddiried.

Twillid rhyfegid, rhyfugaid.

Twyllwr yw gwobr.

Tyfyd Maban ny thf ei gadachan.

Tyfod Ebawl o hd garr.

Tyfyd Enderig o'i dorr.

Tynghedfen gwraig, ott.

Tst yw'r chwedl, yr Englyw.

Tywyll bol hyd pan lefair.

Tywynnyn greynyn i rann.

Tu ny fin Duw ny llwydd.

Uchenaid at ddoeth.

Uchenaid gwrach in o'll ei huw'd.

Uu arffed a fag gant.

Un Came Uiogi a wna dau a thri.

Un llaw ar dan, Can llaw ar wlan.

Un llawiog fydd Mammaeth.

Un-llygeidiog fydd Brenin yngwlad y deillaid.

Un geiniawg a ddyly Cant.

Un pride ar Iar in yr yscubor.

Untrew o garchar.

Unwaith yr aeth yr Arglwyddes i nofio hi a foddodd.

Uwch pen na dwy ysgwydd.

Wineb trist drwg'a Ceri.

Wythnos y llwynog.

Y bendro wibwrn.

Y bol a bil y Cefn.

Y budd a ladd i ludded.

Y chydig laeth a hynny in Enwyn.

Y chydig in aml a wna llawer.

Y Ci a fynner i'grogi a ddiwedir ei fod in ladd defed.

Y Cn a gerddo a yrrir.

Y Cyntaf a ddel yr felin, maler yddo in gyntaf.

Y Cyntaf ai Clybu, dan ei dn, y darfu.

Y Cyntaf in og, Cyntaf in grymman.

Y dafn a dyll y garreg, nyd o gryfder and o fynnych syrrhio.

Y diwedda ar ddiwedder ar yfreuan ar hwnnw y dielir.
Y dn a werthodd in d ymha wlad y caiff letty.

Y diw Corn, heb yscyfarn.

Y fefl a wneler in rhin Nant, hi a dywynnyg yngwydd Cant.

Y felin a fall fynw ddifr.

Y ferch a ddel yw phrofi, hwyr y daw wi phriodi.

Y gath a fo da ei chroen a flingir.

Y gwr in Ceifio y gasseg, ai gsseg dano.

Gown a roed y gannwr, ar nid a'e Gown o dy'r Gwr.

Y law a rydd a gynnill.

Y March a fram a ddwg i Pwn.

Ymbell Amh^uthan wna Mefl.

Ymguddio ar gefn y gist.

Ymhob daioni y mae gobrwy.

Ymhob drygioni, y mae Pechod.

Ymhob dewis y mae Cyfyngder.

Ymhob creft, mae Falster.

Ymhob clwif mae Perigle.

Ymnob gwlad y megir glue.

Ymhob din y mae Enaid.

Ymhod Enaid y mae deall.

Ymhoh deall y mae Meddwl.

Ymhob me ddwl y mae naill ai drwg ai da.

Ymhob rhith y daw Angeu.

Ymhob rhyfel y mae gofall.

Ymhod Pechod y mae ffoledd.

Ymrysson ar gof in in Efail.

Ymrysson a does, ti a fyddi doethach.

Ymrysson a Fol ti a fyddi Folach.

Ymchwelid Duw ei law yngauaf Nos.

Y Mud a ddywaid y gwir.

Y naill flwyddyn fydd mam i ddyn ar llall fydd ei elldrewin.

In ceisio yr blewyn glass, y boddod y gasseg.

Y neb y saetho ar edrybedd, a gyll ei saeth.

Ynfyd a gabl ei wrthban.

Y naill wenwyn a llad y llall.

Y neb a fo a march ganddo, a gaiff march ym menthig.

In y croen y genir y Blaidd, y bydd marw.

In y lle y bo yr da, y rhoir ag y Tyccia.

Yr Aderyn a faccer in vffern in uffern a mynn drigo.

Yr Afr ddu a las.

Yr hai a laddoedd r hwch.

Yr hwch a dau, a foyty'r soeg.

Yr hwch a which, is hi a ladd.

Yr oen in dysky'r ddfad i bori.

Yr un Asgwrn a dal.

Is da felin a ballodd.

Is dir drwg, rhag drwg arall.

Is dir i hael a roddo.

Is drwg y degrees Ewin, ni ffortho un gilfin.

Ysgafn llwyth a glud Coed.

Ysgafn y daeth, ysgafn yr aeth.

Ysgrubl dirieid in eithaf.

Is gwell Can mesur, na chan trwch.

Is ar bawb y bryder.

Yssu bwyd drygwr, heb ei ddiolch.

Yssu bwyd yr ynfyd in y blaen.

Is marw a fo diobaith.

Ystum llawgar in rhannu.

Yspys y dn o ba radd y bo ei wreiddin.
Casbethau gwyr Rhufain.
Ny ad y mor hyd ei wregis.

Ny ad y Mor mawelus ynndaw.

Ni budd llwfr lan ehelaeth.

Ni bu Arthur and tra fu.

Ni bu eiddil, hen in was.

Ni bu esgynny gorwydd oddiar geffyl.

Ni bu rygu, na bu rygas.

Ni ffyddra llaw din, er gwneithr da idd ei hun.

Ni buttra llynwyn.

Ni byddaf na shoryn dwyn na chappan glaw.

Ni bydd Allt heb waered.

Ni bid atglaf o glafur.

Ni bydd frawd heb ei adfrawd.

Ni bydd Budd o ychydig.

Ni bydd Bual, o losgwrn y Ci.

Ni bydd cymen neb oni fo ynfyd Gyssefyn.

Ni bydd chewedl heb ystlys iddo.

Ni bydd dal Ty ar fynach yt.

Ni bydd dialur di ofan.

Ni bydd Cyfoethog, ry gall.

Ni bydd diriaid heb hawl.

Ni bydd does ni ddarlleno.

Ni bydd di un dau Gymro.

Ni bydd gwan, heb ei gadarn.

Ni bydd gwr wrth ddim.

Ni bid hanawg serchog byth.

Ai bydd marw march er un nos.

Ni bydd myny glwen gwraig drygwr.

Ni bydd Moesawg merch a gliw lef liog Cei ei Thad.

Ni bydd myssyglawg maen oi fynych drafod.

Ni bydd neb llyfn, heb ei Anaf.

Ni bydd Preswil Pasg.

Ni bydd rhy barch, rhy gynnefin. Ni, Fa.

Ni bydd y dryw, heb y lyw.

Ni chaiff chwedl nid el o'i die

Ni chaiff rhy An foddawg rhy barch.

Ni char bvwch hesp lo.

Ni char Dofyd diobaith.

Ni char gwaith, nys gorddyfno.

Ni char morwyn, mab oi thref.

Ni charawdd Grist, ai croges.
Ni charo ei fam, cared ei lys fam.

Ni cheffir hoedl her er ymgeledd.

Ni cheffir gwastad y bell.

Ni cheffir gwaith gwr began was.

Ni cheffir mwy na chod y wrach.

Ni cheiff dda ni ddioddefo ddrwg.

Ni cheiff dda nid el in namwain.

Ni cheiff ei ddewis gam a Foo.

Ni cheiff Parch, ar nys dylo.

Ni cheiff Pwyll nys Pryno.

Ni cheidw Cymro, oni gollo.

Ni chein swedydd in vnfron.

Ni cheir Afal per, ar bren sur.

Ni cheir Bwyd Taeog in Rhad.

Ni cheir da o her gysgu.

Ni cheir geirda heb Prd.

Ni cheir began y llwynog and i groen.

Ni cheir gwlan rhwiog ar glun Gafr.

Ni cheir y Melus heb y chwerw.

Ni chel dricdir ei egin.

Ni chel grudd Gystudd Calon.

Ni chel ynfyd y feddwl.

Ni cherir Newynnog.

Ni cherir in llwyr on i ddelo yr wr.

Ni cheliw Madyn ei ddrygsaw ei hun.

Ni chlyw wilkin beth nys Mynn.

Ni choelir y moel, oni weler ei ymmenydd.

Ni cholles mam Ammynedd.

Ni cholles ei gifrif, a ddechruis.

Ni chred eiddig er a dynger.

Ni chryn llaw ar fa^-ddysg.

Ni chwenych Morwyn Mynach Baglawg.

Ni chwery Cath dros i blwydd.

Ni chwsg dedwydd hun foreu.

Ni chwsg Dw pan rydd gwared.

Ni chwsg Gofalus, ag e gwsg Galarus.

Ni chwsg gwag fol.

Ni chwyn Ci er ei daro ag asgwrn.

Ni chwyn yr Jar, fod y Gwalch in glaf.

Ni chi feirch Angen ei borthi.

Ni chill yr Jar ei hirnos.

Ni chymmer lu ceid ar Fo.

Ni chymmyd dedwydd a dadleu.

Ni chymmyd diawl, a duwiol.

Ni chyngain began gennad gywilidd.

Ni chyngain gwarthal ddewis.

Ni chynny gweinid arall.

Ni ddaliaf ddilys, o ddn.

Ni ddaw Cof began lwth ei grach.

Ni daw Cof i'r chwegr ei bod in waudd.

Ni ddaw drwg i un, na ddaw da i arall.

Ni ddawr Crosan pa gabl.

Ni ddawr Buttain pa gnwch.

Ni ddeil yr Eryr Ednogyn.

Ni dderfydd cyngor.

Ni ddiddawr Newynnog pa yfo.

Ni ddelir coed o vnpren.

Ni ddiffig Arf, as was gwych.

Ni ddiffig Esgus ar wraig.

Ni ddiffig Fon ar ynfyd.

Ni ddiylch Angen ei borthi.

Ni ddwg newyn Mam weision.

Ni ddigymmydd Medd a chybydd.

Ni ddyly Cyfrairh, nis gwnel.

Ni ddyly drygfoly namyn dryg yssu.

Ni eill Barnu, ni wrandawo.

Ni eill Duw dda ei ddireid.

Ni eill din ochel tynged.

Ni eill gwrach gwared yw phen.

Pethau anweddus.
Brenin heb ddoethineb. Marchog heb Provedigaeth. Arglwydd heb gyngor. Gwraig
heh Teistrolwr. Cyffredin heb Gyfraith. Gwasnaethnyn heb ofan. Tlawd Balch.
Cyfoethawg heb Elusen. Jstus heb gyfiawnder. Escob heb ddysg. Hen ddyn heb
dduwioldeb. Jeuange heb ostyngeiddrwydd. Does heb weithredodd da.


Casddynion selyf ddoeth.
Gwr Nis gwypo ac nis disgo. Ni bo gantho ai gwsaneitho, ag nas gwasnaetha y
hun. Yr hwn a delo yddo lawer ac ni roddo ddim. A ymryssono ai Arglwydd oni el
y Bwll. A fo Rhyfelwr llesk, ag na ddymuno hedddwch o flaen Rhyfell. A oganno
arall am y beiau fo arno ei hun. A dybio fod in well na neb ar bob peth ag
yntef in waethaf oll. A Echwwyno bymmaint ac no bo gantho ai Talo. A roddo ei
gwbl ag a fo ei hun heb ddim A addawo bob peth ag na chywyro ddim. A fygythio
bawb ac ni bo ar neb ei ofan. A ddywetto lawer ac ni wrandawo ar neb. A Archo
bob peth ag ai welo, ag ni chaffo ddim. A addefo ei rin iw elyn, neu yr neb y
gwypo nas cel. A fasnacho bob peth heb prynny dim. A dyngo lw anudon heb neb in
ei gredw. Ai rhoddo y hunmewn anvrddas, er vrddas i un arall. A welo lawer o
foe^au a chelfiddydau ag ni ddesgo ddim. Y brynno bob peth, ag heb ennill dim.
A gasao bawb, a phawb yntau, Na chretto neb, na nab yntau. A ymyrro ar bob peth
heb achos. A geiso gel, began ddyn dietihr. A gretto i bawb er na's adnappo.
Awnelo in un dydd, fell na allo ddim drannoeth. A ymddirietto i Rodd. A gaffo
ddewis, ag a ddewisso yr gwaethaf. A debycco orfod o falchder. Agasao i les er
afles yw gymmydog. Ni wnel da ag nis gatto i arall. A ymgadarnhao mewn dtwg
olwg. A dybio i fod in gall ag ynteu in angall. A ddysgo lawer ag ni wyppo
ddim, A adawo i gyd ymmaith heb achos. Awnel drwg ag na bo Edifar gantho. Tlawd
a wrthotto grynodeb. A wyppo gyfraith Dduw ai orchyminion, ac a ddadleu in ei
herbyn er gwobr. A ymffrostio or gwilidd ei hun. A ddyrmigo Duw a dn.
Adreuliais a fu fau, Medd yr Enaid. A roddais a fu fau, Medd yr Enaid. A
gedwais a gollais, Medd yr Enaid. A neccais sydd ym Colli, Medd yr Enaid. Dysg
in graff a welych. Cadwyn graff a ddysgwych. A drodd a peth y fedrych. Ni wedd
in bencenedl and gwr. A ymladdo gidai gar, ac a ofner. A ddywetto gyd a'i gar,
ac awrandawer. A fechnio gyd a'i gar ac a gymmerer. I achaf Cig llwdn gwyllt
Iwrch. Llwdn dof Twrch. Edn gwyllt Pettris. Edn Dof Jar. Pysgod Mor llythi.
Pysgod dwr Croyw, draenog a Brithill.


Tri Cadarn Bid. Arglwydd yr hwn sydd faen dros Jaen. Drud ni wnel and a Fynno.
Di ddim na bo dim i gael gantho.


Says gynnedef ynad. Mud a llafar, Drud a Byddar, ynfyd, ofnawg, a Goleichiawg.


Traethawd o Athronddysg.
Trecha treisied gwanna gwiched.

Cais ym-hell er mwyn cael in agos.

Ychidig sy rhwng y Came ar Cymmwys.

Goreu bonedd, Bonedd arfer.

Pob un a addrodd a glyw pan del adref.

Ni lwydda un blaid, in bid Duw in y Blaen.

Gwell Hoo gardottyn, na hw leidrin.

An ffawd i bawb in ei gylch.

Goreu cysgod, cysgod tir a goreu gair yw gair o wir.
Yr neb fo arno, anwyd, chwythed y tan.

Rhaid y gelwyddog fod in gofiadur.

Y darawo y ysgwydd ym bob Rhiw fe Caiff hi'n friw or diwedd.

Tri pheth sidd anhawdd i nabod dn derwen a diwrnod.

Tri Rwystr pen Fordd, Cnoien Merchwen a Gwiwair.
Na fynno i hun,
Na wnaid i un.
Ni hoena meddwl henwr, and i gorph dderfydd yr gwr.
Gwaethaf Marchwr gwryw Gwen.

Dau beth ni raid Arbed, ychydig a llawer.

Mawl drygair, drygwr.

Cae'r stabl gwedi mind y March ir maes.
A ddywetto pawb gwir a fydd.

Dn a feddylia, Duw a lwyodraetha.

Pawb a wl ei gilidd nid oes nemaur a wyr Cyssur ei gilidd.

Gofyn i nhad wyfi leidr.

Os Cybydd a fydd y fo, fe gyll gwnaed oreu ag allo.

Goreu Cyfrwistra i ddyn, ei wadu ei hun.

Na ad yr Nos waethaf, fod, in ddiwaethaf.

Na chais Elw O Esculustra.

Na chais find yr nef^rth fod in chwerw.

Na chais fwrw coel ar die gelwydd.

Ledled rydau waethwaeth deddfau.

Came glowed, na Came ddywedid.

Nid a sy a saif.

Ni pharha swydd and Blwyddyn, na fydded Angall deall Din.

Y mae'r bid wedi magu'r Bendro.

Ni bydd tra ha, in dra her.

Din sy'n Grydd fan, Duw sy'n Gwrando.

Griffudd ni bu erioed i grasfaith, i dynu gwraint o din Gwrach.

Auriog Cin buwch.

Hawdd yw Cael drwg, ag anodd mind odiwrtho.

Cint oneddwl merch, na Milgi.

Mingauad pob Mirsen.

Po gwnna fo y' din, dua fudd y fontin.

Dranoeth gwedi r' digwil.

Rhowir Caen drws, wedi r defaid find allan.
Allan o olwg, allan o feddwll.
Chwerw in y genau, melus in y galon.

Ni Cheir y melus heb y chwerw.

Cof pob diwaetha.

Gwell y fam glyttioge nar Tad goludog.

Geill march farw in aros ir borfa.

Cont vnwaith, Canwaith y ceir.

Ameu pob drwg dybus.

Cynfigen y ladd i pherchen.

Breddwyd gwrach wrth ei huillus.

Chwerthin pawb ar i fantes.

Nid Twill Dwillo Twyllwr.

Ar ddechre yr gist y mae eiriach y blawd.

Drwg y Rhodd ni thal i gofun.

Ni Thyccia Rhybudd in drwch.

Nid oes gin gerdottnn and in gwd.

Nid nesach at Ange wlad arall na chartre.

Ni ddiowrid dim and vffern.

Yr hen y wyr, ag Ifanc y debig.

Ni ddoeth gwlad erioed in fud.

Drwg y Caidw diawl in was.

Mwya Trwst Llestri gweigion.

Yr hwch y dai y fwyttu r soeg.

Cint Cath ir gell nag allan.

Po nessa at yt Eglwys pell a oddiwrth Brodwys.

Nid Cynefin Cath a chebnst.

Nid gwiw mor wylo am laith a gollo.

Cyn edifated ar gwr y laddodd in filgi.

Gwas diog Cenad dda in gyrchu Ange in wrda

Nid Cadarn and Castle.

Cint Crippil nai was.

Credigrwudd gittun felun ai fam.

Cyn siongced ar Bioge.

Nid rhaid in Bechod gyfiadur and Cydwybod.

A fo aml i feibion budd gwag i goliddion.

A fo aml in ferched nid eiff dim ir wared.

Ni wnelo gyngor i fam gwnaed gyngor in Lys fam.

Adar vnlliw a head ir vnlle, (al) pob Cyffelib ymgais.

Gofyn in mam wife leidr.

Ir pant y Rhed y Dwfr.

Na well ar fai and y fedrych ymendio.

Nid oes help ir perh a bassio and tewi son a gathel i ddo.

WHo has God has all, who has him not has less then nothing.

The later that Gods vengeance is,
The heavier far, and sorer it is.
Three things are hard to be known, a man, an oak, and a day.

While through all places thou do rome, yet have thy eyes still toward home.

Red wine, hogs flesh and smoke are three enemies to the eyes.

The tail will always turn with the dog.

Greater was the fright then the fray.

An old dog will not sport with a puppy.

The lambs skin comes to the market as soon as the sheeps.

From sea, from hill, and from the flood,
God sends the fortunate some good.
There is no stint upon alms.

The horse looks not on the hedge, but the corn.

Many words to a fool, half a word to the wise.

An unluckie man shall lose do what he can.

A gentle man gently cools his passion.

Were not for hope the heart would break* yet hope* yet hope.

The Saxon shites in his brich,

The cleanly Britain in the hedge.

Howell is as good as Heilin.

Who so complains without cause, should have cause given him to complain.

Some complain, to prevent complaint.

The bad husband's hedge is full of gaps.

The misfortune of the fool is just, because it proceeds from his own rashness.

A fair promise makes a fool merry.

Who so steals an egg, will steal a hen.

None bewares of him that is in his grave.

Let him that is the stronger oppress; let him that is the weaker cry out.

Let him that would have praise, be dead first.

Let him that would have h^alth be merry.

Each man would give his guess.

At the fall of the old, the young man laughs.

Faults are thick, where love is thin.

Necessity will buy and sell.

The unskilful or (simple) will tear his breech over the close stool.

You must judge at the latter end of a thing.

What is not wisdom (or discretion) is danger.

Who avoids not smoke, avoids not his enemy.

Who so cannot endure a servant, must be his own servant.

Who so feeds not his cat, let him feed his mice.

Every man is a master in his own house.

Greediness breaks its own neck.

Blessing on the sow that owns the fat.

Flowers before May, better they were not.

The more a string is stretched, the sooner it breaks.

An old wifes dream runs according to her wish.

Scatter with (...) hand, gather with two.

You must not count your yearlings till May Day.

The valiant is harder then a stone.

A man has a hundred friends, and a hundred foes,

If the Mare be lame, her Colt will be lame.

Shut the breech after farting.

The true friend is discernd in the distress.

Late leave argues a business.

A snarling dog has a ragged coat.

The dog that hunts every beast, is not good at any.

Correct the Bear in presence of the Lion.

Scratch a clowns tail, and he will befoul thy fist.

An ague in the aged is certain death.

Though the day be long, it will have an evening.

Though nine Nights may be concealed, nine Months cannot.

A lazy shepherd is fellow to the wolf.

As good foot it, as bestride a staff.

Play, but hurt not; jest, but shame not.

The naked youth may play, the hungry will not.

February will blow the snake out of her nest.

The fool will laugh, when he is a drowning.

Great and frequent debate, and to bring forth a mouse.

Well does the spit become the rasher.

Show me the calf, show me not the milk.

Two hungry meals will make the third a load.

Good is God, and long is Eternity.

Good is the stone with the Gospel.

The lucky man will find a thorn in his pap.

Lewd is the frog under ice.

Each bird is well pleased with his own voice.

He shall be slighted that is out of sight.

An old man's end is to keep sheep.

Every man's promise is his debt.

Lend to the naked, and you may go whistle for it the next day.

The man is wise, while he holds his peace.

It Is a sorry stake, that stands not the first year.

Ill does the devil preserve his servant.

Bad is the way, that is trod but once.

Bad is a bad servant, but wors being without him.

Bad is the thing, that is not worth the asking.

Every man's neighbor is his looking-glass.

A work ill done, must be twice done.

God will distribute the cold, as he distributeth the clothes.

There will come ice for the frog.

It is tedious parting with a thing we love.

A sharp April kills the pig.

One scabby fellow knows another.

A man knows when he goes, not when he returns.

A good aunt is a second mother.

You will easily prevail with one that loves you.

He was slain that had warning, not he that took it.

Neither for peace nor for war, will a dead Be gather honey.

A sorry son is active in another man's house.

The easiest work is to miss (or fail.)

Every poor man is a fool.

Fly from bad land, not from a bad landlord.

A man's wealth is his enemy.

The active man will be a Lion, till gray hairs come.

Forbear the alehouse, forbear not to pay.

Dispraise the meat and eat it.

Every man's eye is upon that he loves.

The nimblest footman is a false tale.

Woe be to him that goes from hip to hip, and has nothing of his own.

Woe to him that brings his old servant to a Court of Justice.

Woe to him that loves, and is not loved.

Woe to him that has a bad name in his youth.

Woe to him that seeks his landlord daily.

Woe to the beast, that never sees his owner.

Worse and worse, like the son of a goat.

Woe to that one man, that makes a hundred sad.

The day will discover the work of the night.

It is an easy work to beware.

A friends frown is better then a fools smiles.

An importunate beggar cannot keep.

To cut a witth with a beetle.

Naturam expellas furca, etc.

After long languishing death.

A lion when old may be conquered.

To fish in a sheep-coat.

Too much cunning undoes.

Fortune out-veyes cunning.

A bird in hand is better then two in the bush.

Clear conscience a sure card.

A friend in Court, etc.

Good, though long stayed for is good.

A fair face and a foul heart.

To think his grandmother a maid.

To give pay with a ladle.

No more then the he-goat to the kill* Antipathy.

Better one braggadocio, then two fighters.

Better one pair of feet, then two pair of hands.

Woe to the Owner of a weak bow.

Woe to the servant of a weak Lord.

Multitude conquers greatness.

It is easy to cut out thongs of another man's skin.

Howell is generous at the Countries charge.

The play of an old cur with a whelp.

The tongue will cause beheading.

Easier to censure then do.

The bald will not believe till he sees his brains.

It is easy to draw blood out of a skabbie head.

The kinsmans ear will hear it.

A woman's commodity stronger then a rope.

He that has the daughters cunt, will have the mothers heart.

Long aiming, long shiting.

A woman's hand is the pricks whe^stone.

Enough is as good as a feast.

Enough for each man what he can manage.

Compare only with thy compeers.

Who complains without cause, may have cause to complain.

Spare the surety, spare the principal.

A small cause may produce much grief.

Cause without cause.

The besome ought still be busy.

Without a good horse, to take the field is folly.

Complain for fear of complaints.

A house dry over head is happy.

Long sorrow moulds misery.

A cat may be crammed with crumbs.

Each owner his own.

A child knows who licks, but not who loves him.

Open-mouthed hedges speak bad husband.

Feed liberally, find laborers.

The wise and the fool have their fellows.

Get a son, get a sword.

Great promises, small performance.

A fairly, makes a fool laugh.

The gray is ripe for the grave.

The Heart brayes for the brook.

The Heart being fed takes the field.

The lewd and naught love long nights.

Whom death kills, none recalls.

Should not bad council be cancelled.

He that bears the bag may fill his belly.

He that steals an egg, will steal a nagg.

Teach the child a Sunday, he will remember it a Monday.

If the Lion go to the field, God will be his shield.

He that goes to Court without errand, may bring home an arrest.

Who at horse play would learn skill, at home should leave his skin.

Tine before Kine.

Soon get up, soon go down.

A heart heavy, is not healthy.

A Nurses tongue privileged to talk.

She silent and dull, Domb.

A lary fool, hands foul.

His mouth foully sweats that swears.

Wild and wanton.

He that has store of bread, may beg his milk merrily.

Many boxes make empty bellies.

If much honey hap, thou may put it in thy pap.

A lawyer pleads all pleas, or he that sticks at the first course on all
occasions shifts to discourse.

No plea to what God pleases, or whom God loves in his grave lies.

An Impudent shaver will hardly be saved.

He that scolds at sea, will do the like on land.

He that is uncertain when he goes, will do no good ere he goes.

An old man's best praise is prayer.

Gallant means, gallant men.

The dead out of view we need not avoid.

He that dies for threats with his own T. should be tainted.

The nearer the Porch, the further from Paradise.

Might overcomes right.

To refuse in want, waste.

To give where there is no want.

A twisted lace is not easily loosed*

Once prime man, now no man.

No power, no respect.

Gods will be done.

Who would be commended, let him die first.

If thou would try friends, be sick.

Be hearty, be healthy.

Have the haft, have the blade.

A cuff in the morning is remembered in the evening.

Gods word uppermost.

Who loves not his mother, will hardly love his stepmother.

That love is slender which regards not a friends slander.

Love young sparks, love their sports. Or love the yoke tine, love what
belongs thereto.

Who loves her husband most, love his mother m.

Plundered ware, never thrive.

Close and near will cleave in need.

The great crow does cry, the young says I.

Out of a small complaint, grows a greater.

Over complaint, no complaint.

Rise to plead, lose thy place.

Learn if thou can, and keep it.

Alms more valued then venison.

Offend God, offend man.

Out of sight, out of mind.

Good ale the key of cuuncel (or)

The barley corn is the hearts key.

Patience is Knowledge's lifeguard.

Passion, a note of bad nature.

Every guest can guess.

Love me, love my dog.

Chide the birth for the salt bag.

The old man dies, the young man danceth, (or)

The old does fall, the young laughs his fill.

Plenty of all a tanning.

Plenty of honny a straining.

Where love fails, we spy all faults.

B^ood soon stands on a white steed.

Blood is not hid in a scabby head.

Unrich, unready.

Strange dishes, dainties.

Ignorance denies the conclusion.

Covenant breaks custom.

Breach of custom contempt.

A time for meat, and a time for Mass.

A time for all things.

Ill bred, ill bruised.

Bruise in the sinews, death in the veins.

A hollow man, an ill messenger.

Choler waves kindred.

The dull sees no more then the dark.

An angel in the field, a devil by the fire.

Want will make the old trull to trot.

Want buys and sells also.

Want cancels commands.

Want does rouse the old to run.

Ever lewd, never beloved.

Needy and poor, are nobile Par.

What wants in part, is imperfect.

If fool, ever foul.

Cold will never catch heat.

Death makes speed unexspected.

Grim death buys full dear.

The more fame, the greater shame.

A fool may be shamed in shiting.

A churlish friend never free.

Unhopeful, unhappy.

No confidence in cowards.

A churl, unstaid and stubborn.

If God says, it must be so.

What a babbler says* is fawcy.

Set thy dog, but thou sit down.

Drive the dog to the dayry.

Rash in kind, inconstant.

Cold face calls for fire.

Whom I love, I like.

Patient and silent.

Mock and be mocked.

Soft fire makes sweet malt.

Wise words and great seldom agree.

Give much and mildly (or) divide commons kindly.

Plow while thou art, plow ere thou art not.

Suspend till the end.

A man of power may compel.

Where none choose it is the Lords escheat.

Every one is Lord of his own.

God save a weak Lords servant.

Money is said, to buy and sell.

If foul fail, use fair means.

He that avoids not smoke, may smart.

The meadow is shorn with the shears.

Where no discretion is, there is danger.

He that cannot bear with his servant, must serve himself.

Give the cat meat, or feed mice.

He that will not give what is dear, shall not have what he desires.

Who cannot fell trouse, will never fell a tree, (or) if young a cow, old a
coward.

A sluggard is going still, but stirs not.

Power weakeneth the wicked.

Power descrieth a thievish crew.

Smoke a bad sign they say.

A sign has no Bucks side.

A bad bow, that will not bend.

An orle chip, in a cats cheek.

A clean bosom, a beesome (or) blessing.

A bone bad meat for an old man.

Every fault breeds fear.

Teach a Dog to the Dayrie, and he will go thither daily.

A fighting skit, a foul scab.

A sober man, a soft answer.

In his own house each man is master.

Envy breeds backbiting.

All would gain gold.

A great bruise brings grief.

That rasor's keen that shaves clean.

Few by signs know what thou say.

If thou play the fool stay for a fellow.

If thou do not well, beware.

What God sends, man censures.

What ere is veyled, will be revealed.

He that makes the song, is the author sure.

Who does well, deserves well.

Who bad will do, swears deeply too.

Deceive and be deceived.

Each bad one, waits a bad hour.

Much drink makes drunk.

Greediness breaks Nicks neck.

Old trot, why would break thy thigh?

The brave steed fails that founders.

Pride (Sir Poor) without support.

Pride far-fetchd, fie.

Bread and butter one bit is.

A lazy calf laughs coldly.

Divide and diminish.

The shallow channel chimes.

Thimb thumb say some.

If all had what they liked, then none would long.

A Lions heart boyls with heat.

Anon, anon, quoth the Kite.

The hogs grace, is the grease.

A kind heart happy.

A whore sometimes sheddeth tears, (or) a shameless lock sometimes leaks.

A rash man roves.

Anger notes bad nature.

A rash lout laughs loud.

Up start and new come, bids himself welcome.

A greedy gut would all get.

Cry and howt, the deaf cries ha.

Blood no base spot on a spear.

Green, where the army graze.

Be healthy, be hilarous.

Be jovial, be joyful.

Sick language says I languish.

Great ones bark boldly.

One cannot mourn, and be merry.

A thief most stout, best keep out.

The valiant charge wisely, not wildly.

A woman quelled will be quiet.

Bad words make a woman worse.

Brave, though ill bred.

Lick well and look well, (or) feed well and fight well.

A mad part to be malapart.

Play the cat, even to the tail.

Blossoms e're May, not good some say.

The more wolves in shape, the worse for the sheep.

The Carres will have a second course.

Long sick, at length sink.

The elder you die, the more you dote.

The parents presence, the young man's prison.

Lineage pleads, well lined takes place.

The hens foreshew a morning shower.

A woman merry, a red morning.

When the string is streightest it breaks with stretching.

A rich gull gathers, and the son scatters.

An old wife dreams what she dreads.

All fiddlers are fellows.

Rash judgment soon spent; (or) a fools bolt is soon shot.

Victory wound^, and death a^tidates.

Spend with one, spare with both hands.

The devil take the cursed cat.

To wake a dead corpse with cold water.

Make goose pond, of ducks puddle.

Cast brine salt into the sea.

A p^t brimful and foul.

A dwarf may be a monsters mother.

Few fairie-mouth'd.

The deaf man has his mate.

Short sweetness breeds long sorrow.

A good tale never too tedious.

Good and loved, not long lived.

Twisted third fears no threats.

Do well and have well.

The mill that talks has toll.

Look for him that bears the bell under his steeds belly.

Look for musk in the myskin.

Fair summer greets, yet it makes winter grievous.

A man stout, firmer then stone.

Ever heavy never hearty.

The Welsh knows well the Saxons good will.

Wantons never keep counsel.

A hundred love, and a hundred leave me.

Aged and ached.

The dog does toil, so does his tail.

A hundred sweethearts in a house.

He sings odd, without an ode.

The Romans old, Odium's.

Owen Cyfeyliogs villains, or Odium's.

A friend bars nay, in time of need.

What man hates here, God hates in heaven.

A sharks haunt soon hated.

A bramble tupp turbulent.

Truth not loved, where not allowed.

The mare lame, the colt the like.

The bumme hole's shut, when the fart's shot.

What ere is new is noble, (or) if new prised then praised.

The loss being great, look the mothers recruit.

Passion wardeth inward.

Provide for thy ship, or sink.

If thou be skilful, reveal not thy skill to a fool.

The sea is the Lords cell, or cellar.

Young and tame, sharp in time.

Praise a good woman I pray.

Hard reading a dumb man's meaning.

Well girt, well goes.

Love thy sister notwithstanding disasters.

Death's capp's capacious, (or) death to all sorts pertains.

A snarling cur has a scurvy coat.

Hunt all games have no gains.

A message too late lost.

Without penny penury.

Light knit, easily unknotted.

A horn heard soon, though hardly seen.

See to thy seed.

A leg thought a thigh.

My thought runs where my love rests.

Call God near, when thou do neeze.

Know a lout, by his load.

The hen flaunts on the floor.

A good cow ever, a milking runs over.

He loses many a good bitt, that striveth with his betters.

Hang the poor hen.

The Bear pressed in the Lions presence, (or) strike the man before the master.

Rub a churles tail he will give thee a turd, (or) speak a churl fair, he will
spit in thy face.

The dog bites hard, the bone's harder.

Pinch worse then pincers.

A fool laughs a life.

The hen's beak her mind does speak, (or) the face without shows what is within.

An old man is sick, Death ensues.

Shake a row like a reed.

A short sword a fools supersedeas.

Once steal ever stayed, make much of a steer, when the rest is stolen.

Fall hard and clean, not on foul clay.

Death falls the rich in the ridge.

Strange! a cock tied in a cowes tine.

Goods long tried, not to be trusted.

Hasty, yet wise and wary.

Though day be long night comes at last.

What is nine days kept close, nine months discloseth.

Eat with a Lords son, play not with his Lordship.

As long as the cart calls it carries.

All ought to plead for the plow.

The colt stout as the stallion.

A greedy gut would all get.

Old wives medicines, sins.

The hand finds, where it feels.

Be a friend to the free.

Contemporaries, good and gaudy.

The rich man sells, the poor man seals.

The heart and pate, in plots copartners.

Confession free.

Wranglers, brats and brawlers.

Man's years as Iron.

As easy as the mouse trips in the trap.

As soon does the lambs skin as the sheeps skin march to the market.

A plea after judgment.

The old if not fond, offend not.

At ^ome the churl keeps the chair.

See the beggar looks big.

The kil^^ sooner burns then the barn.

A wa^c^man hies to stand on high.

As good not stir as ride on a staff.

As good the penny as the penny worth.

He and she single may associate.

Contend about fare, at length fast.

Advise a lout too late.

Unlucky wags long for wars.

Youth loves to go hence, then longs to come home.

Play not such in a satchel.

Play and grieve not, jest and disgrace not.

The dog plays a while with the whelp.

So does the sow with the pig also.

The naked plays now, the hungry plays not.

I played now a game, I had well nigh forgot.

Cold laughing lies under ice.

February ^^ging, never stints stinging.

Wine is sweet, till the ^eckoning greet.

A churles feast is sweeter, to make up the meeter.

Where Lovers like they laugh.

The fool never droops, but laughs though he drowns.

Praise innate to nature.

Never cease searching.

Good for the wealthy to want sometimes.

Good that the teeth guard the tongue.

Pleading after judgment.

The mountain fumes, a mouse comes forth.

It Is well God sends cursed kine short horns.

The spit and meat well met.

Him good man call that pleases all.

Good what is musty, from bad pay-masters.

Set the dog upon the hog.

Keep house while thou can.

Give over when thou can not.

All faults if unfortunate.

A stranger they say, blind on his way.

Every chase, chance.

Set dogs upon Doegs.

Give a churl an inch, he will take an ell.

Folly to teach Tutors.

Show heavens seat to sinners.

Show the calf but not the curds.

Two hungry meals belike, makes the third gorbelize.

Have great care, in works curious.

Stand to thy ways, wave wavering.

Man's wrong remembered long.

God is good, everlasting, long patient.

Good the sword, with the word.

Mishaps in haps, happy.

Happy state loves high esteem.

The Lord is great, freely gives grace.

He is happy sure, who is loved when seen.

Rough is not easily wrought.

In capite, is love the best tenure.

Once begun, half done.

Half the way to know the way.

Faiths best hold in the heart.

Carriage carries the respect.

Beauty is clear in good clothes.

The best pedigree, school degree.

Learning bald, if not bold.

Half way rod, when ready.

Towns keep their chairs, maintain their Charter.

Lest music err, give ear.

No gift well, without good will.

A jealous eye does prophecy.

Choose yoke for Ox, or Ax.

Choose foul hag, of both foul hogs.

When all is done, go dine.

Ever a churl voids his chamber.

Happy son that's void of sin.

The poor man flee's, ^he rich man fley's.

The foul frog dies under ice.

God arms the harmless.

A friend, a fiend if offended.

Never loose if sedulous.

One God, enough for one good.

Too much music proves tedious.

Fie, enough of figs.

A little play enough to please.

Ill favored, ill famed.

Each bird it is said loves to hear himself sing.

Fetch the people from the piper.

Grief looks sleepy, and be slubber'd.

Care keeps the wise awake.

Good cloths and closest.

A young swaggerer, an old beggar.

An old man neat news.

A town faithless, foul and falls.

Pawse and let the water pass.

The bitter slanders his betters.

The industrious strives to stand both by sea and by land.

A knave lets pass peace.

Not espied despised.

Long without meal or meat.

A madmans stroke sad and sudden.

The end of the old is to keep sheep in the fold.

More careful then the wolf, for my own: (or) If thou would not miss thy
own message.

A mad puppy meets thorns in his pap.

All prone to promise.

Put thy hand upon thy heart.

Lend to the poor, late thou will be paid.

A seholler may be gulld thrice,

A soldier owl'd but once.

For wise he may pass, that can hold his peace.

On all things by all means measure.

Heart of cares hardly cured.

Long comes at last.

The dear may pay double.

Wary to set, wise to sell

Twice swear pay dear.

A bad guest admitted makes something missed.

A bad Court where none come, (or) A Court void unless invited.

Were all know, most are knaves.

That sin is foul that spreads fame.

Bad to care no more then for to morrow.

A ^ad one, as another.

The devil a most bad master.

Bad is bad, worse worst of all.

That path's poor, but once trod over.

Bad servant bad, worse if none had.

Stark naught, that is not worth asking.

That office is servile, that's not worth the serving.

Thy neighbor as thy self, see.

Do it good, or do it again.

Each wild wanton.

A bawble in the hand of a booby.

Wanton pranks seldom prosper.

God will feed the simple.

Man does say, God does send.

Heaven's mine, if God does say, Amen.

Gods Power, rights the poor.

Woe frog, ware frost.

Loose t^y sense that will not see.

A frantic pate, loses his part.

All ought long for Art and learning.

God ever sends in season.

The days are bad, God send better.

To persecute odd, and odious.

No joy in a jail.

Grievous to leave, whom I love.

A surety owes, and not owes.

Beg of the free, until a frey.

The old plays with the Owl.

A foul abuse long abides.

Much liquor makes eloquent.

To and fro, all out of frame.

Teach the wise with gentle strains, teach the wild with stripes.

Teach an old horse to pace home.

To speak that, he knows not what.

A cruel friend, Death's his end.

Marry ^ere home, malice far hence.

Give God the first fruits free.

If April swell, ware swine.

A churl rue's, that he was royal.

Women's vows double and vain.

Scapes scrapes together.

The old cat knows what to make of milk.

The secrets now seen and noised.

The dog shall yet see summer.

Have at the curds, be chary of the cheese.

I know when I go, but not when I come again.

The cat knows and licks whom she likes.

Each man's worth is praised by his works.

The cat would have fish, but not wet her feet.

Open thy bag to receive a pig.

The world is a wide parish.

The fool does lift his hand full swift.

A good aunt, almost a mother.

Spare thy fist, spare not thy foot.

A suit, where loved not lost.

If not loved spare thy labor.

Without power poor.

Wary that takes warning, not wary beware.

A man dreads what he dreams.

There neeeds no battery upon an open Butterey.

A Maid cracked, adieu credit.

The hand and foot felltws.

Where akinne there call.

One to a hundred, a hundred to one.

Great loaves empty barns.

Trot hag to the mill, if thou would have meal.

Name without fam^.

The swinehaerd swayes over swine.

A bad race, draws great disgrace.

A heart that fears, protracts the field.

To strike is bad when none do bid.

Be it peace or be it war, the dead Be does little care.

The busy brat sculks abroad.

The easiest thing, to do nothing.

All horn, no ear at all.

A servants friendship froath.

A lowse never loved.

The poor though wise a VVittall, (or) All that fail fools.

A far way for foreigners.

Saint Faglans way to heaven winds.

The Be has a fine way to her hive, as the other to Heaven.

Fly from bad land, but not from a bad Lord.

Refuse a wife with one fault, and take one with two.

L^st, the worst night last.

A poor virtue to upbraid poverty.

Ill speak, ill speed.

A stormy wife an evil stench, (or) her crooked words do crash wind.

A woman's words though vile, must prevail.

If a woman stirs, expect a storm.

A man's word out of a Castle is strong.

Sugared kisses divulge secrets.

A man's own means his enemies.

Let go the bad to the good man's barn.

Lambs words, wolves works.

A gift not show, 'twixt hand and sleeve.

In Church appear after a peal.

A truant nere speaks truth.

A Lion once, but now ancient.

A hearth without fire ill favored.

Hasty pranks seldom prosper.

Rash vows known vain.

An easy civility to salute.

A hasty fool ever faulty.

The poor ever trips on troubles.

Over warnd ever forgets his errand.

Ever the gaunt nimbly goes.

The gross sometim^s goes fast.

In time the child becomes a giant.

Well goes the case, where wisdom counsels.

Wicked Peers ever perish.

The poor is sure cast in his suit.

A woman's double negative, is a single affirm live.

Usual to flaunt and fly.

A wanton lass commonly laughs.

Where a cross is reard we commonly rest.

Secrecy shu^, that ends in shame (or) ware vent^r tickles in conventicles.

Drinking over much, ever mads.

The wine in a feast, first fits the founder.

Stolen at length, comes to light.

The vile ever a villain.

None so stout but have their stains.

Fat easily sold out of a fat soil.

Too much care usually miscarries.

A wanton soul insolent.

Small blades full quick becomes a rick.

Enson comes when the bell calls.

Noble guests, nobly give.

Love too hot, turns to hate.

A lovers part, comely port.

Some of esteem, if strange simple seem.

Noble minded, modest; (or) Speak less, speak learned.

Dry over head happy.

After running stay and stand.

Others distress, thy destruction.

After sin long sorrow.

Fear dooms damage.

After showers Phoebus shines.

Ioind soldiers assault.

No rain no rushes.

Ware the alehouse prey, but not to pay.

Seek milk and feed the cowes mouth.

Man deliberates, God delivers.

He scorns the meat, and yet does eat.

Where is no kill, alike scholars.

A dream by daylight lightsome.

God disposes of the despised.

Man is appeased by men of peace.

All look on whom they like.

A lovely look liberal.

A modest look beloved.

The masters eye-bals feeds the beasts belly.

The day is long, yet ends at last.

Abuse got, best forget (or) the best abuse in battle.

Man's best candle understanding.

Of any slow, best is the plow.

The lazy deludes, best pleads delay.

The best part in man, to have good manners.

Practice of goods the best goodness.

Repent some day, thou have sold dear.

Good none are without good name.

My mother had rather be killed, then miscalled.

The wrong side best of a furrow by far.

The best Surgeon is he of the soul.

Silver famine most ravenous.

A false report rides poast.

A small gift great, if discreet.

The best of clothes is a cloak.

The best play that ends pleasant.

Speak the dog fair, till thou pass the fold.

Curs to each other currish.

Frighted young, great wrong.

Trot too often makes the steed stand.

A journey not far easily performed.

Deep lies the hearts language.

Woe to the man who dines on rotten sheep after rain.

Hop hip to hip, woe is his hap, that nothing has in lip or lap.

That master has small cause to sport, when his old servant calls to Court.

Inward disgrace does grate.

Disgrace a let, be it ^re so little.

Woe him that God allows and not believes.

Woe to him who loves, and is not beloved.

Young of bad fame, ever ill name.

Never do good to a lazy gull.

Thy board often see, nere the better be.

No Court favor, a case ill favored.

Bloody and foul, known by his fall.

Woe nonage that longs for dotage.

Woe the Mule, sees not the master.

A bad report no scurvier part.

Woe Lurdans help in harvest,

Wars civil, most savage, (or) None worse to fight* then a carpet Knight.

The worst store, A maid unbestowed.

One wolf lame, worse then two lusty.

Willmots tale worse and worse told.

Wild goat, wilder does get.

Dogs run their course, but worse and worse.

That one is bad, makes hundreds sad.

Woe man! has bad woman.

A house without son sad.

Done what is by night, day brings to light.

Vide Cywala.

White hairs and gray are pilgrims.

Water gives place, throw in what thou please.

Wounds and blood wanton play.

Vide Chwarae, etc.

Strive who is strongest.

Others kine never think they are thine.

Vide Chawreuid, etc.

A servant that does please, nere wants a place.

A good servant is his Lords shield and should.

The easiest work and way, is to beware.

A servant, and subservant to a piper, viz. a puppy.

Haste to the hive, ere the Bees depart, (or) Manly and bold though a Boy.

On the nights work, the day descants.

Sip after the sound.

A trade love without largess.

Love good parts without patience.

Play Fortunes game to the last gasp.

Wounds green do grieve.

See two for one.

He sees his ear with his eye.

Better free, then Miser be.

Better courteous, then curtal.

Better in a Coach with the courteous, then in the Fire with the furious.

Better want the maine, then want the mountain.

Sooner exiles from Groves, then exits from Graves.

Better lie in grave, then live in grief.

Better borrow then beg.

Better the poor man's prayer, then the preying of the mighty.

Better end of Dee, then basest of Bucks.

Better every man's good speech then spite.

Better bonny, then base.

Better beast* barren and few then none in fold.

Better something in purse then nothing in poak.

Better stay then stumble.

Better sit a while, then stand a while.

Better live and do, then ly dead.

Better keep now, then seek anon.

Better lose a pin, then lose a penny.

Better die one then die all, (or) Better die one in a hundred, then a hundred for
one.

Better a kinsman near, then I know not where.

Better a friend in court, then penny in purse.

Better penny in silver, then any brother.

A songs life, the delivery.

Better never stand then ly still.

Better rags and patches then rents and breaches.

Better Cookdom, then Kingdom.

Better trade then traffic.

Better lean whole, then fat unwholsom.

Better churl present, then charitable absent.

An aged man's counsel best kept uncancelled.

Better Art then Experience.

Better lod^e a Ranter, t^en a Robber.

Better play fair then fight.

Better a bungling ^arpenter then bad Smith.

Better God then gold.

Better hope in God then despair of good hap.

God best prized, when most praised.

Bette^ Gods Arm then Earths army.

The Cooks hand's smooth, the Laundress smarts.

Better the Artificers head, then hand.

Better a mean, then too much.

Better scourge the man, that will not mend.

Better man to see, then fantasy.

Better look on a man shiting on a turf, then hewing of a tree.

Better a beast sold, then bought.

Better sit on straw then on the floor.

Better Lord not enter, then entertain.

A woman loves to gad, more then her own good.

Better sing late, then antedate.

Better shame avoid, then revenge.

Better patient, then passionate.

Better deaths shade then live in shame.

Better meanly rich then too much.

Better mouth spare then mouth spend.

Better woe one, then woe all.

Better a kinsmans back, then a strangers beck.

A woman guest is ever best.

Better sorrowful sparing, then shameful spending.

Better come sometimes, then never return.

Better truly, then ly.

Better one man, then many.

Better a man, then means.

Respect a man, he will do the more.

A woman commend, rather then command.

Better half seed, then half summer, or half sown.

Better an action of debt, then of death.

Better prudence then oppression.

Better long unmarried then for ever mard.

Better Mannours, then manners.

Better the harm I know, then that I know not.

The cat and mouse love no removes.

Better go beg with a small bag.

Better a mean match then an over-match.

Better a rough stone that saves, then a smooth stone that deceives me.

Better an able and rich Mother, then a noble and wretched Father.

Better sell then buy by far.

Better die once then languish long.

Better die then waste and want.

Better shame veyld then reveald.

Better mite of man then mountain of woman.

Better hand have, then Gaffer give.

Better nay, then to betray.

Two old stronger then one younger.

Better a Finch in fist, then a Pheasant in field.

Better trust a tree, then a tel-tale.

Better wise then wealthy.

Better for fear, then for fair words.

Better bear then beat.

Better snarl, then sneak.

Better wit, then wealth.

Better silent, then saucy.

Better muck meade, then make merry.

Better crushd, then cruel.

Better one welcome then two invitations.

Better one securer, then two persecutors.

Better one good sty, then two bad stables.

The beetle strikes once better home, then twice the hammer.

Better one word in time, then afterward two.

Better give now, then come anon.

Better till beard, then forwards to beer.

Have much, have more.

Little and good blessed, much and bad not best.

Better something hid, then nothing had.

Better faced then fed.

Better run in the bog, then rush into the battle.

Many faggots, good fire, one stick cold as stone.

A rope is strong, a Maid draws stronger.

Better the rod that bends, then breaks.

Better to be plucked then flaid.

Better a horse with a full crest, then full cratch.

Rare and precious, richly prised.

Sell the sow and buy bacon.

My own mouth says, I Am a saint.

Do good, deserve gold.

For ill do well, then fear not hell.

A liberal hand wins hearts.

Multiply mischiefs.

Some old wife will die here, or elsewhere.

Where is no love, no liking.

Each man seen in summer.

Each Court has its Anti-court.

Refuse a bidding, and go look for lodging.

What thou see thou may say.

A widows goods will soon be gone.

A heart will break e're long with longing.

Command a son, he will not be gone.

Send a Crow to look for land.

Drive the stake that goes and stands.

Love commands commends.

Down now with the wasps nest.

Courteous and curtal (or) free, but afraid.

Free and large on countries charge.

Spare no cost when all is lost.

'Till New year sweat, 'till May no heat.

A cursed cat must have her nails cut.

Well fares the dog, when the other dies.

At the pissing of the Wren, the sea does roar.

If wood appear, sure house is near.

A feasts best cheer cheerfulness.

Be bold and hope, God sends good hap.

If new, good and gaudy.

In January though sun appear, March and February pay home full dear.

Where lovers be, there all agree.

An old hearth soon heats.

'Twixt false and desirous soon decided.

On him thou love call aloud.

Easy to swim well near the willow.

Easy so make a weakling weep.

Easy so make the stout stalk.

Easy to defeat a fool.

A scabby head soon let blood.

Boldly soak by thy beds side.

Easy to wound the weak.

Easy to fret the frantic.

Fifteen is easy told.

A short sword easily drawn.

Better treat far off, then near hand.

Better climb by a good deal, then clamber and go down.

Easier to say much, then do more.

Easier done at evening then early.

Easier to make a Faulcon of a Kite, then a Knight of a Knave.

A house easier burnt then built.

Easier to cosen a roung truant, then an old trot.

Old sin renews the shame.

Easy to bear with an old body.

Long bargains seldom gains.

The poor man's tale long a telling.

Long to die never have done.

Still, I nere no, at length says nay.

Long sit, do nothing but say.

An eye that longs thoroughly looks.

All by ease drinks all he has.

Long third in Needle,
Proclaims a Huswife idle.
A churles tale long,
Be it right or wrong.
Long grief yields no relief.

The hungries care, longs for corn.

The time slips, while man long sleeps.

A thief long holds, at length hangs.

Long a droan, at length drown.

Long ly, at length die.

Every delay long.

Meat for a Knight, never a knife.

Heavy and stout care not to stand.

Long a widow weds with shame

Long patience, breaks into passion.

(...) a ^air in a wolfs tail a long toil.

Blood and wrong lasts long.

A bad husbands Ox, long before it be a bullock.

A bitter bit long a biting.

A little stallion will be long called a colt.

The blind at the deafs door may die.

It Is long I trow to stand in a tree.

His goods a man loves as long as he lives.

Man's life is filled by his foe.

Sweet butter from good fields.

The needy skips if he may score.

Each bird loves to hear himself sing.

Each thinks his own filt fair.

The clown loves his club.

The chi^ds meat soon snatched from his mouth.

A sow from each salt pot.

Late and lazy never wealthy.

Fame out-lives lands.

The black calf a blunt Courtier.

Fame out-lives life.

God stays long, but strikes at last.

The poor trusts to his neighbor.

The clown a Lord on his own land.

Spare not to cry where houses are ^igh.

Every look is lovely, when thou likest.

W^ile thou live, be not lazy.

No day fails the pot on fire.

All on their wakes, wantons.

All would fight, till they come to the field.

Nere condole a cheerful cheek.

The young may prance and prate.

Every soul ought to keep it self.

Anoint grease.

Anoint a sowes tail with tallow.

Down the Road the water runs.

Hands and feet with veins filled.

Make the sole fit to the foot.

A great stone makes a huge stir.

A quarrelsome hand at last wearies the wearer.

The swineherd plays when the wind blows.

A hand quick and quaint.

The fathers share a good hold for the sons hand.

A clean hand is happy.

Many hands make light work.

Many one leads a hungry life, and yet must needs wed a wife.

Many sued, one sues.

Who covets much still wants more.

Friends only in show, Fie for shame (or) Fair tails fine turds.

Words, wind and away.

Many bid fair for foul.

Many have tales better untold.

Some for hunger like to die, yet keep their dog for company.

Much water passes by, the Miller knows not when nor why.

All live now, none say enough.

Fair in show, but full of shame; poor in sight, but pure in soul.

A full earl to roast a collop.

Perjury kills Kings, (or) perjury kills wherever it calls.

Where the pain is, the finger points.

Where love is, the place does please.

A frantic fool kills his fellow.

The Foord in wading grows more wide, (or) a Foord more room affords.

Kill the Ramm that does not runt.

In winter draw a lesser draught.

No learning no blessing, (or) no care no carriage.

Where the horse tumbles to sport himself, he leavet part of himself.

The Antimonial cup a general cure.

On turd tread, the more it will spread, (or) turd stamp the more it stinks.

Who is not full, may eat his fill.

Luxury devours.

He is all faults whom none favors.

When floods ye see, the rain will cease.

Merry is a lout on his mistress lap.

When the ca^'s from home the mice keep house.

A coward kills his companion.

Poor and bare will still appear, till some do say thou come not here.

Poor grass where sheep cannot graze.

Wild and gray nere agree.

Ancient and grave and gray.

The market is sure where there is an old senior.

No man scorns to bear his skin.

The dog licks the spear that did him the spite.

Gods Eye is upon his own.

A curious eye in a Curres head.

Each Ache is greatest at first.

Here the field, and here the hare.

The boy being a man remembers.

A youth untaught a house until'd.

Make the Owl stand with a stone.

The finest wheat has its refuse.

Topsie turvie.

Feed a lowse in thy bosom, it will sometimes be busy.

A blustering cold May, in the barn fills every bay.

As light of wing as Hawk or wind.

Money in thrall goes through, (or) money bears the charge of a journey.

A hunted hare is venison.

As a durty dog.

As stiff as a drabs distaff.

As dogs gape after Goats.

As the blind stands and casts his staff.

As two tinkers.

As a churl having a charge.

As a bird on the bough.

As a pat upon the pate.

As March snow stands on stone.

As Howell Goronwy's staff.

As work of worth.

As bulk some stands, as Ketti's stone.

As an eye in the head.

As a mill Pond d^ained dry.

As honey thaw lickd of thorns.

As a Kidd from the high hills.

As a shovel dipped in doung.

As a warrant to wemm.

As a hook drawn through Bushels.

As an Egg slips on a sledge.

As the Cow so the Calf.

As the man said or sung.

As thou art prone to be praised.

As the hog and hound.

As the dog when the fire burns his foot.

As the dogs to the hogs.

As the penurious for the penny.

As the Cat falls to fish.

As the hair escapes the razing razour.

As the Jury turned out.

As the hen with dung in, and Egg out.

As flax standing on stone.

As the Fox bites the be ry.

As the Frog frets under the harrow.

As the mouse closed in the cats claws.

As hogs beat for beans.

As fish for wet and water.

As the ape whines for her whelp.

As the Crane likes his legs.

As the thrum about the beam.

As the Bark trusses the tree.

As the sow hackd with hatcher.

As the Deer and Wolf.

As the bolt from the bow.

As fire flies in flax.

As the fire heats the hearth.

As door on hook does turn full often, so sluggard turns in down bed soft.

Lusty dame, makes lazy daughter.

A Pigmey mother, her race disgraceth.

Modest grace, makes great.

The best steed stumbles.

A horse sees the hay, sees not the hedge.

A Mule for a mome, a cur for an Epicure.

Command a Castle, and be costly.

March flings, April fleyes.

Misfortunes come by forties.

Let ill will have little wealth.

The cook is disliked that his fingers cannot lick.

That mouse condole who has but one hole.

Single long, shame at length.

June if sunny, brings harvest Early.

Honey staind with a sting.

The poor man's grist, is his bag.

The finger slighted till it is burned.

Good words (or a fray) of my friend.

The nearer the bone, the sweeter the flesh.

Sweet and good, give again.

Sweet appears sour when we pay.

I know my game though I cannot gain.

Though of my mother I had all, I cannot wait her funeral.

The Duck^ soon learn to swim.

Every Nation us own fashion.

Praise the Fo^rd, as cause thou find.

After death Decl^mation.

A lass with a lad in lap.

A b^sh^ul du^ce, dombe.

Man and woman quaint and coy.

No more then a hand mill.

More then one cur did ba^t and bite me.

Bad is the wolf, the porredge far worse.

No more then the go^t ash^med to show her tail.

No more be, then a tennis ball.

No more then the saddle for the sow.

No more ^hen the Quail rests in the ridge.

Fill the sieve at the river side.

To do without need as good as neglect.

The bulls reign is the sheeps ruin.

A ba^ shepherd views often in vain.

O^r (...) often show our shames.

No worse for the sole, then the shoe.

For once or twice neesing, from death no escaping.

Be not so wild to lose the old way, for new pranks now I pray.

Never believe thy sister in Law.

Square not thy feast by the rule of thy guest.

Have a care thou wake not a sleeping mast if.

Wa^e cutting thy swi^e, lest they swell.

Slight not the meanest Minister.

Make no statute of a man's stature.

Better a good dog, then a bad Doeg.

Some neighbor nigh, an enemy.

Thy wife if wise, must not partake thy privities.

Nor stir, nor strive, unless struck.

Nere betray reposed trust.

In chamber long,, at length chamberlain.

Be not too ready when thou may be spared.

Beat a coward often, thou will find he will fight.

Either a Fox, or a fern bush.

Save God, none wise.

The nature of the sow in the suckling.

The stone swims best to the bottom.

Sell with skill when scant.

Fools refuse favors.

A Rulers Errand free and current.

Next to next annexed.

Nearer skin, then skirt.

Nearer me then my maw.

The cry I tell, comes nearer the town.

The elbow near, the wrist nearer.

Each dry place, a Palace.

Get a son, he will help thee soon.

The cal^ would fain be a cow.

Change and pick pikemen.

Change hats and habits.

A fool will not be foild.

Nor the choleric be beloved.

No man can beyond his kenn.

Two bigs will not go in one bag.

No vessel filled beyond brimfull.

Not son in law till consummated love.

None termed right, unless turned rich.

Not guilty full, till one confess.

Never make total of a title.

Soul never fear, if not faulty.

Though a whole year thou do woo,
Thou know not yet what best to do.
A gift often sought, nor thanked, nor bought.

A courtesy noi understood,
Where one foresees not his own good.
Love slack, where slighted.

A sad sigh, speaks tears nigh.

A woman bad, conveighs her bag.

Whom God will, not wealthy.

The saint will not chew cheese.

Internals say, we nere grow gray.

Jealousy not long lived.

Delay is no dismission.

No man's mind moulders.

Naught to gather, worse then wind and weather.

He means not to kill and confess.

Ambassadors harms,
Against the law of Arms.
Though lewd, yet lucky.

Though blessed, yet bloody.

A good friend never offends.

Blessed will not serve, unless thou deserve.

An idle dame empty dayry.

Deny thy riches, be wretched.

The honycomb, bad for cock.

The wickeds race never rise.

Seldom rise unless first ruined.

To change never proffer, but for thy profit.

Lost repute, late repaired.

Slow (O God) will never do good.

Cowardice never scapes death.

Be ever close, yet ware a clap.

Ignoble persons imperfect.

A sigh, a sign of misery.

A cat seldom hangs in a halter.

An Ode endures but a year.

None sends the poor fare from afarr.

Not much between the apple I trow, and the apple tree.

The quick and free never delay the poor man's fee.

Fat meat sure, cannot still endure.

So proud he is, that he deigns not to piss.

Never buy a cat in a bag.

Scarce ought due to the dumb.

No more esteemed then a wodden stone.

All look on a bad leap.

A flout sticks not long on a Lord.

The black ox did not tread on thy foot.

An Egg may chance choke.

A messenger poor, and to no purpose.

Whoredom here doomd.

Debt never melts that still remains.

Submit to a Lord, not to a Lurda^e.

Never again have such a bolt in hand.

Arthur could not tame woman's tongue.

Nere side without considering (or) no man shruggeth in his shroud.

In market grows no grass nor grain.

I Will never thorn draw from others foot, and having pulld it in mine own put.

Head never weary with speaking wisely.

A vessel will not break that is not filled to the brim.

I never saw a Deer leap luckily.

The more displeased with his father at home, the more pleased in ^is father in
laws house.

No clean linen, no cleanliness.

The mouse will not nestle in the cats ear.

The sea can but drench and drown.

Of the Well we see no want, till either dry, or Water skant.

The dog will not bite, for being struck with a Bone.

Hot in blood, himself never blames.

All a man sees is not his sustenance.

No man kens another case.

Keep still at home, never knowledge have.

Easy counted easy, till thought easy becomes uneasy.

Not see, not know, not learn, nor lout.

Fear not feared, nor bard, till bought.

For wit never look without the book.

The full sow regards not what the empty says.

The hen next the cock, knows it not.

Long tarry, taken tardy.

The law frees franticks.

A Lord offers fair, none go further.

A word gone neve recalled.

What God made he never marr's.

Harm soon got, not so gone.

Nere fear curse if no cause.

A tale once told nere returns.

Achilles tried, Impenetrate.

He speaks awry and not down right, (or) It Is naked truth shames the youth.

Fields got, seldom forgot.

Perjurd souls, harm not saints.

The post rides not the fool, but the fool rides the post.

Not each that runs gets the race.

Nere go to sea, till thou learn what to say.

The plow never runs races.

No surety for a shilling.

Lend no man, new spick and span.

Nor bundle nor burden.

Strange dishes antic, makes men frantic.

Not shut hole fast on Fox.

The Priest forgets clean he was a Clerk.

Who fasts though rich is wretched.

Keep a huge coil, or nothing can (or) speaks loudest, does least.

The Crow they say, cannot sing.

Sleep, pain and care seldom concur.

As good want breath as want brother.

Foul play to plunder.

None but fools will jest with water, fire and furious tools.

Too much is stark naught.

Not happy doomd without wisdom.

Scarce meat, where naught remains.

Lazy and lubberly.

None without fault yet ever found.

No bad Lord, but by his servants bad leading.

Good advice, abandons vice.

Wives shrowes, make husbands shrewd.

The gift if free, never censure it.

Never dance in the dark.

Man thrives not by his own device,
But Fortune favors in a trice.
It is not he, feeds us think we.

It is not he, but thou thy self destroys thee.

He naught receives, we all do seek.

The time I miss, but it is not this.

Deny thy goods, deny thy God, (or) denied goods are not Gods.

The good man waves war.

Where naught at all, who can be liberal?

Taste the meat, perhaps you will eat.

Old Cyrrys bids change but to chary.

No blow right that falls awry.

Maldraeth will not own Owen.

A task hard to serve on hire.

A strangers voice, against a Britain voice, (or) Britains none call new
comers.

The furious fights and chafes, as well as the Champion.

No shame, but praise to improve.

The bed cold, till the wife called.

Never fancy beyond sufficient.

Too much and too little alike.

The thief and supporter equally parties.

The shamefast, may fast.

Not a man, but a Meacock.

Hard to let blood with a Leek blade.

Hard to blow the fire well, with thy mouth filled with meal.

Give twice one Maid too much.

A hard thing to steal of a thief.

Hard to strain a Marrow-pie from a Poet.

Hard to make right, wrong.

Wool is never taken from a Goats tail.

Never well do till well die.

A dream makes not a young man.

The more perfect the less painful.

As easily disgraced, as graced.

No Ruler good, save God.

Man's not as current as good gold.

The more thou look for, the less beloved.

Nor Ben nor Bess,
The dog did eat meat and mess.
He is not bald that stays for hair.

The Cuckoe has nothing to do,
But the same to say and sing too.
Difference 'twixt a Major and a Monk.

Not said gone, that comes again.

No speed without steed.

Not cheap said till made sure.

Not sleek till slandered (or) not glorious till eclipsed.

It is not corporeal, makes gnats venereal.

Hell though ardent wants but order.

Nothing so awry as dividing wrong.

Misery cannot shun shame.

His need so great, has not nails to scrape.

Alms Holy days Heralds (or) let Alms be close, not proclaimd.

None found without fault.

Naught in tune, but as is taken.

All gifts plead during pleasure.

Never clear a bad Client.

No blush in a face deformed.

A Prophet of small account in his own country.

No need of a bell on a mad man's belt.

You need not set dogs on Doegs.

A fortunate boor, needs but be born.

No fire without fuel.

None so neat as Neast.

Express no anger to thy Mother.

A Lords honor not hereditary.

The black hair and white, the same weight.

To fox he Fox, no foxing.

Ill and well note two natures.

Orl and Priz^t are not like natured.

The fool and wise differ always.

It Is not beauty makes women amiable.

It Is not by the bill the Woodcock must be bought.

Praise a fair day neither morn or noon, but at night.

Call not every matron, Mother.

The world about is but a ball.

The mad does not care for the meek.

Rome was not done in one day.

Needy poor and noddy pate, never part.

Twixt fury and force no divorce.

Love in show does pass over shame.

Pimps and bawds hate those of their trades.

Proud men care not to meet.

The hand is the treasure of the heart.

A high Feast, the hens farewell.

Bents are known to have knots.

British Philosophical Extracts.
Learn not, and know not.

Hear not, and learn not.

None hear well, but the studious.

None studious, but the happy.

None happy, but that is loved.

None loved by God, but the good.

None good be, but the obedient.

None obedient, but the silent.

None silent, but the patient.

None patient, but the wise.

None wise, but the Conscientious.

None Conscientious, but the Righteous.

None Righteous, but the mindful.

None mindful, but the loving.

None loving, but the melodious.

None melodious, but the fairspoken.

No speech good, but of God.

Other sayings, not unworthy the Consideration.
No advice, to the Fathers.

No Prayer, to the Mothers.

No tenderness, to the sisters. r

No strength to the brothers.

Not powerful, but in cousins.

Not gentle, but in kinsmen.

Nr Gallantry, to the sword.

No protection, to the Target.

No confidence, to the Bowe's.

No battle, to the spear-men.

No danger, to the Dagger.

No house, without a Husband.

No fire, without a block.

No bed, without a wife.

No Folly, to Love.

No poverty, to sickness.

No foolery, te falling out.

No wretchedness, to idleness.

Mo madness, to drunkenness.

No wisdom, to silence.

No sloth, to sinking.

No sinking, to sin.

No sin, to temptation.

No poverty, to obstinacy.

No riches, to sobriety.

No heat, to the Suns.

No cold, to the Moons.

No number, to the Stars.

No swiftness, to the Wind.

No Glory, to Unity.

No health, to wealth.

No plunder, to the Winds.

No sadness, to Death.

No Joy, to Heavens.

No ugliness, to hell.

No mirth good, but with God.

No Ingeniousness, to mirth.

No misery, to sadness.

None happy, but harmless.

None harmless, but sinless.

None sinless, but Saints.

None Saints, but the simple.

None simple, but the innocent.

No juggling, to youthfulness.

No youths sport, but for a short space.

No deceit, to the worlds.

No sadness, to want.

No plenty, if not enough.

No rarity, where still plenty.

No juggling, to the Feminine gender.

No sport, to the Greyhound,

No comfort, to a Horse.

No pleasure to a Hawke.

Not feared, but abhorred, (or) hated.

Not hated, without cause.

None patient but the wise.

The wise strain, never strive.

No wanton, to a we^ch.

None lovely, but the lowly.

No villain to the churl.

No churl, to the Bumkin.

No Bumkin, to the currish.

No cur to the clown.

No clown but by custom, (or) kind.

No loveliness to the lowly.

None lowly, but the merciful.

None merciful, but the righteous.

No horseman without lance.

No footman, without bow.

No covetousness to man's.

No negligence to the Magistrates.

No fidelity, to the dogs.

No sweetnes^, to sin.

No sowreness, to penance.

No trust to a friends.

No joy, to an Heir.

No cleanliness, to a Fish.

No secrets but between two.

Not see, not know.

Not seek, not find.

Not know, not expert.

Not wise fool, if forgetful.

No wit, no learning.

No flattery, to a Maids.

None more prattle, then the idle.

No venom, to the cats.

No fierceness, to the dogs.

No tyranny to the Lions.

No tricks, to the Apes.

No fraud, to the Foxes.

No policy, to the Hares.

No sagacity, to the Hounds.

No gravity, to the Gray's.

No foulness, to the Fichocks.

No niceness, to the Martens.

No nimbleness to the Squirrils.

No slowness, to the Otters.

No sleep, to the Dormouse.

No ugliness, to the Batts.

No haughtiness, to the Heart.

No stateliness, to the Steeds.

No mildness, to the Ox.

No ill brood, to the brute,

No innocence, to the sheep.

No herbalist to the Goat.

No durtiness, to the Buck.

No Pink, to the Peacock.

No presumption, to the Threstle.

No melody, to the Nightingale.

No pride, to the Swan.

No neatness, to the Pianet.

No jolliness, to the Wren.

No housekeeper, to the Cock.

No lavishness, to the Hens.

No fool, to the Goose.

No champion to the mountain-cock.

No kindness, to the Cuckoes.

No sculking, to the Wood-cocks.

No leachery, to the Sparrow's.

No Pecus, to the Gander.

No glutton, to the Cormorant.

No monster, to the Hern.

No violence, to Fire.

No hinderance, to water.

No lightness, to Air.

No weight. to Earth.

None stout, but he that stands.

No valiantness to man's.

No mettle found, but in him that fights.

No fear, to him that flies.

No Coward, to him that couches.

No infinity, to nothing.

Nothing good, but God.

More of the Like.
The Eagles strength in his beak.

The Unicorns strength in his horn.

The Serpents strength in its sting.

The Rams strength in his head.

The Bears strength in his paws.

The Bulls strength in his breast.

The dogs strength in his tooth.

The Boars strength in his bristles.

The Quists strength in her wings.

The Lions strength in his tail.

A woman's strength in her tongue.

For the mothers sake, kiss the son.

Confession the greatest glory.

Let the wind be where it will.

Somewhere rain, it stirs still.

Of all heavies old Age heaviest.

Of mickle comes much.

If the shepherd sing, the whole house will ring.

Bear the worst behind, let him go and be hanged.

No higher toe, nor heel I trow.

Love where not beloved, is love lost.

Woe men, that they had not been women.

Above too long, short below.

Few know to hold the Plow.

Many ask, few can answer.

Thy face hardly keep, be thou ever so curious.

Seldom blow without blood.

Seldom best, unforbid.

Seldom Outlawes laborious.

An honest soul excells.

Seldom fair, but has his fault.

Seldom promised performd.

Seldom good event, without venture.

Among a hundred fools scarce one good fellow.

If we come, we come.

If we come for fourteen, we will come for fifteen.

Scarce the man makes not for means.

A stranger abroad, had need of strength of brain.

Bees are caught with catches.

Wet is cold, need not be coold.

Blood cries and calls, although it cools.

By hair and hair, head bald and bare.

From seas, hills and strands,
From Rivers, depths, sands,
God sends to the fortunate riches and lands.
All sacrifice in the heart fixed.

A small berry in an old belly sowes.

A man void of harm, speaks from the heart.

Forbear debt long, forget at last.

Hair and hair culled, makes the horse cutted.

By little and little, the Pottage-pot drawn dry.

If the cat kills a mouse she makes a dainty mess.

If thou would take the Roe Buck,
Nimbly leap, or no good luck.
If thou be a stranger be merry, and give the first good morrow.

If thou be not strong set, be subtle.

If thou have not Leeks, take what thou likest.

Not sow, not reap.

If not a horse, it is more, a mare.

Of both bad, the least best.

If great a Monster, if little a Mandrake.

From Sunday to Sunday, the Maid becomes a Matron.

What makes the Kite to pry? the prey.

Why does the dog lick the pan? because he cannot eat the pie.

Where in the churn mill lies the buttermilk?

When one treads upon thee, draw thy foot to thee.

When the blind leads the blind, both are down in the ditch.

When the Bullock leads, the Ox loiters.

When thieves squabble true men hear of their cattle.

When the season of the year is come, the Goat sleeps on the Bucks bum.

When man is down and low, God does enlarge.

When the Ox is lean, he is best for labor.

When the Lark's upon his seat,

The Hobby then makes bold to bait.

When the game is at best, best leave.

Have mi hi, and lose mi ha.

Revenge from heaven, heavy.

When all sleep and delay, God sleeps not, but delivers.

When the Kerne's turned out of door,
They feign that he was mad before.
The cat scarce climbes, when you cut her claws.

All hunt for honor.

Presume for favors, near thy father.

All cry fie on the fool.

Each one tells a fair tale.

Each does catch at his Cow.

Every one lays on.

If tongue should tell what hovels hold,
Neighbors would scarce do ought but scold.
When the cat is at home, the mouse keeps hole.

A Bucks head on a Hare's.

The head worth a pound, the tail half a penny.

The owner of the work, the Master workman.

Each man Lords where he is beloved.

Civil demeanor, though to the meanest.

No wizard complete, eats stinking meat.

Pill the Egg round, ere roasted.

Whatever is strong, in the end is destroyed, (or) Sampsons eyes at length put
out.

Like after like, look.

Prophesies never fail to be fulfilled.

Proverbs approved, likely hoods l^es.

The wedge by degrees, cleaves through the trees.

Birds meet, each knows his ma^e.

Every Coast peculiar customs.

Each path in a dingle, run one way to mingle.

Every coward, a Cow.

All do and say in season.

All wrong comes to wrack.

The deeper the sea, the better for the ship.

The older the Welchman, the more mad man,

The older the Rye the sooner reapt.

The more thou longest, the more thy lets.

The greater the sight, the greater the victory.

The more the Tide flows, the more the Ebb flinche^.

Straight string plays Rex, but soon it breaks*

In wood a tree, whose will it be.

Buy old geere, buy again.

Buy flesh ere fleighed.

Without wife, without strife.

Wisdom bears the bell.

Fish before the net.

A candle wastes not for cold.

Let no hire go out of the house.

A hungry man waves manners.

The Hen forelooks before she lays.

The poor does fear an after fall.

An idle dame should have something to do.

Patience must countermand passion.

Creep soft, ere go sure.

The third part, a poor part.

The Colt resembles the Sire.

The meanest in the house has small share of the Hen.

Share between back and belly.

A cart dances downwards.

Stone never stays 'till placed on plain.

Rarities makes wantonize.

The broakers fall, breeds many fello^s.

Secrets twixt three multiply and thrive.

Give and tell a child's good turn.

More performd then promised.

I for gave away his cap.

The men of Ergings gift.

What to old men thou give, thou will never regain.

Put the Cart before the horse.

Hide the beetle under a holly-bush.

A dog leaps unlookd.

A Bull mounts up the Mountain.

A nurse insults and assaults.

Between two stools the tail tumbles.

Little mischief too much.

Not hard to do easily done.

A fearful Don, cries hold the dog.

Forewarnd happy and armd.

Offer too fair, pay for the folly.

Some desires foul and faulty.

Some sin incestuous.

Too straight breaks, though strong.

Too full ever runs over.

The higher the fool, the greater the fall.

A foe soon seen.

The covetous spies through a perspective.

Some odd ones become odious.

Little and scarce is dear and scant.

The Buck-kid leaps by kind.

Who kills discovers.

Disgrace though conceald, not safe.

The shepherd is often the wolf.

Blindness foreseen seven years.

A long tale with a seven-lockd boy, speaks Tomboy.

What is safe, is safest.

Ieffreys is the Helve, and

Ieffreys the Hatchet.

God mock with a dead Monk.

Talk of Lammas when it is Christmas.

Every lout lazy.

Make clean for shame the plough-share.

Fly and be gone speaks guilty.

Tables to play, taverns to talk.

A tongue bad breaks bones, (or)

A bad tongue turbulent.

A golden tongue guides a tale.

Believe no tales from an enemies tongue.

Over-loaded well rewarded.

The silent chews most mischief.

As like as a sack to a sadle.

As like as a hogs cheek to a chalice.

Without fault perfect and fair,

Every one well featured and fair.

Fire seen always seasonable.

A wanton wench bids thrice farewell.

VVanton lasses many lessons.

Pay after sway and forswear.

Who ends and wins takes the wager.

Tell now much and have no more.

The steed sterves while the grass grows.

While the dog tires in the field,

The Hare takes the Fallel.

The Ox draws and is driven ever till evening.

The oppression of orphans,

The destruction of heirs.

While harrow drawn mills must not dry.

Covenant tried stronger then truth.

Nature stronger then nurture.

So God speed never despair.

A weak Lord overtops a great Lurdane.

Fortunes wiles forestall will.

Wealth takes leave, but fame does live.

All sing or sigh are doomd to die.

All sing, or sigh, are doomed to die.

Stay thy vote, till invi^ed.

Stay for glory, if not for gain.

Each mournful soul sad.

Turn about the Bush.

Turn the Puz, in Phoebus.

Mischance hardly eschewed.

A staff firm, a third foot.

Twt la, it is a horse lent.

Deceive trust entrusted.

The trap to highborn, Ambition.

A bribe I know is a juggling knave.

As the boy grows, his coat does decrease.

A Colt's height known by the hams.

A Bullock grows big from the belly.

A woman's Fortune to be wanton.

The saying concurs with the song.

The womb not descried, till the child cry.

A small firebrand flies abroad.

What God will not cannot prosper.

The wise sometimes is sad and sighs.

The old wife may hap,

Cry after her pap.

One O wonder may nurse a hundred, (or) In one lap a hundred may ly.

Neglect one step, make many a stride.

One hand makes Fire,

But hundreds find to cull wool fair.

A Nurse not harmd, though one armd.

Monoculus may be King in Caecus country.

A penny hire brings in a hundred.

The hen barred of Oats in Barn.

Neezing's free, closed cannot be.

Once my Lady would swim ore,

She drowned, O me! she will swim no more.

One head higher then two shoulders.

A sad countenance, a sorry Courtier.

The Foxes procession-week.

The dark vertigo.

The belly robs the back.

Gain waves Impediments.

A little milk, and that Butter-milk.

Many littles make a great.

If hanging for a dog thou would shape,

Say, he kills sheep.

The wedge that goes, drive again.

The first that brings in Grist, let him grind.

The first heard he said it, for ever conceald it.

Harrow fast, reap first.

The drop wears out the stone,

Not by force, but often falling on.

The last that grindeth his meal in Mill,
Deepest toll pays likely still.
He that sells his house, may ly on the hills.

Has a horn no ear to hear.

The sin be it ever so secret that thou do commit, at length it will come out.

The Mill stands that wants water.

A Maid's praecontact, marr's her postcontract.

Were the Cat-skin pure, they would fleigh it sure.

Ride on still more, and still seek thy mare.

The gown was given to many an one, and yet the gown is not gone.

The hand that gives, gathers.

The grunti^g horse bears best.

Though rarely sin, at length breeds shame.

Hide the Calf, top of the coffer.

Whatever is well has its reward.

In each bad saying, sin.

In every choice there is chariness.

In every trade, there is want of truth.

In every wound, there is danger.

In every ground, men valiant and great.

In every self, there is a soul.

In every soul, there is sense.

In every sense or meaning, a mind.

In every mind good or bad abides.

Death shows in all shapes.

In every war, need to be wary.

In every fault, there is folly.

Wish the smith to fight in his own forge.

Strive with a wise man, thou will be wiser.

Strive with a fool, thou will be more foolish.

In winter nights, God save our Neats.

The dumb I trow, speaks truth.

One year, a mother dear,

The next a stepdame.

Seeking the green grass dry,

The Mare drowned.

He that shoots always aright,

Forfeits his Arrow.

A foolish clown tears his own clothes.

One poison expels another.

Have a horse of thy own, thou may borrow another.

In the skin, the Wolf goes in,

The same no doubt, the Wolf goes out.

Have much, have none, and thrive therefore.

A bird hatched in Hell, thereout is nere well.

The Goat in hue, black and blue.

Hai and how, killed the Sow.

Still Sow that grunts, eats all the grains.

The Sow cries we, till dead we see.

The Lamb in show, does teach the Yew.

The one bone pays.

A good Mill, that refuses meal.

Do harm, to avoid harm.

The liberal, does give to all.

Ten nails were made, to feed one mouth.

Light Portage, piles.

Light come, light go.

The fiery Ox outmost.

Better play in, then play out of tune.

All have full hands.

Churls meat devour it, never thank him for it.

The fools mess had before hand.

Till death hies, no hopes, (or)

Till death cries, no Crown.

Faithful and devout, to divide.

Knight or Cobbler soon descries,
From what Root he has his rise.
The Romans Odiums.
The Sea girds above the girdle.

The Sea casts up Corpse.

The coward dares not come to company.

Arthur himself had but his time.

A weak boy will not long be.

Jade nere degrade, it takes no higher degree.

Love to huge, turns to hate.

Thy hand never worse for doing thy own work.

A pool that stirs, never stinks.

I Will neither be coat, nor cap.

No up-hill without down-hill.

Sick, is beyond sickly.

No brother without another.

Little proof of little profit.

Never Bull taken out of a dogs ^ayl.

Only the rich fool is said to speak sense.

No story, without sticklers.

It is not one poast holds up a house.

If revengeful, fearful.

If rich in purse, small reach in pate.

Ill say, and be sued.

Never read, ever rude.

Two more then one alone.

The weakest part, has a party.

No man I think lives of nothing.

A drouzy one, an odious droan.

One night starves not the steed.

A bad husbands wife, still staind with weeping.

Who hears her fathers Cock crow, over crows.

On a rolling stone no moss will stand.

Venus was choice, yet a wart on her cheek.

All passover on the Passover.

Frequent resorting ill resented. Pa, Con.

The Wren though small, over-colourd all.

No news with lout, that goes not out.

Contest, and be contemned.

A barren Cow, never loves Calf.

Happy hates hopeless.

Thou work not please, once entered ease.

A Lady fair, loves far.

Our b^essed Savior, those defied,
That hanged him high and crucified.
Who loves not his mother, may step to his stepmother.

The tenderest dame, at length does die.

A ball never greets plain ground,

The man yields to the master.

Old mother, cries more.

Good never be, till evil bear.

Try good hap, good have.

A runaway, never regains sway.

Without desert, deserted.

Wit best, that is bought.

Learn having lost, to keep at last.

Art is not bred in one man's breast.

A Pear grows not I trow on a Crab-tree.

Dine with a churl, it will be to thy charge.

Sleep and sloth undoes both.

Be fair, be famous.

From a Fox, naught scarce then the skin.

No good wool on a Goats arse.

Sweet and sour meat, inmates.

Bad ground's free of its own fruit.

Inward pain in face appears.

A foolish man poures out his mind.

Hunger-starved of no esteem.

I love son, but more Grandson.

A man of state, thinks he never stinks.

Will* hear will not, what he would not.

Bald sleights bruises till he see his brains.

Patience never mourns for mother.

Never lose reckoning at the beginning.

A jealous one believes no oath.

Expert and quick never quakes.

A Maid hates a monk as a munky.

In one year a Cat grows grave.

A rich Earl rises early.

The keeper of Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps.

Care still's awake, grief sleeps being weak.

His sleep's not great that minds his meat.

The dog will not bite that's struck with a bone.

The Grouse never sighs when the Hawk is sick.

Famine being gone benefactors forgets.

The hen does never lose equal night.

Refused in war flee and beware.

Happy they say, that care not to sue.

The devil and the godly enemies deadly.

A messenger shent yet not ashamed.

Not pleased in choice though he choose.

Others profit never prospers.

I assert, no man certain.

The glutton scarce does mind his scabs.

The mother in law does not remember that she has been a daughter in law by
her Lease.

Though many starve, yet some do stand.

A saucy Jack, prateth he knows not why, nor what.

A whore takes all, no matter who nor where.

The Eagle flies not at the fly.

Counsel never out of date.

The hungry drone, cares not who drinks.

One tree though fair, makes not a Forest, (or) one tree makes not three.

None lack spear, but who lacks spirit.

A woman's cause never wants excuse.

Wild and stout never wants a staff.

Want not pleased, though supplied.

The mother starved, the son's not stout.

Wine and wary, ever vary.

Law bar, or else obey.

Unless quite overcome, take comfort.

Here Saint, ere sentence.

God will not be for the bad.

Not one in forty can avoid his Fortune.

An old hag cannot shake off her head.

Unseemly things.
A King without wisdom. A Knight without trial. A Lord without Counsel. A
Woman without Master. People without Law. A servant without fear. A poor man
proud. A rich man uncharitable. A Justice without Justice. A Bishop without
Learning. An old Man without Godliness. A young Man without Humility. A Man
wise in words, without good works.


Wise Odiums.
A man That knows not letter, and will not learn. That has no servant, and
will not serve himself. That has much and gives nothing. That strives with his
greaters, till he go to his grave. That Is no son of Mars, and yet proclaims
wars. That mocks another for faults written in his own forehead. That thinks
himself good and fine, and is but a giddy fool. That borrows more pounds then
he is able to pay. That supplies others need, and leaves himself nothing That
promises all things and performs nothing. That threatens all fierce, but none
fear him. That talks over and over, and will hear no other. That seeks all
things, and gets nothing. That commits his secrets to his enemy, or women. That
cheapens all, and buys none. That perjures himself, and none believes him.
That dishonours himself to honor another. That sees good Arts and manners,
and knows nothing o^ their meaning. That buys all he sees and gains nothing.
That hates all, and is hated of all. That trusts none, and is trusted of none.
That handles every Case, without cause. That gives his strength to a stranger.
That believes a knave, though unknown. That does so much in one day, that he
can do nothing in the next. That trusts to guiles in a gift. That has his
choice, takes not the chief. That makes a price of pride. That shunneth his own
good, lest his neighbor should gain. That does no good nor suffers others.
That fortifies himself in sin. That thinks he is wise, is but a wizard. That
learns much, knows nothing. That leaves his fellow without fault found. That
commits sin, and repents not soon. The poor that scorns pittance. That knows
Gods Law, pleads against it though for mere reward, to him be woe. That makes
glorious shows of his own shame. That contemns God and man. What I spent was
vain, says the Soul. What I gave is vain, says the Soul. What I kept has
faild me, says the Soul. What I denied has foild me, says the Soul. Learn
diligently what thou see. Keep diligently what thou learnest. Make know what
thou know. None worthy to be top of kin, but one That will fight with his
kinsman and is feared, That will speak for his kinsman and is heard. That will
be surety for his kinsman, and will be taken. The wholesomest of wild beasts
the Roe Buck. Of tame beasts, the Hog. Of wild Fowls, the Partridges. Of tame
Fowls, the He. Of Sea fish, the Crab. Of fresh fish the Trout.


The three Invincibles. A Lord, or Dominus fac totum. The Resolute that is
self-willed. The Penurious that has nothing.


Seven qualities belonging to a Judge. Tongued, and dumb, stout, and deaf,
foolish, fearful, and devout.


Additionall Proverbs.
The powerful plucks, the poor complains.

Talk a good deal, but take only thy due.

Little betwixt right and wrong.

The best gentility is in the predicament of Quality.

What abroad we hear, at home we rehearse.

All are lewd, where God does not lead.

Better still beg, then steal bag.

Misfortune drinks a health, and it goes round about the house.

Earth's the best shelter,
Truth the best buckler.
Who the cold does most fear,

Let him blow the fire.

A liar's gone, if he forget, (or)

Lie the less, or learn thy lesson.

Let none alone, at length be lam'a.

In three things a man may be deceived;

In a Man till known, in a Tree till down, in the Day till done.

Three rubs upon the way;
A Squirrel, a Nut, a neat Maid and gay.
What thou would not have done to thee,
Do not the same good man to me.
Though old men's body do decay,
Their soul's alive, and bears sway.
The choicest Maid, ill chooses man.

Two things need not be spared,

Much gained, and little got.

A bad man's dispraise* praises.

Shut the gate when the horse is gone, (or)

Shut the door when the thief has done.

What all say, as good as sealed.

Man purposes, God disposes.

All see my face, few know my case.

Ask the father, if he thinks his son a thief.

Clutch ever so close, an even lay thou will ever lose.

The best cunning, self-denial.

Thy last night, bid good night.

No painfulness, no gainfulness,

In Heaven, the churl will never be Chairman.

Never seek belief to a ly.

Foords grow wide, Faith weak.

Hear not plain, hardly reply.

The present State, will not long stand.

Lose not the office of thy sense, by the sense of thy office.

Philosophers rise, the Earth turns round.

Lug and hale, it will not long hold.

The man that groans, God hears his moans.

Griffitk a cunning Cook, to pull a worm out of an old wives Coop.

A Cellar before a Cow.

Hurt is sooner received then well cured.

A woman's mind is swifter then the Greyhound.

Each wanton speaks with mincing speech.

The whiter the face, the blacker the arse.

The morrow after the Fair.

Fast bind, faest find.

Out of sight out of mind.

In the mouth gall, in the heart cordial.

He deserves no gains, who takes no pains.

What acted last, the memory retains it best.

Better a poor careful mother, then a rich careless father.

The horse may die, while the grass grows.

Cunt once got, an hundred times if thou will.

Who himself does ill, thinks another will.

Her own dam, envy devoures.

Old Grannams dream of their desire.

When Gamester thrive, he will smile in his sleeve.

To deceive the deceiver is no deceit.

Be provident while chest is full laid, if once empty it is too late.

The gift is bad that is not worth thanks.

Forewarning will not advantage the unfortunate.

Sue a beggar, and get a louse.

No nearer to death, though abroad, then at home.

Forswear to haunt no where but Hell.

What old men by experience know complete, young men think they know in their
own conceit.

Spare to speak, spare to speed.

Who serves the Devil, will be deceived at the latter day.

Empty vessels sound most.

The still Sow eats all the draft.

The cat is more ready to run into, then out from the Dayrie.

The nearer the Church, the further from Christ.

A cat is not used to a collar.

No weeping for shed milk.

He repented with grief, who killed his Greyhound.

A lazy servant a good message to fetch death, to an honest man.

No Town so strong as a Tower.

The lame returns sooner then his servant.

The kindness of Jack to his mother Joan.

More wanton then the Maggpie.

Who in sin commits offense, needs no accuser but his Conscience.

Who has many sons shall have small share of his meat.

Who has many daughters shall have none at all to eat.

Who regards not his mother, may step to his stepmother.

Birds of a feather will fly together.

Ask my mother if I am a thief.

To the Valley the water runs quickly.

Be not too curious (Man) in finding fault, lest you fail to amend.

Sit down and patient be, what is past thou can not remedy.

DIVERSE CENTURIES OF NEW SAYINGS, Which may serve FOR PROVERBS, TO POSTERITY.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, And most R. F. in God, BRIAN DUPPA, Lo. Bishop of
Salsburie.
My Lord,
THat so many poor Infants after so hard a labor, may receive a Benediction
now at the close, specially this last, which (though he comes in the Rear) I
esteem mine own more then any of the rest, I make my humble address to your
Lordshipp; For having called my Thoughts often to Counsel who should give this
Blessing, they all concluded there was none so fit to do it as your Lordshipp:
And indeed there were many resons for it; First, the Character I have heard
applied unto you, which was given of one of the Holiest Fathers of the Church,
That you were Coelestis Homo, and Terrestris Angelus, A Heavenly Man, and
Terrestrial Angel, being Pious in so intense a Degree; which Exemplary Piety
goes attended with a becoming Reverentiall gravity, with such a meekness of
spirit, and so many high Moral Virtues, together with a rare Equanimity in
possessing your soul with so much patience and courage, by making your crosses
stoop unto you after so long a time of pressure. Lastly, your most Exquisite
Learning, and Universality of Knowledge, attended with such a soundness of
Judgment, and clearness of Understanding; The pleasing Contemplation, and
experimental Knowledge of all these Particulars, induced me to this just
Application of desi^ing your Blessing accordingly.

Touching the Ingredients of this last Piece, they cannot yet be called
Proverbs, for as Rome was not built in a day, so a Proverb is not suddenly
made, but it requires a long Tract of Time, and vulgarity of usage before it
becomes a Proverb, it is the Common People alone that have privilege of making
Proverbs.

To conclude, I thought it not amiss to apprehend this Opportunity, to make the
world know the high Reverence I bear to your Lordship, and the sense I have of
sundry Noble Civilities I received from time to time; as also of the favorable
Opinion you please to have of diverse Things of mine; which makes me in a due
Reverenciall posture, thus to crave your Benediction, and to profess my self
upon this public Record,

Calendis Maij, 1659. My Lord, Your obedient, and ever obliged Servant, JAM.
HOWELL.

DIVERSE CENTURIES OF NEW SAYINGS, Which may serve FOR PROVERBS, TO POSTERITY.
The first Century.
MAke thou the furrows, and God will send thee seed.

In a sluttish house the Devil shakes his tail.

As stiff as a Puritans knee, who will not bend to him who made it.

English Merchant, will thou gain?

Then have Commerce, and peace with Spain.

As redd as Rogers nose, who was christened in pump-water.

Robb the King thou may be hanged,
Robb the Church thou will be damned.
The rich misers son quickly mewes his fathers feathers.

War begetts Peace, as a ruddy Evening a fair morn.

Doff not thy clothes till thou go to bed,
Nor part with thy Estate till thou art dead.
Burn not thy fingers to snuff another man's candle.

Who falls to argue ere the case be stated,
Letts slip his dog before the Hare be started.
Repentance is good, but Innocence is better.

Clear thy Conscience before thou close thy eyes, so thou may have golden
dreams.

A good name like a Maydenhead, once lost irrecoverable.

If Spain had Bread enough, and Men,

She of the Cock would make a Hen; viz. Of Gallus the French.

Sea sickness and child-births pain
Are like, they both will to it again.
The works of a Catholic, the words of a Puritan, and the Faith of a
Protestant, may make a perfect Christian.

He is a true Author that creates a fancy.

Who adores gold is the worst idolater.

If thou will make a good Will, do it while thou art well.

As hot as a punks plackett.

A Rebel, and madd dog knock in the head,
They Will bite no more when they are dead.
The Devil is Gods shadow.

Give not a Lawyer or Physician fee,

Unless it be in pure necessity.

You will make me believe as soon, that the Spanish Moon is as hot as the
Swedish Sun.

As sneezing comes from a bad cause,

So from ill manners come good laws.

As Mercury among the Planets, is the French among other Nations.

From the Berry of the Grape, and Grain of the Barley,
Comes many a fray, and hurlyburly.
Be thy breath never so sweet, thy own praise stinks out of it.

An Essex Calf, will never make a Wel^ Run^

When come's from Heaven ba^r on thy knees, what from men on thy shoulders;
viz. Manfully.

Worldly Accidents are but new Moons in the old ones shape.

Get Ireland to day, and England may be thine to morrow.

Put all in the Paternoster, thy self only in thy Creed.

We come into the world without heads forward, we go out with our heels.

I would not wi^^ such an opinion to the wors^ of my enemies.

Rash prayer is rather a sin then a sacrifice.

Here is Wine indeed to be drunk in the Devils skull.

Who woo's with fine clothes, makes the Tailor his Broker.

I think this Bacon was a piece of Lott^ wifes burtock, it is so salt.

Truth is the result of Reason.

As jealousy in Love, so is superstition in Religion.

Rebellion the spawn of wealth and wantonness.

Heaven once named, all things else are bables.

The Dutch in drinking charge the brain with small shot, the English with
bullets, viz. Whole glasses.

A shipp's a wooden horse, who carries his burden in his belly, and his bridle
in his tail.

Chameleons take all colors but the white,

And Schismatics all fancies but the right.

Idleness the Devils couch, and lust his cushion.

The Master who corrects the child kisseth the Mother.

The present Philosophers compared to the old, are as Dwarfs on Giants
shoulders.

Surely he knew well that coals would burn, who first invented fire-tongs.

You must not expect perfumes in a Piggsty.

As wise as the Mayor of Banbury, who would prove that Henry the Third, was
before Henry the Second.

He may knock boldly, who brings good news.

The long Parliament made God Almighty the greatest Malignant, for they
plundered his House most.

He is as fit for that place, as an ambling horse is for a Coach.

A loyal Subject like the Marigold should open and shutt with the Sun; viz.
His Sovereign Prince.

A good hous-wife should twinkle in her house like a Star in its Sphere.

God never turns his face from us, till we turn our backs to him.

Rlutarch gave life to many others, but the longest to himself.

There is many that go up Holborn, and so to Heaven in a string.

There Is no book all Gospel but the holy Scripture alone.

The stripe of a friend, better then the stroaking of a^ enemy.

A true friend a great treasure.

Opportunity the greatest bawd.

The Historian who speaks well of all, speaks well of none.

Who dies by a wrong Sentence is murdered by the sword of Justice.

Parliament Bills without the Princes consent like matches without fire.

An opinion got into a Roundheads brain is like Quicksilver in a hot loaf.

The ^lash of Conscience a sore whipp.

A t^^e friend chimney-like is hottest in winter; vi. In adversity.

The Flower of England fine enough, the Bran very course; viz. the Gentry and
Cominalty.

As much differing as a Frenchmans speech and his writing.

The rich Miser like the Swan sings sweetest before death, viz. When he makes
his last Will.

The way to Heaven is to pass through Hell.

God strikes with the left hand and stroaketh with the right.

The Glutton diggeth his grave with his teeth.

He has good parts, but a fool has them in keeping.

The Churchyard like a Chessboard-bagg where all mates meet.

Better to commend the virtue of an enemy, then flatter the vice of a friend.

Choler opposed, is like a rapid torrent meeting with a damm.

Spanish wares better then Spanish wars.

Opinion the greatest Lady that swayeth the world.

Warm, but do not burn thy self at the fire of Passion.

Take heed of a speedy friend in France, and of a slow enemy in Italy.

Who goes to right himself by Duel, may receive a greater wrong then the
former.

A wavering man like a skeyn of silk, the least thing entangleth him.

The upbraiding of a courtesy half as bad as ingratitude.

Pride a flower that grows in the Devils garden.

French women are so kind, that at first entrance you may have acquaintance,
and at first acquaintance you may have entrance.

Where Mars pitcheth his Tent, Venus pitcheth her Pavilion.

Thank that sin which moves thee to Repentance.

Prayer makes the first rain fall, but Praise the second.

It Is further from London to Highgate, then from Highgate to London.

Who is too familiar with his master stands too near the fire.

He is a sorry soldier who stays for fair weather.

In Gods House there can be no excess of Reverence.

The patient man is always at home.

The second Century.
DO thou thy best, and leave to God the rest.

Had I left one of my ears in Scotland, I should hardly go thither to fetch it
again.

The Presbyterian makes Oaths his Engines to lay battery to the soul.

The Sword makes Reason, where he finds none.

One may draw a damned soul out of Hell, as draw a penny out of his purse.

The King represents God, the Parliament the People, tell me who is highest?

Peace with Heaven the best friendship.

It Is good to be an Athiest among them who make gold their god.

If we knew what would happen we should be all Politicians.

Nor walk nor water thy hott nagg,
So he will carry still thy bagg.
In a hundred pounds of Law, there is scarce an ounce of Love.

The way to improve thy Learning, is to teach another.

There Is many husbands able Arithmeticians, yet they cannot multiply.

While the Cow chewes the cudd the Horse still eats.

Go to bed dry, thou needst not fear death before the morning.

A Translator is an Author as a Cobbler is a Shooemaker.

Some Gentlemen are better then Knights, as Chancery Lane is better then
Knight-riders-street.

He lives in as much plenty as a Millers Cock.

If the Lion says the Fox has horns, he must have them.

New England has undone the old; viz. With distractions.

There Is no danger to prostrate thy self at a Cross, all the while thy mind is
prostrate to thy Creator.

Schismatics like Snakes though cut asunder, yet the pieces will cling again
together.

Excise and plunder though Dutch words, yet are they of the Devils hatching.

Live in compass, so thou may whett thy knife at the Counter-gate.

A wife were a fine Book if she were an Almanac, that a man might change her
once a year.

The Apple grows on the Tree, not the Cider.

To live among bad men is worse then banishment.

The Pox in the bones not curable till the Resurrection.

Let thy Conscience be thy judge here, that he may not be thy accuser hereafter.

A Book borrowed is sooner read then a Book bought.

Two in the afternoon is more then ten in the morning.

Two heads are better then one, said old Weymark, when he wishd Sir W.
Rawleighs head upon Secretary Nantons shoulders.

Pride is oftener seen through a threedbare coat then through a silk cloak.

All your horses do amble.

Sloth breeds the Scurvy.

It Is a dear collop that is cut out of ones own flesh.

Before thou take for better or worse, be sure that one of the two have a good
purse.

The Ducks have merry life's, for they do nothing but tipple and swive.

Who marries a widow falls into a pit wherein another perished.

The Devil will do me no hurt, for I married his kinswoman; quoth one that had
a scold to his wife.

A clean-fingerd wife is not always the best huswife.

The way to loose a Friend is to lend him money.

Day and Truth may be discernd through a little hole.

In marriage the Tongue tieth a knott, that all the teeth in the head cannot
untie afterward.

Hang pinching, letts drink the the other pott, we shall never do it younger.

The sweet savor which Virtue leaves behind, is better then the black sudds
of Vice.

With Time, and Art, the Mulberry leafs grow to be satin.

Rather bribe, then loose thy right.

Man's body is but the thorough-fare of sheep and Oxen.

Who laughs at his own jest, is like the hen that cackles when she has laid an
egg.

Deeds are John's, and words Nans.

Man is Nature's student.

The Presbyterian a Jew of the New Testament.

Holland a great Cow, and Amsterdam the Udder.

A true Cardinal should have his soul in sackcloth, though his body be in
Scarlett.

I care not much that my son is drunk, but that he will have a hair of the same
dog the next day.

The truest Chastity is tried in hott blood.

Corruption sticks to humane nature as rust to brass.

Where diffidence begins, friendshipp ends.

The cholerique man more often abroad then at home.

In Heaven all desires turn to fruition.

Education mendeth Nature, as sauce does meat.

He is as much puzzled as one going up Ludgate hill in a stopp of coaches and
carts.

The conquest of the Passions, the prime trophey of Virtue.

For one hollow Tooth pull not out the sound ones.

From a long P. the Lord deliver me; viz. Parl.

The Rebel uses to fire the Beacon when there is no danger.

Rather then burn, venture a fall out of the window.

Reputation like a Venice-glasse easily crackd.

England uses to have too many tears in her eyes, i. Rain.

Choler has more heat then light.

Garlic the poor man's Treacle.

The way to go right, is to tread the paths of our Progenitors.

We think Lawyers to be wise, but they know us to be fools.

Who goes for his money before the day, need carry a lantern and candle with
him.

War which beggars others, makes the Hollander rich.

All mischiefs from the North proceed,
Witness what came from Thames to Tweed.
Ireland a good Goose to be pluckd.

What Is palpable to sense, needs no proof by reason.

Every one that has a deaths-head in his study is not mortified.

The wings of Rebellion should not only be clipd but seard.

Up hill the knees, down hill the thighs labor most.

Who parts with his estate before he dies is a fool in Folio.

One day thrust's on another still,
Old Moons do fail, and new ones fill.
Zeal like fire, dangerous, if it breaks out of the funnell of the chimney.

Where there is no Law broken, there can be no crime.

In this I did not care, if God Almighty were my Judge.

You may as soon cut out a Kirtle for the Moon.

The clothes warm the body, and the body the clothes by way of thankful
correspondence.

A hundred misdemeanures cannot make one Treason, no more then a hundred Catts
one Lion.

Planting of Trees Englands old thrift.

Unfortunate Princes steer their course by them which know not the use of the
Compass.

As earth and water make but one Globe, so Man and Wife make but one flesh.

That s^n makes one happy, that turns to sorrow.

As black as the soul of Judas.

Ireland a fit Country for Quakers, because it is so full of Boggs.

Whose hearts on Riches dwell, bidd God farewell.

The surest way to cure sore eyes, is to cast them up often toward Heaven.

Money in all great actions, like Mercury among the Chymiques, without which no
conclusion can be tried.

Too much liberty, and too much bread the common levain of Rebellion.

Who accepts an invitation at first wants good manners.

It is the Devils reformation to turn order to confusion, and superstition to
profaneness.

The third Century.
WHen the Sermon is ended in the Church, let it begin in thee.

A fair woman with ill qualities is like a sattin-petticoat lined with course
buckram.

Faith is a great Lady, and good Works are her Attendants.

Princes of an ill destiny follow the worst Counsels.

Who goes to school to himself, may have a fool for his master.

Who discharges a good Conscience has enough of his own to reward himself.

No Innocence so safe, but may be glad to stand in the eye of Mercy.

The futious man when his first blast is spent grows the fearfullest.

Though the Air of Affliction be Clowdy, yet through it we best discern God,
and our friends.

Discretion the best Passe-port to travel the world.

I do not use to supp because I would not have the use of a Physician.

Rebellion suppressed, makes the Prince the stronger.

What sails are to a shipp, the passions are to the spirits.

To give the pettitoes in alms, will not satisfy for stealing the pigg.

Who has a good wit and memory without Learning, has a spindle and distaffe
without flax.

Italy a great Bordell, France a great Bedlam, and Germany a great Brewhouse.

When death kills a Miller, he kills two; viz. A Miller and a Thief.

The sight of her would make a man wish himself ghelt.

Mildness the Cognizance of a Gentleman.

A Dutchman commonly barrells up more then he can broach, and drinks more
then he can carry.

He is as fit for that Office, as Caligulas horse was to be Consul.

The riches of the Church is to a State as Anchors in a storm.

Superstition less dangerous then profaneness.

Night succeeds day, and sorrow joy.

The difference twixt a wife and a wench is, that we pay for the one, and
receive money with the other.

London to the rest of England is like the Spleen, whose swelling makes the
rest of the body lean, and lank.

Intestine broils the readiest way to ruin any Country.

Civil wars like fire in the bed-straw.

The Hollander burns up his Country before the day of Judgment; viz. In Turfs.

Expedition the life of Action.

The greatest arms the Turks ever used against the Christians were their own
divisions.

Spain a cheap Country to travel in, for one cannot get meat for money.

Prayers like Petards break open Heaven gate.

An ingenuous face is a good Letter of Recommendation.

Choose thy Friends as Books, few, but choice ones.

Confession and sorrow without amendment, are like the pumping of a shipp
without stopping the leaks.

The Politician like a Sculler, he looks one way, and roweth another.

Honor should be a spurt to Virtue, not a stir op to pride.

A working brain toile's more then a sweating brow.

The Spaniard looks as high as the German, but not so bigg.

Spanish Coin as Catholic as the King.

As piping hott as a prickeard Preacher in a Pulpitt.

Who spends more then he should,
Shall not have to spend when he would.
Woman and Man are like Loadstone and Iron.

In an Ocean of News, scarce a dropp of Truth.

Aristotle the Philosophers Pope.

She looks like a Carack, that has made three voyages into the East Indies.

Humble Ignorance a safe Knowledge.

English Parlements good Physic, but an ill diet.

He is a cheap Friend that is got by a Complement.

Schools and Hospitalls the best books that Bishops can leave behind them.

France and Spain the two poles that bear up Christendom.

When you travel neither show your mind or your money.

Out of Reverence we bear to Antiquity, we extol things passd, and extenuate
things present.

Venice bears the Bell for Lasses and Glasses.

He less offends who writes many toys, then he who omitteth one serious thing.

No wound heals till the Inflammation be taken away; no peace made without a
cessation of Arms first.

Thanks, a good Usher to draw on a second Courtesy.

Is the Plague in the point that you fly so far from it?

Wine a foul wrastler, it oftentimes takes one up by the legs.

Money, the moving Instrument in all things.

The proud Man's Ambition has no Horizon.

Be content to walk on the battlements of Honor without going upon stilts.

In a whole Volley of News, scarce a true Report.

A Favorite may secure himself from guilt, but not from envy.

As much wit is shown in a pertinent question as in a wise answer.

The Spaniard hardly casts up what he once swallows.

The Frenchman like March, who enters like a Lion, but goes out like a Lamb.

The Divine goes to Heaven by Jacobs ladder, the Astronomer by Jacobs staff.

The first Principle of Policy is for a State to preserve it self.

An honorable Retreat is the hardest thing in the feat of Arms.

France for a Kingdom, Flanders for an Earldom, Milan for a Duchy, Venice for
a Commonwealth.

The Spaniard buggers his mother for gold.

Adam only knew no Minority.

As smooth as an Italian Complement.

In a great fogg the Devil tokes Tobacco.

A natural fool is never out of his rionage.

The Astronomer being loath to go to Heaven, makes Heaven come to him.

As wanton as the English after a long peace.

If the French pesant be a slave, he may thank his warving humor for it.

As hungry as the French Tongue who eats so many letters.

If thou will live long, make thy self old betimes.

Favors like flowers, which quickly fade in the memory of an unthankful man.

The French like a flea, the Dutch like a lowse, the Spaniard like a (...).

If thou art fatt, then sleep not after meal,
If lean, thou in a chair a napp may steal.
Be still prepared against death, for He
Does in thy shadow watch for Thee.
A Cock, a Scold, and a Trumpetr, better heard in thy neighbors house then in
thine own.

As much transformd as De la Motts House (by the Exchange) to Atheists alley.

Pride in the Van, beggary in the Rear.

Where there is no Law there is no transgression, unless thy Conscience tell thee
so.

Necessity never made good bargain.

As like one another, as a Scott, and a Red-shank.

He truly lives, who thinks every beating of his pulse to be a passing bell.

The breaking open of letters is the basest kind of Burglary.

When you have a Petition to make, buy your paper of Mr. Humble.

Above all Creditors be sure to pay God first, so thou will never turn Bankrupt.

Threats without power are like Pistolls charged only with powder.

To make a Scottchman valiant, let him be backed by an Englishman.

A lickrous catt, bears many a patt.

A fool may confute a Philosopher, as the Philistines were knockd down by the
jawbone of an Ass.

Who uses to pick his teeth with his knife point, may come in a short time to
pick them with the haft.

The fourth Century.
USe to make thy bed thy grave, so death will be no stranger to thee when he
comes.

The chiefest lechery of old men is to go well to the stool and the wall.

Who goes more tatterd then the Tailors child?

The sickmans chamber a good Chapel.

If Venus pictures had bin hott and hollow, she had bin made as great a wanton
after her death as before.

Had Ba, Bu, P. bin hanged, when they were cropp'd,
Poor England with such flakes of blood had not so dropped.
A chaste Maid should be like a Venice glass that will hold no poison.

One Be makes no swarm.

Putt God before thee, thou needs not care who comes behind thee.

The droppings of ones own nose wett more then open rain; viz. The scandals of
a friend.

Every ones Fate is writ in his forehead, but the letters are so dark that
none can read them.

The Excise must needs be a drunken fellow, for he sipps out of every cupp.

A poor man asking alms of a rich miser, beggeth of a poorer man then himself.

I give you Pears, and you hurl the parings at me.

The Kings of Spain and France the greatest Merchants; the one of Salt, the
other of Pepper.

The Spanish Monarchy a large cloak made up of patches.

Adam was tempted in Italian, fell a begging pardon in French, and was thrust
out of Paradis in High Dutch.

A Painter is a dumb Poet, and a Poet a speaking Painter.

A valiant man upon the Anvill of affliction grows greater, as a Spanish
three pence is made a groat.

Though a woman be the weakest of the two, yet she will take a man down at the
highest.

So old, that she has no witness she was ever young.

Women among Men in a Tavern, are like flies, they will be still sipping and
drinking, but pay nothing.

Do not poursue ill luck at play,
'Twill be thine own another day.
He is a fool who puts a coach-wheel on his back, when he can trill it
before him.

Truth whence soever it comes, does come from God.

Putt all in the Pater Noster, but thy self only in thy Creed.

Steer thy course with a low Sail, and thou shall not need fear a storm.

Fools have Fortune, and good reason why, for they most need it.

Who eats tosted cheese at supper makes his mouth a mouse-trapp.

God Almighty is the Center, and the Religions of the world are as so many
differing lines tending from the Circumference to that Center.

A Barber Surgeon has two strings to his bow.

The Sun and Man begett Man, the Prince and Parliament begett Laws.

As merry as London boys about a bonefire.

A good countenance to a poor dinner, is like a rich Comment upon a barren Text.

Newgate birds are no Buzzards.

A fool is soon at his wits end, for he has but a little way to it.

Thou with thy body warmst thy clothes, then,
In gratitude thy clothes warm thee again.
Go which way thou will, thou go still toward Gravesend.

As light as a French heart.

As crosgraind a spirit as John Lilburns, when John would fall out with
Lilburn, and Lilburn with John.

Inland fortresses nests for Rebels.

Spinning out of Time never made good cloth.

Py-Corner Law the surest way of wooing.

Who lives in hope danceth in a hoop.

It has as many several shapes as a dish of Fritters.

The Be hive is Natures Confectionary.

As needful as a Catt for a Cheese-mongers shopp.

Repentance the Laundresse of the Conscience.

It Is as easy to quadrate a Circle, as make a Roundhead a good subject.

When the Razor is at the throat, the tongue cannot be free; viz. As long as
there is an Army at the Mewse, the Parliament members cannot speak what they
please.

At meat when thou do sit,
Give thy Creator the first bitt.
As tatterd as the Scotts Colors in Westminster Hall.

The Beast which bleats on Lemsters ore,
Her flesh is good, het fleece is more.
The Cross the first Christian Altar, therefore He who hates the Altar, will
hardly make benefit of the Oblation.

Mercy the inseparable Inmate of a magnanimous spirit.

Henry the Eighth, the Earthquake of Abbeyes.

Take off the dunghill against your own doo^, before you sweep before mine.

A rich fool is good for nothing but to borrow money of.

When a Tallow-Chandler expounds Holy Scripture, one may truly say there is a
thief in the candle.

War is a fire struck in the Devils Tinderbox.

Vices in Queens are like spotts in the Moon, which cannot be hidd.

Though shooing-horns be out of date, yet horns are as plentiful as ever.

In all popular Tumults Rebellion leads the Van, Confusion the Forlorn-Hope,
and Ruin the Rear.

A Noble spirit like the Sun at his Declension, the more he is oppressed, the
more he shines.

The Ass must not be so familiar with his Master as the Puppy.

Next to a single, a married life is best.

One may go to Heaven from off the Devils back; viz. The gallows.

Weigh thy business first, as the Fox did the Goose, before he would carry her
over the Ferry.

Rebellion must be crushed like a Cocatrice in the shell.

Spiritual Pride the Epidemicall disease of England.

To make the House firm, let God be thy Foundation.

Parliament Bills without the Royal assent, like matches without fire.

Letters are the Limners of the mind.

To reform things by a Civil War, is to let one blood by giving him a dash
on the Nose.

Examples passd, are present Instructers.

Who has horns of his own, let him take heed how he forkes his Fingers at
his Neighbor.

Who coseneth another, coseneth himself more.

You may make a windmill go with a pair of bellows as soon.

He would drink and whistle at once.

Go buy a penyworth of soap, and wash an Asses head.

We can go no where but we have God over and under.

A stepp-mothers love, like December Sun.

To thy Physician and Lawyer, make the worst of thy business.

Who has glasse-windowes of his own, let him take heed how he throws stones
at those of his neighbor.

When thou art in a sweat, and hott,
Leak first before thou touch the pott.
As bare as a Baboons bumm.

He looks as pitiful as a Chancery-Bill.

A Widow marrying beneath her self pisseth backward.

As wrinkled as the face of a penny Custard.

Starve not thy cause for want of fees, nor thy horse to save a bottle of hay.

The Presbyters wife had rather see her husband in his shirt then in a Surplice.

Refiners of Religion commonly prove Quacksalvers.

You may as easily snuff the Moon when she shines dimm.

The Venetian Christened in salt water which makes him so wise.

Forgive any one sooner then thy self.

He bears in his face all the Festivalls of the year.

Preferment without profit like a feather in ones capp.

Though its modesty to decline Praise, yet it is a Pride not to care what the
world speaks of thee.

Redd capps, and coiffs fatal to France; viz. Cardinals and Queen Mothers.

The fifth Century.
MAke not Gods House thy through-fare,
Unless thou dropp some Praises there.
A Platonique Lover like one that is still saying grace, and never falls to his
meat.

So long did the good wife pray for a boy, that she had one that proved a boy
all his lifetime.

The wife knows more then the Cuckold her husband.

Who has sore teeth has ill Tenants.

Who hangs one corrects a thousand.

Set thy Watch by the Sun rather then by the Clock.

When thy ankle aches, it little avails thee to anoint thy elbow.

He thrives as well as a Welsh Runt in Rumney Marsh.

Who gives Alms makes the best use of his money.

You may paint the Flower in all his colors, but not give it the smell.

Counterfeit Friendshipp, is worse then false Coin.

A Martyr in Prison is like a Diamond set in a horn-ring.

Hear thy self oftener speaking to God Almighty, then another speaking for thee.

Who commends himself deserves a Garland of Hemlock.

If God be in the Portall, all the rooms in thy house will be well furnished.

Magnitude is not the measure of worth.

More Porters then Princes go to Heaven, because there are more of them.

King Harry loved a Man, and so did his daughter Besse.

A dry Cough the Trumpeter of death.

A Starr twinkleth most in winter, so a wiseman in Adversity.

The great wheel of Providence does always turn, though none can see the
Spokes.

The Rufflingest Winds are commonly found in Churchyards, so the greatest
clashes are about Religion.

Get thy spindle and distaff ready, and God will send thee Flax.

So miserable a kerle that he cannot bestow brown paper enough to wipe his tail
clean.

The Union twixt England and Scotland, like Oil mixed with Vinegar.

A face that wears patches, shows there is a Room to be let, by the Bill
on the door.

The glorious Sun is Gods great Emissary.

One of the best conveniences of a house is to have good neighbors.

The first part of wisdom is to give good Counsel, the second to take it,
the third to follow it.

The body is but the sockett of the soul.

They that are hanged their souls go out at their tayls.

In War take all advantages, but give none.

Never seek enemies abroad, thou have too many at home; viz. Thy own passions.

The Presbyterian licks up that which the Jesuit disgorgeth against Kings.

They who buy Justice by whole sail,
Must sell it by retayl.
Who preaches War, is the Devils Chaplain.

Giving begetts Love, lending does lessen it.

He who will pass a Judgment of himself, must incline more to Rigor, then
Mercy.

There be many witty men, yet their brains cannot fill their bellies.

The Astrologer has this advantage, that one true Prediction makes amends for
a hundred lies.

More easy to raise Captains in England then common soldiers.

The modern Zelotts go to exalt Christ's Church upon the Devils back.

Thou that hate the Cross (which was the first Christian Altar) do thou
hope to have benefitt of the Oblation?

The promise of a Gentleman should be equal to a performance.

In Lotteries men mourn in white, and laugh in black.

The French so fiery-mouth'd, that they must be ridd with a bitt.

On the Desk the Priest is the peeples Messenger to God, in the Pulpitt he is
Gods Messenger to the peeple.

History, the Tribunal of Princes after death.

The Devil may now freely walk upp and down Cheapside, for there is never a
Cross to fright him.

Clear thy Conscience, before thou close thy Eyes, so thou may have golden
dreams.

The Presbyterian, though he hates a Cross in the Church, yet he loves it
too well in his pockett.

The Calvinists believe the Salique Law is in Heaven, which make them so little
esteem the blessed Virgin.

Magnitude is not the measure of worth.

If I had known of your coming, I would have dined with you; Viz. (I had
provided more for you) but now you must be content to dine with me.

Honor moves in a higher Sphere far then pleasure.

The peeple to the Politician like tools to a mechanique.

He seldom goes with gray hairs to his grave, who disobeyeth his Parents.

A Pope by Voices, a King by Nature, an Emperor by power.

A King should impose severer Laws upon himself then on his subjects.

An old Usurer like a Thief, who though he be to be hanged to Morrow, yet he
steals to Day.

Kings should be told what they ought to do, not what they are able.

Learning the Child of Light, born first in the East, next the Sun rising.

He is happy who ends his journey before he be quite tired; viz. Before he be
too old.

The English Language is Dutch Embrodered with French.

Poesy the greatest Light whereby to find that one has a soul.

A redd morn will commonly piss or fart before night.

When thou do read a Book, do not turn the leafs only, but gather the fruit.

A rich kerle like a Mill-horse that grindeth Corn for others.

The worst of Crosses, is never to have had any.

The Passing Bell is deaths Clock, and the Clock is Times Passing Bell.

As hard to brush off an infamy, as a shadow.

The poor are Gods Receivours, and the Angels are his Auditors.

The German proud by Imitation, the French by Inclination.

Death is the certainst of all things to come.

The Majesty of a King, is a Ray of Divine Light.

Craft is bastard-Policy.

Necessity has found more Arts, then Ingenuity ever invented.

Water, Earth, and Air, the three staple Commodities of Nature.

Opportunity the best moment in the whole extension of Time.

Chimistry the torture of Mettalls.

If thy son be given to drink, send him to Spain; if to Drabbs, send him to
Germany to be reclaimd.

False Reports, like Musrumps that have no Roots.

The worst Fever is that of the tongue.

The Rich man walks to get a stomach to his his meat, the poor man to get
meat for his stomach.

Let Reason persuade Thee,
Before she invade Thee.
A Rich City like a fatt Cheese apt to breed Magotts; viz. Mutinies and Vices.

Take part always with Reason against thy Will.

England lies strong, as a Tortois in her shell.

The Living Lord has a dead Hand where he strikes.

Lett's go quickly to Dinner, that we may have a Collation in the afternoon,
and go betimes to Supper, that we may have a Nuntion before we go to bed,
and so rise early in the Morning to Breakefast. Viz. The humor of the French.

The Emperor of China, the only Prince that puts bounds to his Ambition,
being ever upon the Defensive.

The Wise man like the Salamander, can go through the Furnace of Affliction,
and never burn.

Repentance the Laundresse of the Conscience.

Who has glasse-windowes of his own, let him take heed how he throws stones
at those of his neighbor.

A true King like Hercules should have his clubb always lying by him.

The fist is stronger then the hand, though it be nothing but the hand. An
Emblem of Union.

The worst peeple have most laws.

Prudence applies things past, provideth for the present, and preventeth what
may come.

Though the Air of Spain be hotter, yet it is not so subject to Fevers as that
of France.

A Printed Apology, is like penance in a white sheet.

Rather then burn, venture a fall out of the window.

Well fare those days, that sweetmeats were served up in wheele-barrowes at
Goring-House.

He that does a serious business in haste, rides Post upon an Ass.

Infantium Cerebri Quartus, post Quadraginta.
FINIS.

